We measure magnetization as a function of temperature, magnetic field and time in a BaFe 2 (As 0.68 P 0.32 ) 2 single crystal with T c = 27.6 K. The fish-tail observed on many M (H) curves are used to construct isofield M (T ) curves which show an anomalous peak at some temperature T t suggesting a possible phase transition in the irreversible regime. A vortex dynamics study performed along the peaks evidences a minimum in the relaxation rate occurring at the same position T t of the minimum value of M in these peaks. A vortex dynamics study performed on M (H) curves show two distinct minimum in the relaxation rate: a first minimum (H 1 ) for a lower field correlating with T t and a second (H 2 ) correlating with the peak in the fish-tail. A phase diagram is constructed and the line corresponding to T t and H 1 points obey an expression developed in the literature for a structural rhombic to square lattice phase transition, further supporting this view. Since the discovery of superconductivity in iron-pnictide systems Among the explanations found for the SMP it is worth mentioning the phase transition of the vortex lattice which finger-print appears to be a minimum in the isofield relaxation rate -R vs. T . The high-quality BaFe 2 (As 0.68 P 0.32 ) 2 single crystal used in this work (with approximated dimensions 4×4×0.3 mm 3 and mass m = 3.582 mg) was grown by the BaAs/BaP flux method. Figure To check this effect we obtained isofield M(T ) curves by extracting values of M for fixed selected magnetic fields from the zfc M(H) curves, which corresponds to a M(T ) curve with each point obtained after a zfc procedure. The resulting curves for selected magnetic fields obtained from the increasing field branch of the M(H) curves are shown in Fig. - Figure To sumarize the results, we plot the fields H on , H p , H irr , H 1 , H 2 and T t in a phase diagram in Fig. where , λ is the London penetration depth, L z represents an effective superconducting layer width for thermal fluctuations We observe an anomalous peak on isofield M(T ) curves in the irreversible regime of the studied sample which suggests a possible phase transition. To our knowledge, this anomalous peak has been observed for the first time in the present study. It is shown that the anomalous peaks with minimum M value occuring at T t are associated to the SMP observed on M(H) curves. Vortex dynamics studies performed along the peaks on M(T ) curves and along the SMP on M(H) curves suggest that the anomalous peaks are related to a vortex lattice phase transition. The line formed by the points H 1 and T t (extracted from the anomalous peaks) is successfully fitted by a theory developed for a structural rhombic to square lattice phase transition, further supporting this view.