We study the response of a magnetic-field-driven superconducting qubit strongly coupled to a superconducting coplanar waveguide resonator. We observed a strong amplification/damping of a probing signal at different resonance points corresponding to a one and two-photon emission/absorption. The sign of the detuning between the qubit frequency and the probe determines whether amplification or damping is observed. The larger blue detuned driving leads to two-photon lasing while the larger red detuning cools the resonator. Our experimental results are in good agreement with the theoretical model of qubit lasing and cooling at the Rabi frequency. Motivated by the first experiment demonstrating the energy exchange between a strongly driven superconducting qubit and a resonator at the Rabi frequency Ω R 1 , Hauss et al. Experimentally, a single qubit one-photon lasing was demonstrated by the NEC group The lasing effect was investigated by making use of a In practice, we measured a two-qubit sample which represents a unit cell of a one-dimensional array of ferromagnetically coupled qubits exhibiting a large Kerr nonlinearity. where ∆ is the energy level separation of the two level system at zero energy bias = 0, Ω R0 is the driving amplitude of the applied microwave magnetic flux with frequency ω d , and g is the coupling energy between the qubit and the resonator. The coupling energy scales with the ratio of the magnitude of the persistent current in the qubit I q and the critical current of the coupling Josephson junction I c0 as where Z r = 50Ω is the wave impedance of the coplanar waveguide resonator and G 0 ≡ 2e 2 /h is the quantum conductance. This Hamiltonian can be transformed by the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation U = exp(iS) with the generator S = (g/ ω q ) cos η(a + a † )σ y and a rotating wave approximation U R = exp(-iω d σ z t/2) to the Hamiltonian 2 Here, The transmission of the resonator where was calculated numerically by the quantum toolbox Qutip, 8 solving the Liouville equation for the density matrix of the system in the rotating frame ρ = -i H, ρ + Lq ρ + Lr ρ (5) where Lq and Lr are Lindblad superoperators Here The qubit parameters used for the numerical calculations were determined independently from the transmission of the resonator t coupled to the undriven qubit. For a weak microwave signal with frequency ω s , the transmission can be expressed in simple form where δω q = ω qω s , δω r = ω rω s , κ ext is the external loss rate of the resonator and γ is the qubit decoherence rate. The experimental data was fitted by Eq.9 (see Fig. We have investigated the stimulated emission effect observed when strongly driving the system at a frequency To conclude, we have experimentally demonstrated single-qubit one-photon and two-photon lasing. The experimental results are in good agreement with the theoretical model developed by Hauss et al. 