Motivated by recent experimental investigations of the isovalent doping iron-based superconductors LaFe(AsxP1-x)O1-yFy and NdFe(AsxP1-x)O1-yFy we theoretically study the correlation between the local lattice structure, the Fermi surface, the spin fluctuation-mediated superconductivity, and the composition ratio. In the phosphides, the dXZ and dYZ orbitals barely hybridize around the  point to give rise to two intersecting ellipse shape Fermi surfaces. As the arsenic content increases and the Fe-As-Fe bond angle is reduced, the hybridization increases, so that the two bands are mixed to result in concentric inner and outer Fermi surfaces, and the orbital character gradually changes to dxz and dyz, where x-y axes are rotated by 45 degrees from X-Y. This makes the orbital matching between the electron and hole Fermi surfaces better and enhances the spin fluctuation within The discovery of the iron based superconductors In this Fermi surface configuration, the spin susceptibility is enhanced because of the nesting between the hole and the electron Fermi surfaces, and superconductivity is optimized around 110 deg. corresponding to NdFeAsO. Upon reducing the bond angle from 110 deg., the hole Fermi surface around (π,π) shrinks and is eventually lost around 114 deg. (corresponding to LaFeAsO), so that the spin susceptibility and the superconductivity are suppressed as the bond angle is increased. The expectation from this view was that superconductivity is monotonically degraded with the increase of the bond angle. Recently, 1111 iron based superconductors with isovalent doping have been experimentally investigated in LnFeAsxP1-xO1-yFy (Ln=La, Nd, Pr) Furthermore, when the electron doping is changed by controlling the fluorine content, the arsenic content at which the superconductivity is locally optimized moves to a higher concentration. Also, around the arsenic content where Tc is locally optimized, strong spin fluctuation is observed Given this background, we study the correlation between the local lattice structure, the orbital character of the Fermi surface, and Tc in the 1111 system with isovalent doping. In order to extract the essence of the isovalent doping, we calculate the band structure and study the superconductivity of the hypothetical lattice structure of LaFeAsO varying only the Fe-Pn-Fe bond angle. To our surprise, it is found that superconductivity is indeed locally optimized in the bond angle regime between 113 deg. The correlation between the lattice structure and the band structure. It is known that the Fermi surface of the iron based superconductors is mainly governed by the Fe-Pn-Fe bond angle, or the pnictogen height measured from the Fe plane Motivated by recent experiments on LnFeAsxP1-xO1-yFy which observe non-monotonic evolution of the superconducting Tc against the arsenic/phosphorous ratio, we have studied the correlation between the local lattice structure, the orbital character of the Fermi surface, and superconductivity. It is found that one of the key points is the orbital component of the two hole Fermi surfaces around the wave vector (0,0). The orbital character of these hole Fermi surfaces gradually changes from the dXZ/YZ to the dxz/yz orbitals because of the hybridization between the dXZ and dYZ orbitals is enhanced as the arsenic content increases and the bond angle is reduced. The electron Fermi surfaces are constructed from the dxz/yz orbitals, so that the orbital character matching between electron and hole Fermi surfaces gets better as the arsenic content is increased, and this itself enhances superconductivity. On the other hand, the increase of the dXZ-dYZ hybridization reduces the density of states of the inner hole Fermi surface, so that there is a trade-off between the two effects. Hence, the spin susceptibility and superconductivity are locally optimized in the intermediate arsenic content regime. As the amount of the electron doping increases, the bond angle at which Tc is locally maximized decreases, which is also consistent with the experiment. The agreement with the experiments strongly indicates that the nesting condition of the portion of the Fermi surfaces originating from the dxz/yz orbitals plays a key role in the Tc evolution of the isovalent doped 1111 system. On the other hand, recently we have also found From the previous and present studies, we can schematically depict in Fig. First principles band calculation. We calculate the band structure using the VASP package Superconductivity. We consider the standard muti-orbital interactions, namely, the intraorbital U, the inter-orbital U', the Hund's coupling J, and the pair hopping interaction J'. In the fluctuation exchange (FLEX) approximation Matsubara frequencies at temperature T =0.005eV. As for the electron-electron interaction values, we adopt the orbital-dependent interactions as obtained from first-principles calculation in Ref. Therefore we subtract the self-energy at lowest Matsubara frequency from FLEX calculations in each self-consistent loop as in ref. 