It seems that the remarkable properties of the high temperature superconducting oxides, especially the Insulator-Metal Transition (IMT) and the Metal-Superconductor Transition (MST) both originate from the competition (interplay) between ionic versus in-plane covalence nature of bonds in these materials. As a result of this competition, the microscopic order parameter, that is firmly identified to be the local field estimated from the ionic polarization at the sub-unit level (one half of the unit cell), shows a strong temperature as well as chemical doping dependence. While the out-of-plane ionicity is responsible for the interlayer charge transfer (electrons) that reduces it leading to IMT, the in-plane covalency is responsible for the in-plane intersite transfer of charge (holes) that increases the ionicity and leads to MST. This interplay of charge transfer, driven by the out-of-plane ionicity and the in-plane covalency, leads at the critical temperature T c to a local field avalanche (ionic polarization catastrophe at the sub-unit cell level) that triggers an out-ofplane correlation between the local polarization fields at the unit cell and drives the compound into the superconducting state. The asymmetry of the free charge carrier density breaks locally the inversion symmetry of the order parameter leading to an unconventional pairing mechanism characterized by the CPT transformation where C is the charge conjugation symmetry, P is the parity symmetry and T is the time reversal symmetry. It is established that the out-of-plane ionicity versus in-plane covalency is a necessary condition for the occurrence of both IMT and MST. The underlined microscopic mechanism provides a route to a possible unified description of high-T c superconductivity. The ionic model has provided the basis for our understanding of the very wide range of physical phenomena displayed by ionic crystals The High Temperature Superconductors (HTS) are ionic crystals with the parent compound to be charge transfer insulator These variations, as it has been mentioned obviously Moreover, isotope and strain (pressure) effects are considered as direct experiments that establish the role of the lattice in the HTS Through a competition between the ionic nature of bonds versus in-plane covalence nature of bonds mainly in the CuO 2 plane (the cuprates case), the local field that reflects interlayer polarization estimated from the ionic polarization at the subunit cell level (one half of the unit cell) along the c-axis which is the polar axis, is the microscopic order parameter responsible for the in-plane and the out-of-plane physics of high-T c superconductors Although the IMT reduces the iconicity and causes the local field (the order parameter) to vanish, however, the strong inplane covalency of CuO 2 induces an in-plane intersite transfer of holes form oxygen to copper; this transfer of charge increases the iconicity and causes the local field to reemerge again. At a given critical temperature, this competition between ionicity and covalency leads to a sort of local field avalanche that triggers an out-of-plane correlation between the local polarizations fields at the unit cell level driving the metal into the superconducting state. The HTS are ionic crystals with the parent compound to be the charge transfer Mott insulator The most prominent evidence of the strong temperature as well as the oxygen dependence of the local ionic polarization field (the order parameter) has been found in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-╬┤ . The crystal structure of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6 and YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-╬┤ is considered as juxtaposition along z-axis of successive layers including the anionic CuO 2 layer which is characterized by strong in-plane hybridization. The resulting ionic polarization at the sub-unit cell (one half of the unit cell) is the order parameter, see figure. 1. The normal and the superconducting properties of this oxide are strongly dependent on oxygen doping as well as on temperature. Experimentally, in the range of oxygen content 0 ’éŻ ╬┤ ’éŻ 0.65, this compound has an orthorhombic crystal structure with a metallic behaviour at a normal state and superconducting behaviour at a critical temperature which decreases as the oxygen content decreases For an ideal ionic crystal the point charge model would apply. In the crystalline system, the macroscopic ionic polarization P CM is defined as the sum of dipoles moments in a given cell divided by the cell volume, 1 ’üŚ is the unit cell volume, q i are the formal ionic charges located at the atomic positions r i . The formal charges q i assigned for the different constituents ions are +3 for Y, +2 for Ba, -2 for O and assigning a formal charge for Cu balancing exactly the negative total valence charge of the oxygen. In case of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.9 , the formal valence charge assigned for Copper is +2.2667. The positions of the ions r i have been chosen on the basis of high resolution neutron diffraction crystallographic data from reference The oxygen dependence of the order parameter (the local ionic polarization field) correlates very well with the oxygen dependence of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-╬┤ experimental properties. It is noteworthy that YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-╬┤ undergoes an IMT at oxygen content ╬┤ = 0.65 while the order parameter (the local ionic polarization field) vanishes at the same oxygen content ╬┤ = 0.65. By means of the chemical doping which consists in almost cases in adding oxygen to the parent undoped compound, the local ionic polarization field (the ionic polarization at sub-unit cell level) can be reversed with respect to the parent undoped case especially between the anionic CuO 2 and the adjacent cationic layer (see figure. 1 and figure . 2). For 0.65 ’éŻ ╬┤ ’éŻ 1 oxygen content that corresponds to the insulating state of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-╬┤ , the resulting local ionic field at the sub-unit cell level points always from the anionic CuO 2 layer to the cationic layer as it is the case in the parent undoped material YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6 . In fact, in the range of 0 ’éŻ ╬┤ ’éŻ 0.65 oxygen content, the local polarization field is reversed as it is illustrated in figure For a single phase specimen of optimally oxygenated sample YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.9 (x=0.9), a complete diffraction patterns using high resolution neutron powder diffraction taken at 300 K, 182 K, 101 K, 92 K, 82 K and 16 K have been analyzed by profile fitting methods For the atomic position, we have used the crystallographic data taken from In ferroelectric oxides, the Born effective charge Z*, which relates the change of polarization ╬öP with the displacement u as * cell P Z eu V ’üä’ĆĮ is enhanced by a strong orbital hybridization as compared to the formal valence state of ions. In these oxides the covalency induces an electronic polarization that points in the same direction as the ionic polarization doubling the Born effective charge in many cases The local polarization field (the order parameter) at the unit cell level vanishes at any given temperature in the normal state. However, because of the interplay between the ionicity and the covalency the local field tends to become infinite at the avalanche state, but the coupling at the unit cell level of the local fields stopped the field avalanche and at the same time a perfect out-of-plane correlation between these local fields at the unit cell level is established. The mirror plane which is the yttrium plane divides the unit cell into two coupled right and left sub-units cell. So, any decrease/increase of the local field in the right/left sub-unit cell is correlated by a local field increase/decrease in the left/right sub-unit cell. However in the avalanche (superconducting) state, the asymmetry of the free charge carrier density will break the inversion symmetry of the microscopic order parameter (figure. 8). As a consequence of this broken symmetry, the local field is no longer vanishing at the unit cell level leading to an unconventional pairing between the real current and the polarization current, or particle antiparticle pairing characterized by CPT transformation, where C is the charge conjugation symmetry, P is the parity symmetry and T is the time reversal symmetry. It seems that the remarkable properties of the high temperature superconducting oxides (HTS), especially the Insulator-Metal Transition (IMT) and the Metal-Superconductor Transition (MST) both originate from the competition (interplay) between the ionic versus the in-plane covalence nature of bonds in these materials. The microscopic order parameter that has been identified to be the local polarization field estimated from the ionic polarization at the sub-unit cell (one half of the unit cell) shows a strong temperature as well as the chemical doping dependence, as a result of this competition. It is showed that with chemical doping the local ionic polarization field can be reversed. An arrangement of the electronic structure that consist in an interlayer transfer of charge, between the anionic CuO 2 layer and the adjacent cationic layer, removes the resulting local polarization field and induces an IMT. However, the in-plane covalency induces also an intersite transfer of charge that increases the ionicity and causes the vanishing local polarization field to reemerge again. This interplay (competition) between ionicity-induced interlayer electron transfer and in-plane covalency-induced intersite hole transfer leads to a local field avalanche (a local ionic polarization catastrophe) at a given critical temperature T c . This avalanche effect triggers an out-of-plane correlation between the local fields at the unit cell level driving the oxide into the superconducting state. The asymmetry or the free charge carriers density break locally the inversion symmetry of the order parameter leading to an unconventional pairing mechanism between the conduction current and the polarization current that is characterized by the CPT symmetry transformation. The temperature dependence of the order parameter in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.9 