We study the patterns at which the current flow stabilizes in a 1D superconducting wire, for various experimentally reasonable boundary conditions, for small fixed current densities and temperatures close to T c . We pay special attention to the possible existence of a stationary regime. If the contacts are superconducting, truly stationary or normal regimes do not exist, but can be approached as a limit. In the case of weak superconducting contacts, a rich phase diagram is found, with several periodic regimes that involve two phase slip centers. For some of these regimes, the density of Cooper pairs does not have mirror symmetry. If the contacts are normal, the stationary regime is possible. When current is driven along a superconducting wire, it can either flow as normal current, as supercurrent, or as a combination of both. The various patterns that may be obtained in space and time were reviewed long ago, Figure The third possibility found in Ref. 3 is the periodic regime, in which the normal current and the supercurrent are periodic functions of time; however, following a similar approach to Ref. 3, it was found 8 that for realistic material parameters the periodic regime is strongly disfavored in comparison to the stationary state. We must therefore confront an intriguing situation: on the one hand, phase slips are described in textbooks and their presence has been confirmed experimentally, whereas the stationary possibility is practically ignored in the literature; on the other hand, Refs. 3, 7 and 8 suggest that the stationary regime prevails. One reason for this disparity is the small effective length of the wires considered in Refs. 3, 7 and 8. We argue that the other reason is that these studies assume that the order parameter vanishes at the boundaries. The order parameter does vanish at the boundaries if the "banks" at which the current is fed contain ferromagnetic impurities. In the present study we will compare this situation regimes, if the order parameter vanishes at the extremes of the wire and u = 5.79. "S" denotes stationary regime, "N" denotes exclusively normal current, and "NS" denotes a region where both regimes are possible. The blue line is the stability limit when either the current or the temperature decreases (i.e., the normal state is stable up to this line), the red line is the stability limit when they increase (i.e., the stationary state is stable down to this line), and the purple line is the stability limit in both directions. For a wire of length 2L, the values of Γ in this graph have to be multiplied by (L/ξ(0)) -2 and those of j by (L/ξ(0)) with other possibilities. The banks will be either superconducting or normal. We may then consider the limiting cases of very weak superconductors or of normal metals with very short de Gennes length, and examine in what sense the stationary regime is approached. Following Refs. 3 and 7, we use a minimal model. The wire will be perfectly 1D and uniform, we will assume electroneutrality, and superconductivity will be described by the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau model (TDGL). We choose a gauge with no vector potential, write Γ = 1 -T /T c and denote by φ the electrochemical potential. The unit of length will be denoted by x 0 , by t 0 the unit of time, by φ 0 the unit of voltage, and by j 0 the unit of the current density. As in Ref. 8, we take Here ξ(0) is the coherence length at T = 0, k B is Boltzmann's constant, e is the electron charge, and σ is the normal conductivity. With this notation, the TDGL equation and Ohm's law read and Here ψ is the order parameter, with normalization imposed by Eq. ( Our model neglects Joule heating and thermal fluctuations. Joule heating can be neglected provided that the current density is sufficiently small and/or the wire is sufficiently thin and in good thermal contact with a heat bath. Thermal fluctuations are expected to be important near stability limits. The wire is assumed to extend along -L ≤ x ≤ L. Equations ( Ref. 3, we will set L = 1. The most common experimental situation is that the banks and the wire are carved from the same layer. The banks are located at the extremes of the wire, x = ±L, and are much wider than the wire, so that the current density in them is negligible. The banks can therefore be treated as being in equilibrium, and we obtain from Eq. (2) that |ψ(±L)| = Γ 1/2 . The phase of the order parameter has to obey the Josephson relation and we therefore require the boundary conditions The electrochemical potential φ is obtained from Eq. ( Equations 2-4 were solved numerically; numerical details are provided in the Appendix. Figure It should be mentioned that although in the periodic regime there is a voltage drop along the wire, this problem is not equivalent to the case of fixed applied voltage studied in, e.g., Refs. 10 and 11. In the present case φ(-L) -φ(L) is periodic, rather than constant in time. If there is no normal current and if the order parameter has uniform size, then Eqs. ( Since the wire cannot be strictly normal, we investigate in what sense the normal regime is approached when j rises above j c . Figure We consider now the case that the wire and the banks are made of different superconducting materials, so that |ψ(±L, t)| = Γ 1/2 . We write |ψ(±L, t)| = rΓ 1/2 and replace the for periodic regime with one phase slip center at the middle of the wire, and "P1SC" denotes a region where both regimes are possible. The blue line is the stability limit when either the current or the temperature decreases, the red line is the stability limit when they increase, and the purple line is the stability limit in both directions. The dashed grey curve corresponds to the critical current density j c = 2u(Γ/3) 3/2 , that would be obtained in a very long wire in which the boundaries become irrelevant. boundary condition (4) with We will especially be interested in the case that r is significantly less than 1. In this case we find a surprisingly rich phase diagram. Figure As r increases, the region occupied by the purely superconducting regime increases, and the topology of the phase diagram can change. Figure We note that in this case there is a region where SC and P1 are both possible and that the stability boundaries of P2 and P2 ′ have been investigated separately. For j 5.5, the transition between P2 and P2 ′ in Fig. We are not aware of previous reports of situations in a uniform superconducting wire such stands for periodic regime with two phase slip centers, "SC" and "P1" have the same meaning as in Fig. The dashed grey curves are the stability lines for r = 0, presented in Fig. that the order parameter obeys |ψ(-L, t)| = |ψ(L, t)|, but stabilizes in a regime in which It is hard to judge numerically whether situations as the case Γ = 3.225 in Fig. Since Figs. occurs when the P2→SC transition is due to increase of r. An experimentally accessible quantity is the dc component of the voltage drop along the wire. Figure For the parameters chosen in Figs. We are now in a position to discuss in what sense the P2 regime approaches the stationary regime in the limit r → 0. We first note from Fig. Next, we recall that a peculiar measurable property of the stationary regime is that the potential felt by Cooper pairs, -φ 0 t 0 ∂ arg ψ/∂t (that can be probed by means of SIS junctions, as in Ref. 12) is independent of position. Quite generally, we can conclude that if x = x 1 and x = x 2 are two points of the wire such that ψ(x 1 , t) and ψ(x 2 , t) are periodic and there is no PSC in the segment x 1 ≤ x ≤ x 2 , then the time averages of ∂ arg ψ/∂t at x = x 1 and at x = x 2 have to be equal. Otherwise, | arg ψ(x 1 ) -arg ψ(x 2 )| would endlessly increase, the order parameter would become increasingly wound up, and this would force phase slips in the segment x 1 ≤ x ≤ x 2 . Summing up, we conclude that in the P2 regime the time average of ∂ arg ψ/∂t is uniform in the segment between the PSC, and in the limit r → 0 this property applies to the entire wire. In contrast to the stationary regime, in the case of P2 the potential felt by Cooper pairs is not independent of position for arbitrary times in the segment between the PSC. Figure In the spirit of a minimal model description, we adopt the de Gennes boundary condition 13 where b is a length that represents how far Cooper pairs can survive inside the normal metal. The limit b → ∞ corresponds to an insulator and b → 0 corresponds to a metal with magnetic impurities. Condition (6) can be justified microscopically for static situations, and we may expect that it is still qualitatively correct for small current densities. Since condition (6) implies that there is no supercurrent at the contacts, it may also be an appropriate description of the case in which quasiparticles are injected and withdrawn from the wire by means of NIS junctions. The scaling with length introduced at the end of Sec. II has to be supplemented with b → Lb. Within a numerical scheme in which position along the wire is replaced by a computational grid and ψ x (±L) are approximated by finite differences, condition (6) becomes ψ(±L) = bψ(±L ∓ ∆x)/(b + ∆x), where ∆x is the length of a segment in the grid. Unlike the previous sections, and since the points x = ±L ∓ are not in equilibrium, the rate of change of the phases at these points is not dictated by the potential, so that it is possible to have φ(-L) = φ(L) without phase slips, and the stationary regime is not ruled out. The stability boundary of the normal regime can be found as in Ref. where γ is the eigenvalue with the smallest real part. Figure Figure We have studied the patterns of current flow along a one dimensional superconducting wire, for various boundary conditions, for current densities smaller than 160σk B T c ξ 2 (0)/πeL 3 and temperatures above T A possibility that was predicted long ago, 7 but to our knowledge has never been detected, is the existence of a stationary regime, in which all observable fields are independent of time. The stationary regime might find applications in cases in which oscillations would induce disturbances (e.g., back action from a SQUID). Our results clarify to what extent and in what sense the stationary regime can exist when the order parameter is not forced to vanish at the extremes of a superconducting wire. If In the regime with two PSC, the two phase slips may be simultaneous, but there may also be a time lag between them. When a time lag is present, the solution of the dynamic equations breaks the symmetry of the equations, and |ψ(-x, t)| = |ψ(x, t)|. the reciprocal variable of x and p is the order of the desired derivative. We then transformed back to x-space and obtained ∂ p ψ/∂x p . The problem with this method is that it requires that ψ be periodic with period 2L, and in particular that ψ(-L) = ψ(L). Since this is not necessarily the case, we start by evaluating the derivative of ψ ′ (x) = ψ(x) -[ψ(L) -ψ(-L)]x/(2L), which does obey ψ ′ (-L) = ψ ′ (L), and subsequently add the derivative of [ψ(L) -ψ(-L)]x/(2L). We are still left with the problem that the periodic extension of ψ ′ is not smooth at ±L and we cannot evaluate its derivatives at the boundaries. However, ψ xx is not required at the boundaries, and ψ x (±L) enters the problem after multiplication by the length L/2 6 of a segment, so that ψ x (±L) can be evaluated as a finite difference. The additional stages of the solution of Eqs. ( 