Superconductivity of high critical temperature (T c ) superconductors is usually realized through chemical dopant or application of pressure in a similar way to induce charge carriers of either electrons or holes into their parent compounds 1,2 . For chemical doping, superconductivity behaves asymmetrically with the maximum T c often higher for optimal hole-doping than that of optimal electron-doping on the same parent compound 1,3-5 . However, whether electron carriers could be in favour of higher T c than holes in such high-T c superconductors is unknown but attractive. Here we show that the application of pressure can drive KFe 2 As 2 from hole-to electron-superconductivity after passing the previously reported V-shape or oscillation regime 6-8 . The maximum T c in the electron-dominated region is tripled to KFe 2 As 2 is considered as the ideal laboratory for investigating the superconducting and normal states of the iron-based superconductors due to the following important facts: (i) Single crystals of this material can be synthesized in extremely high purity. Some external effects such as cation distortion, disorder, and impurities are therefore safely avoided, contributing it as the cleanest sample of iron pnictides. This ensures the investigation of physical properties from the solely intrinsic aspect. (ii) Because KFe 2 As 2 is located at the end of the overdoped region of Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 (ref. 3), the concern of the effects on superconductivity from the complicated structural and magnetic transitions, quantum criticality, and electronic nematicity arisen for the underdoped compounds can be removed, which simplifies the study only focusing on the superconducting property itself. (iii) KFe 2 As 2 possesses the strongest electronic correlations amongst all the ironbased superconductors, classifying it as an electron correlated material Maintaining the same chemical composition while applying pressure to change the lattice of a solid has proven to be very effective and powerful in tuning its structural and physical properties in a rather clean way. This method has brought about the superconductivity of many parent iron pnictides including the starting member BaFe 2 As 2 of hole-doped Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 and electron-doped BaFe 2-x A x As 2 (A=Ni, Co) systems High-pressure experiments on KFe 2 As 2 indeed revealed a anomaly of the T c evolution in either a V-shape or oscillation with pressure, which was explained by the possible change of the pairing symmetry or superconducting gap structure This unexpected finding provides a shortcut for synthesizing superconductors with better performance in dense electronic correlated systems. We have measured the resistivity of a single crystal of KFe 2 As 2 at various pressures up to 30 GPa. Figure All the early measurements revealed that T c is no more than 4.0 K at ambient pressure or at pressures below 8 GPa (refs. 6-8). The obtained T c of 12 K is apparently the record for KFe 2 As 2 and three times larger than the ambient value. This is the main finding of our current work. and re-compression (solid uptriangles) processes after releasing pressure from 30 GPa. The insets denote the detailed process of changing pressure. Besides the V-shape behaviour below 3 GPa reported previously Below P2, the system is recovered to the beginning SC1 phase. The large difference between P1 and P2 clearly indicates the hysteretic character of the two superconducting phases. This suggests that the first order transition should take place in this compound under pressure. The superconducting transition in the SC2 phase is weak when initially increasing pressure in the first run, while in the second run, it becomes much sharper (SI, Fig. KFe 2 As 2 is classified as the ending compound of the hole-doped Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 superconductors. Applying pressure on the parent compound BaFe 2 As 2 has induced superconductivity with T c variation in a dome-like shape and then destroyed it upon heavy compression 2 . This behavior is very similar to the electron doping in BaFe 2 As 2 with Ni or Co in the Fe site Figure The obvious changes of R H across the pressures P1 and P2 for the compression and decompression runs follow the possible reconstruction of the electronic structure. The higher T c observed in the SC2 phase is possibly due to the Fermi surface topology change in which the dominative carriers become electrons, thus the doping level and the Fermi surface nesting would be totally different with the initial SC1 phase. This can be examined from the electrical transport properties in the normal states of the two SC phases. We found that all the resistivity data below 30 K can be well fitted by using the formula: ρ=ρ 0 +AT 2 (Fig. Although A monotonously increases with decreasing pressure in SC1, A shows a dome-like behaviour in SC2 which is similar to the T c evolution with pressure in this phase. Interestingly, the pressure for the maximum A is coincident with that for the maximum T c in the SC2 phase. In strongly correlated electron systems, the coefficient A of the T 2 is often scaled as the strength of the electronic correlations To obtain more insight into these findings, we examined the structural properties of KFe 2 As 2 by single-crystal X-ray diffraction at high pressures. Our data indeed confirmed the existence of the first order structural transition of this compound under pressure. In Fig. The axial ratio c/a exhibits different features across the critical pressure close to P1. In the T phase, c/a is almost constant at 3.6 below 13 GPa and then rapidly decreases with increasing pressure. Upon further compression, the axial ratio abruptly changes by as much as nearly 33% between the T phase and cT phases. The c/a ratio of the cT phase maintains a constant of 2.4. The pressure-induced cT phase has been thought to be nonsuperconducting due to the suppression of the spin fluctuations This surprising discovery of such high-T c might result from the strong electronic correlations in this material. This finding offers a shortcut to study the asymmetry of electron-and hole-doped superconductivity in an iron-based superconductor with the same chemical composition. It also points to a new route to search for higher T c in ironbased superconductors. The observed cT structure of the SC2 phase also sheds light on the mystery of the second superconducting phase in iron chalcogenides Sample preparation and electrical transport measurements: High-quality single crystals of KFe 2 As 2 were grown by conventional solid-state reaction using KAs as selfflux The sample-to-detector distance and the image plate orientation angles were calibrated using LaB 6 standard. A monochromatic X-ray beam with a wavelength of 0.3344 Å was used. A symmetric DAC with a pair of 500 μm culet size anvils was used to generate pressure. A stainless steel gasket preindented to 35 microns thick with a 200 μm diameter hole was used as the sample chamber. A small piece of a single crystal with a ruby ball was loaded in the gasket hole. Argon was used as pressure-transmitting medium to ensure better hydrostatic pressure condition. The pressures were also monitored by the ruby fluorescence shifts 