A series of (Li0.8Fe0.2)OHFeSe1-xSx (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) samples were successfully synthesized via hydrothermal reaction method and the phase diagram is established. Magnetic susceptibility suggests that an antiferromagnetism arising from (Li0.8Fe0.2)OH layers coexists with superconductivity, and the antiferromagnetic transition temperature nearly remains constant for various S doping levels. In addition, the lattice parameters of the both a and c axes decrease and the superconducting transition temperature Tc is gradually suppressed with the substitution of S for Se, and eventually superconductivity vanishes at x = 0.90. The decrease of Tc could be attributed to the effect of chemical pressure induced by the smaller ionic size of S relative to that of Se, being consistent with the effect of hydrostatic pressure on (Li0.8Fe0.2)OHFeSe. But the detailed investigation on the relationships between Tc and the crystallographic facts suggests a very different dependence of Tc on anion height from the Fe2 layer or Ch-Fe2-Ch angle from those in FeAs-based superconductors. Since the discovery of superconductivity in LaFeAsO 1-x F x with T c ∼ 26K 1 , the iron-based superconductors, as the second family of compounds exhibiting high T c after the cuprates, have attracted wide attention β-FeSe, which shows superconducting transition at ∼ 10 K and owns the simplest crystal structure among iron-based superconductors, is thought to be a promising system to investigate the mechanism of high T c superconductivity in iron-based superconductors In iron-based superconductors, both carrier doping and isovalent substitution can tune the superconducting properties A series of (Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 )OHFeSe 1-x S x samples with nominal composition x = 0.0-1.0 were synthesized by hydrothermal reaction method, as described in the previous report Powder x-ray diffraction(XRD) data of samples were collected by using x-ray diffractometer (SmartLab-9, Rikagu Corp.) with Cu Kα radiation and a fixed graphite monochromator in the 2-θ range of 5 • -70 • at room temperature. The average stoichiometries of Fe, Se and S of the polycrystalline samples were determined from energydispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis. The actual S contents x were determined by EDX to be 0, 0.08, 0.16, 0.22, 0.28, 0.41, 0.53, 0.66, 0.77, 0.90, and 1.0 for the 11 samples used in this work with the nominal molar reagents ratios of Sulfourea/(Sulfourea+Selenourea)= 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and 1.0, respectively. Magnetization measurements were carried out on SQUID MPMS-XL5 (Quantum Design). Refinements of the XRD data were performed by using GSAS software Powder XRD patterns of (Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 )OHFeSe 1-x S x samples are shown in Fig. Figure Based on the magnetic measurements displayed in Figs. Another intriguing phenomenon of the phase diagram shown in Fig. In summary, we successfully synthesized a series of (Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 )OHFeSe 1-x S x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) samples through the hydrothermal method. Due to the smaller ionic size of S relative to that of Se, the S substitution leads to shrinking of the lattice parameters both along the a axis and the c axis. Magnetic susceptibility and specific heat were also studied. Based on the magnetic susceptibility and thermodynamic results of all the samples, the phase diagram of (Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 )OHFeSe 1-x S x is mapped out. T c is suppressed from 40 K to zero as S content increases from 0 to 0.90. The effect of chemical pressure resulting from S substitution for Se is considered as a possible mechanism of the suppression of T c , which is in agreement with the effect of external pressure previously in-vestigated in (Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 )OHFeSe. But the relationships between T c and the crystallographic details reveal that the dependence of T c on anion height from the Fe2 layer or the Ch-Fe2-Ch angle is distinct from those summarized in FeAs-based superconductors. Magnetic susceptibility at 1 T and the specific heat suggest that an AFM transition around 8 K originates from (Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 )OH layers. The magnetic transition temperature does not alter with S concentration, and superconductivity coexists with antiferromagnetism in the superconducting region of S content.