To clarify the nature of correlations in Hund metals and its relationship with Mott physics we analyze the electronic correlations in multiorbital systems as a function of intraorbital interaction U , Hund's coupling JH and electronic filling n. We show that the main process behind the enhancement of correlations in Hund metals is the suppression of the double-occupancy of a given orbital, as it also happens in the Mott-insulator at half-filling. However, contrary to what happens in Mott correlated states the reduction of the quasiparticle weight Z with JH can happen on spite of increasing charge fluctuations. Therefore, in Hund metals the quasiparticle weight and the mass enhancement are not good measurements of the charge localization. Using simple energetic arguments we explain why the spin polarization induced by Hund's coupling produces orbital decoupling. We also discuss how the behavior at moderate interactions, with correlations controlled by the atomic spin polarization, changes at large U and JH due to the proximity to a Mott insulating state. The Mott transition is one of the most dramatic manifestations of electronic correlations In multiorbital systems the Mott transition happens not only at half-filling but at all integer fillings Within the context of iron superconductors, which accomodate 6 electrons in 5 orbitals when undoped, the term Hund metal was coined to name the correlated metallic state induced by Hund's coupling at moderate interaction U Orbital dependent correlations, named orbital differentiation, have been observed in some iron superconductors To address the generic features of Hund metals we consider degenerate 2D multiorbital systems with hopping t restricted to the same orbital and to nearest neighbors and bandwidth W = 8t. For the interactions we start from the Hubbard-Kanamori Hamiltonian a is the orbital index, ↑ and ↓ the spin, n a↓ and n a↑ the electron occupancy of a given orbital with spin ↓ or ↑. We treat the interactions using a Z 2 slave spin representation Repulsive interactions require J H /U ≤ 0.33. The quasiparticle weight Z provides a way to quantify the correlations between electrons. Z measures the overlap between the elementary excitations of the correlated and the non-interacting systems. It is equal to unity in non-interacting systems, decreases with increasing correlations and vanishes in Mott insulators. In Fermi liquid theory it equals the inverse of the mass enhancement. Fig. The correlated metallic state, in the following Hund metal, appears at finite J H in a wide range of parameters, including U < W . The way in which this region depends on the interactions reveals the crucial role played by J H on inducing the strong correlations which seem unrelated to the n = 6 Mott insulating state. Similar phase diagrams are found in other cases, e.g. for 2 electrons in 3-orbitals in Fig. Hund's coupling polarizes the spin locally. The small Z in a Hund metal is due to the small overlap between the non-interacting states and the spin polarized atomic states We now focus on the doping dependence of the correlations. transition. The strength of correlations shows a clear asymmetry with electronic filling around n = 6. No special feature is observed at n = 6 for this value of U what confirms that the n = 6 Mott transition is not responsible for the strong suppression of Z. On the other hand the entrance to the strongly correlated Hund metal appears at smaller J H as n approaches n = 5. Connection with the Mott insulating state at half-filling is evident. A clear doping dependence of correlations is also observed in 3-orbital systems, Fig. The hallmark of Mott physics is the suppression of charge fluctuations C nT which vanish at the Mott transitions. Here In single orbital systems the charge fluctuations C nT and Z have a similar doping and interaction dependence. Consequently, very often, the suppression of Z, is assumed to imply localization. Fig. The increase of charge fluctuations with J H can be traced back to the suppression of interorbital correlations C inter n . Accounting for the equivalency of all the orbitals , by definition positive or zero, is largest in the non-interacting limit. C inter n is negative for repulsive interactions and it vanishes in the absence of interactions as the charge in different orbitals is not correlated. The entrance into the Hund metal has a very strong effect on C intra n and C inter n being both strongly suppressed, see Fig. At half-filling, n = N , processes (i) and (ii) are blocked by Pauli exclusion principle and process (iii) controls the critical U c (J H ) for the Mott transition which strongly decreases with J H , see Fig. In the metallic state the process (i) is allowed and promoted by J H . We ascribe the entrance in the Hund metal at J * H to avoiding process (iii). This process is suppressed by J H for n > 1 and it is directly connected to the Mott transition at half-filling. Its suppression strongly reduces the intraorbital double occupancy and C intra n enhancing the atomic spin polarization in the Hund metal. Process (ii) is suppressed by J H for n > 3 and promoted for n < 3 (as U ′ = U -2J H ). This introduces a qualitative difference between systems with 2 electrons and those with larger integer fillings, which causes that in 2-electron systems the suppression of Z and the enhancement of C S with J H are smoother and favors the enhancement of C nT . Nevertheless, even when process (ii) is allowed, the suppression of process (iii) indirectly reduces the occurrence of atomic configurations with anti-parallel spins in different orbitals (not shown). The strong supression of C intra n =< |δn a | 2 > at the crossover J * H (U ) reduces the interorbital charge correlations < δn a δn b >. The latter are further suppressed by the reduction of the effective interaction between the electrons in different orbitals, what produces orbital decoupling (measured by <δnaδn b > <|δna| 2 > ): The interaction between electrons in different orbitals is U ′ or U ′ -J H depending if they have parallel or antiparallel spins, see Eq. (1). At J * H the occurrence of atomic configurations with parallel spin strongly increases while those involving opposite spin become less frequent, effectively reducing the interaction between electrons in different orbitals to U ′ -J H [37]. If J H is further increased the decoupling is enhanced as the effective interaction U ′ -J H = U -3J H decreases. At J H /U = 0.33, this interaction and C inter n vanish. As discussed above, at intermediate filling and interactions, around J * H (U ) the dependence of the quasiparticle weight and the fluctuations on the interactions is controlled by the establishment of the atomic polarization. On the other hand, at large J H and U , the behavior of the locally spin polarized system becomes dominated by the decrease with J H of the effective interaction between spin-parallel electrons and by the proximity to the Mott insulator, which happens at a larger critical interaction with increasing J H . In particular, in the large J H and U limit, both Z and C nT increase with J H , see Figs. 1(b), S2 and S3. Moreover while, with increasing U , Z decreases monotonously, C S increase for intermediate U but they start to decrease at large U and J H see Fig. In conclusion, we have clarified the nature of correlations in Hund metals and its differences with those in Mott systems. In Hund metals the enhancement of correlations originate in the suppression of atomic configurations which reduce the magnetic moment, specially intraorbital double occupancy, while the hopping of electrons with spin parallel to the locally spin polarized atoms is allowed. The suppression of hopping processes involving intraorbital double occupancy links the correlations in Hund metals to the Mott transition at half-filling. However, contrary to what happens in Mott correlated systems, the reduction of the quasiparticle weight Z in Hund metals, can happen on spite of increasing charge fluctuations. Therefore in Hund metals the quasiparticle weight and the mass enhancement are not good measures of charge localization. The tendency towards orbital decoupling in the Hund metal is due to the reduction of the effective (and J H -dependent) interaction between electrons in different orbitals produced by the predominance of atomic configurations involving parallel spins. Finally, we note that at large U and J H the dependence of the quasiparticle weight and the spin fluctuations on the interactions reveals a crossover to a region of parameters controlled by the proximity to the Mott insulator. The behavior discussed, together with other known properties of Hund metals We thank L. de Medici for useful discussions and for providing us with the DMFT results used in the benchmark in the SM and to G. Kotliar, G. Giovanetti, Q. Si, R. Yu, A.J. Millis, R. Arita, M.J. Calderón, B. Valenzuela and the participants of the workshop "Magnetism, Bad Metals and Superconductivity: Iron Pnictides and Beyond" at KITP Santa Barbara for useful conversations. We acknowledge funding from Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad via FIS2011-29689 and FIS2014-53219-P from Fundación Ramón Areces, a fellowship from University of Rome La Sapienza and from the National Science Foundation under Grant No. NSF PHY11-25915. U and JH are respectively given in units of the non-renormalized bandwidth W and of U . The system shows particle hole symmetry and the results are also valid for electronic filling 2N -n. In (a) as in Fig. FIG. In the Z 2 slave-spin approach the two possible occupancies of a spinless fermion on a given site, n c = 0 and n c = 1, are substituted by the two states of a pseudospin spin-1/2 variable, S z = -1/2 and S z = +1/2: n f is the occupation of an auxiliary fermion f , introduced to satisfy the anticonmutation relations. Two unphysical states |n f = 0, S z = +1/2 , |n f = 1, S z = -1/2 are generated in the procedure. To eliminate them, the local constraint n f = S z + 1 2 has to be imposed. In a multiorbital system each of the orbital and spin species have to be treated in this manner. That is, a set of 2N pseudospin-1/2 variables S z iaσ and auxiliary fermions f iaσ are introduced at each site i Here a = 1, N and σ are the orbital and spin indices. On each site these variables have to satisfy the local constraint: what can be done with time-dependent Lagrange multipliers fields λ iaσ (τ ). Following the prescription in Here O iaσ is a pseudospin-1/2 operator defined as with γ iaσ a complex number To solve the interacting problem several approximations are introduced The fermionic Hamiltonian for a generic multiorbital system without orbital hybridization is: ) where μ is the chemical potential, ǫ a the crystal field and ε aσ the original fermionic dispersion. In this singlesite approximation the renormalization of the dispersion is given by the quasiparticle weight self-consistently determined from the solution of the pseudospin Hamiltonian. where h aσ = O aσ k ε aσ (k) f † aσ (k)f aσ (k) . In the case of a spin and orbital degenerate system without spontaneous breaking of the symmetry, as the one discussed in the main text, λ a,σ , h a,σ and Z a,σ become orbital and spin independent and the corresponding indices can be dropped. A convenient choice for γ i,aσ = γ in this case is In Fig. 