We study the renormalization of the gap of an s-wave superconductor in the presence of two magnetic impurities. For weakly bound Shiba states, we analytically calculate the part of the gap renormalization that is sensitive to the relative orientation of the two impurity spins. For impurities with a strong exchange coupling to the conduction electrons, we solve the gap equation self-consistently by numerics and find that the sub-gap Shiba state turns into a supra-gap Andreev state when the local gap parameter changes sign under the impurities. The study of magnetic impurities in superconductors has a long history. Important effects include the renormalization (reduction) of the gap in the host superconductor by the impurities, The outline of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we introduce our model Hamiltonian for the magnetic impurity in an s-wave superconductor. In Sec. II, we summarize briefly our analytical approach based on the T-matrix formalism. In Sec. III, we apply it to a single classical impurity. In Sec. IV, we present a detailed study of the Shiba to Andreev transition as a function of the impurity strength using both analytical and numerical methods. In Sec. V, we consider the two-impurity case, and show the presence of two subsequent quantum phase transitions as a function of the exchange coupling. Finally, in Sec. VI, we present a summary of our results and some perspectives. In the analytical part of our study, we analyze two (weakly bound) magnetic impurities in a threedimensional s-wave superconductor. The corresponding Hamiltonian H = H kin + H SC + H imp can be decomposed into the kinetic energy, H kin , the BCS mean field superconductivity, H SC , and the impurity contribution, H imp . If there were no impurities, the system could be modeled by the Hamiltonian H 0 = H kin + H SC,0 , where . (E k denotes the kinetic energy dispersion), and H SC,0 = dr ∆ 0 c † ↑ (r)c † ↓ (r) + H.c. with a superconducting order parameter of constant value ∆ 0 (chosen to be positive). Here, c kσ is the annihilation operator for an electron of three-dimensional momentum k and spin σ, while c † σ (r) creates a spin σ electron at position r (in the calculations, we use ↑≡ +, ↓≡ -). Due to the impurities, however, the superconducting part of the Hamiltonian is promoted from H SC,0 to The order parameter is set by the self-consistent equation ∆(r) = -g c ↓ (r)c ↑ (r) H , where g > 0 is the microscopic attractive interaction between electrons in the superconductor, and where the expectation value is taken with respect to the full H. The magnetic impurities, finally, are treated as classical spins S i residing at positions r i , and modeled by a purely magnetic where S iz = ±|S i | is the ẑ component of the spin of impurity i, and J i is the exchange coupling between this impurity and the electrons in the superconductor. This model comes with the Debye frequency ω D as a natural high-energy cutoff. If the renormalization of the superconducting gap is small, |δ∆(r)| = |∆(r) -∆ 0 | ≪ ∆ 0 , one can approximate ∆(r) by evaluating the right-hand side of the gap equation for an unrenormalized gap, with H ′ = H 0 + H imp . This is the approach we employ in the remainder of the analytical calculation. When |δ∆(r)| becomes of order ∆ 0 , this approximation ceases to be valid, and we make use of numerical simulations. The tight-binding Hamiltonian H is defined as where c iσ is the annihilation operator acting on an electron with spin σ at lattice site i, and the first sum runs over neighboring sites i and i ′ located in a twodimensional square lattice of size N x × N y with lattice constant a. The chemical potential μ is taken from the bottom of the energy band, and the local order parameter ∆ i is determined self-consistently in an iterative procedure for fixed value of the exchange coupling Ji at the site i starting from the uniform superconducting order parameter ∆ 0 until convergence is reached. We begin with calculating the full imaginary time Nambu Green's function , and where the Nambu spinor is defined as Ψ k = (c k↑ , c † -k↓ ) T . For equal positions r = r ′ , a Fourier transformation from imaginary time to Matsubara frequencies ω n yields with ν F being the density of states (per spin) at the Fermi energy, and with the Pauli matrices τ i acting in Nambu space (τ 0 = 1 2×2 ), while we obtain at distances δr = |r-r ′ | larger than the Fermi wavelength (k F is the Fermi momentum). Using the imaginary timedependent Dyson equation, the full Green's functions can be expressed as where the T -matrix When the impurities are far apart from each other, (k F r 12 ) -1 ≪ 1, the gap near a given impurity is predominantly renormalized by scattering processes off this impurity. A Gaussian high-energy cutoff at the scale ω D regularizes the logarithmic UV divergence of this integral. For small |α 1 |, we can furthermore expand this expression to second order in α 1 . Since the self-consistent equation (3) yields a bare gap of ∆ 0 ≈ 2ω D e -1/gνF , we find For a more strongly bound Shiba state, |α 1 | → 1, our analytical calculation hints at a very strong suppression of the gap at the positions of the impurities, |δ∆(r i )| ∼ ∆ 0 , but the non-selfconsistent approach cannot make any quantitative predictions in this regime. Numerically, on the other hand, we can readily access the regime |α 1 | ≥ 1, see Fig. After the phase transition, the modulus of the bound state energy increases, whereas the superconducting gap |∆ 1 | decreases as functions of J1 . This means that the energy of the bound state lies outside the gap for J1 > JSA . We refer to this state as an Andreev bound state localized in an effective S-S' junction. The transition is clearly visible in our numerical results plotted in Fig. To obtain further insight into the sub-gap Shiba to supra-gap Andreev state transition, we study the case of a single impurity with a classical spin S = |S| at position r = 0. We use the simple gap renormalization -a 3 ∆ ′ δ(0) to mimic a suppression of the gap from ∆ 0 to ∆ 0 -∆ ′ within a region of volume a 3 around the impurity (note that we require ∆ ′ > 0 since there cannot be a bound state with energy larger than the gap if the latter is locally enhanced). Inverting the Hamiltonian, where ξ p = p 2 /2m -μ, and ∓ corresponds to the parallel and antiparallel orientation of the bound state spin as compared to the impurity spin, respectively. This equation can be rewritten as , where these states become occupied, accompanied by jumps in bound state energies and, hence, in ∆1 and ∆2. There are also two distinct Shiba to Andreev state transitions. The gap between the impurities (blue dots) is suppressed for small J1, when the two bound states have finite overlap, but restores at larger J1, see also Fig. where α ′ = ν F πa 3 ∆ ′ , and α = πν F JS. We find that bound state energies E within the bulk gap ∆ 0 satisfying Eq. ( where τ is the eigenvalue of τ x , and w = τ α ′ ±α. Plugging this expression for E back into Eq. ( The cross-section of the spatial profile of the gap ∆ for two impurities located on the x axis for fixed J2/t = 2.3 and varying J1: J1/t = 1 (yellow dotted line), J1/t = 2 (green dotted dashed line), J1/t = 2.3 (red dashed line), J1/t = 4 (blue solid line). The gap under the first impurity is increasingly suppressed with increasing exchange coupling: After the phase transition J1 > Jc, π-junctions (negative gap value) under the impurity arise accompanied by restoration of the gap between the two impurities. The gap under the second impurity is suppressed the most when J1 ≈ J2 since then the two bound states hybridize strongly. For wavefunction plots, see Fig. for ∆ ′ > ∆ 0 , |α| + α ′ > 1 (as in the numerics), and for ∆ ′ < ∆ 0 , |α| + α ′ < 1, while otherwise the fraction under the square root has to be inverted. When the impurities are further apart than the Fermi wavelength, F , we can expand the gap renormalization in orders of (k F r 12 ) -1 . To second order, we find where n G i1 0,n give rise to the single impurity renormalizations of the order parameter, which we denote δ∆ (i) , while the other corrections to the Green's function result in inter-impurity gap renormalizations δ∆ ± (r 1 ) reads at zero temperature δ∆ (12) with The upper (lower) sign applies for parallel (antiparallel) impurity spin alignment. Besides addressing the gap renormalization at the sites of the impurities, it is also interesting to analyze the scaling of the different contributions to the gap renormalization as a function of the inter-impurity distance in their middle, that is at R = (r 1 + r 2 )/2. The single impurity contributions are found to scale as where ξ is the superconducting coherence length. This scaling has a simple geometrical interpretation: to leading order in (k F r 12 ) -1 ≪ 1, the anomalous Green's function (which determines the gap) is renormalized by the electron traveling from R to impurity i at r i , scattering there, and coming back to R. Since a trip to, and back from, the impurity involves a propagator proportional to (k F r 12 ) -1 , see Eq. ( since they stem from an electron traveling first to impurity one, then to impurity two, and then coming back. This involves three trips, and a total distance of 2r 12 . The inter-impurity renormalization δ∆ In the case of small impurity distances k F r 12 → 0, where G Keeping all orders of (k F r 12 ) -1 ≫ 1 in Eq. ( where δ∆ Analyzing two classical spins in a superconductor, we obtained the gap renormalization analytically for weakly and numerically for strongly coupled bound states. In addition, we found a transition for Shiba to Andreev states which is accompanied by two subsequent quantum phase transitions as the exchange coupling is varied. All these predictions lead to dramatic spectral changes. In order to observe these effects by STM tecniques, A number of additional directions can be envisioned in future work. Instead of investigating the physics associated with large impurity spins, for which a classical treatment is appropriate, one could generalize our work the limit of small impurity spins, for which Kondo physics becomes relevant at low temperatures. With two closeby impurities, this could for instance lead to interesting multi-stage screening effects. Another promising generalization is offered by the use of more exotic superconductors, such as d-wave materials, where impurities induce virtual bound states 