Lately, the three-dimensional (3D) Dirac semimetal, which possesses 3D linear dispersion in electronic structure as a bulk analogue of graphene, has generated widespread interests in both material science and condensed matter physics 1,2 . Very recently, crystalline Cd 3 As 2 has been proposed and proved to be one of 3D Dirac semimetals which can survive in atmosphere [3] be driven into other topological phases including topological insulator, topological metal, Weyl semimetal and even topological superconductor states. The realization of topological superconductivity and Majorana fermions is of great interest due to both the exploration of fundamental physics and the potential applications in fault-tolerant topological quantum computation In our experiment, single crystal of Cd 3 As 2 is synthesized from a Cd-rich melt with stoichiometry Cd 8 As 2 in the evacuated quartz ampoule 'Soft' PC measurement A set of point contact spectra (normalized dI/dV vs. bias voltage) of 5 Ω PC resistance at different temperatures is shown in Fig. The observed superconductivity behavior is further confirmed by another 7.5 Ω PCS measurement at a different position on the same surface of S1. An onset PC resistance drop temperature of 3.9 K is apparent for this point contact too (inset of Fig. Similar DCP features locating at ±1 meV is also observed at 0.28 K, which disappear as the temperature increases above 2.5 K. The weak ZBCP is also observed below 0.8 K (inset of Fig. To further demonstrate our observation of superconductivity in 3D Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 , the PCS of another sample (S2) was studied. Figure As the temperature is decreased below 1.2 K, a ZBCP as well as DCPs appears (Fig. The main features of dI/dV spectra can be classified into two types: (i) a ZBCP observed at low temperature; (ii) DCPs and double conductance dips both symmetric to zero bias, with the peaks smearing into a broad hump at high temperature. These exotic spectra features can be attributed to In order to compare with the experimental observation of (112) surface, we project the above phase diagram onto the one versus the [112] momentum. Since the projection covers all the FAS, the Majorana zero modes of the quasi-1D BDI-SCs for each paired 3 z k channel contribute to the ZBCP. For the quasi-2D HPSCs, the total number of Majorana edge modes of energy E in region II is maximized at E=0 and decreases with increasing energy, implying that these Majorana zero edge modes also contribute to ZBCP. Note that the projection onto the [112] direction can deform the quasi-2D HPSCs to be anisotropic due to the anisotropy of Ferimi surface 2 . Thus the helical Majorana edge modes with finte energy may account for the DCPs in the dI/dV spectra by examing the angle-resolved conductance spectra with an anisotropic pairing However, due to the high mobility of single crystal Cd 3 As 2 , the PC is close to the ballistic limit with the Sharvin resistance R S much larger than Maxwell resistance R M , which is not well consistent with the critical current effect scenario. In summary, by point contact measurement using "needle-anvil" configuration we observe the unexpected superconducting behavior in 3D Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 crystal. The observed ZBCP and DCPs features in PCS indicate the superconductivity we found is unconventional. Our further theoretical analyses reveal that the exotic features may originate from topological superconductivity in the surface FAS and bulk states. In particular, the surface of the superconducting Dirac semimetal renders quasi-1D BDI-SCs which support Majorana zero modes associated with the ZBCP, while the bulk can exhibit as the quasi-2D HPSCs which support helical Majorana edge modes that may contribute to both the ZBCP and DCPs. So far, most experiments are still focused on demonstrating or exploring the existence of topological superconductors. Our discovery of superconductivity in 3D Dirac semimetal which is of ultrahigh mobility may offer an ideal candidate or platform for studying topological superconductivity. Note added: We noted that another group also studied PCS of polycrystalline Cd 3 As 2 and showed an indication of superconductivity in this compound Detailed derivation for the 2D helical p-wave pairing. Considering the basis set of , and , here The gap close condition is given by:  . The region II in Fig. 