It was recently shown that conventional phonon-electron interactions induce triplet pairing states in time-reversal invariant 3D Dirac semi -metals provided magnetic impurities or exchange interactions are strong enough 1 . The order parameter in this case is a vector field. Starting from the microscopic model of the isotropic Dirac semi-metal, the Ginzburg-Landau energy for this field is derived using the Gor'kov technique. It was found that the transversal coherence length ξ T is much smaller than the longitudinal, ξ L = 4 √ 2ξ T , despite the isotropy. Several new features appear when an external field is applied. The Ginzburg -Landau model is used to investigate magnetic properties of such superconductors. Using the small deviation method the magnetic penetration depth was found also to be vastly different for longitudinal and transverse fluctuations λT /λL = 4 √ 2. As a result the superconductor responds as type I to a transverse perturbation, while with respect to a longitudinal perturbation it behaves as type II. At large fields the order parameter orients itself perpendicular to the field direction. The triplet superconductor persists at arbitrarily high magnetic field (no upper critical magnetic field) like in some p wave superconductors. Recently 3D Dirac semi -metals (DSM) like N a 3 Bi and Cd 3 As 2 with electronic states described by Bloch wave functions, obeying the "pseudo-relativistic" Dirac equation (with the Fermi velocity v F replacing the velocity of light) were observed More recently when the Cu doped Bi 2 Se 3 was subjected to pressure 8 , T c increased to 7K at 30GP a. Quasilinear temperature dependence of the upper critical field H c2 , exceeding the orbital and Pauli limits for the singlet pairing, points to the triplet superconductivity. The band structure of the superconducting compounds is apparently not very different from its parent compound Bi 2 Se 3 , so that one can keep the two band k • p description (Se p z orbitals on the top and bottom layer of the unit cell mixed with its neighboring Bi p z orbital). Electronic-structure calculations and experiments on the compounds under pressure 8 reveal a single bulk threedimensional Dirac cone like in Bi with large spin-orbit coupling. Moreover very recently some pnictides were identified as exhibiting Dirac spectrum The case of the Dirac semi-metals is very special due to the strong spin dependence of the itinerant electrons' effective Hamiltonian. It was pointed out 10 that in this case the triplet possibility can arise although the triplet gap is smaller than that of the singlet, the difference sometimes is not large for spin independent electronelectron interactions. Very recently the spin dependent part of the phonon induced electron -electron interaction was considered As mentioned above generally the applied magnetic field is an ultimate technique to probe the superconducting state. In a growing number of experiments, in addition to magnetotransport, magnetization curves, the magnetic penetration depth and upper critical magnetic field were measured In the present paper we derive such a GL type theory for triplet superconductor from the microscopic isotropic DSM model with attractive local interaction. The order parameter in this case is a vector field and the GL theory of vector field already considered in literature The paper is organized as follows. The model of the (phonon mediated or unconventional) local interactions of 3D Dirac fermion is presented and the method of its solution (in the Gorkov equations form) including the symmetry analysis of possible pairing channels and the vectorial nature of the triplet order parameter is given in Section II. In Section III the Gorkov formalism, sufficiently general to derive the GL equations, is briefly presented. The most general form of the GL energy of the triplet superconductor in magnetic field consistent with the symmetries is given in IV. The coefficient of the relevant terms are calculated from the microscopic DSM model in section V. Section VI is devoted to applications of the GL model. The ground state degeneracy, the character of its excitations and basic magnetic properties are discussed. The vector order parameter is akin to optical phonons with sharp distinction between transverse and longitudinal modess. Transverse and longitudinal coherence lengths and penetration depths are calculated and the upper critical magnetic field is discussed. Section VI includes generalizations to include Pauli paramagnetism, discussion of an experimental possibility of observation of the excitation and conclusion. A. Pairing Hamiltonian in the Dirac semi-metal. Electrons in the 3D Dirac semimetal are described by field operators ψ f s (r), where f = L, R are the valley index (pseudospin) for the left/right chirality bands with spin projections taking the values s =↑, ↓ with respect to, for example, the z axis. To use the Dirac ("pseudo-relativistic") notations, these are combined into a four component bi-spinor creation operator, ψ † = ψ † L↑ , ψ † L↓ , ψ † R↑ , ψ † R↓ , whose index γ = {f, s} takes four values. The non-interacting massless Hamiltonian with Fermi velocity v F and chemical potential μ reads 18 K = r ψ + (r) Kψ (r) ; (1) where the three 4 × 4 matrices, i = x, y, z, are presented in the block form via Pauli matrices σ. They are related to the Dirac γ matrices (in the chiral representation, sometimes termed "spinor") by α = βγ with Here 1 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. We consider a special case of 3D rotational symmetry that in particular has an isotropic Fermi velocity. Moreover we assume time reversal, Θψ (r) = iσ y ψ * (r), and inversion symmetries although the pseudo-Lorentz symmetry will be explicitly broken by interactions. The spectrum of single particle excitations is linear. The chemical potential μ is counted from the Dirac point. As usual in certain cases the actual interaction can be approximated by a model local one: Unlike the free Hamiltonian K, Eq.( where the matrices are also the rotation generators. B. The symmetry classification of possible pairing channels. Since we consider the local interactions as dominant, the superconducting condensate (the off-diagonal order parameter) will be local where the constant matrix M should be a 4 × 4 antisymmetric matrix. Due to the rotation symmetry they transform covariantly under infinitesimal rotations generated by the spin S i operator, Eq.( Here and in what follows "t" denotes the transpose matrix. The representations of the rotation group therefore characterize various possible superconducting phases. Out of 16 matrices of the four dimensional Clifford algebra six are antisymmetric and one finds one vector and three scalar multiplets of the rotation group. The multiplets contain: (i) a triplet of order parameters: The algebra is Note that the three matrices T i are Hermitian. (ii) three singlets Which one of the condensates is realized at zero temperature is determined by the parameters of the Hamiltonian and is addressed next within the Gaussian approximation. As was shown in our previous work A. Gorkov equations for Green's functions in matrix form Using the standard BCS formalism, the Matsubara Green's functions (τ is the Matsubara time) obey the Gor'kov equations -gF βγ (r, τ ; r, τ ) These equations are conveniently presented in matrix form (superscript t denotes transposed and I -the identity matrix): Here X = (r, τ ), ∆ αβ (X) = gF βα (X, X) and In the homogeneous case the Gor'kov equations for Fourier components of the Green's functions simplify considerably: The matrix gap function can be chosen as with real constant ∆ z . Here D -1 (ω, p) = iω + μ -α • p, is the noninteracting inverse Dirac Green's function for the Hamiltonian Eq.( where ω n = πT (2n + 1) is the fermionic Matsubara frequency. Solving these equations one obtains (in matrix form) with the gap function to be found from the consistency condition Now we find solutions of this equation for each of the possible superconducting phases. B. Homogeneous triplet solution of the gap equation. In this phase rotational symmetry is spontaneously broken simultaneously with the electric charge U (1) (global gauge invariance) symmetry. Assuming z direction of the p -wave condensate the order parameter matrix takes a form: where ∆ z is a constant. The energy scale will be set by the Debye cutoff T D of the electron -phonon interactions, see below. The spectrum of elementary excitations at zero temperature was discussed in ref. leading to an exponential gap dependence on λ when it is small: ∆ z = T D / sinh (12/λ) 2T D e -12/λ . The critical temperature is obtained from Eq.( The bubble integral is Performing first the sum over Matsubara frequencies and then integrate over q one obtains, similarly to the singlet BCS, (see Appendix A for details): where log γ E = 0.577 is the Euler constant. In this section the effective description of the superconducting condensate in terms of the varying (on the mesoscopic scale) order complex parameter vector field ∆ i (r) is presented. A. The GL description for a vector order parameter The static phenomenological description is determined by the GL free energy functional F [∆ (r) , A (r)] expanded to second order in gradients and fourth order in ∆. In a magnetic field B, as usual, space derivatives of the microscopic Hamiltonian become covariant derivatives ∇ →D= ∇+i e * c A, e * = 2e due to gauge invariance under ∆ i → e iχ(r) ∆ i , A i → A i -c e * ∇χ. Naively the only modification of the GL energy is in the gradient term, Eq.( (30) The factor N, the density of states, is customarily introduced into energy (31) The magnetic part, F mag = B 2 /8π, completes the free energy. The set of the GL equations corresponding to this energy are obtained by variation with respect to Ψ * j and A i . The first is: The anticommutator appears due complex conjugate terms in Eq.( where u = u L -u T . Having established coefficients u T,L ,β 1,2 , μ Z and α, our aim in the next Section is to deduce them from the microscopic Dirac semi-metal model. For the calculation of coefficients of the local part, the homogeneous Gor'kov equation, Eq.( Iterating once the equation Eq.( . (34) Using ∆ t * = ∆ * i T i , multiplying by T t i and taking the trace, one gets the linear local terms where the bubble integral was given in Eq.( where N is the density of states. The cubic terms in Eq.( The calculation is given in Appendix A and results in: The Riemann zeta function is ζ (3) = 1. 2 . To calculate the gradient terms, one first linearizes the Gor'kov equations, Eq.( In particular, The anomalous Green's functions are no longer space translation invariant, so that the following Fourier transform is required: The (time independent) order parameter is also represented via Fourier components ∆ * (X) = P e -iP•r ∆ * (P). The linear part Gor'kov equation (this time including nonlocal parts) as the only "external" momentum P reads To find the coefficients of the gradient terms, one should consider contributions quadratic in P from the expansion of both ∆ t * (P) and D (ω, p -P). In view of the gap equation Eq.(26,27), the expansions of ∆ t * (P) cancel each other up to small corrections of order T -T c . So that multiplying by T t i and taking the trace where Comparing this with the gradient terms in the GL equation, Eq.( Note the very small longitudinal coefficient, u L << u T . As we shall see in the following section it has profound phenomenological consequences. A. Ground state structure and degeneracy A ground state is characterized by three independent parameters corresponding to three Goldstone bosons. The GL energy is invariant under both the vector SO(3) rotations, ∆ i → R ij ∆ j , and the superconducting phase U (1), ∆ i → e iχ ∆ i . In the superconducting state characterized by the vector order parameter ∆ (|∆| = ∆, energy gap) the U (1) is broken: U (1) → 1, while the SO( where n and m are arbitrary unit vectors and 0 < φ < π/2. Using this parametrization the homogeneous part of the free-energy density, Eq.( (49) This form allows us to make several interesting observations. The crucial sign is that of β 2 . In previous studies Here the range of χ was enlarged, -π/2 < χ < π/2, to incorporate n = ±m. One can use the spherical representation of the unit vector (that will be termed "director"): n = (sin θ n cos φ n , sin θ n sin φ n , cos θ n ). The ground state energy density therefore is achieved at Mathematically the vacuum manifold in phase B is isomorphic to S 2 ⊗ S 1 /Z 2 . This determines the thermodynamics of the superconductor very much in analogy with the scalar superconductor with β = β 1 + β 2 . Magnetic properties are however markedly different. B. Small fluctuations analysis: two vastly different penetration depths and coherence lengths. Here the response of the superconductor in phase B to an external perturbation, like boundary or magnetic field, is considered. The basic excitation modes are uncovered by the linear stability analysis very similar to the so-called Anderson -Higgs mechanism in field theory applied to (scalar order parameter) superconductivity a long time ago For a perturbation with wave vector k the energy to quadratic order in fluctuations reads: ) where Diagonalization of this quadratic form reveals three Goldstone modes (that do not affect the characteristic lengths) and the "massive" fields, ε and A (the only one contributing for k = 0) with different longitudinal and transversal characteristic lengths: Here ξ T is the coherence length along the directions perpendicular to the vector n, while the one parallel to n is ξ L . Similarly for magnetic penetration depths λ T,L . Our calculation in the previous Section for the Dirac semimetal, see Eq.( C. Strong magnetic fields: is there an upper critical field Hc2? In strong homogeneous magnetic field H (assumed to be directed along the z axis) superconductivity typically (but not always, see an example of the p-wave superconductor that develops flux phases where coefficients are in Eq.( Since we have three components of the order parameter, there are three eigenvalues. It is easily seen from Eq.( where ξ T is defined in Eq.( The two remaining eigenvalues involving only the order parameter components ∆ x and ∆ y perpendicular to the field are obtained from diagonalizing the "Hamiltonian": This nontrivial eigenvalue problem fortunately can be solved exactly, see Appendix C. The lowest eigenstate being a superposition of just two lowest even Landau levels, |0 and |2 are: The lowest of these eigenvalues is (62) The corresponding critical field H ⊥ c2 ("perpendicular" refers to the order parameter direction) that can be expressed via an effective "perpendicular" coherence length, (63) It is always larger than H c2 , and therefore is physically realized. The upper field H ⊥ c2 becomes infinite at r c = u L /u T = 13 -4 √ 10 /3 0.117. This means that in such material superconductivity persists at any magnetic field like in some p-wave superconductors. It was found in Section IV that for the simplest Dirac semi-metal, r = 1/32 < r c see Eq.( D. What impact has the Pauli paramagnetism at strong fields? Since the prediction of the FFLO effect 14 in low T c superconductors it is well known that at very high magnetic fields the direct spin -magnetic field coupling on the microscopic level might not be negligible. The singlet channel Cooper pair is effectively "broken" by the splitting since the spins of the two electrons are opposite (Pauli paramagnetic limit). It is not clear what impact it has on Dirac semi-metals. If the impact is large it could be incorporated as an additional paramagnetic term in the GL energy. In an isotropic Dirac superconductor one has only one possible term in the GL energy term linear in paramagnetic coupling and consistent with symmetries: where μ p is the effective "spin" of the Cooper pair sometimes called "Zeeman coupling" The single particle Hamiltonian in magnetic field with the Pauli term becomes where the Bohr magneton, μ B = e /2mc, determines the strength of the coupling of the spin to magnetic field, with m being the free electron mass. The direct calculation, see Appendix A, shows that μ p = 0. Starting from the microscopic model of the isotropic Dirac semi-metal, the Ginzburg-Landau energy for this field is derived using the Gor'kov technique. It was found that the transversal coherence length ξ T is much smaller than the longitudinal, ξ L = 4 √ 2ξ T , despite the isotropy. Several new features appear when an external field is applied. The Ginzburg -Landau model is used to investigate magnetic properties of such superconductors. Using the small deviation method the magnetic penetration depth was found also to be vastly different for longitudinal and transverse fluctuations λ T /λ L = 4 √ 2. We have observed that properties of the triplet superconductor phase of the Dirac semi-metal has extremely unusual features that we would like to associate qualitatively with the characteristics of the Cooper pair. The superconducting state generally is a Bose -Einstein condensate of composite bosons -Cooper pairs, classically described by the Ginzburg -Landau energy as a functional of the order parameter. In the present case the Cooper boson is described by a vector field ∆ i (r). In this respect it is reminiscent to phonon and vector mesons in particle physics A massive bosonic vector field in isotropic situation (the case considered here) generally have distinct transversal and longitudinal polarizations (massless fields like photons in dielectric do not possess the longitudinal degree of freedom). The results for coherence lengths ξ T,L and the penetration depths λ T,L in triplet superconductor in DSM demonstrate pronounced disparity between properties of transverse and longitudinal polarizations. In conventional "scalar" order parameter superconductor the Abrikosov ratio 14 , κ ≡ λ/ξ, distinguishes between type I (κ < κ c = 1/ √ 2) and type II, where, for example, vortices appear under a magnetic field. In the present case this separation is ambiguous. There are two quite different ratios: transversal and the longitudinal, (in respect to director of the order parameter n = ∆/ |∆|).see Eq.( For typical DSM one estimates the Fermi velocity and chemical potential 1 v F = c/200, μ = 0.2eV , and with the expected critical temperature 8 , 11 T c = 5K, one obtains the transversal Abrikosov ratio κ T = 0.08, smaller than critical, while the longitudinal, κ L = 2.7 is larger. This means that longitudinal fluctuations the material behaves as type II, while response to the transverse ones is that of a type I superconductor. This has an impact on transport, optical and magnetic properties of these superconductors. The vortex physics of strongly type II triplet superconductors of this type is very rich and some of it has already been investigated in connection with heavy fermion and other superconductors suspected to possess p-wave pairing. In particular, their magnetic vortices appear as either vector vortices or so-called skyrmions Experimentally the major consequence of the present theoretical investigation, namely the polarization effect of the vector order parameter should be pronounced in the AC response of these materials. Recently the AC response of the disordered superconductor was utilized to probe Goldstone modes VIII. APPENDIX A. Starting from equation Eq.( where ε = v F p -μ. See the last (BCS) integral in To fix the two coefficients, β 1 and β 2 in Eq.( Performing finite integration (the upper bound on momentum, μ + T D , can be replaced by infinity), one obtains where the sum is Similarly taking j = l = 2, k = 1 (the coefficient of ψ * 2 2 ψ 1 ) gives after the angle integration (75) = -4μ 2 15π 4 T 2 s 3 . (76) resulting in Eq.( The single particle Hamiltonian in magnetic field was written in Eq.( (77) The Pauli term in Gor'kov equation (after multiplying by T t i and taking the trace as usual), Eq.( The bubble sum is directly evaluated and vanishes B Z ijk = 0. Rotational invariance allows to represent the sum in Eq (46) terms of coefficients u T and u L : -N (μ) u T P 2 δ mj -P m P j + u L P m P j (80) = P k P l ωq T r T t m D (ω, q) T t * j D kl (ω, q) , (81) where (82) {q j α i + q i α j + δ ij (iω + μ + α • q) + 2q i q j D} . (83) In particular In this Appendix the matrix H defined in Eq.( Using Landau creation and annihilation operators in units of magnetic length e * B c = l -2 for the state with k x = 0 (independent of x), so that covariant derivatives are In terms of these operators the matrix operator H takes a form: V 11 = 2u T a + a + u 2 a 2 + a +2 + 2a + a (86) The exact lowest eigenvalue is a combination of two lowest Landau levels. Indeed applying the operator V on a general vector on the subspace gives . For δ = iβ, higher Landau levels decouple and one gets eigenvalue equations resulting in three eigenvalues of H h (91)