We present a detailed study of single crystalline K2Cr3As3 and analyze its thermodynamic and transport properties, anisotropic Hc2(T ), and initial pressure-dependence of Tc. In zero-field, the temperature-dependent resistivity is metallic. Deviation from a linear temperature-dependence is evident below 100 K and a T 3 -dependence is roughly followed from just above Tc (∼10 K) to ∼ 40 K. Anisotropic Hc2(T ) data were measured up to 140 kOe with field applied along and perpendicular to the rod-like crystals. For the applied field perpendicular to the rod, Hc2(T ) is linear with a slope ∼-70 kOe/K. For field applied along the rod, the slope is about -120 kOe/K below 70 kOe. Above 70 kOe, the magnitude of the slope decreases to ∼-70 kOe/K. The electronic specific heat coefficient, γ, just above Tc, is 73 mJ/mol K 2 ; the Debye temperature, ΘD, is 220 K. The specific heat jump at the superconducting transition ∆C ∼ 2.2 γTc. Finally, for hydrostatic pressures up to ∼7 kbar, Tc decreases under pressure linearly at a rate of -0.034 K/kbar. K 2 Cr 3 As 3 has been recently discovered as a new superconducting material with a T c of 6.1 K 1 . Having a structure that contains (Cr 3 As 3 ) 2-chains, it quickly arouses interest as a potentially new, quasi-onedimensional (Q1D) superconductor. Related compounds, Rb 2 Cr 3 As 3 and Cs 2 Cr 3 As 3 , with T c values of about 4.8 K and 2.2 K respectively were reported soon after the discovery of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 K 2 Cr 3 As 3 single crystals were grown using a hightemperature solution growth method Resistance was measured using a standard 4-probe technique. DuPont 4929N silver paint was used to attach platinum wires onto the sample in a N 2 glove box. Electric current was applied along the rod for anisotropic H c2 measurements (Fig. The pressure-dependence of the superconducting transition temperature, T c , was determined via low-field (20 Oe), zero-field-cooled (ZFC), dc magnetization measurements in a QD Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) using a commercial, HMD, Be-Cu piston cylinder pressure cell 8 . Daphne oil 7373 was used as the pres-sure medium and Pb was used as the manometer In the normal state, despite a relatively large RRR value, virtually no magnetoresistance was observed. The right inset of Fig. From one-band BCS theory, for a s-wave, isotropic material, in the clean limit, the orbital 11 . In our case, for field perpendicular to the rod, H orb c2 ∼ 312 kOe. The Pauli limit for a simple BCS superconductor is H p = 1.84T c = 110 kOe. The H c2 of real systems will be influenced by both H orb c2 and H p . The Maki parameter 12 that describes the relative importance of the two critical field limits, α = √ 2H orb c2 /H p , is equal to 4. This suggests that at low-temperature, the H c2 might be Pauli limited. With the current data up to 140 kOe that exceeds the oneband BCS estimated Pauli limit, we see no clear sign of saturation of H c2 . Note that, with multi-band as well as varying coupling strength, the Pauli limit can be different from one-band BCS prediction. For example, in many Fe-based superconductors, H p values are significantly enhanced Zero-field-cooled dc magnetization data are shown in the right inset of Fig. In conclusion, we grew single crystals of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 using a high-temperature solution growth method. Being able to decant the molten solution at high-temperature allows us to get relatively large, free standing, highquality single crystals, which also enables us to perform all of our measurements on single crystals or their arrays. In contrast to previously reported, linear temperature dependent resistivity from 300 K down to 7 K, resistivity of single crystal, with a RRR of 50 (RRR∼10 for polycrystalline samples 1 ), deviates from linear temperature- dependence below 100 K and roughly follows T 3 over the range of 10-40 K. Whereas the differences between the single crystalline and polycrystalline sample transport are easily explained by grain-boundary scattering and potential resistive anisotropies, the rather clear T 3 power law that we observe will require more experimental and theoretical investigation. Despite the fact that the temperature-dependence is different, if the RRR values reflect the intrinsic quality of the samples, and are not due to grain boundary scattering, the independence of T c on the value of RRR, or impurity scattering, suggests a conventional mechanism of its superconductivity. Anisotropic H c2 (T ) data up to 140 kOe were obtained from resistivity measurements. Up to 140 kOe, for field applied perpendicular to the rod, H c2 (T ) is linear with a slope of -70 kOe/K. For field along the rod, dH c2 /dT | Tc is about -120 kOe/K. Above 70 kOe, the the slope decreases to around -70 kOe/K. The T c as well as the slope of H c2 is close to previously reported data Despite the fact that K 2 Cr 3 As 3 can be considered to be close to Q1D in a crystallographic sense, the "small" anisotropy in H c2 appears to suggest a rather 3D nature. In addition, the exotic pairing symmetry requires more detailed study.