Due to its low atomic mass hydrogen is the most promising element to search for high-temperature phononic superconductors. However, metallic phases of hydrogen are only expected at extreme pressures (400 GPa or higher). The measurement of a record superconducting critical temperature of 190 K in a hydrogen-sulfur compound at 200 GPa of pressure Under high pressure conditions, insulating and semiconducting materials tend to become metallic, because, with increasing electronic density, the kinetic energy grows faster than the potential energy. As metallicity is a necessary condition for superconductivity, superconductivity becomes more likely under pressure It was only recently that hydrogen-rich compounds started to be explored as a way to decrease the tremendous pressure of metallization in pure hydrogen Recently it was reported that sulfur hydride (SH 2 ), when pressurized, becomes metallic and superconduct-ing. For pressures above 180 GPa an extremely high transition temperature of about 190 K was measured Electronic and phononic structure calculations are performed within density-functional theory as implemented in the two plane-wave based codes abinit Experimentally little is known on the high pressure stability and composition of the S-H system and, to the best of our knowledge, nothing is known about the Se-H. Therefore we investigate their low temperature phase diagram by means of the MHM for the prediction of lowenthalpy structures. Computed enthalpies as a function of pressure are reported in Fig. In a similar way we have studied the Se-H phase diagram. Chemically, selenium is known to have very similar physical properties to sulfur and this system is not an exception. The enthalpies of the phases found in our MHM runs are shown in Fig. We focus now on the properties of H 3 S and H 3 Se in the pressure range of stability of the Im 3m structure. The two materials present very similar properties. At 200 GPa electronic band dispersions and Fermi surfaces are barely distinguishable, as seen in Fig. Unlike the electronic structure, phonons are strongly pressure and material dependent. Clearly a key role is played by the occurrence of the II order R3m to Im 3m phase transition. Far away from it (i.e. at very high pressure) we have three sets of well separated phonon modes: acoustic (below 60 meV), optical modes that are transverse with respect to the S/Se-H bond (between 100 to 200 meV) and, above 200 meV, stretching modes of the Se/S-H bond. These are clearly seen in Fig. In spite of these important changes in the phononic energy dispersion, the overall coupling strength We have computed, by means of SCDFT, critical temperatures of H 3 S and H 3 Se in the pressure range of stability of the Im 3m structure, these are collected in Tab. I. The predicted T C for the H 3 S system is 180 K at 200 GPa and 195 K at 180 GPa, in agreement with the measured value of 185 K at 177 GPa. On the other hand our predic-tion for the deuterium substituted system D 3 S is 141 K, at 200 GPa. That is much larger than the measured ∂M A , and computed at 200 GPa with a three point numerical differentiation) clearly indicate and confirm Our prediction for H 3 Se at 200 GPa is of 131 K, this reduction of T C is clearly not an isotopic effect of the substitution S to Se. As mentioned in the previous section, it is caused, instead, by a different coupling strength of the hydrogen modes in the Se environment. In spite of the much lower coupling strength λ the reduction of T C is not very large with respect to the sulfur system, as expected from the fact that the critical temperature at high coupling increases with the square root of λ (while is exponential at low coupling) To compute the critical temperatures we have used SCDFT, this choice allow us to deal with the unusual superconducting properties of these systems from first principles without relying on conventional assumptions coming from low pressure experience. There are two aspects of these systems that are uncommon, that make the use of conventional The effect of the energy dependence of the DOS can be appreciated by comparing Eliashberg results with SCDFT when neglecting the Coulomb interaction (see Tab. I). At 200 GPa the two theories [65] disagree by 54 K, SCDFT giving 284 K while Eliashberg gives 338 K. This difference comes from the energy dependence of the DOS, while Eliashberg assumes a flat DOS, in the SCDFT we can easily check this assumption by assuming a flat DOS, and for this case the SCDFT calculation would lead to 334 K, in agreement with the Eliashberg result. Physically the reduction of T C , occurring when the real DOS is considered, arises from the fact that the phononic pairing extends in a rather large region around the Fermi level, over the DOS peak structure of these systems (see Fig. The superconducting pairing is distributed over many phonon modes and over the Brillouin zone in q-space, despite the presence of several Fermi surface sheets and with different orbital character across the Fermi level, we obtained a isotropic (weakly k-dependent) gap at the Fermi level and the effect of anisotropy We have presented a theoretical investigation on the crystal structure and superconductivity of H 3 S. An extensive structural search confirms the H 3 S stoichiometry as the most stable configuration at high pressure. By is the phonon only SCDFT critical temperature; T AD,μ * =0 c is the critical temperature from the Allen-Dynes modified McMillan formula 