We report on highly tunable radio frequency (rf) characteristics of a low-loss and compact three dimensional (3D) metamaterial made of superconducting thin film spiral resonators. The rf transmission spectrum of a single element of the metamaterial shows a fundamental resonance peak at ∼24.95 MHz that shifts to a 25% smaller frequency and becomes degenerate when a 3D array of such elements is created. The metamaterial shows an in-situ tunable narrow frequency band in which the real part of the effective permeability is negative over a wide range of temperature, which reverts to gradually near-zero and positive values as the superconducting critical temperature is approached. This metamaterial can be used for increasing power transfer efficiency and tunability of electrically small rf-antennas. A three dimensional (3D) array of sub-wavelength elements composing a metamaterial can demonstrate unique electromagnetic properties which are not directly accessible in nature, such as negative permeability Of particular interest are radio frequency (rf) metamaterials where the free space wavelength λ 0 can be tens of meters. Despite the challenge of scaling the dimensions down, rf metamaterials offer a wide spectrum of applications including high resolution magnetic resonance imaging In this work, we demonstrate a tunable 3D rf metamaterial composed of electrically small (∼ λ 0 /2300) superconducting thin film resonators. The single resonant element is a planar spiral constructed by w= 3 μm wide semi-circular strips with increasing radii. The center to center separation between two adjacent turns is s= 6 μm. The spiral is densely packed with a large number of turns, N= 200, where the inner and outer diameters are D i = 4.606 mm and D o = 7 mm respectively. The electromagnetic response of the resonant spirals can be studied with a simple circuit model Possessing large geometrical inductance and capacitance (due to large number of turns) over a compact geometry puts the individual spirals into a significantly subwavelength self-resonance regime. Therefore the metamaterial formed by the 3D array of these spirals can be considered as a continuous effective medium characterized with effective constitutive parameters; i.e. frequency dependent permeability μ eff (ω) and permittivity eff (ω). Previous theoretical Here we study a 3D superconducting metamaterial with sub-wavelength spiral elements operating in the rf regime. We find that the mutual interactions between the individual spirals contributes to the effective response of the macroscopic 3D metamaterial. Moreover, we observe that both the center frequency of the resonant bandwidth in the rf transmission and the negative μ eff (ω) region is highly temperature tunable. The metamaterial is patterned out of a 200 nm thick Nb thin film sputtered on to a 350 μm thick quartz substrate. We define circular spiral-shaped resonators Figure The loop antennas are 27.2 mm apart to minimize the direct magnetic coupling between them The low temperature resonance peak shifts to a significantly smaller frequency, 19.15 MHz in the rftransmission spectrum of the 2D array of 3 x 6 spirals due to a significant change in effective parameters; especially μ eff (ω) For 3D metamaterials with strong magnetic coupling in the stacking direction, the enhancement in capacitance due to interlayer interaction where μ eff (ω) and μ eff (ω) are the real and imaginary parts of the effective permeability, F is the filling fraction, ω r = 2πf r is the angular center frequency of the resonance, and Γ is the damping term characterizing ohmic and radiation losses. The center frequency for the resonant bandwidth f r is determined by the resonant parameters of individual elements f 0 , as well as the mutual interactions between them Here it is assumed that H z is the same in both measurements Figure Having discussed the low temperature magnetic response of the metamaterial, we now turn to the tunability of μ eff (ω) as the metamaterial is heated up to a temperature above the T c of Nb. Figure The narrow frequency band in the real part of μ eff (ω) possesses negative values up to ∼ 8.3 K beyond which it starts to show near zero and then positive values. This crossover temperature corresponds to a similar value at which we start to see a discernible downward trend in the temperature evolution of f r (T ) and an upturn in the damping term Γ(T ). To study this behavior, we extracted ω r (thus f r ) and Γ as a function of temperature through fitting the retrieved μ eff (ω) of the 3D metamaterial according to Eq. ( We have developed a low-loss and ultra sub-wavelength 3D superconducting metamaterial. The engineered com- metamaterial shows a strong magnetic response to electromagnetic waves. The resonant frequency and frequency band with negative μ eff (ω) are precisely tuned by means of temperature without lumped elements. We observe a crossover from negative to positive μ eff (ω) at a temperature near T c at which a dramatic increase occurs in losses (Γ) signaling a significant decrease in superfluid density n s (T The work contributes to ongoing research on tunable negative permeability and near zero permeability metamaterials which play an important role to improve the performance and directivity of ultra-small rf antennas.