We report on the synthesis and transport properties of perovskite (Pv) CaIrO 3 thin films. The Pv phase of CaIrO 3 was stabilized by epitaxial growth on SrTiO 3 , (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 AlTaO 6 ) 0.7 , and LaAlO 3 substrates with strong tensile, weak tensile, and compressive strains, respectively. The resistivity of these films showed a poorly metallic behavior. The Hall resistivity exhibited a sign change as a function of temperature and a nonlinear magnetic-field dependence, which clearly indicated the coexistence of electrons and holes and hence supported that Pv CaIrO 3 films are semimetallic. The observed robustness of the semimetallic ground state against tensile and compressive strains is consistent with the presence of symmetry-protected Dirac points (nodes) around the Fermi level that prohibits the system from becoming a band insulator. A surge of interest in 5d transition-metal oxides has been initiated by the discovery of a spin-orbit coupling (SOC)-induced Mott state in Sr 2 IrO 4 epitaxial stain At ambient pressure, CaIrO 3 adopts a post-Pv structure Similarly to Pv SrIrO 3 , Pv CaIrO 3 is also anticipated to be a semimetal, owing to the protection of the Dirac points by symmetry. Because of the large lattice distortion due to the smaller ionic radius of Ca 2+ than that of Sr 2+ , the correlation effect could be enhanced in Pv CaIrO 3 , which suggests that Pv CaIrO 3 is in the closer vicinity to a Mott insulator compared with Pv SrIrO 3 . In this study, we investigated the transport properties of single crystalline Pv CaIrO 3 thin films on SrTiO 3 (STO), (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 AlTaO 6 ) 0.7 (LSAT) and LaAlO 3 (LAO) substrates with strong tensile, weak tensile, and compressive strain respectively. Perovskite CaIrO 3 was successfully stabilized epitaxially on all three substrates. The transport properties of Pv CaIrO 3 were found to be consistent with the presence of a semimetallic ground state. An observed sign change of the Hall coefficient as a function of temperature can be reasonably explained by assuming that (1) CaIrO 3 is a semimetal, where electron bands associated with the Dirac points (nodes) and hole bands coexist at the Fermi energy, and (2) holes are doped into the system owing to impurities/defects. The semimetallic character of Pv CaIrO 3 was found to be rather robust against epitaxial strains, which may suggest that the presence of Dirac points protected by lattice symmetry is the origin of the semimetallic ground state. Thin films of CaIrO 3 with 10 to 30 nm thickness were epitaxially grown by pulsed laser deposition on (001)-oriented SrTiO 3 (STO) (a = 3.905 Å), (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 AlTaO 6 ) 0.7 (LSAT) (a = 3.868 Å), and LaAlO 3 (LAO) (a = 3.793 Å) substrates. A KrF excimer laser (λ = 248 nm) at 10 Hz with a fluence of ~ 1.5 J/cm 2 was used for the deposition. Polycrystalline pellets of post-Pv CaIrO 3 , which were used as the target for the deposition, were prepared from CaCO 3 and IrO 2 by a conventional solid-state reaction. The substrate temperature and the oxygen partial pressure during the growth were 730°C and 25 Pa, respectively. The quality and the lattice parameters of the films were characterized by x-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements with Cu Kα radiation using a diffractometer (Rigaku SmartLab) with a Ge(002) monochromator. The thickness of the films was estimated from the thickness fringes of the CaIrO 3 (001) peak in x-ray θ-2θ measurements and x-ray reflection measurements. The magnetic-field and temperature dependence of the resistivity and Hall coefficient were measured using a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). The observation of well-defined pseudo-cubic 00l (l = 1 -4) peaks in the θ-2θ XRD patterns, shown in Fig. for Pv CaIrO 3 . The results of the transport measurements of the examined films were consistent with the semimetallic character of the ground state of CaIrO 3 . Figure only at low T, followed by a broad shoulder and then semiconducting ρ(T) (dρ/dT < 0) at high temperatures. This is the typical behavior of a semimetal with a small number of electrons and holes: At low temperatures, the system behaves as a degenerate metal with small electron and hole Fermi surfaces. In contrast, ρ(T) is dominated by the number of electrons and holes thermally excited at high temperatures. Clear evidence for the coexistence of electrons and holes in CaIrO The ground state of SrIrO 3 is very close to that of a band insulator due to the interplay of the strong SOC and the orthorhombic lattice distortion When both electron and hole contributions coexist, the Hall coefficient in the low-field limit can be represented as R H = 1/e·(n h μ h 2 -n e μ e 2 )/(n e μ e +n h μ h ) 2 , where n e (n h ) and μ e (μ h ) are the concentration and the mobility of electrons (holes), correspondingly (see, for example, We might anticipate essentially the same electronic structure, and therefore transport behavior, as in Pv SrIrO 3 . In contrast to the case of Pv SrIrO 3 , however, the R H (T) of Pv CaIrO 3 exhibited a sign change from negative to positive with decreasing temperature [Fig. ]. This does not necessarily mean that the electronic structure of Pv CaIrO 3 is different from that of Pv SrIrO 3 . If we assume a sizable amount of hole doping due to some impurities/defects in Pv CaIrO 3 , the contrasting behavior of R H (T) in CaIrO 3 can be described by the same electronic structure as that proposed for SrIrO 3 . With hole doping, the concentration of heavy holes increases while that of Dirac-like electrons is suppressed at low temperatures. In that case (n h > n e ), despite the higher mobility of the Dirac-like electrons (μ e >μ h ), the contribution of the heavy holes to R H could marginally exceed that of the electrons (n h μ h 2 >~ n e μ e 2 ), which explains the positive R H in CaIrO 3 at low temperatures. Indeed, the pronounced non-linear magnetic-field dependence of the Hall resistivity ρ xy (B) [Fig. implies the presence of hidden but competing electron contributions at low temperatures and a stronger magnetic-field dependence of μ h than that of μ e . This corroborates the hypothesis of a marginal competition between the hole and electron contributions in Pv CaIrO 3 , although the origin of the stronger field dependence of μ h is not trivial. At high temperatures, almost equal numbers of Dirac-like electrons and heavy holes are thermally excited and the number of electrons and holes tends to balance (n e ~ n h ). Therefore, the high mobility of the Dirac-like electrons should yield a negative R H (n h μ h 2 -n e μ e 2 < 0), as observed in the experiment. ρ(T) and R H (T) did not show any evident dependence on the type of substrate, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we stabilized single-crystalline Pv CaIrO 3 thin films on (001)-oriented STO, LSAT, and LAO substrates with strong tensile, weak tensile, and compressive strains. Transport measurements indicated the coexistence of electrons and holes, consistent with the semimetallic character of the ground state proposed theoretically. We argue that CaIrO 3 is a hole-doped semimetal with Dirac electrons and heavy holes, which provides a reasonable description of the observed behavior of the resistivity and the Hall effect. The transport properties were found to be rather insensitive to epitaxial strains, which may suggest that the semimetallic ground state is robust owing to the presence of the protected Dirac points (nodes). Our findings give an insight into the unusual semimetallic ground state produced by the interplay of SOC and lattice distortion, where Dirac physics plays a role. *The bulk lattice parameters were converted from the orthorhombic ones in ref 