The influence of a partial substitution with sulphur into Te sites on the crystal, electronic and magnetic structures of FeTe is investigated by DFT calculations. The results reveal a phase transition from the antiferromagnetic double-stripe order for pure FeTe to the single-stripe order for S-substituted samples, which coincides with the previously observed appearance of the superconducting state. The magnetic transition is caused by the variations of the average chalcogen position in the unit cell. The analyzed normalstate properties of Fe(Te,S) and Fe(Se;S) compounds allow a detection of the well resolved nesting-driven magnetic fluctuations only for superconducting samples, consistent with their antiferromagnetic ground state. Thus, the role of an S-substitution is a suppression of the double-stripe antiferromagnetic order to give rise to the single-stripe correlations, which are associated with an occurrence of superconductivity in Fe(Te,S) solid solutions. Superconductivity in iron chalcogenides occurs in the close proximity to magnetic instabilities and, hence, seems to be mediated by spin fluctuations. Fe(Se,Te) solid solutions are superconducting with the maximal critical temperature (T c ) reaching 15 K for FeTe 0.5 Se 0.5 at ambient pressure and 37 K for pure FeSe under hydrostatic pressure In FeTe 1-x S x , the superconducting state appears for x = 0.03 and T c reaches the value of 10 K All iron chalcogenides reveal a similar band structure, according to both photoemission spectra The effects of hydrostatic and non-hydrostatic pressure on the magnetic and electronic structures of FeTe have been investigated by first principle calculations In this work, we study the influence of sulfur on the mag-netic structure of Fe(Te,S). We obtain the transition from the double-stripe to the single-stripe order for sulfur contents higher than 2%, which is related to the variation of the averaged chalcogen position in the unit cell. This finding indicates that superconductivity in the studied systems is strongly related to the AFM fluctuations with the (π, π) nesting vector. An analysis of the Fermi surface and spin susceptibilities obtained from the band structure of some iron chalcogenides suggests a presence of the well resolved nesting-driven magnetic fluctuations only for superconducting samples. This further confirms correlation between the (π, π) spin fluctuations and the appearance of the superconducting state. The examination of the effect of an S-substitution into Te sites in FeTe 1-x S x systems was performed within the density functional theory (DFT) in the generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) of the exchange-correlation potential The choice of the adequate exchange-correlation functional (the local-density approximation, LDA, or GGA) used to obtain the proper characteristics of the system was widely discussed for iron pnictides In used pseudopotential method, the kinetic energy cutoff of 40 Ry for wavefunctions and 240 Ry for charge density were The 2 × 2 × 2 supercells were used to simulate magnetic structures of FeTe 1-x S x solid solutions with x = 0, 0.0625, 0.125, 0.1875 and 0.25. It allowed the study of the superconducting regime of 3-30% S In the tetragonal structure of FeTe, iron atoms form a square lattice, while tellurium ions are located in the distance h Te from the Fe plane. Sulfur atoms, which are substituted into Te sites, change the local atomic structure and S atoms have a different distance h S from the Fe plane. We performed optimization of atomic positions h Te and h S of non-magnetic (NM) and magnetic phases in the 2 × 2 × 2 supercells, which was carried out with a 10 -3 Ry/Bohr convergence criterion on forces. We tested non-equivalent positions of S atoms in the supercell to obtain the averaged properties of the Fe(Te,S) systems. In spin-polarized calculations, we took into account the single-stripe (AFM1) and double-stripe (AFM2) antiferromagnetic arrangements (Fig. The electronic structure calculations for paramagnetic phases were performed employing 2×2×1 supercells of pure FeTe and superconducting FeTe 0.875 S 0.125 compositions. Such a calculation scheme folds the band structure to a respectively smaller BZ and makes complex its comparison with the ARPES measurements. However, the supercell approach appears to be convenient for studying the nesting nature, because now all the Fermi surface sheets are centered around the Γ-Z line. Thus, the area of overlapping contours in the FBZ of the 2 × 2 × 1 supercells reflects an intensity of the ideal nesting, which occurs with the (π, π) vector in the BZ of the 1 × 1 × 1 unit cell (see Ref. The Lindhard spin susceptibility, derived from the band structure ε m,k , is calculated numerically from the formula: where f (ε m,k ) = 0 or 1 denotes the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at zero temperature. Thus defined spin susceptibility allows an estimation of spin fluctuations present in the system. This response function at the Γ(0, 0, 0) point of FBZ reflects mainly the tendency to the nesting driven AFM1 ordering (which occurs at the M 0 (π, π) point of BZ) and a much weaker tendency to FM ordering (at the Γ 0 (0, 0, 0) point of BZ) The calculation results of the relaxed chalcogen position, h Te , magnetic stabilization energy of AFM1 and AFM2 states with respect to the NM state, ΔE = E AFM1/AFM2 -E NM , and the corresponding magnetic moments of pure FeTe are collected in Table For FeTe 1-x S x systems, the dependencies of the magnetic stabilization energy of both AFM1 and AFM2 states (with respect to the NM state) on a sulfur content x are shown in Fig- Figure As seen in Fig. An alteration of a magnetic ground state was observed by the powder neutron diffraction in S-substituted FeTe FeTe FeTe + S 12.5% Interestingly, the AFM1 ground state was previously obtained for FeSe, Fe(Se,Te) and tensile strained FeTe The AFM2 to AFM1 phase transition is strongly related to the crystal structure age anion size of about 2.095 Å, while in FeTe substituted by a smaller S ion the superconductivity with T max c = 10 K occurs for FeTe 0.85 S 0.15 with a very similar average anion radius ∼ 2.1545 Å To examine the non-magnetic electronic structure of Fe(Te,S), the bands and density of states (DOS) of FeTe and FeTe 0.875 S 0.125 are plotted in Figures The electronic structure of all iron chalcogenides consists of a few hole bands near the Γ 0 point and electron bands crossing the Fermi level (E F ) near the M 0 point of the Brillouin zone of the standard 1 × 1 × 1 unit cell In Figure The spin susceptibility is a measure of spin fluctuations derived from the band structure in the considered systems In the series of panels presented in Figure For FeTe 0.875 S 0.125 , the Fermi surface consists of smaller hole and electron sheets (Fig. Thus, nesting-driven spin fluctuations obtained from the NM state are well determined only for superconducting iron chalcogenides, which is consistent with our spin-polarized calculations. The findings indicate a great effect of the electron band structure on magnetic and superconducting properties of the Febased chalcogenides. The magnetic phase transition from the double-stripe to single-stripe antiferromagnetic order was obtained for S-substituted FeTe by first principles calculations, corresponding to sulfur concentrations, for which the superconducting state was detected in the experiment The electronic structures of both FeTe and FeTe 0.875 S 0.125 are characterized by the similar Fermi surfaces, however, nesting-driven spin fluctuations are well resolved only for the Ssubstituted compound. Thus, calculations curried out both with and without spin-polarization indicate the presence of spin fluctuations of the single-stripe type in the probed superconducting systems. The S substitution causes a suppression of the doublestripe antiferromagnetic order, which gives rise to the AFM1 correlations. The results point out that specific magnetic ordering plays an essential role in superconductivity of the iron chalcogenide.