In conventional superconductors the magnitude of the pairing fluctuation is primarily determined by T c and the superconducting coherence length, ξ. In low-dimensional systems with strong structural and electronic anisotropies, the interlayer separation, s, plays a significant role. In cuprates the pseudogap (PG) correlation induces a downturn in the temperature dependent resistivity. As T c is approached from above, this downturn in the resistivity is supposed to either i) add to or ii) join smoothly to that due to paraconductivity caused by short-lived Cooper pairs. It is important to differentiate between these two possibilities since they are closely linked to the origin of the PG. It would be reasonable to assume that if the first scenario is correct then the PG has a non-superconducting origin, while the second scenario, if found to hold, would relate precursor pairing to the PG correlations. In this paper we have studied the in-plane fluctuation conductivity of two c-axis oriented thin films of Y 0.95 Ca 0.05 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7- with similar hole contents (p), p = 0.165 (optimally doped) and p = 0.184 (slightly overdoped). The hole contents are fixed at these values so that the PG affects the slope of the resistivity data only at temperatures close to T c . Analysis of paraconductivity, Δσ ab (T), of these compounds within the mean-field Gaussian Ginzburg-Landau (MFGGL) framework reveals different qualitative and quantitative features for the optimally doped (OPD) and the slightly overdoped (SOD) compounds. The excess conductivity due to Cooper pair fluctuations of the SOD sample can be described reasonably well by the MFGGL formalism. The excess conductivity of the OPD compound, on the other hand, cannot be accounted for by the MFGGL formalism with reasonable set of parameters. There is a significant added contribution to Δσ ab (T) for the OPD sample which appears to come from the presence of a PG in the quasiparticle (QP) spectral density. These findings point towards a non-pairing origin of the PG. Ever since the discovery of high-T c cuprates, there has been intense debate on the question of how the parent Mott antiferromagnetic (AFM) insulator transforms itself in to a high-T c superconductor upon carrier doping, but the answer remains elusive till date. The situation is complicated because these remarkable materials exhibit various normal state correlations (which may well exist in the superconducting state) as the number of added holes, p, in the CuO 2 plane is varied. Besides superconductivity itself, the most extensively studied phenomenon is undoubtedly the pseudogap (PG) in the quasiparticle (QP) energy spectrum In some earlier studies on in-plane paraconductivity of hole doped cuprates Vidal et al. A lot depend on the way the background conductivity has been determined. For example if the enhanced conductivity (the downturn of resistivity from its high-T linear behaviour much above T c ) due to the PG is already included in the background, then the extracted SC fluctuation contribution to the conductivity would be just due to precursor pairing and it may appear that Δσ ab () is indeed independent of the presence of the PG. To avoid this from happening, one has to be careful about the determination of the background conductivity from the high-T fits of the resistivity data. In this paper we wish to distinguish between two scenarios -i) the enhanced conductivity due to PG merges smoothly to the mean-field (Gaussian) paraconductivity near T c and has the same character ii) PG induces an additional and independent contribution to the Gaussian paraconductivity of different nature. We assume that, if the first scenario is found to be correct then PG will be linked with precursor pairing. While for the second scenario, PG originates from correlations of non-SC nature. The number of added holes in the CuO 2 plane determines almost all the normal and SC state properties of high-T c cuprates. The profile of the temperature dependent resistivity is no exception. The temperature range over which the in-plane resistivity,  ab (T), is linear grows progressively with hole content and the characteristic downturn due to PG shifts to lower and lower temperatures By definition, the background conductivity should be free from paraconductive contributions. Vidal et al., Therefore, a background fit to  ab (T) data for T > 150 K is expected to be free from both PG and SC fluctuations. In subsequent sections we have analyzed the paraconductivity of Y 0.95 Ca 0.05 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7- films using the MFGGL formalism. From this analysis it appears that PG adds to an additional contribution to Δσ ab () for the OPD compound which cannot be taken into account by the MFGGL treatment even with grossly unreasonable set of fitting parameters. Δσ ab (), on the other hand, for the SOD sample is significantly smaller and can be better modelled by the MFGGL formalism. This finding supports the scenario where PG and SC correlations have different physical origin. Crystalline c-axis oriented thin films of Y(Ca)Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7- were synthesized from high-density single-phase sintered targets using the method of pulsed laser deposition (PLD). Ca substitution enabled us to access the OD side relatively easily. Thin films were grown on (001) SrTiO 3 single crystal substrates at a deposition temperature of 800 C under an oxygen partial pressure of 1.0 mbar. Samples were characterized by using X-ray diffraction (XRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), ab-plane room-temperature thermopower, S ab [290 K], and  ab (T) measurements. XRD was used to determine the lattice parameters, phase-purity, and degree of c-axis orientation (extracted from the rocking-curve analysis). XRD profile of the OPD Y 0.95 Ca 0.05 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7- is shown in Fig. The experimental in-plane fluctuation conductivity,  ab (T), is taken as,  ab (T) = [ 1/ ab (T) -1/ bg (T)], where  bg (T) is the background resistivity, i.e., the resistivity in the absence of paraconductive contributions. Fig. For theoretical analysis, one needs to locate the mean-field superconducting transition temperature. We have taken T c at the peak temperature of the dρ ab /dT data. The full width at half maximum gives a measure of the transition width. T c of the SOD compound is 89.7 K and that for the OPD one is 90.8 K. The transition widths are 1.0 K and 0.8 K for the SOD and the OPD samples, respectively. Paraconductivity is conventionally studied within the mean-field Aslamazov-Larkin theory. The d-wave order parameter and the energy scale associated with high T c itself leads to strong pair-breaking and therefore, the Maki-Thompson contribution is usually omitted where the interlayer coupling parameter α is expressed as, α = 2[ξ c (ε)/s] 2 . The temperature dependent c-axis coherence length, ξ c (ε) = ξ c (0)/√ε Therefore we have fixed s = 11.7/2 = 5.85 Å for analysis of the fluctuation conductivity data. Figs. 5 illustrate the fits of the experimental paraconductivity within the LD formalism. A reasonably good fit is obtained for the SOD compound (Fig. LD formalism without any cut-off condition in energy or momentum, overestimates the paraconductivity in the high reduced temperatures. Vidal et al., has imposed a total-energy cut-off (EC) condition, given by [k 2 + ξ -2 (ε)] < bξ(0) -2 (in units of ħ 2 /2m cp , where m cp is the effective mass of the preformed Cooper pair) B LD is the Lawrence-Doniach parameter that controls the fluctuation dimensionality, given by [2ξ c (0)/s] 2 . Fig. From the analysis of the paraconductivity data it is evident that Δσ ab () for the OPD compound cannot be modelled within the MFGGL scheme irrespective of theoretical details (with or without the cut-off condition). The best fits of Δσ ab () for the OPD film yield unphysical values for the c-axis coherence length. ξ c (0) for the OPD and the SOD samples should be almost identical. This follows from the fact that for high-T c cuprates with p > 0.16 the mean-field SC transition temperature becomes almost identical to the experimental T c In any analysis of the paraconductivity data, there are two sources of error. The first one is related to the identification of the mean-field T c . Considering the transition widths, the uncertainty in the quoted values of T c should be less than a Kelvin for the samples under study. Thus the conclusions drawn from the analysis of Δσ ab () should not be affected by this factor. The second one is related to the identification of the background conductivity and has the potential to introduce substantial error in estimating the experimental paraconductivity. By selecting sample compositions for which  ab (T) is linear over a significant temperature range, we have been able to minimize this uncertainty in background conductivity to a large extent. Moreover, we have selected samples with hole contents such that the resistivity is linear above 150 K. This is important in two counts -i) the onset of the PG sets in below 150 K and ii) pairing fluctuations are expected to be absent above 150 K for both compounds It is important to notice that the disagreement between experimental and theoretical paraconductivity is pronounced for the OPD sample and tends to set in at T ~ 130 K (ε ~ 0.35) (Fig. It is also worth noticing that introducing a cut-off criterion in the total energy improves the agreement between theoretical and experimental fluctuation conductivities for the SOD compound. At the same time the extracted parameters turn out to be in excellent agreement with the experimentally and theoretically established values. The situation for the OPD sample does not improve. This again can be explained by invoking to the fact that the cut-off condition works for Gaussian pairing fluctuations modes, whereas the added paraconductivity-like contribution comes from a non-SC correlations in the OPD sample. It is customary to plot the paraconductivity versus reduced temperature data using log scale. This enhances the behavior in the high reduced temperature region where paraconductivity is low. In this study we have used a linear scale throughout, since our interest was to scrutinize the overall agreement between theoretical and experimental paraconductivities over an extended temperature range. This study also indicates that both UD and deeply OD compounds are somewhat inappropriate for theoretical analysis of the extracted paraconductivity because of unavoidable uncertainty associated with determination of the background conductivity. UD compounds with large PG, develop a downturn in the resistivity at temperatures much above ε > 0.5. Resistivity for deeply OD compounds, on the other hand, show superlinear behaviour. In either case polynomial fits for background resistivity becomes necessary. Without any clear physical meaning of the various terms in such polynomial fits, the extrapolated background resistivity used to extract the fluctuation conductivity become dubious and can induce significant error in this quantity (paraconductivity). Linear resistivity at high temperatures is a generic feature for all hole doped cuprates and may be related to quantum critical fluctuations The apparent agreement between MFGGL fluctuation conductivity and the experimental paraconductivity below ε ~ 0.02 for samples with varied compositions To summarize, we have found that the PG adds to an additional contribution to the paraconductivity over a wide temperature range. The nature of this extra conductivity is fundamentally different from that due to fluctuating Cooper pairs. As the hole content increases and the PG decreases, the paraconductivity becomes increasingly purely MFGGL type. All these reinforce the idea that PG originates from electronic correlations unrelated to that giving rise to phase incoherent precursor pairing. [27] Naqib S H, Borhan Uddin M and Cole J R 2011 Physica C 471 1598 