We investigate the importance of superconducting order parameter fluctuations in the 122 family of Fe-based superconductors, using high-resolution specific heat and thermal expansion data of various Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 single crystals covering a large range of the phase diagram from the strongly underdoped to the overdoped regime. By applying scaling relations of the 3d-XY and the 3d-Lowest-Landau-Level (3d-LLL) fluctuation models to data measured in different magnetic fields, we demonstrate that a strong increase of the critical fluctuation regime is responsible for the transition broadening in magnetic fields, which is a direct consequence of a magnetic-field-induced finite size effect due to a reduction of the effective dimensionality by a decreasing magnetic length scale related to the mean vortex separation and the confinement of quasiparticles in low Landau levels. The fluctuations are stronger in the underdoped and overdoped regimes and appear to be weakest at optimal doping. I. Superconductors are characterized by a two-component order parameter, in which the phase and amplitude of the Cooper pair wave function represent the two degrees of freedom. In cuprate high-temperature superconductors with their high transition temperatures, the low-dimensional layered structure and the associated small coherence volumes, critical order parameter fluctuations have a strong impact on their superconducting properties in a large temperature regime around their critical temperature ♠ Corresponding author: lortz@ust.h Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 single crystals were grown from self-flux in an Al 2 O 3 crucible. Ba and K were mixed with prereacted FeAs in the desired ratio and filled into the crucible. The crucible was sealed in a steel container and heated to 1151°C. The crucible was then cooled down very slowly to 1051°C at 0.2 -0.5 °C/h. In order to decant the remaining flux, the crucible was tilted at the end of the growth process and slowly pulled out of the furnace. The slow cooling rate allowed us to grow large single crystals of high homogeneity with 4 -8 mm length in the ab plane, which is crucial for high resolution thermal expansion measurement. The exact K content x of the samples typically differs from the starting stoichiometry, and was determined by energy-dispersive x-ray analysis (EDX) and by 4-circle x-ray diffraction. The specific-heat experiments were performed under field-cooled conditions with a home-made high-resolution micro-calorimeter In this article we focus on the crystalline a-axis, for which the largest superconducting anomalies are found in Ba 1- x K x Fe 2 As 2 . In the vicinity of a second-order phase transition, the specific heat and the thermal expansion coefficient are closely related via the thermodynamic Ehrenfest relation , (where ∂T c /∂p| pi → 0 is the uniaxial pressure dependence of T c in the limit of zero pressure, p is the pressure and V mol is the molar volume of the material). Therefore, the anomalies at the superconducting transition will have the same shape and can be analyzed in a similar manner. In contrast to the anomaly ∆C p (T=T c ), which always has a positive signature, the signature of ∆α(T=T c ) can have a positive or negative signature, dependent on the signature of ∂T c /∂p i . Fig. magnetic-field-induced broadening of the transition is obviously observed in the data of Fig. )] 0.67 . A similar characteristic power law dependence has been observed for the vortex melting transition in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ and has been interpreted in the framework of phase fluctuations of the 3D-XY universality class with a critical exponent ν = 0.669 Fig. In the inset of Fig. If the observed broadening of the superconducting transition in applied magnetic fields is caused by the increasing strength of fluctuations, then it should be possible to scale all the magnetic field curves onto a single scaling curve using an appropriate fluctuation theory In Fig. expand the critical regime In Fig. This scaling is also shown by the additional irreversible anomalies in the thermal expansion coefficient (Fig. 1 Note that we could base our argumentation in a similar manner on the 3d-LLL scaling variable, since both scaling theories are applicable to our data. obvious, that the width of the fluctuation regime is largest in underdoped samples and reaches a minimum at optimal doping before it increases again for the overdoped sample with x = 0.6. What is the origin of this doping dependence of the fluctuation strength? The Ginzburg temperature contains the ratio k B T c /H c 2 (0)ξ ξ ξ ξ 0 3 , and furthermore we recall that the scaling means that data taken in different fields are normalized by the ratio of the coherence volume to the magnetic length (Φ 0 /B) 1/2 (the latter is only determined by the magnetic field and is sample independent). Therefore, the doping dependence of the of the fluctuation regime width must originate from the doping dependence of H c (0) and ξ ξ ξ ξ 0 3 . The doping dependence of ξ ξ ξ ξ 0 3 can be verified by the doping dependence of the upper critical field H c2 (0)=Φ 0 /(2πξ 0 2 ). The extrapolated H c2 values for fields applied perpendicular to the FeAs layers for our samples with x = 0.22, 0.35, 0.50 and 0.60 are 60 T, 173 T, 124 T and 85 T, respectively Our data show that, although critical fluctuation effects are comparatively weak in the family of 122 Fe-based superconductors in zero field Upon comparison of Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 with the cuprate high-temperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ and the classical superconductor Nb 3 Sn, we can confirm that the strength of fluctuations in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 is intermediate between cuprates and classical superconductors. Fig. 