Tungsten ditelluride has attracted intense research interest due to the recent discovery of its large unsaturated magnetoresistance up to 60 T. Motivated by the presence of a small, sensitive Fermi surface of 5d electronic orbitals, we boost the electronic properties by applying a high pressure, and introduce superconductivity successfully. Superconductivity sharply appears at a pressure of 2.5 GPa, rapidly reaching a maximum critical temperature (T c ) of 7 K at around 16.8 GPa, followed by a monotonic decrease in T c with increasing pressure, thereby exhibiting the typical dome-shaped superconducting phase. From theoretical calculations, we interpret the low-pressure region of the superconducting dome to an enrichment of the density of states at the Fermi level and attribute the high-pressure decrease in T c to possible structural instability. Thus, tungsten ditelluride may provide a new platform for our understanding of superconductivity phenomena in transition metal dichalcogenides. s a new class of two-dimensional (2D) materials, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) MX 2 , where M is a transition metal (Mo, W, Re and so on) and X is a chalcogen (S, Se and Te), have attracted tremendous attention due to their rich physics and promising potential applications Most recently, an extremely large positive magnetoresistance (MR) was discovered at low temperatures in non-magnetic tungsten ditelluride (WTe 2 ) TMD High pressure has been shown to be a clean and powerful means of generating novel physical states Pressure-induced superconductivity. As shown in Fig. Figure The pressure was increased from 2.5 to 16.1 GPa in run no. 1 as shown in Fig. The dome-shaped superconductivity behaviour. We also carried out measurements of resistance around T c for various external magnetic fields. As seen in Fig. The interpretation by theoretical calculations. We carried out density functional theory (DFT) calculations to better interpret the physics of the observed superconductivity. On the basis of the experimental lattice parameters shown in the Supplementary Table We performed total energy calculations for a number of different volumes to simulate the high pressure conditions in WTe 2 . We optimized the lattice parameters and all the independent internal atomic coordinates for each volume. The obtained volumes versus the total energy behaviour were found to be in good agreement with the Murnaghan equation of state as shown in the Supplementary Fig. We now turn our attention to the electronic structure under compression. We show the numerical Fermi surface at the K z 1⁄4 0 plane in Fig. The MR suppression and the appearance of superconductivity can be considered as follows. The large MR is attributed to the perfect compensation between the opposite carriers, where the balance is too delicate to survive the intense pressures used in our experiments. As seen in the simulation, the applied pressure significantly increases the difference between the hole and electronic Fermi pockets as shown in the Supplementary Fig. In summary, superconductivity was successfully induced in WTe 2 by the application of high pressure with a maximum T c of 7 K at 16.8 GPa. The T c -P phase diagram shows a dome-like superconducting phase, which we attribute to an enrichment of N(E F ) for the low-pressure regime and a possible structural instability at high pressures as suggested by DFT calculations. The semimetal-like electronic dispersion, unsaturated large MR and superconductivity were all observed in WTe 2 , all contributing to the extremely interesting physics seen in this TMD material. Crystal growth and characterization. WTe 2 single crystals were grown using a chemical vapour transport technique. Stoichiometric W and Te powders were ground together and loaded into a quartz tube with a small amount of TeBr 4 (transport agent). All weighing and mixing was carried out in a glove box. The tube was sealed under vacuum and placed in a two-zone furnace. The hot zone was maintained at 800 °C for 10 days and the cold zone was maintained at 700 °C. A Bruker SMART diffractometer equipped with a charge-coupled device-type area detector was used to determine the crystal structure. The data were collected at room temperature with graphite monochromated Mo-Ka radiation (l 1⁄4 0.71073 Å). SADABS stainless-steel gasket was pre-indented from a thickness of 200 to 30 mm, leaving a pit inside the gasket. A hole with a diameter of 280 mm was drilled at the centre of the pit using laser ablation. The pit of the indented gasket was then covered with a mixture of epoxy and fine cubic boron nitride (cBN) powder and compressed firmly to insulate the electrode leads from the metallic gasket. For runs 1 and 2, we used the standard four-probe method to obtain the resistance measurements. The cBN-covered pit served as a sample chamber, into which a WTe 2 single crystal of dimensions 200 Â 40 Â 5 mm was inserted without a pressure-transmitting medium. For run 3, a hole with diameter of 100 mm was further drilled at the centre of the cBN-covered pit, and then a single-piece sample with dimensions 40 Â 40 Â 5 mm was loaded simultaneously using Daphne 7373 oil as the pressure-transmitting medium. We used van der Pauw-like topology to arrange the four probes. The current was introduced into one side and the drop in voltage along the other side was recorded. Some ruby powder at the top of the sample for runs 1 and 2 and a ruby ball next to the sample for run 3 served as pressure markers. The pressure was determined using the ruby fluorescence method at room temperature. Platinum (Pt) foil with a thickness of 5 mm was used for the electrodes. The gasket surface outside the pit was insulated from the electrode leads using a layer of Scotch tape. The DAC was placed inside a homemade multifunctional measurement system (1.8-300 K, JANIS Research Company Inc.; 0-9 T, Cryomagnetics Inc.) with helium (He) as the medium for heat convection to obtain a high efficiency of heat transfer and precise temperature control. Two Cernox resistors (CX-1050-CU-HT-1.4L) located near the DAC were used to ensure the accuracy of the temperature in the presence of a magnetic field. The ambient pressure electrical transport were carried out in a Cryomagnetics cryostat with an SR830 (Stanford Research Systems) digital lock-in amplifier. Ohmic contacts were made using gold wires and silver paste. The a.c. susceptibility was measured using a magnetic inductance technique based on the ideal diamagnetism of a superconductor. One signal coil was wound around a diamond tip with an additional identical compensating coil tightly adjacent to it. These two coils are known as a pick-up coil. Outside the pick-up coil was an exciting coil, into which the a.c. current was fed with a magnitude of 100 mA and a frequency of 997 Hz. The diamond culet was 800 mm in size and a Be-Cu gasket was pre-indented from 450 to 150 mm. A piece of WTe 2 single crystal sample with dimensions 500 Â 500 Â 20 mm was inserted into the pre-indented Be-Cu gasket chamber without a pressure-transmitting medium. Ruby powder placed at the top of the sample served as a pressure marker. The pressure was determined using the ruby fluorescence method at room temperature. Density functional calculations. The electronic structure was calculated based on DFT as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package code The calculations of phonon spectrum were performed in a 3 Â 2 Â 1 supercell, with interatomic forces being computed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package code code with the small displacements method NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:7805 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8805 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications & 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved. NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:7805 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8805 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications & 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.