The rapid experimental progress of ultra-cold dipolar fermions opens up a whole new opportunity to investigate novel many-body physics of fermions. In this article, we review theoretical studies of the Fermi liquid theory and Cooper pairing instabilities of both electric and magnetic dipolar fermionic systems from the perspective of unconventional symmetries. When the electric dipole moments are aligned by the external electric field, their interactions exhibit the explicit d r 2 -3z 2 anisotropy. The Fermi liquid properties, including the single-particle spectra, thermodynamic susceptibilities, and collective excitations, are all affected by this anisotropy. The electric dipolar interaction provides a mechanism for the unconventional spin triplet Cooper pairing, which is different from the usual spin-fluctuation mechanism in solids and the superfluid 3 He. Furthermore, the competition between pairing instabilities in the singlet and triplet channels gives rise to a novel time-reversal symmetry breaking superfluid state. Unlike electric dipole moments which are induced by electric fields and unquantized, magnetic dipole moments are intrinsic proportional to the hyperfine-spin operators with a Lande factor. Its effects even manifest in unpolarized systems exhibiting an isotropic but spin-orbit coupled nature. The resultant spin-orbit coupled Fermi liquid theory supports a collective sound mode exhibiting a topologically non-trivial spin distribution over the Fermi surface. It also leads to a novel p-wave spin triplet Cooper pairing state whose spin and orbital angular momentum are entangled to the total angular momentum J = 1 dubbed the J-triplet pairing. This J-triplet pairing phase is different from both the spin-orbit coupled 3 He-B phase with J = 0 and the spin-orbit decoupled 3 He-A phase. Dipolar interactions have become a major research focus of ultra-cold atomic and molecular physics. For bosonic atoms with large magnetic dipolar moments (e.g. Electric and magnetic dipolar fermions exhibit novel many-body physics that is not well-studied in usual solids. One of the most prominent features of the electric dipolar interaction is spatial anisotropy, which is markedly different from the isotropic Coulomb interaction in solids. In contrast, the magnetic dipolar interac-tion remains isotropic in unpolarized systems. More importantly, it exhibits the spin-orbit (SO) coupled feature, i.e., the magnetic dipolar interaction is invariant only under the simultaneous rotation of both the orientations of magnetic moments and their relative displacement vectors. These features bring interesting consequences to the many-body physics of dipolar fermions. Rigorously speaking, so far there are still no permanent electric dipole moments having been discovered yet at the levels of the elementary particle, atom, and molecule. For example, for a hetero-nuclear dipolar molecule, even though at an instantaneous moment, it exhibits a dipole moment, while it averages to zero in the molecular rotational eigenstates. External electric fields are needed to polarize electric dipole moments, which mixes rotational eigenstates with opposite parities. However, the dipole moment of these mixed states is unquantized, and, thus the electric dipole moment is a classic vector. When two dipole moments are aligned, say, along the z-axis, the interaction between them is spatially anisotropic, which not only depends on the distance between two dipoles, but also the direction of the relative displacement vector. Nevertheless, this anisotropy exhibits an elegant form of the spherical harmonics of the second Legendre polynomial, i.e., the d r 2 -3z 2 -type anisotropy The electric dipolar interaction results in an anisotropic Fermi liquid state, which exhibits differ-ent single-particle and collective properties from those of the standard isotropic Fermi liquid theory The anisotropy of the electric dipolar interaction also results in unconventional Cooper pairing symmetries Next we discuss the novel feature of the magnetic dipolar fermions Typically speaking, the interaction energy scale of magnetic dipolar fermions is much smaller than that of the electric dipolar case. Nevertheless, conceptually they are still very interesting. Unlike the electric dipolar moment, the magnetic moment is proportional to the hyperfine-spin with the Lande factor, and thus its components are non-commutative quantum-mechanical operators The ordinary SO coupling in solids is a single-particle effect originating from the relativistic physics. In contrast, in magnetic dipolar fermion systems The magnetic dipolar interaction also induces novel Cooper pairing structures exhibiting the SO coupled nature In this article, we review the recent progress of the novel many-body physics with dipolar fermions, such as the Fermi liquid properties and Cooper pairing structures, focusing on unconventional symmetries. In Sect. II, we review the anisotropy of the electric dipolar interaction, and the SO structure of the magnetic dipolar interactions, respectively, from the viewpoint of their Fourier components. In Sect. III, the anisotropic Fermi liquid theory of the electric dipolar fermions is reviewed. And the SO coupled Fermi liquid theory of the magnetic dipolar fermion systems is reviewed in Sect. IV. The p zwave Cooper pairing in the single and two-component electric dipolar systems and the TR reversal symmetry breaking effect are reviewed in Sect. V. The SO coupled Cooper pairing with the J-triplet structure in the magnetic dipolar fermion systems is reviewed in Sect. VI. Conclusions and outlooks are presented in Sect. VII. Due to limit of space and also the view point from the unconventional symmetry, we are not able to cover many important research directions of dipolar atoms and molecules in this review. For example, the progress on topics of strong correlation physics with dipolar fermions In this section, we review the Fourier transformations of both the electric and magnetic dipolar interactions in Sect. II A and Sect. II B, respectively. The anisotropy of the electric dipolar interaction and the SO coupled feature of the magnetic dipolar interaction also manifest in their momentum space structure. These Fourier transforms are important for later analysis of many-body physics. Without loss of generality, we assume that all the electric dipoles are aligned by the external electric field E along the z-direction, then the dipolar interaction between two dipole moments is where d is the magnitude of the electric dipole moment; r 12 = r 1 -r 2 is the displacement vector between two dipoles; θ 12 is the polar angle of r 12 ; P 2 (cos θ 12 ) is the standard second Legendre polynomial as The zeros of the second Legendre polynomial lie around the latitudes of θ 0 and π -θ 0 with Within θ 0 < θ 12 < π -θ 0 , the dipolar interaction is repulsive, and otherwise, it is attractive. The spatial average of the dipolar interaction in 3D is zero. For later convenience, we introduce the Fourier transform of the dipolar interaction Eq. 1, A lot of information can be obtained solely based on symmetry and dimensional analysis. First, e i q• r is invariant under spatial rotations, thus V d ( q) transforms the same as V d ( r) under spatial rotations. It should exhibit the same symmetry factor of the spherical harmonics. Second, since V d ( r) decays with a cubic law, V d ( q) should be dimensionless. If V d ( r 12 ) were isotropic, V d ( q) would logarithmically depends on q. However, a more detailed calculation shows that actually it does not depend on the magnitude of q. Let us introduce a short distance cutoff ǫ that the dipolar interaction Eq. 1 is only valid for r ≥ ǫ, and a long distance cutoff R as the radius of the system. A detailed calculation shows that 34 where j 1 (x) is the first order spherical Bessel function with the asymptotic behavior as After taking the limits of qǫ → 0 and qR → +∞, we arrive at At q = 0, V d ( q = 0) is defined as 0 based on the fact that the angular average of the 3D dipolar interaction vanishes, thus V d is singular as q → 0. Even in the case that R is large but finite, the smallest nonzero value of qR is at the order of O(1). Thus, V d ( q) remains non-analytic as q → 0. An interesting feature of the above Fourier transform Eq. 6 is that the anisotropy in momentum space is opposite to that in real space: it is most negative when q lies in the equatorial plane, and most positive when q points to the north and south poles. An intuitive picture is explained in Fig. where V 0 is the system volume. If the wave vector q is along the z-axis, then the dipole density oscillates along the dipole orientation, thus the interaction energy is repulsive. On the other hand, if q lies in the equatorial plane, the dipole density oscillates perpendicular to the dipole orientation, and thus the interaction energy is attractive. Now let us consider the magnetic dipolar interaction The Fourier components of the dipolar interaction V d ( k). The left-hand-side is for k ẑ, and the right-hand-side is for k ⊥ ẑ. total magnetic moment is not conserved, and thus its component perpendicular to the total spin averages to zero. For the low energy physics below the coupling energy among different angular momenta, the magnetic moment can be approximated as just the component parallel to the spin direction, and thus the effective magnetic moment is proportional to the hyperfine spin operator up to a Lande factor, and thus is a quantum mechanical operator. Due to the large difference of energy scales between the fine and hyperfine structure couplings, the effective atomic magnetic moment below the hyperfine energy scale can be calculated through the following two steps. The first step is the Lande factor for the electron magnetic moment respect to total angular momentum of electron defined as μ e = g J μ B J, where μ B is the Bohr magneton; J = L + S is the sum of electron orbital angular momentum L and spin S; and the value of g J is determined as Further considering the hyperfine coupling, the total magnetic momentum is defined μ = μ B (g J J + g I I) = g F F where g I is proportional to the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio and is thus tiny, and F is the hyperfine spin. The Lande factor g F can be similarly calculated as The magnetic dipolar interaction between two spin-F atoms located at r 1 and r 2 is where r = r 1 -r 2 and r = r/r is the unit vector along r. Similarly to the case of the electric dipolar interaction, the Fourier transform of Eq. 10 possesses the same symmetry structure as that in real space Again, it only depends on the direction of the momentum transfer but not on its magnitude, and it is also singular as q → 0. If q is exactly zero, V αβ;β ′ α ′ ( q = 0) = 0. In the current experiment systems of magnetic dipolar atoms, the atomic spin is very large. For example, for 161 Dy, its atomic spin reaches F = In this section, we will review the new ingredients of the Fermi liquid theory brought by the anisotropic electric dipolar interaction A general overview of the Landau-Fermi liquid theory is presented in Sect. III A. In Sect. III B, we review the dipolar interaction induced Fermi surface distortions. The Landau interaction matrix is presented in Sect. III C, and its renormalization on thermodynamic properties including Pomeranchuk instabilities are review in Sect. III D. The anisotropic collective excitations are reviewed in Sect. III E. One of the most important paradigms of the interacting fermion systems is the Landau Fermi liquid theory The interactions among quasi-particles are captured by the phenomenological Landau interaction function, which describes the forward scattering processes of quasiparticles. The Landau interaction function can be decomposed into a set of Landau parameters F l in which l denotes the partial wave channels. The physical observables, such as compressibility, specific heat, and magnetic susceptibility, compared with their values in free Fermi gases, are renormalized by these Landau parameters. The Fermi surface can be made analogues to an elastic membrane. The energy cost to deform the Fermi surface can be viewed as the surface tension, which consists of two contributions from the kinetic energy and the interaction energy. The kinetic energy cost is always positive, while the interaction part can be either positive or negative. If the Landau parameter F l is negative and large, i.e., F l < -(2l + 1), then the surface tension vanishes in this channel, and then spontaneous distortion will develop on the Fermi surface The Landau interaction function also gives rise to collective excitations which are absent in free Fermi gases, such as the zero sound mode. The zero sound is a generalization of the sound waves in fluids and solids. In fluids, the sound wave describes the propagation of the density vibration ρ( r, t), which is a scalar wave; in solids the sound wave is the vibration of the displacements of atoms from their equilibrium positions u( r, t), which is a vector wave. Compared to ordinary fluids which can only support density fluctuations, Fermi liquid possesses a microscopic structure of the Fermi surface which can be viewed as an elastic membrane, whose degree of freedom is infinite described by the spherical tensor variables δn lm . Consider a macroscopically small and microscopically large volume around r, around which a local Fermi surface can be defined. The local Fermi surface deformation can vibrate and propagate, and thus generating sound waves δn lm ( r, t), which is the physical picture of the Fermi liquid collective excitations. The restoring force for the zero sound arises from Landau interactions rather than hydrodynamic collisions for the sound modes in ordinary fluids. Let us neglect the influence of the confining trap, and also assume that dipoles polarize along the z-axis. The second quantized Hamiltonian of a single component electric dipolar fermion system reads In Sect. III, we define the dimensionless parameter as λ = d 2 mk f /(3π strength, which equals the ratio between the average interaction energy and the Fermi energy up to a factor at the order of one. The Fermi surface structure of an electric dipolar fermion system is uniform but anisotropic. Intuitively, the inter-particle distance along the z-axis is shorter than that along x and y-axes because the dipolar interaction is attractive (repulsive) along the z-(xy) direction, respectively. Consequently, the Fermi surface will be approximately a prolate ellipsoid, elongated along the z-axis and compressed in the equatorial xy-plane, which has been investigated in Refs. [31-34]. The above picture can be confirmed from the explicit calculation of the fermion self-energy at the Hartree-Fock level. The Hartree term vanishes because it involves the spatial average of the dipolar interaction. The anisotropy of the Fermi surface can be determined from the Fock term, while the latter also depends on the actual shape of the Fermi surface, thus they are coupled together and should be solved self-consistently. Nevertheless, at the leading order, we approximate the Fermi surface as a sphere with the radius in the free space as k f0 , and then Σ HF ( k) can be calculated analytically ), (13) where In the two-component dipolar Fermi gases, the Hartree term still vanishes and the Fock term only exists for the intra-component interaction, thus the Hartree-Fock self-energy remains the same. The anisotropic Fermi surface distortion is determined by solving the equation of chemical potential μ as where n is the particle density. The Fermi wave vector k f depends on the polar angle as in which the anisotropic distortion is at the linear order of λ, and the λ 2 term appears to conserve the particle numbers. Although Eq. 15 is only valid at λ ≪ 1, it provides qualitative features. The Fermi surface anisotropy was also calculated by using the numerical variational method in Ref. [31]. The comparison between the analytic perturbative result and the variational one is plotted in Fig. The anisotropy also exhibits in other single particle quantities. For example, the angular distribution of the density of states on the Fermi surface is calculated as where, N (Ω k ) is the differential density of states along the direction of Ω k . At the linear order of λ, N (Ω k ) develops the same anisotropy of P 2 (cos θ). Thus the total DOS at the Fermi energy does not change compared with that of the free Fermi gas. Nevertheless, it may be changed due to high order corrections. The anisotropic Fermi liquid theory has been constructed in Ref. [33,34,42] for the dipolar fermion systems. The anisotropy of the interaction leads to the mixing among different partial-wave channels, thus we need to generalize the concept of Landau parameters into the Landau matrices. The variation of the Fermi distribution function at momentum k is defined as where ) is the Fermi distribution function in the absence of interaction. The ground state energy variation of the single component dipolar Fermi gas is where, k, k ′ are momenta close to the Fermi surface; f ( k, k ′ ; q) is the interaction function describing the forward scattering; q is the small momentum transfer for the forward scattering process, which is explicitly kept because of the non-analyticity of the Fourier component of V d ( q) as q → 0; n k, q = c † k+ q c k , which is reduced to the fermion occupation number as q → 0; ǫ k is the renormalized anisotropic single particle spectra, and at the Hartree-Fock level ǫ k = ǫ 0 k + Σ HF ( k). The Landau interaction function is expressed at the Hartree-Fock level as where the first and second terms are the Hartree and Fock contributions, respectively. Due to the explicit anisotropy, f ( k, k ′ ; q) depends on directions of both k and k ′ , not just the relative angle between k and k ′ as in the isotropic Fermi liquids. The Landau interaction matrix elements for the dipolar system have been calculated in Ref. [33] by Fregoso et. al. According to the Wigner-Eckart theorem, the d r 2 -3z 2 anisotropy of the dipolar interaction renders the following spherical harmonics decomposition as where f ll ′ ;m remains diagonal for the index m but couples partial wave channels with l ′ = l, l ±2. The even and odd partial wave channels decouple because of the even parity of the dipolar interaction. The q dependence only appear in the channel of l = l ′ = m = 0, in which f 00;0 ( q) = V d ( q). Other matrix elements at the Hartree-Fock level are tri-diagonal as 100 where For each l = 0, f 3D ll ′ ;m 's satisfy the sum rule that which reflects the fact the angular average of the dipolar interaction vanishes. To make the Landau matrix dimensionless, we multiply the single component density of states (DOS): ) is the DOS of free Fermi gas and m * is the effective mass. At the linear order of λ, m * = m. For concreteness, some low order Landau matrix elements are expressed at the linear order of λ as F 00;0 (Ω q ) = 4πλP 2 (cos θ q ), F 02;0 = -πλ; The thermodynamic properties, including the anisotropic effective mass and thermodynamic susceptibilities, are renormalized by the Landau interaction matrices. For simplicity, only the single-component dipolar systems are considered here. It is well-known that the Galilean invariance leads to the relation between the bare mass of fermions and the effective mass of quasiparticles as For an isotropic system, the effective mass m * is defined as ∂ǫ( k)/∂ k = k/m * for k on the Fermi surface. The renormalization of m * , or, the renormalization of the density of states, is specific heats for the Fermi liquid and ideal Fermi gas, respectively. The dipolar Fermi gas is Galilean invariant so that Eq. 25 is still valid. However, due to the anisotropy, a selfconsistent solution has to be done numerically. To the linear order of λ, we approximate ǫ( k ′ ) in the right-handside of Eq. 25 with the free fermion energy. Defining the radial effective mass as m * 3D, where F11, (θ k ) and F13, (θ k ) are the angular dependent Landau parameters defined as follows Thus to the linear order of λ, the anisotropic radial effective mass is Viewing the Fermi surface as an elastic membrane, we define the angular variation of the fermion distribution as which can be further expanded in terms of the spherical harmonics as For a Fermi surface distortion characterized by a set of δn lm , the energy variation is calculated as where χ 0 = m * m N 0 is the density of states at the Fermi energy; m * is the average value of the effective mass on the Fermi surface which equals m at the linear order of λ; h lm = h ex lm + h 0 20 . h ex lm is the external field in the partial wave channel of lm, and h 0 20 = 2 3 π 5 λE 3D k f 0 is the explicit symmetry breaking arising from the dipolar interaction. The matrix kernel K ll ′ in Eq. 30 contains two parts as in which, M ll ′ ;m is the kinetic energy contribution. At the linear order of λ, M ll ′ ;m is calculated as The expectation value of δn lm in the field of h lm can be straightforwardly calculated as Thus χ 0 (K 3D ll ′ ;m ) -1 is the renormalized susceptibility matrix for the 3D dipolar Fermi system The inverse of an eigenvalue of the matrix K ll ′ ;m can be considered as a thermodynamical susceptibility in the corresponding eigen-channel. If all the eigenvalues of K ll ′ ;m are positive, i.e., this matrix is positive-definite, then the system is thermodynamically stable. If any of them becomes negative, the corresponding susceptibility diverges, which signals the onset of the Fermi surface instability of the Pomeranchuk type For the anisotropic dipolar system, the K ll ′ ;m matrix needs to be diagonalized to analyze its thermodynamic instabilities. The two strongest instabilities lie in the sectors of of m = 0 and m = ±2, and l's are even. For the case of m = 0, F 00;0 ( q) is singular as q → 0, explicitly depending on the direction of q. The most negative eigenvalue occurs when q lies in the equatorial plane. The corresponding eigenvector mainly lies in the s-wave channel with l = 0, and the eigenvalue μ s reaches zero at λ s = 0.135. This instability corresponds to the Fermi surface collapsing with a density modulation wave vector in the equatorial plane. This result nicely agrees with the numerical calculation in Ref. [36], in which the onset of an unstable collective mode implies the Fermi surface collapsing starting from λ s ∼ 0.14. It should be noted that, actually, this instability is mostly driven by the Hartree term interaction V d ( q), which cannot be simply dropped off by setting q = 0. Otherwise, the stability of the dipolar Fermi gas would be significantly overestimated. As for the sector of m = ±2, the eigenvectors of the minimal eigenvalues mainly lie in the d x 2 -y 2 ±2ixy -wave channels. The lowest eigenvalues μ d±2 touch zero at λ d±2 = 0.35. This instability corresponds to the biaxial nematic instability of the Fermi surfaces studied in Ref. [43]. With the purely dipolar interaction, the swave channel instability occurs before the d-wave channel one because λ d±2 > λ s . Nevertheless, the s-wave channel instability can be cured by introducing a positive non-dipolar short-range s-wave scattering potential V 00;0 , which adds to the Landau parameter of F 3D 00;0 without affecting other channels. In this part, we review the calculation of the zerosound-like collective mode in the dipolar Fermi gases ∂n( r, k, t) ∂k i = 0, (35) where n( r, k, t) and ǫ( r, k, t) are the density and energy distributions in the phase space. In order to linearize the Boltzmann equation, the small variations of n( r, k, t) and ǫ( r, k, t) are defined as where δν is defined with respect to the deformed equilibrium Fermi surface, and ǫ HF is the Hartree-Fock single particle spectrum. Substituting δν( r, k, t) = q δν k e i( q• r-ωt) , the linearized Boltzmann equation is arrived at where v k is the Fermi velocity; N (Ω k ) is the differential density of states defined in Eq. 16; δν(Ω k ) is defined as The spherical harmonics decomposition can be performed as where δν lm is the component in terms of the spherical harmonics, and, Due to the dipolar anisotropy, for a general propagation direction of q, δν lm in different channels are coupled. We first truncate Eq. 40 by only keeping the s-wave channel of l = 0. Even at this level, the anisotropy of the zero sound mode has already appeared. Taking into FIG. where , and the propagation direction q is chosen in the xz-plane with the polar angle θ q . Then the zero sound mode dispersion is determined by 1 + F 00;0 (Ω q )χ 00;00 (ω, q) = 0. ( The quantity s(θ q ) = ω(θ q )/(v f0 q) is defined to represent the angular dependent zero sound dispersion, which is solved numerically and plotted in Fig. Even in the isotropic Fermi liquid state, because the propagation direction q of the zero sound already breaks the 3D rotational symmetry to the uni-axial one, actually the zero sound mode mixes all the longitudinal channels of δn l0 . If the Landau parameter F 1 is not small compared to F 0 , the mixing between the s and p-wave longitudinal channels significantly modifies the sound velocity. In the isotropic Fermi liquid state, the modified sound velocity is determined by the following equation as For example, in the The case of the dipolar Fermi gas is more complicated. If the propagating direction q is not along the z-axis, no rotational symmetry is left, and thus, in principle, the longitudinal and transverse p-wave components are mixed. Here, the spherical harmonic functions Ỹl=1,m=0 (longitudinal) and Ỹl=1,m=±1 (transverse) are defined according to the principle axis along q instead of the z-axis. Nevertheless, usually the transverse p-wave channel mode is overdamped unless the p-wave channel Landau parameter is positive and large, thus their effect to the zero sound mode is small and will be neglected. By keeping the mixing between the s-wave and the longitudinal p-wave modes, Eq. 40 is reduced to a 2 × 2 matrix equation, and the collective mode can be solved based on where the matrix kernel of N ( q, ω) reads N ( q, ω) = χ 00;00 ( q, ω)F 00;0 ( q) χ10;00 ( q, ω) F110( q) 3 χ10;00 ( q, ω)F 00;0 ( q) χ11;00 ( q, ω) F11;0( q) 3 . F 3D 11;0 ( q) is the longitudinal p-wave Landau parameter defined as F11;0 ( q) = cos 2 θ q F 11;m=0 + sin 2 θ q F 11;m=∓1 , (46) and the response functions are χ10;00 ( q, ω) where q lies in the xz-plane with the polar angle θ q , and q • k = sin θ q sin θ k cos φ k + cos θ q cos θ k . The numeric solution taking into account the anisotropic Fermi velocity and Fermi surface is performed, and the zero sound velocity as a function of θ q is plotted in Fig. The magnetic dipolar interaction brings a new ingredient to the Fermi liquid theory, i.e., the SO coupled nature If the magnetic dipolar systems are partially polarized, this SO coupling already appears at the single-particle level exhibiting anisotropic Fermi surfaces, which is a result from the ferro-nematic coupling as shown by Fregoso et. al. The second quantized Hamiltonian of the spin-1 2 fermions with the magnetic dipolar interaction is expressed as Similarly, the dimensionless interaction parameter can be defined accordingly as ). The SO coupled Landau interaction function is reviewed and the SO coupled partial wave decomposition is performed in Sect. IV A; the Pomeranchuk instability is reviewed in Sect. IV B; the zero sound-like excitation with the SO coupled feature is reviewed in Sect. IV C. In Ref. [61], the Landau interaction function of the magnetic dipolar fermions with a general hyperfine-spin F was given. For simplicity and concreteness, below we still use the spin- where k and k ′ are at the Fermi surface; the small momentum transfer q in the Hartree term is explicitly kept due to the singularity at q → 0 in Eq. 11; p is the unit vector defined as p ; the matrix kernel M αα ′ ,ββ ′ ( m) only depends on the direction of m as for m = p and q. In order to arrive at f F αα ′ ,ββ ′ ( k, k ′ ) in Eq. 48, the following identity is used 1. The SO partial-wave decomposition It is convenient to work in the SO coupled bases for the magnetic dipolar Fermi liquid theory. The variation of the single particle density matrix in momentum space is defined as and n 0 ( k) refers to the ground state distribution of the free Fermi system. As for spin indices, δn αα ′ ( k) can be expanded as where χ Ssz,αα ′ are the bases for the particle-hole singlet (density) channel with S = 0 and triplet (spin) channel with S = 1, respectively, defined as Similarly as before, we integrate δn αα ′ ( k) along the radial direction, and arrive the angular distribution δn αα ′ ( k). In the SO decoupled bases, it is expanded as More conveniently, it can be reorganized in the SO coupled bases as where δn JJz;LS = msz LmSs z |JJ z δn LmSsz ; Y JJz;LS ( k, αα ′ ) is the SO coupled spherical harmonic functions Using the SO coupled bases, the Landau matrix is diagonal with respect to the total angular momentum J and its z-component J z as The matrix kernel F JJz L1;JJzL ′ 1 reads in which the first term is the Hartree contribution with q set as the z-axis; the second term is the Fock contribution with T F Lm1sz;L ′ m ′ 1s ′ z defined in the SO decoupled bases as 61,62 The same value of J may arise from L with different parities. Below we use (J ± J z LS) to represent different angular momentum channels, where ± is the parity eigenvalue. The Hartree term of Eq. 55 only contributes to the (1 + J z 01) sector, which explicitly depends on J z because q (chosen as the ẑ-axis) breaks the 3D rotation symmetry down to the uniaxial rotation symmetry. For other sectors, F J ± JzL1;J ± JzL ′ 1 does not depend on J z as required by the Wigner-Eckart theorem. The matrix F JJzL1;JJzL ′ 1 is nearly diagonalized except for the case with L = L ′ . For J + = 0 + , 2 + , .. and J -= 1 -, 3 -, ..., there is only one possibility that L = J, and thus F J ± JzL1;J ± JzL ′ 1 is already diagonalized. In comparison, for J + = 1 + , 3 + , ... and J -= 0 -, 2 -, ... L can take two different values of L = J ± 1, and thus the matrix is reduced to 2 × 2 (For J -= 0 -the only possibility is L = 1.). The concrete forms of F J ± JzL1;J ± JzL ′ 1 for a few low orders of J ± are given in Ref. [61,62]. The variation of the ground state energy in the SO coupled bases is expressed as where the matrix kernel is χ 0 = N 0 is the Fermi liquid density of states; h JJzLS is the external field. At the Hartree-Fock level, N 0 receives no renormalization from the magnetic dipolar interaction. The expectation value of δn JJzLS is calculated as The thermodynamic stability condition is equivalent to that all the eigenvalues of the matrix M JJzLS;JJzL ′ S are positive. Fregoso et al. Apparently, Eq. 60 breaks TR symmetry, which is markedly different from the relativistic SO coupling in solids. If one of the eigenvalue of the Landau matrix becomes negative, Pomeranchuk instability occurs in the corresponding channel. The SO coupled nature in the magnetic dipolar system manifests as follows. Let us first consider the channel of J = 1 +62 . In the absence of external fields, a density wave with a long wave length q → 0 can take the advantage of the Hartree channel interaction. The leading instability lies in the sector with J z = ±1. Without loss of generality, we use the J z = 1 sector as an example: whose negative eigenvalue and the associated eigenvector are The instability occurs at 1 + 1 = 0.86, and the eigenvector shows that it is nearly a ferromagnetic instability hybridized with a small component of the ferro-nematic channel. The spin polarizations lie in the xy-plane and the spiral wave vector is along the z-axis. The spiral wave vector q should be at the order of the inverse of the system size in order to minimize the energy cost of spin twisting, which may further depend on concrete boundary conditions. An interesting point is that because of the coupling between the ferromagnetic and ferro-nematic orders, the Fermi surfaces are distorted The next sub-leading instability is in the J = 1 -channel with L = 1 and S = 1, which has been studied in Ref. [61,62]. For J z = 0, the generated SO coupling at the single particle level exhibits the 3D Rashba-type as where |n z | is the magnitude of the SO order parameter. The magnetic dipolar interaction already possesses the SO nature. The Pomeranchuk instability brings it to the single particle level by breaking rotational symmetry and parity. The instability of the J = 1 -sector is similar to but fundamentally different from the Pomeranchuk instability in the L = S = 1 channel studied in Refs. [84,85]. Different from the magnetic dipolar systems, the starting Hamiltonian in the latter case has no SO coupling at all. After instability occurs, an effective SO coupling appears at the single particle level. In particular, a k • σ type SO coupling can be generated with total angular momentum J = 0. It is generated from the SO decoupled interactions through a phase transition, and thus was denoted as spontaneous generation of SO coupling We review the study of the collective modes in the SO coupled Fermi liquid theory - , ∂n( r, k, t) where n αα ′ ( r, k, t) and ǫ αα ′ ( r, k, t) are the density and energy matrices for the coordinate ( r, k) in the phase space; [, ] and {, } mean the commutator and anti-commutator, respectively. After linearizing Eq. 64 and expanding it in the plane-wave bases we arrive at where s is the dimensionless parameter ω/(v f q). Without loss of generality, the propagation direction of the wave vector q is defined as the z-direction. By using the SO coupled bases δn JJz;LS , Eq. 66 is rewritten as The matrix kernel K JJzLS;J ′ JzL ′ S reads where Ω LL ′ (s) is equivalent to the particle-hole channel Fermi bubble in the diagrammatic method defined as The largest positive Landau parameter lies in the (1 + 001) channel, which can support propagating modes. Since q breaks parity and the 3D rotation symmetries, the (1 + 001) channel couples to other channels with J z = 0. The Landau parameters of orbital partial wave channels with L ≥ 2 are small, which will be neglected henceforth. There are three spin channel modes with L = S = 1 and J z = 0 denoted as (0 -011), (1 -011), and (2 -011). Even in the presence of q, the system still possesses the reflection symmetry with respect to any plane including q. By writing down their bilinear fermion expressions, we can check that among the above modes, (1 + 001), (0 -011), (2 -011) are odd, and (1 -011) is even under this reflection operation. Furthermore, the (2 -011) channel can be neglected because the Landau parameter in this channel is about one order smaller than those in (1 + 001) and (0 -011). Now, we only keep two coupled modes (1 + 001) and (0 -011). Using the following relations K 1001;1001 (s) = Ω 00;0 (s), K 1001;0011 (s) = K 0011;1001 (s) = sΩ 00;0 (s), = Ω 00;0 (s), (70) we reduce the coupled 2 × 2 matrix equation based on Eq. 67 into where For the two branches of Eq. 71, only the one with the minus sign possesses the solution with s > 1, as required by the condition of the undamped collective mode of the Fermi liquid. Since n 1 + 001 ( q) = k ψ † ( k + q)σ z ψ β ( k), , the former mode describes spin oscillation along the direction of q, and the latter exhibits a hedgehog configuration of spin distribution on the Fermi surface. The eigen-mode is a hybridization between them, which can be represented as where (u 1 , u 2 ) T is the eigenvector for the collective mode. For all the values of λ m , |u 2 | > |u 1 | is satisfied. Thus, the spin configuration, as shown in Fig. The p-wave (L = 1) triplet (S = 1) Cooper pairing is a celebrated unconventional pairing superfluid state which has been a research focus of condensed matter physics for decades (see Ref. [56,90] for reviews). The typical system is the superfluid 3 He which exhibits both the isotropic B phase 86 and the anisotropic A-phase As explained in Sect. I, the anisotropic dipolar interaction provides a novel and robust mechanism for the p-wave spin triplet Cooper pairing and the competition between the singlet and triplet channel pairing instabilities In this section, we will first present a brief overview of the p-wave pairing in the superfluid A. A quick overview of the p-wave triplet pairing in the superfluid The general structure of the p-wave spin triplet pairing takes the form of a 2 × 2 symmetric matrix ∆ αβ ( k) in momentum space, which can be conveniently represented by the d-vector as 56 where ∆( k) is a complex number; d describes the spin degree of freedom, which is a complex unit 3-vector satisfying d * • d = 1; iσ μ σ y (μ = x, y, z) form the bases of the 2 × 2 symmetric matrices for the triplet pairing. The so-called unitary pairing means that ∆ † ( k)∆( k) equals the identity matrix up to a constant, i.e., ∆( k) is proportional to a unitary matrix. In terms of the d-vector language, the unitary pairing corresponds to d * × d = 0, i.e., d is equivalent to a unit real vector up to an overall complex phase. The two most prominent superfluid phases of 3 He are B and A phases, both of which belong to the class of unitary pairing. In the B phase 86 , a typical pairing matrix structure is where ∆ is a complex constant. In this configuration, L and S are combined into J = 0, and thus, the B phase is rotationally invariant and also a fully gapped phase. In other words, the B phase spontaneously breaks the relative SO symmetry, exhibiting the SO coupled paired structure. It maintains TR and parity symmetries. Furthermore, it has also been recently found that the B phase is actually a 3D topological superfluid phase. In comparison, the 3 He-A phase is anisotropic, in which L and S are decoupled and J is not well-defined in which d is an arbitrary unit 3-vector. It breaks TR symmetry and exhibits nodal points on the north and south poles on the Fermi surface. We will see in this section and in Sect. VI that both the electric and magnetic dipolar fermion systems support novel p-wave triplet structures which are different from the 3 He-B and A phases. The pairing symmetry structure of the singlecomponent dipolar system was studied in early works of Refs. [28,29]. In this case, the gap function is simplified as a complex number, and thus, the d-vector notation is not needed. ) due to the two-particle interference and the Fermi statistics. In real space, this p z -pairing symmetry is also clear since the electric dipolar interaction is the most attractive if the displacement vector between two fermions is along the z-axis. Below, we present the partial wave analysis in momentum space. The pairing interaction can be expressed at the mean-field level as where as shown in Fig. where The integral of Eq. 78 has been regularized following the t-matrix method at the level of the Born approximation. This regularization is equivalent to truncate the energy away from the Fermi energy ±ω, and ω is at the order of the Fermi energy Although the p z -pairing is very intuitive in the real space, it is not so obvious in momentum space. Before performing the partial-wave analysis, a qualitative momentum space picture can reveal why the p z -pairing is natural as shown in Fig. FIG. For the case of k x, and k ′ → k, Vt( k; k ′ ) varies and its angular average is positive. the yz-plane. The value of V d ( k -k ′ ) depends on the polar angle of the vector of k -k ′ . Its average is 2π 3 d 2 and that of This means that the pairing amplitude is suppressed in the equatorial plane. Combining the pairing structures both in the polar region and the equatorial plane, it is clear that the pairing symmetry is mostly of the p z -wave, which is also consistent with the real space picture of pairing. Around T c , the gap equation can be linearized. The standard pairing eigenvalue analysis is performed by defining the eigenvectors φ i t,s ( k) satisfying the eigenequation where w i t are eigenvalues; N 0 is the density of states on the Fermi surface; i is the index of eigenvectors. The actual pairing occurs in the channel with the lowest negative eigenvalue. The spherical harmonics decomposition of V t,s ( k; k ′ ) reads where l and l ′ only take odd values. Compared with Eq.19 and Eq. 20, we arrive at The diagonalization shows that the most negative eigenvalue lies in the sector with m = 0, whose eigenvalue and eigenvector are The above pairing eigenvector shows that the pairing symmetry is mainly of the p z -type, in agreement with the intuitive real space analysis. The pairing eigen-values in the sector of m = 0 can even been solved analytically as shown in Ref. 29 as The gap function of Eq. 83 vanishes for quasi-particle momenta lying in the equatorial plane, and thus exhibits a nodal plane in the Bogoliubov excitation spectra. As shown in Ref. [29], the standard mean-field value of T c is related to the eigenvalue solved above as where γ = 0.5772 is the Euler constant. In Ref. [29], a further analysis based on Gor'kov, Melik-Barkhudarov (GM) approach The new ingredient of the two-component dipolar fermions is that both the spin singlet and triplet pairings are allowed with μ = x, y, z, respectively, where Then the pairing Hamiltonian is expressed as where ) are pairing interactions in the singlet and triplet channels, respectively. The Bogoliubov quasiparticle spectra become , and λ 2 1,2 ( k) are the eigenvalues of the positive-definite Hermitian matrix ∆ † ( k)∆( k). The gap equation takes the matrix form as where || means the thermal ensemble average. ∆ αβ ( k) can be decomposed into the singlet and triplet channel pairings as in which ∆ s and ∆ t,μ satisfy where After linearizing the gap equation around T c , we perform the eigenvalue analysis for the pairing problem. The eigen-equation of the triplet sector is the same as Eq. 80, while that of the singlet sector can be obtained by replacing V t ( k; k ′ ) with V s ( k; k ′ ). The spherical harmonics decomposition of V s ( k; k ′ ) can be done in a similar way to Eq. 81, and the resultant V ll ′ ;m takes the same form as Eq. 82 but with l, l ′ only taking even integer values. However, the Hartree interaction does not exist in the pairing channel, and thus, for l = l ′ = m = 0, V 00;0 = 0 for the case of the purely dipolar interaction. The analysis of pairing eigenvalues in the triplet sector is the same as that in the single component case. Thus, the leading pairing symmetry still lies in the p z -channel. The pairing eigenvalue and eigenvector are the same as Eq. 83, and T c is still approximately determined by Eq. 84. We can express the triplet pairing in terms of the d-vector as where γ is the U(1) phase and ∆ t is the pairing amplitude. This spin-triplet pairing breaks the U(1) gauge symmetry in the charge channel and the SU(2) symmetry in the spin channel, and thus, there are two different low energy excitations: phonon and spin-wave modes. This pairing is still invariant under a combined Z 2 -symmetry of dμ → -dμ and γ → γ + π In the singlet channel, the lowest eigenvalue and the corresponding eigenvector are respectively. The eigenvector mixes the s and d k 2 -3k 2 zchannels. All other negative eigenvalues are small and negligible. Although for the purely dipolar interaction, the singlet channel pairing instability is significantly weaker than that of the triplet channel. Nevertheless, the matrix element V 00;0 may receive additional contributions from the short-range s-wave scattering interaction, which in principle is tunable through Feshbach resonances. At V 00;0 /λ ≈ -3.15, the singlet and triplet channel instabilities become degenerate. Considering the competition between the spin triplet and singlet channel pairings, we generally expect two pairing superfluid transitions. The first transition is triggered by the stronger pairing channel, say, the triplet p zchannel, which determines T c1 . In the case that the singlet channel pairing is weaker but nearly degenerate with the triplet one, a second transition may occur at T c2 as further lowering temperature. The mixing between the single and triplet pairings breaks parity, and thus, the second transition is also a genuine phase transition. The coupling between these two pairing channels can be captured by the following Ginzburg-Landau (GL) free energy as 50 where ∆ t is a compact notation for ∆ t,μ (μ = x, y, z); other non-gradient terms in the GL free energy only depend on the magnitudes of order parameters. γ 3 should be positive, such that ∆ t can be described by a real dvector multiplied by a U (1) phase. The sign of γ 2 determines the relative phase between ∆ s and ∆ t : if γ 2 < 0, the phase difference between ∆ s and ∆ t is 0 or π; if γ 2 > 0, the phase difference is ± π 2 . The latter case gives rise to a novel pairing with TR symmetry breaking as explained in Sect. V D. In SO coupled systems, the coupling between the singlet and triplet pairings through a spatial gradient is considered in Ref. [98], which leads to a spatially nonuniform state. Nevertheless, because of the spin conservation, such a term is not allowed in electric dipolar systems. When the singlet and triplet channel pairings coexist, a natural question is: what is the relative phase between these two pairing channels? It was found in Ref. [50] that, at the mean-field level, the phase difference of ± π 2 between ∆ s and ∆ t,μ is favored, so that TR symmetry is spontaneously broken. This is a general mechanism leading to the TR symmetry breaking pairing, which applies for the mixing problem between singlet and triplet pairings in the absence of SO coupling in the weak coupling limit. It has also been found later in Ref. [52,53] that the TR symmetry breaking also exists in the resonance interaction regime of the dipolar Fermi gases. The reason for the above TR symmetry breaking effect is that the weak coupling theory favors the unitary pairing, i.e., ∆ † ( k)∆( k) is an identity matrix up to a factor. A simple calculation shows that ∆ The unitary pairing is achieved if and only if a phase difference e iφ = ±i exists between ∆ s and ∆ t,μ . More precisely, it can be proved following the method presented in Ref. [99]. The quasi-particle spectra read The quasiparticle contribution to the free energy is f and the minimum is reached at λ 2 1 = λ 2 2 . This is precisely the condition of the unitary pairing. Here is another intuitive view to see why the phase difference e iφ = ±i is favored. Without loss of generality, let us set d ẑ, and assume a relative phase difference φ. The ratio between the pairing amplitudes is Only when e iφ = ±i, the magnitude of this ratio is 1, such that the pairing strengths are the same. Otherwise, say, if e iφ = ±1, the pairing amplitudes of ψ ↑ ( k)ψ ↓ (-k) and ψ ↓ ( k)ψ ↑ (-k) are not equal. Again, the pairing structure, whose gap magnitudes distribute over the Fermi surface in a more uniform way, is usually favored. The magnetic dipolar interaction also gives rise to novel Cooper pairing structures possessing the SO coupled nature Even within the J-triplet sector, there are still competing instabilities regarding to different possibilities of J z 's: the helical polar state (J z = 0) which maintains TR symmetry, and the axial state (J z = ±1) which breaks TR symmetry. The helical polar state exhibits a pair of nodes around which the quasi-particle wavefunction exhibits winding numbers ±1, thus it is a gapless Dirac pairing. It is a TR invariant generalization of the 3 He-A phase with coupled spin and orbital degrees of freedom. This state was also proposed before, in the context of superfluid In this section, we review the SO coupled pairing structure of the magnetic dipolar fermions. An intuitive real space picture for the J-triplet pairing is presented in Sect. VI A. The partial-wave analysis for the pairing eigenvalues is performed in Sect. VI B. The structure of the nodal Bogoliubov quasi-particles is given in Sect. VI C. A. The real space picture for the J-triplet pairing We perform an intuitive real space analysis based on a simple two-body problem. It can be shown that the magnetic dipolar interaction between two spin-1 2 fermions vanishes in the total spin singlet channel, and it only exists in the total spin triplet channel. Naturally, the magnetic dipolar interaction leads to the triplet pairing. Let us introduce a characteristic length scale at which the kinetic energy equals the interaction energy at a dp = mg 2 F μ 2 B / 2 where m is the fermion mass. Since our purpose is to seek the most attractive angular partialwave channel, without loss of generality, we can fix the inter-particle distance at a dp . In the spin triplet channel, the lowest value of orbital angular momentum is p-wave, and thus there are 3 × 3 = 9 states with L = S = 1. According to the total angular momentum J, they can be classified into J = 0, 1 and 2. The interaction energies can be easily diagonalized in each sector as respectively, where E dp = g 2 F μ 2 B /a 3 dp . Only the channel with J = 1 can support bound states, which is also confirmed from the momentum space analysis below in Sect. VI B. The reason why the J-triplet channel is the most attractive one is because of its particular pairing spin configuration, which shows a dominant "head-to-tail" configuration and thus the interaction is attractive. More precisely, let us denote the spin wavefunctions and the relative orbital wavefunctions as χ μ and p μ ( Ω), which satisfy for μ = x, y, and z. In other words, χ μ and p μ ( Ω) are polar eigenstates of total spin and the relative orbital angular momentum, respectively. In the sector of J = 1, we define the SO coupled polar state satisfying which can be expressed as φ μ (Ω) = 1 √ 2 ǫ μνλ χ ν p λ (Ω). In particular, for the state with J z = 0, it can be further expressed as where, êρ = x cos φ + ŷ sin φ; |α eρ and |β eρ are eigenstates of êρ • σ with eigenvalues of ±1, respectively. This shows the "head-to-tail" configuration in Fig. In contrast, the eigenstate of J = 0 shows the "headto-head" configuration as shown in Fig. , where |α Ω and |β Ω are eigenstates of Ω • σ with the eigenvalues ±1, respectively. In this part, we review the partial-wave analysis in momentum space, which arrives at the same pairing symmetry as that obtained through the real space analysis. After the mean-field decomposition, the pairing Hamiltonian of the magnetic dipolar system becomes where where i = 1, 2 and λ 2 i ( k) are the eigenvalues of the positive-definite Hermitian matrix defined as ∆ † ( k)∆( k). The pairing matrix ∆ αβ is defined as where 1S z | 1 2 α 1 2 β is the Clebsch-Gordan coefficient for two spin-1 2 states to form the spin triplet. ∆ Sz satisfies the mean-field gap function as where , and the integral in Eq. 102 is already normalized following the standard procedure The interaction matrix element in Eq. 102 is defined as The spherical harmonics decomposition of V SzS ′ z ( k; k ′ ) can be formulated as where L = L ′ , or, L = L ′ ± 2, and L, L ′ are odd integers. The expressions of the dimensionless matrix elements V LMSz ;L ′ M ′ S ′ z are the same as those in Eq. 56 except an overall minus sign and a numeric factor. The free energy can be calculated as where is the inverse of the interaction matrix defined as In order to analyze the pairing eigenvalues, the gap equation is linearized around T c for states around the Fermi surface. The total angular momentum quantum number J is employed to classify the eigen-gap functions denoted as φ a,JJz Sz ( k), in which the index a is used to distinguish different channels with the same value of J. The eigen-equation for φ where w a J are dimensionless eigenvalues; k, k ′ are at the Fermi surface. Employing the spherical harmonics decomposition of Eq. 103, the most negative eigenvalue is calculated lying the channel of J = L = 1 as w J=1 = -2πλ m . All other negative eigenvalues are significantly smaller. Thus, the dominant pairing channel remains in the J-triplet channel in the weak coupling theory in agreement with the real space analysis. For later convenience, the pairing matrix in the J = 1 sector is represented as for μ = x, y and z. It represents a pairing symmetry whose angular momentum projection along the direction of êμ is zero, i.e., it is an eigenstate of êμ • J with the zero eigenvalue. In the sector of J = 1, there are still two non-equivalent pairing possibilities: J z = 0, or J z = ±1, whose pairing matrices are ∆ z αβ ( k) and 1 √ 2 {∆ x αβ ( k)± i∆ y αβ ( k)}, respectively. Based on the GL analysis up to the quartic order of the pairing order parameter, it can be proved that these two are the only non-equivalent pairing symmetries under 3D rotations. Right at T c , the Ginzburg-Landau free energy can be linearized, and these two instabilities are degenerate, while this degeneracy is lifted below T c due to the non-linearity of the Ginzburg-Landau free energy. In quantum mechanics, if a system possesses rotation symmetry, of course, the eigenstates of its energy in the J = 1 sector and all of their superpositions are degenerate because of the linearity of quantum mechanics. However, the index J labeling the pairing order parameter is not the angular momentum of the many-body eigenstate. The description of a many-body system in terms of order parameters is a great simplification by only keeping a very limit but essential amount of degrees of freedom. A price to pay is that the description in terms of order parameters, say, the Landau-Ginzburg free energy, is non-linear even though quantum mechanics remains linear. This is the reason why the J z = 0 and J z = ±1 in principle are non-equivalent and the superposition law does not hold for Cooper pairing symmetries. The two pairing patterns with J z = 1 and J z = -1 are equivalent to each other which can be connected either by a rotation or by the TR transformation. The pairing symmetry with J z = 0 is also called the J-polar pairing, characterized by the following pairing matrix ∆ pl αβ = which is a unitary pairing and preserves TR symmetry. The spin-up fermions are paired in the p x -ip y symmewhile, the spin-down fermions are paired with the p x + ip y symmetry. Thus, it is equivalent to a helical version of the 3 He-A phase. In the 3 He-A phase, the pairing symmetry defines an orbital angular momentum direction represented by the l-vector. Here, the z-axis plays a similar role, but due to the TR symmetry, it represents the bi-direction of the polar axis, and thus it is no long a vector but a director. Thus if we rotation the polar pairing around any axis in the xy-plane for 180 • , then the system returns to itself up to a global phase difference. The Bogoliubov quasiparticle spectra are degenerate for two different spin configurations as E pl k,α = ξ 2 k + |∆ pl ( k)| 2 with the anisotropic gap function |∆ pl ( k)| 2 = 1 4 |∆| 2 sin 2 θ k depicted in Fig. where ψ T ( k) = (ψ ↑ ( k), ψ † ↑ (-k)). Eq. 108 describes a Weyl fermion with a unit winding number. Combining the effective Hamiltonian for the spin down sector which is also a Weyl fermion but with an opposite chirality, the low energy Bogoliubov spectrum is 3D gapless Dirac like. If the quantization axis for the polar pairing is rotated away from the z-axis, then the spin quantization axis for the Bogoliubov quasiparticles should also be transformed accordingly. Without loss of generality, we pick up the J z = 1 pairing, and the result of the state of J z = -1 can be obtained by performing TR transformation. The pairing matrix, ∆ ax αβ = for i = 1 and 2, respectively, as depicted in Fig. Considering the coupling between k and -k, we can combine the north and south poles together into a four component spinor. The above energy spectra show that two of them are gapped, while, another two of them are gapless forming a two-component Weyl spinor. Different from the usual linear dispersion of Weyl fermions, the dispersions are quadratic with respect to the the transverse momentum k = k 2 x + k 2 y . A natural question is: which pairing is energetically more stable? For the case of 3 He, at the mean-field level, the B-phase is always more stable than the A-phase The above study of the spin-1 2 magnetic dipolar system is just a toy model to start with. Of course, the energy scale is too small to be observed in current cold atom systems. Even for large moment atoms 161 Dy (μ = 10μ B ) with the current available density 10 13 cm -3 , the dipolar energy scale is only around 6nK We have briefly reviewed the novel many-body physics of both electric and magnetic dipolar fermion systems focusing on the aspect of unconventional symmetries. The electric dipolar interaction is characterized by its d r 2 -3z 2 -anisotropy, which leads to anisotropic Fermi liquid properties in the particle-hole channel and a robust mechanism of spin-triplet p z -wave Cooper pairing in the particle-particle channel. The competition and coexistence between the singlet and triplet Cooper pairing leads to a novel mechanism of TR symmetry breaking pairing. The magnetic dipolar interaction manifests its SO coupled nature in unpolarized fermion systems. Its Fermi liquid theory is SO coupled whose collective zero sound mode exhibits an oscillation of a topological nontrivial spin structure over the Fermi surface. The magnetic dipolar interaction also lead to a SO coupled p-wave spin triplet Cooper pairing state with the total spin of a Cooper pair J = 1. This is a novel pairing symmetry different from that in both 3 He-B and A phases, whose Bogoliubov quasiparticles exhibit nodal helical Dirac or chiral Weyl spectra. k + |∆ ax i ( k)| 2 , with