We employ the chemical fragment formalism to perform a targeted superconductor search in the Nb-Ru-B system, yielding the orthorhombic metal-rich boride NbRuB, which displays BCS-like superconductivity with a Tc = 3.1 K. NbRuB is derived from the chemical fragments Nb3B2 + Ru3B, in which the Nb3B2 fragment contains B-B dimers and the Ru3B fragment contains isolated B atoms. A charge transfer occurs between the fragments. The results indicate that the fragment formalism is a useful chemical tool for the design of new intermetallic superconductors much the same way as the charge reservoir concept has been a useful chemical tool for the design of new copper oxide superconductors. Borides are an important class of non-molecular solids. The samples were synthesized by arc melting elemental starting materials in a water-cooled copper hearth. Niobium (99.9%, Alfa Aesar), ruthenium (99.95%, Aldrich), and boron (99.999%, J&M) were weighed in the NbRuB stoichiometric ratio with 10% molar excess B added in order to balance the light element B loss during the arc melting. The buttons were turned and melted several times to ensure good homogeneity. Weight losses during the melting process were less than 1%. Annealing the as-cast products below 1400 ┬░C yielded Nb3Ru5B2 as the dominant phase, indicating that the NbRuB compound is stable only at higher temperatures. The as-cast arcmelted NbRuB sample was examined by powder X-ray diffraction for identification and phase purity on a Rigaku powder diffractometer employing Cu K╬▒ radiation with aid of a full-profile Rietveld refinement using LHPM RIETICA. To specify the structure of NbRuB, single crystals were investigated on a Bruker Apex II diffractometer with Mo K╬▒1 radiation. The crystal structure was solved using direct methods and refined by SHELXTL. To gain further insights into the electronic character of NbRuB, TB-LMTO-ASA calculations In intermetallic compounds like these, without clear formal differences in element electronegativity, metallic characteristics may appear to exclude the possibility for charge transfer between atoms, but this does not discount the possible presence of differences between the orbital occupations of the atoms in the compound from those of their ground state neutral gaseous atoms. To quantify the charge transfer in this material, we have used Bader charge analysis The temperature (T) dependent electrical resistivity (’ü▓) of NbRuB in the vicinity of the superconducting transition, measured by a four-probe technique using silver paste electrodes in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), is shown in Figure To prove that the superconductivity is intrinsic to NbRuB, and is not a consequence of the impurity phases present, the superconducting transition was characterized through heat capacity measurements. The heat capacity for NbRuB in the temperature range of 1.9 to 40 K is presented in Figure The good quality of the sample and the bulk nature of the superconductivity are supported by the presence of a large anomaly in the heat capacity at Tc= 3.0 ~ 3.1 K in the plot of Cp /T, at a temperature that is in excellent agreement with the Tc determined by ’ü▓(T) and ’üŻ. The electronic contribution to the specific heat, ╬│, measured in a field of 5 T to suppress the superconductivity (inset to Figure In conclusion, we report the results of a directed search for superconducting borides through the use of the chemical fragment formalism. This search yielded NbRuB as a candidate superconducting material based on the donor-acceptor relationship of the structural fragments present and the understanding of the structure and electron count of the Re3B superconductor. Although they do not address the complexity of the root physical causes of the superconductivity in copper oxide and iron arsenide superconductors, the analogous chemically-based charge reservoir concept has been a useful in designing new superconducting compounds in those families 