We combine scanning-tunneling-spectroscopy experiments probing magnetic impurities on a superconducting surface with a theoretical analysis of the tunneling processes between (superconducting) tip and substrate. We show that the current is carried by single-electron tunneling at large tip-substrate distances and Andreev reflections at smaller distances. The single-electron current requires relaxation processes between the impurity-induced Shiba bound state and the quasiparticle continuum, allowing us to extract information on such relaxation processes from our analysis. Introduction.-Impurity-induced subgap states provide a fruitful window into conventional and unconventional superconductors In scanning tunneling spectroscopy, Shiba states induce resonances which occur symmetrically at positive and negative bias voltages Here, we combine scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) of Shiba states using superconducting tips with a comprehensive theoretical analysis to elucidate the nature of the tunneling processes. We show that both single-electron and Andreev tunneling contribute in experiment and explain the observed inversion of peak-height asymmetry as function of tunneling rates. Our analysis shows that STM experiments on Shiba states provide access to quasiparticle relaxation rates in superconductors, complementing recent work on superconducting quantum dots Experiment.-We have performed STM experiments probing Mn adatoms on a Pb(111) single crystal surface. The experiments were carried out in a Specs JT-STM at the base temperature of 1.2 K as well as at 4.8 K. The Pb single crystal surface was cleaned by repeated sputter/anneal cycles until a clean, atomically flat, and superconducting surface was obtained (critical tempera-ture T c = 7.2 K and gap ∆ = 1.35 meV at 1.2 K). Mn adatoms were evaporated onto the clean sample at a temperature below 10 K, resulting in a density of 30 atoms per 100×100 nm 2 (see Supplementary Figure The peaks in the dI/dV spectra appear at thresholds for various fundamental tunneling processes between superconducting tip and substrate with magnetic adatom: (i) Single electrons can tunnel when the negative-energy quasiparticle continuum of the tip overlaps with the positive-energy continuum of the substrate (or vice versa). This requires a threshold voltage eV = ±2∆. (ii) Thermally excited quasiparticles (holes) in the positive-(negative-) energy quasiparticle continuum induce a single-particle current even near zero bias. (iii) With a Shiba state of energy 0 , a single-particle current flows when the negative-energy continuum of the tip overlaps with the Shiba state, or the positive-energy continuum with the symmetric energy -0 . These processes have threshold biases eV = ±(∆ + 0 ). (iv) Due to thermal occupation, a single-electron current can also flow when the positive-energy continuum overlaps with the Shiba state (and symmetrically when the negativeenergy continuum overlaps with -0 ). This requires a threshold bias eV = ±(∆ -0 ). (v) At e|V | < 2∆, an electron from, say, the tip can be reflected as a hole, transferring a Cooper pair. As all tunneling electrons and holes gain an energy eV , (multiple) Andreev processes between the quasiparticle continua have thresholds eV = ±2∆/n with n = 2, 3, . . .. Andreev processes require two or more particles to cross the tunnel barrier and thus become relevant for strong tunnel coupling . dI/dV spectra measured on an isolated Mn adatom on Pb(111) for increasing tunneling strength from top to bottom (recorded with a lock-in modulation amplitude of 15 μV rms at a frequency of 912 Hz). Spectra are normalized to the 'normal-state' conductance measured at 4 meV (i.e., well outside the superconducting gap) in units of G0 = 2e 2 /h, offset for clarity, and scaled when indicated for better visibility. The distance to the closest neighboring Mn atom was greater than 5 nm. A spectrum acquired above the clean Pb(111) surface overlays the smallest-conductance trace (top curve) for comparison. The four peaks originating from the deepest Shiba level are marked by dashed lines at e|V | = ±(∆ ± 0). only There is an important difference between the singleelectron and resonant Andreev processes The heights of the peaks associated with this Shiba state are plotted in Fig. Here, the Fermi functions n F are evaluated at ω ± = ω ± eV and Γ = Γ e + Γ h + Γ 1 + Γ 2 . The expressions for I s and I a can be understood in terms of the basic processes discussed above. The An-dreev current I a involves tunneling of an electron, described by Γ e (ω) = 2πu 2 ρ(ω -eV )t 2 , and a hole, described by Γ h (ω) = 2πv 2 ρ(ω + eV )t 2 . Here, t is the amplitude for tunneling between tip and substrate. The rates Γ e and Γ h are strongly ω-dependent through the tip's BCS density of states ρ(ω). The denominator in Eq. ( Eqs. ( Linear regime.-This picture is substantiated by a quantitative analysis of the linear regime. For weak tunneling and Γ 1 Γ 2 (i.e., 0 T ), Eq. ( for the peak heights. Here, we introduced the normalstate electron (hole) tunneling rate , where ν 0 is the normal-state density of states of the tip. The expressions for α -and β + simply differ by the substitution u ↔ v (or γ e ↔ γ h ). Thus, in this regime, the peak height is indeed a measure of the Shiba wavefunction at the tip position. From the data in Fig. As Γ 1 increases with temperature, Eq. (3) also predicts the peak heights in the linear regime to decrease with T . This is consistent with the data as seen by comparing the main panel and the inset in Fig. Regime of strong tunneling.-As tunneling rates increase relative to the relaxation rates, the magnitude of the single-particle conductance reaches a maximum and eventually decreases. As a result, the thermal peaks β ± should exhibit a maximum vs normal-state conductance. The situation is different for the main peaks α ± with their additional Andreev contribution which keeps increasing and eventually dominates the peak magnitude. Sufficiently far into this regime, Eqs. ( as well as α -and β + which differ again by u ↔ v. The main peaks α ± keep increasing with tunneling γ e,h , albeit with a sublinear dependence. We note that the transition from weak to strong tunneling is also accompanied by a change in the lineshape of the peaks (see Eq. ( To further substantiate our analysis, we have used Eqs. ( Relaxation rates.-To extract the relaxation rates Γ 1 and Γ 2 quantitatively, we focus on the thermal peak β + . In the sublinear regime it contributes a current I ∼ eΓ 2 / [27]. Moreover, Eq. ( If the relaxation process relied on directly exciting a quasiparticle from the Shiba state to the continuum, we would predict a ratio of the relaxation rates at the two experimental temperatures of order ∼ 10 4 . We can account for a substantial part of the apparent discrepancy with our observations by recalling that there are additional Shiba states. If relaxation proceeds as a multistep process which first excites to the second Shiba state, we predict a ratio of relaxation rates which is consistent with experiment (see also Conclusions.-We show that STM experiments on subgap states in superconductors probe both singleelectron and Andreev tunneling. We emphasize that such experiments are particularly fruitful when performed with superconducting tips. In this case, thermal smearing can be neglected and the temperature dependence of the current arises entirely from activated quasiparticle relaxation processes. Moreover, the additional thermal peaks facilitate the analysis and provide access to the relaxation rates. We find that at weak tip-substrate tunneling, the current is dominated by single-electron tunneling and linear in the normal-state conductance. This regime can be used to map out the bound-state wavefunction. At stronger tip-substrate tunneling, the dependence on the normal-state conductance becomes sublinear. While the dependence on the Shiba wavefunction becomes more involved, this regime provides access to pertinent quasiparticle relaxation rates involving the subgap states. Specifically, we can extract the rates for quasiparticle relaxation into and out of the bound state. The present experiment was restricted to two different temperatures. To gain further microscopic understanding of the relaxation processes, it would be rewarding to perform more systematic experiments as a function of temperature. We thank Piet Brouwer and Leonid Glazman for discussions, and acknowledge financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through SFB 658 and FR2726/4 (KF) as well as SPP 1285 and SPP 1666 (FvO), by an ERC grant NanoSpin (KF) and the Helmholtz Virtual Institute New States of Matter and The Pb(111) surface was cleaned by Ne + sputtering, followed by annealing to T = 430 K. This yields an atomically clean surface with terraces of several nm width, which are separated by mono-atomic steps [see Fig. Manganese atoms were deposited on the clean Pb(111) sample inside the STM at a temperature below 10 K. All Mn adatoms have the same apparent height after the evaporation. By contacting the adatom with the tip at a bias of 5 mV, we can induce a change in the adsorption configuration. The resulting species has a larger apparent height [Fig. Both configurations show distinct dI/dV spectra. The initial adsorption site has been investigated by Ji et al. In the main manuscript, we focus on experiments with a superconducting tip. For completeness, we include spectra and corresponding peak-height vs. conductance curves acquired with a normal-metal tip at 1.2 K (Fig. Here, we derive the expressions for the tunneling current between a superconducting tip and a superconducting sample with magnetic impurity, as given in Eqs. ( The system is described by the Hamiltonian Ĥ = ĤL + ĤR + ĤT , where the three parts describe the tip, the substrate, and the tunnel coupling. The superconducting tip is described by the BCS Hamiltonian where ξ k = k 2 /2m -μ, μ is the chemical potential, ∆ is the superconducting gap, and c L,kσ (c † L,kσ ) annihilates (creates) an electron in the tip with momentum k and spin σ. The Hamiltonian of the substrate contains a magnetic impurity, located at the origin, with spin S pointing along the z direction. The impurity couples to the substrate via a potential V δ(r) and exchange coupling JSσ z δ(r), where σ z is a Pauli matrix in spin space. The Hamiltonian takes the form where the operator ĉR,σ = ́dkĉ R,kσ /(2π) 3 annihilates an electron with spin σ at the origin. One can always choose a gauge such that the superconducting order parameters in tip and substrate are real. The superconducting phase difference φ(τ ) then enters the tunneling Hamiltonian where τ is the time argument, t the hopping strength, and we have made the time dependence of c L/R,σ and c † L/R,σ explicit. In writing the tunneling Hamiltonian, we have assumed that the substrate is contacted at the impurity location. The time-dependent phase difference between the tip and the sample, φ(τ ) = φ 0 + 2eV τ , depends on the voltage V applied to the junction. The current operator can be obtained from the Heisenberg equation of motion Î = -e ṄL = ie[ NL , ĤT ], where NL is the electron-number operator of the tip. We obtain Taking the expectation value yields where τ z is a Pauli matrix acting in Nambu space. In the last expression, we introduced the lesser Green function in Nambu space with i, j = L, R and the hopping matrix The time dependence only enters the phase difference and thus the current is a periodic function of time τ with period 2π/eV . We can expand the current in a Fourier series in terms of the frequency ω 0 = eV The nonequilibrium Green functions depend on two time arguments and have a generalized Fourier expansion We adopt the notation G nm (ω) = G(ω + nω 0 , ω + mω 0 ) for which the relation G nm (ω) = G n-m,0 (ω + mω 0 ) holds. The hopping matrix and its conjugate are given by t(τ ) = te 01 e iω0τ + th 10 e -iω0τ = t 0 0 0 with te/h nm = te/h n-m,0 . Here, we focus on the dc current which is given by the zeroth order in the Fourier expansion, = e h ˆdω tG <,ee RL,10 + tG <,hh RL,-1,0 -tG <,ee LR,01 -tG <,hh LR,0,-1 , (S17) where the superscripts ee and hh denote the two diagonal matrix elements in Nambu space. We do not include the nonresonant Andreev reflections at the superconducting tip and thus neglect multiple Andreev reflection processes, i.e., g eh L = g he L = 0, where g L denotes the bare Green function of the tip in the absence of the tunnel coupling. Importantly, we retain Andreev reflections at the substrate as they may be resonantly enhanced due to the presence of Shiba bound states. We can now write the Green functions G LR appearing in Eq. (S17) in terms of g L and the sample Green functions G R , which includes tunneling only through the self energy of the Shiba state. Using the Langreth rule we obtain G r,ee R,11 te 10 g <ee L,00 + G <,ee R,11 te 10 g a,ee L,00 , (S20) G <,ee LR,01 g r,ee L,00 te 01 G <,ee R,11 + ĝ<,ee L,00 L,00 Writing G(ω + neV ) = G nn (ω), and g L = g ee L = g hh L , we obtain for the current where we used the short-hand notation ω ± = ω ± eV . By using the relation G < -G > = G a -G r , we arrive at To determine the Green function G R of the substrate, we first calculate the bare Green function g R neglecting the tunnel coupling to the tip. Without the magnetic impurity, the Green function of a BCS superconductor in Nambu space evaluated at the origin is We can include the coupling to the impurity spin in Eq. (S7) by means of the Dyson equation where we introduced the dimensionless parameters α = πν 0 JS > 0 and β = πν 0 V . The subgap states with |ω| < ∆ correspond to the poles of the Green function. In particular, in our model the Shiba state energy is given by the pole of g R , To calculate the tunneling into the Shiba state, we only need g R (ω) with ω close to 0 . In this limit, we set ω = 0 +δω and expand the denominator in Eq. (S27) to linear order in δω, The numerator can be evaluated at ω = 0 , which leads to Thus the Green function has the approximate form Self energy due to tip-substrate tunneling We now include the tunnel coupling of the Shiba state to the tip. For simplicity, we assume that the tip position is identical with the impurity position. Then, the self energy due to the tunneling is local at the position of the impurity, and we can suppress spatial arguments in the following. The tunneling gives rise to the self energy Σ r R = th 01 g r L,11 where we neglect Andreev reflections in the tip as discussed in the main text. Similar relations hold for the self energies Σ a,<,> R . The retarded and advanced Green functions of the Shiba level coupled to the tip can be obtained from the Dyson equation where the imaginary part of the self energy leads to a broadening Γ = Γ e (ω) in terms of the BCS density of states with ν 0 the normal density of states at the Fermi energy. In Eq. (S43) we have neglected the real part of the self energy which would lead to a shift of the resonance energy ∝ t 2 . The lesser Green function of the Shiba state is given by [34] A straightforward calculation using the relations g < L (ω) = 2πiρ(ω)n F (ω) and g > L (ω) = -2πiρ(ω)(1 -n F (ω)) reveals Along the same lines we find We can now evaluate the current in Eq. (S25) which yields I = I s + I a , where The current I a originates from resonant Andreev reflection, whereas I s describes single-particle tunneling and subsequent relaxation of quasiparticles in the Shiba state. These two equations are given in the main text as Eqs. ( The intrinsic broadening of the Shiba level is determined by the rates Γ 1 for emptying and Γ 2 for filling a Shiba state. In Ref. In the present experiment, we find no indication for the presence of a quasiparticle bath at subgap energies as the Pb sample exhibits a hard gap away from the impurities. A more likely source are phonon-assisted transitions which result in a thermal distribution of the Shiba state f = n F ( 0 ) in the absence of a tunnel coupling, where f = Γ 2 /(Γ 1 + Γ 2 ) [see Eq. (S41)]. Thus for purely thermal relaxation we generally find The most basic relaxation process involves direct transitions between the Shiba state and the quasiparticle continuum. Such processes were studied in Ref. The relaxation rate Γ 1 for leaving the Shiba state has a thermal factor exp[-(∆-0 )/T ] involving the required phonon energy of the transition to the continuum ∆ -0 , whereas Γ 2 is limited by the thermal occupation exp(-∆/T ) of the excited quasiparticles in the continuum. The ratio of the two rates indeed yields Eq. (S53). We study the nature of the relaxation processes in the experiment by determining the relaxation rates at different temperatures (see discussion in main text and Sec. IV B). While our findings are generally consistent with thermal relaxation, the data cannot be readily explained in terms of direct transitions to the continuum. Instead, we propose a cascade of thermal relaxation processes via intermediate Shiba states as an alternative mechanism consistent with our experimental findings. In this section, we provide details of the calculations underlying Eqs. A. eV = ∆ + 0 At this threshold, there are two contributing processes to the current, namely single-electron tunneling into the Shiba state as well as resonant Andreev processes: I ∆+ 0 = I s ∆+ 0 + I a ∆+ 0 . We find for the peak current and for the peak conductance. We will now derive these results, first treating the single-electron processes and subsequently analyzing the Andreev process. The quantities entering into these expressions will be defined as the calculation proceeds. The relevant single-electron process is shown in Fig. to the current. Here, the subscript denotes the threshold and the superscript the single-particle (as opposed to Andreev) nature of the contributions. The integration variable ω denotes the energy of the tunneling electron as measured from the Fermi energy of the substrate superconductor. In Eq. (S58) and throughout this section we focus on contributions to the current which originate from the vicinity of the BCS singularity. Unlike the differential conductance, the full current at the main thresholds e|V | = ∆ + 0 also includes the contributions from terms ∝ Γ 2 in Eq. (S51), which are responsible for the thermal peaks. The quantitative comparison with experiment in Sec. IV A includes all contributions to the current. At the threshold eV = ∆ + 0 , the coupling Γ e (ω) becomes singular exactly at the Shiba energy ω = 0 because of the diverging BCS density of states ρ(ω -eV ) [cf. Fig. in terms of the normal-state tunneling rate γ e = 2πu 2 ν 0 t 2 . In the region of interest the thermal occupation of the tip is n F (ω -eV ) 1. Note that this insensitivity to thermal smearing is a consequence of the superconducting tip. (Of course, the current is still sensitive to temperature which enters into the relaxation rates Γ 1 and Γ 2 .) This also implies that the bias voltage enters into the current only via the BCS density of states which is quite distinct from the case of a normal-state tip. With these ingredients, we can now compute the current in the vicinity of the threshold, Here, we used that Γ 1 Γ 2 for 0 T and Γ h Γ e . The latter will be justified below. Note that it is however important to keep both Γ 1 and Γ e . We simplify notation by measuring voltages from the threshold, and introducing the characteristic energy Then, we have and for the corresponding conductance G = dI/dV . The conductance involves an integral over the tip density of states ∼ 1/ √ ω multiplied by the function is not the spectral function of the Shiba state as it would be for a normal metal tip. This special feature of the superconducting tip arises because the voltage dependence enters through the tip density of states rather than the occupation numbers. As shown in Fig. We can now also discuss the hole tunneling rate Γ h (ω) with an associated energy scale ω h = (γ h √ ∆) 2/3 /2 in terms of the normal state hole tunneling rate γ h = 2πv 2 ν 0 t 2 . In principle, hole tunneling introduces another term into the broadening of Z(ω). The broadening then becomes We can neglect the last term (i.e., the hole contribution to the width of Z(ω)) as long as max{Γ 1 , ω e } ω 3 h / 0 . In principle, one may imagine situations in which v u so that Γ h (ω) contributes significantly to the broadening in the strong tunneling regime. As this case is probably irrelevant for this experiment we exclude it from our analytical considerations. We discuss implications of a broadening due to Γ h (ω) in the presentation of the numerical results at the end of this section. We focus attention on the peak current and peak conductance. The peak occurs approximately at the threshold bias eV = ∆+ 0 and we restrict our analytical considerations to the threshold, setting eV = 0 in the following. While this makes our analysis more transparent it also introduces a small numerical error. We emphasize that our results exhibit the correct parametric dependence and the quantitative analysis in Sec. IV A is based on the numerically exact peak heights. The peak position and height relative to the threshold are discussed in detail in Sec. III F. Evaluated at the threshold, the integral for I s ∆+ 0 contains the two energy scales Γ 1 and ω e . For weak tip-substrate tunneling, ω e Γ 1 , we can neglect the contribution of Γ e to the broadening of Z(ω). In this limit, we find The integral is elementary and we obtain the result The peak conductance in the regime ω e Γ 1 can be calculated along the same lines, where the x-integration is again elementary. In the opposite limit of strong tip-substrate tunneling, ω e Γ 1 , we can neglect the contribution of Γ 1 to the broadening of Z(ω). In this limit, we find Performing the integral yields The peak conductance in the regime ω e Γ 1 can be calculated along the same lines, The Andreev current is given by The Fermi functions can be approximated by n F (ω -eV ) 1 and n F (ω + eV ) 0, since ω ∼ 0 and eV ∼ ∆ + and with ω e 0 we can approximate Γ h (ω) by a constant. In the case 0 ∆ it simply reads With these approximations, the integrals become equal to those for the single-particle contribution, with the replacement Γ 1 → Γ h in the numerator and an overall prefactor of two. Note that we can still ignore Γ h in the broadening of Z(ω) under the assumptions spelled out above. This yields the result summarized in Eqs. (S56) and (S57) above. At threshold the current is again the sum of single-electron and Andreev processes. The relevant single-electron process is shown in Fig. for the peak current and for the peak conductance. At this thermal threshold, only single-electron processes contribute which are shown in Fig. Noting that we see that this differs from the expression for the single-electron current at the threshold eV = ∆ + 0 merely by a factor Γ 2 /Γ 1 . Thus, we obtain for the peak current and This thermal threshold is dominated by the contribution shown in Fig. This differs from the thermal threshold at eV = -∆ + 0 by the replacement of Γ e (ω) by Γ h (ω). Thus, we obtain the current at this threshold by the replacement u ↔ v. This yields for the peak current and for the peak conductance. In Fig. Figure We can estimate the normal state conductance G * N at which the Andreev current becomes the dominant contribution to the current at the threshold eV = ∆ + 0 from Γ 1 ∼ Γ h . We obtain In Fig. At the crossover between regimes (ii) and (iii) the effective electron and hole tunneling rates are equal and the Andreev contribution to the conductance becomes resonant and reaches a maximum of order 2e 2 /h. In regime (iii) both contributions to the differential conductance decrease with tunneling strength. This peculiar feature arises because of the strong energy dependence of the density of states in the superconducting tip and this regime has a sizable extension only when u 2 and v 2 differ by several orders of magnitude. In the experiment this regime is presumably limited to very strong tunneling, G N > 0.1(2e 2 /h), where our approach ceases to be valid as the peak width becomes of the order of 0 . Furthermore the extension of this regime is too narrow to observe a decreasing peak height. The thermal peak β -originates entirely from single-particle tunneling and its peak height simply follows the singleparticle contribution to α + up to a prefactor Γ 2 /Γ 1 in regimes (i) and (ii). The remaining peaks α -and β + have the same qualitative behavior as α + and β -although with different regime boundaries, which are obtained from Eqs. (S84) and (S85) by interchanging u ↔ v. The peak heights of all four peaks are shown in Fig. In this section we analyze how the lineshape of the Shiba conductance peak is affected by the tunneling strength with important implications for fitting experimental dI/dV traces. In the linear regime the single-particle current in Eq. (S58) can be approximated near eV = ∆ + 0 by a convolution of the BCS density of states and a Lorentzian of width Γ 1 In the sublinear regime where the broadening of the Shiba resonance is determined by the tunnel coupling Γ e to the tip the current reads The tip density of states now also enters the width of the resonance and this expression does not have the form of a convolution. Consequently the lineshape of the Shiba resonance changes qualitatively from linear to sublinear regime as shown in Fig. Our analytical results in the previous subsections refer to the differential conductance exactly at the threshold voltages e|V | = ∆ ± 0 . The shift of the maximum away from the threshold yields a somewhat larger peak height. Given that the peak heights vary by orders of magnitude in the experiment this deviation of at most 35% only affects details but is inessential to our central results. Note that we calculate the actual peak height and not the threshold values in the quantitative comparison to the experimental data in Sec. IV A. Our analysis implies that the subgap transport provides insight into the population dynamics of the Shiba state, as governed by the competition between tunneling and quasiparticle relaxation. We now fit the data against the results of our model and extract the quasiparticle lifetime in the Shiba state due to thermal relaxation processes. Besides demonstrating the validity of our description, this also yields valuable information about the dominant transport mechanisms in experiment as a function of the tunnel coupling between tip and sample. We have used the parameters mentioned in Sec. IV A. (b) Plot of (α+β+)/(α-β-) vs. conductance as extracted from Fig. Here we provide details of the theoretical fits to the conductance and current at the Shiba peaks as a function of normal state conductance, as shown in Fig. The theoretical conductance peak heights obtained numerically from Eqs. (S51) and (S52) are plotted in Fig. While several features of the theoretical curves qualitatively agree with the experimental data in Fig. In Fig. direct transitions to the quasiparticle continuum as the dominant relaxation process. An alternative scenario involves a cascade of transitions first to the next Shiba state at 1 = 0.77 meV ( 1 = 0.68 meV at 4.8 K) and subsequent relaxation to the third Shiba state and the continuum. A rough estimate using Eq. (S54) with 1 instead of ∆ yields a ratio Γ 1 (4.8 K)/Γ 1 (1.2 K) ∼ 10 2 . This result is much closer to the experimental value though a more detailed analysis of the population dynamics of the various Shiba states is required for a quantitative comparison. Note that a slightly higher temperature than 1.2 K could account for a significant part of this deviation.