Identifying the nature of magnetism, itinerant or localized, remains a major challenge in condensed-matter science. Purely localized moments appear only in magnetic insulators, whereas itinerant moments more or less co-exist with localized moments in metallic compounds such as the doped-cuprate or the iron-based superconductors, hampering a thorough understanding of the role of magnetism in phenomena like superconductivity or magnetoresistance. Here we distinguish two antiferromagnetic modulations with respective propagation wave vectors of Q ± = (H ± 0.557(1), 0, L ± 0.150 Unravelling the interplay between opposite but also complementary phenomena stands at the forefront of condensed-matter science. For example, unconventional Cooper pairs, on the one hand, can be glued by the common thread of spin fluctuations; on the other hand, they can be competitively ruined by the formation of long-ranged ferromagnetic (FM) or antiferromagnetic (AFM) ordering The 5f electrons in actinides such as U-based compounds UPt 3 and UPd 2 Al 3 show experimental and theoretical evidence for a localized and delocalized dual nature The SDW state, a low-energy self -organized collective modulation of electron spins, often appears in electronic conducting materials such as organic linear-chain compounds, low-dimensional metals or superconductors Intermetallic RE Pd 2 Si 2 silicides all crystallize with the same ThCr 2 Si 2 -type (Fig. Neutron diffraction with polarization analysis. Figure where the subscripts NSF and SF refer to the non-spin flip (NSF) and spin flip (SF) crosssections, nsi means the nuclear spin incoherent contribution, nuc refers to nuclear coherent and isotopic incoherent contributions. The magnetic contributions, labelled by mag, are from two parts: the component of μ that is along the direction of P contributes to NSF scattering, i.e., ( dσ dΩ ) mag ∝ μ P 2 ; (3) the component that is normal to both P and Q gives rise to SF scattering The NSF channel shows only the nuclear Bragg reflections structurally permitted by the tetragonal space group. The SF scattering shows magnetic Bragg peaks with two incommensurable propagation vectors. One set of peaks, that will be called I + and I -(Fig. In our study, the a and b axes are equivalent in the tetragonal symmetry. There is no magnetic signal in the NSF channel (Fig. Reciprocal space maps and temperature-dependent phase diagram. Figure Magnetic-field dependent phase diagram. The magnetic-field dependence of the intensities were measured at 3 K, which is the point where the intensities of I ± and I C are roughly equivalent as shown in Fig. Resistivity measurements. The temperature-dependent resistivity along the <001> and <110> directions at zero field is shown in Fig. Our data show evidence for different electronic origins of the magnetic peaks. We observe that the I ± peaks persist down to the lowest temperature (∼ 1.7 K) in this study, and they do not change position with field (Fig. We believe that the I C peaks are due to a SDW state from the following observations: (1) The I C peaks are suppressed with a relatively weak magnetic field of ∼ 0.1 T (∼ 0.006 meV), showing a fragile electronic instability that closely resembles the behaviour of CDWs driven by the electron-phonon interactions resulting from a lattice distortion Figures To summarize, we have shown that two incommensurate magnetic states exist in a ErPd 2 Si 2 single crystal, with different modulations propagating at Q ± = (H ± 0.557(1), 0, L ± 0.150(1)) and Q C = (H ± 0.564(1), 0, L), respectively, but possessing the same moment direction. We have established their temperature and magnetic-field dependent phase diagrams. We show that both states not only co-exist at ∼ 3.2 -4.2 K, but they are also in competition at ∼ 2.9 -3.2 K. One magnetic state correlates with the underlying lattice insofar as both are independent of the applied magnetic field in this study. In contrast, the other magnetic state is so delicate that a modest magnetic field of ∼ 0.17 T can suppress it, and it is not recovered on releasing the field. We thus propose that the two states have different electronic origins. One state corresponds to the localized unpaired 4f n electrons associated with the Er atoms, mediated mostly by the RKKY interactions, whereas the second one is a SDW state stemming from the conduction electrons, derived probably by the Fermi-surface nesting and/or their coupling to the local moments. We thus propose that ErPd 2 Si 2 represents a prototypical model system for simultaneously studying the interesting behaviors of itinerant and localized moments well-separated in one compound. Methods Resistivity measurements and in-house X-ray powder diffraction. The growth and in-house characterizations of ErPd 2 Si 2 single crystals were previously reported Crystal quality and alignment. We selected a single piece with a mass of ∼ 1.12 g for the neutron scattering studies, which was oriented in the (H, 0, L) scattering plane of the tetragonal symmetry with the neutron Laue diffractometer, OrientExpress quoted in units of r.l.u., where a, b, and c are the relevant lattice parameters referring to the tetragonal unit cell. Neutron polarization analysis. Uniaxial longitudinal neutron polarization analysis was performed at the D7 (ILL) diffractometer with incident vertically-polarized neutron spins with λ = 4.8 Å. In this polarization setup, the NSF channel collects neutron scattering intensities from the nuclear Bragg reflections and the out-of-plane magnetic moments along the <010> direction, while the SF channel records the magnetic intensity from the in-plane moments that are perpendicular to both the b axis and the scattering vector Q Unpolarized neutron scattering. Elastic neutron scattering measurements were carried out on the same oriented sample at the IN12 (ILL) cold triple-axis spectrometer with a vertical moderate magnetic field (up to 3. With dc current I parallel to the <001> axis (up) and along the <110> zone (down). We note that the threshold of magnetic field for weakening the SDW state is so small (Fig. 