We perform a numerical analysis of counterflow quantum turbulence of superfluid 4 He with nonuniform flows by using the vortex filament model. In recent visualization experiments nonuniform laminar flows of the normal fluid, namely, Hagen-Poiseuille flow and tail-flattened flow, have been observed. Tail-flattened flow is a novel laminar flow in which the outer part of the Hagen-Poiseuille flow becomes flat. In our simulation, the velocity field of the normal fluid is prescribed to be two nonuniform profiles. This work addresses a square channel to obtain important physics not revealed in the preceding numerical works. In the studies of the two profiles we analyze the statistics of the physical quantities. Under Hagen-Poiseuille flow, inhomogeneous quantum turbulence appears as a statistically steady state. The vortex tangle shows a characteristic space-time oscillation. Under tail-flattened flow, the nature of the quantum turbulence depends strongly on that flatness. Vortex line density increases significantly as the profile becomes flatter, being saturated above a certain flatness. The inhomogeneity is significantly reduced in comparison to the case of Hagen-Poiseuille flow. Investigating the behavior of quantized vortices reveals that tail-flattened flow is an intermediate state between Hagen-Poiseuille flow and uniform flow. In both profiles we obtain a characteristic inhomogeneity in the physical quantities, which suggests that a boundary layer of superfluid appears near a solid boundary. The vortex tangle produces a velocity field opposite to the applied superfluid flow, and, consequently, the superfluid flow becomes smaller than the applied one. Quantum turbulence in counterflow of He II has left a mystery: the transition between two different kinds of superfluid turbulence, namely, the T1-T2 transition This study is motivated by the recent observation by Marakov et al. In this work we study a numerical simulation of the vortex dynamics under these laminar profiles of the normal fluid. Liquid The idea of quantized circulation in superfluid helium was suggested by Onsager Thermal counterflow in He II, which is internal convection of the two fluids, has been studied well as a prototype of quantum turbulence. One end of the channel is connected with a He II bath and the other end is closed. Upon heating the closed end, the normal fluid flows to the cooler side to transfer heat. The superfluid flows oppositely to the warmer end to satisfy mass conservation: where the integral is performed over the cross section of the channel. Thus a relative velocity v ns = |v nv s | occurs between the two fluids, where the overline denotes the spatial average over the channel cross section. When the counterflow velocity exceeds a critical value, a selfsustaining tangle of quantized vortices appears to form superfluid turbulence. The measurements where γ is a parameter depending on temperature and v 0 is a small parameter. The scheme for understanding quantum turbulence from the vortex dynamics was addressed by Vinen. By assuming homogeneous turbulence he estimated the vortex growth by using a dimensional analysis and modeled the decay process phenomenologically where χ 1 and χ 2 are temperature-dependent parameters. If the vortex tangle is in a steady state, dL/dt = 0, resulting in Eq. ( Counterflow quantum turbulence is known to depend on the aspect ratio of the cross section of the channel The recent visualization experiments have made important breakthroughs for these issues. By using micronsized solid hydrogen tracers the Maryland group 12 succeeded in visualizing quantized vortices in superfluid We mention previous numerical studies of thermal counterflow in He II with a nonuniform profile. Samuels A vortex tangle obtained by Baggaley et al. In this paper we performed a numerical analysis of thermal counterflow in a square channel. It is necessary to address the coupled dynamics of the two fluids to understand the T1-T2 transition. In a typical model of the coupled dynamics one would suppose that the superfluid is described by the vortex filament model, the normal fluid is described by the Navier-Stokes equation, and they are coupled through mutual friction The contents of this paper are as follows. Section II describes the formulation of this work. In Sec. III we show results of our simulation with Hagen-Poiseuille flow. In Sec. IV we show results of our simulation with tailflattened flow. Section V is devoted to a discussion. Section VI presents our conclusions. Here we describe the formulation of a vortex filament model and its numerical analysis. The equation of motion of a vortex filament is first explained, then the velocity fields of the normal fluid are described and the conditions of our simulation are noted. The physical quantities necessary for characterizing the vortex tangle are also introduced. In a vortex filament model 22 a quantized vortex is represented by a filament passing through a fluid and has a definite vorticity. This approximation is very suitable in He II, because the core size of a quantized vortex is much smaller than any other characteristic length scale. At zero temperature the vortex filament moves with the superfluid velocity where v s,ω is the velocity field produced by vortex filaments, v s,b is that produced by solid boundaries, and v s,a is the applied uniform flow of the superfluid. The velocity field v s,ω is given by the Biot-Savart law The filament is represented in parametric form as s = s(ξ, t), where s 1 refers to a point on the filament and the integration is performed along the filament. This work addresses the full Biot-Savart integral The velocity v n of the normal fluid is prescribed to be two profiles, namely, the Hagen-Poiseuille profile u p and the tail-flattened u t profile. We suppose that the flow direction is along the x coordinate and that y, z are coordinates are normal to x, namely, v n = u(y, z) x; the center of the channel is (y, z) = (0, 0). In a rectangular channel the Hagen-Poiseuille profile is given by where u 0 is a normalization factor and a and b are halves of the channel width along the y and z axes, respectively where max[A, B] refers to the larger value of the two arguments, and 0 < h < 1 is a fitting parameter, which determines the flattened area. Figure The simulations are performed under the following conditions. We discretize the vortex lines into a number of points held at a minimum space resolution of ∆ξ = 8.0 × 10 -4 cm. Integration in time is achieved using a fourth-order Runge-Kutta scheme with time resolution ∆t = 1.0 × 10 -4 s. The computing box is 0.1×0.1×0.1 cm 3 . Periodic boundary conditions are used along the flow direction x, whereas solid boundary conditions are applied to the channel walls at y = ±0.05 cm and z = ±0.05 cm. The solid boundaries are assumed to be smooth completely, thus neither vortex pinning nor surface drag occurs. We reconnect two vortices artificially, when the vortices approach each other more closely than ∆ξ. We eliminate vortices that are shorter than 5 × ∆ξ = 2.4 × 10 -3 cm. Temperatures 22 are T = 1.9 K (α = 0.21, α ′ = 0.009), 1.6 K (α = 0.098, α ′ = 0.016), and 1.3 K (α = 0.036, α ′ = 0.014). The density of the normal fluid 24 is ρ n /ρ = 0.43 at 1.9 K, 0.16 at 1.6 K, 0.05 at 1.3 K. The initial state consists of eight randomly oriented vortex rings of radius = 0.023 cm. In this subsection we introduce the physical quantities used in this paper. The vortex line density is defined as where the integral is performed along all vortices in the sample volume Ω. The anisotropy of the vortex tangle is represented by dimensionless parameter 2 : Here rp represents the unit vector parallel to the flow direction. If the vortex tangle is completely isotropic, I = 2/3. If the tangle consists entirely of curves lying in the plane normal to the flow direction, I = 1. To analyze the inhomogeneity of the vortex tangle, we divide the computational box into subvolumes by using a uniform 31 where the integral is performed along all vortices in the subvolume Ω ′ . The local anisotropic parameters are defined as These local quantities are always averaged over the flow direction x. Thus these are functions of position y, z normal to the flow direction, namely, L ′ (y, z) and I ′ (y, z). In this section we present results of our simulation under the Hagen-Poiseuille flow expressed by Eq. (7). We analyze physical quantities to discuss the dynamical and statistical properties of the quantum turbulence. We discuss the time development of L, and we show that the inhomogeneous vortex tangle is sustained by space-time oscillation. This is characteristic of the present case, which cannot appear in uniform counterflow Figure Figure We investigate the statistics of the quantum turbulence in a statistically steady state. In this subsection every physical quantity is averaged temporally over the statistically steady states and spatially over the computational box. Typical experiments using second sound attenuation have observed values integrated over the channel. The statistical values have been extensively investigated both experimentally and numerically. We discuss the properties of Hagen-Poiseuille normal fluid flow by comparing the statistical values with those obtained in previous studies of uniform counterflow. The statistically steady state is known to satisfy the relation of Eq. ( We have discussed the physical quantities averaged over the whole volume. Here we analyze local physical quantities introduced in Sec. II D to investigate the structure of the vortex tangle. In this subsection every physical quantity is averaged temporally over the statistically steady states and spatially over the flow direction. Figure We discuss the dependence of the L ′ profile on T in terms of the difference between the maximum and minimum values of L ′ . The nonuniform v ns makes the vortex tangle inhomogeneous through the mutual friction terms of α and α ′ in Eq. ( Figure It is important to know how the superfluid velocity field v s behaves in quantum turbulence. This issue is closely related to the classification of two types of turbulence in He II at finite temperatures. One type is that in which both the superfluid and the normal fluid are turbulent and couple strongly, where the coupled turbulence exhibits the Kolmogorov law for its energy spectrum The flow direction component v x s of the superfluid velocity field v s is plotted along z = 0 mm in Fig. Our model of the tail-flattened flow of Eq. ( First, we investigate the statistics of the quantum turbulence in statistically steady states. Here every physical quantity is averaged temporally over the statistically steady states and spatially over the computational box. One finds that they are similar to those of uniform counterflow. Figure Figure Figure Finally, we study the superfluid velocity field. The flow direction component v x s of the superfluid velocity field v s is plotted along z = 0 mm in Fig. We discuss five important topics by using the results of this work. It is important to understand how the geometry of the square channel affects quantum turbulence. Of course, a real channel is not the periodic cube used in the preceding studies Figure It is also important to know how the vortices move under the nonuniform counterflow. Thus we calculated the velocity ṡ of the vortices [Eq. ( In Secs. III and IV we regarded the counterflow velocity as v ns = v nv s,a in the analysis of γ. However, the actual relative velocity obtained from Eq. ( v ns = v n -v s , and, in nonuniform counterflow, v s = v s,a , as shown in those sections. Thus we should recalculate the counterflow velocity by taking account of the reduction in the velocity of the superfluid. Figure The present work addresses only the case in which the aspect ratio of the channel is unity, but the change of the ratio should seriously affect the profile of the vortex line density. The aspect ratio of the channel plays an important role in the density and the profile of the vortex tangle. As long as the counterflow velocity is fixed, the increase of the aspect ratio from unity reduces the counterflow velocity gradient along the long side of the cross section. Thus the exclusion of the vortex tangle shown in Figs. It would be meaningful to consider how the aspect ratio affects the normal fluid, though it is prescribed in this formulation. A linear stability analysis of the Navier-Stokes equation shows that the critical Reynolds number for turbulence transition of a viscous fluid increases significantly with decreasing aspect ratio Considering the report 4 by Marakov et al. we would expect the T1-T2 transition to be a transition of the normal fluid from tail-flattened flow to turbulent flow. Here we discuss the T1-T2 transition under this assumption. The nature of the T1 state can be understood by using the results of tail-flattened flow obtained in this work. The T1 state will be the about homogeneous quantum turbulence. Under tail-flattened flow, the vortex line density increases with flat parameter h, becoming saturated at h 0.7. This suggests that the vortex line density does not jump at the transition from tail-flattened flow to turbulent flow. According to experiments 1 , at the T1-T2 transition the vortex line density does not jump, in agreement with our results. The value of γ tf obtained in this work is larger than γ of the T1 state obtained in the experiment. The origin of this difference is unknown, but addressing this issue by using coupled equations for the two fluids would resolve this discrepancy. In this study, we have investigated counterflow quantum turbulence with nonuniform flows of the normal fluid using the vortex filament model. The velocity field of the normal fluid was prescribed to consist of two nonuniform profiles, and the solid boundary condition is applied to the walls of a square channel. First, we conducted a simulation with Hagen-Poiseuille flow. The vortex line density has a fluctuation with a large amplitude. We investigated the configuration of the vortex tangle in the oscillation, and it was revealed that one cycle of the oscillation consists of four characteristic states. The relation L 1 2 = γ(v ns -v 0 ) is almost satisfied, but there are quantitative discrepancies between the results of this work and those found in uniform counterflow. The anisotropy found here is larger than in the case of uniform counterflow. Then we investigated the inhomogeneity of the vortex tangle. The quantized vortices concentrate near the channel walls, and the vortex tangle becomes more isotropic near the solid boundaries. The region near the solid boundary is a boundary layer of the superfluid, which was also found by Baggaley et al. Second, we conducted a simulation with tail-flattened flow. We showed that the vortex line density increases significantly as the flat parameter h increases, becoming saturated at h 0.7. We confined ourselves to h = 0.7 to be consistent with the experiments. The value of γ was found to be larger than those obtained from simula-tions with uniform counterflow, and the anisotropy was found to be slightly larger than in the case of uniform counterflow. The inhomogeneity is significantly reduced in comparison to the case of Hagen-Poiseuille flow. In the center of the channel the vortex line density becomes slightly lower, and the vortex tangle becomes slightly anisotropic. This is because the Hagen-Poiseuille profile remains in the central region of the tail-flattened profile. The velocity field v s,ω is different from that in the case of Hagen-Poiseuille flow, where the reduction of the central region becomes greater. The present simulation revealed that tail-flattened flow is some intermediate state between Hagen-Poiseuille flow and uniform flow. When we focus on the physics quanti-ties averaged over the whole volume, we find that they are similar to those of uniform counterflow. However, if we look at the spatial dependence of these values, they show inhomogeneous behavior. These considerations suggest that some in situ observation is necessary to understand tail-flattened flow.