A large and high-quality single crystal (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFe 0.98 Se, the optimal superconductor of newly reported (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Se system, has been successfully synthesized via a hydrothermal ion-exchange technique. The superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of 42 K is determined by magnetic susceptibility and electric resistivity measurements, and the zero-temperature upper critical magnetic fields are evaluated as 79 and 313 Tesla for the field along the c-axis and the ab-plane, respectively. The ratio of out-of-plane to in-plane electric resistivity,ρ c /ρ ab , is found to increases with decreasing temperature and to reach a high value of 2500 at 50 K, with an evident kink occurring at a characteristic temperature T*=120 K. The negative in-plane Hall coefficient indicates that electron carriers dominate in the charge transport, and the hole contribution is significantly reduced as the temperature is lowered to approach T*. From T* down to T c , we observe the linear temperature dependences of the in-plane electric resistivity and the magnetic susceptibility for the FeSe layers. Our findings thus reveal that the normal state of (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFe 0.98 Se becomes highly two-dimensional and anomalous prior to the superconducting transition, providing a new insight into the mechanism of high-T c superconductivity. The binary Fe 1+δ Se compound Recently, (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Se (FeSe11111) superconductors with T c up to 40 ~ 43 K have been synthesized by hydrothermal approaches In this Letter, we report the successful synthesis of a large and high-quality single crystal (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFe 0.98 Se via a hydrothermal ion-exchange technique using big insulating K 0.8 Fe 1.6 Se 2 crystal as a matrix. Its superconducting transition is confirmed by magnetic susceptibility and electric resistivity measurements, and the zero-temperature upper critical magnetic fields are estimated to be 79 and 313 Tesla for the field along the c-axis and the ab-plane, respectively. The temperature dependences of out-of-plane and in-plane electric resistivity are measured and their ratio,ρ c /ρ ab , as a measure of the charge transport anisotropy, is found to increase with decreasing temperature and to reach its large value of 2500 at 50 K, showing an evident kink at a characteristic temperature T*=120 K. Meanwhile, the negative in-plane Hall coefficient indicates that electron carriers dominate the charge transport and the hole contribution is significantly reduced as the temperature is lowered to approach T*. From T* down to T c , there emerge the linearly temperature dependent in-plane electric resistivity and the magnetic susceptibility deduced for the FeSe layers. Hence, our results reveal that the electron carriers of (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFe 0.98 Se superconductor are getting highly two-dimensional prior to the superconducting transition, resulting in the anomalous normal state properties. The current hydrothermal methods using commercially available reagents together with, in a particular case, synthesized binary FeSe As-derived high-quality FeSe11111 single crystals are of a size over 10 mm in length and about 0.4 mm in thickness. The cartoon in Figure Fig. Displayed in Fig. In the normal state, the in-plane electric resistivityρ ab displays a metallic behavior in the whole measuring temperature range (Fig. Actually, other normal state properties are also readily measured on our large FeSe11111 crystal. The in-plane Hall voltage has been obtained under the magnetic fields along the c-axis by sweeping the field up to 9 Tesla at fixed temperatures. The extracted Hall resistivity (ρ xy ) is proportional to the magnetic field at all measuring temperatures (Supplemental Material Fig. The static magnetic susceptibility χ =M/H is carefully measured and analyzed under different magnetic fields H along c-axis in the region with linear field dependences of magnetization M (Supplemental Material Fig. When the Curie-Weiss term χ CW is subtracted, the rest part of magnetic susceptibility depends almost linearly on temperature in the range of 55 K ~ 75 K (inset of Fig. Finally, we have established for the first time a common temperature scale (T*=120 K) in (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFe 0.98 Se superconductor, which characterizes the prominent reduction in the slope of the in-plane electric resistivity, the kink in the ratioρ c /ρ ab , the dip in the in-plane Hall coefficient, and the deviation in the magnetic susceptibility from the Curie-Weiss law. Below this characteristic T*, normal state electronic behaviors are getting highly two-dimensional and the AFM spin fluctuations in the FeSe layers set in, manifested by the anomalous linear in-plane electric resistivity and nearly linear magnetic susceptibility deduced for the FeSe layers. The two-dimensional electron-electron interaction is crucial to the electron pairing of superconductivity in the FeSe layers, as commonly believed in optimal iron arsenide In conclusion, we have successfully synthesized large and high quality superconducting (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFe 0.98 Se single crystal out of insulating K 0.8 Fe 1.6 Se 2 matrix crystal via hydrothermal ion exchange. Its in-plane lattice constants a and b determined as 3.78 Å are comparable to the primary bulk FeSe (3.77 Å) and A y Fe 2-x Se 2 (3.90 Å) superconductors. In contrast, its FeSe-tetrahedron layers weakly bonded to the (Li/Fe)OH layers via hydrogen ions have a larger inter-layer spacing (9.32 Å) compared with the bulk FeSe (5.52 Å) and A x Fe 2-y Se 2 (7.02 Å) superconductors. Consequently, (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFe 0.98 Se exhibits an enhanced two-dimensionality of the electronic structure among iron selenide superconductors, prior to the superconducting transition at 42 K. Hence our findings provide a new insight into the pairing mechanism of high-T c superconductivity. Furthermore, a series of large single crystals of (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Se system are expected by duplicating the hydrothermal ion-exchange technique. The breakthrough in crystal preparation reported here will greatly promote the in-depth investigations on this system. In addition, this very successful technique developed for synthesizing (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFe 0.98 Se crystals may be applicable in other layer-structured materials, opening up a new route for producing and exploring high-quality bulk functional crystals desired for both basic research and applications. The results slightly depend on the magnitude of the applied field. The sudden drops in the magnetic susceptibility are due to the appearance of the superconductivity. In the high temperature range, all the data can be fitted to a modified Curie-Weiss law χ m = χ 0 + χ CW . But a deviation is clearly visible below T*=120 K as well. Further lowering temperature, the rest magnetic susceptibility in which the Curie-Weiss term is subtracted shows the nearly linear temperature dependence in a narrow temperature range (the inset).