In [1, 2] I. M. Suslov proposes a theoretical description for the interplay between disorder and superconductivity that, among other things, claims to predict situations where superconductivity is enhanced by disorder. In this comment we show that Suslov's results do not make any sound predictions relating to this problem. Suslov also suggests that the percolation approach recently employed by the authors to compute the global critical temperature of inhomogeneous superconductors induced by weak multifractality [3] is not satisfactory. We refute Suslov's opinion using simple ideas from the Bardeen-Cooper-Schiaffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity. More importantly we stress that our theory makes quantitative analytical predictions for observables such as the global critical temperature and the spatial distribution of the order parameter. Our work can therefore be easily confirmed or disproved through either numerical or experimental study. Suslov has recently claimed Suslov studies the critical temperature of a superconductor T c after adding a small concentration of point-like impurities in two limits: 1. Strong coupling: corresponding to an impurity that act as a deep potential well of the size the lattice spacing, a, and is effectively isolated from the rest of the system. This region is completely unrelated to our recent investigation 2. Weak coupling: corresponding to a weak random potential where the superconductor is not strongly affected by the impurity. Let us first discuss the case of strong coupling. Suslov assumes that these impurities induce discrete levels around the Fermi energy and then uses mean-field techniques to compute the critical temperature. His main result is that T c ∼ E 0 λ where E 0 is of the order of Fermi energy and λ is the electron-phonon coupling constant. However, it is well established that a mean-field approximation is completely unjustified in this ultra-small limit where the effective mean-level spacing δ, controlled by the lattice spacing a, is much larger than the bulk gap ∆ 0 . In this region, rightly termed catastrophic by Suslov, the spectroscopic gap must be computed using either the Richardson equation Even assuming Suslov's picture and its prediction of T c to be accurate, which we have shown above is not the case, in a weakly coupled superconductor λ ≪ 1 so T c /E 0 is always small and the global critical temperature must necessarily be zero. Moreover we have serious reservations as to whether it is possible to tune this number in any realistic disordered material. In summary, Suslov's statement that, after including phase fluctuations, the global critical temperature is still not very different from T c ∼ 5000K is absolutely unrealistic. Towards the end of In summary the enhancement of superconductivity predicted by Suslov in the catastrophic regime is unphysical. Not surprisingly it has never been observed and, from our point of view, it will never be observed numerically or experimentally. We must also emphasise that this model is completely unrelated to the weakly coupled inhomogeneous superconductor induced by weak multifractality that we have recently investigated We now turn to the weakly coupled disordered region of Ref. where ν 1 (r) is the deviation of the local density of states at the Fermi energy, ν F (r), from its unperturbed value ν 0 , λ = gν 0 is the dimensionless coupling constant, T c0 is the transition temperature in the absence of disorder and L d is "a volume for one impurity". The length, L, is poorly defined as it is unclear whether it is related to the system size. Similarly ν 1 (r) is not properly defined as a function of a small parameter. On physical grounds we speculate that its strength is controlled by the dimensionless conductance, g 0 , so that the small parameter in the expansion is 1/g 0 λ. Irrespective of this, the simple dependence on λ indicates that this is a first order purely perturbative result that describes the leading correction to the Anderson theorem. Suslov uses this expression as the starting point for his criticism of our recent paper The main criticism of Ref. It is well known The 1/λ dependence of Eq. ( We also believe part of Suslov's criticism of Ref. Finally we comment on other statements in Suslov's papers that are not correct. Suslov claims that our results are only valid in small and strictly two dimensional systems. However it is well established in the theory of disordered systems that weak multifractality also occurs in quasi two dimensional systems (thin films) and two dimensional systems with spin-orbit interactions. All of these systems are of direct experimental relevance. Suslov also states, referring to our calculation of the critical temperature, that "there is no need to use the approximate equation ( Suslov claims towards the end of [1] that we do not discuss phase-fluctuations and Coulomb interactions. We must point out that section VII from Ref. An important part of Ref. To summarise, Suslov's claim to have explored conclusively the possibility for enhancement of superconductivity due to disorder are clearly unfounded. His theory is based on ill defined concepts, the results are rarely testable and lead, in general, to unphysical predictions. Similarly, the criticism of the percolation formalism employed in our paper 