We used resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) with and without analysis of the scattered photon polarization, to study dispersive spin excitations in the high temperature superconductor YBa2Cu3O6+x over a wide range of doping levels (0.1 ≤ x ≤ 1). The excitation profiles were carefully monitored as the incident photon energy was detuned from the resonant condition, and the spin excitation energy was found to be independent of detuning for all x. These findings demonstrate that the largest fraction of the spin-flip RIXS profiles in doped cuprates arises from magnetic collective modes, rather than from incoherent particle-hole excitations as recently suggested theoretically [Benjamin et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 247002(2014)]. Implications for the theoretical description of the electron system in the cuprates are discussed. Electronic spin fluctuations are of central importance for current models of unconventional superconductivity in d-and f -electron compounds Resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) at transition-metal L 2,3 -edges has recently emerged as a powerful momentum-resolved spectroscopic probe of collective spin excitations in crystals of sub-millimeter dimensions, and in thin films and multilayers To realize the potential of RIXS as a probe of unconventional superconductors and other correlated-electron systems, it is imperative to develop a quantitative description of the energy-and momentum-dependent RIXS cross section. Initial theoretical work on the undoped cuprates suggested that the RIXS intensity can be written in terms of spin-spin correlation functions Here we report Cu-L 3 edge RIXS experiments on the prototypical high-temperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x (YBCO 6+x ) that resolve this controversy. Following up on the explicit prediction of Benjamin et al. In the latter case, the 3d x 2 -y 2 → 2p transition with π polarized emission is dipole-forbidden, and consequently, the RIXS signal obtained with incident σ polarization in the scattering geometry represented in Fig. Having firmly established π-polarized incident light and grazing emission as the optimal geometry for the investigation of magnetic excitations, we now use this geometry for high-resolution RIXS experiments without polarization analysis. Figure We have fitted all RIXS spectra acquired in the π channel close the L 3 resonance with resolution-limited Gaussians for the quasi-elastic peak [33] and an antisymmetrized Voigt function for the magnetic component, on top of a background arising from the tail of dd-excitations which was modeled by a Voigt fit At each investigated doping level, the intensity rapidly drops as the incident photon energy is detuned from the L 3 edge, essentially following the x-ray absorption intensity (Fig. At first glance, these results appear to be in conflict with those reported for underdoped Bi 1.6 Pb 0.4 Sr 2 Ca 0.95 Y 0.05 Cu 2 O 8+δ (at a doping level comparable with the one of our YBCO 6.55 crystal) in Ref. These observations have important consequences for the interpretation of the RIXS data. Even for doping levels as high as 20 %, the essential component of the spinflip response cannot be interpreted in terms of the noninteracting particle-hole excitation continuum as proposed by Benjamin et al. Our RIXS measurements reaffirm the presence of collective spin excitations associated with short-range antiferromagnetic correlations in optimally doped and overdoped high-T c superconductors. They thus confirm the viability of the large class of models of unconventional superconductivity (including the well-known "spin fermion" model 