We show that the Fulde-Ferrell (FF) phase may appear as a sole result of the orbital effect in a cylindrical metallic nanowire. Namely, in the external magnetic field the two-fold degeneracy with respect to the orbital magnetic quantum number m is lifted, what leads to a Fermi wave vector mismatch between the subbands with opposite orbital momenta in the paired state. This mismatch can be compensated by the nonzero total momentum of the Cooper pairs created by electrons from the split subbands what results in the formation of the FF phase. In this manner, a transformation of the orbital motion into a linear supercurrent parallel to the applied field is taking place. With the increasing magnetic field a series of FF stability regions appear, in between which the standard BCS superconducting phase is stable. For the sake of completness, we show, that the inclusion of the Zeeman term in the model does not change the picture qualitatively, particularly if larger m states contribute essentially to the Fermi-surface splitting. A brief but important note concerning the possibility of steering the supercurrent by an applied magnetic field parallel to it, is also provided. According to the original concept by Fulde and Ferrell 1 (FF), as well as by Larkin and Ovchinnikow 2 (LO), a superconducting phase with nonzero center-of-mass momentum of the Cooper pairs can be induced by the Zeeman spin splitting of the Fermi surface which appears in the external magnetic field. The Fermi wave vector mismatch, caused by this Fermi surface splitting, is detrimental to the pairing, but can be compensated by the emerging nonzero total-momentum of the Cooper pairs. This allows for the superconducting phase to persist in magnetic fields substantially higher than the second critical field H c2 . In order to make it possible for the resultant non-zero momentum Cooper pairing to appear, several requirements are to be met. First of all, the Maki parameter 3 should be large meaning that the Pauli paramagnetic effect has to be strong relative to the orbital pair-breaking mechanism. An indirect experimental evidence of nonzeromomentum pairing has been recently reported for a system consisting of ultracold We consider here the case of a metallic cylindrical nanowire and demonstrate that the orbital effect, which so far has been regarded as detrimental to the FFLO phase formation, can in fact induce the nonzeromomentum paired state. This situation is facilitated in a unique manner by the transfer of kinetic energy from the rotational to the translational degrees of freedom. Namely, the rotational degrees of freedom lead to the Fermi surface splitting since in the applied field the states with the magnetic quantum numbers m and -m have opposite magnetic moments what in turn results in opposite energy contributions. The Fermi wave-vector mismatch created by the splitting is transferred into the nonzero total momentum of the Cooper pairs along the nanowire inducing the FF phase formation. We also provide an argument for a feasibility of such state observability. The structure of the paper is as follows. In the next Section we determine the quasiparticle states in the wire with nontrivial azimutal states (i.e., in the direction perpendicular to its length) within a modified Bardeen-Cooper-Schriffer (BCS) approach, in which the superconducting gap acquires an explicit angular momentum dependence. We also specify explicitly how the Fermi wave vector mismatch arises solely from the angularmomentum induced Fermi surface splitting. The selfconsistent equation for the gap, together with that determining the chemical potential for the fixed carrier con-centration, are also specified. In Section III we discuss our results, as well as predict concrete experimentally verifiable effects of sandwiching the FF states in the sequence of the BCS-type states with the increasing applied magnetic field. Finally, Sec. IV is devoted to a brief summary and a general discussion to what extent the proposed effect can be useful in creating/modifying the supercurrent in quantum-electronics devices. Additionally, some details concerning the derivation of the self-consistent equations for the superconducting gap and the chemical potential are deferred to the Appendix A, whereas the elementary determination of the superconducting parameters is provided in Appendix B, together with a direct interpretation of our results. We start with introducing the cylindrical coordinates (r, φ, z) and choosing the gauge for the vector potential as A = (0, eH || r/2, 0), where the magnetic field H || is parallel to the nanowire axis. Then the single-electron Hamiltonian in the cylindrical nanowire then has the following form where m e is the electron mass and e is the electron charge. To underline the role of orbital degrees of freedom we have neglected the Zeeman term which complicates uneccesarily the analysis (the argument remains of the same type). For the sake of completeness, at the end of Sec. III we show, that the inclusion of the Zeeman term does not change the results qualitatively. Hamiltonian (1) is simplified further due to the negligible role of the diamagnetic term ∼ A 2 which for nanowires is one order of magnitude lower than that of the order parameter. In the nanowire geometry the quantization of the single-electron energy into a series of subbands appears. These subbands are indexed by the orbital magnetic m and radial j quantum numbers, what leads to the dispersion relations where k is the particle momentum along the nanowire (z axis), γ m,j is the j-th zero of the m-th order Bessel function, R is the nanowire radius, and μ is the chemical potential. The corresponding single electron wave functions have the form where Jmj (r) is defined as with J m (r) being the m-th order Bessel function. One should note that ξ k,m,j = ξ k,-m,j for H || = 0. Next, we include the effective electron-electron attraction term in the model and perform the BCS approximation with the possibility of non-zero momentum pairing (with the momentum q along the z-axis). The BCS Hamiltonian is then of the form where V is the coupling constant and ∆ mjq is the superconducting (SC) gap defined by with the gap modulation The primed summation means that m runs over the nonnegative values only. Additionally, for the summation over k, the pairing appears only in the range [μ -hω D , μ + hω D ], where ω D is the Debye frequency. From Eq. ( The set of self-consistent equations for the SC gap parameter and the chemical potential have the corresponding form where n e is the electron concentration and f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. One should note that Eqs. ( where u kmjq (r) = U kmjq Jmj (r) and v kmjq (r) = V kmjq Jmj (r), with U kmjq , V kmjq being the Bogoliubov coherence factors, which in turn are elements of the diagonalization matrix of (5). The SC gaps ∆ mjq and the chemical potential are obtained by solving Eqs. ( Calculations have been carried out for the following values of the parameters: hω D = 32.31 meV, gN (0)=0.18, where N (0) = mkF 2π 2 h2 is the bulk density of states at the Fermi level, ∆ bulk = 0.25 meV and μ bulk = 0.9 eV which corresponds to the electron density n e = 3.88 × 10 18 cm -3 . The selected parameter values correspond to Al superconductor. In Fig. for the value of R corresponding to T c maximum labeled by II. As one can see from Eq. ( The structure of the FF and BCS stability ranges (cf. Fig. may vary significantly. In Fig. Close to H m || the Fermi wave vector mismatch between the paired electrons |(k, m, j, ↑), (-k, -m, j, ↓) is compensated by the non-zero total momentum of the Cooper pairs leading to the stable FF phase. However, upon further increase of the field it is not possible to adjust the vector q so as to sustain the pairing in such subband and the Cooper pairs in this subband break up leading to a decrease of the energy gap and standard BCS pairing reentrance. This allows to formulate the conditions for the appearance of the FF stability regimes induced by the orbital effect in nanowires. Namely, the FF phase appears only if the dominant quasi-particle branch has the orbital quantum number lower than the other superconducting branches excluding those with m = 0. The number of FF stability regions is equal to the number of the subbands which fulfill this criterion. From Fig. Zeeman effect. To underline the role of the orbital effect in the creation of the FF state in nanowires, the results presented so far did not include the influence of the spin Zeeman term. However, it should be noted that the Pauli paramagnetism is the second factor being able to create the FF phase in nanowires. The extension of our theoretical model for the case with the spin Zeeman effect included, leads in a straightforward manner to the spin-dependent dispersion relations in the form analogous to Eq. ( where σ = ±1 for spin-up and down electrons, respectively. Diagonalization of ( In Fig. The orbital effect (i.e. the Fermi-surface dependence on the orbital magnetic quantum number, m) in cylindrical superconducting nanowires results in the Fermi wavevector mismatch which can be transferred to the nonzero linear momentum of the Cooper pairs. By solving the system of Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations numerically, we have shown that this effect leads to stability of the FF phase in certain ranges of the applied magnetic field oriented parallel to the nanowire. The nonzero total momentum of the Cooper pairs is induced to sustain the pairing in the corresponding subbands what in turn leads to structure of alternating FF and BCS stability ranges as shown in Figs. The proposed mechanism of the FF phase formation induced by the orbital effect appears only if few states with different quantum numbers participate in the superconducting phase. At the same time, the thicker the nanowire is, the more states take part in the pairing. As a consequence, our analysis is restricted to relatively thin nanowires. Nevertheless, by lowering the electron concentration we also decrease the number of states taking part in the pairing. As shown in one of our previous papers, By carrying out the specific heat measurements one could detect if the phase transitions between the FF and BCS phases, shown in Figs. For simplicity, we have analyzed nanowires with a uniform cross section. One should note that the effect of sample nonuniform cross section can make the experimental observation of the FF state obscured, since the energy gain coming from the nonzero momentum pairing is rather small [cf. Fig. Finally, a methodological remark is in place here. The quantum wires considered in this paper have a nontrivial dynamics in the dimensions perpendicular to its length. Therefore, such systems cannot be regarded as strictly one-dimensional. This is the reason why we do not consider them from the electronic point of view as Tomanaga-Luttinger liquids. The question whether superconducting 1D liquids can produce the proposed effect, is still open. This work was financed from the budget for Polish Science in the years 2013-2015, project number: IP2012 048572. M. Z. and J. S. acknowledge the financial support from the Foundation for Polish Science (FNP) within the project TEAM. J. S. acknowledges also the Grant MAESTRO from the National Science Center (NCN), No. DEC-2012/04/A/ST3/00342. In this Appendix we present some details of the effective BCS Hamiltonian derivation for the superconducting nanowire in an external magnetic field. Moreover, we also show how to obtain the self-consistent equations for the gap parameter and the chemical potential. We start from the general form of the BCS Hamiltonian Ĥ = σ d 3 r Ψ † (r, σ) Ĥ0 Ψ(r, σ) where Ĥ0 is the single-electron Hamiltonian, in our case defined by (1), and the gap parameter in real space is given by For the case of cylindrical nanowire we chose the field operators in the form where φ kmj (r) are the eigenfunctions of Ĥ0 and are given by Eq. ( where and ∆ mjq is defined via Eq. ( are the Bogoliubov coherence factors. The columns of the unitary transformation matrix from Eq. ( After the diagonalization transformation, the Hamiltonian has the following form where E ± kmjq are given by Eq. ( where Ω is the system volume. It should be noted that with the use of the self-consistent equation ( A brief note concerning the experimental situation is in place here. The experimental evidence for superconductivity appearance in the thinnest nanowires of radius R ∼ 1 nm in not clearly established 32 even though for thicker nanowires the T C value grows with the decreasing diameter. In particular, the role of the order-parameter quantum fluctuations has been discussed as a detrimental factor 33 in the case of zero field. Here we have considered relatively thin wires and have shown that a stable BCS or FF states can appear even for R ∼ 1nm and in strong fields. Such state of affairs can be understood within the following semi-macroscopic picture emerging from the Ginzburg-London type of approach 34 in which we treat the nanowire as a 3-dimensional cylinder filled with electron gas and do not include the quantum size effect explicitly. The London penetration depth λ L = (m 0 c 2 /e 2 n c ) 1/2 is for the low carrier concentration n c ∼ 4•10 18 cm -3 of the order of 10 3 nm, i.e., much larger than the wire diameter. On the other hand, the coherence length ξ = h2 k F /(m * ∆), where k F is the Fermi wave vector, is much smaller than λ L and is of the order of R. Hence, we have the superconductor of extreme type II. Note that bulk Al is the superconductor of type I. The difference appears because for the wire the carrier concentration is about 4 orders of magnitude smaller and in this situation, the values of the λ L ∼ 1/n c and ξ ∼ hk F ∼ n 1/3 c will be vastly different. It should also be noted that in nanostructures the coherence length can be suppressed even more due to the quantum size effect Parenthetically, the physical situation is reminiscent of what takes place in the case of high-temperature superconductors. It is thus tempting to suggest an experiment on wires (or rather, thin stripes) composed of a hightemperature superconductor.