We report successful growth of flux free large single crystals of superconducting FeSe 1/2 Te 1/2 with typical dimensions of up to few cm. The AC and DC magnetic measurements revealed the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) value of around 11.5K and the isothermal MH showed typical type-II superconducting behavior. The lower critical field (H c1 ) being estimated by measuring the low field isothermal magnetization in superconducting regime is found to be above 200Oe at 0K. The temperature dependent electrical resistivity ρ(T ) showed the T c (onset) to be 14K and the T c (ρ=0) at 11.5K. The electrical resistivity under various magnetic fields i.e., ρ(T)H for H//ab and H//c demonstrated the difference in the width of T c with applied field of 14Tesla to be nearly 2K, confirming the anisotropic nature of superconductivity. The upper critical and irreversibility fields at absolute zero temperature i.e., H c2 (0) and H irr (0) being determined by the conventional one-band Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) equation for the criteria of normal state resistivity (ρ n ) falling to 90% (onset), and 10% (offset) is 76.9Tesla, and 37.45Tesla respectively, for H//c and 135.4Tesla, and 71.41Tesla respectively, for H//ab. The coherence length at the zero temperature is estimated to be above 20Ǻ by using the Ginsburg-Landau theory. The activation energy for the FeSe 1/2 Te 1/2 in both directions H//c and H//ab is determined by using Thermally Activation Flux Flow (TAFF) model. One of the most surprising discoveries in field of experimental condensed matter physics in last decade had been the observation of superconductivity in Fe based REO 1-x F x FeAs pnictide compounds As far as the experimental results are concerned, one always aspires for the clean single crystal data on physical properties of any new material, which is true for the exotic Fe based superconductors as well. The clean singly crystal data are a real feast for the theoreticians to work out the model basis for the observed physical properties of the given material. There are several standard techniques for obtaining single crystals of various functional materials including for superconductors. Particularly, the single crystals of Fe based chalcegonide superconductors are grown using mainly the Bridgman technique We, in this short article report the successful single crystal growth of flux free FeSe 1/2 Te 1/2 superconductor in a normal tube furnace without any complicated heating schedules related to travelling-solvent floating zone technique. The constituent stoichiometric high purity elements are mixed, vacuum sealed in quartz tube and heated to high temperature of 1000 0 C, with an intermediate step at 450 0 C for 4hours. The hold time at 1000 0 C is 24hours. Finally the furnace is cooled slowly (2 0 C/minute) down to room temperature. The obtained crystals, being taken from cylindrical melt are big enough in size of around 2cmx1cmx0.5cm. Interestingly, any part taken from the melt is single crystalline, as if whole the melt is grown in crystalline form. The crystals are bulk superconducting at above 12K. The intermediate step at 450 0 C for 4hours, while heating to melting temperature of 1000 0 C is crucial. It seems the FeSe 1/2 Te 1/2 seed is formed at this temperature, which grows in melt and gets stabilized during slow cooling to room temperature. The method thus reported is novel for obtaining single crystals of Fe chalcogenide superconductors. Worth mentioning is the fact that the method is checked for its reproducibility by several repeated runs. The flux free FeSe 1/2 Te 1/2 crystals are grown earlier The investigated FeSe 1/2 Te 1/2 crystals were grown by a self flux melt growth method. The crystals had a platelet like shape and shining surfaces with typical dimensions of (2-1)cm x (1.0)cm. We took high purity (99.99%) Fe, Se and Te powder weighed them in stoichiometric ratio and grind thoroughly in the argon filled glove box. The mixed powder is subsequently pelletized by applying uniaxial stress of 100kg/cm 2 and then pellets were sealed in an evacuated (<10 -3 Torr) quartz tube. The sealed quartz tube is kept in automated tube furnace for heating at 450 0 C with a rate of 2 0 C/min for 4 h and then the temperature is increased to 1000 0 C with a rate of 2 0 C/min for 24h. Finally the furnace is cooled slowly with a rate of 1 0 C/minute down to room temperature. The schematic of heat treatment is shown in Figure Figure x Te x crystals were earlier reported to contain excess interstitial Fe Figure Figure To evaluate lower critical field H c1 (T) we measure low field M-H at different temperatures for H//ab as shown in figure Figure For the determination of the upper critical field (H c2 ) the criteria of normal state resistivity (ρ n ) falling to 90% of the onset is used. The upper critical field at absolute zero temperature H c2 (0) is determined by the conventional one-band Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) equation, i.e., H c2 (0)= -0.693T c (dH c2 /dT) T=Tc for all the criteria. The estimated H c2 (0) for 90% (onset) is 76.9Tesla for H//c and 135.4Tesla, for H//ab. In Figures The electrical resistivity under various magnetic field of FeSe 1/2 Te 1/2 single crystal is further investigated by using vortex glass model to estimate vortex glass state and TAFF (Thermally activated flux flow) model to calculate the activation energy. According to the vortex phase transition theory According to Thermal Activation Flux Flow (TAFF) theory We have successfully synthesized the FeSe 1/2 Te 1/2 large (cm size) single crystals through self flux method applying a simple heating schedule in an ordinary tube furnace. The single crystal grows along the (0 0 l) plane, which has been confirmed by XRD data. The superconductivity at 11.5K has been established by both AC and DC magnetic measurements. The ρ(T) measurements showed T c (onset) and T c (ρ=0) at14 K and 11.5 K respectively. The ρ(T)H for H//ab and H//c showed strong anisotropy. H c2 (0) is determined by the conventional one-band WHH equation with 90% of ρ n criterion and found to be 76.9Tesla and 135.4Tesla for H//c and H//ab respectively. Similarly, the H irr (0) being determined from 10% of ρ n criterion is found to be 37.45 Tesla and 71.41 Tesla for H//c and H//ab respectively. The estimated activation energy U o (H) showed weak power law decreases low fields (1-4Tesla) for the both field directions suggesting that the single vortex pining dominates in this region. The large (cm size) single crystals, which are bulk superconducting at above 12K could be good candidates for neutron scattering studies and thus to unearth the physics of these novel superconductors. Authors would like to thank their Director NPL India for his keen interest in the present work. This work is financially supported by DAE-SRC outstanding investigator award scheme on search for new superconductors. P. K. Maheshwari thanks CSIR, India for research fellowship and AcSIR-NPL for Ph.D. registration.  0 H(Tesla)