Microstructurally clean, isovalently P-doped BaFe 2 As 2 (Ba-122) single crystalline thin films have been prepared on MgO (001) substrates by molecular beam epitaxy. These films show a superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of over 30 K although P content is around 0.22, which is lower than the optimal one for single crystals (i.e. 0.33). The enhanced T c at this doping level is attributed to the in-plane tensile strain. The strained film shows high transport self-field critical current densities (J c ) of over 6 MA/cm 2 at 4.2 K, which are among the highest for Fe based superconductors (FeSCs). In-field J c exceeds 0.1 MA/cm 2 at μ 0 H = 35 T for H ab and μ 0 H = 18 T for H c at 4.2 K, respectively, in spite of moderate upper critical fields compared to other FeSCs with similar T c . Structural investigations reveal no defects or misoriented grains pointing to strong pinning centers. We relate this unexpected high J c to a strong enhancement of the vortex core energy at optimal T c , driven by in-plane strain and doping. These unusually high J c make P-doped Ba-122 very favorable for high-field magnet applications. Electron and hole doped BaFe 2 As 2 (Ba-122) compounds show high upper critical fields with low anisotropy at low temperatures. The P-doped Ba-122 thin film has a thickness of 107 nm, obtained from transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and was grown on a MgO (001) substrate by MBE. The substrate was clamped to the holder with a thin indium layer in between to achieve high thermal conductivity from the heater. All elements were supplied from Knudsen cells using solid sources: Ba, Fe, As, and GaP (GaP decomposes and produces a Ga-free film). The detailed fabrication process of the thin film can be found in Ref. 12. Electron probe micro analysis was used to determine the film stoichiometry and it results to be Ba:Fe:(As+P) = 1 : 1.92 : 1.93 with a P content of P/(P+As) = 0.22, which is lower than the optimal doping level for single crystals (i.e., 0.33). High field transport measurements on a small bridge of 1 mm length and 40 μm width, prepared by laser cutting, were conducted in the dc facility up to 35 T at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in Tallahassee, FL, at 4.2 K. A criterion of 1 μV/cm was used to define J c . The higher temperature measurements were performed in a 16 T Physical Properties Measurement System. The magnetic field H was applied in maximum Lorentz force configuration during all measurements (H ⊥ J, J being the current density). Resistivity measurements in the absence of magnetic field unveiled an onset T c of 30.7 K, which is higher than that of PLD processed films In Fig. Figure There is still room for further increase in J c of the P-doped Ba-122 thin films, like doping with pinningpromoting particles the way it was done by Miura et al. To conclude, using MBE we have fabricated P-doped Ba-122 thin film directly on MgO achieving epitaxy and phase purity with a high T c of 30.7 K. We measured the field and the angle dependence of J c up to 35 T. A very high self field J c of 6.3 MA/cm 2 at 4.2 K was observed even though no structural defects were found in TEM and XRD. This observation suggests that in the optimally doped P-doped Ba-122 compound rather weak structural