We have studied the magnetic field or disorder induced insulating and metallic phases in amorphous Ta superconducting thin films. The evolution of the nonlinear transport in the insulating phase exhibits a non-monotonic behavior as the magnetic field is increased. We suggest that this observation could be an evidence of the presence of localized Cooper pairs in the insulating phase. As the metallic phase intervenes the superconducting and insulating states in Ta films, this result further reveals that Cooper pairs also exist in the metallic ground state. 1 Superconductivity in homogeneously disordered two dimensional (2D) system is of particular interest because 2D is the lower critical dimension for both superconductivity and localization. Conventional theory predicts that in 2D the disorder-or magnetic field (B)induced suppression of superconductivity leads to a direct superconductor-insulator transition (SIT) While the nature of the insulating state is still an issue to be solved, the subject has attracted more attention because of the observation of the metallic phase in amorphous MoGe In this work, we study the evolution of nonlinear current-voltage (I-V) characteristics in the insulating phase of amorphous superconducting Ta films with the increase of B field. The non-monotonic B field dependence of the dV/dI peak, which has been observed in all the films we have studied, suggests the existence of the localized Cooper pairs in both Band disorder-driven insulating phases. Our study also implies that the nonlinear transport characteristics might be a consistent and sensitive probe to detect localized Cooper pairs. Our Ta thin films are dc sputter deposited on Si substrate and are patterned into a 1mm wide and 5mm long Hall bar for the standard four point measurement using a shadow mask. The thickness of the films is between 6 nm and 2 nm. As reported before Recent studies on Ta films have shown that each phase displays remarkably different nonlinear I-V characteristics Qualitatively similar dV/dI peaks have been observed in the insulating phases of TiN and the observed phases at low temperature (S for the superconducting phase, M for the metallic phase, and I for the insulating phase). For samples exhibiting the superconducting phase, we list mean field T c at B = 0, the critical magnetic field H c as defined by the field at which the low temperature (60 mK for Ta 1 -Ta 3, 50 mK for Ta 4) resistance reaches 90% of the high field saturation value, and the superconducting coherence length calculated from ξ = Φ 0 /2πB c , where Φ 0 is the flux quantum. [32], InO The resistivity of each film increases monotonically with the magnetic field and eventually saturates, implying that the localized Cooper pairs in the insulating phase of Ta films, if present, are not detectable in the linear transport regime. In this work, we focus on the evolution of dV/dI peak structure in the insulating phase with the increase of magnetic field. The height of the dV/dI peak in Fig. Such non-monotonic feature in the dV/dI peak height vs. B plot is evident for all low disordered Ta films we have studied. The origin for this high field feature, which is most likely not due to superconductivity related mechanism In addition to low disordered samples which exhibit superconducting behaviors at low T and low B, we also studied the evolution of dV/dI as a function of B field for highly disordered films that are insulating at low T at B = 0. Figure A high field maximum is also observed in these highly disordered insulating films, as shown in Fig. and their ratio are plotted as a function of ρ n in Fig. The evolution of dV/dI peak structure with the increase of B field for films with various To summarize, we have reported that in the insulating transport regime of homogeneously disordered Ta films, the height of the dV/dI peak structure experiences a non-monotonic change with the increase of magnetic field. This observation suggests that Cooper pairs persist into the insulating phase of the films, and further implies the presence of Cooper