Utilizing a SU(2) gauge symmetry technique in the quasiclassical diffusive regime, we theoretically study finite-sized two-dimensional intrinsic spin-orbit coupled superconductor/normal-metal/superconductor (S/N /S) hybrid structures with a single spin-active interface. We consider intrinsic spin-orbit interactions (ISOIs) that are confined within the N wire and absent in the s-wave superconducting electrodes (S). Using experimentally feasible parameters, we demonstrate that the coupling of the ISOIs and spin moment of the spin-active interface results in maximum singlet-triplet conversion and accumulation of spin current density at the corners of the N wire nearest the spin-active interface. By solely modulating the superconducting phase difference, we show how the opposing parities of the charge and spin currents provide an effective venue to experimentally examine pure edge spin currents not accompanied by charge currents. These effects occur in the absence of externally imposed fields, and moreover are insensitive to the arbitrary orientations of the interface spin moment. The experimental implementation of these robust edge phenomena are also discussed. The interaction of a moving particles' spin with its linear momentum embodies the so-called spin-orbit interaction (SOI). The SOI is a quantum mechanical effect that is relativistic in origin. For materials possessing a strong SOI effect, it becomes possible to manipulate spin currents with less dissipation, higher speeds, and lower power consumption compared to conventional charge-based devices 1 . Consequently, a number of high-performance devices that exploit the SOI effect have been proposed, including, spin transistors, and devices that store or transport information There have also been extensive efforts to manipulate the spin currents 1,2, To explore the interplay of these phenomena, we consider charge and spin currents in a finite sized intrinsic spin-orbit coupled s-wave superconductor/normal-metal/s-wave superconductor (S/N /S) junction with a single spin-active interface. We utilize a spin-parameterized two-dimensional Keldysh-Usadel technique The paper is organized as follows: We outline the theoretical techniques and approximations used to characterize the intrinsic spin-orbit coupled superconducting S/N /S hybrid structures with spin-active interfaces in Sec. II. In Sec. III, we discuss all of the types of superconducting pairings present (spin-singlet and spin-triplet correlations) and illustrate the associated spatial profiles, which follow directly from the inherent proximity effects. Next, we present results for the spin current densities, with spatial maps, and discuss possible experimental realizations of the presented edge spin phenomena. In addition, we discuss the spin current symmetries relative to the spin moment orientation of the spin-active interface in the presence of Rashba or Dresselhaus SOC. We finally summarize our findings in Sec. IV. A quasiclassical framework has recently been developed for superconducting hybrid structures in the presence of generic spin-dependent fields where the momentum is restricted to the xy plane. The R and D indices represent the Rashba and Dresselhaus SOIs with strength Ω R and Ω D , respectively. A linearized ISOI can be treated as an effective background field that obeys the SU(2) gauge symmetries. where ρ 3 is a 4 × 4 Pauli matrix (see Appendix A), D represents the diffusion constant, and ∆ is a 4 × 4 matrix which represents the superconducting gap Since we consider the low proximity limit of the diffusive regime, Within the low proximity approximation, the advanced com-ponent can be ultimately expressed as: In equilibrium, the Retarded and Keldysh blocks of the total Green's function are obtained via: . The Boltzmann constant and system temperature are denoted by k B and T , respectively. Within the low proximity approximation, the linearized Usadel equation involves sixteen coupled complex partial differential equations which become even more complicated in the presence of ISOI terms. Unfortunately, the resultant system of coupled differential equations can be simplified and decoupled only in extreme limits that can be experimentally unrealistic. where the unit vector, n, is directed normal to an interface, and it is assumed for the time being that the left and right interfaces [Fig. where the S lr can have arbitrary directions and magnitude of the spin moment at the S/N interfaces. The solution to Eq. (1) for a bulk even-frequency s-wave superconductor results in where θ(ε) = arctanh(|∆|/ε), and θ represents the macroscopic phase of the bulk superconductor. The phase difference between the left and right S electrodes, shown in Fig. where Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function and ∆ is the superconducting gap at temperature T for a conventional s-wave superconductor. We next employ a spin-dependent field technique that permits the incorporation of ISOIs into the Keldysh-Usadel approach We can now define the covariant derivative by, where ∂ ≡ (∂ x , ∂ y , ∂ z ). Hence, the brackets in the Usadel equation Eq. (1) and the boundary conditions Eq. ( It should be noted that the quasiclassical approach employed here allows for the study of systems with spin dependent vector potentials possessing arbitrary spatial patterns, and spinactive interfaces with arbitrary spin moment directions. Here we assume that the impurity scattering (encapsulated by the diffusion constant) is spin-independent, and thus the spindependent fields introduced in Eqs. ( where α and β are constants and determine the strength of Rashba and Dresselhaus SOIs. This choice simplifies the resultant Usadel equations since ∂α = ∂β = 0 ∂ • A(r) = 0. Hence, by substituting the above set of parameters, Eqs. (10), into Eqs. ( Although these assumptions lead to further simplifications of the Usadel equations, the end result involves sixteen coupled complex partial differential equations that we have analytically derived, but omitted here due to their excessive size. As mentioned in the introduction, crystallographic inversion asymmetries One of the most striking topics in the study of transport in junction systems involves spin currents. Since a decade ago, various features and behaviors of spin currents in hybrid structures have extensively been studied. where J c 0 = N 0 eD/4, J s 0 = J c 0 /2e, and N 0 is the number of states at the Fermi surface. The vector current densities provide local directions and amplitudes for the currents as a function of position. We designate γ = x, y, z for the three components of spin current, e.g., J sx represents the x component of spin current. The integral of Eq. ( In order to pinpoint the behavior of the spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings inside the spin-orbit coupled N wire, we exploit a spin-parametrization scheme In terms of this spin-parametrization, the quantities S and T x,y then correspond to the singlet and triplet components with m = ±1 total spin projection along the spin quantization axis, while T z represents the triplet component with m = 0. For additional insight and comparison purposes, we first consider a S/N /S junction with negligible SOIs and either one or two spin-active interfaces. We compute the spin currents, and discuss the singlet and triplet correlations in such systems. Next, we compute these same quantities after incorporating one of the Rashba or Dresselhaus ISOIs introduced above. As remarked earlier, Eq. (1) in the presence of ISOI terms leads to lengthy coupled partial differential equations. Although we have analytically derived the current densities [Eqs. (12) and ( 1 and F(r, ε) 1. We consider a fixed value for the spin moment amplitude of the spin-active interfaces, |S lr | = G T (φ lr ) -1 = 15, corresponding to realistic experimental situations. FIG. tial profiles to the regions 0 < x < d N /2 and 0 < y < W N /2 in the figures presented throughout the paper. III.1. S/N /S junctions with spin active interfaces in the absence of SOC Figure As described above and seen in Fig. . To simplify the solutions, we denote 2iε/ε T = λ (in which ε T is the Thouless energy) and assume θ lr = ±φ/2. By substituting the obtained solutions into Eq. ( It is immediately evident that the charge current has the usual sin φ odd-functionality in the superconducting phase difference. The same procedure is followed to derive analytical expressions for the spin current components using Eq. ( Since S l = (0, 0, ±S z l ), we find J sx x (x, φ) = J sy x (x, φ) ≡ 0 and J sz x (x, φ) = 0. Unfortunately, even by means of the simplifying approximations made to the equations thus far, we arrive at a rather lengthy expression for the z component of the spin current, J sz x (x, φ). The z component of spin current, J sz x , is evidently an evenfunction of φ, namely cos φ, although it involves some complicated prefactors. In Fig. x is nonvanishing, confirms this phenomenon. III.2. Intrinsic spin orbit coupled S/N /S junctions with a single spin active interface: Singlet and triplet correlations Now we incorporate ISOIs in the S/N /S junction with one spin-active interface at x = 0 (see Fig. Examining the spatial map of the triplet correlations in Fig. The spatial behaviors of the singlet S(ε, x, y) and triplet T(ε, x, y) correlations inside a Rashba S/N /S system with S l = (0, 0, ±S z l ) and Sr = 0. The quasiparticles' energy is set at ε = 0.1∆0, dN = WN = 2.0ξS, and φ = π/2. The top panels display the various pair correlations vs x at y = 0.25ξS, 0.5ξS, 0.75ξS, and 1.0ξS, whereas the bottom panels exhibit the same quantities as a function of y at x = 0.25ξS, 0.5ξS, 0.75ξS, and 1.0ξS. pressed when moving away from the spin-active S/N interface at x = 0 (a consequence of the so-called short-range behavior of T z ). The spin-1 quantities, T x,y , on the other hand, remain nonzero over greater distances (the so-called long-range behavior). The actual distances that the triplet correlations can propagate over them before fully vanishing in a system depends on the system parameters such as temperature, degree of the interface opacity ζ, strength of the interface spin-activity and the magnitude of SOCs present in the system. Nonetheless, a direct comparison of penetration depth between the triplet correlations with zero total spin T z and nonzero total spin i.e. T x,y clearly reveals that T z is the short-ranged triplet component while T x,y are long-ranged in the ISO coupled S/N /S junction with one spin-active interface. We note that this conclusion generally holds, independent of the representative values chosen. The bottom set of panels in Fig. The symmetries can be easily understood by considering the symmetries of the spindependent fields in Eq. ( tions investigated in the top row of panels in Fig. A spin-active S/N interface can be ordinarily fabricated by coating a superconductor with a spin-active layer. Rashba SOI J sx J sy J sz J sx J sy J sz J sx J sy J sz Magnetic moment S l =(S x l , S y l , S z l ) Sr=(0, 0, 0) S l =(0, ±S y l , 0) S l =(±S x l , 0, 0) S l =(0, 0, ±S z l ) Dresselhaus SOI J sy J sx J sz J sy J sx J sz J sy J sx J sz TABLE I. Symmetries of the spin current components, J sγ (x, y), in an intrinsic spin-orbit coupled S/N /S junction with one spin-active interface depicted in Fig. states as the STM tip moves toward the edges of the N layer and probes the signatures of triplet pairings, which manifest themselves in zero-energy peaks of the local density of states. Spin accumulation is a distinctive trademark of the spin-Hall effect. In conclusion, finite-sized two-dimensional intrinsic spinorbit coupled S/N /S junctions with one spin-active interface in the diffusive regime are theoretically studied using a quasiclassical approach together with spin-dependent fields obeying SU(2) gauge symmetries. We have computed the singlet and triplet correlations, and the associated spin currents in a S/N /S system where the interface spin moment can take arbitrary orientations. Using spatial maps of the singlet and triplet pair correlations within the two-dimensional N wire, we demonstrate that the combination of one spin-active interface and an intrinsic spin-orbit interaction (ISOI) effectively converts singlet pairs into long-range triplet ones. Interestingly, the spatial profiles illustrate that the proximity-induced triplet correlations are nonuniformly distributed and accumulate at the borders of the N wire nearest the spin-active interface. By contrast, the spatial amplitude of the singlet correlations is uniform within the spin-orbit coupled N wire. The results suggest that the maximum singlet-triplet conversion takes place at the corners of the N wire nearest the spin-active interface. The spatial profiles of the associated spin current densities also demonstrate that the three components of spin currents accumulate the most at the edges of the N wire. Subsequently, the corners of the N wire near the spin-active interface host maximum density of spin currents. 