Motivated by recent experiments on isovalent-doped 1111 iron-based superconductors LaFeAs1-x Px O1-y Fy and the theoretical study that followed, we investigate, within the five orbital model, the correlation between the spin fluctuation and the superconducting transition temperature, which exhibits a double dome feature upon varying the Fe-As-Fe bond angle. Around the first dome with higher Tc, the low energy spin fluctuation and Tc are not tightly correlated because the finite energy spin fluctuation also contributes to superconductivity. On the other hand, the strength of the low-energy spin fluctuation originating from the d xz/yz orbital is correlated with Tc in the second dome with lower Tc. These calculation results are consistent with recent NMR study, and hence strongly suggest that the pairing in the iron-based superconductors is predominantly caused by the multi-orbital spin fluctuation. It is now well known that the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of the iron-based superconductors can vary, in some cases largely, by substituting some elements with others. In particular cases, the T c variation upon element substitution has been found to be nonmonotonic. These observations have sometimes lead to a speculation that the Cooper pairing in the iron-based superconductors may involve multiple pairing mechanisms. One of the recent important example is the hydrogendoped 1111 system Another example was recently found in an isovalent doping 1111 system, where As is partially substituted with P in LnFeAs(O,F) (Ln=Nd, Ce, La). It is known that increasing the phosphorous content enlarges the Fe-Pn-Fe (Pn=pnictogen) bond angle (or reduces the pnictogen height). Therefore, it was expected, from the empirical T c trend found by Lee et al Experimentally, the magnitude of the low energy spin fluctuation is often probed by the NMR experiment. Namely, 1/T 1 T measured in the NMR experiment is proportional to the slope of the imaginary part of the dynamical spin susceptibility taken in the ω → 0 limit. Therefore, the correlation between the superconducting T c and the development of 1/T 1 T upon lowering the temperature in the normal state has often been discussed in the context of determining whether the Cooper pairing is mediated by the spin fluctuation or not. In fact, in some cases, the superconducting T c and the development of 1/T 1 T at low temperature is found to be correlated As for LaFe(As,P)(O,F) mentioned above, the correlation between T c and 1/T 1 T has been investigated in ref. [8] as shown in Fig. Given the above mentioned background, in the present study, we theoretically study the correlation between the Fe-Pn-Fe bond angle, the strength of the ω ∼ 0 or finite energy spin fluctuation, and the superconductivity mediated by spin fluctuation. We conclude that the existing experimental results can indeed be understood within this framework, where the key point is the contribution to superconductivity coming from finite energy spin fluctuation that has small contribution to NMR 1/T 1 T . We first perform first principles band calculation of LaFeAsO using the WIEN2k package , where c † i,jμ,νσ creates an electron with spin σ on the μ, ν th orbital at site i, j, and t μν ij are the hopping integrals. We define the band filling n as the number of electrons per number of sites (e.g., n = 10 for full filling). On top of the non-interacting part H 0 , we take into account the electron-electron interaction in the following form : where the standard interaction terms that comprise the intra-orbital Coulomb interaction U , the inter-orbital Coulomb interaction U ′ , the Hund's coupling J, and the pair-hopping J ′ are considered. The magnitude of the interactions are taken to be dependent on the orbital. In the present study, we adopt The fluctuation exchange (FLEX) approximation where G 0 is the Green's function of the non-interacting electrons and Σ is the self energy. In FLEX, bubble and ladder type diagrams are considered in the self energy calculation, which is determined self-consistently in the Baym-Kadanoff sense in order to have the conservation laws satisfied. The spin and charge susceptibilities matrices χ s (q) and χ c (q), respectively, are described in this approximation by the following equations, where S and C are orbital dependent interaction vertex matrices. q ≡ (q, iω n ), where q is the wave vector and iω n ≡ (2n + 1)πk B T is the Matsubara frequency. The irreducible susceptibility matrix elements χ l1l2l3l4 0 (q) is given using the renormalized Green's function as where l i (i = 1, 2, • • • , 5) are orbital indices. After χ s (q) is obtained on the imaginary frequency axis, we perform analytic continuation exploiting the Padé approximation to obtain the spin susceptibility on the real frequency axis. We define quantities that measure the strength of the intra orbital spin fluctuation as Here, the intraorbital spin susceptibility of the μ-th orbital is χ μ s = χ μμμμ s . Γ μ (ω) measures the strength of the spin fluctuation within the μ-th orbital at a certain frequency ω, while γ μ is a measure of the intraorbital spin fluctuation in the low energy limit. In order to analyze the superconductivity, the singlet pairing interaction is described by the following equation: Then, the linearized Eliashberg's equation is given as where φ(q) is the gap function. In the present study, the dominant form of the gap function has the s± form with some nodes on the electron Fermi surface for large phosphorous content, consistent with previous studies The eigenvalue λ monotonically increases with lowering the temperature T , and reaches unity at T = T c . We calculate this quantity for a fixed temperature T > T c , so that λ(T ) is positively correlated with, and thus measure of the T c . It is known that the spin fluctuation around the wave vector (π, 0)/(0, π) contributes to the s± superconductivity, so in the actual calculation of Γ μ (ω), the summation over the wave vectors is restricted to the vicinity of (π, 0)/(0, π). In Fig2, we show, as functions of the Fe-As-Fe bond angle α, the calculated superconducting eigenvalue λ as well as the imaginary part of the low energy derivative of the intraorbital spin susceptibilities γ xy and γ xz/yz . λ is calculated for s-wave symmetry, and the resulting gap function has the s± wave form. In ref. [12], some of the present authors have shown that the variation of λ against the bond angle α exhibits a double dome feature as in Fig. However, the spin-fluctuation and λ are re-enhanced in the larger bond-angle region (intermediate phosphorous content regime) because the density of states of the inner hole Fermi surface originating from the d xz/yz orbital increases. As the bond angle is further increased (near the phosphide end), the orbital character of the hole Fermi surfaces have the d XZ and d Y Z character, where X-Y axes are rotated by 45 degrees from x-y. The electron Fermi surfaces around (π, 0)/(0, π) always have the d xz and d yz character, so that the matching of the orbital character between the electron and the hole Fermi surfaces is not good for too large bond angles, thereby suppressing again the superconductivity. At first glance, the superconducting eigenvalue and the strength of the low energy spin fluctuation appear to be correlated. However, if we look more closely, we find that this is not necessarily the case around the first dome. Namely, (i) while λ barely changes around the bond angle where it is maximized, i.e., 109 ≤ α ≤ 111, the strength of the spin fluctuation in that region strongly varies. At α = 109, on the left side of the dome, the d xz/yz spin fluctuation is large, but it is strongly suppressed at α = 111, on the right side. Similarly, the d xy spin fluctuation is largely suppressed at α = 111 compared to α = 110 ∼ 109. (ii) On the left and right sides of the first dome, α = 106 and λ = 112 have almost the same value of λ, but the low energy spin fluctuation, especially that for the d xy orbital, is much larger for α = 106. (iii) At α = 109, the d xz/yz spin fluctuation exhibits a sharp enhancement, but this does not seem to affect the superconductivity. The low energy spin fluctuation is mainly governed by the details of the Fermi surface nesting condition, so this result indicates that those details and superconductivity are not intimately correlated. On the other hand, λ around the second dome seems to be correlated with the strength of the d xz/yz low energy spin fluctuation. In this large bond angle regime, the d xy spin fluctuation is always suppressed because of the absence of the d xy Fermi surface around (π, π) In order to further investigate the correlation between superconductivity and the low energy spin fluctuation, we now study the temperature dependence of γ xy and γ xz/yz for various bond angles. In Fig. As for the second dome, γ xz/yz increases upon lowering the temperature only at α = 118, where λ is locally maximized . In short, the low energy spin fluctuation and superconductivity is not intimately correlated around the first dome, while the superconductivity is correlated with the low energy the d xz/yz spin fluctuation in the second dome. So far we have seen that superconductivity is not tightly correlated with the low energy spin fluctuation around the first dome. The reason for this is expected to be because the finite energy spin fluctuation also contributes to the superconductivity. If the strength of the low energy and finite energy spin fluctuations were correlated, so would superconductivity and the low energy spin fluctuation. Hence, it is expected that the low and finite energy spin fluctuations exhibit different behavior upon varying the bond angle. To see this, we go back to the issue raised as (ii) in section III A, and compare Γ(ω) between the bond angles α = 112 and α = 106 by taking their ratio as in Fig. In the second dome, on the other hand, the magnitude relation of Γ(ω) among the bond angles α = 116, 118, 120 depends on ω as seen in Fig. As described in the Introduction, it was found in the NMR experiments To see more directly the correspondence between the calculation and the NMR experiment, we plot in Fig. V. CONCLUSION In the present work, using the five orbital model of the 1111 iron-based superconductor, we have studied the correlation between the spin fluctuation and the superconducting transition temperature (eigenvalue of the Eliashberg eq.), which exhibits a double dome feature upon varying the Fe-As-Fe bond angle. Around the first dome with higher T c , the low energy spin fluctuation and T c are not tightly correlated because the finite energy spin fluctuation also contributes to superconductivity. In fact, even near the T c maximum, the measure of the low energy spin fluctuation, proportional to 1/T 1 T , tends to saturate or even decrease upon lowering the temperature. On the other hand, the magnitude of the low-energy spin fluctuation originating from the d xz/yz orbital is correlated with T c in the second dome. These calculation results are consistent with recent NMR study 8 , and therefore strongly suggest that the pairing in the iron-based superconductors is predominantly caused by the multi-orbital spin fluctuation.