Using a second-order perturbative Green's functions approach we determined the normal state spectral function A( k, ω) employing a minimal model for ferropnictides. Used before to study magnetic fluctuations and superconducting properties, it includes the two effective bands related to Fe-3d orbitals proposed by S. Raghu et al. [Phys. Rev. B 77, 220503 (R) (2008)], and local intra-and inter-orbital correlations for the effective orbitals. Here, we focus on the normal state electronic properties, in particular the temperature and doping dependence of the total density of states, A(ω), and of A( k, ω) in different Brillouin zone regions, comparing them with existing angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and theoretical results. We obtain an asymmetric effect of electron and hole doping, quantitative agreement with the experimental chemical potential shifts, as well as spectral weight redistributions near the Fermi level with temperature consistent with the available experiments. In addition, we predict a non-trivial dependence of A(ω) with temperature, exhibiting clear renormalization effects by correlations. Interestingly, investigating the origin of this predicted behaviour by analyzing the evolution with temperature of the k-dependent self-energy obtained in our approach, we could identify a number of Brillouin zone points, not probed by ARPES yet, where the largest non-trivial effects of temperature on the renormalization are predicted for the parent compounds. In 2008, the discovery of superconductivity in LaFeAsO 1-x F x , with transition temperature T c = 26 K at x 0.05 doping, It is generally recognised that the ground state properties of the ferropnictide parent compounds are mostly well described by first principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations, indicating that the low energy excitations are mainly due to electrons in the Fe-3d orbitals. Many aspects of the temperature dependence of the normal state spectral properties remain largely unstudied in ferropnictides, which motivated our present work. Here, we present our study of the changes with temperature and doping of the normal state electronic structure, throughout the Brillouin zone (BZ). We compare our results with ARPES experimental and previous theoretical results, where feasible, and have been able to predict interesting non-trivial temperature dependent effects at Brillouin zone points, yet unexplored by ARPES. To do this, we employed a minimal microscopic model, which includes two effective bands Our perturbative treatment for the electronic correlations in ferropnictides is justified by previous estimations of intermediate values for them, both from numerical calculations and experimental results. For example, a combination of local density approximation for DFT and dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) calculations for REOFeAs (RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd), APPROACH. A. Correlated effective two-orbital model. To describe analitically the properties of ferropnictides, we will consider a simplified model which contains the minimum number of degrees of freedom preserving the essential physics of the problem in 1111 and 122 compounds, as mentioned in previous section. In particular, a minimal two-orbital model suitable to describe the Fermi surface topology of ferropnictides was proposed by Raghu et al. in Ref. Thus, we will be modelling these compounds by an effective extended Hubbard model: consisting of two correlated electronic orbitals, described by Hamiltonian H 0 including the two effective bands proposed by Raghu et al. where the operators c † kσ and d † kσ create an electron in the respective c and d effective bands, with spin σ =↑, ↓ and crystal momentum k while, following Ref. μ denotes the chemical potential: notice that we refer the energies to μ, since we will adopt the grand canonical ensemble in our Green's function treatment of the system, like in Ref. where the parameters t i , i = 1, 4, denote the hopping amplitudes between sites on the square lattice formed by the Fe atoms 30 in ferropnictides. As for the electronic correlations, we assume that short-range Hubbard-like electron-electron interactions are present, and consider two local correlations between the effective orbitals at each site ( as in Refs. Here: n iσ = c † iσ c iσ and N iσ = d † iσ d iσ , and i denotes the lattice sites. Fourier transforming, V int can be written in k-space as follows: B. Our electronic structure calculation for ferropnictides. The total electron spectral density to be compared with ARPES experiments is A( k, ω), which in our effective extended Hubbard model is defined by: with contributions from both electron bands given by: Here: G ret σ (k, ω) and F ret σ (k, ω) denote the retarded Green's functions corresponding the c and d electrons in our two effective bands, i.e. where δ is an infinitesimal positive number. Integrating the spectral density over the 1st Brillouin zone, yields the total density of states (TDOS), or local spectral function: We calculated the temperature-dependent Green's functions using Zubarev's equations of motion (EOM) formalism, where A and B are fermionic operators, ≪ A; B ≫ is the time Fourier-transform of the retarded Green's function -iθ(t -t ′ ) A(t) B(t ′ ) + B(t ′ ) A(t) , where the timedependent operators appear in Heisenberg representation, and the expectation value is calculated using the appropriate statistical ensemble at finite temperature T (or the ground state of the system, at T=0 ) [ω - where in Eq. 12 we denoted: and in Eq. 13: having introduced the following notation, above, for simplicity: ) where c α , c β , c γ describe c-or d-annihilation operators and σ α , σ β , σ γ their spins (σ, or σ), as required by each equation (more details in supplementary Appendix A). Notice that the Hartree-Fock solution to this problem would be obtained by closing this set of equations of motion in first-order, with a mean-field approximation of Γ i (i = 1, 6) in terms of G σ (k, ω) and F σ (k, ω), as detailed in supplementary Appendix A. In our work, instead, we calculated the equations of motion for the three Γ i (i = 1, 3) functions coupled to G( k, ω) in first order as stated in the previous equations; and proceeded likewise for Γ i (i = 4, 6) coupled to F ( k, ω). Each of these second-order equations of motion introduces three new coupled higher-order Green's functions in the problem. To close and solve the coupled set of equations of motion in second-order, we used the following approximation: all higher-order Green's functions introduced in each subset of equations of motion for Γ i (i = 1, 3), were approximated in mean-field in terms of Γ i (i = 1, 3) and G( k, ω) (introducing proper average values), yielding a 4 × 4 closed set of equations of motion ( for details, see supplementary Appendix A). We proceeded likewise for the subset of equations for Γ i (i = 4, 6) related to F ( k, ω). Notice that this RPA-like approximation leads to a second-order closed system of eqs. of motion for G, Γ 1 , Γ 2 , Γ 3 ; and an analogous one for F , Γ 4 , Γ 5 , Γ 6 ; which after lengthy calculations we could solve. In supplementary Appendix A we detail the full expressions obtained for these Green's functions, which might be used to calculate other normal state properties, and in supplementary Appendix B we discuss the corresponding k-dependent electron self-energies, which are obtained in our level of approximation. The decoupling scheme proposed for the higher order Green's functions, which appear coupled in the EOM, accounts for the self-energy effects of the single-particle Green's function. These self-energy effects may describe both intra-and inter-orbital coupling with equal and opposite spins at lowest order (charge and spin fluctuations), thus leading to band splitting effects, which are not a mere renormalization of the energy spectrum. This fact is well known for other Hubbard-like models (see e.g. Refs. We shall be interested in describing the behavior of this many-particle system at finite temperatures. For a system in thermodynamic equilibrium the expectation value of any operator may be computed by using the grand-canonical ensemble. To complete our solution in RPA approximation, the total electron band filling n (or the chemical potential μ) at temperature T is determined self-consistently by the following equation: Thus, a major self-consistent set of coupled equations has to be solved, since the total spectral density function, which we obtain by solving two coupled sets of Green's functions, is required and will be integrated over the Brillouin zone ( k) and all energies ω, weighed by the Fermi occupation factors of each effective band at temperature T . The thermodynamic state of the system is defined by the parameter μ and β, the inverse temperature measured in energy units, i.e. β = 1 kB T , where k B is Boltzmann's constant. Zero temperature, or β → ∞, describes the ground state of the system. Notice that in this model, half-filling (n = 2) corresponds to the ferropnictide parent compounds. As detailed in supplementary Appendix A, to evaluate the Green's functions G σ (k, ω) and F σ (k, ω), we need to perform double and triple summations over the first Brillouin zone of the crystal lattice. For simplicity, we have assumed a square lattice, as done previously, Below, we present electronic structure results at different temperature and doping values, which we obtained for the normal state of ferropnictides with the extended Hubbard model and our analytical treatment presented in previous section, and compare them with available theoretical and experimental ARPES results in ferropnictides. The self-consistent sets of equations obtained for the Green's functions detailed in previous section, were solved numerically using the following tight-binding interaction parameters: t 1 = -1 eV, t 2 = 1.3 eV , t 3 = t 4 = -0.85 eV, adopted in Ref. Next, in subsection III B we exhibit the momentum dependence of the spectral density function along symmetry paths of the square lattice Brillouin zone (BZ), comparing our results with reported ARPES data. Notice that in order to allow for direct comparison with the published ARPES intensity results, the same treatment is adopted here for the data: i.e. all spectral density data here presented ( denoted Ã( k, ω), here) have been convoluted with an energy resolution of 30 meV, and also multiplied by the Fermi-Dirac function f F D (ω) at temperature T as in the experimental references cited. Subsequently, in subsection III C we study the effects of hole and of electron doping in terms of our model, and compare them with the electronic properties of ferropnictides observed in ARPES. Finally, in subsection III D we study and compare with available experimental data the temperature dependence of the total density of states and the spectral density at the most relevant BZ points. As discussed in the Introduction, previous theoretical and experimental research works estimate intermediate values for the electronic correlations, i.e. most of them placing the local intra-orbital Hubbard repulsion in the range U ∼ 3.69 eV for ReFeAsO (Re= Ce, Pr, Nd) In Fig. Our analysis of the two-orbital extended Hubbard model included the calculation of the one-particle spectral function. In this section, we will show our electronic structure results along two BZ paths, namely along Γ -X in Fig. -0,6 -0,4 0,2 0 FIG. In particular, in Fig. Along Γ -M , in Fig. Notice that the spectral density results shown in Figs. We will now refer to the effects of doping on the total density of states, and in particular the degree of accuracy presented by the results obtained with our approach, taking advantage of the experimental data available for comparison, such as Refs. In Fig. For comparison with the results of Figure A(ω) ( Arb. units ) which we denote ∆μ CLS , can be obtained from the doping dependence of the measured As-3d core level shifts ( ∆E CLS ) reported in their Fig. Let us first stress one result: notice that in spite of the band renormalization effects due to correlations known to be included in our level of approximation ( as shown in our self-energy analysis of Suppl.Appendix B), we obtain electron-hole asymmetric effects such as experimentally observed Next, we would like to stress that, even though one might expect the values of the chemical potential shifts upon doping to be material-dependent, we find that our results in Fig. As mentioned in the Introduction, Lifshitz transitions have been reported for ferropnictides, in particular as a function of doping. Our analytical approach is specifically well adapted to shed light on the temperature dependence of the normal state spectral properties throughout the Brillouin zone, subject largely unstudied in ferropnictides, on which we were able to find interesting predictions. First, we will focus on the effect of the temperature on the total density of states. We found only low temperature density of states ARPES data reported for the parent compounds, e.g in Refs. In Figure In Fig. Notice in Fig. Furthermore, in connection with the location of the peak near the Fermi level, which may be materialdependent: in Fig. Next, we will analize the evolution with temperature of the spectral density, analyzing the changes in Ã( k, ω). In first term, we will fix k at the relevant high-symmetry points of the BZ which have been studied in ARPES experiments. In the spectral density at M, to be compared with the reported ARPES data in Figure In any case, the spectral function results at the high symmetry BZ points probed by ARPES, which are presented in Figs. Nevertheless, as discussed in connection with Fig. , are shown at different BZ points in Fig. Though a large amount of experimental and theoretical research work has been done since 2008, the true nature of electron correlations in ferropnictides remains an open question. Here, using a simplified model based on two correlated effective bands and an analytical approximation to decouple the equations of motion for the electron Green's functions, we determined the normal state spectral density function and the total density of states. With model parameters in the range relevant for ironbased superconductors, we could describe: (i) the momentum dependence measured in ARPES along Γ -X, and the main features along Γ -M ; (ii) an asymmetric effect of electron and hole doping, with the characteristics observed in ARPES experiments. In particular, the band structure renormalization due to the correlation effects captured by our analytical approach, allows to obtain a direct agreement of our calculations with the experimental chemical potential shifts reported, with the correct order of magnitude in contrast to LDA calculations. (iii) We found that an important spectral weight reduction near the Fermi level takes place if temperature is increased, and the evolution with temperature of the total density of states which we predict is consistent with the relatively few available data from ARPES and hard X-ray photoemission experiments. (iv) The conduction electron mass renormalization obtained corresponds to a correlated metal, while the range of quasiparticle weights at the Fermi level which we obtain along the Brillouin zone agrees with theoretical LDA+DMFT results which estimated Z ∼ 0.8 in the absence of Hund coupling. Among the results obtained, we want to stress an interesting prediction which might be tested experimentally: our work not only predicts a non-trivial temperature dependence of the total density of states, due to correlation effects. We could trace the origin of this behaviour to specific Brillouin zone regions where the effect of temperature on the renormalization is amplified, by exploring the k-dependent self-energy obtained in our approach throughout the Brillouin zone. It would be interesting to have this prediction tested, by temperature dependent ARPES experiments in the specific BZ points we explicitly identified for undoped compounds. Our calculated Green's functions might be also employed to evaluate other normal state physical properties of iron pnictides, at our level of approximation: which has the advantage of enabling to describe temperature and k-dependent results, in contrast to other theoretical techniques where the self-energy is local. We have shown that our results describe well most of the main common features of the bulk electronic structure observed, not only 1111 and 122 ferropnictides, but also in FeSe compounds which we believe is related to the fact that the two correlated effective bands of the model capture the relevant details of the 3d-Fe orbitals near the Fermi level, lying the As or Se orbitals further below in energy. The simplified pnictides model and analytical approach used in the present work, are suitable for extensions to describe details of magnetotransport in FeSe compounds, as well as adapting them to describe electronic properties of BiS 2 -based layered compounds. Our approach could also be useful to address the nature of correlations in Hund metals and its relationship with Mott-physics in other multi-orbital systems introduces coupling of the EOM to new higher order Green's functions. In particular, the term [Γ 1 , H 0 ] couples new Green's functions << A; c † kσ >> where A involves three operator products: one creation and two annihilation ones, e.g.: On the other hand, the term [Γ 1 , V int ] in Eq. A11 couples four new higher order Green's functions, each involving five operator products in A: two creation and three annihilation ones, such as Similar results are obtained when calculating the equations of motion for Analogously, the exact equation of motion for F ( k, ω), Eq. 13, involves sums over two k-indices of three coupled Green's functions: Γ i (i= 4,6) defined in Eqs.15, whose own equations of motion indirectly couple F ( k, ω) to new higher-order Green's functions in the problem. To close the coupled set of equations of motion at this second-order level, we used the following approximation: all new higher-order Green's functions introduced in each subset of equations of motion for Γ i (i = 1, 3), were approximated in mean-field in terms of Γ i (i = 1, 3) and G( k, ω) (introducing appropriate average values), yielding a 4 × 4 closed set of equations of motion. We proceeded likewise for the subset of equations for Γ i (i = 4, 6) related to F ( k, ω). To exemplify the decoupling scheme adopted to close the set of EOM at this level, below we show the approximation used for the higher-order Green's functions involving three operator products: , according to the definition in Eq.16. Approximating this Green's function in mean field yields: We now illustrate the decoupling of the higher-order Green's functions involving five operator products, by two examples: ≫. Approximating these Green's functions in mean field yields: and, All other higher-order Green's functions were decoupled following the same procedure. We proceeded likewise for the subset of equations for Γ i (i = 4, 6) related to F ( k, ω). Finally, the equations of motion for the six Green's functions Γ i (i = 1, 6) in RPA approximation read: Notice that this RPA-like approximation involves a second-order closed set of equations for G σ (k, ω), and double k-index summations of Γ 1 , Γ 2 and Γ 3 ; and an analogous one for F σ (k, ω), Γ 4 , Γ 5 and Γ 6 . Below we explain how we could solve these two sets of coupled equations of motion, and detail the Green's functions G( k, ω) and F ( k, ω) obtained, required to calculate the spectral density and total density of states results presented in Section III. a. Solution of the equations of motion determining Gσ(k, ω). The keypoint to close the EOM system at this second-order level, enabling to determine G σ (k, ω) from Eq. 12 using the RPA-coupled set of Eqs. A12,A13 an d A14, is that only BZ summations over k 1 and k 2 of the Γ i (k 1 , k 2 , k) (i=1,3) functions appear in Eq. 12. So that, appropriately (double) summing over the BZ the set of coupled set of equations, one can effectively extract G σ (k, ω) at a fixed k as we explain in the following. It is useful to introduce the following notation: which allows to rewrite Eqs.A12, A13 and A14 as follows: where the coefficients A i , B i and C i are: and, Notice that if Eqs.A19 are BZ summed over k 1 , each of the Φ i (k 2 , k) can be derived in terms of G σ (k, ω) and coefficients involving the temperature dependant-fillings, the effective band structure and the model's correlation parameters. Meanwhile, if one introduces the notation: Eq. 12 can be rewritten as: Carrying out the summations over k 1 and k 2 BZ points in the set of equations in Eq. A23 and Eq.13, we analogously find an expression for the Green's function F σ (k, ω) corresponding to the d-electrons, in this RPA-level approximation: the correlations included: with non-trivial crystal momentum, temperature, doping, and energy dependence. In the following, our results will be presented in a series of figures, in particular exhibiting the diversity of the temperature dependence which is obtained at different k-points in the Brillouin zone. As general consistency checks of our results, notice: the correct (negative) sign exhibited by the imaginary parts of the electron self-energies, while the real parts of the selfenergies, which represent the energy shifts renormalizing the bare electron energies in our approximation, are correctly Kramers-Kronig related to the respective imaginary parts. First, we exemplify the momentum dependence of the imaginary part of the two self-energies Σ c (k, ω) and Σ d (k, ω) in our approximation. In Fig. The lower panel depicts the imaginary parts of the two self-energies at X ( k = (π, 0)): which noticeably differs from the previous cases. At X the renormalization is relevant mostly near the band edges of the bare electronic structure, while near the Fermi level the renormalization at X is not significant. In the rest of this appendix, we will focus on the renormalization of the energies obtained near the Fermi level, and therefore center our discussion on Σ c ( k, ω). Now, we will focus on the evolution with temperature of the imaginary part of Σ c ( k, ω), in particular fixing k at the relevant high-symmetry points of the BZ studied by ARPES experiments, and also at other BZ points: in which we found that the temperature dependence of the renormalization was larger and non-trivial (not the expected behaviour resulting from f F D (ω)). Fig. But from the total density of states results in Fig. Finally, in Figure To complete the presentation of the renormalization effects described in our approach, in Figure -0,3 -0,2 -0,1 0 0,1 0,2 0,3 In Fig. In Figure In Figure C.9 we focus on the total density of states: the results shown evidentiate that the non-trivial temperature dependent renormalization effects by correlations found for the parent compounds, shown in Fig. We also explored the effect of doping on the temperature dependent spectral density function results. In Figure Y. Kamihara et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 3296 (2008). J. Paglione, R. L. Greene, Nature 6, 645 (2010). L. M. Roth, Phys. Rev.184, 451 (1969).