In recent few years, the search for topological superconductors (TSCs) has been a hot topic in condensed matter physics Experimentally, the simplest way to get a candidate for TSC is to convert a TI into superconductor, by tuning the parameters such as doping or pressure. For example, by doping, Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 and Cu x (PbSe) 5 (Bi 2 Se 3 ) 6 are considered to be candidates for TSCs Under pressure, Bi 2 Te 3 , Bi 2 Se 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 , and Sb 2 Se 3 become superconducting, which are also regarded as candidates for TSCs Note that there are debates on whether these candidates are indeed TSCs Here we present the resistance measurements on Cd 3 As 2 single crystals under pressure up to 50.9 GPa. After an initial increase with pressure, the low-temperature resistance starts to decreases with pressure above 6.4 GPa. Superconductivity appears at 8.5 GPa with T c ≈ 2.0 K, and the T c increases to about 4.0 K at 21.3 GPa, then persists to the highest pressure 50.9 GPa. A structure phase transition around 3.5 GPa is also observed by X-ray diffraction measurements. These results suggest that Cd 3 As 2 may be a new topological superconductor under high pressure. Pressure-induced superconductivity. To make sure the resistance drop in Fig. . The resistance drop is gradually suppressed to lower temperature with increasing field, which demonstrates that it is indeed a superconducting transition. Fermi surface topology as in MgB 2 We notice that no superconductivity was observed up to 13.43 GPa in an earlier pressure study of Cd 3 As 2 single crystal Pressure-induced crystal structure phase transition. Before discussing whether the pressure-induced superconductivity is topological or not, it is important to know whether it is accompanied by a structure phase transition, as observed in pressurized TIs In Fig. Now we discuss whether the superconducting state of Cd 3 As 2 under high pressure is topological or not. In Ref. [40], the observation of zero bias conductance peak (ZBCP) and double conductance peaks (DCPs) under "hard" tip reveal p-wave like unconventional superconductivity in Cd 3 As 2 . Considering its special topological property, they suggested that Cd 3 As 2 under high pressure is a candidate of the TSC In summary, we have done resistance measurements on the 3D Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 single crystals under pressures up to 50.9 GPa. It is found that superconductivity with T c ≈ 2 K emerges at 8.5 GPa. The T c increases to 4.0 K at 21.3 GPa, then it shows an anomalous constant pressure dependence up to the highest pressure measured. High-pressure powder x-ray diffraction measurements reveal a structure phase transition around 3.5 GPa. Our observation of superconductivity in Cd 3 As 2 under high pressure provides an interesting candidate for topological superconductor. High-quality Cd 3 As 2 single crystals were grown from Cd flux Such a phase diagram is similar to that of the 3D topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 .