The parent compound of an unconventional superconductor must contain unusual correlated electronic and magnetic properties of its own. In the high-Tc potassium intercalated FeSe, there has been significant debate regarding what the exact parent compound is. Our studies unambiguously show that the Fe-vacancy ordered K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 is the magnetic, Mott insulating parent compound of the superconducting state. Non-superconducting K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 becomes a superconductor after high temperature annealing, and the overall picture indicates that superconductivity in K 2-x Fe 4+y Se 5 originates from the Fe-vacancy order to disorder transition. Thus, the long pending question whether magnetic and superconducting state are competing or cooperating for cuprate superconductors may also apply to the Fe-chalcogenide superconductors. It is believed that the iron selenides and related compounds will provide essential information to understand the origin of superconductivity in the iron-based superconductors, and possibly to the superconducting cuprates. Our studies unambiguously show that the Fe-vacancy ordered K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 is the magnetic, Mott insulating parent compound of the superconducting state, and non-superconducting K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 becomes a superconductor after high temperature annealing, strongly indicating that superconductivity in K 2-x Fe 4+y Se 5 originates from the Fe-vacancy order to disorder transition. in the non-superconducting regime It is generally accepted that there exists many competing states, such as orbital order, magnetic order, nematic electronic phases, structural distortion and superconductivity in the Fe-based superconductors. However, which interaction is at the root of observed phenomena and superconductivity? The large anisotropy of properties found below the structural phase transition experimentally Another issue is the controversy of the superconducting phase in A 1-x Fe 2-y Se 2 system. Apart from the stable A 2 Fe 4 Se 5 non-superconducting matrix in superconducting crystals, a separated phase with an expanded c-axis and a composition close to A x Fe 2 Se 2 ARPES investigations on alkaline-metal iron selenides (A x Fe 2-y Se 2 ) reveal the absence of hole pockets at the Fermi surface (FS) A recent study on the non-superconducting Fe 4 Se 5 Addressing this question in pure FeSe may be complicated by issues of different stoichiometry. Here we report a systematic study of K 2-x Fe 4+y Se 5 compounds with controlled stoichiometry, and we unambiguously demonstrate the appearance and disappearance of superconductivity in the same sample depending on preparation processes. Our measurements clearly show the correlation between the Fe-vacancy disorder and superconductivity in these compounds. Furthermore, we pinpoint the exact phase that is the parent compound from which superconductivity can emerge. These results along with recent theories provide a framework for better understanding the origin of superconductivity in Fe-chalcogenides. A novel synthesis approach developed in this report is to combine the mechanical ball milling and high temperature calcination processes to the formation of polycrystalline K x Fe 2-y Se 2 samples with homogenous chemical composition and crystal phase (Supplement Materials and Method). As we discuss below, our samples maintain the 245 stoichiometry, with no presence of other phases such as the 122 phase. We treated the sealed powder material with K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 stoichiometry (we denote as 2(Fe 4 )5) into furnace by slowly heating to 700 oC in 7 hours, kept at the same temperature for 24 hours and then slowly cooled to room temperature. These as grown samples (-AG) were further heat treated with two processes. The first is a low temperature post-annealing at 300 oC for 12 hours followed by ice water quench (-LT). The second is a high temperature (with furnace already at 750 oC) treatment for 3-6 hours followed by quenching in ice water (-HT). In Fig. Since the stoichiometric 2(Fe 4 )5 sample has intrinsic 20% Fe-vacancy, it is difficult to completely suppress the √5 × √5 Fe-vacancy order, explaining the low superconducting volume fraction observed. We introduce extra iron and intentionally reduce the potassium in an attempt to fill the vacant sites and allow additional iron to go into the crystal structure. The nominal compositions for these samples are K 2 Fe 4.1 Se 5 (2(Fe 4.1 )5), K 1.9 Fe 4.1 Se 5 (1.9(Fe 4.1 )5), K 1.9 Fe 4.2 Se 5 (1.9(Fe 4.2 )5) and K 1.9 Fe 4.3 Se 5 (1.9(Fe 4.3 )5). Similar to 2(Fe 4 )5, the other samples can be switched from the state with 125 K transition to superconducting by the heat treatment cycle, as shown for 2(Fe 4.1 )5 in Fig. We performed structural analyses with XRD and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) in order to understand the influence of the preparation process on the crystal structure and Fe-vacancy. Supplementary Fig. Based on the main Bragg peaks we calculated the lattice parameters using I4/m symmetry for samples with superstructure peaks (in 2(Fe 4 )5-LT and 1.9(Fe 4.1 )5-HT samples) and I4/mmm symmetry for samples without superstructures (1.9(Fe 4.2 )5-HT). The results are summarized in Table We stress again that our crystals do not contain phases with different stoichiometry. Furthermore, the XRD patterns of the HT and LT phases for the same sample 1.9(Fe 4.2 )5 are compared in Supplementary Fig. The relative intensity of (123) and (002) peaks is significantly changed from the non-superconducting to superconducting samples, as shown in Figs. Figure In Fig. The features in the susceptibility as a function of temperature can be correlated to those in the resistivity versus temperature. The resistivity of the studied samples are shown in Fig. These results unambiguously resolve the controversy of the exact parent phase in K 2-x Fe 4+y Se 5 system. The K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 with Fe-vacancy order is the parent semiconducting phase for the Tc ~ 30 K superconducting phase. Superconductivity emerges after the removal of the vacancy order, which can be easily achieved by thermal processing. Our results also suggest the reduction in the Fe-vacancy density alone by adding extra irons into the lattice is not sufficient to induce bulk superconductivity. Introducing extra irons in the lattice makes the Fe-vacancy in the sample more disordered and leads to higher volume fraction of superconductivity. An important question that arises is what is the role of the interface between the disordered and ordered phases, and whether stabilizing the proper nanoscale interface is related to the very high Tc observed in monolayer FeSe. This picture associating the superconducting transition with the Fe-vacancy orderdisorder transition provides the basis to understand the results of the high-pressure study on the mixed phase A x Fe 2-y Se 2 The mechanism behind the 125 K transition in samples with vacancy order is not well understood at the moment and requires further study. Preliminary magnetic susceptibility measurements indicate this transition is phenomenologically similar to that of the Verwey transition observed in Fe 3 O 4 , suggesting the possibility of charge/spin order in the non-superconducting parent compound. This is consistent with the electronic nematicity, which is associated with the C4 rotational symmetry breaking that has been observed in the Fe-based superconductors. In summary, our studies on the K 2-x Fe 4+y Se 5 superconductors show that the magnetic, non-superconducting K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 phase with iron-vacancy order is a Mott insulator. Non-superconducting K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 becomes a superconductor after high temperature annealing, which disorders the Fe vacancy order but with no stoichiometry change. These results settle two issues: 1) that the Fe-vacancy ordered K 2-x Fe 4+y Se 5 is the insulating parent compound of the superconducting state and 2) superconductivity in K 2-x Fe 4+y Se 5 originates from the Fe-vacancy order to disorder transition. The similarities for this system to the cuprates are striking. Thus, the long pending question whether magnetic and superconducting state are competing or cooperating for cuprate superconductors may also apply to the Fe-chalcogenide superconductors. It is believed that the iron selenides and related compounds will provide essential information to understand the origin of superconductivity in the iron-based superconductors, and possibly to the superconducting cuprates. 