We generalize the screened Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (SKKR) method for solving the corresponding Kohn-Sham-Bogoliubov-de Gennes (KSBdG) equations for surfaces and interfaces. As an application of the newly developed theory we study the quasiparticle spectrum of Au overlayers on a Nb(100) host. We find that, within the superconducting gap region, the quasiparticle spectrum consists of Andreev bound states (ABS) with a dispersion which is closely connected to the underlying electronic structure of the overlayer. We also find that the spectrum has a strongly k-dependent induced gap. The properties of the gap is discussed in relation to the thickness of the overlayer, and it is shown that certain states do not participate in the Andreev scattering process. The theory of Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS) successfully describes the universal properties of conventional (s-wave) superconductors 1 , but it can not be applied easily to inhomogeneous systems where the wave number, k, is not a good quantum number. The generalization of the well-known Hartee-Fock method with the introduction of the concept of mixed particle-hole excited states 2,3 yields the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations where H e ( r) = -∇ 2 + V ef f ( r) is the single-particle Hamiltonian, and the wavefunction is decomposed into an electron-like part u n ( r) and a hole-like part v n ( r). The effective electrostatic and pairing potentials are where V ext ( r) is the external potential (e.g. the Coulomb attraction from the protons). The ρ( r) charge and χ( r) anomalous densities can be calculated from the wavefunction components: f ( n ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, E 0 xc [n] is the usual exchange correlation energy for normal electrons and λ is a semi-phenomenological adjustable parameter (it can be site-dependent). It should be noted that the zero point of the energy scale is the Fermi level. The past few years have shown a growing interest in the study of superconductor based heterostructures The present paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we generalize the SKKR method for the solution of the KSBdG Eqs. (1). Sec. III is denoted to the computational details. In Sec. IV we illustrate the power of the developed method by studying the quasiparticle "band" structure of the niobium (Nb) -gold (Au) system. Finally Sec. V is devoted to the summary. Some technical details are provided in the Appendix. The central problem of the DFT calculations is the solution of the KSBdG Eqs. (1) in order to determine the single-particle wavefunctions and the corresponding eigenvalues. However, the single-particle Green function contains all information about the ground state. The local DOS, the anomalous and charge densities can be obtained from the single-particle Green function. Consequently, if the single-particle Green function is obtained, it is not necessary to calculate the Kohn-Sham orbitals. In this section we show how the SKKR method can be generalized to get the single-particle Green function for multilayered systems corresponding to the KSBdG Eqs. (1). Here we do not try to follow every single step of the derivation, as it would be too extensive for this paper, instead we just show how the most important quantities, concepts and formulas needs to be modified due to the presence of holes. Most interim derivations can be performed in analogy of the normal state MST, well described for example in Ref. 26. The first step in this generalization is to decompose the BdG Hamiltonian in the following way: where In the KKR method, the potential is usually treated in the so called muffin-tin approximation, ie. the potential is written as a sum of single-domain potentials centered around each lattice site, n, namely It is usually assumed, that V n ( r) is spherically symmetric. This is not a necessary assumption for the theory, however, MST for a general shape of potentials are still not common even for the normal state. Therefore, in what follows we still restrict ourselves to spherical atomic potentials. In our approach, we assume the same form for the effective pair interaction as well, namely ∆ ef f ( r) = n ∆ n (r). The potentials V n ( r) are of muffin-tin type which means that V n (r) = 0 and ∆ n (r) = 0 if r = | r n | ≥ S n , where S n is the muffin-tin radius. The resolvent of the BdG Hamiltonian can be defined as which has the usual property At the real axis the up-and down-side limits of G(z) are defined by Similarly to the normal state, we can define the Toperator as where τ nm (z) is the so called scattering path operator (SPO) which comprises all possible scattering events between the sites n and m, including now the Andreev reflection as well. Since V is Hermitean, The two different, generalized eigenfunctions of H BdG can be obtained from the Lippmann-Schwinger equation: where φ( ) is a generalized, multicomponent eigenfunction of H 0 and G 0 (z) is the resolvent corresponding to H 0 . Here we emphasize the difference from the normal state now, that is the wavefunctions also have a hole part. Following the footsteps of normal state MST, we define the following orthogonal and complete basis set: where L = (l, m) is the usual composite index, and j l (x) is the spherical Bessel function of the first type, In a first step the free-particle Green function is derived which is related to the structure constant describing the structural properties of the investigated system. Using the definition of the basis abobe, Eqs. (13), in terms of contour integrations -commonly used in MST -it can be shown, that the Green function of free particles has the following form: where Here we used the notation r < = min (r, r ), r > = max (r, r ) with the choice of Im{p e } > 0 and Im p h > 0, a, b denote the electron, hole indices, and h e l (x) = h + l (x) is the Hankel function of the first type, while h h l (x) = -h + l (x). We defined the × operator for any arbitrary function, f , as 0 is diagonal in indeces a and b, and the hole part of the free-particle Green function can be obtained from its electronic part Nowadays almost all electronic structure codes are built around what is called the "scalar relativistic" approximation, where the mass-velocity and Darwin terms are properly taken into consideration, but the spin-orbit coupling is neglected. Consequently, to be able to thoroughly compare our results with normal state electronic structure calculations, a scalar relativistic generalization of the BdG theory is needed. To arrive to such a theory, one needs to start from the relativistic Dirac-Bogoliubovde Gennes (DBdG) equations already worked out in the literature where the wavefunctions are defined as and In MST, the scattering matrices and the scattering solutions are obtained by matching the solutions of the above equations inside the muffin-tin sphere to the solutions outside. After performing the necessary integrations in the Lippmann-Schwinger equation ( where t n,ab L L (z) is the single-site t-matrix which is diagonal in L, L indices for potentials with spherical symmetry. Equation (22) implies that an electron (hole) like solution to the Lippmann-Schwinger equation may have a hole (electron) like component as well. If the incoming wave is electron like, the solution outside the muffin-tin sphere can be written as ) and if the incoming wave is hole like, it can be expressed as (23b) It should be noted that these equations are different not only in the electron-hole components, but also in the appropriate energy dependence as well through p e and p h . As mentioned earlier, the t-matrix can be obtained by matching the outside scattering solutions and the regular solutions inside the muffin-tin sphere at the boundary, which is described in more details in the Appendix. Using the particle-hole symmetry These symmetry relations are independent from the actual form of ∆(r) and V (r) in the superconducting muffin-tin sphere. A rather convenient property of the KKR method that it allows a transparent decoupling of the potential (described by its scattering matrix) and the structural properties of the system of scattering centers (atoms). Similarly to the normal case where R nm is the vector pointing from site n to site m and C L LL are the usual Gaunt-coefficients where the τ (z) SPO can be determined from the singlesite t-matrix and the real space structure constant similarly to normal state in the supermatrix formalism For periodic systems in KKR theory it is possible to write the above equations in reciprocal space, which allows to obtain the SPO as a function of the wave number and the energy. Finding the poles of the SPO as a function of k and gives the electronic band structure. Butler described a one-dimensional version of KKR In the normal state MST, it had been shown by Faulkner and Stocks 31 that the Green function can be obtained from the scattering path operator and from the scattering solutions. The derivation can be followed step by step, and the result for the site-diagonal part of the Green function can be written in an analogous form as well. First, the full Green function was evaluated for the case of where we used the following matrix notation (F = Z, or J): and the corresponding adjoint vector, where To calculate physical quantities, we have to continue the Green function inside the muffin-tin spheres by using the solutions of the scalar relativistic BdG Eqs. (19) as described in details in the Appendix. The formulas given above can be applied to surfaces and interfaces quite straightforwardly following the idea of the so called Screened KKR (SKKR) formalism described in Refs. 24 and 25. In this formalism, a special reference system is used to obtain structure constants that are localized in real space. In the supermatrix formalism we used above, the screening transformation can be written in a way that is formally exactly the same as it was presented in Ref. 25. Thus the whole formalism can be derived for layered systems with two-dimensional periodicity and applied as the SKKR method prescribes. To perform fully self-consistent calculations for S/N systems, it is necessary to calculate the charge density and the anomalous density for layer I, which can be obtained from the Green function: III. COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS In this section, we describe the technical details of the calculation of quasiparticle spectrum for a real superconducting heterostructure using the BdG-SKKR method outlined in Sec. II. The geometry of our system builds up from twodimensional translational invariant layers. The system comprises three regions: (i) semi-infinite bulk (Nb); (ii) the interface region that -in our case -consists of six superconducting layers (Nb), various number of normal metal layers (Au) and three layers of empty spheres; (iii) and semi-infinite vacuum. The Nb has the body-centered cubic (BCC) crystal structure with a lattice parameter a = 3.3 Å. Here we do not try to investigate the effect of matching different lattice structures on the quasiparticle spectrum. Thus, for simplicity we assume BCC epitaxial growth for the Au overlayers and the Nb/Au BCC(100) heterostructure will be investigated. As we mentioned in the introduction, we do not calculate self-consistently the ∆ ef f (r) pairing-potential, only the normal state calculation is performed selfconsistently to obtain the V ef f (r) effective potential. We do this to simplify our first calculations, and because it has been shown in Ref. 9, that a good guess of the selfconsistent pairing-potential can be the following average where V W S is the volume of Wigner-Seitz cell. Consequently, we treat the ∆ averaged pairing potential as an adjustable parameter. Since ∆ is the experimentally observed gap (the gap is measured from the Fermi level), in principle, it should be set to equal the experimental value Similarly to normal state electronic structure calculations, single-site t-matrices are obtained for each layer, where the ∆ averaged pair interactions can be different on each layer, just as the atomic potentials. In our model a finite, constant ∆ pairing potential is assumed on the Nb layers and ∆ = 0 Ry on the Au overlayers. In practice, we obtain the t-matrix and the wavefunctions in the following way: first, the radial scalar relativistic BdG Eqs. (19) are integrated outwards up to the radius of the muffin-tin sphere with different starting values to obtain the R ab l ( , r). The matching to the scattering solutions (details in the Appendix) yields the tmatrix. Then the H ab l ( , r) irregular wavefunction is calculated similarly by an integration inwards starting at the muffin-tin radius. The integrations are performed with a predictor-corrector algorithm In what follows, we calculate the DOS and the Bloch spectral function (BSF) which is equivalent to the quasiparticle spectrum. In all of the following plots the energy is measured in units of Rydbergs and k in units of π/a. The contour plots of the spectral functions are calculated in 400 energy points × 265 k-points. The BSF is defined as A B ( , k) = n δ(n (k)) and can be calculated directly from the Green function. In a layered system for layer I, this can be expressed as Since the BSF is equivalent to the quasiparticle spectrum, drawing a contour plot of the BSF as a function of energy along specified directions of k is a powerful tool to visualize the quasiparticle states. In a layered system this can be done for each layer, based on Eq. ( To test our procedures, and to show the effect of the ∆ pairing potential on a bulk sytem (Nb), we first performed calculations for the case of bulk niobium using the values ∆ N b = 0 Ry and ∆ N b = 0.01 Ry. The DOS can be calculated from the BSF D( ) = A B ( , k || ) dk || . The particle-hole symmetry implies that the density of the hole-like states are just the reflection of the density of electron-like states to the Fermi energy. This is indeed the case in our calculations, as it can be seen in Fig. To demonstrate the power of our new theory for an inhomogeneous system, we apply it to study the system of Au overlayers on Nb(100). Foremost, we made calculations for the normal state, for two reasons. First, to obtain self-consistent potentials and work functions for the BdG calculations. Second, it is important to explore the features in the normal state electronic structure to later understand the quasiparticle spectrum we are planning to calculate. Therefore, self-consistent calculations were performed for systems containing a semi-infinite Nb, an additional 6 Nb layers and subsequently 3, 9, 24, and 93 Au layers. In Fig. For a fixed number of Au layers, one can investigate the layer dependence of the electronic structure. This is illustrated for the system with 9 Au layers in Fig. We now consider the solution of the BdG equations described in the theory section, we model the pair potential in the inhomogeneous Nb(100)/Au(100) system by assigning a constant value ∆ N b = 0.05 Ry to the Nb layers and a constant ∆ Au = 0 Ry for the Au layers (and the same to the empty sphere and vacuum layers). The results of the calculation are shown in Fig. Further interesting features of the quasiparticle spectrum are revealed if we analyze the spectrum layer by layer for a fixed system size (6 Nb and 9 Au layers, see Fig. It is also useful to mention that for k = 0 the spectrum of the ABS is comparable with the results of onedimensional model calculations and the Andreev energy levels show the similar 1/L dependence which were also obtained in Ref. 19. However, we emphasize that this property is the consequence of the roughly 2π/L sampling connected to the QW states and can not be regarded as an universal feature for every S/N heterostructures. Metallic surfaces often exhibit a Shockley-type surface state. The energy of such states are located in a relative band gap of the bulk, normal state band structure and usually have a parabolic dispersion, and therefore such electrons behave like a nearly free two dimensional electron gas. Surface states are easily accessible to spectroscopy with photoemission, since they are often located near the Fermi energy. Therefore, it is interesting to study such surface states once the material becomes superconducting. We calculated such Shockley-type surface state from the BdG equations in the case of the investigated Nb/Au heterostructure along the direction k y = 0. It should be emphasized that this surface state is entirely fictitious, as this surface is of an Au(100) in the BCC lattice structure. First, setting the ∆ N b = 0 Ry (see the left panel of Fig. As we indicated earlier, an opposite behavior could be observed for the interface state, which is localized to the Nb/Au interface. The energy of these states shifts upwards. This can be explained by the stronger interaction between the superconductor and the normal metal resulted in a larger gap than in the QW states. In this paper we have presented the first material specific calculations for an s-wave superconductor -normal metal heterostructure. Based on first principles BdG equations a novel and unique computer code was developed which allows us to study the nature of the Andreev bound states related to the proximity effect in normal metal -superconductor heterostructures. For the first time we have extended the SKKR method for the solution of the KSBdG Eqs. (1) which allows one to investigate the quasiparticle spectrum of super-conducting heterostructures. In order to compare our results with normal state electronic structure calculations, a scalar relativistic generalization of the BdG equations within Multiple Scattering Theory was also provided. Formally, the generalized Faulkner-Stocks formula, given by Eq. ( To illustrate the power of the new method, it was applied to Nb/Au heterostructures. For simplicity, Au overlayers of BCC(100) lattice structure on a Nb BCC(100) host have been investigated. While such material is not likely to exist for larger Au thicknesses, by assuming a layer by layer growth, it resulted in an easily understandable system with quantum well states. The effect of the superconducting host on the quasiparticle spectrum of Au overlayers can be more easily identified by these states than on a more complex band structure of a real material. Calculations for a more realistic geometry will be published elsewhere. We showed that the QW states (we found to exist in the normal state band structure calculations) become bound Andreev states due to Andreev scattering. The major result of our investigations is that the ABS have dispersion, which can be obtained only by developing the BdG-SKKR method. We also found that the proximity of a superconductor in the studied heterostructures induces the mirroring of the electronic bands, and opens up a gap at each band crossing, and the gaps are strongly kdependent. We have seen that this induced gap remains constant for each layer for a given Au thickness, however, the size of the gap decays as function of the Au thickness. For k = 0, the one-dimensional model calculations of the Andreev energy levels 