It is shown that nanoparticles made of low Tc superconductors have large diamagnetic response at temperatures several orders of magnitude above Tc. Most features of the recently observed Giant diamagnetism of Au nanorods are explained in terms of superconducting fluctuations, except for the huge magnitude of the effect. Very recently The experience This work is motivated by the above experimental results, but we believe that this study leads to a much more general insight: as may be expected on general grounds, the effect of fluctuations increases with decreasing sample size. On the nanoscale, especially in superconductors with their large coherence lengths, fluctuations may become dominant over the averages!. The model we use here, invokes superconducting fluctuations, much above T c , of the conduction electrons. We state from the outset that, for gold, it gives "only" about an order of magnitude increase of the susceptibility compared to χ L (the Landau diamagnetic susceptibility of the conduction electrons). The results of Ref. The inherent difficulty of this problem stems from the fact that the bulk volume susceptibility of Au, χ b ∼ several ∼ 10 -5 , results from the dense core electrons, which should not change very much with the arrangement and binding of the atoms (for example, in the metal or the nanoparticle). The electrons that do change and therefore should be expected to yield the effect, are the valence/conduction ones, whose Landau susceptibility, χ L , is ∼ 2 orders of mag smaller! Thus, to explain the observed nanorod effect, a susceptiblity larger by roughly an order of magnitude than χ b , one needs, as stated, a ∼ 3 orders of magnitude boost over χ L . Here we start with the finding of Ref. A set of 10 colloidal spherically-capped Au nanorod systems was prepared in Ref. The susceptibilities were negative (diamagnetic), increasing with decreasing size, larger than that of the bulk by an order of magnitude (depending on size and aspect ratio) and temperature-independent in the whole measurement range of 5-300K. We emphasize that |χ ⊥ | is larger than |χ |. Their ratio increases with the aspect ratio of the cylinder. These results are rather unexpected and quite difficult to understand, especially the huge size and the temperature independence of a mesoscopic effect. Here we show that the superconducting fluctuations much above T c qualitatively explain, except for the already mentioned order of magnitude, all the trends of these results. More generally, the importance of fluctuations on the nanoscale is highlighted. The most straightforward way to understand these effects qualitatively is by employing the Physical picture of Schmid We shall later use k B = 1. Adopting the Langevin expression for the diamagnetic susceptibility per unit volume of a finite, mobile-charge carrying, entity where n is the density of charge carriers, q their charge, m their mass and < r 2 > their typical radius-of-motion squared. For ξ(T ) we take the "normal-metal coherence length" which agrees for T >> T c with the GL length . It is also the characteristic scale for interaction effects [20] For T ∼ T c this yields the dirty limit T = 0 G-L coherence length, which is of the order of 1000nm for the gold used in Ref. Expressing this in terms of the Landau susceptibility for a normal metal, χ L = e 2 kF 12π 2 mc 2 we find, allowing for D = v F l/3, where l is the elastic mean free path, Taking the typical orbit radii < r 2 > parallel,perp to be A parallel R 2 and A perp RL where A parallel,perp are numerical constants of order unity, and the indices parallel and perp referring to the directions of the magnetic field vs. the cylinder's axis, we find In the the bulk l ∼ = 60nm and because the rods being single-crystalline The two main features which appear in the microscopic theory and are neglected in the simplest classical (static) and uniform (q = 0) fluctuation theory are the finite wavenumber, q and Matsubara frequency (ω ν = ν(2πT ), with ν being an integer). As to the former, we note To understand the essence of the differences between the fluctuation G-L and the microscopic theory, we compare the results for the paradigmatic case of the orbital response of a thin small Ref where T 1 = D (2πR) 2 is the Thouless energy. Both results are for T T 1 . We see that the microscopic result is approximately given by the fluctuation G-L one multiplied by 32/(π 2 ln(T 1 /T c )) ∼ 1/4 for the Au samples of Ref. A very satisfying feature of the microscopic result of Eq 8 is the, albeit weak, dependence on T c . χ vanishing as 1 ln(T1/Tc) with T c . T c = 0 is the normal metal limit. To explain the scale-dependence of the interaction, we recall briefly how it is derived. By integrating over thin shells in momentum (or energy) space, one obtains the well-known (see e.g. Notice that a repulsive/attractive interaction is "renormalized downwards/upwards" with decreasing energy scale ω < . What makes superconductivity possible is that at ω D the renormalized repulsion is much smaller than its value on the microscopic scale. At ω D the attraction may win and then at lower energies the total interaction increases in absolute value, until it diverges at some small energy scale, the conventional T c of the given material. Choosing ω < = T c (where the inverse interaction vanishes) and ω > to be the "Physical scale", this gives The physical scale for the (dominant) first moment of the flux-dependence of the persistent current in a ring is the Thouless energy, T 1 (in the notation of Ref. For T 1 << T , the physical scale becomes T. This gives the usual G-L temperature dependence of the various quantities, especially relevant when T approaches T c . We mention that the above change of sign has serious consequences for the magnetic response. As mentioned in Ref. We conclude this note with a speculation on the origin of the giant diamagnetic susceptibility I thank Yuval Oreg, Alexander Finkelstein, Ora Entin-Wohlman, Amnon Aharony and Erez Berg for important discussions, Hamutal Bary-Soroker for participation in and contributions to Refs Hernando in Coma-Ruga 14, 10th International Workshop on Nanomagnetism and Superconductivity at the Nanoscale.