Varying the superconducting transition temperature over a large scale of a cuprate superconductor is a necessary step for identifying the unsettled mechanism of superconductivity. Chemical doping or element substitution has been proven to be effective but also brings about lattice disorder. Such disorder can completely destroy superconductivity even at a fixed doping level. Pressure has been thought to be the most clean method for tuning superconductivity. However, pressureinduced increase of disorder was recognized from recent experiments. By choosing a disordered Tl2Ba2CaCu2O 8+δ at the optimal doping, we perform single-crystal x-ray diffraction and magnetic susceptibility measurements at high pressures. The obtained structural data provides evidence for the robust feature for the disorder of this material in the pressure range studied. This feature ensures the pressure effects on superconductivity distinguishable from the disorder. The derived parabolic-like behavior of the transition temperature with pressure up to near 30 GPa, having a maximum around 7 GPa, offers a platform for testing any realistic theoretical models in a nearly constant disorder environment. Such a behavior can be understood when considering the carrier concentration and the pairing interaction strength as two pressure intrinsic variables. There has been no agreement on what mechanism controls superconductivity in the cuprate superconductors since their discovery. Superconductivity in cuprates usually appears at certain doping levels in which spin and charge stripes Amongst various known orders, lattice disorder has been generally observed to significantly affect the superconducting transition temperature T c of many cuprates Changing lattice disorder was originally thought to provide direct information on the pairing interaction strength for high-T c cuprate Lattice instability and structural fluctuation have been generally observed in thallium-based cuprate superconductors We first investigate the evolution of disorder with pressure by carefully analyzing the crystal structure and lattice parameters. Pressure-dependent single crystal XRD patterns were collected by a MAR345 image plate at pressures up to 25.6 GPa at room temperature, by using Beamline at 16BM-D of High Pressure Collaborative Access Team at the Advanced Photon Source, with an incident x-ray wavelength of 0.50917 Å. The two dimensional patterns were integrated into one dimensional XRD patterns with Fit2D software There are no new diffraction peaks and no peak merging and/or splitting. The peak intensity and their full width at half maximum (HWHM) are insensitive to the applied pressure. The diffraction peaks monotonically shift to higher angles slowly with increasing pressure, illustrating the homogeneous compression of the lattice. All these behaviors indicate that the structure of Tl2212 was stable under pressure. This result is different to the pressure-induced phase separation observed in Y123 superconductor The structure of Tl2212 has been refined from the single crystal XRD and neutron powder diffraction measurements The evolution of disorder with pressure was usually studied by combining XRD and Raman measurements Here we examine the disorder effects on Tl2212 based on these three aspects. We chose two characteristic peaks of ( Our results indicate that pressure has negligible effect on the disorder in the optimally doped Tl2212 in the pressure range studied. Figure where V 0 is the volume per formula unit at ambient pressure, V is the volume at pressure P given in GPa, B 0 is the bulk modulus at ambient pressure, and B 0 is value of the first derivative of bulk modulus with respective to pressure. In contrast to Y124 and Y123 A least-square fit to the measured P -V data yields B 0 = 111.7 ± 5.0 GPa for Tl2212 with a fixed B 0 = 4.0, while V 0 = 438.8 ± 0.8 Å3 . A bulk modulus of 233 GPa was reported for Tl2212 from early energy dispersive XRD measurements Raman spectroscopy is another effective method for investigating the phase separation/transition and lattice distortions. The deviation of certain vibrational modes from the expected monotonic evolution with pressure or the sudden change of the peak width are often taken as evidence for the change of the disorder The analysis of both the high-pressure structural and Raman data has established that disorder is insensitive to pressure in Tl2212. There does not exist phase transition or phase separation in Tl2212 in the pressure range studied. Therefore, the concern of pressure-induced effect of disorder in the studied Tl2212 can be safely removed. The optimally doped Tl2212 offers an excellent opportunity for examining the intrinsic pressure effects on superconductivity. The consistent experimental data based on the same single crystal can provide a testing platform for any existing theoretical models. Next we present the results from a systematic high-pressure study on T c for Tl2212 by using the same crystal at the optimal doping as the structural study. For the T c measurements, a single crystal with dimensions of 120×100×20 μm 3 was loaded into a Mao-Bell cell which was made from hardened Be-Cu alloy. A nonmag- netic Ni-Cr alloy gasket was preindented to 35 μm thick with a hole of 250 μm in diameter to serve as the sample chamber. Daphne 7373 was loaded into the gasket hole as the pressure transmitting medium. We used a highly sensitive magnetic susceptibility technique to determine T c at high pressures, as detailed previously A photograph taken through the diamond windows of a single crystal at 3.1 GPa is shown in the inset of Fig. Figure The obtained parabolic-like T c vs P behavior for the optimally doped Tl2212 with 5 K enhancement of T c at a critical pressure about 7 GPa is generic for almost all optimally doped cuprates. This behavior can be explained by many two-component models including charge car-rier concentration and another intrinsic variable. For the generally used charge-transfer model, the maximum of T c is considered as the other intrinsic variable besides carrier concentration. This simple model worked very well for many cuprates with different dopants Recent experimental efforts shed new light on the nature of the pairing interactions In summary, the consistent information on the evolution of both the structure and superconducting transition temperature with pressure up to near 30 GPa has been obtained for the optimally doped Tl 2 Ba 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ by using a high-quality single crystal. The structural data collected from single-crystal x-ray diffraction measurements provides evidence for the robust feature for the disorder of this material under pressure. This allows the investigation of the pressure effects on superconductivity distinguishable from the disorder. Highly sensitive magnetic susceptibility measurements on the same crystal as used for structural study yielded a generic parabolic-like T c behavior upon compression with a maximum around 7 GPa. We demonstrated that this behavior can be explained by considering the carrier concentration and the pairing interaction strength as two pressure intrinsic variables. The optimally doped Tl 2 Ba 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ was found to still hold 89% of its ambient value of T c when reducing 15% of the unit-cell volume near 30 GPa in a nearly constant disorder environment. This advantage will be helpful for any realistic test for the T c variation of theoretical models in a clean environment.