Effects of disorder on electron-doped iron pnictides are investigated systematically based on self-consistent Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations. Multiply impurities with same scattering potential (SP) are randomly distributed in a square lattice. Probability distribution functions of normalized order parameters for different impurity concentrations δ imp , different electron doping concentrations δ are investigated for given SPs. Samples are found to be very robust against weak SP, in which order parameters do not have qualitative change even at very large δ imp . While strong SP is able to easily break down the order parameters. For moderate SP, variations of order parameters on and around impurities strongly depend on δ, however the distribution functions of normalized order parameters have similar behavior as δ imp increases. Compared with superconducting (SC) order, the magnetic order is more sensitive to multi-impurity effect. The spatial spin density wave pattern has already been destroyed before the system loses its superconductivity. Dependence of SC order on temperature is similar to that of impurity-free case, with the critical temperature being remarkably suppressed for high δ imp . The discovery of the new family of layered ironbased SC materials has attracted much attention since their discovery. Anderson's theorem tells us that the s-wave superconductivity is insensitive to small SP impurity. While in cuprates, impurity effect on the local density of states has been used as a prominent feature of d-wave superconductor. In TM doped cases, doping density is expected to be equal to impurity concentration. X-ray absorption experiment Impurity effects are sensitive to SC order symmetry. One commonly believed idea is that the SC order is formed via spin fluctuation, leading to s ± -wave By employing a phenomenological model based on Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations, we study systematically the multi-impurity effect in iron pnictides. The impurity Hamiltonian is described by an on-site point-like δ-function potential, with SP strength U imp ranging from weak to strong. Multiple impurities have interference effect that can smear out the effect of single impurity. Although order parameters may be suppressed or enhanced on and around impurities, average values of order parameters decrease as δ imp increases. And as a whole lattice they obey a statistical distribution function. We will study the probability distribution functions of normalized order parameters for different δ imp , different δ and different U imp . With increasing δ imp , the height of the peak of distribution functions falls down at the beginning and then goes up for more larger δ imp corresponding to the vanished order. For weak SP, average values of the order parameters do not have qualitative change from that of the impurityfree case even when δ imp is very large, suggesting that the system is very robust against weak multi-impurity. For moderate SP, SC order has finite values at δ imp = 0.2, however, the stripe-like magnetic structure is destroyed. Strong SP breaks down the order parameters, for U imp = 5.0, the SDW pattern immediately disappear at δ imp = 0.0125. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce the model. In Sec. 3, we investigate the small SP cases, and in Sec. 4 and Sec. 5 we discuss the moderate and strong SP cases respectively. Finally, we provide a summary and conclusion. We use a two-orbital four-band phenomenological model The total Hamiltonian is defined as H = H BCS +H int + H imp . Here H BCS is the BCS-like Hamiltonian, which includes the hopping term and the pairing term. The interaction Hamiltonian H int includes the on-site Coulomb interaction U and Hund's coupling J H at the mean-field level. They are described by In the above equations n iνσ is the electron density operator at site i, orbital ν, and spin σ, and μ is the chemical potential. t 1 represents the nearest-neighbor (nn) hopping between the same orbitals on Fe ions, t 2 (t 3 ) denotes the next-nearest-neighbor (nnn) hopping between the same orbitals mediated by the up (down) As ions, t 4 is the nnn hopping between different orbitals. See a schematic illustration in c jν↑ is chosen as the nnn intra-orbital pairing with ν ′ = ν and V sc = 1.5. This kind of pairing is consistent with the s ± -wave superconductivity Impurity Hamiltonian H imp is given by where m is the impurity site acting as a scattering center with U imp varying from weak to strong. Our numerical calculation is performed on a 40 × 40 square lattice with the periodic boundary conditions. For fixed δ imp , δ and U imp we self-consistently solve the BdG equation In the calculations, the positions of the multiple impurities are spatially random. In order to obtain reliable probability distribution functions, for a fixed concentration δ imp , we carry out several numerical calculations of different configurations. The probability distribution functions of SC order ρ ∆ and magnetic order ρ |m| are then statistically analyzed. ρ ∆ (ρ |m| ) is denoted as the probability of ∆ i /∆ 0 (|m i |/|m 0 |), and here we define ∆ 0 and |m 0 | as the order parameters in the corresponding impurity-free case. Summation of ρ ∆ and ρ |m| are required to be unity for renormalization condition. In order to convergence of our calculations we have verified that further sampling almost does not change ρ ∆ and ρ |m| . For weak SP, we choose typical doping concentrations to investigate the distribution of the order parameters. In the figures of distribution function, the horizontal axis denotes the value of the normalized order parameters Q i /Q 0 , and the vertical axis denotes the corresponding probability ρ Q , where Q stands for ∆ or |m|. Fig. Magnetic order is more sensitive to multi-impurity, the peak of distribution function ρ |m| is lower than that of corresponding ρ ∆ . As x coordinate of the square(circle) dots in Fig. Then we investigate moderate SP cases, and Fig. Distribution functions for δ = 0.08 have similar properties as that of δ = 0.04. Fig. Results of overdoped δ = 0.16, moderate U imp = 2.0 are shown in Fig. Fig. Although order parameters may be enhanced at some sites, the average value Qi is less than the corresponding Q 0 for all cases. Fig. Strong SP multi-impurity suppress the order parameters more easily, the relevant properties are depicted in Fig. Motivated by experiments of TM doped iron-based superconductors and the different superfluid densities between bulk and film samples, we investigate multiimpurity effect systematically based on a phenomenological model. s ± -wave superconductivity has its distinct properties when impurities are introduced. We use a number of configurations with random impurities to study the probability distributions of the order parameters. For weak SP, averaged order parameters do not have qualitative change even at very high impurity concentration δ imp . They resemble the properties of the clean sample, just like by setting the Coulomb interaction U slightly larger and the system is still in a stable SC phase. For moderate SP, small δ imp but larger δ, the distribution functions of ρ ∆ have a sharp peak together with a small hump, since the vicinity of impurities consists a considerably main part with enhanced ∆ i . As δ imp increases, the hump disappears due to the interference between many impurities. The multi-impurity effect on order parameters is remarkably different for low and high doping levels; however, the averaged order parameters are suppressed with the increasing δ imp in all cases. The probability distribution functions have similar behavior as δ imp increases for moderate and strong SPs. The distribution peaks move towards zero for the larger δ imp , meanwhile the peak near unity is suppressed and then replaced by the increased peak corresponding to a vanished order. s ± -wave superconductor is robust again moderate SP multi-impurity effect, since ∆i is finite for all doping levels at large δ imp = 0.2 and no site has ∆ i = 0. While magnetic order is more sensitive to multi-impurities. At δ = 0.1, although average |m i | is finite, the stripe-like SDW pattern has already been destroyed. The T c values of the samples are robust against small δ imp , and are increasingly suppressed for the higher impurity concentration. Finally, we find that the strong SP is able to easily break down the order parameters. All the above features from our calculations provide some deep understanding of the difference between clean and dirty samples of iron-based superconductors.