We perform a microscopic theoretical study of the generic properties of competing magnetic phases in iron pnictides. As a function of electron filling and temperature, the magnetic stripe (single-Q) order forms a dome, but competing non-collinear and non-uniform double-Q phases exist at the foot of the dome in agreement with recent experiments. We compute and compare the electronic properties of the different magnetic phases, investigate the role of competing superconductivity, and show how disorder may stabilize double-Q order. Superconductivity is shown to compete more strongly with double-Q magnetic phases, which can lead to re-entrance of the C2 (single-Q) order in agreement with recent thermal expansion measurements on K-doped Ba-122 crystals. In correlated materials in general, and unconventional superconductors in particular, a microscopic understanding of the magnetism is of paramount importance. Generally, this is because a proper description of the relevant exchange mechanism in these materials is intimately tied to their basic electronic properties. More specifically, it is additionally shown within a wide class of models that the nature of the magnetic fluctuations may be closely linked to the emergence of the superconducting condensate. The starting Hamiltonian consists of a five-orbital tight-binding band relevant to the pnictides where c † iμσ creates an electron at site i with spin σ in orbital state μ. φ μν ijσ and ω μν iiσ are functions of the interaction parameters U , J (J = U/4), and the fields ĉ † iμσ ĉjνσ (see Supplementary Information (SI)). We diagonalize Eq.(1) unrestricted on N x × N y lattices, and self-consistently calculate the spin σσ ĉiμσ , and charge density n(r i ) = μ ĉ † iμ↑ ĉiμ↑ + ĉ † iμ↓ ĉiμ↓ , where l = x, z, and extract the ordering components M l and n l of M(r) = l M l exp(iQ l • r) and n(r) = l n l exp(iQ l • r). We have compared the free energy of the magnetic states F = H M F -T S to verify the stability of the results. Figure In the remainder of this paper we focus on the U = 0.95 eV case, and use the x = -0.09 and x = 0.02 electron and The 1Q-2Q transition taking place at x = 0.02 is shown in Fig. and thus increases gradually (see SI for more information). In the range T 1 < T < T 0 , where M 2 is increasing, the system is still C 2 symmetric (0 < M 2 < M 1 ) but has developed characteristics of the SCO state, such as the (π, π) charge order [see Fig. Next we compare the electronic properties of the magnetic phases, MS, OM, and SCO, by focussing on the three different fillings indicated by the black stars in Fig. the filling is increased further, large nested areas of α 1 and γ with the electron pockets appear at the FS as seen from Fig Motivated by the recent experimental discovery of the effects of superconductivity on the magnetic states, A recent Landau order parameter expansion has also been used to study this problem close to T N . We end with a brief study of disorder effects on the three magnetic states (without SC) by including the term H imp = μσ V ĉ † i * μσ ĉi * μσ in Eq. ( In summary, we have presented a detailed microscopic study of competing magnetic phases in iron pnictides. We have mapped out the phase diagram both in the absence and presence of SC, and found qualitative agreement with recent experimental findings. We acknowledge useful discussions with A. V. Chubukov, I. Eremin, R. M. Fernandes, J. Lorenzana, and financial support from a Lundbeckfond fellowship (grant A9318). Supplemental Materials: "Competing magnetic double-Q phases and superconductivity-induced re-entrance of C 2 magnetic stripe order in iron pnictides" Here, we provide the details of the tight-binding band and the mean-field decoupled Hamiltonian both in real and momentum space. We show the orbitally resolved order parameters in the single-Q and double-Q phases. In addition, we show the dependence of the band and the Fermi surface reconstruction on the interacting parameters. Finally, we provide the details of the RPA-generated couplings used to generate the superconducting order. The starting Hamiltonian consists of a five-orbital tight-binding band relevant to the pnictides The operators c † iμσ (c iμσ ) create (annihilate) an electron at site i in orbital state μ with spin σ, and μ 0 is the chemical potential which adjusts the filling. The indices μ and ν denote the five iron orbitals d xz , d yz , d xy , d x 2 -y 2 , and d z 2 . The five orbital tight-binding band and Fermi surface for filling x = -0.09 S1 is shown in Fig. The interacting part of the Hamiltonian is described by the multi-orbital onsite Hubbard model with U = U -2J, J = J, and J = U/4. We mean-field decouple Eq. ( where Eq. ( for all sites i, j and orbital combinations μ, ν. Here E n denote the eigenvalues, and f is the Fermi function. From these fields we obtain the spin and charge configurations of the final solution in real space In order to readily study the electronic properties we also solve the above model in momentum space with the mean-fields ĉ † μσ (k)ĉ νσ (k + q l ) , where q 2 , q 3 }. The mean-field Hamiltonian in momentum space takes the following form where and the summation k is done in the reduced Brillouin zone -π/2 < k x , k y < π/2. The entries below the main diagonal were not included for clarity but are obtained by the transpose conjugate of where the abbreviation f n ≡ f (E n (k)) has been used. II. ORBITALLY RESOLVED ORDER PARAMETERS: M μ l AND n μ l The Figs. The band reconstruction taking place in the ordered state obviously depends on the amplitude of the magnetic OPs M 1 and M 2 , which in turn depend on the interacting strength U . This is illustrated in Fig. The multi-orbital pairing vertex in the singlet channel S2 is calculated from the RPA spin-χ RP A s and chargesusceptibilities where U s and U c are 5 × 5 matrices identical to those of Ref. S2. The real-space pairings are then obtained by Fourier transforming equation (S22), Γ βν μα (r ij ) = q Γ βν μα (q) exp(iq • (r i -r j )). We retain all orbital combinations up to next-nearest neighbor sites to calculate the superconducting order parameter ∆ μν ij = αβ Γ βν μα (r ij ) ĉjβ↓ ĉiα↑ . Μ