Rare-earth-barium-copper-oxide (REBCO) tapes are now available from several industrial manufacturers and are very promising conductors in high field applications. Due to diverging materials and deposition processes, these manufacturers' tapes can be expected to differ in their electro-mechanical and mechanical properties. For magnets designers, these are together with the conductors' in-field critical current performance of the highest importance in choosing a suitable conductor. In this work, the strain and stress dependence of the current carrying capabilities as well as the stress and strain correlation are investigated for commercial coated conductors from Bruker HTS, Fujikura, SuNAM, SuperOx and SuperPower at 77 K, self-field and 4.2 K, 19 T. Due to their high current density and zero direct current resistivity, superconductors are the enabling component of powerful and efficient magnets for accelerators, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and fusion reactors. As the superconductors' current carrying capabilities are not only influenced by the magnetic field and the operating temperature but also by the mechanical strain Studies of the electrical transport properties under longitudinal mechanical loads are routinely performed on Nb 3 Sn wires In this work, we will compare the influence of mechanical strains and stresses on the current carrying capabilities of REBCO coated conductor tapes from five major industrial manufacturers. Experiments have been carried out using the Walters spring (WASP) probe developed at the University of Geneva Rare-earth-barium-copper oxide tapes are layered conductors. By chemical or physical means, layers of metal oxides (buffer layers), a superconducting REBCO layer and stabilizing silver and copper layer are deposited with a two dimensional texture upon a substrate of structural material (usually Hastelloy R , stainless steel or nickel alloys). Due to this type of manufacturing, REBCO tapes are often referred to as coated conductors. Their layout is shown schematically in figure The sample has to be soldered to the spring in order to transfer the mechanical strain. With low temperature superconductors, this is commonly done with Sn 50 Pb 32 Cd 18 solder (melting point of 145 • C) using a soldering iron at 350 -400 • C and heaters (100 -120 • C set-point) attached to the spring. With this setup, the heat transferred from the soldering iron through the sample is sufficient to locally heat the spring above the solder's melting point in order to bond the sample Challenges with REBCO tapes: REBCO coated conductors however exhibit very low transverse thermal conductivity Solution for REBCO tapes: As it is necessary for the soldering of the sample to heat the spring above the melting point of the solder, significant heat input is required. In order to prevent the sample's current carrying capabilities from becoming inhomogeneous during mounting, the temperature and exposure times have to be constant along the length of the coated conductor sample. This is achieved with a two step approach: in the first step, the spring and the REBCO tape sample are coated with Sn 50 Pb 32 Cd 18 solder (melting point of 145 • C, containing a colophony base flux core). The Walters spring is nickel coated and can be easily coated with solder by using stainless steel flux. By attaching the REBCO tape vertically to a surface with low thermal conductivity and using a soldering iron at 180 • C, the soldering is quick and without any critical current degradation. The REBCO sample is then wound around the spring, coated side inwards. Two pieces of adhesive tape keep the sample in place. In the second step, the sample and the spring are put into a vacuum furnace and heated to 220 • C for 1.5 h. The heat treatment in the vacuum furnace reduces the sample's critical current. The reduction however is homogeneous along the length of the sample. The reduction depends on the length of the heat treatment, normalized critical currents are therefore used in all following investigations. An impact of the heat treatment on the sample's electro-mechanical properties is investigated in subsection 3.5. As the samples are soldered to the spring, they follow the spring's thermal expansion upon cooldown. The thermal expansion mismatch between the spring (in our case titanium-aluminumvanadium Ti-6Al-4V) and the sample, induces pre-strain which has to be determined and subtracted. With an LTS sample this is done in a two step procedure. In a first step the sample is soldered at the spring's ends while the rest of the sample remains "free" it follows its own thermal expansion during cool-down and is without pre-strain Challenges with REBCO tapes: For REBCO coated conductors on the other hand, the strain effect is significantly lower compared with low temperature superconductors. Within the reversible region, mechanical strains reduce the current carrying capabilities solely by a few percent, preventing precise determination of the zero strain with the above mentioned procedure. Electro-mechanical Walters spring measurements with REBCO tapes require therefore a different mean to obtain their point of zero strain. Solution for REBCO tapes: The use of two strain gauges, one glued onto the sample and one glued to a free piece of REBCO tape located close to the spring, enables direct measurement of the strain induced into the sample during cool-down Four pair of voltage taps are used to determine the samples' critical current. One pair of voltage taps over the first turn (A: 122 mm measurement length) , one pair over the second and third turns (B: 244 mm measurement length) and one pair over the fourth turn (C: 122 mm measurement length). The final pair of voltage taps is over the whole spring (D: 484 mm measurement length). During the measurement, the current is increased in small steps while four Nano-volt meters simultaneously read the voltage over the different turns of the sample. This arrangement allows low noise measurements for precise determination of the critical currents and the critical current index values (n-values). An exemplary electric field vs. current curve, demonstrating the precision of the system, is shown in figure If the superconducting layer is not located in the sample's center, strain is induced while bending around the spring. The bending strain bending depends on the displacement of the superconducting layer from the tape's neutral axis and is determined by comparing the circumference of the neutral axis and the circumference of the REBCO layer. In all investigated samples, the superconducting layer is located closer to the center of the spring compared with the sample's neutral axis, the superconducting layer is therefore compressed upon bending around the spring. The sample's strain is obtained by subtracting the zero strain value zero and the bending strain bending from the applied strain. In order to determine the samples' irreversibility limits (irreversible strain irr and irreversible stress σ irr ), after each critical current measurement I c ( n ) at certain strain n , the strain is reduced to the previous strain step n-1 and the critical current is measured again I back c ( n-1 ). Within the reversible strain region of the sample, the critical current recovers yielding the same value as on the first measurement at this strain I back c ( n-1 ) = I c ( n-1 ). However, if the sample is damaged, this procedure is not reversible and the critical current of the "backstep" is lower than the value found at the first measurement I back c ( n-1 ) < I c ( n-1 ). With this method, the irreversible strain irr of the sample is therefore defined as the strain interval between the highest strain step after which at least one of the backsteps recovered and first strain step with no recovering backsteps. This interval is converted into a stress interval using the stress and strain correlation of the corresponding sample (subsection 4.2) yielding the irreversible stress limit σ irr . All following experiments utilize this method to determine the samples' irreversibility limits. In order to translate the strain behavior of the coated conductors to stress, their stress -strain correlation is measured at the same temperatures of the electro-mechanical tests using a free standing mechanical measurement system. One side of the sample is fixed while the other is attached to a pulling rod. Nyilas type extensometers In this work, REBCO coated conductors from the major industrial manufacturers Bruker HST, Fujikura, SuNAM, SuperOx and SuperPower are characterized. An overview of the investigated samples including their strain corrections, zero strains zero and bending strains bending is given in table Tab. 1: Overview of the investigated REBCO tapes and their strain corrections: bending strain bending and zero strain zero . Tape width and thickness are obtained from micro-graphs. Engineering current densities are from the samples as received (without heat treatment). Values marked with * are extrapolated using scaling relations. As the samples are heated in a vacuum furnace to 220 • C during mounting, their superconducting layers are partially depleted of oxygen with the level of depletion depending on the duration of the heat treatment. In order to investigate the influence of the oxygen depletion on the electromechanical properties, two samples of the same REBCO tapes are mounted using two different heat treatment times (long heat treatment of 1.5 h and short heat treatment of 0.5 h) . Their electro-mechanical properties are measured in a liquid nitrogen bath at 77 K, self-field. The strain dependence of their normalized critical current as well as their irreversible strain irr limits are shown in graph (a) of figure 0 . 6 6 < i r r < 0 . 6 9 % Fig. With the above mentioned setup and measurement procedure, all REBCO tape samples (SuperPower, Bruker HTS, SuNAM, Fujikura and SuperOx) are electro-mechanically characterized at 77 K, self-field and 4.2 K, 19 T. The magnetic field is oriented parallel to the tape surface. All samples have been subjected to the same heat treatment during mounting (1.5 h at 220 • C). Their strain behavior (subsection 4.1) is combined with stress-strain measurements at the same temperatures (subsection 4.2) in order to gain the samples' stress behavior (subsection 4.3). To ease the comparison of the results for the various manufacturers and due to the critical current degradation during their heat treatments, the current carrying capabilities of all coated conductor samples are normalized to their maximal critical current. The 77 K, self-field strain dependence of the samples is shown in figure Similar behavior of the coated conductor samples is observed at 4.2 K, 19 T as shown in figure As described in subsection 3.3, the samples' correlation of applied strain and mechanical stress is measured at 77 K and 4.2 K. The 77 K data is shown in graph (a) of figure The Fujikura samples fully de-laminate during the stress -strain measurements as shown in figure length, the samples are split between the buffer layer stack and the superconducting layer indicating again a weakness of the interface between these layers in the coated conductors from Fujikura. No de-lamination is observed the other manufacturers' tapes during the stress -strain measurements. In the stress -stain measurements, all samples are as received without heat treatment, therefore any influence of the mounting can be excluded. The strain dependence of the tapes' normalized current carrying capabilities shows strong differences between the manufacturers. The irreversible strain limits range from 0.45 % for SuperOx tapes to 0.72 % for Bruker HTS tapes. Due to similar conductor layouts, the strain dependencies of tapes from SuperPower and SuNAM are close, with irreversible strain limits of 0.66 -0.69 %. Fujikura and SuperOx tapes de-laminate during the electro-mechanical measurements, resulting in a step like transition to irreversibility and in lower irreversible strain limits. Neither de-lamination nor such a step like transition is observed for any other manufacturer. All samples were heated to temperatures 10 % above the manufacturers' recommendations during mounting, an impact of this heat treatment cannot be excluded. Comparing 77 K, self-field and 4.2 K, 19 T, the irreversible strain limits of all samples are identical while the strain effect (the reversible reduction of the critical current) is significantly lower at low temperature and high field. Remaining below 0.4 % strain, there are no discernible differences in the samples' strain dependencies within the measurement accuracy. These results are in good agreement with free-standing critical current versus strain measurements which yield irreversible stress-limits irr of different commercial conductors in the 0.4 -0.8 % range In a second step, the samples' mechanical properties are investigated at 77 K and at 4.2 K. From the comparison of the results at these two temperatures, we found for all the tapes that the Young's modulus does not vary but the yield strengths is ca. 10 % higher at the lower temperature. Young's moduli are in the 149 -186 GPa range, highest for Bruker HTS and lowest for SuperPower. All samples' curves are nonlinear even at low strains due to the significant fraction of copper which is always in yielding solely from the cool-down to cryogenic temperatures 