Polymorphism in materials often leads to significantly different physical properties -the rutile and anatase polymorphs of TiO 2 are a prime example. when the geometry of a repeating structural layer is maintained but the layer stacking sequence of the overall crystal structure can be varied; SiC is an example of a material with many polytypes. Although polymorphs can have radically different physical properties, it is much rarer for polytypism to impact physical properties in a dramatic fashion. Here we study the effects of polytypism and polymorphism on the superconductivity of TaSe 2 , one of the archetypal members of the large family of layered dichalcogenides. We show that it is possible to access 2 stable polytypes and 2 stable polymorphs in the TaSe 2- x Te x solid solution, and find that the 3R polytype shows a superconducting transition temperature that is nearly 17 times higher than that of the much more commonly found 2H polytype. The reason for this dramatic change is not apparent, but we propose that it arises either from a remarkable dependence of T c on subtle differences in the characteristics of the single layers present, or from a surprising effect of the layer stacking sequence on electronic properties that instead are expected to be dominated by the properties of a single layer in materials of this kind. The MX 2 Layered transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs, M = Mo, W, V, Nb, Ta, Ti, Zr, Hf, and Re, and X = Se, S or Te), have long been of interest due to the rich electronic properties that emerge due to their low dimensionality Structurally, these compounds can be regarded as having strongly bonded (2D) X-M-X layers, with M in either trigonal prismatic or octahedral coordination with X, and weak inter-layer X-X bonding of the van der Waals type. Many of these materials manifest charge density waves and the competition between CDWs and superconductivity, e.g. For pure TaTe 2 , the monoclinic structure is 1T-based (Figure We report the structures and superconducting properties of TaSe 2-x Te x for 0 ≤ x ≤ 2. The 2H (H: hexagonal), 3R (R: rhombohedral), 1T (T: trigonal) and monoclinic distorted 1T-structure forms were successfully synthesized. Only a small amount of Te doping (x = 0.02) changes 2H-TaSe 2 into the 3R-polytype. Within the 3R polytype, TaSe 2-x Te x shows the coexistence of a CDW and superconductivity above 0.4 K for 0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.35. For x = 0.35, 3R-TaSe 1.65 Te 0.35 shows the highest T c in the system, 2.4 K, which is 17 times higher than that of 2H-TaSe 2. For 0.8 ≤ x ≤ 1.3, 1T-type TaSe 2- x Te x emerges and shows a T c of 0.5 -0.7 K. At higher Te substitutions (1.8 ≤ x ≤ 2), TaSe 2-x Te x changes again, into the monoclinic polymorph, and shows normal metallic behavior to 0.4 K. We argue that the isovalent Te/Se substitution acts to tune the anisotropy of the layers, inducing the 3R to 1T transition, consistent with what has been proposed previously The polycrystalline samples of TaSe 2-x Te x were prepared as described in the experimental section. In the composition range of 0.02 ≤ x ≤ 0.35, the samples have the non-centrosymmetric rhombohedral 3R structure (R3m, space group #160), evidenced by their powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns. The 3R-stucture of the materials in this composition range is also confirmed by single crystal X-ray diffraction and electron diffraction. The detailed crystallographic data determined from the quantitative structure refinements of a single crystal of the 3R phase are summarized in Tables To compare the structural stability regimes of the different forms of TaSe 2- x Te x , it is most instructive to divide the c axis lattice parameter by the number of layers in the stacking repeat, n, and then compare the reduced c/a ratios (c/n)/a to define the structural characteristics of single MX 2 layers. Figure To determine whether CDWs are present in the 3R and 1T forms of TaSe 2-x Te x , the materials were studied at low temperatures by electron diffraction and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The temperature dependent electron diffraction patterns obtained from single-crystal domains (Figures Thus, in analogy to the 2H form of TaSe 2 , 3R-TaSe 1.9 Te 0.1 first has an ICDW and then locks in to a CCDW phase on further cooling. The q vectors of the CCDW phase, q 1 = q 2 = 0.33, indicate a tripling of the in-plane unit cell along both a 1 and a 2 by the CDW. STM measurements on 3R-TaSe 1.9 Te 0.1 and on 3R-TaSe 1.7 Te 0.3 provide additional characterization of the CCDW phase. Topographic images on the atomic scale (Fig. The situation is somewhat different for the 1T polymorph (Figures In this case, weak, diffuse superlattice spots whose intensities and positions are relatively independent of temperature between 10 and 330 K are observed in the electron diffraction experiments. Here the in-plane q vector is further from the commensurate value, near q = 0.30, but the weakness and diffuseness of the spots makes them invisible in a single crystal diffraction experiment and so we have no information about their c axis component. These spots likely represent an ICDW phase that is ordered over short spatial distances and stable over the whole temperature range studied. Alternatively they may have a chemical origin, such as might occur due to short range Se/Te ordering. Further work will be required to determine which is the case. We next consider the electronic properties of the phases. The main panel of Figure The main panel of Figure x Te x (0.8 ≤ x ≤ 1.3). In this case, the residual-resistivity-ratio is very small, RRR =  300K / n < 1.3, which we take as a reflection of the substantial Se-Te disorder present. No signature of a CDW lock-in transition is seen in (T), consistent with the electron diffraction data. At low temperatures, a clear, sharp (∆T c < 0.1 K) drop of (T) is observed, signifying the onset of superconductivity (inset of Figure Further information on the electronic properties and superconductivity in the 3R and 1T variants of TaSe 2-x Te x was obtained from specific heat measurements. The main panels of Figure By fitting the data in the temperature range of 2 -10 K, we obtain the electronic specific heat coefficients γ = 7.25 mJmol -1 K -2 for 3R TaSe 1.65 Te 0.35 and γ = 2.91 mJmol -1 K -2 for 1T-TaSe 1.2 Te 0.8 , and the phonon specific heat coefficients β = 0.93 mJmol -1 K -4 for 3R-TaSe 1.65 Te 0.35 and β = 1.82 mJmol -1 K -4 for 1T-TaSe 1.2 Te 0.8 . Using these values of β, we estimate the Debye temperatures by the relation θ D = (12π 4 nR/5β) 1/3 , where n is the number of atoms per formula unit (n = 3), and R is the gas constant; the θ D values are found to be 184 K for 3R-TaSe 1.65 Te 0.35 and 147 K for 1T-TaSe 1.2 Te 0.8 . As shown in the insets for Figures . This yields N(E F ) = 1.88 states/eV f.u. for optimal 3R-TaSe 1.65 Te 0.35 and N(E F ) = 0.82 states/eV f.u. for 1T-TaSe 1.2 Te 0.8 . These compare to λ ep = 0.4 and N(E F ) = 1.55 for the 2H-TaSe 2 Finally, the overall behavior of the TaTe x Se 2-x system is summarized in the structural and electronic phase diagram shown in Figure We conclude that 3R-TaSe 2-x Te x can be considered as a good candidate for characterizing the balance between CDW formation and superconductivity in the 3R polytype of the layered TMDCs. With further Te doping, the 3R-polytype becomes unstable as its (c/n)/a ratio approaches the structural stability limit expected for TMSCs, and the 1T polymorph, with octahedral rather than trigonal prismatic coordination for the Ta, emerges at x = 0.8. The 1T polytype structure exists from x = 0.8 to 1.3. 1T-TaSe 2-x Te x-x displays superconducting transitions below 1 K and the T c does not change significanly with x. 1T-TaSe 2-x Te x appears to display a weak, short range ordered incommensurate CDW at temperatures as high as 330 K, but further work will be necessary to support that conclusion. The monoclinic polymorph exists over a limited composition range in TaSe 2-x Te x , from x = 1.8 to 2.0; it is metallic but not superconducting above 0.4 K. In conclusion we have shown that the TaSe 2-x Te x system, based on the isoelectronic substitution of Te for Se in TaSe 2 , is an excellent venue for investigating the influence of polytypism and polymorphism on superconductivity in the layered transition metal dichalcogenides. It may be that the major impact of the change in polytype from 2H to 3R in this system, which increases Tc by a factor of 17, is in the the final analysis actually still a 2D effect. The 3R polytype is stable for larger (c/n)/a ratios for a single layer than it is possible to obtain in the 2H polytype: (c/n)/a for the 2H polytype is 1.84 whereas for the maximum Tc of the 3R polytype it is 1.89. If this is the primary reason for the difference in Tc, then it indicates a remarkable sensitivity of Tc to the aspect ratio of the TaX 6 triangular prisms that make up the single layers. Alternatively, the superconducting transition temperature may depend on differences in the electronic structure that arise as a result of the differences between a two layer stacking repeat and a three layer stacking repeat, in other words how the nominally 2D Fermi surface is modulated along c, the perpendicular direction, by the stacking. Further investigation will be required to resolve which of these is the case, or whether a different strong influence on Tc is present. The Tc of the 1T polymorph is intermediate between that of the 2H and the 3R, with a Tc a factor of 5 larger than that in the 2H variant at approximately the same (c/n)/a, but as the TaX 6 coordination scheme is octahedral rather than trigonal prismatic in this polymorph, different aspects of its electronic structure may determine its superconducting transition temperature. Further study of this system may prove to be of significant interest. Polycrystalline samples of TaSe 2-x Te x (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) were synthesized in two steps by solid state reaction. First, mixtures of high-purity fine powders of Ta (99.8%), Te (99.999%) and Se (99.999%) in the appropriate stoichiometric ratios were thoroughly ground, pelletized and heated in sealed evacuated silica tubes at a rate of 1 o C/min to 700 o C and held there for 48 h. Subsequently, the as-prepared powders were reground, re-pelletized and sintered again, heated at a rate of 3 o C/min to 1000 o C and held there for 48 h. Single crystals were grown by chemical vapor transport (CVT) method with iodine as a transport agent. 1 gram as-prepared powders TaSe 2-x Te x mixed with 50 mg iodine were sealed in sealed evacuated silica tubes and heated for one weeks in a two zone furnace, where the temperature of spurce and growth zones were fixed at 1050 o C and 1000 o C, respectively. The identity and phase purity of the samples was determined by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD, Rigaku, Cu Kα radiation, graphite diffracted beam monochromator). Unit cell parameters were refined from the powder diffraction data through use of the FULLPROF diffraction suite Magnetization measurements as a function of temperature and applied field were carried out in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement (MPMS). Selected resistivities for TaSe 2-x Te x (0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.25, 0.7 ≤ x ≤ 1.3 and 1.8, 1.9, 2), and heat capacities for TaSe 1.65 Te 0.35 and TaSe 1.2 Te 0.8 were measured in the PPMS equipped with a 3 He cryostat. Single crystals from the samples were mounted on the tips of glass fibers. Room temperature intensity data were collected on a Bruker Apex II diffractometer with Mo radiation Ka 1 (=0.71073 Å). Data were collected over a full sphere of reciprocal space with 0.5° scans in ω with an exposure time of 10s per frame. The 2θ range extended from 4° to 60°. The SMART software was used for data acquisition. Intensities were extracted and corrected for Lorentz and polarization effects with the SAINT program. Empirical absorption corrections were accomplished with SADABS which is based on modeling a transmission surface by spherical harmonics employing equivalent reflections with I > 2σ(I) Prior to the STM measurements, the samples were cleaved and transported to the microscope in ultra-high vacuum. The experiments were performed on TaSe 1.9 Te 0.1 at 48 K and on TaSe 1.7 Te 0.3 at 27 K with a home-built variable temperature STM. Temperature-dependent electron diffraction measurements were performed on a JEOL 2100F microscope at Brookhaven National Laboratory equipped with a liquid-helium cooling sample holder. The Fourier transform of 440 Å x 440 Å large topographic image reveals wave vectors corresponding to the atomic modulation (black circles) and q vectors of the commensurate charge density wave phase (q 1 = q 2 = 0.33 -red circles). Higher harmonics of q 1 and q 2 are marked by gray circles. Similar topographic images (d-e) of the surface of TaSe 1.7 Te 0.3 at V Bias = 300 mV, I =200 pA and T = 27K, and (f) Fourier transform of a 490 Å x 490 Å large area. The CDW is clearly observed in spite of the disorder induced by the higher Te substitution. 