In light of the new experimental and theoretical important developments in high-Tc superconductivity, we revisit the fermionic hot-spot model relevant to the phenomenology of the cuprates. We extend previous results by means of a complete two-loop order renormalization group (RG) framework. Here, we explicitly study the effect of the charge-density-wave (CDW) order parameter with a d-wave form factor with the experimentally observed modulation (±Q0, 0) and (0, ±Q0) at the infrared-stable nontrivial fixed point obtained previously for this model. Additionally, we proceed to investigate also the so-called pair-density-wave (PDW) order that was recently proposed in the literature as a possible candidate for the "hidden" order to describe the pseudogap phase observed in underdoped cuprates. We confirm that although the above two ordering tendencies are also found to be nearly degenerate both at one-loop and two-loop RG orders and linked by an emergent SU (2) pseudospin symmetry, they turn out to be subleading for weaker couplings in the present model to antiferromagnetism, d-wave bond-density wave (BDW) order with modulation along Brillouin zone diagonals (±Q0, ±Q0), and d-wave singlet superconductivity (SSC). However, as we increase the strength of the initial coupling towards moderate values, we do capture a tendency for the entangled PDW/CDW order to become leading compared to BDW/SSC in the model, which suggests that the former composite order might be indeed a viable concept to describe some cuprate superconductors at high temperatures in the underdoped regime, as has been recently alluded to by many authors in the literature. The underlying nature of the pseudogap phase observed in the underdoped cuprates continues to be one of the most enigmatic and profound problems in condensed matter theory. Despite this statement, a lot has been learned about this phase both theoretically and experimentally in the last years. On the experimental side, groundbreaking measurements performed on the non-Lanthanum-based materials have increased dramatically our present knowledge about these compounds. Nuclear magnetic resonance experiments 1,2 , resonant 3,4 and hard Since the "tips" of the Fermi arcs in the pseudogap phase are close to the so-called hot spots (i.e., the points in momentum space in which the antiferromagnetic zone boundary intersects a putative underlying Fermi surface of these compounds), this could mean that a possible low-energy effective model to describe these materials might be a spin-fermion model, or more generally, a hotspot model For this reason, many researchers continue trying to uncover what might be the "hidden" order that is fundamentally responsible for the emergence of the pseudogap phase seen in the cuprates. Several good candidates on the table (which are not mutually exclusive) in-clude pair-density-wave (PDW) order The PDW order refers essentially to a superconducting order with a finite Cooper-pair center of mass momentum, similar in this respect to a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state In light of the many recent experimental and theoretical developments described above, we build upon a work by two of us by revisiting here the so-called fermionic hot spot model defined in Ref. FIG. To begin with, we consider a single-band fermionic model whose noninteracting part is given by the following energy dispersion ξ k = -2t(cos(k x ) + cos(k y )) -4t ′ cos(k x ) cos(k y ) -μ, which is given in terms of units of the lattice constant, the parameters t and t ′ are, respectively, the nearest neighbor and next-nearest neighbor hoppings and μ is the chemical potential. For the specific case of the cuprates, one may assume for simplicity the choice of parameter t ′ = -0.3t, which, at low hole doping, results in the Fermi surface (FS) displayed in Fig. Since we will focus on the universal properties of this model, we may linearize the energy dispersion around the hot spots as ξ k ≈ v F .k with k being the momentum measured relative to the hot spots, the Fermi velocity v F =(v x ,v y ) with the modulus of the components given by v x = |∇ (kx,ky) ξ k | k=kF | cos θ and v y = |∇ (kx,ky) ξ k | k=kF | sin θ, with θ being the angle depicted in Fig. The fermionic hot spot model at zero temperature is described by the partition function ) with the interacting renormalized Lagrangian L R given by where k 4 = k 1 + k 2k 3 and the volume V has been set equal to unity. All bare quantities (indicated by the superscript B) are related to the renormalized quantities (indicated by the superscript R) by the following standard expressions: , where Z ψ is the field renormalization factor and Z x v and Z y v are the Fermi velocity renormalization factors. The renormalized Grassmann fields ψ R σ (k) and ψ R σ (k) are associated, respectively, to the creation and annihilation operators of the low-energy excitations residing in the vicinity of the hot spots with momentum k and spin projection σ. The index i refers to the many possible interaction processes in the model that generate singularities within perturbation theory. Here we follow roughly the notation of Ref. F is the density of states at the Fermi level. In all above expressions, we set conventionally , where δZ ψ , δZ x v , δZ y v and δḡ R i are the counterterms that will be calculated order by order within the renormalized perturbation theory Since the number of couplings in the present model is large, the possibilities for choosing their initial conditions are also considerable. Therefore, our choice here will be motivated by relevant physical microscopic models. We shall restrict our analysis in the present paper to the paradigmatic 2D Hubbard model, whose initial conditions for the couplings are given by g ) for all i, where U > 0 is the local on-site repulsive interaction strength. In this section, we describe the two-loop RG approach that we shall apply in the rest of this work. Our discussion here will be relatively concise, since the fieldtheoretical RG methodology was already explained by two of us in great detail in the context of the present model elsewhere To exemplify the field-theoretical RG method, if we calculate the self-energy of the present model (e.g., for k x > 0 and k y > 0) at two-loop order within the renormalized perturbation theory, we obtain the following nonanalytic contribution where For simplicity, we shall omit the superscript R in the above renormalized dimensionless couplings of the model from here on. As a result, we obtain the following RG flow equation up to two loops associated with the renormalized Fermi velocity where = tan θ R is the ratio between the components of the Fermi velocity at the hot spots and γ vy ({g R i }) = γ vy + γ ψ . From Eq. (3), one obtains that the only infrared (IR) stable fixed point corresponds to κ * R → 0 (or θ * R → 0), which refers to a perfect nesting condition of the hot spots connected by the antiferromagnetic (AF) ordering wavevector Q = (π, π). Although this only happens, strictly speaking, in the limit of Λ → 0, one can check numerically that for moderate couplings and not too low RG scales, κ is already reasonably suppressed and the resulting renormalized FS exhibits an approximately nesting condition connected by (π, π) (see, e.g., Fig. It is important to discuss at this point on the contribution of both particle-particle and particle-hole bubbles for some choices of wavevector q (to check our present definitions, see Fig. with Λ being the RG scale which could be interpreted (to logarithmic accuracy) in terms of an effective temperature scale. Besides, the prefactors λ and λ ′ are given by λ = 1/(cos θ R + sin θ R ) and λ ′ = 1/(cos θ Rsin θ R ) for the present hot spot model. We mention here that even though the bubbles Π P H (q = Q x ) and Π P P (q = Q x ) have initially different prefactors and different low-energy cutoffs compared to Π P H (q = Q ′ x ) and Π P P (q = Q ′ x ), those prefactors and cutoffs become identical for the renormalized Fermi surface (i.e., θ * R → 0). In this way, we will refer only to one type of particleparticle and particle-hole bubbles [i.e., Π P H (q = Q x ) and Π P P (q = Q x )] in what follows. All the above polarization functions agree precisely with those derived in Ref. We first begin by reviewing previous results 0.07, 0.23, 0.39, -0.04, -0.02, 0.13, 0.19, 0.19, 0.11, 0.12, 0.25), (11) and It is interesting to note that in the resulting effective theory there are indeed only four coupling constants that do not diverge (g 1s , g 1r , g 1b , and g 2f ) as the RG scale Λ is lowered towards Λ c . In this way, they become comparatively much smaller than the other couplings at low energies. For this reason, one can go back to the original model [Eq. ( Next, we move on to the two-loop RG case. An important point we wish to stress here is that it is crucial to implement the RG method for the present model at least at two loops or beyond, since as we have shown previously the first nonanalytic contribution to the self-energy (and, consequently, the renormalized single-particle Green's function and related quantities ) ≈ (0, 1.68, 1.84, -2.0, -1.0, 1.92, 1.92, 1.92, 0, 0, 0). (12) We will refer to the above nontrivial fixed point henceforth as simply the hot-spot fixed point (HSFP). It is important to emphasize that Umklapp interactions in the present fermionic hot-spot model are fundamental for stabilizing the HSFP in the IR-limit. It may also be noteworthy the fact that some couplings, due to two-looporder quantum fluctuations, now flow asymptotically to zero at low energies, whereas others flow instead to finite values. This interesting fact should potentially simplify the solution of the present model by means of other complementary methods. To study the enhanced correlations and possible ordering tendencies in the present model, we must add to Eq. (1) the following term where ∆ αβ B,SC (k, q) and ∆ αβ B,DW (k, q) correspond to the bare response vertices for the superconducting (SC) and density-wave (DW) orders, respectively. This additional term will generate some new Feynman diagrams with three-legged vertices (see Fig. R,i (k, q)] for i = SC and DW . As a result, we shall obtain straightforwardly the corresponding RG equations up to two loops. Since two of us have already derived elsewhere If we take into account the effect of the renormalization of the FS, the corresponding RG equations are given by Λ d∆ Λ d∆ where the two-loop self-energy feedback contribution is given by the anomalous dimension η = Λ(d ln It is interesting to point out here that the above RG equations are the same for both Q x and Q y , such that the C 4 lattice rotational symmetry is always preserved in our theory. This explains our present notation Q x(y) in the response vertices. By antisymmetrizing these response vertices with respect to the spin indices, we obtain the PDW and CDW order parameters Solid lines represent noninteracting fermionic singleparticle Green's function, while the wavy lines stand for the renormalized coupling constants. Depending on the channel analyzed, the vector q can be: where the points at the FS are denoted by j = 1, 2 (see Fig. P DW (Q x(y) ) -∆ (2) As a result, the two-loop RG flow equations for the response functions associated with a potential instability of the normal state towards a given ordered (i.e. symmetrybroken) phase then finally read To get a qualitative idea of the results in the RG analysis, it can be very useful here to discuss first the results of the present model in a one-loop approximation, before moving on to the full two-loop RG case. For this reason, we shall perform this now. At one-loop RG order, we can calculate the PDW and CDW response functions close to the critical scale Λ c by simply substituting the ansatz g i (l) = C i /(l c -l) for the couplings into Eqs. ( In the first regime, which occurs for weaker couplings in the present model (i.e. g i < g c , where g c is a critical coupling parameter), it is easy to verify that v R F k c > Λ c . This means that the low-energy cutoff in the particlehole and particle-particle bubbles at the incommensurate wavevector q = Q x will prevent those polarization functions in the corresponding susceptibilities to diverge in the scaling limit. In this way, both PDW and CDW orders will remain subleading with respect to BDW and SSC, since these latter two orders clearly do not possess an infrared cutoff in their respective bubbles [see Eqs. (4) and ( By contrast, in the second regime, and for our present purposes the most interesting one, the behavior of the system changes dramatically. This occurs for moderate couplings in the present model (i.e., g i > g c ), since in this case it turns out that Λ c > v R F k c . Most response functions calculated in this work will exhibit a divergence within such a "high-temperature" regime, which is due to the divergence of the couplings at one-loop RG order explained in the previous section. Consequently, the PDW and CDW response vertices will now behave near the energy scale Λ c as a power-law given by ∆ m (Λ) ∼ (Λ -Λ c ) αm , with the exponents given approximately by To establish a precise comparison among the different possibilities of ordering tendencies in the present model, we quote the previous one-loop results obtained by two of us in a previous work We note from the above one-loop RG results that the exponents associated with CDW and PDW response functions (both with a d-wave form factor) at the experimentally observed incommensurate wavevectors Q x(y) turn out to be negative, which implies that the two quantities diverge close to the critical scale Λ c at this order. The only exception is the CDW order at wavevectors Q x(y) with an s-wave form factor whose exponent is positive and therefore the corresponding response vertex instead renormalizes to zero near Λ c . This latter order parameter turns out to be irrelevant in this case and, for this reason, we shall neglect this order from here on. In addition to this, we find, quite surprisingly, that the exponents associated with d-wave CDW and PDW at Q x(y) turn out to be larger than the exponents related to both BDW and SSC orders within this regime. We mention here that this qualitative trend will also hold at two-loop RG level. Therefore, we establish here that the PDW and the experimentally relevant CDW indeed emerge as leading ordering tendencies compared to BDW/SSC in the present fermionic hot-spot model. With further hole doping, the absolute value of the wave vectors Q x(y) that determine the modulation of the PDW and CDW orders will naturally decrease. This dependence of the observed CDW wave vector on doping has some support from the experimental situation As we have shown earlier in this paper, the renormalized couplings at two loops approach asymptotically only one IR-stable nontrivial fixed point (the HSFP), which controls the universal physics of the model at low energies. By integrating Eqs. ( From the above result, we conclude that two-loop RG level the critical exponents of all response functions calculated in this work become positive and, as a consequence, instead of a divergence displayed at one-loop order, they now clearly scale down to zero at two loops. Physically speaking, this happens because of the twoloop self-energy feedback (i.e., the pseudogap instability) onto the RG equations that acts as a "preemptive order" that self-consistently gaps all the correlations out, thus finally generating only short-range orders in the present model. The two-loop-order corrections also implies that the quasiparticle weight Z ψ tends to be nullified at the hot spots in the present model and that both uniform spin and charge susceptibilities tend to become suppressed in the low-energy limit, which was previously obtained in Ref. Another very interesting property that we obtain straightforwardly at two-loop RG level concerns one additional emergent SU (2) pseudospin symmetry that shows up naturally in the present model. Here we use the word emergent in the sense that the original fermionic hot spot model that we analyze in the present work is not invariant under this given symmetry, but only at the novel twoloop fixed point we obtain that this symmetry appears. The first emergent SU (2) symmetry that relates the dwave SSC order and the d-wave BDW order parameter at the incommensurate wavevectors Q = (±Q 0 , ±Q 0 ) was previously emphasized in the context of the fermionic hot-spot model in Ref. In the present work, we have investigated within a complete two-loop RG framework the fermionic hot spot model relevant to the phenomenology of the cuprates, which describes excitations with a linearized dispersion in the vicinity of eight hot spots (i.e., the points in momentum space in which the AF zone boundary intersects a putative underlying Fermi surface of the cuprate superconductors at low hole doping). The present model can be seen as descendant of the Abanov-Chubukov spinfermion model that, most importantly, includes here all relevant interactions between the fermions and, for this reason, allows one to investigate on equal footing all of its possible instabilities from a weak to moderate coupling regime. Here, we have explicitly studied the role played by two types of order in the model (CDW and PDW) in the vicinity of the IR-stable nontrivial fixed point obtained at two loops. By analyzing the CDW response at the experimentally relevant wavevectors (±Q 0 , 0) and (0, ±Q 0 ), we were able to establish that this charge order is short-ranged and has a predominant d-wave form factor, consistent with recent STM experiments 10 and resonant x-ray scattering For weaker couplings in the model, the PDW/CDW composite order (with a predominant d-wave form factor) is always subleading compared to BDW/SSC. This is in agreement with several works in the literature that either consider a spin-fermion model with weak interactions Finally, we point out that it is crucial to implement the RG method for the fermionic hot model at least at twoloop order or beyond, since we have shown here that the first nonanalytic contribution to the self-energy (which is responsible for many effects such as, e.g., the renormalization of the single-particle renormalized Green's function and related quantities β 2x = g 1c g 1x + g 2c g 2x + 2g 1s g 1r -g 2 g 2x -g 3 g 3x -g 2 3v + 1 2 g 1c g 1 g 1x -2g 1c g 1 g 2x + g 1c g 2 g 2x + g 1 g 2c g 2x -2g 2c g 2 g 2x -g 1x g 3p g 3x + g 2x g 3p g 3x -1 2 g 2x (g 2 3x + g 2 3p ) + 2ηg 2x , (A13) β 3p = (2g 1 -g 2c )g 3p + g 1x g 3 + 4g 2 3t -g 2 g 3p -g 2x g 3 -g 1 g 3x -4g 3v g 3t + 1 2 2g 2c g 2 g 3p + g 2 2x g 3x -g 1 g 2c g 3p -g 1c g 2 g 3p -g 1x g 2x g 3x -g 1c g 1 g 3x -g 2 1x g 3p 2 + 2ηg 3p , (A14) β 3x = (2g 1c -g 2c )g 3x -g 1c g 3p -g 2x g 3 -g 2 g 3x -g 2 3v + 1 2 2g 2c g 2 g 3x + g 2 2x g 3p -g 1 g 2c g 3x -g 1c g 2 g 3x -g 1x g 2x g 3p -g 1c g 1 g 3p -g 2 1x g 3x 2 + 2ηg 3x , (A15) where we have omitted the superscript R in the renormalized dimensionless couplings of the model to not clutter up our notation and η is the two-loop anomalous dimension contribution. In Fig. 