We demonstrate theoretically that a dissipationless spin-current can flow a long distance through a diffusive normal metal by using superconductors interfaced with magnetic insulators. The magnitude of this spinsupercurrent is controlled via the magnetization orientation of the magnetic insulators. The spin-supercurrent obtained in this way is conserved in the normal metal just like the charge-current and interestingly has a term which is independent of the superconducting phase difference. The quantum state of the system can be switched between 0 and π by reversing the insulators from a parallel to antiparallel configuration with an external field. We show that the spin-current is carried through the normal metal by superconducting triplet (odd-frequency) correlations and that the superconducting phase difference can be used to enhance these, leaving clear spectroscopic fingerprints in the density of states. Using superconductors as active components in spintronics devices is a research field that has attracted increasing activity in recent years In the context of utilizing superconductors for spintronics purposes, the possibility of spin-supercurrents in ferromagnetic materials FIG. as its weak link? Can this create a spin-polarized dissipationless flow and, if so, can such a spin-supercurrent be controlled externally? We here demonstrate that the presence of magnetic insulators in a Josephson junction offers an interesting way to create a conserved spin-supercurrent in a normal metal (see Fig. Moreover, the spin-supercurrent is carried by oddfrequency Cooper pairs which leave a clear spectroscopic fingerprint in the density of states. We show that by tuning the superconducting phase difference θ, one can qualitatively change the nature of the proximity effect from a conventional singlet one to a triplet one in situ. We also show that the presence of magnetic insulators not only creates a spinsupercurrent, but that it has important consequences for the quantum phase of the system which undergoes a dynamic 0π transition for a single sample by changing from a P to AP configuration for the insulators. We use the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity In the absence of non-equilibrium effects, such as applied voltages and temperature-gradients, it is sufficient to consider the retarded part g R ≡ g, which may be parametrized conveniently as follows We have defined N = (1 -γγ) -1 for normalization and the . . . operation means complex conjugation and reversal of quasiparticle energy. The Ricatti-matrices {γ, γ} are 2×2 matrices in spin space and the Green function g satisfies the Usadel equation Here, D is the diffusion coefficient of the normal metal, ρ 3 = diag(1, -1), and ε is the quasiparticle energy measured relative the Fermi level. In order to account for the magnetic insulators at the interfaces, we use spin-dependent boundary conditions discussed in Ref. with j = {L, R}. We have introduced where ∆ 0 is the magnitude of the superconducting order parameter. The bulk solution is an excellent approximation for low interface transparencies when using large superconducting reservoirs. We have used the second Pauli matrix σ y , and the superconducting phase difference across the junction is defined as θ ≡ θ R -θ L . The boundary conditions read: where ζ j = R B,j /R N is the ratio between the normal-state barrier resistance on side j and the resistance of the normal metal, and G j φ =n dφ n / n T n where T n is the transmission probability for channel n and dφ n are the spindependent part of the phase-shifts picked up by particles scattered at the interface. Finally, the matrix M j describes the orientation of the magnetic moment of the magnetic insulator on side j, while d is the length of the normal metal. Experimentally, it is likely that the magnetic insulators will have exchange fields lying in the plane perpendicular to the tunneling direction due to shape anisotropy if one uses a layered 'pancake' geometry for the junction. This case, and other configurations, are covered by us setting the right interface to M R = diag(σ z , σ z ) whereas the left interface is allowed to have an arbitrary orientation, i.e. M L = cos αdiag(σ z , σ z ) + sin φ sin αdiag(σ y , -σ y ) + cos φ sin αdiag(σ x , σ x ). Here, φ is the azimuthal angle in the xy-plane and α is the angle between the magnetization and the z-axis. For later use, we define the magnetic moments of the insulators on the left and right side as m L and m R . The boundary conditions used here can also be extended Finally, we will later on include non-ideal effects such as spin-flip scattering due to magnetic impurities and spin-orbit impurity scattering to see how they influence the spin-and charge-flow as well as the density of states in the system. These are accounted for Here we have defined the matrix vector τ = (τ x , τ y , τ z ), where the components are given by: For future reference, we introduce the normalized strength of magnetic impurity and spin-orbit scattering as g sf = 1/8∆ 0 τ sf and g so = 1/8∆ 0 τ so , where τ sf/so are the relaxation times associated with each type of scattering. We proceed to discuss how the charge-and spinsupercurrents sustained by the system are influenced by the presence of the ferromagnetic insulators. In the quasiclassical framework, these are given by and Here, N 0 is the density of states at the Fermi-level in the normal-state, e is the electric charge, is the reduced Planck constant, while A is the interface contact area. For future use, we also define the bulk superconducting coherence length ξ S = D/∆ 0 . In the weak proximity effect regime, we were able to find a general analytical result for the supercurrents of spin and charge (see Appendix for details). We first briefly consider the charge-supercurrent which reads: where the coefficients I Q,0 and I Q,1 are lengthy expressions that depend on junction parameters such as the width d, misalignment angle α, temperature T , and the interface transparencies ζ L/R . The charge-current is found to be independent of which orientation the magnetic moments have in the xy-plane, φ. We see that the presence of magnetic insulators coupled to the superconductors introduces a cos αdependence on the supercurrent, not only tuning its overall magnitude, but also changing the quantum ground-state of the junction from 0 to π when Thus, 0-π transitions can now occur even with a normal metal interlayer by changing α, a feature which was also reported in the ballistic limit in Ref. Eq. ( This spin-supercurrent has several remarkable features: first of all, it is conserved throughout the normal metal just like the charge-current. Secondly, it is long-ranged as it flows through a normal metal without any exchange field. Thirdly, it has one component that is independent of the superconducting phase difference θ. The other component goes like cos θ, meaning that the total spin-supercurrent satisfies I x S (θ) = I x S (-θ). This can be understood physically, since a spin-current is invariant under time-reversal symmetry. The latter operation transforms θ → (-θ) and causes the charge-supercurrent to change sign. In the Appendix, we give the full expression of the spin-supercurrents including the coefficients and their dependence on the junction parameters. The spin-supercurrent vs. misalignment angle α is shown in Fig. The spin-supercurrent should be possible to control with a weak external field coupling to the magnetic insulators, tuning their relative orientation. We underline that our structure, unlike previous works, does not include any ferromagnetic metals. In fact, a conceptually similar experimental structure to the one that we propose to use in our manuscript has recently been demonstrated in Ref. In an experimental setting, the normal metal sample may well include some degree of magnetic impurities or spin-orbit scattering on impurities. Thus, it is of interest to see how such non-ideal effects influence the predictions made in this paper. Although no tractable analytical expression is accessible in this case, we have computed numerically the charge-and spinsupercurrent in the presence of spin-flip scattering and spinorbit impurity scattering as described by Eq. ( The physical origin of the different behavior of the chargeand spin-supercurrents when adding magnetic impurities and spin-orbit scattering can be traced back to how the singlet and triplet superconducting correlations are affected by them The same reasoning can be applied to the spin-current. In this case, it is solely the triplet part which is responsible for its existence. Since both magnetic impurities and spinorbit scattering suppress the triplet Cooper pairs, the spinsupercurrent decays monotonically as the scattering rate increases. It can be seen from Fig. Besides the appearance of this unusual spin-supercurrent, a Josephson junction with magnetic insulator interfaces offers a unique way to control triplet superconductivity as we now demonstrate. It has previously been shown that a crossover from pure conventional even-frequency pairing to odd-frequency pairing is made possible via spin-active interfaces in S|MI|N bilayer junctions Instead, we here show that when spin-active interfaces are incorporated in a Josephson junction geometry, the crossover from even-to odd-frequency pairing can now be controlled by the superconducting phase difference θ, which in turn is determined by the current flowing through the system. This offers a new way to induce a triplet proximity effect which can be changed in situ within a single sample, simply by varying θ. The crossover is manifested by the qualitative nature of the proximity effect, going from a minigap (conventional singlet proximity effect) to an enhanced low-energy peak (oddfrequency triplet proximity effect). In order to probe how the change in pairing symmetry is manifested experimentally, we here compute the density of states in the normal metal region its phase-dependence numerically which allows us to relax the assumption of a weak proximity effect. The DOS normalized to its normal-state value is obtained from the solution of the Ricatti equations via: To make better contact with experimental measurements, we have added a small imaginary part to the quasiparticle energies, ε → ε + ıδ where δ/∆ 0 1, which represents inelastic scattering. We consider the most general case where each superconducting interface contains a magnetic insulator. The results are shown in Fig. The qualitative change in the density of states (going from fully suppressed to enhanced at low energies) can be seen clearly also when keeping the superconducting phase difference θ fixed and varying the magnetic configuration α. This is shown in Fig. It is interesting to note that the density of states for each electron-spin is highly non-degenerate and tunable, as shown in Fig. Similarly to our treatment of the spin-and chargesupercurrent, we also investigate the influence of spin-flip and spin-orbit scattering on the density of states. In the left column of Fig. We here discuss in more detail how our work is related to previous findings. In the proposal by Houzet and Buzdin The spin-supercurrent reported in our work occurs in the first harmonic, i.e. it is not a higher-order effect, meaning that it is present without any fine-tuning of parameters in order to suppress the first harmonics in favor of higher ones. Moreover, it occurs without use of any ferromagnetic metals: the spin superflow takes place in a non-magnetic normal metal. There are several different choices for magnetic insulators that can be used in the proposed setup shown in Fig. We note that very recently, quasiclassical boundary conditions valid for any strength of the barrier polarization were derived In summary, we have shown that by integrating superconductors with magnetic insulators, one arrives at a unique way to both create and control triplet superconductivity in a welldefined way with the superconducting phase-difference, and to also create a conserved and tunable spin-supercurrent flowing through a normal metal. We here provide comprehensive results for the analytical expressions of the supercurrents of charge and spin supported by the system. In the weak proximity effect, one finds the following completely general expressions: Above, the notation ( . . .) means changing the sign of energy and complex conjugate and we defined the inverse temperature β = 1/(k B T ). It is seen that the spinless singlet correlations f s do not contribute to any of the spin-currents. In the special case of a normal metal separating the superconductors, one can work further with the above expressions by inserting the solutions f m = A m e ıkx + B m e -ıkx , m = {s, t, ↑, ↓}. We then get expressions for the supercurrents which is independent of position: The coefficients {A m , B m } for the singlet and each of the triplet components are determined by the boundary conditions. For instance, one finds for the charge-supercurrent that upon defining the quantity: The spin-supercurrent is given by: where we have defined the expressions