The stoichiometric "111" iron-based superconductor, LiFeAs, has attacted great research interest in recent years. For the first time, we have successfully grown LiFeAs thin film by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on SrTiO3(001) substrate, and studied the interfacial growth behavior by reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope (LT-STM). The effects of substrate temperature and Li/Fe flux ratio were investigated. Uniform LiFeAs film as thin as 3 quintuple-layer (QL) is formed. Superconducting gap appears in LiFeAs films thicker than 4 QL at 4.7 K. When the film is thicker than 13 QL, the superconducting gap determined by the distance between coherence peaks is about 7 meV, close to the value of bulk material. The ex situ transport measurement of thick LiFeAs film shows a sharp superconducting transition around 16 K. The upper critical field, Hc2(0) = 13.0 T, is estimated from the temperature dependent magnetoresistance. The precise thickness and quality control of LiFeAs film paves the road of growing similar ultrathin iron arsenide films. Introduction. -LiFeAs is a "111" type iron-based superconductor (Fe-SC) and has attracted much attention recently due to its unusual properties compared to other superconducting iron pnictides. Without chemical doping, the stoichiometric LiFeAs already shows a superconducting transition at 18 K under the ambient pressure LiFeAs has a layered tetragonal structure (p4/nmm). As shown in fig. Synthesis of high quality single-crystal is critical for a comprehensive study of LiFeAs. Similar to some other iron pnictides, LiFeAs was first synthesized by the high pressure method Experimental method. -The experiment was carried out on a Unisoku low-temperature STM combined with MBE. The base pressure is lower than 1 × 10 -10 Torr. The LiFeAs films were grown in the MBE chamber and immediately transferred into the STM at a temperature of 4.7 K without taking out of the ultra-high vacuum (UHV) environment. A PtIr alloy tip was used in STM for topography and spectroscopy measurement. The Nb-doped SrTiO 3 (001) substrate was cleaned in UHV by direct current heating up to 1200 • C for several times. Each time the heating lasted for 5 minutes. The temperature of substrate was monitored by an infrared pyrometer. Li and Fe were evaporated from two standard Knudsen cells (K-cell). The evaporation tem- The transport measurements were carried out ex situ on a Quantum Design PPMS system, where the lowest temperature is 1.8 K and the highest magnetic field is 9 T. To avoid the degrading of LiFeAs film in the ambient atmosphere, several nanometer thick Ag protection layer was deposited on the top of the LiFeAs epitaxial film before taking out of UHV. Atomically resolved image [fig. Li/Fe flux ratio is essential for LiFeAs film growth. Besides the Li/Fe flux ratio, substrate temperature is another important factor to determine the film topography. In particular, the effective Li flux changes with the substrate temperature because of the desorption of Li atoms, which is more pronounced when the Li source temperature (usually 350∼400 • C) is close to that of the substrate. For example, the sample in fig. By adjusting the Li/Fe flux ratio at the optimal substrate temperature (450 • C), we can obtain atomically flat film as thin as ∼3 QL. Below 3 QL, LiFeAs islands with several tens of nanometer lateral size are formed [figs. The dI/dV spectra measured off the islands are identical to that of the SrTiO 3 substrate, confirming the island thickness assignment. On SrTiO 3 , it is difficult to follow the layer-by-layer growth mode, mainly because Li tends to form clusters on the substrate. Thicker film becomes flatter and more uniform [fig. Two types of defects are visible on the surface [fig. We performed STS measurements on the films with different thicknesses [fig. It is interesting to compare our LiFeAs film with the FeSe film epitaxially grown on SrTiO 3 (001) substrate. Although as grown 1 TL FeSe film is not superconducting, it shows superconducting T c as high as ∼50 K after proper annealing procedure Furthermore, we measured the transport properties of the LiFeAs thin film. Since LiFeAs degrades in the ambient atmosphere, several nanometer thick silver was deposited on top of LiFeAs as the protection layer before the sample was taken out of UHV for transport measurement. Figure Conclusion. -We have realized the molecular beam epitaxial growth of LiFeAs thin film with high quality on SrTiO 3 (001) substrate. The MBE film makes it possible to study the intrinsic properties of LiFeAs. At 4.7 K, the superconducting gap is revealed in ultra-thin film thicker than 4 QL. The gap size of 13 QL film is as large as 7 meV, which is close to the bulk value. The 100 QL film shows sharp superconducting transition at 16 K in transport measurement. The upper critical field H c2 is estimated to be 13.0 T from the magnetoresistance measurement. The current growth approach can be applied to other materials consisting of highly reactive alkaline elements, such as NaFeAs and KFe 2 As 2 . Our work paves the way for further studies on the intrinsic properties of LiFeAs, which can be disturbed by the impurities introduced in the bulk growth methods. The linear fitting gives the slope dHc2/dT = -1.17 T/K, corresponding to critical field Hc2 = 13.0 T at zero temperature.