Following the early discovery of stripe-like order in La-based copper-oxide superconductors, charge ordering instabilities were observed in all cuprate families. However, it has proven difficult to distinguish between uni-(stripes) and bi-directional (checkerboard) charge order in Y-and Bi-based materials. Here we use resonant x-ray scattering (RXS) to measure the two-dimensional structure factor in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y , in reciprocal space. Our data reveal the presence of charge stripe order, i.e. locally unidirectional density waves, suggesting it as the true microscopic nature of charge modulations in cuprates. At the same time, we find that the well-established competition between charge order and superconductivity is stronger for charge correlations across than along the stripes, which provides additional evidence for the intrinsic unidirectional nature of the charge order. Recent studies of Y-based copper oxides have highlighted the importance of a chargeordered electronic ground state, also termed charge-density-wave (CDW), as a central element within the phenomenology of high-temperature superconductors YBCO is a layered copper-oxide-based material where hole doping is controlled by the oxygen stoichiometry in the chain layer -characterized by uniaxial CuO chains running along the crystallographic b axis. In addition to ordering within the chain layer -attained via the periodic alternation of fully-oxygenated and fully-depleted CuO chains -recent experiments have extensively shown the presence of charge ordering in the CuO 2 planes, with an incommensurate wavevector Q ∼ 0.31 reciprocal lattice units Here we study the local density correlations of the charge-ordered state, and the interaction of the latter with superconductivity (SC) in underdoped YBCO, using resonant x-ray scattering (RXS). This technique, which is now at full maturity, represents a unique combination of diffraction (to probe reciprocal space) and resonant absorption (allowing element-specificity and therefore site-selectivity), and directly measures the structure factor S(Q x , Q y ), where Q x and Q y represent the momenta along the reciprocal axes H and K, respectively. The structure factor is linked to the density-density correlation function, and therefore to the CDW order parameter in momentum space (see Materials and Methods in Ref. 27). Here, in order to reconstruct the two-dimensional (2D) structure factor with high resolution, we utilize a specifically devised RXS probing scheme whereby a charge-ordering peak is sliced along different directions, parametrized by the azimuthal angle α (Fig. ∆Q between α = 0 • and 90 • is already apparent, but is even better visualized in the color map of Fig. The observed 2D peak structure directly bears the signatures of a breaking of fourfold (C 4 ) symmetry at both the macro-and nano-scale, and therefore of the emergence of a stripe-ordered state. In fact, under the fourfold symmetry the electronic density would be invariant under a 90 • rotation in real space (x → y, y → -x), which is equivalent to a 90 • rotation in momentum . This finding demonstrates an unambiguous breaking of global C 4 symmetry in all investigated samples, and might elucidate the origin of the anisotropy observed in the Nernst effect Having established the underlying stripe-like character of charge modulations in the CuO 2 planes, we turn to the temperature dependence of the longitudinal and transverse correlation lengths, respectively parallel and perpendicular to the specific ordering wavevector. These can be extrapolated by inverting the momentum HWHM ∆Q, as illustrated in Fig. This anisotropy has an opposite doping trend from the crystal orthorhombicity whose associated anomalies across T c increase with hole doping [as revealed e.g. by lattice espansivity measurements Our results may explain many common aspects between CDW physics in YBCO and the stripy cuprates from the La-based family, such as: thermoelectric transport Sample characterization. This investigation was performed on three detwinned, oxygenordered underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+y single crystals: (i) y = 0.51, p 0.10, T c = 57 K, Ortho II oxygen-ordered, hereafter labeled Y651; (ii) y = 0.67, p 0.12, T c = 65 K, Ortho VIII oxygenordered, hereafter labeled Y667; (iii) y = 0.75, p 0.13, T c = 70 K, Ortho III oxygen-ordered, hereafter labeled Y675. The in-plane lattice constants, which in turn determine the degree of orthorhombicity, are: (i) a 3.8362 Å and b 3.8740 Å in Y651; (ii) a 3.8257 Å and b 3.8814 Å in Y667; and (iii) a 3.825 Å and b 3.885 Å in Y675. The superconducting critical temperature T c was determined from magnetic susceptibility measurements. The in-plane lattice constants have been measured using XRD in Y651 and Y667, and are taken from Ref. Resonant soft X-ray scattering. Resonant x-ray scattering (RXS) is a coherent probe of fluctuations in those physical quantities (X) that are directly or indirectly coupled to light, and is therefore proportional to the Fourier transform of the correlation function of δX, i.e.: where C X (r) = dr δX(r )δX(r + r) represents the correlation function of δX. Charge ordering is manifested through variations in different physical quantities, such as the ionic displacements (X = δR, in this case X is a vector operator), the local valence (X = p), or the energy shifts of the resonant transition (X = ∆E). The sensitivity of the experimental signal to these fluctuating quantities is material-dependent: in the cuprates it has been shown that the resonant scattering is predominantly controlled by variations in the energy shifts (i.e., a scalar field) where the second equality follows from the fact that the density operator is a real function, and S(Q) is termed the static structure factor. For this work, RXS measurements were performed on a 4-circle diffractometer in a 10 -10 mbar ultra-high-vacuum chamber, with a photon flux around 5 • 10 12 photons/s and ∆E E ∼ 2 • 10 -4 energy resolution. In addition, fully polarized incoming light is used, with two available configurations: σ (polarization vector perpendicular to the scattering plane) or π (polarization vector in the scattering plane). In order to maximize the charge order signal, the series of measurements as a function of the azimuthal angle α were performed at the peak energy of the Cu-L 3 edge (hν = 931.5 eV, see Fig. Å-1 at hν = 931.5 eV. One should note that the spectrometer integrates the energy of scattered photons; however, since inelastic process are incoherent in nature, the only portion of the spectrum which carries the information on the momentum structure of the electronic density is the elastic (zero-loss) line. Since the inelastic contributions, albeit strong at or near resonance, do not have a sharp structure in momentum space, the momentum structure of the CDW peaks as observed with an energy-integrated spectrometer is still predominantly determined by the elastic processes, and therefore it is representative of the static electronic modulations in Fourier space. This is also confirmed by the close agreement between the CDW momentum linewidth previously measured in the energy-resolved (RIXS) and energy-integrated (RXS) mode (see Fig. Azimuthal scans and experimental geometry. The azimuthal angle α is defined as the angle between the direction of the RXS scan in momentum space and the crystallographic a axis, or equivalently its reciprocal axis H. This configuration is illustrated in Fig. In order to extract a proper profiling of the CDW peak, it is important that each Q-scan cuts through the CDW peak maximum. To ensure that this condition is met for each azimuthal angle α, angular optimization perpendicular to the Q-scan direction was performed by scanning through the peak as a function of the transverse angle χ (see lower-left inset of Fig. In a RXS measurement, the angle-to-momentum conversion is encoded in the equations: where Q is the wavevector magnitude, Q is its projection on the sample surface (a -b plane), while θ det is the detector angle, θ sample is the sample angular position (see schematics of the probing geometry in Fig. The resolution of the RXS diffractometer is evaluated by measuring the Bragg reflection (0, 1, 3) at high photon energy (hν = 2230 eV). By scanning the detector arm across the Bragg reflection -whose intrinsic broadening is much smaller than the instrumental resolution and therefore represents a δ-like signal -we estimate the angular resolution to be ∆θ det ∼ 0.2 • (see lower part of Fig. Data analysis methodology. RXS scans have been analyzed by means of a least-square nonlinear regression analysis, with fitting function defined as the sum of a Lorentzian peak and a cubic background polynomial function B: where Q * is the peak position, A is the amplitude and ∆Q is the half-width-at-half-maximum. All momentum scans were measured around the ordering wavevector using two light polarizations, vertical (σ) and horizontal (π). A preliminary analysis has shown that the linewidths do not depend on the light polarization, consistently with the fact that the linewidth is an intrinsic property of the system (related to correlation lengths, as will be discussed later) and therefore does not vary upon changing an external parameter, such as light polarization. In order to provide a more precise quantitative estimate of the linewidth ∆Q with a reduced statistical error, this parameter has been subsequently constrained to be the same during least-squares fitting of the σand π-polarized scans. An example of the fitting analysis is provided in Fig. Stripe order with anisotropic correlations. As anticipated in the Materials and Methods section, in our case the RXS observable is proportional to the static structure factor S(Q): (S6) Here we focus on how a rotational symmetry breaking in real space -a tell-tale of a stripelike charge-ordered state -can be equivalently detected by looking at the structure of density modulations in reciprocal space. Whenever C 4 symmetry is preserved, the electronic density fluctuations δρ must be invariant under a 90 • rotation in real space (defined through the transformations x → y and y → -x), or δρ(x, y) = δρ(y, -x). This can be readily translated in momentum space by taking the Fourier transform of δρ(x, y), which yields: which proves that the structure factor S(Q) has to likewise be invariant under a 90 • rotation in momentum space, or S(Q x , Q y ) = S(Q y , -Q x ). We then apply this procedure to the full 2D momentum structure of the CDW structure factor as measured using RXS (see Fig. The resulting peak structure is readily shown to violate C 4 symmetry, as illustrated in the three panels of Fig. More detailed doping-, azimuthal angle-, and temperature-dependent results on peak widths and correlation lengths are presented in the next two sections. Azimuthal-dependent experimental data and parameters. The two-dimensional structure factor near the ordering wavevectors Q a and Q b is well-approximated by a two-dimensional Lorentzian function defined as follows: where is the CDW wavevector, ∆Q x,y are the half-widths-at-half-maximum (equal to the inverse correlation lengths) along x and y, respectively, while in the last equality the reduced coordinate Q = Q -Q * was used. By parametrizing Q in polar coordinates as (Q x , Q y ) = Q (cos α, sin α), we can subsequently study the directional dependence of the RXS intensity from Eq. S8, where the direction in reciprocal space is controlled by the angle α: Eq. S9 is used to fit the azimuthal series of RXS scans, which allows extracting the experimental α-dependent linewidths ∆Q α (error bars are computed from a least-squares fitting analysis), shown in Fig. This last formula is used to fit the α-dependent linewidths displayed in Fig. From the values of ∆Q α we can derive the α-dependent correlation lengths upon simple inversion: ξ α = ∆Q -1 α . The corresponding data points are plotted in Fig. A more detailed study of the native anisotropy of the peak shape and consequently of the correlation lengths, in relation to possible CDW domain structures, is also important in revealing the stripy nature of charge ordering in YBCO. Such analysis relies on a few preliminary observations: • The x-ray beam spot size (d ∼ 500μm) is much larger than the average correlation length (ξ ∼ 40 -60 Å), hence variations in the latter with the azimuthal angle α cannot be attributed to the (minimal) motion of the beam spot on the probed region of the sample. • The shortest and longest correlations always occur at either α = 0 (corresponding to a direction parallel to the a axis) or α = 90 (parallel to the b axis) and therefore rule out the influence of extrinsic effects related to the probing geometry in determining the α-dependence of the correlation lengths -which would not preferentially select a highsymmetry direction, and would rather cause the signal to be minimized or maximized at a random angular position. • The different variation of ξ with azimuthal angle between Y675 and the other two samples (see again Fig. Based on the results shown in Fig. x and ξ a,b y , respectively (the superscript refers to the peak at Q a or Q b ). The latter quantities are related to the longitudinal and transverse correlations via the relations: Therefore, for domains with wavevector Q a = (0.31, 0) [Q b = (0, 0.31)], ξ and ξ ⊥ are evaluated at α = 0 • [90 • ] and α = 90 • [180 • ] respectively. For all the investigated charge ordering peaks, we find that ξ x = ξ y . Whenever ξ x > ξ y (ξ y > ξ x ), we will talk of x-oriented (y-oriented) domains, and we will similarly say that the anisotropy is along x (y). Since we are dealing with local, not global correlations, two situations may arise: (i) a biaxial anisotropy, where both x-and y-oriented domains are present; (ii) a uniaxial anisotropy, where only x-oriented (or y-oriented) are found. Case (ii) would effectively correspond to a global, macroscopic anisotropy. These two possibilities are pictorially illustrated in Figs. By inspecting the diagrams in Figs. i.e., the correlation lengths along a given direction have to coincide for the two structure factors S a (Q) and S b (Q). At the bottom-left corner of the various diagrams we also report the conditions that apply to the correlation lengths in the various cases presented here (see also Table From this theoretical analysis, we can conclude that for both uniaxial and biaxial anisotropy it is in principle possible to discriminate between a pure checkerboard and a pure stripy order, unless ξ a x = ξ b x , in which case the patterns shown in Figs. S7F and H become indistinguishable. Even though the uni-vs bi-directional character can be assessed regardless of the character of the anisotropy, the condition of biaxial anisotropy more intuitively discriminates between stripe and checkerboard charge order, as a consequence of a simple fact: for stripy nanodomains, the direction of the intra-domain wavevector can be locked to the direction of anisotropy -the two can be parallel (as in Fig. The comparison between the conditions laid out in Table Domain canting and its effect on the charge order structure in reciprocal space. So far the charge order has been assumed to be strictly on-axis, i.e. a modulation of the electronic density with crests (and valleys) parallel to the a or b axis for the Q b and Q a component, respectively. The existence of domains with slightly canted density modulations cannot be a priori ruled out, hence we here analyze its effect on the momentum structure of charge order and its relationship to the peak shapes discussed in the previous section and their link to the inner structure of charge order (checkerboard vs. stripes). Figure Subsequently, we simulate the effect of a distribution of canted domains on the structure factor S (Q x , Q x ). Such distribution is Gaussian and centered about θ c = 0 • (see Fig. A qualitative analysis reveals a striking similarity between panels E and F, thus raising the possibility that, contrary to the conclusions reached in the previous section, the pattern shown in Figs. S8 might in fact be compatible with checkerboard, when a distribution of canted domains is present. However, a quantitative analysis of the experimental peak widths shows that a checkerboard scenario has to be still ruled out. In the following, we consider the more general checkerboard case, for which these relations must hold (see also Supplementary Table The subscript i means intrinsic, as the above relations refer to the native broadening of the charge order peaks resulting from finite spatial correlations. As mentioned earlier, the effect of a distribution of canted domains will change the transverse width. The momentum broadening associated to the distribution of canted domains (∆Q c ), in the case of small angular spreads, can be approximated as ∆Q c = 2Q CO • σ θ which, for σ θ = 5 • = 0.087 rad, gives ∆Q c 0.054 r.l.u.. The analysis of Fig. As a result, while the experimental longitudinal widths will remain unaffected: the transverse widths will increase, and experimentally one would observe: where in the second (third) equality Eqs. S13 (Eqs. S14) have been used. By taking the square of Eqs. S15 it directly follows that, in the case of checkerboard order in presence of a distribution of canted domains centered about the crystallographic axes, the following equality must hold: The set of mathematical relations introduced so far has also been summarized in Fig. The magnitude of the asymmetry, which is closely related to the degree of elongation of the CDW peaks in momentum space (see again Fig. • In general, in presence of isotropic correlations (measured in number of unit cells) defined on a square lattice, the two-dimensional structure factor is also isotropic. However, when the underlying structure and its unit cell become orthorhombic, the peaks will develop • If we assume that the influence acted by the chain layer and its associated potential onto the CuO 2 plane is more complex and, e.g., involves native anisotropic correlations in the CuO chain order, than one might wonder whether this alone could explain the observed anisotropy in the peak profiles. If this was the case, then the CDW peak along a and b should exhibit the very same elongation, since the chain layer breaks C 4 in a unique manner. In other words, the anisotropy measured at Q a and Q b must be the same within such scenario, again at variance with the experimental data presented in Fig. • The deviation of the peak anisotropy parameter γ from the isotropic case (γ = 1) is largest for the most underdoped sample, and is reduced for increasing hole doping (see Fig. • The temperature evolution of the peak anisotropy shows an anomaly near the superconducting transition T c . Such a behavior in principle can not be immediately deemed to be incompatible with the evolution of the lattice parameters a and b, whose temperaturedependent espansivity α a,b also shows a cusp near T c • In addition to these aspects, a recent study by Achkar et al. Finally, Figure Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z1, Canada Quantum Matter Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada Canadian Light Source, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 2V3, Canada Quantum Materials Program, Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1Z8, Canada Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany