Inelastic low-energy Raman and high-energy X-ray scatterings have made great progress in instrumentation to investigate the strong electronic correlations in matter. However, theoretical study of the relevant scattering spectrum is still a challenge. In this article, we present a Schwinger-Keldysh canonical perturbation formalism for the electronic Raman scattering, where all the resonant, nonresonant and mixed responses are considered uniformly. We show how to use this formalism to evaluate the cross section of the electronic Raman scattering off an one-band superconductor. All the two-photon scattering processes from electrons, the non-resonant charge density response, the elastic Rayleigh scattering, the fluorescence, the intrinsic energy-shift Raman scattering and the mixed response, are included. In the mean-field superconducting state, Cooper pairs contribute only to the non-resonant response. All the other responses are dominated by the single-particle excitations and are strongly suppressed due to the opening of the superconducting gap. Our formalism for the electronic Raman scattering can be easily extended to study the high-energy resonant inelastic X-ray scattering. Inelastic low-energy Raman and high-energy X-ray scatterings have become powerful tools to study the strong electronic correlations in matter In this article, we focus our study on the second difficulty. We show that it can be overcome by introducing the Schwinger-Keldysh contour time formalism, which has been well established for non-equilibrium physics Our starting point is the differential cross section of the inelastic light scattering. Consider a two-step photon-in photon-out scattering as shown schematically in Fig. where Ŝ(t f , t i ) is the time evolution matrix from an initial state |Ψ I ≡ |p i e i φ i into a final state |Ψ F ≡ |p f e f φ f , and E i is the energy of the electrons in the initial state. Suppose there are N photons in the initial state |p i e i . Among the N photons there are N p f e f Γ(p f e f ; p i e i ) photons scattered. The conservation of the photons in the scattering process shows that where σ is the effective scattering cross section, Φ i (p i , e i ) = nc = N c V is the current density (or flux) of the incident photons (V is volume of the photon field and c is the light velocity), and ∆t = t f -t i . Since ω f = p f c, we have f dω f dΩ where dΩ the differential solid angle. The double differential cross section with the initial and final photon states |p i e i and |p f e f is given by where q and ν are the transferred momentum and energy frequency, respectively, and are defined by Formula (3) shows that the differential cross section is proportional to the scattering probability Γ. The time difference ∆t can be canceled by an additional factor ∆t in Γ which comes from the energy conservation law. Therefore Γ/∆t can be taken as a scattering rate. Suppose the coupling of the electron and the photon field is V I . Define the total Hamiltonian of the combined system as H = H + H p + V I with H and H p the Hamiltonian of the electron and the photon system respectively, Ŝ matrix is given by where V I (t) = e i (H+Hp)(t-ti) V I e -i (H+Hp)(t-ti) and T t is the time ordering operator. Separate the interaction V I into V 1 of linear to A and V 2 of quadratic to A , where A is the photon vector potential. To lowest-order perturbations, only the following two expansions of the Ŝ matrix contribute to the scattering probability Γ, where Ŝ1,2 are defined by Γ 1 , Γ 2 and Γ 12 are the so-called non-resonant, resonant and mixed parts of the scattering probability, respectively. Γ 12 describes quantum interference of the resonant and non-resonant scattering processes. The positive or negative Γ 12 comes from the corresponding constructive or destructive quantum interference. Since the states of the incident and the scattered photons are defined definitely, the scattering probability Γ can be reduced into a representation of the pure electron system. Now Ŝ1,2 matrices can be re-expressed in similar forms to Eq. ( The non-resonant scattering probability Γ 1 is determined by the correlation function as where A ≡ 1 Z Tr e -βH A and V(t) = e i H(t-ti) Ve -i H(t-ti) . With the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, Γ 1 can be re-expressed into the standard form: where χ(ν) is the frequency Fourier transformation of the time-ordered correlation function ] . Perturbation theory can then be easily introduced to evaluate Γ 1 . This is a standard formalism to study the scattering probability in the single-particle scattering technique such as ARPES, neutron scattering etc. Because of the time ordering operator ] in Ŝ2 matrix, the fluctuation-dissipation theorem is invalid to evaluate the resonant Γ 2 and the mixed Γ 12 . In most studies of the Raman or the X-ray scattering spectrum, Γ 2 and Γ 12 are evaluated from the Kramers-Heisenberg formula FIG. From the picture of a time evolution, the scattering probability Γ involves two time evolution processes, forward time ordering from the initial state |Ψ i at t i to the final state |Ψ F at t f , and backward anti-time ordering from the final state |Ψ F back to the initial state |Ψ I . Introducing an anti-time ordering evolution matrix S, we can then define the anti-time ordering S 1,2 matrices analog to Ŝ1,2 in Eq. (7). Following the time-and-anti-time evolution picture, Γ 2 can be expressed as where ti dt 1 dt 2 (this abbreviation will be used in the whole article where the time variable without or with prime will follow time evolution or anti-time evolution, respectively). Introduce a time contour C which describes both the time and the anti-time evolution process, C = C + ∪ C -, where t ∈ C + evolve as t i → t f and t ′ ∈ C -evolve as t f → t i as shown schematically in Fig. Here T c is the contour time ordering operator defined by where > c and < c are defined according to the position of the contour time arguments, latter or earlier in the time contour C, and ± are defined for the bosonic or fermionic operator, respectively. From a similar derivation, the non-resonant Γ 1 and the mixed Γ 12 can be re-expressed within the contour-time formalism as Introducing the contour time formalism to evaluate the scattering probability Γ is our principle to overcome the difficulty in theoretical study of the two-photon inelastic light scattering. Formulae (3), ( Introduction of the Schwinger-Keldysh contour time formalism into the study of the resonant inelastic X-ray scattering can retrospect to 1974 by Nozières and Abrahams 7 , which was then followed by Igarashi et al in 2006 The article is arranged as following. In Section I, we present the principle to establish a Schwinger-Keldysh contour time formalism for the two-photon inelastic light scattering. In Section II, we show an example how to use this formalism to study the electronic Raman scattering off an one-band superconductor. The scattering cross section with contribution from all the two-photon processes is studied in details in mean-field approximation. Summary is present in Section III. In A, we provide a preliminary introduction to the non-equilibrium contour time formalism In this section, we show how to study the electronic Raman scattering off an one-band superconductor with the Schwinger-Keldysh formalism we have established in Section I. The contribution from the resonant, non-resonant and mixed responses to the scattering cross section is evaluated in details. All the responses are considered in mean-field approximation in superconducting state as an example. It should be noted that in superconducting state some low-energy excitations may play roles in the electronic Raman responses, which include the Bardasis-Schrieffer bound states Consider an one-band electron system with Hamiltonian H = H t + H I , where H t and H I are the free kinetic and the interaction part of the Hamiltonian respectively. H t is given by where d iσ , d † iσ are the annihilation and creation operators, respectively, of the electron at site i with spin σ. The electron-photon coupling can be obtained by considering the gauge invariance of H t , which leads to an additional phase factor for t ij and thus where is defined on bond and the charge of electron is -e. Extend the phase factor into second-order of A, the electron-photon coupling where α, β = x, y, z. j α (-q) and n αβ (-q) are the current and the stress tensor operator which couple linearly or quadratically to A respectively, and are defined by Note that the electron-photon coupling in (19) only involves the electron charge degree of freedom. In a more general case, the electron-photon coupling should also involve the electron magnetic orbital and spin degrees of freedom Let us now derive the scattering probability. Introduce the second quantization of the vector potential A as 17 where a qλ (t) = a qλ e -iω qλ t and e λ (q) is the polarization vector with λ = 1, 2 (the polarization can be linear or circular). In the below we will assume that the photon energy is polarization independent, i.e., ω qλ = ω q . When the photon states in Eq. ( where the operator V 2 (t) is defined by Here T 0 (t) and Λ(k, q) are given by and q, ν are the transferred momentum and frequency defined in (4). Following the principle to establish the contour time formalism in Section I and in the non-transient approximation 6 (shown in A 1), Γ 1 can be expressed in contour time formalism as where T c is the time ordering operator defined in the Schwinger-Keldysh contour C and t ∈ C + , t ′ ∈ C -. The contour time evolution operator Ŝc is defined in contour C as In formula (24), the operators are defined in interaction representation by H 0 and A 0 ≡ Tr[e -βH 0 A] Z0 . The resonant scattering probability Γ 2 is shown to follow where π l (t 1 , t 2 ) is given by The l-dependent interactions V l1 and V l2 (l = 1, 2) are defined by Here q j , ω j , j = 1, 2 are all l-dependent defined in Table where Following a similar procedure, the mixed scattering probability Γ 12 can be expressed in the contour time formalism as with t 1 , t 2 ∈ C + , t ′ ∈ C -. TABLE I: Parameters qj, ωj, j = 1, 2 of V lj (t) in l-dependent. Also included are the l-dependent time factor T l (t1, t2). Green's functions in superconducting state In this article, we focus our study on the Raman responses of a superconductor in superconducting state. Thus we can simplify the electron Hamiltonian H = H t + H I in mean-field approximation as where Ψ k is the so-called Nambu spinor defined as is the band energy, and ∆ k is the paring potential of the Cooper pairs. τ i , i = 1, 2, 3 are the Pauli matrices. Introduce transformation T , H 0 can be diagonalized into the form as where For realistic calculation, we introduce the corresponding real-time Green's function as where an additional Schwinger-Keldysh index is introduced according to whether t 1 , t 2 belong to C + or C - 6 . The four real-time Green's functions in G(k; t 1 , t 2 ) are defined by Fourier transformed the real-time Green's function by t)e iωt with the real-time translational symmetry, it is readily shown that the real-time Green's functions in mean-field superconducting state follow , and δ + is a positive infinitesimal value. The reduced interactions V lj (t) and V 2 (t) defined in Section II A can now be re-expressed by the new two-component operator Φ k as where q, ν are the transferred momentum and frequency defined in Eq. ( To obtain Υ 2 (k, q), we have considered the approximation q → 0 in Raman scattering. Fig. Consider the non-resonant scattering probability Γ 1 with the contour time formula (24). In superconducting state, we consider a mean-field approximation where we neglect the roles of the collective low-energy excitations as we have discussed above. Γ 1 can be approximated in zero-th order mean-filed perturbation as which is shown schematically by the Feynman diagram in Fig. FIG. Use Wick's theorem to decompose the multi-particle correlation in Γ (0) 1 and then transform it into the real-time formalism, the non-resonant scattering probability Γ 1 in mean-field approximation is given by To obtain ∆t in the last derivation, we have used the identity ∆t 2π δ(ν . Substitute the Green's functions Eq. (35) into Eq. (39), Γ 1 is shown to be where c ±± are defined by In formula (40), c +-and c -+ terms describe contribution from single-particle excitations and c ++ and c --terms from Cooper pairs. At low temperature T ≪ T c , since n k↑ = 0 and n -k↓ = 1, c +-= c -+ = c ++ = 0 and c --=1. In this case, only Cooper pairs provide finite contribution to the non-resonant scattering, and thus It shows that there is a threshold frequency ν c beyond which the non-resonant scattering probability is finite. In a s-wave superconductor ν c = 2∆ with ∆ the superconducting gap. Our result Eq. ( In the mean-field superconducting state, Γ 2 can be approximated at zero-th order as Substitute Eq. ( 2 is re-expressed as where q j , q ′ j , j = 1, 2 are l-dependent given in Table In formula (43), Γ is defined by where t 1 , t 2 ∈ C + , t ′ 1 , t ′ 2 ∈ C -and the l-dependent variables T l (t 1 , t 2 ) = e -iω1t1-iω2t2 are given in Table . They can be classified into three categories, the Rayleigh scattering, the fluorescence and the intrinsic energy-shift resonant Raman scattering. Rayleigh scattering is an elastic scattering with the incident and scattered photons having same frequency. The Feynman diagram for Rayleigh scattering is Fig. where 1 . The Rayleigh scattering probability denoted by Γ (0) 2,1 is shown to be where the exchange symmetry between l(l ′ ) = 1, 2 has been considered and I 1 is defined by Here p i and ω i are the momentum and frequency of the incident photons and In the superconducting state, I 1 follows This formula shows clearly that only the single-particle excitations have dominant contribution to the elastic Rayleigh scattering in superconducting state. At low temperature T ≪ T c , the finite superconducting gap leads to I 1 = 0 and thus the Rayleigh scattering is strongly suppressed. It should be noted that since 2,1 is also in order of O(1). This is in contrast to the non-resonant scattering probability Γ (0) 1 in Eq. ( In a fluorescence process, there are sequent photon absorption and photon emission as schematically shown by the Feynman diagram in Fig. where δ l,l ′ and q j , ω j are l-dependent as given in Table where l-dependent integral I l,j is defined by In the mean-field superconducting state, I l,j follows It shows that only the single-particle excitations have contribution to the fluorescence scattering. At low temperature T ≪ T c , I l,j = 0, thus the fluorescence response is largely suppressed in superconducting state. Moreover, the fluorescence scattering probability Γ (0) 2,2 is in order of O(1) similar to the Rayleigh scattering Γ (0) 2,1 . The intrinsic resonant Raman scattering processes are shown schematically in Fig. Denote the intrinsic resonant Raman scattering without time evolution cross by Γ where O * l ′ = O * l ′ (k 1 , q ′ 1 ; k 1q 2 + q ′ 1 , p ip fq ′ 1 ) and O l (k 1 , q 1 ; k 1q 2 + q ′ 1 , q 2 ). The two Wick's decompositions shown by the two Feynman diagrams in Fig. where δ c = δ(ν ′ 1 -ν 1 -ω 1 )δ(ν ′ 2 -ν 1 -ω ′ 1 )δ(ν 2 -ν 1 -ω 1 + ω ′ 2 ). In the mean-field superconducting state, Γ where I 4,j are defined by At low temperature T ≪ T c , since n k↑ = 0 and n -k↓ = 1, I 4,j = 0. Therefore Γ (0) 2,4 is strongly suppressed in superconducting state. Note that all the contributions from the intrinsic resonant Raman scattering to the cross section are in order of O(1/N ), in contrast to that from the two-loop Rayleigh and fluorescence processes. In the general effective mass approximation for the electronic Raman scattering Mixed scattering probability Γ12 The mixed scattering is a pure quantum effect, as it comes from the quantum interference of the resonant and non-resonant scattering processes. In the mean-field superconducting state, the mixed scattering probability denoted t f ti dt 1 dt 2 T t [V 1 (t 1 )V 1 (t 2 )] .Thus the scattering probability Γ involves three contributions,Γ = Γ 1 + Γ 2 + Γ 12 ,(8)