The properties of the superconducting and the anomalous normal state have been described by using the Eliashberg method. The pairing mechanism has been reproduced with help of the Hamiltonian, which models the electron-phonon and electron-electron-phonon interaction (EEPh). The set of the Eliashberg equations, which determines the order parameter function (φ), the wave function renormalization factor (Z), and the energy shift function (χ) has been derived. It has been proven that for the sufficiently large values of EEPh potential, the doping dependence of order parameter (φ/Z) has the analogous course to that observed experimentally in cuprates. The energy gap in the electron density of states is induced by Z and χ -the contribution from φ is negligible. The electron density of states possesses the characteristic asymmetric form and the pseudogap is observed above the critical temperature. Superconductors, in which the condensate of the Cooper pairs is induced by the electron-phonon (EPh) interaction, can be modeled by Fröhlich Hamiltonian The Eliashberg equations can be divided into three groups. The first one allows to determine the function of the order parameter (φ k (iω n )), the second one serves to calculate the value of the wave function renormalization factor (Z k (iω n )), and the third one determines the energy shift function (χ k (iω n )). The Eliashberg system is supplemented by the equation for the chemical potential. The quantities k and ω n denote respectively the mo-mentum of the electron and the fermion Matsubara frequency: ω n ≡ (π/β) (2n -1), where β ≡ (k B T ) -1 (k B is the Boltzmann constant). It should be noted that the order parameter in the Eliashberg formalism is defined by: ∆ k (iω n ) ≡ φ k (iω n ) /Z k (iω n ). The function Z k (iω n ) determines the ratio of the electron effective mass to the electron band mass, and the quantity χ k (iω n ) directly renormalizes the electron band energy. The great advantage of the approach proposed by Eliashberg is the fact that the thermodynamic properties of the superconducting state can be determined under this scheme for any value of the electron-phonon coupling constant. The results obtained for the classical superconductors usually provide the quantitative agreement between the theoretical predictions and the experimental data The Eliashberg equations can be reduced to the BCS model, but it is necessary to skip the retardation, strongcoupling, and many-body effects: ∆ k (iω n ) → ∆ k , Z k (iω n ) = 1, and χ k (iω n ) = 0. The main purpose of the presented paper is to analyze the properties of the energy gap in the electron density of states in the framework of the Eliashberg formalism. We are interested in the case of the gap, which exists also above the critical temperature (T C ). Such gap is usually described as the pseudogap in difference of the energy gap induced by the order parameter. The inspiration for the conducted research was the experimental data obtained in the high-temperature superconductors based on cooper We demand that the pseudogap would appear spontaneously in the electron density of states, and not be artificially postulated in the formalism. In order to initially approximate the considered issue let us take into account the isotropic spectral function (A (ω, ε)) that uniquely determines the electron density of states: N (ω) ≡ A (ω, 0). The quantity A (ω, ε) should be calculated on the basis of the formula: while the diagonal part of the Green function takes the form: Let us note that on the real axis Z (ω), χ (ω), and φ (ω) take the complex values, thus the formula (1) can denote a very complicated function. For the case T > T C , we assume φ (ω) = 0. However, the disappearance of the physical value of the order parameter above the critical temperature (∆ (T ) = φ (T ) /Z (T )), determined with the help of the equation: does not automatically mean the disappearance of the function φ (ω) on the whole real axis. Mindful of this notice, we write down the simplified formula on the electron density of states: The indexes R and I denote the real and imaginary part, respectively. On the basis of the equation (3), we conclude that if the pseudogap in the electron density of states has to be observed above T C , is will has to be induced by the strong-coupling and many-body effects (Z (ω) and χ (ω)). Hence, the following conclusions can be drawn: -The pseudogap cannot be described in the mean-field approximation, where Z (ω) = 1 and χ (ω) = 0. It is the dynamic effect, i.e. it is related to the dependence of the wave function renormalization factor and the energy shift function on the frequency. The description of the pseudogap in the static approach is incorrect. -The pseudogap has nothing in common with the additional electron phase, because Z (ω) and χ (ω) do not represent the order parameter. -Z (ω) and χ (ω) take the non-zero values both below and above T C . Thus, they may make the important contribution in the energy gap in both superconducting and "normal" state. -Due to the weak dependence of Z (ω) and χ (ω) on the temperature, in the case of the significant pseudogaps existence, we can expect the anomalous temperature dependence of the energy gap in the superconducting state. The energy gap in the superconducting state should smoothly transit into the pseudogap. As it was already mentioned, our goal is to quite simply describe the properties of the energy gap existing also above T C . For this reason, we consider incomplete pairing mechanism associated with the superconducting state in cuprates. We limit to the electron-phonon component, which consists of the electron-phonon and electron-electron-phonon ineraction. This choice was based on the following experimental and theoretical facts: -(i) in cuprates, the ARPES method clearly indicates the existence of the low-energy kink in the energy spectrum near the phonon energy -The important role of EEPh interaction in cuprates is evidenced by the experimentally observed half-value of the magnetic flux -Carried out so far theoretical studies suggest that using the Hamiltonian including EPh and EEPh terms it is possible to reproduce some properties of the superconducting state in cuprates. In particular, it was shown that the model allows to correctly calculate the critical temperature and the energy gap at zero Kelvin. It should be noted that appropriate calculations were carried out for the large number of the chemical compounds, and each time obtained results were consistent with the experimental data The Hamiltonian, which models the electron-phonon and electron-electron-phonon interaction, in momentum representation has the following form where first term describes the system of non-interacting electrons and phonons: The symbol ε k is defined by: ε k ≡ ε k -μ, whereas ε k is the electron band energy; μ denotes the chemical potential. We assume that electrons can propagate in the square lattice with the hopping integral t. In the considered case, energy band can be calculated using: The function ω q determines the values of the phonon energies. The interaction operators are given by: and k (q) and v (2) k,k (q, l) denote the EPh and EEPh potentials, respectively. Next, we define the Nambu spinors: The matrix Green function takes the form: ≡ g For T > T C , the diagonal elements of G k (iω n ) model the properties of the non-superconducting state. The condensate of Cooper pairs below the critical temperature is described by all elements of the matrix Green function. The Nambu spinors do not meet strictly anti-commutation relation where the non-interacting Green functions are defined as: The scalar Dyson equations were achieved only for diagonal Green function. The non-diagonal elements describing the properties of the superconducting state meet the truncated Dyson equation due to the existence of the condensate only in the case of non-zero pairing interaction. The self-energies m k (iω n ) can be written as: New symbols occurring in the formulas ( The phonon propagator can be calculated in the non-interacting case: where: ω l ≡ (2π/β) l, F q (Ω) represents the phonon density of states, and ω 0 is the maximum phonon frequency. Obtained results enable the derivation of the Dyson equation for the matrix Green function: -1 denotes the propagator for the non-interacting electrons. The matrix of self-energy has the form: where τ 0 -τ 3 represent the Pauli matrix base and the following dependence was used: Next, the distribution of self-energy was postulated: On the other hand, the equation ( Substituting the expression ( where: In the next step, the formula Comparing with each other the formulas ( where: and D q (m) ≡ D q (iω m ). It should be noted that φ n and φ n take identical values. For this reason, the discussion is limited to φ n . The function P (n) is given by: n 2 +ν 2 , and ν ≡ βω 0 /2π. The chemical potential should be calculated from the equation: , W is the half-width of the electron band, and the density of states has the form , where b 1 = -0.04687t -1 and b 2 = 21.17796t. From the physical point of view, the function ρ (ε) characterizes the van Hove singularity located at the Fermi level. In the cuprates it is related to the CuO 2 planes and is observed close to the Fermi energy. For example, in YBa 2 Cu 4 O 8 the singularity exists about 19 meV below ε F at the Y point in the Brillouin zone The Eliashberg equations set was solved for 45 Matsubara frequencies, which was related to taking into account above 90 thousands of terms in the triple sum over Matsubara frequencies. The calculations used the modified numerical methods originally designed to solve the classical Eliashberg equations with the electron-phonon pairing kernel The figures 3 (A)-(C) show plots of ∆ n=1 , Z n=1 , and χ n=1 in the dependence of the average number of electrons (doping). The most interesting results were obtained for the order parameter (Fig. Interesting results concerning the superconducting state can be obtained for doping < n >= 0.95, in the case of which, the highest value of the critical temperature was determined (T C = 39.4 K). By studying the dependence of the order parameter on the EEPh potential, we found that initially increasing v 2 causes the strong increase of ∆ n=1 . Nevertheless, above 1.25 eV, the order parameter again starts to decrease and disappear for v 2 = 5 eV (Fig. The dependence of the order parameter on the potential v 1 looks completely different. For any value of doping, for which the superconducting state is observed, increase in v 1 always causes the increase in ∆ n=1 (and therefore also increase in T C ). Sample results are presented in the figure Referring to the results of above discussion, it can be assumed that the superconducting state with the maximum critical temperature would rise in the case, in which EPh interaction will be strong enough, and EEPh interaction will be relatively weak so that both the electron band mass and the electron band energy would not be renormalized in the significant manner. Taking into consideration the significant dependence of v 1 and v 2 on the distance between atoms building the crystal lattice, it is necessary to consider the possibility of carrying out the series of the high-pressure experiments analogously as it was done for lithium, calcium, and hydrogenated compounds The Eliashberg equations on the imaginary axis enable to determine the exact value of the critical temperature. They also allow (with the good approximation) the calculation of order parameter, electron effective mass, and energy shift function. However, imaginary axis formalism is useless in the analysis of the superconducting state in the non-static area (ω = 0). In order to determine the significance of dynamic effects, ∆ n , Z n , and χ n should be analytically continued on real axis: ∆ n → ∆ (ω), Z n → Z (ω), and χ n → χ (ω). The easiest way to do it is using the formula where: X ∈ {∆, Z, χ}. Parameters p j and q j are determined in the numerical manner. In addition, we have adopted r = 6. The figures 6 (A)-(C) present exemplary results obtained for the case: v 1 = 150 meV, v 2 = 5 eV, and n = 0.8, whereas the selected values of the temperature were taken into account. It can be seen that in the range of the low frequencies (ω ∈ 0, ∼ 100 meV for ∆ (ω), and ω ∈ 0, ∼ 75 meV for Z (ω) and χ (ω)), the solutions of the Eliashberg equations take the real values. From the physical point of view, this means the lack of the damping effects The results obtained for the cases analogous as in the figure As it was already mentioned, the real axis formalism allows to study the properties of the superconducting state outside the static area. It is possible then to give the answer to question: what can be the reason of the creation of the anomalous energy gap in the electron density of states, observed experimentally in cuprates In the presented work we have partially reproduced the properties of the superconducting and the anomalous normal state in cuprates. Considerations have been based on the Hamiltonian modeling the electron-phonon and the electron-electron-phonon interaction. The thermodynamic equations have been derived in the framework of the Eliashberg formalism. We have shown that the experimental dependence of the order parameter on the doping can be qualitatively reproduced for the sufficiently large value of the EEPh potential. Then, it was proven that the Eliashberg equations correctly characterize the type of the normal-superconducting state phase transition. In our opinion, the most interesting result was obtained during explaining the origin of the energy gap in the electron density of states. We have shown that the energy gap is induced by the diagonal elements of the matrix self-energy (Z and χ), which are associated with the anomalous normal state above T C . The explicit contribution to the course of the electron density of states derived from superconducting state proves to be negligibly small. 