We present temperature-dependent in-plane resistivity measurements on FeSe single crystals under He-gas pressure up to 800 MPa and magnetic fields B ≤ 10 T. A sharp phase transition anomaly is revealed at the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic transition at Ts slightly below 90 K. Ts becomes reduced with increasing pressure in a linear fashion at a rate dTs/dP ≃ -31 K/GPa. This is accompanied by a P -linear increase of the superconducting transition temperature at Tc ∼ 8.6 K with dTc/dP ≃ +5.8 K/GPa. Pressure studies of the normal-state resistivity highlight two distinctly different regimes: for T > Ts, i.e., in the tetragonal phase, the in-plane resistivity changes strongly with pressure. This contrasts with the state deep in the orthorhombic phase at T ≪ Ts, preceding the superconducting transition. Here a T -linear resistivity is observed the slope of which does not change with pressure. Resistivity studies in varying magnetic fields both at ambient and finite pressure reveal clear changes of the magnetoresistance, ∆ρ ∝ B 2 , upon cooling through Ts. Our data are consistent with a reconstruction of the Fermi surface accompanying the structural transition. The discovery of superconductivity in LaFeAsO High-quality single crystals of FeSe were synthesized by employing a vapor-transport technique as described elsewhere Figure In the inset of Fig. Figure For analyzing the temperature dependence of the normalstate resistivity shown in Fig. slope A i with temperature is shown in the inset of Fig. For the data at P = 0, A i stays constant within the error bars at A = (4.9 ± 0.15) μΩ cm for 10 K ≤ T ≤ T 0 ≃ 35 K, i.e., ρ(T ) follows to a good approximation an in-T linear behavior (solid line in Fig. In Fig. For magnetic fields aligned parallel to the c axis (Fig. In addition, the data in Fig. For a more detailed investigation of the MR effect, especially for exploring its interrelation with the structural transition at T s , experiments at T = const. under varying magnetic fields have been performed. In the main part of Fig. for two fixed temperatures, T 1 = 81 K and T 2 = 89 K, i.e., slightly below and above T s , respectively. In these experiments the temperature was stabilized within ∆T ± 0.01 K. For both temperatures, the MR ∆ρ ab (B) for B ≤ 10 T, the maximum field available, follows to a good approximation a B 2 dependence albeit with different slopes. A ∆ρ ab (B) ∝ B 2 dependence was observed also for all other T = const. experiments on samples #1 and #2 performed here. The slopes, d(∆ρ ab )/dB 2 for samples #1 and #2 are plotted as a function of temperature in the inset of Fig. To follow the MR effect and its interrelation with T s also under varying hydrostatic pressures, we compare in Fig. The response we observed for both the structural and the superconducting transition of single-crystalline FeSe to hydrostatic pressure can be compared with results of other pressure studies on this material reported in the literature. The initial decrease in T s observed here of dT s /dP = -(31 ± 0.7) K/GPa is slightly larger than ∼ -22 K/GPa revealed by Miyoshi et al. where V m = 23.34 cm 3 is the molar volume, ∆β and ∆C p are the corresponding jumps at T cr in the volume thermal expansion and specific heat, respectively. For the superconducting transition, by using ∆β = 2.14 • 10 -6 K -1 and ∆C p /T c = 9.45 mJ mol -1 K -2 39 , this yields dT c /dP = (5.3 ± 1.2) K/GPa 26 , in good agreement with the present results. For the structural transition, using ∆C p /T s ≈ 5.5 mJ mol -1 K -2 23 and ∆β ≈ 8.87 • 10 -6 K -1 26 , we find dT s /dP ≈ 37.6 K/GPa, also in good agreement with our present data. Whereas there appears to be a clear correlation between the increase of T c and the decrease of T s under pressure as found in other Fe-based materials The data in Fig. In contrast to the tetragonal phase, the resistivity in the orthorhombic phase upon approaching the superconducting state is found to be essentially pressure insensitive. For pressures P ≤ 350 MPa an in-T linear behavior ρ ab (T ) = ρ ab (0) + AT α , α = 1, with a pressureindependent slope A, could be identified over an extended temperature range. This is a remarkable observation in various respects. First, an T -linear resistivity over an extended temperature range has been observed also for other Fe-based superconductors there is no obvious way to link the in-T linear resistivity with the presence and the strength of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations in FeSe observed by NMR experiments From the temperature-dependent resistivity measurements performed under field orientations (Fig. Detailed studies of the resistivity and magnetoresistivity were performed under hydrostatic pressure on highquality FeSe single crystals. From these experiments, the pressure dependences of the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic phase transition at T s and the superconducting transicould be determined with high accuracy. For T s we find a linear decrease with increasing pressure at a rate -31K/GPa which is accompanied by a linear increase in T c with +5.8K/GPa. In addition, the pressure studies revealed a normal-state resistivity which is (i) highly pressure sensitive in the tetragonal phase and (ii) pressure independent in orthorhombic state preceding the superconducting transition. More specifically, we observed an in-T linear resistivity over an extended temperature range the slope of which does not change with pressure. Given the positive effect of pressure on both T c and the of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations 51 in this compound, we do not see an obvious way to relate the T -linear resistivity to a magnetic quantum-critical-point scenario as, e.g., revealed for BaFe 2 1-x P x ) 2 