Using a spin-parameterized quasiclassical Keldysh-Usadel technique, we theoretically study supercurrent transport in several types of diffusive ferromagnetic(F )/superconducting(S) configurations with differing magnetization textures. We separate out the even-and odd-frequency components of the supercurrent within the low proximity limit and identify the relative contributions from the singlet and triplet channels. We first consider inhomogeneous one-dimensional Josephson structures consisting of a uniform bilayer magnetic S/F /F /S structure and a trilayer S/F /F /F /S configuration, in which case the outer F layers can have either a uniform or conical texture relative to the central uniform F layer. Our results demonstrate that for supercurrents flowing perpendicular to the F /F interfaces, incorporating a conical texture yields the most effective way to observe the signatures of the long-ranged spin-triplet supercurrents. We also consider three different types of finitesized two-dimensional magnetic structures subjected to an applied magnetic field normal to the junction plane: a S/F /S junction with uniform magnetization texture, and two S/F /F /S configurations with differing F /F bilayer arrangements. In one case, the F /F interface is parallel with the S/F junction interfaces while in the other case, the F /F junction is oriented perpendicular to the S/F interfaces. We then discuss the proximity vortices and corresponding spatial maps of currents inside the junctions. For the uniform S/F /S junction, we analytically calculate the magnetic field induced supercurrent and pair potential in both the narrow and wide junction regimes, thus providing insight into the variations in the Fraunhofer diffraction patterns and proximity vortices when transitioning from a wide junction to a narrow one. Our extensive computations demonstrate that the induced long-range spin-triplet supercurrents can deeply penetrate uniform F /F bilayers when spin-singlet supercurrents flow parallel to the F /F interfaces. This is in stark contrast to configurations where a spin-singlet supercurrent flows perpendicular to the F /F interfaces. We pinpoint the origin of the induced triplet and singlet correlations through spatial profiles of the decomposed total supercurrents. We find that the penetration of the long-range spin-triplet supercurrents associated with supercurrents flowing parallel to the F /F interfaces, are more pronounced when the thickness of the F strips are unequal. Lastly, if one of the S terminals is replaced with a finite-sized normal metal, we demonstrate that the corresponding experimentally accessible S/F /F /N spin valve presents an effective platform in which the predicted long-range effects can be effectively generated and probed. The interaction between the different order parameters in proximity coupled nanostructures comprised of ferromagnets (F ) and superconductors (S) has attracted considerable attention from numerous scientific disciplines in both the theoretical and experimental communities. When a single quantization axis can be defined throughout the system, such as in a simple S/F bilayer with a uniformly magnetized ferromagnet, the Cooper pair wavefunction is composed of singlet and opposite-spin triplet components. In this paper, we make use of a spin parametrization scheme for the Green's function, the Usadel equation, and associated boundary conditions. This method provides a suitable framework for separating the supercurrent into spin singlet, opposite-spin triplet, and equal-spin triplet components, using the spin parametrization technique outlined for a generic three dimensional system. Our model allows for investigations into a broad range of realistic finite-size ferromagnet/superconductor hybrids with arbitrary magnetization patterns subject to an external magnetic field Next, we consider three different types of finite-sized two-dimensional magnetic Josephson junctions subject to an applied magnetic field. To explore the possibility of induced long-range triplet effects, additional magnetic inhomogeneity is introduced by the addition of another ferromagnet layer, thus establishing double magnet S/F /F /S Josephson junctions. These types of structures comprise the main focus of the paper. Two types of S/F /F /S configurations are considered: In one case, the F /F interface is parallel to the interfaces of the S leads, while in the other case, the F /F junction is oriented perpendicular to them. In either scenario, when an external magnetic field is present, it is applied normal to the junction plane. Our findings demonstrate that a diffusive S/F /F /S Josephson junction in the low proximity limit can generate long-ranged triplet supercurrents depending on the direction of charge supercurrent with respect to the F /F interface orientation. In particular, if charge supercurrent flows parallel with the F /F interface, spin-triplet components generated in one ferromagnetic wire deeply penetrate the adjacent ferromagnet with relative orthogonal magnetizations. For these types of structures, we find that the long-ranged effect manifests itself when the thickness of the ferromagnetic strips are unequal. The paper is organized as follows: We present a succinct review of the theoretical framework, spin-parametrization scheme, and parameters employed in Sec. II. In Sec. III, the one-dimensional spin-parameterized Green's function is discussed, and in Sec. III.1 we present the approach taken to evaluate the corresponding decomposed supercurrents. In Sec. III.1, we discuss the critical supercurrent, 0-π transitions and equal-spin triplet components of the supercurrent for one-dimensional S/F /F /S, S/F /F /F /S, and S/Ho/F /Ho/S structures. Next, in Sec. IV we expand our investigations into two-dimensional hybrid junctions. In Sec. IV.1, the pertinent technical points and parameters used to study the proposed heterostructures theoretically are presented, and which are chosen to be aligned with realistic experimental conditions. In Sec. IV.2, we consider i) the wide-junction limit, and ii) the narrow-junction limit of a uniform S/F /S junction. Corresponding analytical expressions are given for the pair potential and supercurrent response when the system is subject to an applied magnetic field. In part iii) we compliment our analytical expressions with a full numerical treatment that does not resort to the previous simplifying assumptions. In Sec. IV.3, we present the spin-parameterized Usadel equation, supplementary boundary conditions, and separate out the contributions from the odd and even frequency components of the net supercurrent describing these two-dimensional systems. In Sec. IV.4, we study one of the main structures, a magnetic S/F /F /S junction, where the double layer F /F interfaces are aligned with the interfaces of the S terminals. In Sec. IV.5, the remaining structure is discussed, where the F /F interfaces are orthogonal to the interfaces of the S terminals. For both configurations, we study the pair potential, charge supercurrent, and its odd or even frequency decomposition. We show also how an external magnetic flux can induce vortex phenomena and modifications to the singlet and triplet correlations responsible for supercurrent transport. We also study the influence of ferromagnetic strip thicknesses on the long-range spin-triplet contributions to the charge supercurrent. Finally, in Sec. IV.6, we study the long-range spin-triplet supercurrents in S/F/F/N valves. These results are then compared with those obtained for their S/F /F /S counterparts. The experimental implications of our findings for these structures are also discussed. Finally, we summarize our findings in Sec. V and give concluding remarks. Here we first outline the theoretical approach for generic three-dimensional systems. The corresponding reduced onedimensional and two-dimensional cases are presented in the subsequent sections. The coupling between an s-wave superconductor and a ferromagnet leads to proximity-induced triplet correlations in addition to the usual singlet pairings. in which ρ3 and σ are 4 × 4 and 2 × 2 Pauli matrices, respectively, and we denote the diffusive constant of the medium by D. Here, the exchange field of a ferromagnetic region, h(x, y, z) = h x (x, y, z), h y (x, y, z), h z (x, y, z) , can take arbitrary directions in configuration space. We have defined the 4×4 version of partial derivative, ∂, by ∂ ≡ ∇ 1 -ie A(x, y, z)ρ 3 in which A(x, y, z) stands for a vector potential producing the applied external magnetic field H(x, y, z) and [ ∂, Ĝ(x, y, z)] = ∇ Ĝ(x, y, z)ie[ A(x, y, z)ρ 3 , Ĝ(x, y, z)]. We have denoted the quasiparticles' energy by ε which is measured from the fermi surface ε F . In the low proximity limit, the normal and anomalous components of the Green's function can be approximately written as, F no (x, y, z) 1 and F (x, y, z) 1, respectively. In this regime therefore, the advanced component of the Green's function can be directly expressed as: where the underline notation reflects 2×2 matrices. Thus, the advanced component, ĜA (x, y, z), of total Green's function Ǧ can be written as: In general, when a system is in a nonequilibrium state, the Usadel equation must be supplemented by the appropriate distribution functions. where n is a unit vector denoting the perpendicular direction to an interface. The parameters G S and G T introduce spinactivity at the S/F interfaces. where, Here we have represented the macroscopic phase of the bulk superconductor by θ. To have more compact expressions, we define the following piecewise functions: where Θ(x) denotes the usual step function. In the situations where an external magnetic field is applied, it is directed along the z-axis. We also use the Coulomb gauge ∇ • A(x, y, z) = 0 throughout our calculations for the vector potential. In a magnetic junction the vector potential is composed of two parts: a) a part due to the magnetic field associated with the exchange interaction in the ferromagnetic layer h(x, y, z), and b) a part due to the external magnetic field H(x, y, z). The contribution due to the exchange interaction measured in experiments reveals itself as a shift in the observed magnetic interference patterns One of the most important quantities in the context of quantum transport through Josephson junction systems is the charge supercurrent, which provides valuable information about the superconducting properties of the system and the associated favorable experimental conditions under which to detect them. Under equilibrium conditions, the vector current density can be expressed by the Keldysh block as follows: where J 0 = N 0 eD/4, N 0 is the number of states at the Fermi surface, and e is the electron charge. The vector current density, J(x, y, z), provides a local spatial map and measure of the charge supercurrent flow through the system. To obtain the total Josephson charge current flowing along a particular direction inside the junction, it is necessary to perform an additional integration of Eq. ( in which W F is the junction width (see e.g., Fig. where we normalize the pair potential as, Ũpair (x, y, z) = U pair (x, y, z)/U 0 , where U 0 = -N 0 λ/8, and λ is a constant inside the superconducting regions. We note that although the pair potential must vanish outside of the intrinsically superconducting regions, the pair amplitude, Ũpair (x, y, z), is generally nonzero in the ferromagnetic regions due to the proximity effect. Due to the possible appearance of triplet pairings in such hybrid structures where τ = (τ x , τ y , τ z ) is a vector comprised of Pauli matrices and T(x, y, z, ε) = (T x , T y , T z ). Thus, the probability of finding odd-frequency triplet superconducting correlations with zero spin projection along the z-axis is |T z | 2 . 1. Having now outlined the Keldysh-Usadel quasiclassical formalism and spinparametrization framework employed in this work, we now proceed to present our analytical and numerical findings in the next sections. In this section, we consider the effectively one-dimensional hybrid structures sketched in Fig. Upon decomposing the Green's function via Eq. ( The Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions at the left S/F interface, Eq. ( Similarly, the Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions at the right F /S interface are also transformed as, By solving this coupled set of complex differential equations with the boundary conditions [Eqs. (11) and ( The current through the junction can be easily obtained by integration of the current density along the y and z directions over the F junction widths W and L, respectively (corresponding to the cross section of the wire). We assume that our system is very wide in the y direction, so that the onedimensional approximation is valid, and therefore the current density remains constant in the y and z directions. It is convenient to define the normalization constant, I 0 ≡ LW J 0 , for the supercurrent, I(x). To extract the contributions to the total supercurrent from the even frequency singlet, and odd frequency triplet correlations, we have also decomposed the supercurrent accordingly into four components: where the total supercurrent is thus the sum of decomposed terms, namely, This decomposition allows for pinpointing the exact behavior of the even-and odd-frequency supercurrent components. Various analytical or numerical schemes with varying approximations have been employed to investigate the structures with magnetization patterns shown in Fig. For comparison purposes, we first consider the simpler S/F/F/S heterostructure 15 shown in Fig. Top row: Critical supercurrent and its components as a function of dF 2, the width of the right magnetic layer in a S/F/F/S junction (see Fig. the introduction, recent theoretical works showed that signatures of the triplet supercurrent may be detected by the appearance of a second harmonic in the supercurrent in ballistic S/F/F/S Josephson junction, provided that d F 1 d F 2 . The higher harmonics were shown to decay exponentially (faster than the first harmonic) when varying the system parameters such as the thickness of the magnetic layers, and exchange field intensities, in the full proximity limit of the diffusive regime. We therefore consider a S/F /F /F /S trilayer structure, as depicted in Fig. To further explore the behavior of the current throughout the junction, we next examine (bottom row, Fig. In a recent experiment perconducting correlations. We have also found consistency with previous studies In this section we present the main results of the paper. We first consider a two-dimensional magnetic S/F /S system subject to an external magnetic field for two regimes: the wide junction W F d F , and the narrow junction W F d F regimes. The magnetic strips are sandwiched between two swave superconducting reservoirs, where the exchange field in the F strips is spatially uniform. This permits analytical solutions that are capable of accurately predicting the behavior of relevant physical quantities such as charge and spin supercurrents, as well as the pair potential. The analytical results are complemented with full numerical investigations, including studies of the dependence of the critical charge supercurrent on the external magnetic field, and the corresponding appearance of proximity vortices. The current density spatial map is also investigated, giving a global view of the distribution of supercurrents throughout the junction. We next consider two kinds of finite-sized magnetic S/F /F /S Josephson junctions subject to an external magnetic field. For these systems, analytical routes are scarce, and we must in general resort to numerical approaches. In one case, we assume the double layer magnetic F strips comprising the F /F junction are parallel with the S interfaces. In the other case, however, we assume that the F strips are perpendicular to the S interfaces. Using the spin-parametrization introduced in Sec. II.2, we can then study the even and odd frequency components of the total charge Josephson current inside the proposed structures. In this subsection, we discuss the assumptions used in our calculations, along with the parameters and notations used throughout. As was previously mentioned, the external magnetic field is confined within the non-superconducting regions In normalizing our equations, we write the external magnetic flux as Φ = Φ/Φ 0 , where Φ ≡ W F d F H z , W F is the junction width, and Φ 0 = /2e is the magnetic flux quantum. We here consider a two-dimensional ferromagnetic S/F /S Josephson junction where the magnetization of the magnetic strip is homogeneous. Although our theoretical approach allows for completely general patterns in the magnetization texture, we restrict our focus here to a specific case where the exchange field has only one component along the z direction, h(x, y, z) = (0, 0, h z ), thus permitting analytical solutions to the Usadel equation. The two-dimensional junction resides in the xy plane so that the S/F interfaces are parallel with the y axis (see Fig. Using this simplified system of decoupled partial differential equations, we consider two regimes: In the first case, we assume the junction width W F d F , thus, terms involving the ratio d F /W F can be dropped, leading to further simplifications. In the second regime, the junction width W F d F , corresponding to a narrow magnetic nanowire. To be complete, we also implement a full numerical investigation, without the simplifying assumptions above and with arbitrary values of ratio W F /d F . This requires numerical solutions to a complex system of partial differential equations [see Eqs. (1)]. Several checks on the numerics were performed, including reproducing previous results involving nonmagnetic S/N /S Josephson junctions, where the exchange field of the F layer is equal to zero. where ∇ ≡ (∂ x , ∂ y , ∂ z ). The above decoupled partial differential equations appear only for a magnetic junction where the magnetization has one component h = (0, 0, h z ). If we now expand the boundary conditions given by Eq. ( while the boundary conditions at the right interface take the following form: The simplifying geometric approximations mentioned above can now be applied to the above equations, while adhering to the requirement that the corresponding regimes are experimentally accessible. Wide junction limit, WF dF : Analytical results If we assume that the width of junction is much larger than its length, terms involving d F /W F in Eq. ( Here, we define ± ≡ ε ± h z (x, y, z), and the Thouless energy T = D/d 2 F . Note that all partial derivatives in Eqs. (20) are solely with respect to the x coordinate. In other words, the original two-dimensional problem is now reduced to a quasi one-dimensional one. These uncoupled differential equations can be solved analytically thus permitting additional insight into the transport properties of ferromagnetic Josephson junctions. The Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions, Eq. ( Similarly, the boundary conditions at the right S/F interface located at x = d F can be written as follows: The macroscopic phases of the left and right superconducting terminals are labeled θ l and θ r , respectively. The magnetic strips are assumed isolated in the y direction so that physically no current passes through the boundaries at y = 0, and y = W F . Thus, to ensure that the supercurrent does not pass through the vacuum boundaries in the y direction, we have the following conditions: With the solutions to Eq. ( The normalized pair potential, Eq. ( If we solve the Usadel equations Eqs. ( where the numerators N ± and denominators D ± are given by Similar solutions can be found for f * ± (-ε). In order to simplify notation, we have defined λ ± = 2i( ± h z )/ T , and the macroscopic phase difference of the superconducting terminals is denoted by φ = θ l -θ r . The charge current density expressed by Eq. ( where, Integrating the junction width over the y-direction, we end up with the total charge supercurrent across the junction: where we have extracted the phase and flux dependent terms and absorbed the remaining coefficients into I 0 . The maximum charge supercurrent occurs when the superconducting phase difference equals |φ| = π/2. From Eq. ( If we now insert the recently obtained solutions to the Usadel equations into the pair potential equation, Eq. ( If we restrict the proximity pair potential profile above by considering a fixed x position, corresponding to the middle of the junction (x = 1/2), we arrive at an expression which is now x independent: As seen, the cos [φ-2yΦ]/2 term is zero at φ-2yΦ = mπ, for m an odd integer. Therefore, the zeros of the proximity pair potential at the middle of magnetic strip are located at y = (φ -mπ)/2Φ so that -1/2 < y < 1/2. Setting h z = 0, recovers the nonmagnetic S/N /S junction result for the proximity pair potential. The next useful regime that leads to analytical results is that corresponding to a narrow junction, that is, W F d F . In this case, we assume that the width of the ferromagnetic layer W F ξ H , where ξ H is the characteristic length describing the Green's function oscillations in the ferromagnetic layer. This assumption permits averaging the relevant equations over the junction width. Therefore, making the substitutions -Hyx y = 0 and H 2 y 2 y = H 2 /12, where . . . y denotes spatial averaging over the y direction, results in the modified Usadel equations: where we define Γ H ≡ Dπ 2 H 2 W 2 F /6, and thus, Γ H / T = Φ 2 /6. The quantity, Γ H , is known as the magnetic depairing energy where the numerators N ± and denominators D ± are now defined by the following expressions; and, Here, we have introduced a simplified notation, where we define: . If we substitute these solutions to the anomalous Green's function, Eq. ( where the junction characteristics are obtained via averaged values. The critical supercurrent thus shows a monotonic decaying behavior against the external magnetic flux Φ in the narrow junction regime. This fact can be understood by noting the role of Γ H in the Usadel equations. In the narrow junction limit, the external magnetic field breaks the coherence of Cooper pairs and the Fraunhofer diffraction patterns for the critical current in the wide junction limit turns to a monotonic decay. The proximity vortices, which are closely linked to the Fraunhofer patterns, vanish in this regime due to the narrow size of junction width. This finding is also in agreement with the nonmagnetic S/N /S junction counterpart If we substitute the solutions from Eq. ( Interference patterns, proximity vortices, and current densities: Numerical investigations Previously we utilized various approximations to simplify situations and permit explicit analytical solutions. To investigate the validity of our analytic results, we solve numerically the Usadel equations, Eq. ( Figure In Fig. The Usadel equations in this section have dealt solely with the even-frequency superconducting correlations with spinzero projection along the spin-quantization axis. This is due to the fact that we have only considered ferromagnetic strips with a uniform magnetization texture. For inhomogeneous magnetization textures, the complex partial differential equations become coupled and increase in number to eight in the low proximity limit. This number is doubled if the full proximity limit The spin parameterized boundary conditions at the left S/F interface, Eq. ( and for the right S/F interface, we have: Using Eq. ( The y component of the supercurrent density, J y (x, y), takes the same form as J x (x, y), with the partial-x derivatives replaced by derivatives with respect to y, and also the inclusion of the appropriate component of the vector potential. Incorporating the spin-parametrization, Eq. ( x,y (x, y)) and odd-frequency (J sy x,y (x, y), J sz x,y (x, y)) components. The two ferromagnetic layers have unequal lengths: dF 1 = 0.2ξS, and dF 2 = 1.8ξS, while their widths are equal: WF 1 = WF 2 = 2.0ξS. The vertical lines identify the two ferromagnetic regions labeled F1 and F2. In part (a), there is no applied magnetic field, while in part (b) the external magnetic field corresponds to a flux of Φ = 3Φ0. The critical current components in both cases, (a) and (b), are plotted as a function of x-position at four different locations along the junction width: y = 0.25ξS, 0.50ξS, 0.75ξS, 1.0ξS. Thus, the pair potential involves only even-frequency components of the parameterized Green's function, consistent with the presence of a singlet order parameter in the left and right superconducting banks. In the next subsections, we solve the above equations for two different magnetization configurations, with and without an external magnetic field. The spin-parametrization outlined here will then delineate the various contributions the singlet and triplet correlations make to the supercurrent. IV.4. S/F /F /S heterostructures: parallel F /F and S/F interfaces Employing the spin-parametrization with the Usadel equations together with the boundary conditions given in the previous section, we numerically study the proximity induced triplet correlations in a two-dimensional magnetic S/F /F /S Josephson junction. Here the F /F interface is parallel with the outer S interfaces. The configuration is depicted in Fig. ). Also, the junction width is equal to the width of the F stripes, i.e., The charge supercurrent given by Eq. ( terms involving T y ⇒ J sy x,y , (39c) terms involving T z ⇒ J sz x,y . In order to explicitly study the influence of each component of the decomposed charge supercurrent, we fix the magnetization of the F 1 wire to be in the y-direction: h 1 = (0, h y , 0). Similarly, the magnetization of F 2 is orthogonal to that of F 1 , and oriented in the z direction: h 2 = (0, 0, h z ). This orthogonal magnetization configuration is an inhomogeneous magnetic state that results in effective generation of equal-spin triplet correlations x , J sy x , and J sz x , are also shown. These quantities can only vary spatially in the x-direction too since in the absence of an external field, the total supercurrent is generated from the phase difference φ between the S terminals, which vary only along the junction length (x direction). The odd-frequency triplet components of the supercurrent are localized in the F 1 or F 2 regions depending on the specific magnetization orientation in each region (see also the discussion in Sec. III). It is evident that J sy x disappears in the right F while J sz x is zero inside F 1 segment where h 1 = (0, h y 1 , 0), h 2 = (0, 0, h z 2 ), respectively ( h 1 → J sy , h 2 → J sz ). Thus J sy is generated in F 1 and at the F /F interface is converted into J sz in F 2 , or vice versa. The two components are generated in one F and do not penetrate into the other F with orthogonal magnetization. Turning now to Fig. x (x, y), is somewhat smaller than the other components due in part to the small F 1 width, d F 1 = 0.2ξ S . However, comparing J sy x (x, y) in panels (a) and (b), we see that the presence of a magnetic field can result in this triplet component now existing in F 2 , and it can also be more prominent in F 1 . Turning now to the y components of the currents, we see that the magnitudes have increased in most instances by almost an order of magnitude or more. Although Spatial maps of the maximum total charge current, pair potential, and the even-(J s0 x,y (x, y)) and odd-frequency (J sx x,y (x, y), J sy x,y (x, y), J sz x,y (x, y)) components of the charge current. The configuration of the S/F /F /S Josephson junction considered here is shown in Fig. To study the effects of varying the system geometry and its corresponding effects on the triplet supercurrents, we consider more symmetric F regions with equal lengths d F 1 = d F 2 = 1.0ξ S . All other parameters are identical to the previous S/F /F /S junction in Fig. FIG. 12. Schematic of the S/F /F /S Josephson junction where the interface of the double ferromagnet region is oriented perpendicular to the S/F interfaces. The junction is located in the xy plane and the S/F interfaces are along the y axis while the F /F interface is along the x axis. The width of the rectangular F strips WF 1, and WF 2 are generally unequal, i.e., WF 1 = WF 2. The lengths of the F strips, dF , however, are the same and correspond to the junction length. An external magnetic field H is applied normal to the junction plane along the z axis. FIG. x,y (x, y), and triplets, J sy x,y (x, y), J sz x,y (x, y). Here the system parameters are identical to those used previously in Fig. IV.5. S/F /F /S heterostructures: F /F interface perpendicular to S/F interfaces Here we consider a type of S/F /F /S Josephson junction where the previous ferromagnet double layer system is rotated by π/2, so that the F /F interface is normal to the outer S/F interfaces. This layout is shown in Fig. In Fig. The vector plot of the charge supercurrent in Fig. x , is most negative at x = 0 along the y axis while J sy x and J sz x are maximal. Therefore, the singlet-triplet conversion with W F 2 W F 1 is maximal at x = 0. Another important aspect of this S/F /F /S junction is seen in the behavior of J sy x and J sz x as a function of y: the two components are generated in one F region and penetrate deeply into the adjacent F segment. By comparing these plots with those of a S/F /F /S configuration where F /F interface is parallel with the S/F interface subjected to an external magnetic field, presented in Fig. In Fig. x,y (x, y), J sx x,y (x, y), J sy x,y (x, y), J sz x,y (x, y). The same parameter set as Fig. In the previous two figures, the source of the driving current was the macroscopic phase differences between the S terminals in the Josephson structures. We now introduce an additional source and associated triplet correlations by applying an external magnetic field (with corresponding flux Φ = 3Φ 0 ), normal to the junction plane along the z-axis (see schematic, Fig. Upon changing the width of the F layers to W F 1 = W F 2 = 1.0ξ S , Fig. Spatial maps of the total charge supercurrent and pair potential in addition to the current components J s0 x,y (x, y), J sx x,y (x, y), J sy x,y (x, y), J sz x,y (x, y), at maximum charge current flowing across the junction. The same investigations as Fig. Having analyzed in detail the singlet-triplet contributions to the supercurrent in various situations, we now proceed to demonstrate an experimentally accessible structure that can directly detect our predictions involving parallel transport in F /F bilayers. We convert one of the outer S terminals to a finite sized normal layer, so that in effect we consider a simple S/F/F/N spin valve (Fig. Strictly speaking, to determine A y (x), it is necessary to solve Maxwell's equation incorporating the Coulomb gauge in conjunction with the expression for J y (x) and appropriate boundary conditions for H To study the supercurrent behavior, and similar to what was done above for Josephson structures, we separate out the even-and odd-frequency components of the total supercurrent the same as Sec. III.1. We achieve this by first defining I tot (x)=I S0 (x)+I Sx (x)+I Sy (x)+I Sz (x), where I S0 (x), I Sx (x), I Sy (x), and I Sz (x) are given by, Also the boundary conditions at the right far end interface of the normal metal should be modified accordingly (see Fig. Having now established the method in which to determine the spatial behavior of the supercurrent and its decomposi-tions, we present in Fig. It turns out that the the pure spin-1 odd-frequency spinvalve effect is optimal for asymmetric F layer thicknesses. To illustrate this, we consider a symmetric configuration with d F 1 = d F 2 = ξ S , which ensures the same total thickness of the ferromagnet regions (the normal metal thickness is unchanged at d N = 2.5ξ S ). The results of this configuration are represented in the bottom row of Fig. We are now able to compare the behavior of various supercurrent components in the S/F /F /N and the S/F /F /S Josephson structures presented in Sec. III. As seen, our investigations for a wide range of parameters, including misaligned S/F /F /S structures with d F 2 d F 1 , illustrate localized spin-1 components, I Sx (x), I Sy (x), whereby their spin orientation follows the local magnetization orientation. These components of supercurrent are unable to propagate throughout the bilayer F /F junctions where there is a relative orthogonal magnetization. This comparison immediately reveals the efficiency and advantages of a S/F /F /N nanovalve for detecting proximity spin-1 triplet superconducting correlations experimentally. The pure spin-1 triplet diamagnetic response discussed here for the S/F /F /N spin valves might be measured using a local probe such as the density of states or current density. As is well understood, the triplet correlations can alter the induced minigap in the local density of states in the nonsuperconducting regions. For example, the traditional s-wave minigap profile can become peaked due to the emergence of triplet correlations which cause a resonance near the Fermi surface. Also, as seen, our findings demonstrate that only spin-1 triplet components of the diamagnetic current survive in the N region if d F 2 d F 1 , for sufficient magnetization misalignment. Therefore, these results suggest that currents measured experimentally within the N wire for such systems should be comprised of purely equal-spin triplet correlations that are odd-frequency in character. Therefore, the spin-parameterized technique reveals the spatial profile of the odd and even frequency components of the total supercurrent and provides additional insight into their behaviors. The general three-dimensional approach which we outlined can then be employed for two-dimensional finite-size magnetic/superconducting proximity hybrids with arbitrary magnetization patterns. In this paper we categorized S/F hybrids with layered F regions into two classes: configurations hosting supercurrent transport 1) parallel and 2) perpendicular to the F /F interface. The one-dimensional structures studied in Sec. III belong to class 2), while the two-dimensional configurations discussed in this section are examples of class 1). For the fairly wide range of configurations considered in this paper, we demonstrated that singlet supercurrent flow "par-allel" to uniformly magnetized F/F interfaces can generate substantial long-range triplet supercurrents regardless of the specific configuration and geometry In conclusion, we have employed a quasiclassical method and spin-parameterization technique in both the Usadel equations and associated boundary conditions. This approach provides a suitable computational and analytical framework to pinpoint the spatial behaviors of the decomposed odd and even frequency supercurrent components in layered ferromagnetic junctions. We have studied the transport characteristics of the spin decomposed supercurrent components for two generic scenarios and several experimentally relevant structures: systems with 1) parallel or 2) perpendicular charge supercurrent flow relative to the magnetic interfaces. Two types of finite-size two-dimensional magnetic S/F /F /S Josephson junctions subject to an external magnetic field, and supporting supercurrents flow parallel to the F /F interface, are considered. In one type, we assume the F /F interface is parallel to the S/F interfaces, while in the other type, the F /F interface is perpendicular to the S/F interfaces. Our studies revealed that when a supercurrent flows parallel to the F /F junction, the long-ranged spin-triplet supercurrent will be effectively generated and it will propagate deeply into the ferromagnetic regions independent of junction geometries. This phenomenon is more pronounced when the thickness of ferromagnetic strips are unequal (d F 2 d F 1 or W F 2 W F 1 ), depending on the junction type under consideration. This effect disappears when the supercurrent direction is perpendicular to the F /F interface. To gain more insight and to have explicit comparisons, we also studied the various aspects of the spin-decomposed supercurrent components in onedimensional S/F/F/S, S/F/F/F/S, and S/Ho/F/Ho/S hybrids using the spin-parametrization scheme. We studied the spatial maps of each supercurrent component and found that the total supercurrent is dominated by the long-range triplet component, which also governs the behavior of total supercurrent. Our results demonstrated that structures with inhomogeneous magnetization patterns generate long-ranged supercurrents stronger than their uniform counterparts and that the component of supercurrent corresponding to the rotating magnetization component is long-ranged in such structures. Finally, we proposed an S/F /F /N spin-valve, which represents an experimentally accessible platform to probe the predicted phenomena in the parallel supercurrent transport scenario. We have studied the spatial maps of the singlet and triplet supercurrent components of this spin-valve when subjected to an external magnetic field. Our findings demonstrated that for misaligned magnetizations and different thicknesses of the F layers, d F 2 d F 1 , a long-ranged odd-triplet component of the supercurrent response arises and populates the adjacent normal metal N .