We utilize numerical linked-cluster expansions (NLCEs) and the determinantal quantum Monte Carlo algorithm to study pairing correlations in the square lattice Hubbard model. To benchmark the NLCE, we first locate the finite-temperature phase transition of the attractive model to a superconducting state away from half filling. We then explore the superconducting properties of the repulsive model for the d-wave and extended s-wave pairing symmetries. The pairing structure factor shows a strong tendency to d-wave pairing and peaks at an interaction strength comparable to the bandwidth. The extended s-wave structure factor and correlation length are larger at higher temperatures but clearly saturate as temperature is lowered, whereas the d-wave counterparts, which start off lower at high temperatures, continue to rise near half filling. This rise is even more dramatic in the d-wave susceptibility. The convergence of NLCEs breaks down as the susceptibilities and correlation lengths become large, so we are unable to determine the onset of long-range order. However, our results extend the conclusion, previously restricted to only magnetic and charge correlations, that NLCEs offer unique window into pairing in the Hubbard model at strong coupling. Despite several decades of intensive theoretical research, the question of whether a non-local attraction can dominate in a fermionic Hubbard model with local repulsive interaction has remained largely unanswered for parameters relevant to cuprate high-temperature superconductors. These limitations emphasize the need for continued algorithm development. Recently developed numerical linked-cluster expansions (NLCEs) A natural next step is the application of NLCEs to superconductivity. In this Rapid Communication, we show this method can be developed and successfully used to study the pairing correlations in the square lattice Hubbard model, where c iσ (c † iσ ) annihilates (creates) a fermion with spin σ on site i, n iσ = c † iσ c iσ is the number operator, U is the onsite Coulomb interaction, and t is the near neighbor hopping integral. We set k B = 1, and t = 1 as the unit of energy throughout the paper. We complement our NLCE results with those obtained from (numerically unbiased) DQMC simulations on a large lattice. We find excellent agreement between the two in parameter regions accessible to both, and show that the lowest temperatures achievable in the NLCE are similar to, or often lower than, those of the DQMC. For the attractive model (U < 0), or in the weak-coupling regime of the repulsive model, where the sign problem is either absent or less severe, DQMC can generally access lower temperatures than the NLCE. On the other hand, the series converges to lower temperatures in the strong-coupling regime, where DQMC runs into sampling difficulties and faces an unforgiving sign problem. We find that, for an interaction strength U equal to the bandwidth, the s-wave pairing structure factor of the attractive model away from half filling shows divergent behavior at low temperatures, and points to a finite transition temperature that is consistent with findings of previous large-scale DQMC studies. In NLCEs, an extensive property of the lattice model, when normalized to the number of sites, is expressed in the thermodynamic limit in terms of contributions from finite clusters of various sizes and topologies that can be embedded in the lattice. Thus, NLCEs use the same basis as the high-temperature expansions (HTEs). However, the calculation of the extensive quantities at the level of individual clusters is left to an exact numerical method, such as exact diagonalization, as opposed to a perturbative expansion in terms of inverse temperature in the HTEs. A typical expansion involves clusters up to a certain size that are chosen according to a self-consistent criterion (see below). Despite the lack of an explicit small parameter, having a finite number of clusters in the series inevitably leads to the loss of convergence below a certain temperature, where the correlations in the system extend beyond a length of the order of the largest sizes considered. However, the exact treatment of clusters leads to convergence temperatures that are lower than those of HTE with a comparable number of orders. Similar to the analytic Padé approximations used extensively in HTEs, here we take advantage of two numerical resummation techniques to improve the convergence of our series at low temperatures. We use the Euler algorithm We study the superconducting properties of the model at several values of the interaction strength and on a fine grid of temperature and chemical potential. The latter allows us to study the calculated quantities at constant electronic densities after numerical conversion. As with previous studies of Hubbard models using the NLCE, One of the quantities we calculate is the equal-time pairing structure factor, where is the equal-time pair-pair correlation function. Here, the pairing operator for the symmetry α is defined as We consider three pairing symmetries in this study; (local) s-wave, d-wave, and s * -wave. For the s-wave symmetry, f s ij = δ ij . In the case of s * -wave, f s * ij is +1 if i and j are nearest neighbors and j > i (to avoid double counting) and zero otherwise. f d ij for the d-wave symmetry is the same as f s * ij except it takes the value -1 if the bond connecting i and j is along the y axis. Here, we consider only the uniform pairing structure factor, S α (q = 0). The correlated structure factors, S α corr , is obtained by first subtracting off the uncorrelated parts of the expressions in Eq. 3. Having the uniform structure factor (S α or S α corr ), the corresponding correlation length, ξ, can also be calculated using, e.g., (ξ α corr ) 2 = 1 2dS α corr (q = 0) where d = 2 is the dimension. The other quantity of interest for superconductivity is the uniform pairing susceptibility, which is defined as where O α (τ ) = i ∆ α i (τ ). We start with the attractive Hubbard model, for which we know there exists a finite-temperature Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) phase transition to an s-wave superconducting state away from half filling. We now turn our focus to the main subject of this study; pairing in the repulsive Hubbard model. We know that if a similar finite-temperature transition to a superconducting phase takes place in the latter model, the pairing symmetry has to be nonlocal because of the onsite Coulomb repulsion. Therefore, in this case, we only explore the d-wave and the s * -wave symmetries. We also expect the corresponding temperature scales to be much smaller than those for the attractive model since we are looking for attraction in a repulsive model. In Fig. The favorability of d-wave over s * -wave pairing is also evidenced by the behavior of the corresponding correlation lengths, shown in the insets of Fig. Finally, we turn to the pair-field susceptibility. Figure In summary, we have employed two unbiased methods, the NLCE and the DQMC to study finite-temperature superconducting properties of the square lattice Fermi-Hubbard model. To benchmark our NLCE approach, we first explore the s-wave pairing in the attractive model away from half filling. By fitting our low-temperature pairing structure factor to known forms, we obtain a T c that is consistent with the best estimate from largescale QMC simulations. We then investigate the nonlocal s * -wave and d-wave pairing instabilities in the repulsive model at various dopings and for several interaction strengths. We find that the d-wave symmetry has the tendency to be dominant at low temperatures and that its structure factor has a maximum at U ∼ 8. We also calculate the pairing susceptibility, which shows a similar divergent behavior in the d-wave channel and a sharp upturn at low temperatures for large interactions. An important potential application of the results described here is to ongoing emulation of model Hamiltonians which describe fermionic atoms in optical lattices. NLCEs allow the rapid evaluation of physical properties on a dense mesh of Hamiltonian parameters, a requirement for accurate modeling of optical lattice experiments 