We introduce a hybrid qubit based on a semiconductor nanowire with an epitaxially grown superconductor layer. Josephson energy of the transmon-like device ('gatemon') is controlled by an electrostatic gate that depletes carriers in a semiconducting weak link region. Strong coupling to an on-chip microwave cavity and coherent qubit control via gate voltage pulses is demonstrated, yielding reasonably long relaxation times (∼0.8 μs) and dephasing times (∼1 μs), exceeding gate operation times by two orders of magnitude, in these first-generation devices. Because qubit control relies on voltages rather than fluxes, dissipation in resistive control lines is reduced, screening reduces crosstalk, and the absence of flux control allows operation in a magnetic field, relevant for topological quantum information. Superconducting qubits present a scalable solid state approach to building a quantum information processor Previous work has demonstrated superconductornormal-superconductor (SNS) JJs where the normal element is a semiconductor Here we present a superconducting transmon qubit on the epitaxial InAs-Al nanowire JJ We have fabricated and measured two gatemon devices, which show similar performance. Except where noted, data is from the first device. The qubit features a single InAs SNS JJ shunted by a capacitance, C S As with conventional transmons, the gatemon operates as an anharmonic LC oscillator with a nonlinear inductance provided by the JJ. The total capacitance of the gatemon qubit, C Σ , is determined by the capacitance of the T-shaped Al island to the surrounding Al ground plane, as shown in Fig. Fig. Demonstrations of qubit control were performed in the dispersive regime, |f Q -f C | g/2π. Figure While pulsed microwaves allow rotations about axes in the X-Y plane of the Bloch sphere, rotations about the Z-axis may be performed by adiabatically pulsing V G to detune the qubit resonance frequency. Such dynamic control of the qubit frequency is important for fast two qubit gate operations where the resonant frequencies of two coupled qubits are brought close to each other pulse was applied to rotate the qubit out of the X-Y plane and measure the resulting qubit state. The observed precession frequency is consistent with the ∆f Q predicted from the spectroscopy data in Fig. tively cancels low frequency noise in f Q , increases the dephasing time to T Echo = 0.95 μs. This indicates a greater degree of low frequency noise in E J (V G ) in the second device. The observation that T Echo does not reach 2T 1 indicates that higher frequency noise fluctuations faster than τ also contributes to dephasing. Coherence times for these first-generation gatemon devices are comparable to SIS transmons reported a few years ago, where typically T * 2 ∼ T 1 ∼ 2 μs Conventional SIS transmons typically enable tunable frequency control by using two JJs in a SQUID geometry to create an effective flux tunable Josephson coupling energy. The qubit frequency is then controlled using superconducting current loops. The large (mA scale) currents used to control conventional flux-tuned transmons makes scaling to many qubits difficult using control electronics that pass into the cryogenic environment through normal coax lines, filters, and attenuators. On-chip voltage pulses are relatively easily screened, compared to flux pulses, which will reduce cross-talk between qubit control lines. Gatemons, with voltage tunable f Q , also offer new possibilities for large scale superconducting architectures. For instance, FET-based cryogenic multiplexers Finally, we note that the epitaxial InAs-Al nanowires are expected to support Majorana bound states 