We report the electronic properties of the cubic laves phase superconductor CaIr2 (Tc = 5.8 K), in which the Ir atoms have a Pyrochlore lattice. The estimated superconducting parameters obtained from magnetization and specific heat measurements indicate that CaIr2 is a weakly coupled BCS superconductor. Electronic band structure calculations show that the Ir d -states are dominant at the Fermi level, creating a complex Fermi surface that is impacted substantially by spin orbit coupling. Compounds based on 5d transition metals are of recent interest because electron correlations and spin-orbit interactions play an important role in determining their electronic properties. Iridium oxides with the pyrochlore lattice, in particular, are predicted to host exotic electronic states Here we report the synthesis, experimental electronic characterization, and calculated electronic band structure of the cubic Laves phase superconductor CaIr 2 . The Ca atoms in this material (see Fig. Polycrystalline samples of CaIr 2 were prepared by a two-step solid state reaction method, starting from elemental Ca-pieces (99.99%; Alfa Aesar) and Ir-powder (99.99%; Alfa Aesar). A significant amount of calcium excess (200%) was found to be necessary to make high quality material due to Ca volatilization. The starting materials were added into an alumina crucible inside an Ar-filled glove box, which was then sealed inside an evacuated quartz tube. The tube was then slowly heated (50 0 C per hour) and held at 850 0 C for 20 hrs. The resulting powder was then ground well and pressed into a pellet, again with excess calcium, slowly heated in an evacuated quartz tube to 700 0 C, and then held for 12 hrs. The material was single phase at this point, and was kept inside the glove box until characterization. Such handling is necessary to avoid decomposition. The electrical resistivity was measured using a standard four-probe method with an excitation current of 10 mA; small diameter Pt wires were attached to the sample using a conductive epoxy (Epotek H20E). Data were collected from 300 -2 K and in magnetic fields up to 5 T using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The specific heat was measured between 2 and 20 K in the PPMS, using a time-relaxation method, at 0 and 5 Tesla applied magnetic fields. The magnetic susceptibility was measured in a DC field of 10 and 100 Oe; the sample was cooled down to 2 K in zerofield, the magnetic field was then applied, and the sample magnetization followed on heating to 8 K [zero-fieldcooled (ZFC)], and then on cooling to 2 K [field-cooled (FC)] in the PPMS. The electronic structure calculations were performed by density functional theory (DFT) using the WIEN2K code with a full-potential linearized augmented plane-wave and local orbitals [FP-LAPW + lo] basis Fig. , where γ n T represents the electronic contribution in the normal state and β 1 T 3 and β 2 T 5 describe the lattice-phonon contributions to the specific heat. The solid line in Fig. . The μ 0 H c1 data is well described with the above equation, and a least squares fit yielded the value of μ 0 H c1 (0)=381 Oe, which is comparable with the cubic Laves phase CeRu 2 (see Table. I). Fig. to calculate orbital upper critical field (μ 0 H c2 (0) = 3.8T ), which yields a value that agrees well with the calculated value using the WHH method. The WHH expression and the empirical formula are widely used to calculate the μ 0 H c2 (0) for a variety of intermetallic and oxide superconductors. The ratio ∆C γTc can be used to measure the strength of the electron-phonon coupling. In a simple Debye model for the phonon contribution to the specific heat, the β coefficient is related to the Debye temperature Θ D through β = nN A T) contains the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling constant λ ep , which, in the Eliashberg theory, is related to the phonon spectrum and the density of states. ). This value is slightly lower than the value obtained from our band structure calculation. The actual H c2 of real materials is generally influenced by both orbital and spin-paramagnetic effects. The relative importance of the orbital and spin-paramagnetic effects can be described by the Maki parameter, Fig. When the Laves phase structure contains f -electrons then it seems to influence the electron-phonon coupling. To understand this picture have compared the electronic band structure of the strongly coupled superconductor CeRu 2 , In oxide based Ir pyrochlores, the pyrochlore lattice causes magnetic frustration and complex behavior. We have characterized the properties of the pyrochlore lattice superconductor CaIr 2 . The presence of a bulk superconducting transition with T c = 5.8 K was confirmed, and the properties of the superconductor were elucidated through magnetization and heat capacity measurements. The inferred electron-phonon coupling constant λ ep and ∆C γTc show that CaIr 2 is a weakly coupled BCS-type superconductor. The electronic band structure calculations indicate that the the Ir d states are dominant through the Fermi level. Given the profound effect of spin-orbit coupling on the calculated electronic structure, it can be argued that the value of T c , and possibly even the existence of superconductivity at all, is due to the heavy element character imparted to this material by the Ir pyrochlore lattice. This work was supported by the Department of Energy, Division of Basic Energy Sciences, grant DE-FG02-98ER45706.