We report the temperature evolution of the detailed electronic band structure in FeSe singlecrystals measured by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), including the degeneracy removal of the dxz and dyz orbitals at the Γ/Z and M points, and the orbital-selective hybridization between the dxy and d xz/yz orbitals. The temperature dependences of the splittings at the Γ/Z and M points are different, indicating that they are controlled by different order parameters. The splitting at the M point is closely related to the structural transition and is attributed to orbital ordering defined on Fe-Fe bonds with a d-wave form in the reciprocal space that breaks the rotational symmetry. In contrast, the band splitting at the Γ points remains at temperature far above the structural transition. Although the origin of this latter splitting remains unclear, our experimental results exclude the previously proposed ferro-orbital ordering scenario. Several experimental studies report the breakdown of the rotational symmetry in parent and underdoped compounds of Fe-based superconductors (FeSCs) In this letter we report the existence of two distinct splittings between the d xz /d yz bands of FeSe singlecrystals near the Fermi level (E F ). We show that a first splitting decreases with temperature increasing, and disappears at about 100 -120 K, which is slightly higher than T s , suggesting that it is caused by short-range orbital order or fluctuations related to the structural transition. This splitting has a d-wave form breaking rotational symmetry High-quality single-crystals of β-FeSe were grown by the KCl/AlCl 3 chemical vapor transport method We show in Fig. Fig. In Fig. Two major candidates for the splitting at Γ/Z are the SOC In conclusion, we report the temperature evolution of the detailed electronic band structure in FeSe singlecrystals. We observe two distinct d xz /d yz band splittings at the high-symmetry points. The splitting at M is related to the structural transition and has a d-wave form factor, while the splitting at Γ originates most likely from magnetic frustration. Our results clearly exclude the commonly-believed ferro-orbital order and require a new consideration of the origin and implication of the orbital order in FeSCs. We acknowledge D. H. Lee, T. Li and K. Jiang for useful discussions. This work was supported by grants from CAS (XDB07000000), MOST (2015CB921300, 2011CBA001000, 2013CB921700, 2012CB821400), NSFC 