Recent theories of Sr 2 RuO 4 based on the interplay of strong interactions, spin-orbit coupling and multi-band anisotropy predict chiral or helical ground states with strong anisotropy of the pairing states, with deep minima in the excitation gap, as well as strong phase anisotropy for the chiral ground state. We develop time-dependent mean field theory to calculate the Bosonic spectrum for the class of 2D chiral superconductors spanning 3 He-A to chiral superconductors with strong anisotropy. Chiral superconductors support a pair of massive Bosonic excitations of the time-reversed pairs labeled by their parity under charge conjugation. These modes are degenerate for 2D 3 He-A. Crystal field anisotropy lifts the degeneracy. Strong anisotropy also leads to low-lying Fermions, and thus to channels for the decay of the Bosonic modes. Selection rules and phase space considerations lead to large asymmetries in the lifetimes and hybridization of the Bosonic modes with the continuum of un-bound Fermion pairs. We also highlight results for the excitation of the Bosonic modes by microwave radiation that provide clear signatures of the Bosonic modes of an anisotropic chiral ground state. Superfluid 3 He and unconventional superconductors share a common and fundamental property that the ground state breaks one or more symmetries of the normal Fermionic vacuum in conjunction with the usual U(1) gauge symmetry associated with BCS condensation. In the case of Sr 2 RuO 4 the connection with superfluid 3 He may be stronger. The theoretical proposal for a spin-triplet, p-wave ground state in Sr 2 RuO 4 was motivated by similarities between Sr 2 RuO 4 and liquid 3 He, particularly the existence of exchange enhanced paramagnetism in a strongly correlated Fermi liquid Similarly, Rice and Sigrist argued that for Sr 2 RuO 4 , which is a layered perovskite belonging to the D 4h point group, the likely pairing state, in analogy with 3 He, would be the planar state, the 2D analog of the BW state. In weak-coupling theory, and neglecting spin-orbit coupling, the planar state, which belongs to the one-dimensional A 1u representation of D 4h , is degenerate with the 2D chiral AM state, which belongs to the 2D E 1u representation. Thus, if spin-fluctuation exchange is also the mechanism for pairing in Sr 2 RuO 4 , we expect the strong-coupling feedback effect will stabilize the chiral AM state. However, in addition to the near two-dimensionality of the Fermi surface of Sr 2 RuO 4 , incommensurate spin-density-wave (SDW) fluctuations connected with the quasi-one-dimensional α and β bands co-exist with ferromagnetic fluctuations at lower temperatures In what follows we develop a field theory for the Bosonic modes based on the Ginzburg-Landau theory (TDGL) for spintriplet, odd-parity pairing that allows one to compare predictions for 3 He and Sr 2 RuO 4 , and to examine the roles of crystalline anisotropy and strong correlation effects on the Bosonic modes. The Bosonic modes are excitations of a condensate of Cooper pairs for which the parent state is the Fermionic vacuum. Thus, although the TDGL field theory provides insight into the Bosonic excitation spectrum, it misses key features of a more complete theory of the low-lying excitations of the BCS pair condensate. Notably, (i) polarization effects of the underlying Fermionic vacuum on the excitation energies (masses and dispersion) of the Bosonic modes, (ii) finite lifetimes of the Bosonic excitations due to coupling to the Fermionic continuum and (iii) selection rules and matrix elements for the coupling of the Bosonic modes to the electromagnetic (EM) field. Key predictions of a microscopic theory of interacting Fermionic and Bosonics modes are summarized, including microwave spectroscopic signatures of the Bosonic excitation spectrum. The mean-field order parameter for spin-triplet Cooper pairs, ∆ αβ (p) = d μ (p)(iσ μ σ y ) αβ , where α, β label the projections of fermion spins of the Cooper pair, {iσ μ σ y | μ = x , y , z } is the spin-triplet basis of 2 × 2 matrices, is expressed as where d μ (p) is a vector under rotations in spin space, and is a function of the vector basis of p-wave orbital basis functions, ( px , py , pz ), for bulk 3 He. Thus, the amplitudes A μi provide a bi-vector representation of SO(3) S × SO(3) L . For quasi-twodimensional Sr 2 RuO 4 , the orbital basis, (Y x (p),Y y (p)), provides a 2D vector representation in which Y x,y (p) transforms as p x,y under the point group D 4h . These basis functions reflect anisotropic pairing on the Fermi surface. The chiral AM state is the stable equilibrium phase in a narrow temperature window T AB ≤ T < T c of bulk 3 He at pressures P ≥ P c = 21 bar. However, if we confine 3 He as a thin film or within a thin cavity of thickness D ≤ D c ≈ 1 μm the quasi-2D A-phase with d(p) = ∆ √ 2 ẑ ( px ± i py ) is the ground state for all pressures and temperatures However, in the weak-coupling limit the chiral AM phase is degenerate with the 2D planar phase, d(p) = ∆ √ 2 ( x px + ŷ py ). In the context of Sr 2 RuO 4 the 2D planar state is referred to as the "helical state" Consider the Ginzburg-Landau theory for the class of equal-spin pairing (ESP) states of confined superfluid 3 He in 2D. A simple generalization also describes spin-triplet superconductivity on a 2D cylindrical Fermi surface, i.e. pairing on the γ band in Sr 2 RuO 4 within the E 1u representation of D 4h . The general form of the order parameter is then given by where {Y i (p)|i = x, y} are basis functions for the 2D irreducible representation, E 1u , of D 4h , and A = A x x + A y ŷ is a complex vector describing pairing in this generalized "p-wave" orbital basis. In what follows we consider the class of ESP states in which the direction d along which the Cooper pairs have zero spin projection is fixed, either as a spontaneously broken symmetry direction, or by spin-orbit coupling. The general form of the GL free energy functional is constructed from invariants of the maximal symmetry group from products of A i and A * i through 4th order where α(T ) determines the onset of pairing in the E 1u representation, i.e. α(T c ) ≡ 0, and thus, α(T ) ≈ α (T -T c ). The fourth order coefficients, β 1,2,3 , determine the magnitude of the condensation energy density and the relative stability of phases belonging to the E 1u symmetry class. The first three terms in Eq. 3 are invariant under the larger group, i.e. U(1)× SO(2) L z × Z orbit 2 × P × T, while the last term is an additional invariant that is allowed in the case of Sr 2 RuO 4 by the lower symmetry, U(1)× D 4h . It is convenient to express the bulk order parameter in terms of an amplitude and a normalized complex vector, A = ∆ a, with |a| 2 ≡ a • a * = 1. The normalized order parameter is then parametrized by two angles, a = cos θ x + e iφ sin θ ŷ / √ 2 The resulting GL functional is then weak coupling: FIG. For T < T c , minimization with respect to ∆ leads to , and a condensation energy given by with β [a] > 0 for global stability. The ground state is then determined by the normalized order parameter that minimizes β In the case of 2D 3 He we have β 3 = 0, in which case there are two possible ESP ground states; for β 1 > 0 and β 2 > 0 the chiral AM state which breaks time-reversal and 2D parity is preferred. There are two degenerate chiral ground states which are time-reversed partners of one another, a ± = (x ± iŷ)/ √ 2. However, for -β 1 < β 2 < 0 the in-plane polar state with a = cos θ x + sin θ ŷ , for , θ ∈ [0, 2π] minimizes the GL functional. This phase has a continuous degeneracy with respect to orientation of polar axis in the xy plane. Tetragonal anisotropy lifts the continuous degeneracy of the in-plane polar state. For β 2 < 0 and β 3 > 0 the polar state aligns along a [110] direction, e.g. a = (x + ŷ)/ √ 2. However, for -2 3 (1 + β 2 /β 1 ) < β 3 /β 1 < 0 the polar state aligns along a [100] direction, e.g. a = x. The phase diagram is shown in Fig. Here we consider fluctuations within the E 1u representation, and neglect possible low-lying fluctuations of the "helical" phase (A 1u ) or even-parity, B 1g or B 2g , "d-wave" states. Consider the Bosonic excitations of the chiral AM ground state with a + = (x + iŷ)/ √ 2. Space-time fluctuations of the E 1u order parameter, A (r,t) = A -∆a + , are represented by two complex amplitudes, There are two classes of excitations -modes with chirality L z = +1 represented by the field D(r,t) and modes with the timereversed chirality, L z = -1, represented by the field E(r,t) -and altogether four orbital collective modes within the E 1u representation. We construct an effective Lagrangian by expanding the GL free energy functional about the ground state. Time-dependent fluctuations introduce an additional invariant, where μ is the effective inertia of the Cooper pair fluctuations and Ȧ = ∂ t A . The effective potential is obtained by expanding the GL functional to 2 nd order in the fluctuations A (r,t): The Lagrangian, L = K -U , takes a simplified form when expressed in amplitudes for the normal modes: TABLE I: Bosonic Mode Spectrum for the 2D Chiral Ground State a + . The masses of the E ± modes are those for an isotropic 2D chiral condensate in the weak-coupling limit. Also indicated is whether or not the mode can be excited by absorption of microwave photons. The Euler-Lagrange equations reduce to four uncoupled mode equations, where M L z C is the excitation gap ("mass") of the Bosonic mode with quantum numbers L z ,C, and C is the parity under charge conjugation (particle-hole) symmetry Collective modes of the Cooper pair condensate with quantum numbers distinct from those of the ground state were discussed soon after the formulation of BCS theory by Anderson Note that in the weak-coupling limit (β 2 /β 1 = 1 2 ) for an isotropic (β 3 = 0) 2D chiral ground state the time-reversed modes are degenerate, and lie well below the Fermionic continuum edge at 2∆. However, the degeneracy of the E ± modes is lifted by tetragonal anisotropy of the Fermi surface and pairing basis functions, which leads to β 3 = 0. The crystal field splitting of the E ± modes is shown in Fig. 2 ) is plotted as a function of β 3 /β 1 . The soft E + mode, i.e. M -+ → 0 for β 3 → -2β 2 , is the dynamical signature of the boundary of the unstable region of the GL phase diagram shown in Fig. For quantitative predictions of the effects of anisotropy of the Fermi surface and pairing interaction on the collective mode spectrum we require the angle-resolved density of states on the Fermi surface, n(p), and the anisotropy of the pairing basis functions, {Y x (p),Y y (p)}, that define the E 1u orbital order parameter in momentum space, ∆(p) = A x Y x (p) + A y Y y (p). For a single-band Fermi surface the GL functional for ESP states in the weak-coupling limit can be expressed in terms of Fermisurface averages of the mean-field order parameter defined on the Fermi surface These results are obtained by using the transformation properties of the basis functions under the group operations of D 4h : A key result is that the ratio of GL parameters, β wc 2 /β wc 1 = 1 2 , is independent of anisotropy For cylindrical symmetry, e.g. a Fermi disk for 2D 3 2 |Y x (p) + iY y (p)| ≡ ∆, is also isotropic. These basis functions also lead to the following results for the E 1u GL β parameters, β 1 = β 0 , β 2 = 1 2 β 0 , and β 3 = 0, the latter as expected for an isotropic Fermi surface with pure p-wave basis functions. These values give the weak-coupling, isotropic results for the E ± modes reported in Table Recent calculations of pairing instabilities for odd-parity pairing in Sr 2 RuO 4 starting from lattice models based d-band electrons and holes with on-site and near neighbor Hubbard interactions and spin-orbit coupling lead to a helical or chiral ground state, but with strong anisotropy. For the chiral state obtained from pairing on hybridized, quasi-1D α and β bands Multi-band models leading to a chiral superconducting state also exhibit strong anisotropy of the amplitude of the order parameter, in particular, an excitation gap |∆(p)| with nodal, or near nodal, directions on the Fermi surface Tetragonal anisotropy is parametrized by the function I(p), which is invariant under D 4h . The E 1u basis functions are normalized, dφ 2π Y * i (p)Y j (p) = δ i j , and in the limit ε → 1 exhibit strong anisotropy with a minimum excitation gap, ∆ min ∝ (1ε) → 0 as ε → 1 in the [100] directions. The anisotropy of the excitation gap for the chiral ground state is shown in the left panel of Fig. A microscopic formulation of the electrodynamics of the excitations of p-wave superconductors, including the coupling of Bosonic modes to a transverse (EM) electromagnetic field, is developed in Refs. The dynamics of the order parameter is formulated in terms of the space-and time-dependent mean-field pairing self-energy, which for spin-triplet fluctuations is given by where is the pairing interaction in the spin-triplet E 1u channel, f K (p, ε; r,t) is the anomalous Keldysh pair-propagator, the energy integration is over the bandwidth of attraction near the Fermi level, -Ω c ≤ ε ≤ +Ω c with Ω c E f , and the momentum integration is an average over the Fermi surface defined by the Fermi momentum p. Below we discuss the orbital dynamics for an ESP chiral ground state of the form and the spin component of the order parameter, d, is fixed along the direction ẑ. The orbital fluctuations of the Cooper pairs are represented by two complex fields, where the notation is equivalent to that in Eq. 5 of the TDGL theory. The solution to the linearized Eilenberger equations for the non-equilibrium pair-propagator, f K (p, ε; r,t), in terms of the time-dependent order parameter, d(p; r,t) = d d(p; r,t), and the coupling of charge currents to the EM field, e c v p • A(r,t) leads to coupled "gap equations" for the orbital fluctuations of the Cooper pairs • q generates the dispersion of both Fermionic and Bosonic excitations, and we have expressed the gap equations in terms of Fourier modes. Note in particular that the cross-coupling terms between d(p; q, ω) and d (p; q, ω) are proportional to the complex amplitudes, ∆(p) 2 and ∆ * (p) 2 . The Tsuneto function determines (i) the coupling of the EM field to the Bosonic modes, (ii) the mass shifts for the Bosonic modes D ± and E ± , (iii) finite lifetimes of Bosonic modes arising from coupling to the un-bound continuum, i.e. when M ≥ 2 min[|∆(p)|], and (iv) coupling of the EM field to the Fermionic spectrum, including absorption of EM radiation by creation of unbound Fermionic quasiparticles for hω ≥ 2|∆(p)|. Finally, the term 1 2 γ(p) is the log-divergent integral that determines the BCS instability and equilbrium gap function, ∆(p). Thus, we can regulate the divergence and eliminate the pairing interaction, V 1 , in the dynamical equations for d(p) and d (p) in favor of the self-consistently determined equilibrium gap function, ∆(p), using the identity, Energies and Lifetimes of the E ± modes The Bosonic modes are obtained from the eigenvalue spectrum of the homogeneous equations, i.e. for A = 0. In the q = 0 limit the eigen-modes are the linear combinations D ± = D(ω) ± D * (-ω) and E ± = E(ω) ± E * (-ω) as in the TDGL theory, with D -representing the phase mode and D + the corresponding amplitude mode. For the modes with time-reversed chirality we obtain where the functions λ nm (ω) are moments of the q = 0 Tsuneto function. For the anisotropic E 1u model with basis functions given in Eq. 14 with px = cos φ and py = sin φ , we have for the anisotropic chiral ground state, ∆(p) = ∆ e iφ I(φ ). The corresponding moments λ nm are then given by For the 2D chiral p-wave ground state the gap is isotropic on the Fermi circle, in which case λ 10 = λ 00 = 2λ 11 = λ (ω), with leading to the degenerate E ± modes with M -,+ = M -,-= √ 2∆(T ), in agreement with the weak-coupling limit of the TDGL theory; however now valid at any temperature. The effects of anisotropy of the pairing state on the E ± modes are computed by solving the eigenvalue equations, Eqs. 20,21 and 22 numerically. The minimum and maximum of the anisotropic gap function are shown as a function of the anisotropy parameter ε in Fig. At sufficiently large anisotropy the continuum edge of un-broken Fermion pairs at 2∆ min intercepts the excitation energy of E ± modes. This opens a channel for the E ± mode to dissociate into un-bound Fermion pairs, and thus leads to an intrinsic lifetime for the E ± mode(s), τ ± = h/Γ ± , where Γ ± is the width of the E ± resonance. The latter are calculated perturbatively from Eqs. 20,21 and 22 and are shown in the right panel of Fig. Indeed key signatures of an anisotropic chiral ground state in Sr 2 RuO 4 are the excitation and decay channels for the E ± modes. Both depend on the charge conjugation parity of the modes. Consider an EM field incident normal on a surface of Sr 2 RuO 4 defined by the four-fold axis of symmetry, ẑ, and an axis lying in the xy plane, i.e. q ⊥ ẑ, and with linear polarization also in the xy plane, i.e. A ⊥ ẑ and A ⊥ q. The EM field couples directly to the Fermionic degrees of freedom (particles and 0.0 0.5 Note that the effects of the pairing correlations on the Fermionic contribution to the charge current -the opening of a gap in the Fermionic spectrum and the a.c. response of the negative energy continuum (condensate) -are encoded in the Tsuneto function, λ (p; ω, q). For T → 0 and low frequencies, ω < 2∆ min , only the negative energy continuum (condensate) responds as an a.c. supercurrentπ/2 out of phase with the electric field -with zero dissipation. The supercurrent, and thus the self-consistently determined EM field, are screened by the Meissner effect and penetrate a distance of order the London penetration depth, Λ. This length scale is typically large compared to the coherence length of the superconductor, Λ ξ h/p f . In this limit the EM response is dominated by the bulk excitation spectrum. For a chiral ground state the EM field also couples directly to the E ± Bosonic modes as shown in Eqs. 20-21. The Bosonic modes also generate a charge current, J B (q, ω) = 1 4 N f d 2 p (2ev p ) (v p • q) λ (p; ω, q)) ∆ * (p) d(p; q, ω) + ∆(p) d (p; q, ω) . Thus, the total current, J = J F + J B , can be expressed in terms of a response function, J i = K i j (ω, q) A j (q, ω), that encodes both Fermionic and Bosonic contributions to the a.c. surface impedance. The response function K i j (q, ω) determines both dissipative and non-dissipative contributions to the current. In particular, the microwave power absorption spectrum can be expressed as a sum over the modes contributing to the Joule losses of the electric field and current that penetrate into the superconductor, P S (ω) = -1 2π +∞ -∞ dq Re [J(q, ω) • E * (q, ω)]. To calculate the power spectrum requires a solution of the boundary value problem for the incident, reflected and transmitted EM fields. This boundary value problem determines A(q, ω) in terms of K i j and the value of the EM field in vacuum at the surface, B 0 . For a detailed discussion of the boundary solution see Refs. For weak anisotropy, ε = 0.1, the Bosonic modes have well defined excitation energies, hω ± (q) = M -,± + c 2 ± |q| 2 /2M -,± , with M -,± ≈ √ 2∆ and c ± ≈ 1 2 v f , and carry current for finite q at frequencies below the un-bound Fermion pair continuum, hω < 2∆ min , supported by the condensate, represented by λ (p; q, ω) > 0. Resonant excitation of the E ± modes occurs over the frequency band, M -,± < hω < 2∆ min , spanned by the dispersion of the E ± modes. Thus, excitation of the E ± leads to an absorption band that is sharply peaked near threshold as shown in the left panel of Fig. † Electronic address: sauls@northwestern.edu