We report small-angle neutron scattering measurements of the vortex lattice (VL) structure in single crystals of the lightly underdoped cuprate superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 . At 2 K, and for fields of up to 16 T applied parallel to the crystal c-axis, we observe a sequence of field-driven and first-order transitions between different VL structures. By rotating the field away from the c-axis, we observe each structure transition to shift to either higher or lower field dependent on whether the field is rotated towards the [100] or [010] direction. We use this latter observation to argue that the Fermi surface morphology must play a key role in the mechanisms that drive the VL structure transitions. Furthermore, we show this interpretation is compatible with analogous results obtained previously on lightly overdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 . In that material, it has long-been suggested that the high field VL structure transition is driven by the nodal gap anisotropy. In contrast, the results and discussion presented here bring into question the role, if any, of a nodal gap anisotropy on the VL structure transitions in both YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 and YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 . It is now more than fifty years since the seminal theoretical work of Abrikosov wherein the superconducting vortex lattice (VL) was first shown to be expected in type-II superconductors. Close to optimally-doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ is a prototypical High-T c cuprate with superconducting critical temperatures in the region of 90 K, the exact value being composition dependent. Towards addressing this problem, here we present new SANS studies of detwinned and lightly underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 . Despite the light underdoping which introduces oxygen vacancies, and hence pinning centers, into the CuO chains, we nonetheless observe well-ordered VLs up to the highest magnetic field of 16 T applied parallel to the caxis. We observe a sequence of VL structure transitions in this material that is analogous to that seen in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , though the transition fields are slightly modified. We also present extensive measurements of the VLs observed in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 as a function of angle of applied field to the c-axis. The VL structure transition fields are found to display a strong and characteristic angle-dependence, and we use this observation to provide new insights into the physical origin of the two field-driven VL structure transitions in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ . Single crystals of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 were prepared by the flux growth method, and from a starting mixture of BaCO 3 , CuO and Y 2 O 3 powders molten in yttrium-stabilized ZrO 2 crucibles. The SANS experiments were conducted on the SANS-I instrument at the Swiss spallation neutron source (SINQ), Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI), Villigen, Switzerland, the D11 at the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL), Grenoble, France, and the NG3-SANS instrument at NIST Center for Neutron Research, USA. The neutrons were collimated over 6-18 m (SANS-I), 5.5 m (D11) and 4.5-8m (NG3-SANS), and wavelengths between 4.5-10 Å were selected with a typical FWHM spread of 10%. A position-sensitive 2D multi-detector placed behind the sample was used to detect the scattered neutrons. At SANS-I, D11, and NG3-SANS, 11 T, 17 T and 9 T horizontal field SANS cryomagnets were respectively available. In each cryomagnet the sample was initially installed with the crystal c-axis parallel to the applied field direction, and approximately parallel to the neutron beam. For the 11 T magnet at PSI, an additional motor-head allowed rotation of the sample stick about the vertical axis inside the variable temperature insert (VTI) of the cryomagnet. This motor provided in-situ control of the direction of the magnetic field with re-angle-dependent measurements of the VL structure presented in Section 3.2. At each SANS instrument the cryomagnet was placed on a goniometer table that enabled both rotation and tilt of the sample-magnet ensemble. The SANS measurements of the VL were done by rotating the sample and cryomagnet together through a range of angles that moved the VL diffraction peaks through the Bragg condition. By summing over all measurements at different angles, the SANS diffraction patterns shown in this paper are obtained, and wherein all the VL diffraction spots can be observed in a single image. For all the low temperature measurements reported in this paper, the VL was prepared using the oscillation-field-cooling (OFC) method. By this method the sample is field-cooled through T c until the measurement temperature in a timedependent magnetic field that weakly oscillates around the target field. The oscillation amplitude used was typically 1 % of the target field. The OFC method was used to prepare the VL since previous work on twin-free YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 showed such an approach allows i) the VL to achieve an improved perfection, and ii) a preferred VL coordination due to a lower effective temperature than achieved when cooling in a static field. Figs. 1(a)-(c) show a selection of VL SANS diffraction patterns obtained from YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 at T = 2 K, and at different magnetic fields applied parallel to the crystal c-axis (μ 0 H c). Fig. In the field range between 2.37(2) T and 5.37(2) T, structure TP coexists with an additional single distorted hexagonal VL domain, which we call structure B. Fig. Increasing the field beyond 5.37(2) T leads to a suppression of both structures B and TP. Instead the VL structure becomes composed of a different intrinsic and single VL domain aligned with the crystal axes that we call structure A. Structure A prevails until the highest measured field of 16 T, the SANS diffraction pattern of which is shown in Fig. Fig. Bearing in mind the similarity between the primitive cell orientations for both structures TP and A, structure A can be expected to be the intrinsic structure that would be present at lower fields in the absence of an orientational effect due to twin-plane pinning. This assumption can be readily tested, since it is well-known that in lightly-twinned YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ samples, twin-plane pinning effects can be suppressed by rotating the sample so that all twin-planes form a small angle of ∼5-10 • with respect to the field direction. Returning to μ 0 H c, another important feature seen in Fig. The inset of Fig. YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 To provide further insight into the μ 0 H-dependent behaviour of the VL observed for μ 0 H c, we conducted measurements of the VL structure for a range of angles between the applied field and the crystal c-axis. As illustrated in Fig. In Fig. Interpreting these angle-dependent measurements in terms of effective mass anisotropy incorporated into local London theory provides at least a qualitative understanding of why the VL opening angle, and hence distortion, changes as a consequence of rotating the crystal with respect to μ 0 H. Nonetheless, similarly as for μ 0 H c, the most important aspects of the observations, the μ 0 H-dependence of both φ and ρ, and the transitions observed between structures A and B, require a theoretical explanation that goes beyond the local approximation inherent to the London theory. The purpose of this study is to shed new light on the sequence of μ 0 H-driven and first-order VL structure transitions observed at low temperature in close to optimally-doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ with μ 0 H c. Using SANS we have studied the VL in a detwinned and lightly underdoped sample of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 . By underdoping we aimed to controllably alter the electronic structure compared with the case of lightly overdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , both in terms of the precise Fermi surface morphology and the superconducting density of states (DOS). In theory, tuning these properties can lead to a variation in the μ 0 H-dependence of the VL structure between the First we establish the experimental observations. For μ 0 H c and at T =2 K the following sequence of VL structure transitions has been reported in detwinned YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 : The principal differences between the two sequences concern the low and intermediate field phases. In the lowest field phase of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 , measurements with μ 0 H applied at an angle to the c-axis, allow us to deduce that structure TP arises due to residual twin-plane pinning in the sample. In a truly twinfree sample, structure A is expected to be present instead of structure TP, with this being the same low field VL structuretype seen in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 . In the intermediate field phase, both YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 and YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 display structure B, yet only in the latter compound does structure B occupy the entire sample for μ 0 H c. In YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 , it remains unclear precisely why structures B and TP, which are spatially-separated in the sample, display such a broad range of field-coexistence. Since measurements at finite α/β show that the co-existence of structures TP and B becomes replaced by a co-existence between structures A and B, this allows us to rule out an obvious influence of the twin-plane pinning. Instead, the co-existence may reflect an extreme sensitivity of the VL structure to local variations in stoichiometry and homogeneity within the individual crystals of the sample. Whatever the true explanation, the general observation is that in terms of absolute field, the propensity for structure B falls with underdoping, since it occupies a narrower field range in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 compared with YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 . Future measurements on further underdoped samples may reveal a complete suppression of structure B for all μ 0 H c. It is also informative to re-write the transition sequences in terms of magnetic fields normalised to values of H c2 (T = 0), quantitative estimates of which have recently become available. For YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 , we use the value of H c2 =70(10) T reported for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.86 , and the transition sequence is: This shows both VL structure transitions to occur at a higher fraction of H c2 in the more underdoped compound, even though the absolute transition fields are similar. We also point out that while our experiments made use of the highest magnetic fields presently available for SANS, these fields extend only up to limited fractions of H c2 ; for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 the highest applied field of 16.7 T corresponds to ∼0.11 H c2 , Next we discuss the physical origin of the VL structure transitions seen in both compounds for μ 0 H c. The vast majority of theoretical work on VL structure transitions has been developed on model systems with μ 0 H perpendicular to a fourfold symmetry plane, since this provides the simplest system in which to treat the expected effects of either (or both) of a Fermi surface anisotropy and d-wave nodal gap symmetry. As mentioned previously, local London theory provides a useful starting point for understanding the coupling between the VL and the crystal anisotropy in high-κ superconductors. Bearing in mind the expected similar influences of the Fermi surface and gap anisotropies on the μ 0 H-dependent VL structure, it is difficult to reconcile the observation of successive first-order reorientation transitions like those observed in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ with the expectation of any theory. As mentioned above, according to the calculations presented in Ref. the field-dependence of the opening angle for structure A, φ varies smoothly over the high-field range, and above 90 • tends toward a saturation orientation at the very highest fields. On considering the above discussion, here we propose that the high field first-order transition seen in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ corresponds to the "generic" first-order transition expected in theory that can in principle be driven by either the Fermi surface or gap anisotropy. Theoretical work aimed at exploring the role of the chains in the vortex state of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ included calculations of the magnetic-field dependence of the coherence length, and hence vortex core size, in a bilayer model composed of plane and chain layers. The angle-dependent measurements also shed light on the underlying nature of the high field transition for μ 0 H c. Were the high-field transition driven solely by a nodal gap anisotropy, increasing α and β would be expected to have a largely similar effect on the transition field since each rotation plane includes an anti-nodal direction. In particular, by rotating the in-plane gap anisotropy away from the field direction it can be expected that a higher magnetic field, and so shorter intervortex distance, is required for the relevant nonlocal interaction to drive the structure transition. Since like the low transition field, the high transition field shifts in opposite directions for the two rotation directions, this confirms that the Fermi surface morphology plays a key role in the high-field transition in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ . It also shows that a sig-DOS, likely arising from persistent CuO chain superconductivity, Having established that the Fermi surface morphology influences strongly the observed VL structure transitions in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ for μ 0 H c, we finally discuss the role of the nodal gap anisotropy. This anisotropy is generally expected to become increasingly important at higher fields due to the increasing prevalence with vortex density of the vortex lattice effect (VLE). Nonetheless, since in our SANS experiments on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 we have explored the VL for applied fields up to ∼0.23 H c2 , we can expect that the observed VL properties in the high field range are indeed sensitive to the gap symmetry, even if it is does not drive the high field transition. From this viewpoint, it is therefore interesting to note that, as in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , In summary, using the small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) technique we have studied the magnetic fielddependence at 2 K of the VL structure in a sample of detwinned and lightly underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 . For magnetic fields applied parallel to the crystal c-axis (μ 0 H c), measurements were conducted for fields up to 16 T, and we observed two field-driven and first-order VL structure transitions at 2.37(2) T and 5.37(2) T. These transitions are analogous to those reported in detwinned and lightly overdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 at 2.3(2) T and 6.7(2) T, and it can be expected that the physics behind the transitions in the two compounds is largely similar. In YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 further measurements at 2 K, and up to 10 T in applied field were done after rotating the direction of applied field away from the c-axis. Dependent on whether the field is rotated around the orthogonal a * -or b *axes, we observed a strong and opposing angle-dependence of the two transition fields, and consequently markedly different VL structure phase diagrams as functions of both field and rotation angle. From our observations, and in conjunction with available theory, we have argued here that the low-field VL structure a consequence of a strong low field-dependence of a vortex core anisotropy that arises from the CuO chain superconducting density of states. Due to the proposed involvement of the chain states, this low field transition can be considered as particular to YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ . In contrast, and once the pronounced low-field core anisotropy is suppressed on increasing the field, we propose that the high-field VL structure transition in both compounds more likely corresponds to the 'generic' first-order VL reorientation transition expected in theory to be driven either by an anisotropy in the Fermi surface or a nodal gap. Although we are unable to unambiguously assign a particular anisotropy as driving the high field transition, the contrasting angle-dependences of the transition fields on the direction of field-rotation away from the c-axis allow us to demonstrate that this transition is indeed dependent on the Fermi surface morphology. By again comparing our experimental results to those of theory, we expect that the clearest evidence for an influence of the nodal gap structure on the VL properties is most likely away from the second transition field, and instead more in the range of the highest accessible fields. This can be checked by further field-angle SANS VL measurements done for very high fields above 10 T. Finally, and perhaps most strikingly, on the approach to the highest explored fields in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.85 with μ 0 H c=16 T, the precise field-evolution of the VL coordination is observed to tend towards a saturation orientation. This very high field VL coordination is not consistent with being stabilized by either the established superconducting gap or Fermi surface anisotropies at zero-field. This ultimately demonstrates the strong magnetic field-dependence of the superconducting density of states in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ that is reflected by the VL structure phase diagram. Overall it can be stated that the accumulated SANS observations on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ illustrate the richness of the VLs in even 'prototypical' unconventional superconductors, but which still call for further experimental and theoretical studies aimed at clarifying the mechanisms that dictate the novel field-dependent properties.