Cuprate superconductors have a universal tendency to form charge density-wave (CDW) order which competes with superconductivity and is strongest at a doping p 0.12. Here we show that in the archetypal cuprate YBa2Cu3Oy (YBCO) pressure suppresses charge order, but does not affect the pseudogap phase. This is based on transport measurements under pressure, which reveal that the onset of the pseudogap at T * is independent of pressure, while the negative Hall effect, a clear signature of CDW order in YBCO, is suppressed by pressure. We also find that pressure and magnetic field shift the superconducting transition temperature Tc of YBCO in the same way as a function of doping -but in opposite directions -and most effectively at p 0.12. This shows that the competition between superconductivity and CDW order can be tuned in two ways, either by suppressing superconductivity with field or suppressing CDW order by pressure. Based on existing high-pressure data and our own work, we observe that when CDW order is fully suppressed at high pressure, the so-called "1/8 anomaly" in the superconducting dome vanishes, revealing a smooth Tc dome which now peaks at p 0.13. We propose that this Tc dome is shaped by the competing effects of the pseudogap phase below its critical point p ∼ 0.19 and spin order at low doping. The recent observation of charge density modulations in YBa 2 Cu 3 O y (YBCO) That the CDW phase in cuprates is universally peaked at p = 0.12 is a striking experimental fact which naturally begs an understanding. Prior explanations in terms of a commensurate match of the CDW period with either the lattice or the hole density are no longer viable. Indeed, while in LBCO or LSCO-based materials the CDW incommensurability tracks p and the period be- comes nearly commensurate with the lattice at p 0.12, neither of these facts are true for YBCO Here we show that pressure is a second, independent tuning parameter for this competition, shifting T c in the same way as the magnetic field, as a function of doping, but in opposite direction. Therefore, pressure is seen as a tuning parameter that weakens CDW order, with little direct effect on superconductivity or on the pseudogap phase. Recent x-ray studies observe that pressure suppresses CDW order in YBCO Single crystals of YBa 2 Cu 3 O y were prepared as described elsewhere The a-axis electrical resistivity ρ a (T ) at ambient and high pressure, in H = 0 and 15 T, was measured at Sherbrooke on three single crystals with a high degree of oxygen order: 1) y = 6.50, T c (0) = 54.5 K, p = 0.090 (ortho-II); 2) y = 6.54, T c (0) = 60.2 K, p = 0.107 (ortho-II); and 3) y = 6.67, T c (0) = 65.3 K, p = 0.119 (ortho-VIII). The Hall coefficient R H (T ) = ρ ab (T )/H at ambient and high pressure, and magnetic fields up to H = 35 T, was measured at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Tallahassee on two single crystals with high oxygen order: 1) y = 6.54, T c (0) = 61.3 K, p = 0.109 (ortho-II) and 2) y = 6.67, T c (0) = 66.0 K, p = 0.120 (ortho-VIII). The samples were pressurized using a nonmagnetic pistoncylinder clamp cell with either a 1/1 mixture of pentane and 3-methyl-1-butanol or 7373 Daphne oil as the pressure medium, ensuring a hydrostatic pressure during pressurization. The pressure was determined from the superconducting transition of a lead gauge or from the fluorescence of a ruby chip. Note that pressure can enhance oxygen order in YBCO, and oxygen ordering increases the doping in the CuO 2 planes (see Sec. III D). To avoid this, one should apply pressure at temperatures below ∼ 200 K In Figs. 2(a), (c) and (e), the electrical resistivity ρ a (T ) of our 3 oxygen-ordered YBCO samples is plotted as a function temperature, for different values of the applied pressure. In Figs. In YBCO, a clear consequence of the CDW is the fact that the Fermi surface is reconstructed at low temperatures. This FSR was first established through quantum oscillation measurements We interpret this reduction in the amplitude of the negative R H as a clear signature of the suppression of the CDW by pressure. As discussed below, doping is also affected by pressure, but the change in R H seen here cannot be explained by that alone. At p = 0.120 and 20 K, we see a relative change ∆R H /R H = (R H (1.8GPa)-R H (0GPa))/R H (0GPa) of about 40%. According to R H data as a function of doping in YBCO Recent Hall effect measurements on YBCO at p = 0.11 up to 2.6 GPa revealed a very weak effect of pressure on R H In contrast to T , pressure has a large effect on T c . In Fig. There are two mechanisms by which pressure increases doping in YBCO. The first, previously mentioned, has to do with the re-arrangement of oxygen atoms in the CuO chains. Pressure improves the degree of oxygen order. With oxygen ordering comes an enhanced charge transfer between CuO chains and CuO 2 planes, and hence an increased doping of holes into the planes. This has been studied in detail (e.g. ref. In Table The second mechanism by which pressure increases doping is one that cannot be avoided. By bringing the chains closer to the planes, charge transfer is improved and hole doping is increased. The variation of T c , with pressure therefore includes two terms The term on the left of the equation is the raw "sensitivity to pressure", as measured in the experiment. The first term on the right represents the doping effect of pressure and the second term is the direct (intrinsic) dependence of T c on P , of interest here. Fortunately, the first term is small. In Fig. The sensitivity of the superconducting transition temperature T c to a magnetic field H applied along the c axis was studied across the doping range of YBCO, from p 0.06 to p 0.19. Using either resistivity (Fig. - We see that it is small and flat above p = 0.16, it rises rapidly below p = 0.16, to reach a maximum at p = 0.12, and then decreases at lower p. So -dT c /dH vs p peaks at p = 0.12. This is not surprising, since we know that H c2 vs p has a local minimum at p 0.12 In Fig. We therefore expect that a sufficiently strong pressure will suppress CDW order entirely and reveal the superconducting phase diagram of YBCO free of competition. To examine this scenario, we reproduce in Fig. In Fig. than it was at ambient pressure (Fig. The first scenario is spin order. In YBCO at ambient pressure, long-range antiferromagnetic order exists up to p = 0.05 and short-range incommensurate spin-densitywave (SDW) correlations extend up to p 0.08 A second scenario for a competition that persists at high pressure is the pseudogap phase. In particular, the pseudogap due to strong correlations associated with the Mott insulator is known to compete with superconductivity In any scenario, two questions must be addressed: Why a dome of CDW order peaked at p 0.12? Why does pressure have such a strong detrimental effect on CDW order, while it has little direct effect on either superconductivity or the pseudogap phase? Note that in the present manuscript we focused on the short-range 2D CDW order present in zero (and low) magnetic field, which was shown to cause the FSR Over the years, the numerous studies of the effect of pressure on T c in YBCO have collectively revealed a complex behavior that has remained a mystery. A crucial piece of information that had been missing until recently to make sense of the apparent complexity is the existence of a dome of CDW order in YBCO. Here we showed that magnetic field and pressure shift T c in the same way as a function of doping, but in opposite directions, and conclude that they are two independent parameters with which to tune the competition between superconductivity and CDW order in YBCO. This is likely the reason why the record T c in cuprate superconductors was reached by applying pressure 