We compared four hole-scales that have been used to determine the hole-concentration in hightemperature cuprate superconductors. We show that the hole-scale, P pl -scale, based on the thermoelectric power [T. Honma et al., Phys. Rev. B70, (2004) 214517.] is quantitatively consistent with spectroscopic probes for many different cuprate materials, while the other hole-scales, based on a well-known dome-shaped T c -curve [M. R. High-temperature cuprate superconductors (HTCS) have a very wide doping range that resulted in numerous doping dependent studies of various physical properties. While doping dependent studies of HTCS are becoming more and more quantitative through continuous improvements on experimental conditions, such as sample quality, experimental resolution and techniques, in the past twenty-eight years there has been, unfortunately, a misinterpretation of the corresponding data due to the use of a, although popular, quantitatively incorrect scale for determining the hole concentration. In this report, we address two issues of the doped-hole inhomogeneity and competition between magnetic order and spin density wave to demonstrate the fundamental importance of using the quantitatively correct scale to arrive at the physically correct conclusions and to address the subtle issues when comparing the doping dependence among different HTCS materials. The most popular hole-scale is a measure of the hole concentration using the doping dependence of a superconducting transition temperature, T c , that follows a dome-shaped T c -curve with an empirical formula of T c = T c max {1-82.6(P dome -0.16) 2 }, where P dome is the hole concentration, the value of 0.16 is the universal optimal hole concentration and T c max is a maximum in T c . We proposed a hole-scale which is also based on S 290 but quantitatively different from dome-scale. x La x CuO 6+δ and Tl 2 Ba 2 CuO 6+δ over P pl ~ 0.15 deviates upward from that of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . In Fig. In this report, we analyzed the doping dependent data of HTCS by using of P pl -scale, and compared our conclusions with that derived from other hole-scales. P pl is determined by comparing the value of S 290 data with P pl -scale, which is more reliable. In Fig. Here, we demonstrate the first example that completely opposite conclusions resulted when using the P pl -scale and P dome -scale to analyze data. While many HTCS are shown to be having an inhomogeneous doped-hole concentration We first compare the doped-hole concentration determined by nuclear magnetic resonance, NMR, using P pl -scale and P dome -scale. In Fig. In Ref. 34, from 89 Y NMR Fourier transform spectra at 300 K, the doping distribution, ΔP dome , of the slightly overdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 and the underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 were deduced by using the relation of the slope of 580 ppm/hole based on the P dome -scale. 4(a) and 4(b), using the SAME NMR data, the electronic spread determined by P pl -scale is seven times and one and a half as large as those determined by the P dome -scale for underdoped and slightly overdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+δ , respectively. The doping distribution estimated by the P pl -scale is comparable to other cuprates. Therefore not only our conclusion is opposite to that when using P dome -scale but also more importantly, based on all currently available data, implies that doped-hole inhomogeneity is a generic property of all HTCS. As a second example, we demonstrate the universal nature of our quantitative scale by focusing on the translational symmetry preserving magnetic order (T mag ) recently observed in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+δ by polarized neutron in the pseudogap state. Finally, we want to point out some recent theoretical approaches to the hole-scale. In summary, we have demonstrated the quantitative consistency and the use of the universal P pl -scale. Independent of any theoretical considerations we shall emphasize that P pl -scale is consistent with the carrier concentration estimated by many different experimental probes in many cuprates. We suggest that the P pl -scale should be used for all quantitative doping dependent studies of HTCS.