We provide a new perspective on the pseudogap physics for attractive fermions as described by the three-dimensional Hubbard model. The pseudogap in the single-particle spectral function, which occurs for temperatures above the critical temperature Tc of the superfluid transition, is often interpreted in terms of preformed, uncondensed pairs. Here we show that the occurrence of pseudogap physics can be consistently understood in terms of local excitations which lead to a splitting of the quasiparticle peak for sufficiently large interaction. This effect becomes prominent at intermediate and high temperatures when the quantum mechanical hopping is incoherent. We clarify the existence of a conjectured temperature below which pseudogap physics is expected to occur. Our results are based on approximating the physics of the three-dimensional Hubbard model by dynamical mean field theory calculations and a momentum independent self-energy. Our predictions can be tested with ultracold atoms in optical lattices with currently available temperatures and spectroscopic techniques. The analysis of peaks in the single particle spectral function, measured, for instance, by photoemission experiments in solids or radio frequency (RF) spectroscopy for ultracold atoms, provides important information about correlation effects in interacting quantum many-body systems. In the limit of weak interactions the spectral function displays peaks close to the energies of the free fermion energy-momentum distribution and as such directly represents single-particle properties. At finite temperature and energies away from the Fermi surface, peaks are broadened and the width is indicative of interaction effects, which open up decay channels. If spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs below a certain temperature, such as in a superconductor below T c , the single-particle excitations become gapped out and shifted by an amount ∆, the superconducting gap. A more peculiar behavior is that of excitations being gapped out (or suppressed) even though no obvious symmetry breaking and thermodynamic ordering transition occurs. This is often referred to as pseudogap (PG) physics. The spectral gap can look very similar to a gap due to symmetry breaking at finite temperature. Therefore, it can be difficult to clarify the origin of PG physics and to distinguish whether it is due to some hidden order or a different effect. A very prominent example of such physics is provided by the experimental observations in the hole doped copper-oxide high temperature superconductors, There is a substantial literature of previous work on BCS-BEC crossover and PG physics for attractive fermions, which however does not provide a clear and complete picture about PG physics. A popular approach is the diagrammatic T-matrix approximation, • For large enough coupling strength we find PG physics at temperatures T > T c . At half filling the PG remains for all temperatures above T c and therefore a pairing temperature T p (Fig. • The occurrence of PG physics at high temperatures can be understood via split local excitations on lattice sites visible for strong enough interactions. • PG physics in the spectral function is related to Non Fermi Liquid (NFL) properties of the selfenergy (see Fig. • We demonstrate in detail how the PG transforms smoothly into the superconducting gap, when the temperature is lowered through T c (see Fig. The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II we briefly describe our model and method. Sec. III discusses conceptual background about the occurrence of PG physics in relation to the self-energy. In Sec. IV and V we show results for spectra and self-energies at and away from half filling before concluding in Sec. VI. In the appendix we compare the DMFT-NRG calculations to iterated perturbation theory and to T-matrix calculations. Our study is based on the three-dimensional attractive Hubbard model, with the chemical potential μ, the interaction strength U > 0 and the hopping parameters t ij . c † i,σ creates a fermion at site i with spin σ, and n i,σ = c † i,σ c i,σ . We take only a nearest neighbor hopping (-t), so that the non-interacting energy-dispersion relation in the threedimensional cubic system is given as, k = (k x , k y , k z ), The dispersion satisfies ε -k = ε k . The corresponding density of states (DOS) is denoted by ρ 0 (ε). In the calculations we will use the hopping t and the bandwidth W = 12t as energy scales. The main method used to study the Hamiltonian (1) is the dynamical mean field theory (DMFT). Before presenting the results of our calculations it is useful to discuss some basic features of the Green's functions and self-energy, which will help us to better understand under which conditions PG physics occurs. In the literature PG physics is considered quite generally either for the integrated spectral function ρ which is equivalent to the local spectrum ρ ii (ω), or for k-resolved spectra ρ k (ω) close to the Fermi surface. We will consider both quantities in this paper. We note that a PG in one of these does not necessarily imply one in the other quantity. Let us first note that in the limit of high temperature T W, U correlation lengths become small and the physics is dominated by local processes. where ξ k = ε k -μ and τ ∈ [0, β). In the limit of high temperature, β = 1/T → 0 and n F (ξ k ) → 1/2. Then G 0 ij (τ ) in Eq. (3) becomes essentially local, ∼ δ ij , and spatial components with i = j vanish exponentially with length scale λ ∼ at T . , where Γ → 0. This implies δ-function peaks at ±U/2 in the spectral function. In Sec. IV we will see that DMFT results at high temperature and large U are indeed of a similar form, . Away from half filling the situation is more complicated, but similar features remain visible. If the peak in the self-energy is strong enough, we find in the spectral function increased weight at ω = ±U/2 and a suppression of spectral weight at the Fermi energy. These are the signatures of the PG in the integrated spectral function. For strong interactions this effect remains observable down to intermediate temperatures. In other words, the PG in ρ(ω) is related to the existence of Hubbard bands which are visible in the spectral function at all temperatures. We now discuss the appearance of a gap and PG in the momentum resolved spectral function ρ k (ω). In the normal phase the Matsubara Green's function reads where we have assumed a momentum independent selfenergy as appropriate for DMFT calculations. The spectral function is obtained from analytic continuation, ( We have separated real (R) and imaginary (I) parts of the self-energy. In the SF state we can include an explicit symmetry breaking term, ∆ 0 sc , ∆ 0 sc → 0 for spontaneous symmetry breaking, and the non-interacting Green's function matrix For the interacting system we introduce the matrix selfenergy Σ k (iω n ) such that the inverse of the full Green's function matrix G k (iω n ) is given by the Dyson equation The diagonal component of the k-dependent Green's function reads ω with The off-diagonal self-energy Σ 12 (ω), in particular its real part, plays the role of a dynamic gap function, ReΣ 12 (ω) ∼ ∆. Therefore, low energy spectral excitations which correspond to ω = z(ξ k -Σ R (0)) in the normal phase are shifted by the gap is the renormalization factor. Usually we associate the gap with a binding energy of pairs and hence we can interpret this energy shift as an energy required to break a pair and see a single-particle excitation. We now discuss the occurrence of a PG for momenta close to the Fermi surface in the situation where no offdiagonal self-energy is present. Thus consider k = k F (interacting Fermi surface) such that ξ kF -Σ R (0) = 0. 66 Then we can write where does not vary rapidly, we expect ρ kF (ω) to be peaked when the implicit equation ω = Σ R (ω) is satisfied. According to our definitions there is always a solution to this equation for ω = 0. In a weakly interacting system at low temperature |Σ I (ω)| usually has a local minimum at ω = 0, where a(T ) → 0 for T → 0 and a, b > 0. By the Kramers-Kronig relation This is the Fermi liquid peak in the spectral function at ω = 0 with width ∼ z|Σ I (0)| and weight z, where 0). We define the low energy behavior in Eq. ( A PG is obtained with different behavior. then If the slope is large enough we will then encounter additional solutions of ω = Σ R (ω) as can be easily seen graphically [see Fig. As we have discussed above |Σ I (ω)| is typically maximal at ω = 0 at high temperature when the physics becomes dominated by local interactions. It is also directly visible in the phase space factor appearing in the second order perturbation theory in U (see appendix). Therefore, at high temperature we expect NFL behavior, and at low temperature we usually have FL behavior. We define the crossover scale as T FL , i.e., where the behavior of Σ I (ω) changes from Eq. ( In this section we analyze results from the DMFT calculations for spectral functions and self-energies and focus on the situation at half filling. An overview of the different regimes as function of U and T is shown in Fig. The phase diagram includes the SF phase and the regimes where the self-energy shows FL and NFL behavior as defined in Eq. (10) and Eq. (11), respectively. By performing calculations suppressing the SF phase below T c , we find that the boundary between FL and NFL regimes (not shown) is connected to the bipolaron transition at T = 0, which is equivalent to the Mott transition for repulsive interactions. The NFL regime in the phase diagram is separated into a region for stronger interactions where we observe a PG in the integrated spectral function, and a region without PG (no PG) for weaker couplings. In the upper panels of Fig. Independent of the interaction strength, in the high temperature limit, T W, U , the pair densities approach the non-interacting values n 2 σ , where n σ is the density for one spin component, at half filling n ↑ n ↓ = 0.25. In the atomic limit, t = 0, the double occupancy can be easily calculated. At half filling, all atomic states are occupied with equal probability, so that the double occupancy reads At high temperature, T /W > 0.5, this formula agrees very well with the results in Fig. The plots in the upper part of figure show ρ(ω) for U/W = 0.6 and U/W = 1, which correspond to a transition into the SF phase from the FL and NFL regime, respectively. The lower part of the figure displays the corresponding diagonal and off-diagonal self-energies (real and imaginary parts). For the weaker coupling case, U/W = 0.6, at T > T c there is the usual FL dip in ImΣ 11 (ω) and the corresponding peak in ρ(ω). When the temperature is lowered through T c the off-diagonal self-energy becomes finite and a dip in ρ(ω) is induced. Very close below the transition temperature, the main effects for this come from ReΣ 12 (ω). Lowering the temperature further, the amplitude of the diagonal part of the self-energies decreases without showing new features. As discussed in Sec. III the gapping out of excitation is dominated by contributions from ReΣ 12 (ω). In the case of stronger interaction, U/W = 1, superfluidity sets in the NFL regime with a PG at the Fermi energy. When lowering the temperature through T c , the off-diagonal self-energy becomes finite, but at first the diagonal part of the self-energy remains nearly unchanged (The orange line, T /T c = 1, overlaps with the dark green line, T /T c = 1.1). On further reducing the temperature the off-diagonal self-energy increases substantially and ImΣ 11 (ω) is strongly reduced developing a FL dip at the Fermi energy. The gap in ρ(ω) changes smoothly from the PG with broad peaks separated by U to the sharper structures (coherence peaks) in the SF phase. It is interesting to note that the gap, if defined as the distance between the maxima is larger above T c in the PG regime than in the SF phase. One should also note that for low temperatures the gap becomes much more pronounced with a suppression of spectral weight at ω = 0 and as such is approaching a full gap in the limit T → 0. A remarkable observation is that the qualitative behav- ior of the off-diagonal part of the self-energy can change within the SF phase. Generally, |ReΣ 12 (ω)| approaches the mean field result U c i,↑ c i,↓ for |ω| → ∞. We now turn our attention to features in the momentum resolved spectral function ρ k (ω). A good overview of the behavior for different interactions and temperatures can be obtained in the intensity plots in Fig. We show ρ k (ω) for three interaction strengths [U/W = 0.4 (upper panels), U/W = 0.6 (middle panels), and U/W = 1 (lower panels)] for three different temperatures [T /W = 0.2 (left), T /W = 0.08 (middle), and T /W = 0.01 (right)]. We also show the Fermi level (dashed line) and the non-interacting dispersion (full red line) as an orientation. At weak coupling, U/W = 0.4, the spectral function only displays a weak modification from the non-interacting result with certain broadening of the peaks and a minor shift of spectral weight. At low temperature the system is SF and excitations at k F are gapped out. Notice that the width of the Bogoliubov peaks at the gap edge is overestimated by our broadening procedure. For U/W = 1 the NFL regime extends from high temperatures down to T c . The self-energy undergoes only very slight changes when decreasing the temperature in the NFL regime. Accordingly, the momentum-resolved spectral function for T /W = 0.2 and T /W = 0.08 (lower left panel and lower middle panel) are nearly the same. We observe a large PG around the Fermi energy; the spectral weight at the Fermi energy is very small. When entering the SF phase, gap features are visible and the dispersion changes in the vicinity of ω = 0. For this interaction strength, we observe a clear deviation between the non-interacting band structure and the interacting spectral function. In the SF phase we find a mirror or "shadow" band appearing as reflected from ω = 0. These bands can be understood due to a particle-hole doubling in the Nambu representation. This is an effect also observed in the antiferromagnetically ordered phase with zone doubling. So far we have focused on the situation at half filling where the discussion is somewhat simplified due to the particle-hole symmetry. In this section we show results for different filling factors (n < 1) to see how the PG behavior is affected. This is important for comparison with experiments with ultracold atoms, where due to the trapping potential no homogeneous filling fraction can be expected. In Fig. The PG structure in ρ(ω) at elevated temperature can still be understood from the local picture. For n < 1, we can write μ = -U/2 -∆μ (U > 0) assuming ∆μ > 0, and the atomic energies are E α = 0, U/2+∆μ, 2∆μ. The partition function reads There are now excitations at ω + = U/2 + ∆μ and ω -= -U/2 + ∆μ with generally asymmetric weights and Without showing explicit results we note that the pair density n ↑ n ↓ displays a similar temperature dependence for n = 0.5 to what was shown in Fig. In order to get an insight to overall trends, we compare several different fillings in Fig. For U/W = 1, we find a NFL peak in ImΣ(ω) for all fillings in Fig. In summary, when analyzing ρ(ω) and ImΣ(ω) we can find similar features to the ones of the half filled situation and a PG appears for suitable parameters. However, depending on filling, temperature, and interaction strength, the occurrence of the PG may be limited. At high temperatures it can be shifted away from ω = 0, although it is still clearly visible in the spectrum. Moreover, the impact of the local Hubbard interaction becomes weaker for a system with smaller filling factor. Momentum resolved spectra for n = 0.5 and various values of T and U are displayed in Fig. Particular cuts along ω for momenta which satisfy ξ kF + ReΣ(0) = 0 are shown in Fig. We have analyzed the occurrence of PG features in the integrated and k-resolved spectral function of the three-dimensional attractive Hubbard model for different temperatures, interactions and filling factors. Properties of the spectral functions have been traced back to the characteristic behavior of the self-energy. We find PG behavior as long as the interaction U is large enough (∼ W ) and the self-energy shows NFL behavior, i.e., T > T FL (U ). Our results show marked deviations from the popular preformed pair scenario, where PG behavior is directly linked to the formation of pairs at a temperature T p > T c : (i) We find that PG behavior persists up to large temperatures and is not bounded by some temperature scale T p . (ii) We find cases with a substantially enhanced pair density where no PG behavior occurs. The first effect is related to the fact that we are working with a lattice model, such that local excitations are always well defined and related to the chemical potential μ and U . This might be different in the continuum where it is conceivable that the preformed pair scenario of Fig. A word of caution is in order when discussing the large temperatures addressed in this paper. Here we dealt with a strict one-band model where the kinetic energy is limited by the bandwidth. In most real systems very high temperature would activate higher bands, and in solid state systems, it can lead to the melting of the crystal structure; such effects are obviously not allowed in our setup. Experiments with ultracold atoms in optical lattices provide an excellent platform to test our predictions. Interactions can be tuned in a wide range by Feshbach resonances, the lattices can be loaded with different filling factors and a temperature range T /W = 0.1 -0.2 is routinely accessible In the local approximation, the expression simplify. We find the following result after analytic continuation, and We have and ρ Γ = -1 π ImΓ(ω + ). Introducing spectral functions we can also write, The T -matrix calculations can be done non-selfconsistently (Tnsc) and self-consistently (Tsc). We start with a comparison of the DMFT results obtained using NRG calculations for the effective impurity model with DMFT calculations using second order perturbation theory, usually termed iterated perturbation theory (IPT). IPT gives qualitatively reliable results in the half filled Hubbard model. We also provide a comparison of the DMFT-NRG results with T-matrix calculations. In particular, we use the Eq. ( For intermediate coupling, U/W = 0.6, and T /W = 0.2, we show a further comparison in Fig. The result for the second order retarded self-energy reads, 71 The imaginary part of the retarded self-energy is then given by where F r (ε, k) = f 1 (ε, k)+f 2 (ε, k), with the phase space factors, and, The expressions can be simplified in the limit of large dimensions. The momentum integrations can be replaced by integrals over the density of states, momentum conservation is implicit so we can omit the corresponding δ-function and the k-dependence disappears, f 1 (ε) = dε 1 dε 2 dε 3 ρ 0 (ε 1 )ρ 0 (ε 2 )ρ 0 (ε 3 )δ(ε We can do the integration over the δ-function, and similarly for f 2 (ε). In the particle-hole symmetric case we have, It is then sufficient to evaluate f 1 (ε) and we can write, This can be evaluated as a double integral for a given temperature and ρ 0 (ε). Assuming that ρ 0 (ε) is only finite in an interval (-D, D) we can analyze the double integration as being determined by certain region in the ε 3 -ε 2 plane. At T = 0 a geometric analysis of the integration region shows, f 1 (ε) ∼ ε 2 , which gives the typical Fermi liquid behavior, Eq. ( 