We present a first-principles approach to describe magnetic and superconducting systems and the phenomena of competition between these electronic effects. We develop a density functional theory: SpinSCDFT, by extending the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem and constructing the non-interacting Kohn-Sham system. An exchange-correlation functional for SpinSCDFT is derived from the Sham Schlüter connection between the SpinSCDFT Kohn-Sham and a self-energy in Eliashberg approximation. The reference Eliashberg equations for superconductors in the presence of magnetism are also derived and discussed. In this work, we present how magnetic (M) and superconducting (SC) properties can be computed on the same footing and from first principles by extending the Density Functional Theory (DFT) framework. In developing this spin DFT for SC (SpinSCDFT) we will restrict ourselves to situations where currents are negligible and only consider the effect of the Zeeman term of the Hamiltonian. Under this assumption we can exclude the occurrence of the Abrikosov vortex state The expulsion of static M fields from the bulk 2 is one of the most spectacular properties of SC materials and illustrates the profound competition between M and SC behavior. The SC-M interaction generates in fact a large number of interesting phenomena on which the scientific community has focused attention. Some of the most investigated are the Abrikosov vortices 1 and the variety of fascinating effects occurring in heterostructures Among the many effects generated by the interplay of magnetism and superconductivity, some have an intrinsic microscopic nature and could be accessible to firstprinciple calculations, in particular we refer to the sharp suppression of the critical temperature due to paramagnetic impurities We will start our formulation from the Pauli Hamiltoninan (Sec. II). In Sec. (III), we formulate a density functional theory (DFT), proving that the electronic den-sity n(r) , the spin magnetization m(r), the diagonal of the nuclear N -body density matrix and the singlet and triplet SC order parameters χ(r, r ) are uniquely connected with their respective external potentials. With this extension of the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem The interacting system is also being investigated directly by means of a magnetic extension of the Eliashberg method We assume that the interacting system is governed by the Pauli Hamiltonian (we use Hartree atomic units throughout) Ĥ = Te + Tn + Ve + Ûee + Ûen + Ûnn , where Te ( Tn ) is the kinetic energy operator of the electron (nuclei) and Ûee ( Ûnn ) is the electron-electron (nucleinuclei) interaction, i.e. usually the Coulomb potential. Ûen is the Coulomb potential between electrons and nuclei. To break the respective symmetries and allow the corresponding densities to adopt non-zero values in a thermal average we include an external vector potential A ext (r) and an external singlet/triplet pair potential ∆ ext (r, r ) in the Hamiltonian. These external fields will be set to zero at the end of the derivation. Because we do not consider currents, the only term in the Pauli Hamiltonian containing A ext (r) is: with B ext (r) = ∇ × A ext (r) and S = 1 2 ( σ x σ y σ z ) T , σ x,y,z being the Pauli matrices. We use the notation ψ † (r) = ψ † (r ↑) ψ † (r ↓) for the field operator where ψ † (r ↑) creates an electron at location r with spin up. The scalar potential part of Ĥ reads: Here, the anomalous density operator is defined by χ(r, r ) is a 4-vector of which the first component (proportional to Φ 1 ) is the singlet part of the order parameter, while the other components (related to Φ 2 ,Φ 3 and Φ 4 ) are the triplet part. The 4 components of the singlet/triplet vector Φ = (iσ y , -σ z , σ 0 , σ x ) T are 2 × 2 spin matrices similar to the components of S. Similarly, the anomalous external potential is assumed to have singlet and triplet components. The conventional density functional approach to the Many-Body problem We follow Ref. 33 and consider a multi-component DFT with the normal n(r), the SC order parameter as the anomalous density χ(r, r ), that describes the electrons condensed into singlet and triplet states, and Γ (R 1 ..R N ) the diagonal of the nuclear N -body density matrix. In addition, we introduce the magnetization m(r) as another electronic density. The HK proof n(r), m(r), χ(r, r ), is a straightforward generalization of Mermin's HK proof in a finite temperature ensemble In this work we are mainly interested in the influence of a magnetic field on the SC state. We briefly review the approximation steps to arrive at the Fröhlich Hamiltonian starting from the formally exact multi-component DFT. The reader may refer to the existing literature for further details where we have separated the electronic Ĥe from the nuclear We write v s (r) = v ext (r) + v xc (r) with v xc (r) being the scalar xc potential (similar for B s (r) and ∆ s (r, r )). m(r) = ψ † (r) • S • ψ(r) is the operator of the magnetic density. In the nuclear description, ζ † (R) creates the nuclear field at location R. Following Lüders et al. Here, we neglect the spin of the nuclei and consider only one atomic type (the generalization is straightforward). Since SC occurs in the solid phase, we assume that ions can only perform small oscillations about their equilibrium position. A discussion that goes beyond this simple picture can be found in Ref. 36 and 32. We expand We use the notation q = q, λ with Bloch vector q and mode number λ. We further use the notation -q = -q, λ for all Bloch vector and band or mode combinations. We point out that via the functional dependence of W s [n, m, χ, Γ ] the KS phonon frequencies Ω q are in principle functionals of the densities as well. b † q creates a bosonic KS phonon with quantum numbers q. Usually, approximating W s with the Born-Oppenheimer energy surface, leads to phonon frequencies in excellent agreement with experiment The electron phonon scattering should be formally constructed from the bare Coulomb interaction where m = 0, z and g 0 q (r) = δvs(r) δuq , g z q (r) = δBs z (r) δuq , u being the phononic displacement vectors Here T is the usual time (τ ) ordering symbol of operators bq (τ )+ b † -q (τ ) in the Heisenberg picture and . . . ph means to evaluate the thermal average using the Hamiltonian Ĥph KS of Eq. ( The electronic KS Hamiltonian Ĥe KS is not diagonal in the electronic field operator ψ(r) because Eq. ( where E 0 is the ground state energy and the E k are all positive. This form can be achieved 39 by commuting the operators Ĥe k and then redefining the negative energy particle operators as holes âk = γ † k . We use a notation that is based on the one of Ref. 40, 41 and 24. We introduce Using this Nambu field operator Ψ (r) the KS Hamiltonian reads where the KS Hamiltonian (first quantization Nambu form) is given by with Note that the changed order of the electronic field operator implies a transposition in spin space in the (-1, -1) component that is equivalent to using S * . In a similar transformation the diagonal KS Hamiltonian Eq. ( with Φk = γk γ † k . As a consequence of the rearrangement of the operators, in the Nambu-Anderson form should appear the trace of the Hamiltonian Ĥe KS . However, not being an operator, this cancels from thermal averages and has been disregarded. Φk is a two (not four) component vector because the spin may not be a good quantum number in the SC KS system. We can diagonalize the form in Eq. (15) to the form Eq. ( Note that in the first case the matrix is 4×2 dimensional, and in the second 2 × 4 because of the spinor property of the u k (r), v k (r). In going from Eq. ( which are the KS Bogoliubov de Gennes (KSBdG) equations for magnetic system. Applying the inverse Bogoliubov-Valatin transformation from the left we obtain two redundant vector equations of which we usually consider the first for the positive eigenvalues This is the usual form of the KSBdG equations which generalize those of Ref. 44 a. The Normal State KS Basis expansion The KS-BdG equations 21 pose a challenging integro differential problem. Sensible approximations can be obtained by first performing an expansion into a basis set that is accessible in practice and resembles closely to the true quasi particle structure of the non-superconducting phase of the material under consideration. With this in mind we consider the non-SC KS single particle equation: s (r) and B 0 sz (r) are known functionals, like the local spin density approximation (LSDA) Defining the matrix elements and the singlet/triplet parts of the pair potential expansion coefficient matrix we can finally cast Eq. ( The superscript 1, 2, . . . means we have ordered the Bloch vectors and bands in some way. The precise way of ordering is unimportant. Note that the set of {g - k } solves the eigenvalue equation similar to Eq. ( and similar for m(r) and χ(r, r ) where χ(r, r ) is expanded in φ * i (rσ) and φ * j (r σ ). The coefficients read We want to stress that we have not performed any approximations so far and the SC KS system reproduces the exact interacting densities of the Hamiltonian of Eq. (1). b. Singlet Superconductivity Due to the antisymmetric structure of the fermionic wavefunction and the effectively attractive interaction, in absence of magnetism, the singlet solution always leads to a more stable SC state. Known SC that feature a triplet pairing all share a very low critical temperature less than a few Kelvin We therefore make the assumption that our pairing potential has only the singlet component (marked as a subscript S in the KS potential). In addition, we assume a collinear spin structure in the normal state part of the Hamiltonian: Then, we observe that spin becomes a good quantum number in the SC KS system. This follows because the KS Hamiltonian matrix elements can be brought to a Block diagonal structure in Nambu and spin space with two kind of eigenfunctions to each individual block. Consequently we re-label the eigenvectors with k → k, μ where the size of the set of k is reduced to half. Each block μ is diagonalized as E + kμ is an eigenvalue that may or may not be positive. However, we have introduced the SC KS particles in Eq. ( We conclude that to every k we have 4 eigenvalues of which 2 are positive. These positive eigenvalues are identified with E kμ . In the next Subsection III A 2 c after introducing the Decoupling approximation we will be able to compute these eigenvalues explicitly, and continue this discussion. c. The Spin Decoupling Approximation It is desirable to reduce the effort to solve the KSBdG Eq. ( This type of approximation is inherent in the Eliashberg equations as well as SCDFT functionals. It is also straightforward to include a diagonal correction R σσ ii . In the form presented here we will call it Spin Decoupling Approximation (SDA). For each k and μ, Eq. ( Here we have introduced a single spin notation v The spin label on the coefficients of the Bogoliubov transformation always refers to the normal state KS basis spin label and thus we use the spin notation μ → σ. Note however that the spin label cannot be strictly identified with the spin of a SC KS particle. We will come back to this point later. From now on we we will use the notation ∆ s sk = ∆ s sk,-k = ∆ s s-k,k . We may compute the two eigenvalues and eigenvectors analytically. From the high energy limit ε kσ + ε -k,-σ ε kσ -ε -k,-σ we identify the name ± for the two branches. The eigenvalues are In the spin degenerate limit, the + branch has always positive eigenvalues E + kσ and it is clear which of the eigenvectors belongs to the first column of the Bogoliubov Valatin transformation. In the spin polarized case the situation is more complicated. Again, because two of the four Bogoliubov eigenvalues to a given k are positive but without knowledge of ε kσ and ∆ s sk one can not tell in advance which ones these are. The general situation is sketched in Fig. d. Eigenvalues in the SDA Our first concern is how to interpret the spin quantum number σ of E ± kσ in connection with the underlying normal states ε kσ . First, consider the non-SC limit where This situation is plotted in Fig. Second, consider the following case that occurs at any k 0 where ε k0↑ + ε -k0↓ = 0. Given that we have an energy splitting ε k0↑ -ε -k0↓ > 2|∆ s sk | we find that both E ± -k0,↓ are negative. This means that according to the definition in Eq. ( e. Eigenvectors in the SDA Furthermore we can analytically compute the normalized eigenvectors g α kμ to the eigenvalues E α kμ (α = ±). We introduce the notation to label the components which are given in terms of the eigenvalues and components of the matrix by Starting from a converged zero temperature normal state calculation, within the SDA the only remaining variable is thus the matrix elements of the pair potential ∆ s sk because the SC KS wavefunctions as well as the Bogoliubov eigenvalues are explicitly given in terms of it. It is important to point out that within the SDA ∆ s sk can be chosen to be real we get: where ∆s sk = sign( ∆ s sk )|∆ s sk | ∈ R. Thus the (k, -k) matrix elements of our general complex decoupled pair potential are gauge equivalent to purely real ones. We still keep a general complex notation for ∆ s sk first, to investigate explicitly if self-energy corrections affect this conclusion and, second, to make it easier to extent the formalism to the case where the gauge symmetry does not have enough freedom to make all matrix elements real. The SDA, as introduced so far, assumes that we compute SC on top of a (magnetic) quasi particle structure. Thus, for example, it does not allow magnetism to be suppressed when a weakly magnetic system becomes SC. In conventional SCDFT We want to point out in here that it is also possible to keep the simple form of the SDA and include competition of SC and magnetism at the same time, by means of the following iterative scheme: 1. Take the normal KS states { φ iσ } and eigenvalues ε kσ as starting orbitals. 2. Solve the KS-BdG equations in the SDA 3. Recompute the densities n(r) and m(r) according to the Eqs. ( This procedure changes the meaning of the SDA during the iteration because we are self consistently updating the orbitals { φ iσ } it refers to. So far we have presented the structure of SpinSCDFT with the focus on the electronic SC KS system. However explicit functionals for the xc-pairing potential ∆ s sk have not yet been discussed. The derivation of the approximations for the xc-potentials generalizes one proposed by Marques 50 in SCDFT and uses the Sham-Schlüter equation of SpinSCDFT. This equation is based on the observation that the parts of the KS GF and the interaction GF that correspond to the densities must be equal. Using the Dyson equation for a SC in a magnetic field starting from the SC KS system as the formally non interaction one we can relate the xc-potentials to an approximation for the self energy. Here and in the next section we present a derivation of an xc-potential for SpinSCDFT that generalizes the ones of Marques 50 and Sanna and Gross We introduce the GF with the τ ordering symbol T and the field operators in the Heisenberg picture The imaginary time ordering symbol in Nambu space T is defined to act on every of the (4×4) components individually which can be achieved by transposing in Nambu-spin space We define the equal time limit in the -1, -1 component different to the usual one (that we use in the 1, 1 component). The equal time limit of the time ordering symbol should be defined to recover the density matrix operator but according to the usual rule where the creation operator is taken infinitesimally before the annihilator would lead to the form ψψ † in the -1, -1 component. From the equation of motion we derive the Dyson equation starting from the SC KS system as a formally non interacting system with Here Σ is the irreducible Nambu self-energy, where the electronic Hartree diagram was subtracted, and vxc is the Nambu xc potential The SC KS Greens function satisfies From the equation of motion we can compute the SC KS GF. Because by construction the SC KS GF yields the same densities as the interacting system we can cancel the respective parts of the GFs in the Dyson Eq. ( For convenience the self energy is decomposed in a phononic part Σph (ω n ) and a Coulomb part ΣC (ω n ) : Σ(ω n ) has a diagrammatic expansion in terms of Ḡ(ω n ) As an interesting extension we could include parts of the vertex corrections that lead to spin fluctuations. These, in the form of an effective spin interaction, are discussed by Essenberger et al. As compared to the polarization corrections of the same order, the phononic vertex corrections are negligible It has been observed that computing the GW quasi particle band structure in a metal gives usually small corrections to the KS bands (compare Ref. 55 Fig. For convenience we use a similar assumption for the spin part. This way we can drop the Nambu diagonal vxc construction from the Sham-Schlüter equation. Representing ḠKS (r, r , ω n ) and Ḡ(r, r , ω n ) in the same basis as the Bogoliubov-Valatin transformations, i.e. essentially the normal state KS orbitals {Ψ KS iσα (r)} with the pure Nambu and spin spinor wavefunctions Sorting the expansion coefficients of ḠKS (r, r in similar Nambu and spin form we obtain the 4N × 4N matrix equation that we need to solve for Φ • ∆ s . From here on we use Φ • ∆ s and Φ • ∆ xc synonymously, i.e. the external pair potential is assumed to be infinitesimal. In the next section we reduce the problem to the singlet case and employ the SDA. Because we can solve the KSBdG equations analytically we obtain a potential functional theory and arrive at a functional form that is formally similar to the BCS gap equation. We stress that the methods presented here and in the next section could also be applied without the restriction to the SDA. However in that case the equations would have an implicit form and require a numerical solution of the KS-BdG equations. Such a general form would be of importance in considering triplet superconductivity or to account for pairings beyond the usual one of time reversed states (as would be needed for example to describe the FFLO state The Sham-Schlüter Eq. ( ). This will give inaccurate critical temperatures but qualitatively correct results. Thus we are left to solve the equation: In this form the matrix elements of the SC KS GF in the normal state KS basis are given by We use given in Eq. (23). Similar for v i k . Further we assume the SDA for the rest of this paper. Results beyond the SDA are discussed in the PhD thesis Ref. 56. In the SDA the SC KS GF simplifies to This form and any further formula based on it use the components of the SC KS wavefunction as given in the Eqs. ( Here we see that self-energy contributions ∝ τ z σ 0 change the average spin Fermi level = 0. Similarly contributions ∝ τ z σ z change the splitting of single particle levels. It has to be understood that these are global properties of the band structure, meaning that the full ε iσ dispersion has to be integrated to obtain N electrons per unit cell. If the interaction changes dispersion and occupations far away from the Fermi level this may still cause a shift of the original Fermi level. An clear cut example is the following: In the context of SC one often employs the Eliashberg function α 2 F (Ω) which is the Fermisurface average of the electron-phonon interaction and the splitting would show a logaritmic divergece. As commonly done in Eliashberg theory, where the same effect occurs, one then excludes self-energy contributions ∝ τ z . We will assume the same approximation. As the Hartree diagram is proportional to τ z is thus not considered. While the expected Fermi energy shift is negligible, corrections to the spin splitting could be of relevance. However due to the extreme additional numerical complexity of considering the true full electronic state dependence of the electron phonon interaction we leave this to a future project. We compute the self-energy matrix elements in the SDA from the Eq. ( From the hermiticity of Ĥe-ph KS of Eq. ( have the property g q ijσ = g -q jiσ * . Moreover g q ijσ ∝ δ ki,kj +q which is expected from the lattice translational symmetry with the static screened Coulomb matrix elements with the inverse dielectric function -1 (r, r , 0) that is accessible in many electronic structure codes 57,58 . -1 (r, r , 0) is often calculated within the RPA which yields very good results for metals in general. As we have pointed out, terms proportional to τ z i.e. contributions ( ΣKS ph 1,1 -ΣKS ph -1,-1 ) are dropped from the functional construction. Because of the gauge symmetry discussed in Sec. III A 2 c, we expect the equations for ∆ s sk and ∆ s s * k to be similar. Thus we proceed and evaluate only the 1, -1 component of the Sham-Schlüter equation (62) in SDA and arrive at ) Here D k,-k are the purely phononic contributions due to the Nambu diagonal self energy parts τ 0 ( ΣKS ph 1,1 + ΣKS ph -1,-1 ). C k,-k is due to the Nambu-off-diagonal self energy contributions and contains the phononic interaction along with the Coulomb potential on the same footing. The coefficients are the Matsubara summed SC KS GF parts. Note that sk so the Sham-Schlüter equation in the SDA is unaffected by the phase of ∆ s sk , as expected from the gauge symmetry. D kk and C kk have non vanishing matrix elements apart from k, -k. These are not included in the SDA. Other SC theories such as Eliashberg and spin degenerate SCDFT are build on similar approximations and from the quality of the results one obtains, we conclude that such corrections are in general not important. Another interesting aspect of the functional construction to observe is that a self-energy part showing tx triplet symmetry appears, that means the spin inverted Nambu off diagonal components are not equal and of opposite sign These self-energy part leads to non-vanishing functional contributions in C k,-k in the singlet channel. We call these contribution intermediate triplet contributions. We have investigated the effect of removing them and found that this has essentially no consequence in the numerical calculation for a spin independent coupling (see part II ). In addition we note that similar to the matrix elements k = -k, the diagrams generate triplet contributions that cannot be incorporated into the SDA. This also means that the terms are not zero as, on the other hand, one would expect for a singlet SC. This fact simply means that ignoring the triplet components from the external potential is not consistent, in presence of a magnetic field, because a tripletsinglet coupling exists at the level of the xc-potential. As discussed earlier (Sec. III A 2 b), it is not clear in which cases triplet effects become relevant. However, since experimentally triplet SC is only observed at very low temperature, in high temperature regimes disregarding all triplet components should be safe, we will show in II when we investigate the influence of intermediate triplet contributions, at least, that they are small. Within the SDA the SC KS wavefunction components v -kα k-σ , u kα kσ are explicit functionals of the potential ∆ s s . Thus, left and right hand side of the Sham-Schlüter equation (79) are equally non-linear functionals of the potential ∆ s s . We interpret the Sham-Schlüter condition (79) as Here The non-linear Sham-Schlüter operator contributions are given by and The term S D β kk due to the Nambu diagonal acts to reduce the critical temperature. In the Refs. 33 and 35 this term was scaled down by a factor of 1/2 in the functional construction to compensate for a systematic underestimation as compared to the Eliashberg critical temperature in the phonon only case. In Ref. 51 a SCDFT functional is constructed, by using a proper interacting GF in the exchange self-energy of Eq. ( and the contribution that derives from the static Coulomb interaction reads The functions P s , L and L C coming from analytic Matsubara summations, are given in the Appendix A, together with a discussion on some limiting cases. If the SC transition to the normal state is of second order, χ(r, r ) is assumed to go to zero continuously upon approaching the critical temperature. From earlier work where a σ,-σ k is some function of ∆ s s and show that Given that this is the case, in the limit |∆ s s | → 0 only linear order terms in the Sham-Schlüter equation are relevant. Then, at a second order phase transition T c can be computed from the condition that the matrix lim |∆ s s |→0 S β [∆ s s ] is singular. Coming back to Eq. ( Clearly, at T > 0 a σ,-σ k can only be zero if E + kσ -E - kσ → 0. Taking the respective limit lim which is the desired result. We may thus use |∆ s s | → 0 instead of |χ s | → 0 at the point of a second order phase transition. We sketch the function a σ,-σ . We thus observe that the order parameter χ s (r, r ) is only weakly dependent on the potential matrix elements ∆ s si that correspond to states below the splitting energy A. Still, this does not invalidate the conclusion that at any finite temperature a continuously vanishing order parameter implies a continuously vanishing pair potential. We thus expect that (at low splitting) we can use the linearized Sham-Schlüter equation (85). In the following, we use a breve on top of linearized entities such as Sβc = lim |∆ s s |→0 S β [∆ s s ] and Eq. ( where β c = 1/T c . The right eigenvector of Sβc is proportional to ∆ s s . To compute the small ∆ s s limit of Sβc we Also we see that Thus it is straightforward to arrive at and and 2. Non-linear Gap-Equation Far from T c or in those parts of the phase diagram where the SC transition is of first order we need to use the non-linear Sham-Schlüter equation, because a solution with small |∆ s sk | may not exist. The most common method to solve an equation of type Eq. ( This is the gap equation of SpinSCDFT. In the spin degenerate limit the choice S = -SM β leads to the SCDFT gap equation given in Ref. 33. We point out that while we can show that all SM β k,k < 0 at ) and is thus a numerically problematic object. In the implementation that we describe in detail in II we find that a good choice is Obviously in the spin degenerate limit we recover the formulas given in Ref. 33. In part II we will also discuss the properties of the splitting versus temperature diagram for a simple system in detail. In the KS-SpinSCDFT formalism, interaction effects are mimicked by the xc-potential that is an (implicit) functional of the densities. While the functional construction and the additional complications of the SC KS system pose additional algebraic complexity, the result is a numerically cheaper computational scheme. This is owed to the fact that Matzubara summations in the selfenergy are not computed numerically but absorbed into the analytic structure of the xc-potential. Likely, the knowledge of the interacting self-energy is essential to a future improvement of the presented functional. The selfenergy Eq. ( The starting point of the derivation of the Eliashberg equations is the Dyson equation of a SC Eq. ( where ḠKS ij is the SC KS GF and Σs ij (ω n ) = Σxcij (ω n )vxcij where Σxcij (ω n ) is the Nambu exchange and correlation self-energy that also includes the phononic Hartree diagram 52 . vxcij are the matrix elements of the xcpotential of the SC KS system. Note that the SC KS GF is not diagonal in the space of { φ iσ (r)}. Similar to our approach in SpinSCDFT of Section III we assume that { φ iσ (r)} is a good approximation to the quasi particle state 59 , i.e. Σs kl (ω n ) and Ḡij (ω n ) are essentially diagonal. We use similar diagrams (Eq. ( , under the mentioned approximations, the Dyson equation is a 4 × 4 matrix equation that can be solved analytically. Note that here we do not substitute the SC KS GF for the interaction GF in the self-energy (as was done in the functional construction of SpinSCDFT of Sec. III C). This is the main difference in the two approaches so far. The easiest way to invert the right hand side of the Dyson equation is to identify contributions of the self-energy that add to a given variable of the inverse SC KS GF ḠKS ij -1 (ω n ) of Eq. (66). We summarize these self-energy contributions in Table Table responding scalar self-energy components read Note that A ω k (ω n ) stands out in the sense that the SC KS GF has no contribution along this direction in Nambu and spin space. On the Nambu-off-diagonal we similarly introduce Here we introduce are real B k is the complex conjugate of B k . Further, for the same reasons discussed in Sec. III A 2 b, we do not consider the possibility that triplet self-energy contributions appear. It is important to remark that, just as in the usual derivation of the spin degenerate Eliashberg equations, the k dependence of all self-energy parts is generated via the k dependence of the Couplings |g q kk σ | 2 and in addition W stat k k,-k ,-k σ,-σ on the Nambu off diagonal. Introducing the mass renormalization function Z k (ω n ) as we can rewrite some of the above equations by including Z E k (ω n ) into the self-energy parts: Then by introducing the abbreviation and suppressing the arguments ω n , we arrive at the for-mulas for non-vanishing SC GF components We have thus expressed the GF in terms of the self-energy components (Eq. ( 1. Start with the coupling matrix elements g q k kσ and W stat k k,-k ,-k σ,-σ and an initial guess for the selfenergy components ∆ E k , ∆ E k , εk , Jk and Ãω k . 2. Evaluate Eq. ( 3. Construct a new self-energy and iterate from point 2, up to self-consistency. k is a peculiar object because it generates a spin imbalance in the particle as compared to the hole channel. To understand the effect of Ãω k consider the following self-consistent cycle. We start the iteration of these equations with Ãω k = 0 and kσ,kσ = Ḡ1,1 k,-σk,-σ we find then that Ãω k is proportional to the difference of the interaction in the spin channels If now the interaction is independent on the spin channel |g q kk ↑ | 2 -|g q kk ↓ | 2 = 0 then Ãω k also remains zero and we are at our starting point. Thus we conclude that for spin independent couplings Σ ∆ k and Ãω k remain zero during iteration. If the interaction is spin dependent |g q kk ↑ | 2 -|g q kk ↓ | 2 = 0 the self-consistency iteration will generate a spin imbalance in the GF. This is not surprising because the up and down single particle spectrum is altered in a different way by the interaction. Then a non-vanishing Σ ∆ k cannot be excluded. For future reference we extract the renormalized energy dependence εk of the GF as it appears in the selfenergy Eq. ( In a numerical solution, the equations (115) to (119) have to be iterated until self-consistency is reached. Each self-consistent step requires to perform Matsubara summations in addition to the k space summations which will be numerically demanding. Note however that the k space summations can be avoided using an approximation that is very common in the context of Eliashberg theory which is essentially to replace the couplings with their value at εk (ω n ) = 0. The reason why this is sensible can be understood from the GF. From the above equation (126) one can easily see that Ḡ1,1 kσ,kσ (ω n ) -Ḡ-1,-1 kσ,kσ (ω n ) behaves as εk (ω n ) -1 for large εk (ω n ). In turn, Ḡ1,1 kσkσ (ω n ) + Ḡ-1,-1 kσkσ (ω n ) and the Nambu off-diagonal parts Ḡα,-α kσ,-k,-σ (ω n ) behave as εk (ω n ) -2 for large εk (ω n ). Using this insight we see from the Eqs. ( are almost independent on the space k belonging to large εk because its contributions are suppressed by a factor εk (ω n ) -2 . Thus these quantities can be computed replacing the couplings with their value at εk (ω n ) = 0. With the integrand behaving as εk (ω n ) -1 , the convergence of the Brillouin zone integrals in Σ ε k (ω n ) and Σ J k (ω n ) depend on the k-dependence of the couplings in an essential way, even on k that correspond to a large εk . In particular, in absence of any k dependence of the couplings Σ ε k (ω n ) and Σ J k (ω n ) diverge logarithmically. From the physical point of view Σ ε k (ω n ) shifts the position of the Fermi energy and Σ J k (ω n ) the magnetic splitting of quasiparticle states due to many-body interactions. These terms are zero if the system shows particle-hole symmetry and small in general (see also the discussion in Sec. III C). Therefore we will discard these contributions completely and replace the couplings with their value at εk (ω n ) = 0 entirely, reducing the computational costs significantly. Another very effective simplification of the formalism comes from assuming the system to be isotropic in k. This means that the couplings will depend on k only via the quasi particle energy ε kσ . Here, we introduce the averaging operation on a generic function F kσ on equal center of energy and equal splitting surfaces according to where the number of states on center of energy and splitting surfaces is given by (ε, J) = Îkσ (ε, J) 1. The subscript indices "kσ" on Îkσ (ε, J) indicate the variables that are averaged. Note that we invert the sign of k for the σ =↓ part which makes Îkσ (ε, J)F kσ = Î-k,-σ (ε, J)F -k,-σ . Now we define the analog of the Eliashberg function α 2 F (ω) and on the Nambu off diagonal Note that in the above equations ( as the sum of residues in the upper complex half plane. Since it is not clear which of the four poles will be in the upper half we compute all residues. Adding those, we obtain the energy integral in Eq. ( Further, for Eqs. ( that is evaluated to We obtain the Eliashberg equations similar to their usual, spin-degenerate form Ãω n (J) = 1 4Z n (J) where K σ n,n (J, J ) = ˆdΩ 2Ω α 2 F D σ (0, J, 0, J , Ω) (ω n -ω n ) 2 + Ω 2 (142) L n,n (J, J ) = ˆdΩ 2Ω α 2 F (0, J, 0, J , Ω) (ω n -ω n ) 2 + Ω 2 + +C stat (0, J, 0, J ) . (143) We point out that the Coulomb interaction is not well suited for the k-constant coupling approximation. The reason is that the function N n (J) behaves as 1/n for large n while Z n (J) goes to 1 and thus the Matsubara integral shows a logarithmic divergence due to C stat (0, J, 0, J ) if ∆ E n (J) does not cut off the integral. Often the effect of the Coulomb potential is mimicked by replacing C stat with μ θ(ω c -|ω n |) where μ = C stat 1+C stat ln(E/ωc) with E, a parameter of the electronic band structure and ω c a phonon frequency cutoff Comparing the equations for the SC KS GF of Eq. (65) (noting u kα kσ (v -kα k-σ ) * = αsign(σ)∆ s sk /F k where F k = ε k↑ +ε -k↓ 2 + |∆ s sk | 2 ) with the interacting GF Eq. (123) we note that ∆ s sk takes the role of ∆ E k (ω n ) so the similar name is not accidental. However, as we have seen ∆ E k (ω n ) takes its significant shape in Matsubara space while ∆ s sk does not have such a ω n dependence and mimics the SC pairing in its k dependence in a way that densities of the interacting system are reproduced. In this work we have developed fully ab-initio methods to compute the SC phase of a material in a magnetic field Zeeman-coupled to the spin magnetization. In a unified notation we present a purely GF based (the Eliashberg approach) and a Density Functional based scheme. In our DFT we have employed a SC KS system to reproduce the interacting densities n(r), m(r), χ(r, r ) and Γ (R 1 . . . R N ). The SC KS system can be solved analytically using the SDA where we only consider the singlet pairing of time reversed basis states. We have derived xc-potentials in this case that include the electronnuclear interaction on the level of KS phonons and treats the Coulomb interaction in the same footing without the need for any adjustable parameter. As a second step we have applied similar approximations to the Dyson equation starting from the SC KS system as a formally non-interacting system. This procedure leads to the Eliashberg equations of a SC in a magnetic field similar to those discussed in Ref. 24. While SpinSCDFT allows to include the full Coulomb potential and promises numerically efficient calculations tor real materials, the direct GF approach is, instead, valuable to get direct physical insights to develop approximations and further improve the SpinSCDFT scheme. The theoretical framework presented in this work allows to compute the phenomenon of coexistence and competition of SC with magnetism from first principles. Especially in connection with the discovery of Fe superconductors this was intensively studied in recent years. In the subsequent part II, we will discuss a detailed numerical implementation of the equations presented in this work, i.e. the linear and non-linear functionals and the Eliashberg equations without Coulomb interactions. Further we will introduce a G 0 W 0 scheme to obtain the excitation spectrum starting from a SpinSCDFT calculation. explicitly, again using Mathematica. The results are We point out here that the Limit Ω qλ → 0 does not exist. It is however unimportant as the g λq ij go to zero in the limit Ω → 0 faster than L diverges. KS