A high-frequency optical phonon mode of SrTiO 3 (STO) was found to assist the high-temperature superconductivity observed recently at the interface between monolayer FeSe and STO substrate. However, the origin of this mode is not clear. Through first-principles calculations, we find that there is a novel polar phonon mode on the surface layers of the STO substrate, which does not exist in the STO crystals. The oxygen vacancies near the FeSe/STO interface drives the dispersion of this phonon mode to be flat and lowers its energy, whereas the charge transfer between STO substrate and FeSe monolayer further reduces its energy to 81 meV. This energy is in good agreement with the experimental value fitted by Lee et al. for the phonon mode responsible for the observed replica band separations and the increased superconducting gap. The oxygen-vacancy-induced flat and polar phonon mode provides clues for understanding the origin of high Tc superconductivity at the FeSe/STO interface. Recently the extremely enhanced superconductivity in monolayer FeSe grown on Nb-doped SrTiO 3 (STO) substrate have been reported It is so far not clear how the FeSe monolayer and the STO phonon mode coupled with each other, or why the experimentally observed replica bands appear. One possibility could be from the well-separated phonon mode of bulk STO Although the phonons of bulk STO have been widely studied, those of the surface of STO substrate have seldom been systematically studied. In this paper, based on the first principles calculations, we have carefully studied the vibrational properties of the FeSe/STO interface, and successfully identify a special phonon mode, which is strongly related to the oxygen vacancy on STO surface and the charge transfer between the FeSe monolayer and STO substrate. The calculated energy of the phonon mode is in accordance with the recent observed particular surface phonon mode, which is very different from bulk STO. The calculations were performed in the framework of density functional theory (DFT) with the local density approximation (LDA) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) First we calculated the phonon spectrum of the cubic STO crystal, as shown in Fig. The imaginary phonon mode at R point indicates the AFD phase transition near 105 K. A large phonon band gap appears in the phonon spectrum with the LO-TO splitting, and there is no phonon mode in the energy range 70-90 meV. Above the gap, there is a phonon mode about 97 meV at Γ point. This high-energy mode of bulk STO is obviously separated from all other phonon bands. For the STO surface, a surface polar phonon mode appears, which is very different from the isolated phonon mode of bulk STO. phase, which means that the induced polar field will not be canceled. This kind of surface polar phonon mode has not been found neither in the phonon spectrum of bulk STO nor in that of the un-relaxed STO slab. If the STO slab is not relaxed, the interlayer Ti-O bond lengths between the top two layers are same as those in the bulk, then our calculation does not find any new mode around 107.5 meV. After the relaxation of the STO surface structure, the Ti-O bond length becomes shorter, and meanwhile the new phonon mode appears with larger energy. where (0) represents the static in-plane dielectric constant. Since the in-plane dielectric constant increases, the magnitude of the LO-TO splitting will be reduced, thus the high-energy phonon mode of bulk STO will not exist anymore. It is well known that the FeSe monolayer on STO with oxygen vacancies was heavily n-type doped which were experimentally observed We have checked all the phonon mode with energy higher than 60 meV, there are two more similar modes, but with much smaller surface dipole moment. We have calculated the ratio of the "surface vibration" in STO, STOov, and FeSe/STOov slabs. The ratio of the surface vibration is calculated by summing up the square of the phonon eigenvectors of the atomic displacements in the top two layers of STO substrate. The ratio of the phonon modes with the phonon energy above 60 meV is shown in Fig. Though there are several phonon modes composed mainly of the surface atomic vibrations (blue ones), only one mode is dominated by the surface polar vibrations (red ones) in the STOov and FeSe/STOov slabs. Recently, Lee et al. They proposed that the interaction between the FeSe electrons and a particular phonon mode from STO substrate is also responsible for raising the superconducting gap opening temperature in the monolayer FeSe/STO system. They used a dispersionless phonon mode of 80 meV to fit their experimental data and got a very good agreement. However, the origin of this special mode is not clear. Based on our calculated results, we predict that the oxygen-vacancy induced flat phonon mode with the energy of 81.7 meV in FeSe/STO slab is very likely to be the interfacial mode proposed experimentally. According to our calculations, this flat surface phonon mode is unique, which is also consistent with the experimental phenomenon that only one replica band can be effectively observed. Furthermore our results are also in good agreement with the results of Peng et al. In conclusion, we have systematically investigated the phonon modes of the STO surface, and found a special surface polar phonon mode which is mainly composed of the Ti and O atomic vibrations perpendicular to the surface. This mode becomes flat and dispersionless when there are oxygen vacancies on the surface. With the FeSe monolayer deposited on the surface, the strong interaction between FeSe monolayer and STO surface significantly decreases the energy of the phonon mode to lower value at 81.7 meV, which is consistent with the interfacial phonon mode observed recently near the FeSe/STO interface with high-temperature superconductivity 2 . As a result of the surface dipole field induced by the surface mode, the electron-phonon coupling can be strong near the interface, which might play an important role in the superconductivity observed by Lee et al. 