High pressure structures, phase diagram and superconductivity of polonium hydrides have been systematically investigated through the first-principles calculations based on the density functional theory. With the increasing pressure, several stoichiometries (PoH, PoH 2 , PoH 4 and PoH 6 ) are predicted to stabilize in the excess hydrogen environment. All of the reported hydrides, exception of PoH, exhibit intriguing structural character with the appearing H 2 units. Moreover, the electronic band structure and projected density of states (PDOS) demonstrate that these energetically stable phases are metallic. The application of the Allen-Dynes modified McMillan equation with the calculated electron-phonon coupling parameter reveals that PoH 4 is a superconductor with a critical temperature T c of 41.2-47.2 K at 300 GPa. Over the past ten years, hydrogen-rich compounds have been the focus of research for their potential to become extraordinary high-temperature superconductor at lower pressures accessible to current experiments. The elements of group VIA, which include oxygen, sulfur, selenium, tellurium and polonium elements, present many interesting properties under pressure, such as the metallic phases of O 2 , S, Se and Te are found to be superconducting in experiment, with a transition temperature Tc of 0.6, 10, 5 and 4.5 K, Polonium (Po) belongs to the chalcogenide family of the periodic table, which is the only metal element in the group VIA. In addition, Po is one of the strangest elements of the periodic table, which possesses the simple cubic (sc) structure at ambient conditions, while most elements are tendency to form complex crystal structures (fcc, bcc, hcp, etc). Based on the intriguing nature of Po, H-rich polonium hydrides might exhibit different properties over other chalcogenide hydrides. It is well established that the application of high pressure can influence the physical and chemical properties of matter, and lead to the formation of unprecedented phases or complexes that have novel characters. Such as, the superconductivity of SiH 4 and PtH was confirmed under pressure experimentally. In this article, to explore the ground-state structures of Po-H system over a range of pressures, we use the recently fast-developed evolutionary algorithm Universal Structure Predictor: Evolutionary Xtallography (USPEX) The searches for stable high pressure structures of the PoH n (n = 1-6) system were performed through the evolutionary algorithm, implemented in the USPEX code. In the geometrical optimization, all forces on atoms were converged to less than 0.005eV Å. The lattice dynamics and electron-phonon coupling electron-phonon coupling (EPC) for superconducting properties of stable compounds have been computed with QUANTUM-ESPRESSO. We explore polonium hydrides with hydrogen-rich contents through the evolutionary algorithm USPEX. The calculations were performed at 50-300 GPa with considering simulation sizes ranging from one to four formula units (f.u.) for PoH n (n=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). Our calculations gave convex hulls on the formation enthalpy of the Po-H system with H-rich stoichiometry from 50 to 300 GPa shown in Figure In summary, we explore the structures, phase diagram and superconductivity of polonium hydrides under pressure using ab initio calculations. The polonium hydrides do not become thermodynamically stable with respect to decomposition into the Po 