We analyze the quantum dynamics of two electromagnetic oscillators coupled in series to a voltage biased Josephson junction. When the applied voltage leads to a Josephson frequency across the junction which matches the sum of the two mode frequencies, tunneling Cooper pairs excite photons in both modes simultaneously leading to far-from-equilibrium states. These states display highly non-classical features including strong anti-bunching, violation of Cauchy-Schwartz inequalitites, and number squeezing. The regimes of low and high photon occupancies allow for analytical results which are supported by a full numerical treatment. The impact of asymmetries between the two modes is explored, revealing a pronounced enhancement of number squeezing when the modes are damped at different rates. It has long been known that the current flowing through a voltage-biased mesoscopic conductor can provide an extremely sensitive probe of its electromagnetic environment For a Josephson junction which is biased with a subgap voltage, V , the relationship between the dc current and the energy pumped into the electromagnetic environment is particularly simple as all of the energy associated with a tunneling Cooper pair must be absorbed by the environment, In this article we consider a voltage-biased superconducting junction whose ac Josephson frequency is tuned to excite two electromagnetic modes simultaneously (see Fig. Starting from a simple model Hamiltonian which describes the effect of the Cooper pairs on the oscillators through a highly non-linear ac drive at the Josephson frequency, we use a rotating wave approximation to derive an effective time-independent Hamiltonian which we use to analyse the quantum dynamics of the oscillators. Although the full behavior of the system can only be uncov-ered by numerical solutions of the quantum master equation, we find that approximate analytical descriptions are available in the two regimes of low and high photon occupancy. In the former one a perturbative treatment in the Josephson energy applies while in the latter explicit results are obtained by linearizing about the classical fixed points which provide a faithful description of the quantum dynamics when the zero-point fluctuations of the oscillators are small. The excitation of the two oscillators shows a clear threshold as a function of the Cooper pair pumping rate. Earlier work, which investigated the quantum dynamics of a single mode This work is organised as follows. We introduce our theoretical model in Sec. II and analyse its low photon limit in Sec. III and its semi-classical dynamics in Sec. IV. Sections V and VI explore the quantum dynamics of the system in the below and above threshold regimes, respectively. Finally, Sec. VII contains a discussion and the conclusions. The Appendix contains further details on some of the calculations described in the main text. We consider a system consisting of a Josephson junction in series with two LC oscillators, A and B with angular frequencies ω a and ω b across which a voltage V is applied (see Fig. We examine the behavior of the system as a function of the Josephson energy which describes the strength of the Cooper pair tunneling. The value of E J can be thought of like a pumping rate for the oscillators: as it is increased the oscillators will be more strongly driven, become more strongly excited and behave more non-linearly. In practice E J can be varied in an effective single-junction by forming two junctions in parallel and applying a tunable flux in the SQUID loop that they form The strengths of the quantum fluctuations parameterised by ∆ a , ∆ b , also play a very interesting role in determining the dynamics of the system and we will examine how the behavior is modified when they are varied. For systems where a Josephson junction is embedded in a superconducting resonator designed to have a very high-Q the quantum fluctuations will typically be very small ∆ a(b) ≪ 1 . However, significantly stronger quantum fluctuations have very recently been engineered in low-Q resonators coupled to tunnel junctions The explicit time-dependence in the Hamiltonian complicates the analysis of the corresponding dynamics significantly. However, close to the resonance we are interested in, ω J ≃ ω a + ω b , only some of the terms will play an important role and these can be picked out by a rotating wave approximation (RWA). We proceed following the approach in Refs. 20-22. We move to a rotating frame, applying a unitary transformation of the form U (t) = e iωaa † at e iω b b † bt where we define ωa + ωb = ω J , and make a RWA in which we neglect all of the rapidly oscillating terms in the rotating frame. The resulting effective Hamiltonian takes the form, where the colons imply normal ordering of the operators, For sufficiently low photon numbers (such that 2∆ a a † a , 2∆ b b † b ≪ 1) we can expand the Bessel functions in Eq. ( B. Quantum master equation The two oscillators are assumed to be weakly damped at rates γ a and γ b which in general will not be the same. We therefore assume that the quantum master equation of the system takes the standard quantum optical form in the T = 0 limit where we adopt dimensionless units of time τ = t √ γ a γ b , r = γ a /γ b and HRWA = H RWA /( √ γ a γ b ). In an actual experimental realization of the JJoscillators system in Fig. The basic structure of the RWA Hamiltonian [Eq. ( where in this case we have returned to dimension-full units. The quantum nature of the photonic states in the oscillators is captured by photon correlation functions such as and the Fano factors Whilst these two types of correlation functions are closely related to each other, they are nevertheless useful to characterize the photonic states in opposite regimes of parameter space. In the regime of weak driving and low photon occupation deviations from the case of a driven harmonic oscillator are best seen in the g aa(bb) (0) ≡ 1 with g ab (0) = 0 capturing growing cavitycavity correlations. In the opposite regime of strong driving, nonlinearities may substantially influence the widths of the peaks for photon occupations (energy fluctuations) as properly measured in the Fano-factors (7). In the following, we will first focus on the regime of low photon occupancy, where charge transfer through the Josephson junction occurs sequentially (Coulomb blockade regime) and analytical results can be obtained via a perturbative treatment in the drive amplitude E J . In the opposite domain of large photons numbers in the cavities, a semi-classical type of approximation applies, though, with substantial quantum fluctuations. In both domains, the magnitude of the parameters ∆ a , ∆ b , i.e. the strength of the ground state fluctuations of the respective cavities, plays a decisive role: they rule the impact of nonlinearities in the former regime and control the impact of quantum effects in the latter one. Corresponding findings will be supported by numerical solutions of the stationary states according to (2) and (4). The physics of the system described by the Hamiltonian (2) and the master equation ( and where n b follows by replacing r → 1/r. In the lowest order in the driving strength this reduces to with the superscript indicating the leading order in E 2 J and with n b again following from r → 1/r. ab (0) -1/(2n) aa(bb) (0) (left) and cross-correlations g bb (0)]/2 depicted as symbols for the case of symmetric damping r = 1. For the correlations we focus on the symmetric case γ a = γ b at resonance so that n a = n b = n. Then, based on the full Hamiltonian (2) one can show the general relation bb (0) (10) which implies bb (0) (11) with n as given in (8). Now, working to order E 4 J , one finds 8 . (12) Two types of correlations are encoded in the above g bb (0) -2g (2) However, the perfect correlation of the excitation process leads to perfectly correlated occupations in the oscillators with a noise reduction factor NRF = 0 only for the undamped case γ a = γ b = 0. For any finite photon lifetimes in the cavities, the decay out of the two cavities occurs uncorrelated which according to (11) always implies in the stationary state and for the symmetric situation NRF = 1/2. Further correlations in the light field are caused by the back-action of the resonator occupations on the photon creation processes. Generally speaking, the existence of photonic excitations in the resonators can either increase the probability of further excitations, similar to a stimulated emission effect, or it can hinder further excitations. Formally, these effects are encoded in the transition matrix elements of the RWA-Hamiltonian (2) between neighboring oscillator states, where the nonlinearities of the Bessel functions enter. If charge quantization of the Cooper-pair current is significant, the parameters ∆ a/b become large, so that the nonlinearities already appear at the few photon level. For the case of a single resonator, it was shown in Ref. 21 that ∆ 2 = 2 can completely suppress transitions to higher occupations and reduces the resonator effectively to a two-level system, thus operating as a perfect single photon source. The behavior of the correlation functions in the two-mode case is shown in Fig. aa (0) = 0 at ∆ 2 a = 2, but not at ∆ 2 b = 2. The general result (11) also reveals that the classical Cauchy-Schwartz inequality for photon intensities is always violated in the quantum case, i.e., g Namely, introducing the parameter ǫ = g bb (0)/g aa (0) the violation of the inequality requires [-g (2) aa (0), n ≥ 0. Accordingly, emission of photons from the cavities occurs in a correlated way for all driving strengths and photon occupations. In the next Section we ascribe to the individual photon states in the cavities respective amplitudes (energies) and phases. One then sees that these states are correlated through their phases due to the simultaneous creation process in the transfer of a single Cooper pair. For large photon occupancy in the cavities a semiclassical type of approximation applies. The simplest semiclassical description of the dynamics of the system is obtained from the equations of motion for a and b which follow from Eq. ( a +∆ 2 b )/2 would arise naturally. Using amplitude-phase coordinates for the two oscillators, α = Ae -iφa and β = Be -iφ b , and introducing the total and relative phase variables ξ ± = φ a ± φ b , Eqs. ( where we used the Bessel function identity, J 2 (z) + J 0 (z) = 2J 1 (z)/z, and have defined δ (±) = δ(a) ± δ(b) . Further, with the property F + (-A, B) = F -(A, B) and ). The behavior of the system is determined by the fixed points of the amplitudes A 0 , B 0 and the total phase ξ + 0 . Since the relative phase does not appear on the righthand side of any of these equations its fixed point value is arbitrary. For simplicity, we concentrate on the on-resonance case δ (a) = δ (b) = 0 in our analysis. The amplitude equations lead to the fixed point conditions A 0 = B 0 = 0 or The second equality in Eq. 23 leads to the energy balance condition B 0 = rA 0 . From the equation for ξ + , we see that fixed points arise when either cos ξ + 0 = 0 or This latter condition is independent of E J and hence leads to a locking of the amplitudes at particular values as a function of E J , something which is an important characteristic of the dynamics in the single-oscillator system Thus we identify three possible fixed points for the system: a zero-amplitude one, one given by the conditions cos ξ + = 0 and (from Eq. ( and a third solution for which the amplitudes lock to values where Eq. ( Thus we see that a non-zero amplitude solution only exists for E J > E c J . Thus E c J has a simple physical interpretation: it is the value of E J at which the oscillators reach the threshold for non-zero amplitude oscillations. Taking into account the stability of the fixed points, we find that as E J is increased from zero the amplitudes remain zero until the system reaches threshold at E J = E c J , after which the amplitudes grow smoothly according to Eq. ( In the next two sections we will examine the quantum dynamics of the system in the below and above threshold regimes. In the sub-threshold regime (E J < E c J ) the semiclassical fixed points have zero amplitude (A = B = 0). In this case we can gain some insight into the behavior of the system by approximating the Hamiltonian of the system by its lowest order terms, i.e. setting H RWA = H (0) RWA [see Eq. 3], an approach which is equivalent to analysing the linear fluctuations about the semi-classical fixed points. When this approximation is made the Hamiltonian is quadratic and the equations of motion for the moments take a rather simple form. Solving these equations, we find in the steady-state We note in passing that the result for n a reduces to the one derived in (9) in leading order in E J /E c J . Simplified in this way, the linearized description leads to a Gaussian steady-state Wigner function which takes the form 36,37 The fluctuations in the energy of the oscillators, described by the Fano factors F a(b) (7) change rather more dramatically with ∆ a . The thermal Wigner function obtained from the linearized calculation [Eq. (31)] predicts the simple relationship between Fano factor and photon number associated with thermal states, F a(b) = n a(b) + 1, leading to growth in F a(b) as E J /E c J increases and again there is a divergence at threshold. For small values of ∆, the full quantum dynamics follows a similar pattern though with saturation in F at the threshold leading to a peak rather than a divergence. In contrast, for larger ∆ values the behavior is completely different: the value of F a(b) drops monotonically as E J /E c J is increased and its behavior contains no signature of the threshold at E c J . The change in the behavior of F a as ∆ a is increased is reminiscent of quantum optical systems like the laser Above threshold the oscillators become strongly excited though this does not mean that their states become classical. As in the case of the single-oscillator system For symmetric oscillators (r = 1, ∆ a = ∆ b = ∆) the steady-state properties of the two oscillators must be the same and there is a very simple scaling to the semiclassical fixed point amplitudes obtained in Sec. IV: the value of 2∆ a A 0 is a function of just E J /E c J , see (23). This scaling provides a convenient way of comparing the average oscillator occupation n = n a = n b (obtained by solving the master equation numerically) for different values of ∆ with the semi-classical prediction, as shown in Fig. Figure We now turn to the fluctuations in the occupation numbers of the oscillators, described by the single mode Fano factors, F = F a = F b . The value of F decreases progressively the further above threshold we go as shown in Fig. The simple semi-classical analysis in Sec. IV can be extended to describe fluctuations (at least to lowest order) by essentially adding a noise term to the equations of motion for the amplitudes, Eqs. ( The comparison of the semi-classical and quantum calculations of the Fano factor shown in Fig. We now consider what happens when the oscillators are no longer entirely symmetric. We start by considering the case where the zero-point fluctuations of the modes remain the same (∆ = ∆ a = ∆ b ), but the damping rates are different r = 1 and then go on to consider the general case where ∆ a = ∆ b and r = 1. The effect of asymmetric damping on the average occupation numbers of the oscillator (shown in Fig. Figure The semi-classical calculation predicts a minimum value of F ≃ 0.1 for the small-∆ limit when r = 1/3, substantially lower than any of the Fano factors predicted for the single-oscillator system Finally, we examine the behavior in the regime where ∆ a = ∆ b . Figure We have analyzed the quantum dynamics of two electromagnetic oscillators coupled to a voltage biased Josephson junction. We considered the case where the voltage across the junction was tuned so that the energy lost by a Cooper pair crossing the circuit matches the sum of the photon energies of the two oscillators. In this regime the oscillators are pumped by the flow of Cooper pairs and can become strongly excited. Using a rotating wave approximation, we derived an effective timeindependent Hamiltonian for the system and explored the behavior it gives rise to under a wide range of conditions using a mixture of numerical and analytic approaches to solve the master equation. We use a perturbative approach to obtain analytic results for the regime where the occupation of the oscillators is low while in the opposite regime of large occupation numbers a semi-classical approach provides an effective description. The steady states of the oscillators display signatures of non-classical behavior over a very wide range of conditions with sub-Poissonian photon statistics found in both the low and high occupancy regimes. The strength of the zero-point fluctuations in the oscillators, ∆ a(b) , plays an important role: as these are increased the overall excitation level of the oscillators tends to move towards lower photon numbers whilst the signatures of non-classicality are enhanced. The ratio of the damping rates of the two cavities, described by r = r a /r b , also has an interesting effect on the behavior of the system. The photon numbers in the two oscillators are related in a simple way, n b = r 2 n a , as one would expect. However, the quantum fluctuations (e.g. measured by the Fano factors F a(b) ) also become unequal in the asymmetric case, r = 1. Indeed we find that the Fano factor in the less-damped oscillator can become low enough to lead to significant negative regions in the corresponding Wigner function. Strong correlations between the two oscillators are to be expected in the regime we consider given the fact that the tunnelling Cooper-pairs excite photons in each of the two oscillators simultaneously. The violation of the classical Cauchy-Schwarz inequality for the photons in the two oscillators, g ab , indicates that the corresponding two-mode states are non-classical. It would be natural to also investigate the entanglement between the two oscillators. However, this is complicated by the fact that in practice local voltage fluctuations, even when weak, would be expected to have a very strong influence on phase dependent correlation functions such as ab which can be important in determining the level of entanglement. This is in contrast to the observables such as photon occupation numbers and correlation functions which we have focussed on here which, as remarked in Sec. II B, are expected to be only very weakly affected. We plan to address the issue of inter-oscillator entanglement in a future work using a form of the master equation where the effects of voltage fluctuations are explicitly included where [J 0 (2∆ a A 0 ) + J 2 (2∆ a A 0 )] and a corresponding expression for h (b,a) . The noise terms obey the correlation functions Using Eq. (A5) we obtain the steady-state variances . (A13) Recalling that α and β are phase space variables of a Wigner function, we can connect these variances to quantum averages: A 2 = a † a + 1/2 and A 4 = (a † a) 2 + a † a + 1/2. For fixed points where A 0 ≫ 1, corrections of order A -2 0 can be neglected, leading to the simple result, Note that as the system approaches the bifurcation at E J = E c2 J , F + (A 0 , B 0 ) → 0 implying that the total phase fluctuations within this linearized approach diverge.