Recent experiments show that the Nernst-Ettingshausen effect is orders of magnitude stronger than the thermoelectric Seebeck effect in superconductors above the critical temperature. We explain different magnitudes of the two effects accounting for the magnetization current of virtual Cooper pairs. The method allows for detailed understanding of the surprising non-monotonic dependence of the Nernst-Ettingshausen coefficient on the magnetic field. Introduction. Thermoelectric and thermomagnetic phenomena in solids were discovered in the XIXth century The aforementioned phenomena found their theoretical explanation only in the middle of the XXth century in the works by The SE in type I superconductors occurs due to the transformation of normal excitations into Cooper pairs at the edges of samples subjected to a temperature gradient Nowadays, the control of heat fluxes and minimization of related losses are crucially important in nanoelectronics. This is why the thermoelectric and thermomagnetic phenomena in nanostructures and new materials attracted much attention in the recent years. First indications of a sizeable EE in a wide range of temperatures in superconductors above the critical temperature were reported by Palstra et al The theoretical description of fluctuation contributions to the thermoelectric and thermomagnetic coefficients remains complex and controversial. Initially, the fluctuation contribution to the Seebeck coefficient in 3D superconductor was studied by Maki After the new experimental findings of Ref. The magnetization currents of virtual Cooper pairs are in the focus of the Letter aimed at understanding of the surprisingly large difference in magnitudes of SE and NEE in fluctuative superconductors. These currents may be induced if the magnetization in the sample is spatially inhomogeneous. Its inhomogeneity is caused by the temperature gradient. The induced electric current contributes to the Ettingshausen coefficient (see the schematic in Fig. The physics of magnetization currents has been revealed half a century ago by Obraztsov In what concerns the properties of superconductors in the fluctuation regime, Ussishikin et al. FIG. We present here a unified thermodynamic approach to NEE and SE in fluctuative superconductor which elucidates the physics behind the striking difference in their magnitudes. We show that while the Seebeck thermopower is governed by the chemical potential temperature derivative, the NE effect is dominated by magnetization currents of virtual Cooper pairs, which are present in superconductors above the critical temperature Generalities. Let us consider a conductor subjected to a temperature gradient and satisfying the boundary conditions: j x = j y = 0, ∇ y T = 0, and ∇ x T = 0 (see Fig. where μ (x) and T (x) are the coordinate dependent chemical potential and temperature. We underline that this approximation is not universal. In particular, it is likely to fail if the electron scattering is specifically energy dependent (Kondo effect, thermoelectric effects in the vicinity of the 2 1 2 phase transition) or in the case of a strong phonon drag effect. Nevertheless, it remains a valid and powerful tool in a large variety of systems including the most part of up-critical (above the critical temperature T c ) superconductors. The conclusions of this Letter are restricted to the systems where the aformentioned assumptions are applicable. Once Eq. ( It is instructive to apply to both parts of Eq. ( Consequently, the Seebeck coefficient writes: We will consider up-critical 2D suprconductors. The coexisiting subsystems of fluctuation Cooper pairs (FCP) and electrons will be assumed locally non-interacting. This means that in each small volume characterised by the coordinate x the number of electrons involved in fluctuation Cooper pairing is dependent only on T (x). The FCP gas with concentration N cp [T (x)] and the depleted electron gas with the local concentration n e (x) -N cp [T (x)] /2 can be considered as two independent parallel conducting channels (the indices e and cp are related to electrons and FCP, respectively). Indeed, in the first order, the electron-electron interactions in the Cooper channel are taken into account once the FCP subsystem is introduced. In the second order, one would need to consider FCP interactions, but these are known to be important only in the critical vicinity of T c . The constancy of electrochemical potential condition applied to both electron and Cooper pair subsystems results in: The chemical potential of FCP needs to be derived. From its general definition one can write with F cp being the free energy of the FCP gas, = ln T Tc ≈ (T -T c ) /T c being the reduced temperature. We shall specifically consider a superconducting film of the thickness less than corresponding coherence length ξ. Corresponding values of F (2D) cp and N (2D) cp above the critical temperature can be written in the GL approximation as where the GL parameter α = 4π 2 / [7ζ (3)] T c /E F is proportional to the electron-hole assymetry factor (see Appendix A in Ref. Seebeck coefficient. The substitution of Eq. ( which exceeds the normal carrier contribution by a large logarithmic factor. We note that Eq. ( Nernst-Ettingshausen (NE) signal. In a similar way, one can calculate the contribution of FCP to the NE coefficient. It is dependent on the components of the thermoelectric (β ij ) and resistivity (ρ ij ) tensors as Taking advantage of the relations β yy = -σxx 2e dμ dT ; β xy = c ∂Mz ∂T derived in our previous work The fluctuation contribution to the Hall conductivity σ yx cp is proportional to the coefficient of the electron-hole assymetry T /E F (see Ref. Close to T c and for weak enough magnetic fields, one can use the GL approach while the longitudinal magnetoresistivity of FCP is given by the expression: In the above expressions, ψ(z) is the logarithmic derivative of the Euler Gamma function Γ(z), h = 2πξ 2 H/Φ 0 is the dimensionless magnetic field. Substituting these expressions into Eq. ( Eq. ( It worth to recall that the similar problem was discussed in 1970's in relation to the formal saturation of the fluctuation magnetization of 2D superconductors in strong fields calculated using the GL model Ref. where g is the effective BCS interaction strength, while the fluctuation propagator L n (Ω k ) is the two particle Green function describing fluctuation Cooper pairings of electrons in a wide range of temperatures above the line T c (H) Here ζ is the electron density of states and where D is the electron diffusion coefficient. The summation in Eq. ( (13) This expression allows finding N (2D) cp (T, H) in the whole range of magnetic fields and temperatures above the phase boundary H c2 (T ) . In particular, one can derive analytically the magnetic field and temperature dependencies of the NE signal at very low temperatures close to the second critical field H c2 (0), where only the contribution of the lowest Landau level is essential and summation over bosonic frequencies can be done exactly. The corresponding expression for M (2D) cp T, h can be found in Ref. γ E = 1.78. Here we took into account also the temperature dependence of the second critical field: . The Cooper pair contribution to the resistivity above T c can be found in Ref. with h = [H -H c2 (0)] /H c2 (0) . Eqs. ( h . The temperature dependence of the maximum in the NE signal dependence on the magnetic field is of special interest. Recently, the authors of Ref. Our Eq. ( where ς (x) is some smooth function which satisfies the condition ς (0) = 0. We note that Eq. ( The heuristic justification of Eq. ( 1/2 In conclusion, we have derived the Seebeck and Nernst-Ettingshausen coefficients for fluctuative superconductors, in the local equilibrium approximation. A thermodynamical approach allows analytical evaluation of both constants which appear to be different by orders of magnitude due to the crucial contribution of magnetization currents to the NE signal. We explain the nonmonotonous behaviour of the NE signal as a function of magnetic field above T c and estimate the position of the maximum of this dependence from a simple scaling argument.