The paper reports on finding the effect of a strong change in the microwave losses in an HTSbased coplanar waveguide (CPW) at certain values of the input power P in and direct current I dc . CPW on the basis of 150 nm thick YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ epitaxial film on a single crystal MgO substrate was studied experimentally. A sharp and reversible transition of the CPW into a strongly dissipative state at the certain meanings of P in and I dc depending on temperature was observed. Apparently the effect can be explained by self-heating of HTS structure caused by magnetic flux flow under the joint influence of MW and DC. Since discovery of high-temperature superconductors (HTS) in 1986 [1] a lot of attention has been given to studying nonlinear properties of HTS in microwave (MW) fields Peculiarities of the MW nonlinear response of the superconductors are due to varieties of the interaction mechanisms of electromagnetic fields with these materials, and are equally important for both Physics and applications of HTS. Important characteristic of a superconductor in the MW field is the surface impedance Z s = E s / H s , where E s and H s are the electric and magnetic fields on the surface of the superconductor. In the case of local electrodynamics the impedance Z s can be expressed in terms of the complex conductivity σ as Z s = (iωμ 0 / σ) 1/2 = R s + iX s , where ω is the MW field angular frequency, μ 0 = 4π * 10 -7 H / m is the permeability of free space Increase of the field amplitude H ω (or power P ω ) can change the conductivity σ, which leads to a dependence of Z s on H ω . There are a number of nonlinearity mechanisms responsible for Z s (H ω ). However, for high-quality HTS films, which are superconductors of the second kind, the most pronounced, apparently, is the mechanism associated with the formation of vortices and flux flow In contrast to the infinite conductivity of superconductors for direct current (DC) I dc smaller than the critical current I c , MW fields produce heat in a superconductor at any value of the MW current I ω . Effect of heating increases substantially when the magnetic flux flow resistance kicks in. These effects lead to an increase in MW loss at P ω values typical for practical devices Soon after the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity In this paper we report on discovery of the effect of a strong and abrupt change in the microwave losses in a section of an HTS-based coplanar line at certain values of the input MW power P ω(in) = P in and direct current I dc . Here, no irreversible changes in HTS film were observed. For the experimental study a coplanar waveguide (CPW) on the basis of 150 nm thick YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ epitaxial film on a single crystal MgO substrate was fabricated by photolithography. The HTS film produced by THEVA (Germany) had the following characteristics: T c = 86.5 K, J c = 3.6 10 6 A/cm 2 at T = 77 K. CPW cross-section dimensions were a = 0.186 mm, w = 0.1 mm, and h = 0.5 mm (Fig. Figure The authors If we assume that the quenching mechanism in MW field remains the same, it makes sense to evaluate the ratio of DC and MW current densities, J* dc and J ω , triggering the quenching effect, as a function of the input power P in . Although the central conductor of CPW is not a superconducting channel where J dc would be a function of the position within the cross-section of the strip, it can be assumed that in our case that J* dc varies weakly over the strip cross section S, as film is already in the resistive or pre-resistive state under the action of MW field alone. Therefore J * dc ≈ I dc /S. It can be noted that at low P in the characteristic value of J* dc decreases with increased P in more sharply than at higher levels of P in (Fig. 