In this paper we report on the results of a numerical study of the nonlinear time-dependent Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) equations, often also denoted as Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) equations, for a one-dimensional system of fermions with contact interaction. We show that, even above the critical temperature, the full equations and their linear approximation give rise to completely different evolutions. In contrast to its linearization, the full nonlinear equation does not show any diffusive behavior in the order parameter. This means that the order parameter does not follow a Ginzburg-Landau-type of equation, in accordance with a recent theoretical result in When Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer, shortly BCS, published one of the most famous papers in physics in 1957 As the Ginzburg-Landau theory yields reliable results on the large scale, soon the question arose as to whether this model can be understood as a macroscopic limit of BCS theory for systems close to the critical temperature. Gorkov gave a positive answer to this question for the stationary case shortly after the publication of BCS, see But what remains unclear and controversial up to this day, in particular in terms of a rigorous derivation, is the question whether the time evolution of superconducting systems close to the critical temperature are governed by a Ginzburg-Landau type of equation. After first attempts for a derivation of the macroscopic limit had been presented With our work, we demonstrate this result by means of a thorough numerical study of the long-term evolution of the BCS equations and their linearization for spatially homogeneous systems close to equilibrium at temperatures slightly above the critical one. For decreasing values of the parameter h, defined via T = (1 + h 2 )T c , we evolve the full and the linear system over a long time span and track the behavior of the Cooper pair density and the order parameter. For each values of the small parameter h, we find clear differences between the full equation and its linearization. Additionally, we see that the full BCS /BdG equations yield oscillations in the order parameter about a constant value. Such a behavior has long been predicted for and already been observed in out-of-equilibrium systems, see, e.g., In the realm of numerical analysis, the treatment of quantum dynamical systems has been of huge interest for many decades (see The paper is organized as follows: First, we introduce the system we are considering and the physical background in Section 2. This is followed by a brief summary of the theoretical results of In mathematical terms, BCS theory is a special case of a generalized Hartree-Fock variational principle, itself described by Bogoliubov-theory, for the density operators γ : H → H and α : H → H acting on the considered Hilbert space H. Those matrices are put together to form the two-by-two operator-valued matrix see, e.g., where the entropy S is defined as The evolutions of α and γ are given by the time-dependent BCS equations which are also known as Bogoliubov-de-Gennes equations Here, the subscript t indicates the time-dependence and the Hamiltonian H Γt (p) is defined as with * denoting the convolution. Calculating the upperleft and upper-right entries of the matrix-valued equation (4), we arrive at the system of coupled nonlinear equations In this paper we concentrate on attractive contact interactions, i.e., potentials of the form which lead to exactly solvable systems in the stationary case. Not only is such a potential the most interesting one from a physical model point-of-view but also does it allow us to implement the terms including a convolution in the equations of motion conveniently as we will illustrate in the numerics Section B. In this work we consider initial data which, in the stationary case, could be described by the Ginzburg-Landau energy functional for temperatures T close to the critical temperature T c , i.e., T = T c + h 2 for a small parameter h ∈ R. For temperatures above T c , the free energy is minimized by the so-called normal state Γ N for which α N = 0, For initial data Γ 0 to be within the range of Ginzburg-Landau, they have to satisfy This condition can be complied with by choosing with where ∆ 0 is a small parameter of the order of h, see, e.g., where γ0 and α0 take the special form In our simulations we choose a temperature which is slightly above the critical temperature for the setting under consideration and set the initial value for the gap parameter ∆ 0 to a non-vanishing value. We explain how to obtain the critical temperature for our setting and how to find physically reasonable initial values for ∆ in the Appendix Section A. For the stationary case it is well known that the Ginzburg-Landau theory emerges as the macroscopic limit of the BCS theory. To be more specific, define |α * as the translation invariant minimizer of the BCS functional which, in case of the contact interaction (8), can be calculated via Then, for the Cooper pair density |α corresponding to the non-translation invariant minimizer of F T , the quantity is an approximate solution of the stationary Ginzburg-Landau equation, see, e.g., should, close to T c , approximately satisfy a conventional time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) equation. In the spatially homogeneous case we are studying in this work, the conventional TDGL equation takes the form with some appropriate parameters c GL,1 and c GL,2 , see, e.g., Let us decompose the particle density as For states satisfying (9) η t appears to depend quadratically on αt , see, e.g., However, close to the Fermi-surface the quantity η t is not small but the dominant part in the non-linear evolution. Consequently, the full BCS equations ( The BCS time-evolution ( Based on the work for an appropriate constant C independent of h. On the other hand, it is shown in holds, where λ is a resonance of order 1 /h 2 which emerges from the zero-eigenvalue at T = T c of the linear operator The combination of the bounds ( Furthermore, using the methods of In other words, although the solution |ψ t | tends to the constant |ψ 0 | in the limit h → 0, its derivate might well oscillate more and more -in line with according predictions for systems which are suddenly perturbed out of equilibrium ( In this work we are interested in a qualitative study of the differences between the full BCS/BdG equations and their linearization. Thus, without loss of generality, we can work in dimensionless units and set the constant a of the contact interaction and the chemical potential μ to a = 1 and μ = 1, respectively. The initial data for the simulations are obtained as outlined in the Appendix Section A. For this, we approximate the integrals in Eqs. ( For the sake of reproducibility we add the thus-obtained values for T c and ∆ 0 to the results of our simulations. For more details on the discretization of the equations under consideration we refer the interested reader to the Appendix Section B. In order not to have to calculate the initial value of the gap parameter which depends on the crucial parameter h at the start of each evoluation again, we calculate ∆ 0 with the procedure outlined in the Appendix Section A for various h once. The interesting result is illustrated in Fig. Finally, with both T c and ∆ 0 at hand, we are able to present the results of the simulations. Doing so, we take into account that at temperatures T = T c + h 2 , physically interesting dynamics are expected to occur on a time-scale of O( 1 /h 2 ). Therefore, we always set t end = 1 /h 2 or t end = 2 /h 2 in the following. We plot the scaled L 2 -norm of α, which in the discrete setting is given by the sum over the K discrete momenta as as well as the modulus of the interesting macroscopic parameter ψ t introduced in Eq. Here, too, we consider the scaled norm of the Cooper pair density and the modulus of the parameter ψ t . The results are shown in Fig Once more, we depict the time evolution of α t and |ψ t |, cf. Figs. We have introduced a reliable integration scheme for the time-dependent BCS equation and its linear approxima-tion in spatially homogeneous settings. With the help of these algorithms, we could perform numerical long-term studies for systems close to equilibrium in order to investigate the time-evolution of the order parameter at the limit close to the critical temperature. The study shows very clearly that, opposed to the linear case, the full BCS equation does not yield any decay over time in the order parameter ψ t . Since the conventional time dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation is dissipative above the critical temperature by definition, it cannot give a valid macroscopic limit of the full time-dependent BCS/BdG equations. It can only be seen as the limit of the linearization of the full equations but the effects of this linearization could clearly be shown not to be negligible in the considered regime. We thus confirm the analysis provided in In addition, when evolving the system as described by the non-linear BCS/BdG equations, we observed oscillations in the Cooper pair density and in the order parameter about a finite value which are similar to oscillations which have been observed for out-of-equilibrium systems in various works. For translation invariant systems with contact interaction, the cricital temperature T c is well-known to be given implicitly by see, e.g. In order to calculate the critical temperature and a realistic initial value for the gap parameter we thus proceed as follows: For a given value of the small crucial parameter h, we first determine the critical temperature T c and set T = T c -h 2 . For this temperature we then search the corresponding gap ∆ following the above definition We want to model a system of infinite spacial extension, which, of course, is not possible to achieve on a machine. Therefore, we pretend our system to be periodic in space but with a large enough period. In the Ginzburg-Landau regime, one often takes into account external potentials that vary on a scale of O( 1 /h) and, consequently, lead to variations of the system which occur over intervals of that very scale. Thus, a valid model system should have an extension no smaller than those physical variations. But, in order to avoid artificial effects due to the periodicity, it is necessary to enlarge this extensions by some multiples of 1 /h. For convenience we furthermore include a factor of 2π, wherefore we consider systems with period 2πN /h, 1 < N ∈ N. The kernels of the density operators are now functions on L 2 ([0, 2πN /h] → R). In order to simplify the notation, we introduce macroscopic variables via x mac := h /Nx. We end up in a 2π-periodic setting for which the inner product of two functions f and g is just The self-consistent BCS equations are now given by with the Hamiltonian and the Fourier transform VNh of Please note that in the present discrete case the convolution of two summable series a k and b k has to be understood as For systems on a large torus with a contact interaction (8), we can easily see that where φ is the state given by φ(k) = 1 for all integers k. With this, the equations of motion take the convenient form for the nonlinear case and for the linear case. Up to now we are still left with an infinite-dimensional system of equations. In order to solve these numerically, we have to introduce a suitable finite-dimensional subspace. As the BCS equations are given in their momentum space representation, it is most convenient to use the so-called Fourier collocation. This means that a 2π-periodic function f (x) = j∈Z f (j)e ıkx is approximated by where the coefficients f K (j) are obtained by the discrete Fourier transform of the values f j = f ( 2π /Kj), j = -K /2, ..., K /2-1. Mathematically speaking we work on the subspace spanned by the first K eigenfunctions of the Laplacian on [0, 2π]. As a consequence, the evolution of the system is given by the K-dimensional system of ordinary differential equations (ODE) and accordingly for the linear case. From numerical analysis it is well known that (35) yields a very good approximation to 2π-periodic functions with the discretization error decreasing rapidly as a function of K, see, e.g. for a large enough integer M . Let us now explain how we solve the system of ODE ( We first notice that the Hamiltonian H Γt is self-adjoint. Thus, the time-evolution of Γ t is a unitary transformation and, hence, its eigenvalues are preserved. With regard to definition (1), the eigenvalues can be readily computed as and we see that the equality holds. Solving this for γt , we get where we have defined the auxiliary function The signs in Eq. ( This said, we now present our time integration algorithm. Putting it in a formal way, the system we have to integrate is given by with The right hand side of our initial problem can be written as the sum of two terms, where f 1 represents the linear part which resembles the kinetic part in the Schrödinger-equation and f 2 is the nonlinear part. Let τ denote a time step and Φ τ,f the smooth map between y(0) and y(τ ). Given the special form (46) of the differential equation, one can approximate Φ τ,f numerically by This is the well-known Strang splitting. Applying it successively yields an approximation to the exact solution at times t = nτ , n = 1, 2, ..., the error of which decreases quadratically as a function of the step size τ , see, e.g. Chapter II.5. The advantage of the Strang splitting is that Φ τ,h can be calculated exactly as As for Φ τ,f2 , it has to be approximated due to the nonlinearity. For this, we choose a simple Runge-Kutta scheme as proposed by The step size has to be chosen small enough for both the numerical approximation of Φ τ,f2 and the Strang splitting to give accurate results. For our simulations it turned out that reliable results can only be expacted for a step size inversely proportional to K. Playing safe we include a small factor and set τ = 0.1 /K. As a measure for the time integrator's accuracy, we consider the discrete analogon of the free energy introduced in Eq. ( along the numerical evolution. Recurring to a constant of motion as a criterion of accurateness is a much applied procedure in various computational fields, see, e.g. We have seen in the previous Subsection that the time step has to be inversely proportional to the dimension of the subspace we are approximating our system on. Furthermore, every time step requires a computational effort which grows linearly with K. Consequently, the complete CPU time for a simulation over a given time interval [0, t end ] is quadratic in K. So the dimension of the subspace and, thus, the related N and M should be the smallest possible. In order to check how small a M we can choose without any significant loss of accuracy, we fix N = 8 and h = 1 /4 and calculate the cricital temperature via the discretized version of Eq. ( for different values of M . The result can be seen in Fig. For different values of N and h we get the same plot. We see that for M = 256 the critical temperature is still slightly too small. However, when comparing the evolutions obtained with M = 256 to the according ones for M = 512, the relevant figures are indistinguighable from each another. For the sake of efficiency, we thus fix M = 256 for the rest of this work. As for the extension of our interval, N , we have to choose it large enough so that the solution cannot reach the boundaries during the simulation. As, by construction, we work with a periodic setting, a solution reaching one end of the interval would enter again at the other end, thus leading to unphysical interference. As an example of this numerical artifact, we consider the case h = 1 /8, N = 4 and plot the modulus of ψ t in Fig. 1 1 