We investigate the electronic reconstruction across the tetragonal-orthorhombic structural transition in FeSe by employing polarization-dependent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) on detwinned single crystals. Across the structural transition, the electronic structures around the  and M points are modified from four-fold to two-fold symmetry due to the lifting of degeneracy in d xz /d yz orbitals. The d xz band shifts upward at the  point while it moves downward at the M point, suggesting that the electronic structure of orthorhombic FeSe is characterized by a momentum-dependent sign-changing orbital polarization. The elongated directions of the elliptical Fermi surfaces (FSs) at the  and M points are rotated by 90 degrees with respect to each other, which may be related to the absence of the antiferromagnetic order in FeSe. Most of the parent compounds of the iron-based superconductors show the tetragonal-orthorhombic structural transition at T s and the stripe-type antiferromagnetic (AFM) order below T N ( T s ) In Ba(Fe,Co) 2 As 2 , the spin-driven nematicity has been suggested from the phase diagram in which T s and T N closely follow each other as the carrier is doped In this Letter, we report the electronic reconstruction across T s of FeSe by using He-discharge lamp and laser-ARPES on detwinned crystals. We observed a drastic modification of FSs from four-fold to two-fold symmetry around both the  and M points. The electron FS at the M point and the hole FS at the  point were found to be of elliptical shape rotated by 90 degrees with respect to each other. Polarization-dependent ARPES further revealed that the xz orbital shifts upward at the  point while it moves downward at the M point, thus indicating a momentum-dependent sign-inversion of orbital polarization in xz/yz orbitals. Imperfect FS nesting condition in the orthorhombic phase might be related to the absence of the antiferromagnetic order in FeSe. High quality single crystals of FeSe were synthesized as described in ref. Shown in Fig. In order to assign the orbital characters of the band dispersions which make the hole FS around the Γ point, we employed laser-ARPES with s-and p-polarizations. Considering the parity symmetry of light polarizations with respect to a mirror plane, one can assign the orbital character for each band dispersion In the tetragonal phase, the present laser-ARPES results summarized in Fig. The band structure is four-fold symmetric, but ,  bands are not degenerate at the Γ point, showing an energy gap of 20 meV. This gap scale is consistent with the previous ARPES In the orthorhombic phase, the calculations in Fig. Figures Regarding the FS at the M point, we have reported highly anisotropic k F in the xz and yz electron bands arising from the orbital order of E yz > E xz Our observation of the two elliptical FSs with different orientations at the  and M point is consistent with the quasiparticle interference (QPI) observed by STM/STS on FeSe It is also worth mentioning that the lifting of degeneracy of E yz > E xz at the M point with its orbital polarization larger than that at the  point is common to several iron-based superconductors. These facts indicate that the relation in the occupied electron numbers of n xz > n yz always holds, which might be an origin of the orthorhombicity. Theoretical studies suggested that the k-independent orbital polarization on the order of 10 meV resolves the magnetic frustration between q = (,0) and (0,) However, it is puzzling that FeSe does not exhibit any AFM order despite the strongly enhanced spin fluctuation. Here we focus on the orbital polarization of E xz > E yz around the  point, which has been detected only for FeSe until now. As clearly shown in this work, the k-dependent sign-inversion of orbital polarization leads to the situation that the elliptical FS at the  point (long-axis along k y ) is rotated by 90 degrees with respect to that at the M point (long-axis along k x ). Such electronic reconstruction makes the FS nesting condition worse. In the case of the orthorhombic/paramagnetic phase (T N < T < T s ) of NaFeAs, both of the elliptical FSs at the  and M points are aligned with their long-axes along k x , thus making the FS nesting condition better In conclusion, polarization-dependent ARPES study on detwinned FeSe revealed the drastic reconstruction of the FSs across T s . The electronic structure in the orthorhombic phase is qualitatively explained by the T-independent component from the SOI and T-dependent part due to the orbital order. We found that the xz band lifts up around the Γ point while the yz band moves up around the M point. Such momentum-dependent sign-inversion of orbital polarization modifies the FSs at the  and M point into elliptical shapes elongating along k y and k x , respectively. This modification makes the imperfect FS nesting condition, which may be related to the absence of the AFM state and electronic nematicity of orbital-origin in FeSe.