Recent experiments in optimally hole-doped iron arsenides have revealed a novel magnetically ordered ground state that preserves tetragonal symmetry, consistent with either a charge-spin density wave (CSDW), which displays a non-uniform magnetization, or a spin-vortex crystal (SVC), which displays a non-collinear magnetization. Here we show that, similarly to the partial melting of the usual stripe antiferromagnet into a nematic phase, either of these phases can also melt in two stages. As a result, intermediate paramagnetic phases with vestigial order appears: a checkerboard charge density-wave for the CSDW ground state, characterized by an Ising-like order parameter, and a remarkable spin-vorticity density-wave for the SVC ground state -a triplet d-density wave characterized by a vector chiral order parameter. We propose experimentally detectable signatures of these phases, show that their fluctuations can enhance the superconducting transition temperature, and discuss their relevance to other correlated materials. One of the hallmarks of the superconducting state of the iron-based materials Recently, experiments in the hole-doped pnictides Ba(Fe 1-x Mn x ) 2 As 2 In this paper, we show that both the CSDW and the SVC magnetic phases support composite order parameters that can condense at temperatures above the onset of magnetic order, and whose fluctuations can help enhancing T c . As with the nematic phase, these partially ordered phases are paramagnetic, i.e. fluctuations restore the time-reversal symmetry that is broken in the ground state. In contrast to the nematic phase, however, they preserve the point group symmetry of the lattice, but break other symmetries, including translational symmetry in cuprates The paper is organized as follows: in Section II we present the theoretical model that gives rise to the vestigial CDW and SVDW orders. Section III discusses the implications of these vestigial orders for both the normal state and superconducting state properties. Concluding remarks are presented in Section IV. To make the paper transparent and accessible, all formal details are presented in appendices. Appendix A contains the derivation of the saddle-point equations that give the phase diagram of the SVDW phase discussed in Section II. In Appendix B we derive microscopically the free energy discussed in Section III. Finally, Appendix C presents the derivation of the effective pairing interactions promoted by CDW and SVDW fluctuations discussed in Section III. For simplicity, we will consider the finite temperature problem, but the same conclusions can be extended to the quantum case. Here, ́q ≡ ́dd q (2π) d and ́x ≡ ́dd x where q is the momentum and x is the position. In the neighborhood of a finite T magnetic transition, and for a quasi-2D system, we can use the small q expansion χ -1 q ≈ r 0 + q 2 + J z sin 2 qz 2 , where r 0 is the distance to the mean-field magnetic critical point. The quartic coefficients u, g, w determine the nature of the magnetic ground state. These are, in turn, sensitive to microscopic considerations. The localized J 1 -J 2 model favors positive g and w Because Z 2 is a discrete symmetry, while spin-rotational O(3) is a continuous symmetry, a strongly anisotropic 3D system will generically display a vestigial paramagnetic nematic phase where M i = 0 but φ nem = 0 For g < max (0, -w), the ground state of Eq. ( Consider the CSDW state: Once the magnetization direction is chosen by spontaneous breaking of the O(3) spin-rotational symmetry, there remains a four-fold degeneracy corresponding to whether M 1 and M 2 are parallel or anti-parallel to the chosen direction. As is apparent in Fig. The order parameter field for this Z 2 symmetry is obtained via a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation on the quartic term with coefficient 2w in Eq. ( . the condensed phase is a CDW that doubles the unit cell, but leaves timereversal and the tetragonal symmetry of the lattice intact (see Fig. , interchanges the identities of the two scalar orders, φ nem ↔ φ CDW , but leaves the form of S unchanged albeit with (g, w) → -(w, g). Thus, the properties of the CDW phase are akin to those of the Ising-nematic phase -in particular, a quasi-2D system will again display for a range of intermediate temperatures a phase with M i = 0 but φ CDW = 0. Consider now the SVC state, characterized by two equal magnitude orthogonal vectors M 1 and M 2 . Upon fixing the direction of M 1 , which breaks the O(3) spinrotational symmetry, there remains an additional O(2) symmetry related to choosing M 2 in any direction along the plane perpendicular to M 1 which can be identified as a vector chirality ), but also the soft spin fluctuations near the magnetic transition are constrained to lie in the plane defined by φ SVDW (see Fig. Because φ SVDW breaks a continuous O(3) symmetry, there are two Goldstone modes in the SVDW phase. Consequently, in contrast to the Ising-nematic cases, the Mermin-Wagner theorem does not ensure the existence of the SVDW phase even in the two-dimensional limit. To investigate whether φ SVDW = 0 while M 1 = 0 is possible, we calculated the phase diagram for a magnetic SVC ground state treating the action in Eq. ( To discuss the experimental manifestations of the vestigial CDW and SVDW states, we investigate their coupling to the low-energy electronic states of the pnictides. We consider a three-band model , where the operator c a,kα annihilates an electron in band a with momentum k (measured with respect to the center of the pocket) and spin α, and σ αβ are Pauli matrices. We further introduce magnetic ∆ S and charge ∆ C order parameters with ordering vector Q 1 + Q 2 = (π, π), which couple to the electronic states via Here these fields have real and imaginary parts, , where the real parts correspond to conventional SDW or CDW orders, while the imaginary parts corresponds to spin or charge current orders. By integrating out the electronic degrees of freedom, we obtain the coupling between M i and ∆ S , ∆ C to lowest-order in the action (see Appendix B): is the corresponding non-interacting Green's function. As expected, the Ising-like order parameter φ CDW ∝ M 1 • M 2 induces a checkerboard-like charge order (see Fig. , with the same Ginzburg-Landau coefficient γ. Therefore, in the presence of a magnetic field, a pattern of staggering orbital currents (i.e. a singlet d-density wave Fluctuations of the SVDW and CDW states arise from four-spin correlations, and are complementary to the magnetic fluctuations that arise from two-spin correlations. An important issue is whether these fluctuation modes promote compatible superconducting states. Because the magnetic fluctuations are peaked at momenta Q 1 = (π, 0) and Q 2 = (0, π), they promote a repulsive inter-pocket interaction V > 0 between the hole and the electron pockets (see Fig. , and N a denoting the density of states of band a. The SVDW and CDW fluctuations, on the other hand, are peaked at the momentum Q 1 + Q 2 = (π, π) and promote an attractive inter-pocket interaction U < 0 between the two electron pockets (see Fig. In summary, we showed that both biaxial tetragonal magnetic ground states of the pnictides -the nonuniform CSDW and non-collinear SVC states -can melt in two-stage processes, giving rise to CDW and SVDW vestigial states, respectively. While both preserve the point-group and time-reversal symmetries, but break the translational symmetry of the iron square lattice, only the SVDW state also breaks inversion symmetry by entangling the spin-space handedness to a doubling of the real-space unit cell. Because in the iron superconductors the hybridization with the puckered As atoms already doubles the unit cell of the Fe square lattice, the CDW and SVDW states are more rigorously classified as intra-unit-cell orders. Recent experiments on Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 Beyond the physics of iron-based superconductors, our results establish the melting of double-Q orders as a microscopic mechanism to create d-density wave states. The latter have been proposed to be realized in other strongly correlated systems, such as the pseudogap phase of underdoped cuprates , i.e. it corresponds to Gaussian magnetic fluctuations. Thus, the effective action is given by: Approaching the SVDW phase from the paramagnetic state, we can integrate out the magnetic degrees of freedom, yielding an effective action for ψ and φ SVDW : where λ i,q are the eigenvalues of the matrix A ij corresponding to the Gaussian action in M i . The Gaussian part of the action can be rewritten in the convenient matrix form: Evaluation of the eigenvalues gives: So far our result is exact. To proceed, we employ the saddle-point approximation to determine the equations of state for ψ and φ SVDW , which corresponds to self-consistently accounting for the Gaussian magnetic fluctuations. The saddle-point equations become: Since our focus is on the proximity to a finite-temperature magnetic transition, we ignore the spin dynamics and use the low-energy expansion for the spin susceptibility appropriate for anisotropic layered systems: where r 0 = a (T -T N ), a > 0, T N is the mean-field magnetic transition temperature, q 2 = q 2 x + q 2 y , and J z is the inter-layer magnetic coupling. Defining the renormalized magnetic mass: where ξ is the magnetic correlation length, we obtain: In the case where there is no external magnetic field, we focus on the two types of fermionic order that couple directly to the SVDW order parameter, M 1 × M 2 , and to the CDW order parameter M 1 • M 2 . Thus, we introduce the Q 1 + Q 2 = (π, π) spin-current density-wave ∆ ′′ S (i.e. a purely imaginary SDW) and the checkerboard charge order ∆ ′ C (i.e. a purely real CDW) defined by: To proceed, we introduce the 6-dimensional Nambu operator: which allows us to write the fermionic action in the compact form: In the previous expression, S 0 M 2 i corresponds to the terms M 2 i that arise from the decoupling of the fermionic interactions. As we explained above, these terms can be ignored for our purposes. The total Green's function is given by: Ĝ The bare part is: where G -1 i,k = iω nξ i,k are the non-interacting single-particle Green's functions. The interacting parts are: B9) and: as well as: It is now straightforward to integrate out the fermions and obtain the effective magnetic action: where, in the last step, we expanded for small M 1 , M 2 . Here, Tr (• • • ) refers to sum over momentum, frequency and Nambu indices. A straightforward evaluation gives, to leading order in the coupling between ∆ ′′ S , ∆ ′ C , and M i : with the coefficient: For perfect nesting, δ 0 = δ 2 = 0, this coefficient vanishes. For a system in proximity to a finite temperature phase transition, expansion in powers of δ 0 gives: where ρ F is the density of states at the Fermi level. Therefore, it is clear that a spin-current density-wave ∆ ′′ S parallel to φ SVDW is triggered by the SVDW order parameter, φ SVDW ∝ M 1 × M 2 , whereas a checkerboard charge order ∆ ′ C is triggered by the CDW order parameter φ CDW ∝ M 1 • M 2 . In the presence of a magnetic field, additional types of fermionic order are triggered by the condensation of the SVDW and CDW order parameters. To show that, we first introduce the Zeeman coupling between the uniform field H and the electrons: We also introduce the Q 1 + Q 2 = (π, π) charge-current density-wave ∆ ′′ C (i.e. a purely imaginary CDW) and the spin density-wave ∆ ′ S (i.e. a purely real SDW) defined by: Following the same steps as in the previous subsection, we obtain the expanded action: where the Nambu-space matrices are given by: and: as well as: A straightforward evaluation yields, to leading order in the magnetic field: where we neglected all isotropic biquadratic terms of the form H 2 M 2 i . The coefficients are given by: It is useful to perform an expansion around perfect nesting, δ 0 = δ 2 = 0. The coefficients ζ and η become identical in this limit: The fact that ζ > 0 implies that the magnetic field induces an easy plane, rather than an easy axis anisotropy. As for the coefficient η, it remains zero in all orders in perturbation theory if an infinite bandwidth is assumed. However, keeping the top of the hole pocket W (or bottom of the electron pocket) throughout the calculation gives: The fact that γ = 0 implies that, in the presence of a uniform field, the SVDW order parameter φ SVDW ∝ M 1 × M 2 also triggers a charge-current density-wave ∆ ′′ C , whereas the CDW order parameter φ CDW ∝ M 1 • M 2 triggers a spin density-wave of same period, ∆ ′ S . Although this was expected by symmetry, here we have microscopic expressions for the corresponding Ginzburg-Landau coefficients. It is interesting then to compare the coefficient γ in Eq. (B22), which determines the amplitudes of ∆ ′′ C and ∆ ′ S , to the coefficient λ in Eq. (B13), which determines the amplitudes of ∆ ′′ S and ∆ ′ C . We find that: Therefore, for pnictides whose band dispersions do not deviate strongly from perfect nesting, and whose bandwidths are not too large either, it is conceivable that the two coupling constants γH and λ will be of similar order for moderate values of the magnetic field H. As a result, the charge-current density-wave and the spin density-wave generated in the presence of the field could be as large as the spin-current density-wave and the charge density-wave generated in the absence of the field. the action can be written conveniently as: where we defined the 4 × 4 matrices: where τ i are the Pauli matrices and 0 denotes the 2×2 matrix whose elements are all zero. To obtain the Eliashberg-like gap equations, we need to solve Dyson's equation: with Ĝ-1 0,k = iω n 1εk and the one-loop self-energy: Σk = g 2 ˆq χ S (kq) ρS Ĝq ρS + g 2 ˆq χ iS (kq) ρiS Ĝq ρiS (C6) It is convenient to parametrize the self-energy by: where we introduced the imaginary normal components Z μ,k , the real normal components ξ μ,k , and the anomalous components W μ,k (μ = d, f is a band index): The superconducting gap in band μ is therefore proportional to W μ,k . Using Eqs. (C5) and (C7), it is straightforward to invert the matrix and obtain Ĝ. Substituting it in (C6) and comparing back with Eq. (C7), we arrive at a set of six self-consistent equations. Four of them have the same form for either real or imaginary SDW, namely, the two equations that renormalize the dispersion εa,k = ξ a,k + ε k and the two that renormalize the quasi-particle weights Z μ,k . However, the two self-consistent gap equations acquire different forms: where we defined D 2 μ,q = Z 2 μ,q ω 2 n + ε2 μ,q + W 2 μ,q . From the form of these equations, it becomes clear that while the fluctuations near the real SDW instability give rise to a repulsive inter-band pairing interaction, V df ∝ g 2 χ S , the fluctuations near the imaginary SDW instability promote an attractive inter-band pairing interaction, V df ∝ -g 2 χ iS . This difference relies ultimately on the different structures of the matrix elements (C4) in Nambu space. A similar analysis can be performed in the charge channel: In Nambu space, we obtain: where we defined the 4 × 4 matrices: ρC = 0 τ z τ z 0 ≡ τ z ⊗ σ x ; ρiC = 0 iτ 0 -iτ 0 0 ≡ -τ 0 ⊗ σ y (C12) Solving the one-loop Dyson equation, we obtain the two self-consistent gap equations: Therefore, in the charge channel, real CDW fluctuations promote inter-band pairing attraction, V df ∝ -g 2 χ C , whereas imaginary CDW fluctuations promote repulsion, V df ∝ g 2 χ iC .