We present practical methods to measure entanglement for quantum simulators that can be realized with trapped ions, cold atoms, and superconducting qubits. Focussing on long-and short-range Ising-type Hamiltonians, we introduce schemes that are applicable under realistic experimental conditions including mixedness due to, e.g., noise or temperature. In particular, we identify a single observable whose expectation value serves as a lower bound to entanglement and which may be obtained by a simple quantum circuit. As such circuits are not (yet) available for every platform, we investigate the performance of routinely measured observables as quantitative entanglement witnesses. Possible applications include experimental studies of entanglement scaling in critical systems and the reliable benchmarking of quantum simulators. Harnessing the potential of well-controlled experimental platforms, quantum simulators have recently emerged as analogue devices to study paradigmatic condensed-matter models We construct and analyze lower bounds to the bi-partite entanglement of states arising in the quantum simulation of a variety of spin models such as which have recently been implemented in experiments with trapped ions Our aim is to quantify bi-partite block entanglement of one part of the chain vs. the rest relying only on measurements of certain observables Ĉi . Denoting experimentally obtained expectation values of these observables by c i [24], we are thus interested in i.e., we consider the minimal amount of entanglement that is consistent with the obtained measurements c i . Here, E is the entanglement measure of choice and the minimization is taken over all density matrices ˆ . As such, we follow the programme initiated in Refs. For systems governed by Hamiltonians as in Eq. ( Throughout, we will use the logarithmic negativity We start by introducing the relevant quantities. The logarithmic negativity is defined as where ˆ Γ is the partial transpose of ˆ with respect to the chosen bipartition A|B (here, {1, . . . , N 2 }|{ N 2 + 1, . . . , N }) and is the trace norm. By its variational form we have that for any observable with -1 ≤ ĈΓ ≤ 1 Any observable Ĉ with this property thus serves as a quantitative entanglement witness as it not only witnesses entanglement but indeed provides a lower bound. As an important example for such a quantitative witness consider the unnormalized maximally entangled state which fulfils The significance of the quantitative witness Û |Φ Φ| Û † becomes clear when considering pure states: For a given pure state, consider its Schmidt decomposition |ψ = s ψ s |a s |b s and let Û = V ⊗ Ŵ be the unitary that takes |Φ to s |a s |b s . Then ψ| Û |Φ = (|ψ ψ|) Γ 1/2 1 and thus Eq. ( While in general this requires the knowledge of the Schmidt vectors, we will see below that for large classes of states, equality may be achieved for one particularly simple unitary. This fact may be used to greatly simplify the optimization in Eq. ( ˆ may be obtained directly by applying a simple quantum circuit as in Fig. The Ising model in Eq. ( where Ω i is the Rabi frequency of the ith ion, k the wave vector difference of the laser beams, M the mass of the ions and b i,m denotes the transformation between the vibrational site excitations and the normal modes with 0 < p < 3. A transverse magnetic field may be introduced by an additional laser beam. Furthermore, ferromagnetic couplings may be obtained by choosing different detuning μ or by initializing the system in the highest excited state and following an adiabatic protocol Our main result is that for ground states of a variety of spin Hamiltonians the maximizing unitary in Eq. ( Corollary 1 Let Ĥ a Hamiltonian as in Eq. (1) and suppose it has a non-degenerate ground state |ψ . Let the couplings be such that If J is positive semi-definite then where This is a corollary of a theorem allowing for even larger classes of Hamiltonians which we prove in the appendix, where we also show that the conditions of the corollary are met by couplings as in Eq. and Ĉi,j denotes the controlled-not gate acting on spin i (control) and j (target) and Ĥi the Hadamard gate acting on spin i. The antiferromagnetic case, (J > 0), follows by additionally applying the transformation N/2 i=1 σi x before the measurement. Note that in ion trap experiments, spin polarization measurements along a particular axis are routinely performed by spin-dependent resonance fluorescence. The logarithmic negativity of any state may thus be lower bounded by applying the circuit R, which is depicted in Fig. Let us emphasize again that R neither depends on the couplings J i,j nor on the magnetic field B. Therefore, one does not require any knowledge about these parameters and the method is robust against an inexact implementation of the Hamiltonian as long as the hypotheses of Corollary 1 hold. Also, as |Φ Φ| is a quantitative entanglement witness, the state in the laboratory ˆ does not need to be exactly in the ground state, it does not even need to be pure, in order for R(|0 0|) ⊗N R † ˆ to be a lower bound. Although experimentally feasible (see e.g. Ref. Considering this SDP instead of the original Eq. ( where we included the (optional, see Fig. to account for the small gap in the phase. This further simplifies the optimization in Eq. ( x and all pairs σi z σj z for which J i,j is non-zero. In ion-trap and superconducting-qubit experiments such observables are routinely measured. For nearest-neighbour couplings as, e.g., the ultra-cold atoms experiment in Ref. as then the constraint Ŵ ≤ |Φ Φ| is automatically fulfilled. As this operator is a sparse matrix, standard eigenvalue solvers allow for system sizes of more than 20 qubits. In fact, since |Φ Φ| possesses a representation as a matrix product operator of bond dimension four, DMRG algorithms may be used to obtain the smallest eigenvalue for much larger systems. In Fig. FIG. x in blue and without in cyan. In non-equilibrium situations, quantum simulators of onedimensional spin systems may outperform classical computers already for a moderate size of spins: As opposed to states in equilibrium, which typically have little entanglement (cf., area laws for ground and thermal states x • • • σN x as input (solid cyan), and by optimizing the quantitative witness in Eq. ( reaches a maximum and then decreases in time In the setting of quantum simulations of the transversefield Ising model, we have introduced methods to estimate bi-partite block entanglement without putting any assumptions on the state in the laboratory. The principles presented here are applicable to, e.g., ion-trap, cold-gases, and superconducting-qubit implementations and we have focused on the ion-trap platform for specific examples. A lower bound to the entanglement is given by the overlap with a certain state, which may, e.g., be obtained by a simple quantum circuit and, for large classes of states, actually gives the entanglement exactly instead of just bounding it. As obtaining this overlap may, depending on the platform, may represent a considerable experimental challenge, we further investigated the performance of routinely performed measurements as means to estimate the entanglement. As we consider the benchmarking of quantum simulators as one possible application, we have compared the matrix-product-operator bond dimension, block entanglement, and block entropy for a quasi-adiabatic protocol preparing ground states of the transverse-field Ising model. It is our hope that this inspires work towards revealing the exact mathematical connection between the MPO approximation error and correlation measures and also towards schemes to estimate the former directly by measurements in a way similar to the schemes presented here for entanglement. Proof. Since Ĝ is real and the ground state non-degenerate, we may write (up to a global phase) with ψ i,j real. Furthermore, since Ĝ is SWAP invariant we have ŜA↔B |ψ = |ψ such that i,j i.e., the coefficent matrix is real symmetric. Hence there is an orthogonal transformation O diagonalizing ψ with diag(λ i ) := OψO T . This allows us to write The equivalence between SWAP and Î-invariance may now be exploited to obtain a result for spin Hamiltonians which are invariant under Î: If Ĥ is Î invariant then ÎB Ĥ ÎB is SWAP invariant such that if ÎB Ĥ ÎB is negative SWAP invariant and the ground state |ψ of Ĥ unique, we have with |Φ as in the main text. In particular, the Ising Hamiltonian with transverse field in Eq. ( where p ≥ 0. To simplify notation we define the N 2 × N 2 -matrix J as J i,j := J i,N +1-j = -1 |N + 1 -i -j| p = - . We show that the couplings fulfil the condition -J ≥ 0 by a result of entrywise matrix calculus. To this end, let f [A] denote the matrix obtained from A by applying f entrywise, i.e. (f [A]) i,j := f (A i,j ). According to Theorem 1.4 in 