Superconductivity is traditionally viewed as a low-temperature phenomenon. Within the BCS theory this is understood to result from the fact that the pairing of electrons takes place only close to the usually two-dimensional Fermi surface residing at a finite chemical potential. Because of this, the critical temperature is exponentially suppressed compared to the microscopic energy scales. On the other hand, pairing electrons around a dispersionless (flat) energy band leads to very strong superconductivity, with a mean-field critical temperature linearly proportional to the microscopic coupling constant. The prize to be paid is that flat bands can generally be generated only on surfaces and interfaces, where high-temperature superconductivity would show up. The flat-band character and the low dimensionality also mean that despite the high critical temperature such a superconducting state would be subject to strong fluctuations. Here we discuss the topological and non-topological flat bands discussed in different systems, and show that graphite is a good candidate for showing high-temperature flat-band interface superconductivity. The purpose of this chapter is to propose a route to increasing the critical temperature of superconductivity by searching for special electronic dispersion that would promote the superconducting strength. We first show that a huge increase in the (mean-field) critical temperature is possible, if a dispersionless energy spectrum, a flat band can be created in the system in the absence of the interaction leading to superconducting correlations. We then discuss a few known schemes to generate such (approximate or exact) flat bands. 1 Superconductivity: pairing energy vs. dispersion Within the BCS mean-field theory, the occurrence of Cooper pairing at zero temperature can be studied via the free energy density for the pairing energy ∆ : where d is the dimensionality, g < 0 describes the interaction strength, and E p (∆ ) = ε 2 p + ∆ 2 is the quasiparticle excitation energy at momentum value p, evaluated in a system with the normal-state dispersion ε p . The first term in Eq. Requiring ∆ to minimize F ∆ , we get the self-consistency relation or Equation ( Here is the density of states in the normal metal; A d is the area of the d-dimensional Fermi surface; and ε uv ε F is the ultraviolet cut-off of the logarithmically diverging integral, such as the Debye temperature. This leads to the exponentially suppressed gap: and correspondingly to the exponential suppression of the transition temperature T c . Situation drastically changes when the spectrum of the normal state has a flat band -a region in momentum p where ε p = 0. Since within the flat band E p (∆ ) = ∆ , Eq. ( where V d is the volume of the flat band in momentum space. Hence instead of the usual exponentially suppressed behavior in Eq. ( Since the critical temperature of the superconductors is typically of the same order of magnitude as the gap at zero temperature, the resulting superconductivity may exist at high temperatures. It is instructive to consider the intermediate case when the quasiparticle spectrum is Then for M > d, Eq. ( In the limit of large M 1, the spectrum In the sections below, we consider different systems where the exact or approximate flat bands could be realized. We start with the flat bands induced by interaction between the fermions. As was found by Khodel and Shaginyan Their argument is based on the phenomenological Landau's consideration on the derivation of the distribution function n p of fermions at T = 0. It is determined by the energy functional E {n(p)}, whose variational derivative ε p is the quasiparticle energy. The variation of this functional gives the equation for n p and ε p : Since the quasiparticle distribution function is constrained by the Pauli principle 0 ≤ n p ≤ 1, there are two classes of solutions of the variational problem. One class is ε p = 0, which is valid if 0 < n p < 1; another one is δ n p = 0 with n p = 0 or n p = 1. In the following we illustrate these two classes of solutions. Let us start with the Fermi gas -the system of free fermions with the spectrum ε p = p 2 /2mμ, where μ > 0. The energy functional for free fermions is E {n(p)} = d d p (2π h) d ε p n p , which gives the solution shown in Fig. The structure with the Fermi surface is topologically protected. The topological stability can be illustrated using the d = 2 system, when the Fermi surface p = p F is the 1d circle. For that one has to consider the Green's function at imaginary frequency: x + p 2 y = p 2 F in the three-dimensional space (ω, p x , p y ). Stability of the Fermi surface is protected by the invariant For more complicated cases, when the Green's function has spin, band and other indices, and for arbitrary dimension d the winding number N of the Fermi surface is expressed analytically in terms of the matrix Green's function in the following form: Here the integral is taken over an arbitrary contour C around the Green's function singularity in the d + 1 momentum-frequency space. For the Green's function in Eq. ( When the interaction between the particles is strong enough, so that it starts dominating over the fermionic statistics, a more classical behavior of the distribution function may emerge, in which the natural solution of the variational problem corre- Correspondingly the line of the Green's function singularities in Fig. Here we consider the formation of the Khodel-Shaginyan flat band in the vicinity of a saddle point in the d = 2 quasiparticle spectrum using the phenomenological Landau theory The simple Landau-type functional for the interacting Fermi liquid is We illustrate the flat band solution using an even simpler functional with contact interaction: where U > 0. This functional has always a flat band solution with 0 < n p < 1: In the vicinity of the saddle point the non-perturbed spectrum (i.e. at U = 0) has the form ε For μ = 0, there are two hyperbolic Fermi surfaces. They interconnect at the Lifshitz transition, which takes place at μ = 0. When the interaction U is switched on, the flat bands emerge. Figure In the previous section we discuss the fermion condensate -the flat band, which may emerge due to interactions in the vicinity of a singularity in the non-interacting spectrum. There are also other ways to generate flat bands or approximate flat bands. Historically the flat bands first appeared as Landau levels of charged particles in a magnetic field In this section we characterize semimetals that have an internal spin-like structure. All the examples discussed here can be characterized via the topological invariant of the form where H is the Hamiltonian in the momentum space; Γ is a matrix which commutes or anti-commutes with the Hamiltonian, such as the third Pauli matrix σ 3 acting on the spin-like degree of freedom; and C is a contour in momentum space, specified separately for each semimetal. In semimetals, the flat bands are realized as a particular consequence of the bulkboundary correspondence of topological media (see Let us consider an example semimetal characterized by an even number of 2dimensional Dirac points, such as that found in graphene around the two valleys. Close to the Dirac point the Hamiltonian can be written as a 2×2 matrix in (pseudo)spin space, where p = (p x , p y ) and σ = (σ x , σ y ), where σ j are Pauli matrices. The eigenvalues of H satisfy ε 2 = v 2 F |p| 2 having a node ε(p = 0) in a single point in momentum space. To illustrate the topological protection of this node, let us add a perturbation of the form V (p) = v(p)•σ , where v = (v x , v y ) does not break the (pseudo)spin symmetry. As a result, the dispersion becomes 2 , which again has a single node at (p x , p y ) = -(v x , v y )/v F . The only effect of the potential is thus to shift the node, but not annihilate it. This property can be expressed via the presence of the topological charge of the form Figure If we were to place the interface in the y direction (in which case we would obtain the "armchair" edge), there would be no flat band due to the fact that the normal to the interface would run across both K and K points. In this case the change of the topological charge across this normal line would be N 1 (K) + N 1 (K ) = 0. In the following sections we explain the topological invariants in multilayer graphene structures and discuss the consequent (approximate) flat band surface states. In graphite, the coupling between the graphene layers is much weaker than that within the atoms producing the hexagonal lattice in individual layers. Because of this, we may assume that the individual layers remain to be described by the twodimensional low-energy momentum-space Hamiltonian of the form in Eq. ( around one of the graphene valleys (K-point) for this pair of layers. Here γ 1 quantifies the interlayer hopping. Around the other valley (K point) the Hamiltonian is H K (p x , p y ) = H K (p x , -p y ). It is straightforward to show that H K/K have four branches of eigenvectors, two gapped ones (with ε(|p| = 0) = ±γ 1 ) and two with a quadratic dispersion around a Fermi node, Beyond the bilayer, the graphene layers can be stacked in two qualitatively different ways by respecting the AB stacking for each pair of layers. In Bernal stacking, the line of strongest interlayer coupling is straight, i.e., connects the same atoms in each layer whereas for rhombohedral (ABC) stacking, it follows an armchair-type pattern, i.e., the strongly coupled atoms differ between neighbouring pairs of layers. The corresponding elements of the momentum space Hamiltonians coupling layers n and m for 2D momenta around the K point are In H Bernal the terms in square brackets take care of indexing the even and odd layers separately. Note that since the choice of the A/B indices for the graphene sublattice atoms is arbitrary, we could have also chosen to write the coupling in H rhombohedral in terms of σ ↑ instead of σ ↓ . Formally, these two choices correspond to different signs of the bulk topological invariants (see below), but they have a meaning only in the presence of (Bernal) stacking faults that change the coupling around some particular interface. We first derive the bulk dispersion of Bernal graphite by including only the strongest interlayer hopping term γ 1 . We make the bulk Ansatz for the wave function on the n-th layer. Here p z is the momentum in the direction perpendicular to the layers and a is the distance between the layers. This is an eigenfunction with energy ε provided that the coefficients α e/o , β e/o satisfy where p ± = p x ± ip y ≡ p ⊥ e iφ , p ⊥ ≥ 0. This has (four) zero-energy solutions at p x = p y = 0, regardless of the value of p z . Within this approximation, Bernal graphite has therefore two Dirac lines, running through the K and K points of the 2D graphene band structure, or between the H points in the 3D graphite band structure, see Fig. Fig. This is thus nothing but the generalization of the graphene topological charge to graphite and it yields N 1 = ±2 for the momenta along the lines H -K -H/H -K -H Let us now consider the effect of higher-order hopping elements. First they split the Dirac line with multiple charge N 1 = 2 into elementary Dirac lines. The natural splitting would be into two lines with charges N 1 = 1. However, the situation is more interesting, see Fig. In addition, the higher-order hoppings break the symmetry Γ To obtain the bulk dispersion of rhombohedral graphite, it is enough to make the Ansatz holes N 1 = 2 electrons electrons Fig. Fig. This is an eigenfunction of H rhombohedral if α and β satisfy for some energy ε. The zero-energy solutions are found along a spiral in the momentum space, In this case the topological charge equals the spiral helicity, and can be defined by Eq. ( As a result of the existence of the non-trivial topological charge, the surface layers of rhombohedral graphite contain flat bands, i.e., ε(p ⊥ < |γ 1 |/v F ) = 0. This can be understood as follows. For each p ⊥ with p ⊥ = |γ 1 |/v F , the Hamiltonian H p ⊥ (p z ) describes a 1D insulator. For p ⊥ < |γ 1 |/v F , this insulator is topological, since it has the topological charge N 1 (p ⊥ ) = 1. According to the bulk-boundary correspondence, each topological insulator has an edge state with zero energy. These states form a flat band in the region p ⊥ < |γ 1 |/v F . Recently another possible source of the topological flat band has been discussed in two materials: highly oriented pyrolytic Bernal graphite (HOPG) The above two systems exhibit similar phenomenon. In both cases superconductivity related with the interfaces has been found The topological origin of the flat bands in these systems can be understood either in terms of the overlapping of the 1D flat bands formed within the dislocations or using the following consideration. In case of the heterostructures, on one side of the interface the insulator is topological, and thus the interface contains Dirac fermions. The strain at the interface (with its dislocations) acts on Dirac fermions as the effective magnetic field. Such emergent field is now extensively discussed for strained graphene, see e.g. the most recent paper Ref. In particular, Ref. written in terms of (scaled) momentum k y along the dislocation, and a scaled straininduced gauge field A(x) satisfying A(x + d) = A(x) and d 0 A(x)dx = 0. In the case of Ref. The emergence of the approximate flat band in Eq. ( Let us include the term H 1 = k y σ y as a perturbation. The second order secular equation produces the 2 × 2 Hamiltonian constructed from the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian H 1 : 0 H (1) +-H -+ 0 = c 0 k y k y 0 with the spectrum E = ±ck y . The slope c of the spectrum is obtained from the matrix elements of the normalized eigenfunctions . For A(x) = β cos(x) we thus get c = 1/I 0 (2β ), where I 0 (x) is the zeroth Bessell function of the first kind. When c 1, requiring β 1, the result is an approximate flat band. Alternatively, we may consider the case of a periodic line dislocation. There, the vector potential is proportional to the strain field, A(x) = α 1 u xx (x)+α 2 u yy (x), where α 1 and α 2 are coupling constants and where b is the size of the Burgers vector of the dislocation, z is the distance from the dislocation plane, and ν is the Poisson ratio. We also assume that such dislocations repeat after each d. In this case we may estimate the slope c for d z by The flat band dispersion where c 1 thus requires either ν ≈ 1 or coupling constants α i 1/b. Note that this result show that the estimates done in Ref. As discussed in Sec. 3, bulk neutral graphite and graphene are typically considered to have a very low density of states. This is why the occurrence of superconductivity in these bulk systems would require a strong doping, shifting the Fermi energy to a finite value and thereby increasing the density of states. Let us consider the example case of a 2D Fermi line with the superconducting coupling g, but with a shifted Fermi level by a value μ. In this case Eq. ( The situation is opposite in flat band systems: doping does not aid superconductivity, but rather decreases the critical temperature. Fith a non-zero chemical potential μ, the gap becomes where ∆ FB is the gap obtained for μ = 0, as in Eq. ( There are experimental indications for the presence of superconductivity at graphite interfaces The discussion in Sec. 1 concerns only the relation of the mean field order parameter with normal-state electronic spectrum. The details of the flat band superconducting state, such as the quasiparticle spectrum, supercurrent and collective modes, depend on the way the flat band is formed. The case of rhombohedral graphite has been worked out in Refs. In this chapter we have concentrated on illustrating the results for mean-field models of superconductivity on flat bands. As discussed in As we have discussed in this chapter, there are many ways of realizing (approximate) flat bands. Some of these realizations may be relevant in interfaces of graphite, where indications of superconductivity with a very high critical temperature have been observed. It remains to be demonstrated whether these properties can be explained within the flat band scenario of superconductivity. We acknowledge Pablo Esquinazi, Ville Kauppila and Timo Hyart for discussions. This work was supported by the Academy of Finland through its Center of Excellence program, and by the European Research Council (Grant No. 240362-Heattronics).