In a fully-gapped superconductor the electronic Raman response has a pair-breaking peak at twice the superconducting gap ∆, if the Bogoliubov excitations are uncorrelated. Motivated by the iron based superconductors, we study how this peak is modified if the superconducting phase hosts a nematic-structural quantum critical point. We show that, upon approaching this point by tuning, e.g., doping, the growth of nematic correlations between the quasiparticles transforms the pair-breaking peak into a nematic resonance. The mode energy is below 2∆, and stays finite at the quantum critical point, where its spectral weight is sharply enhanced. The latter is consistent with recent experiments on electron-doped iron based superconductors and provides direct evidence of nematic correlations in their superconducting phases. Introduction.-Nematicity in correlated metals implies the propensity of the interacting electron fluid to break rotational symmetry without necessarily breaking translation symmetry While nematicity in the normal state of Fe SC has been studied extensively, it is unclear whether nematic fluctuations couple to low energy charge carriers in the superconducting state. In fact, even the existence and detailed nature of the nematic fluctuations below T c is not established either experimentally or theoretically. In this Letter we demonstrate that, near a nematic quantum critical point (QCP) which is well inside a fullygapped superconducting phase When compared to the normal state behavior, the resonance in the superconducting phase can be understood as the consequence of the opening of the gap, which shifts spectral weight to higher frequencies, thereby transforming the quasi-elastic peak into a resonance. It is caused exclusively by electronic contributions, while renormalizations due to the lattice are dynamically screened and are thus suppressed. This leads to the interesting result that the Raman nematic resonance energy remains finite even at a nematic QCP. The nematic resonance is analogous to the spinresonance, observed in neutron scattering experiments in Fe SC and cuprates superconductors Nematic resonance.-In the following we develop a theory for the nematic resonance, and we argue that it is intimately related to the quasi-elastic peak with diverging spectral weight experimentally observed in the normal state B 1g Raman response of electron doped Fe SC whose susceptibility can be accessed in Raman scattering experiments in B 1g geometry x -k 2 y under the point group operations. Note that, Raman experiments thus imply that the nematic instability has a d-wave Pomeranchuk component. We take this as our starting point, and write a phenomenological interaction H I = -g/2 q ρ B1g (q) ρ B1g (-q), with g > 0, that can be tuned to study the Pomeranchuknematic QCP. The microscopic origin of g, which can be due to spin or bond-current The bare nematic susceptibility χ 0 nem (q, iω n ) is the Fourier transform of T τ ρ B1g (q, τ ) ρ B1g (q, 0) 0 , where • • • 0 implies average in the BCS ground state with g = 0. In Raman spectroscopy of Fe SC the momentum transfer by the photons is typically small compared to the frequency transfer (ω v F q, where v F is typical Fermi velocity). Consequently, the B 1g Raman response function probes the imaginary part of the full nematic susceptibility χ nem (q, iω n ) in the dynamical limit, and, in random phase approximation, is given by where we suppressed the momentum q = 0. For simplicity we evaluate the above at T = 0 and by ignoring lifetime broadening of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles. Later we comment about finite-T and finite lifetime effects. Furthermore, we assume a constant superconducting gap ∆ on the electron pockets (for other scenarii see This result is, up to the d-wave weighted electron-pocket ), the usual one for a fully gapped superconductor !/2"# Besides the low-energy contribution, there is a weakly frequency dependent contribution from the high energy fermions, which we approximate by a constant χ 0 nem,∞ . It can be absorbed in the dimensionless coupling λ = ρg/ 1 -gχ 0 nem,∞ , and henceforth we take λ as the tuning parameter that increases with increasing g. Because of its singular behavior, the leading contribution to Reχ 0 nem (ω) for frequencies below 2∆ is the second term above. If we insert this result into Eq.3, we find a sharp pole in the renormalized Raman response once the condition 1 = gReχ 0 nem (Ω r ) is fulfilled for Ω r < 2∆, where the imaginary part vanishes. As illustrated in Fig. where θ(λ) obeys the equation sin 2θ = 2λθ. In the clean limit and at T = 0 K, the mode is arbitrarily sharp as it occurs below the particle-hole continuum that starts at 2∆. Near the resonance the electronic Raman response is: with spectral weight x √ 1-x 2 +(2x 2 -1) arcsin(x) . Z r must be compared with the total weight π 2 ρ∆/2 of the usual pair-breaking peak of the BCS theory. Near 2∆ the spectral weight vanishes linearly Z r ≈ π Ωr-2∆ ∆ . Since ρ∆ 1, the resonance mode soon acquires a weight comparable to the noninteracting BCS pair-breaking peak. A typical value for Ω r = 3 4 2∆ is Z r ≈ 1.45. In Fig. Lattice cutoff.-Next we discuss the fate of the nematic resonance as the system approaches the nematic QCP by increasing λ. From Eq. (2) it is tempting to deduce that the QCP, defined by gχ 0 nem (0) = 1, is given by λ = 1. This, in turn, would imply that, using Eq. 6, the resonance frequency Ω r → 0, while the spectral weight of the resonance Z r ≈ 3π∆ 2Ωr diverges. However, in practice, this is not the case since, in addition to the purely electronic contribution of Eq. ( γ is a nemato-elastic coupling constant and u is the usual phonon displacement field. In the harmonic approximation of the lattice, the effect of the coupling to the phonons is a renormalization of the nematic coupling constant C 0 s is the bare value of the orthorhombic elastic constant and q is a wave vector along the critical directions of the Brillouin zone On the other hand, it is the static limit that governs thermodynamics and the actual nematic phase transition. Thus, the condition for the nematic QCP is λ stat = 1, where λ stat = ρg stat / 1 -g stat χ 0 nem,∞ is the dimensionless nematic coupling constant in the static regime, renormalized by high energy excitations. Since g stat > g, it follows λ < λ stat ≤ 1. In other words, even at the nematic QCP Ω r does not soften to zero frequency, and concomitantly, Z r stays finite (see Fig. Raman Experiments.-We now make contact with the experiments on Fe SC and in particular with electron doped BaFe 2 As 2 (Co-Ba122) The above observations can be naturally explained by the nematic resonance scenario whose spectral weight Z r is strongly enhanced by the proximity of an nematic instability. In Co-Ba122 the position of the purely electronic nematic instability x c can be determined by looking at the enhancement of Raman B 1g nematic fluctuations observed in the normal state of the tetragonal phase The nematic resonance scenario captures remarkably well the salient features of the B 1g peak observed in the SC state of electron doped Fe SC: its nematic symmetry (B 1g ) and the strong enhancement of its spectral weight near the nematic QCP. It also makes a direct link between the nematic response in the normal and superconducting state via Eq. 3: close to x c the enhanced nematic susceptibility of the normal state converts into a sharp nematic resonance at finite energy in the SC state because of the gap opening. Furthermore, our theory leads to the following three predictions which can be verified in future experiments. (i) From Eq. 6, and assuming λ to be T -independent, we expect that Ω r ∝ ∆ upon varying temperature. (ii) Due to the nemato-elastic coupling of Eq. 8 the orthorhombic elastic constant is renormalized to C s = C 0 s -γ 2 χ nem (ω = 0). From Eq. 7 and from Kramers-Kronig relation we de-duce that the elastic softening δC s ≡ C s -C 0 s scales as δC s ∝ Z r /Ω r upon approaching the nematic transition deep in the SC state, as a function of either doping or temperature. (iii) The nematic resonance will lead to single particle renormalizations (like peak-dip-hump features) everywhere on the electron pockets which should be visible in ARPES experiments. Conclusion. -In summary we have demonstrated the generic presence of a nematic resonance in the SC state of systems near a nematic quantum critical point like Fe SC. The very existence of this resonance relies only on the presence of a fully gapped Fermi pocket and the proximity of a nematic quantum critical point. Existing Raman data in the B 1g symmetry channel of several Fe SC systems like Co-Ba122 and Co-Na111 indicate that this resonance actually dominates the Raman response in the SC state. It provides the most striking manifestation of nematicity in the superconducting properties of Fe SC. We are grateful to U. Karahasanovic and R. Hackl for discussions. Y.G. and L.C. acknowledge support from the ANR grant PNICTIDES. J.S. acknowledges support from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through DFG-SPP 1458 Hochtemperatursupraleitung in Eisenpniktiden and thanks the Université Paris Diderot, where this work was done, for its hospitality.