We conducted a systematic study of the disorder dependence of the termination of superconductivity, at high magnetic fields (B), of amorphous indium oxide films. Our lower disorder films show conventional behavior where superconductivity is terminated with a transition to a metallic state at a well-defined critical field, Bc2. Our higher disorder samples undergo a B-induced transition into a strongly insulating state, which terminates at higher B's forming an insulating peak. We demonstrate that the B terminating this peak coincides with Bc2 of the lower disorder samples. Additionally we show that, beyond this field, these samples enter a different insulating state in which the magnetic field dependence of the resistance is weak. These results provide crucial evidence for the importance of Cooper-pairing in the insulating peak regime. When a highly disordered, superconducting, film is subjected to a strong magnetic field (B) it can undergo a transition to an insulating state A key ingredient implicit in this picture relates to the high-B limit of this Cooper-pair insulator (CPI). If this insulator is comprised of (localized) Cooper-pairs one expects that, at high enough B such that the pairs are locally broken To achieve the results of this work we conducted a comparative study of a wide range of disorder levels in a:InO films. The samples were prepared on a SiO 2 substrate cleaned and plasma polished immediately prior to the e-gun deposition using 99.99% In 2 O 3 pellets in a highvacuum chamber with a controlled O 2 partial pressure of 1.5-15•10 -5 Torr. The samples, ranging in size from 20-200 μm, were contacted using pre-deposited Au-Ti pads. The measurements were carried out at the high-B facility in Grenoble, using a dilution refrigerator capable of base T ≥ 0.035 K mounted in the bore of a resistive magnet capable of B = 30 T. Transport measurements were conducted using low-frequency (typically 3 Hz) 4-terminal lock-in technique for R < 1 M Ω and extended to higher R (< 10 10 Ω) using 2-terminal AC measurements The results of these measurements are represented in Fig. To extract these parameters we plot, in Fig. Inspecting Fig. -4Φ 0 k B /π 2 D, where φ 0 = h/2e is the flux quantum Another consequence of the increase in disorder is the increase of the extrapolated B c2 (0). Disregarding spin effects B c2 (0) is directly related to the (dirty) superconducting coherence length ξ d through B c2 (0) = 0.69φ 0 /2πξ 2 d For four of our low-disorder samples we measured the magnetoresistance isotherms down to T = 0.035 K in order to approach B c2 (0) limit. Interestingly the resulting B c2 (T ), shown in Fig. Given our T c values of 2.7 to 3.5 K, the corresponding B c2 (0)'s are unexpected. In conventional type II superconductors, B c2 (0) is determined by orbital effects and rarely exceeds the Pauli paramagnetic limit given by B p [T ] ≃ 1.8 T c [K] Because the spin susceptibility is corrected by spinorbit scattering according to χ S /χ N ≃ 1 -2∆τ so / for ∆ ≪ h/τ so , where χ S(N ) is the spin susceptibility in the superconducting (normal) state and τ so the spin-orbit scattering time leads to an increase of B p with spin-orbit scattering rate. In our samples τ so can be readily estimated from the elastic scattering time τ through τ so ≃ τ /(Zα) 4 , where Z is the atomic number of the scattering atom and α ≃ 1/137 the fine-structure constant We now turn to the higher disorder a:InO samples. For these samples B c2 can no longer be identified because it is masked by the appearance of a pronounced magnetoresistance peak. Instead superconductivity is terminated by another transition, at a well-defined (and lower) B C , to a strongly insulating state For the highest disorder sample in this study, H34S03, superconductivity is no longer observed and the sample is insulating at B = 0. Despite this marked difference a similar insulating peak is found at B ≈ 5 T. For less disordered thin-film superconductors, B c2 marks the B where superconductivity is terminated by elimination of Cooper pairing. The coincidence of B c2 with the B that terminates the CPI in the three higher disorder samples implies a remarkable possibility: if we assume that, in the insulating peak, transport is maintained by Cooper-pairs that are localized in space, then breaking these pairs by applying B > B c2 should destroy the CPI and strongly modify the transport in the sample. If the termination of the insulating peak is a result of full pair-breaking at B ∼ B c2 a natural question arises: what is the electronic state at B > B c2 for our higher disorder samples. The high-B state beyond the CPI in titanium-nitride and a:InO has been recently studied by Baturina et al. Another question raised by our findings pertains to the microscopic mechanism by which the system undergoes the B-driven transition from the insulating-peak regime, the CPI where transport is by Cooper-pairs, into the high-B insulating state that, being above B c2 , should only comprise unpaired electrons. The observation of such a transition opens the possibility for a new transition, between bosonic and fermionic insulators, driven by an increase in B. The details of this transition awaits further theoretical and experimental inputs. In summary, we have conducted a comprehensive study of a:InO films spanning the largest B-range and the widest range of disorder levels to date. The breadth of our study enabled us to make two new observations: First, we showed that the insulating peak observed in higher disorder samples terminates at a typical B = 13-15 T that coincides with B c2 in our cleanest samples, providing further evidence for localized Cooper pairing in the insulating peak. Second, we demonstrated that the high-B phase terminating the CPI in a:InO is another insulating phase, having transport properties consistent with conventional Mott hopping of single electrons. The nature of the transition between these two distinct insulators is still unclear.