We present a dual cut-off, dc-tunable low-pass microwave filter on a superconducting Nb microstrip with uniaxial asymmetric nanogrooves. The frequency response of the device was measured in the range 300 KHz to 14 GHz at different temperatures, magnetic fields, and dc current values. The microwave loss is most effectively reduced when the Abrikosov vortex lattice spatially matches the underlying washboard pinning landscape. The forward transmission coefficient S 21 (f ) of the microstrip has a dc-tunable cut-off frequency f d which notably changes under dc bias reversal, due to the two different slope steepnesses of the pinning landscape. The device's operation principle relies upon a crossover from the weakly dissipative response of vortices at low frequencies when they are driven over the grooves, to the strongly dissipative response at high frequencies when the vortices are oscillating within one groove. The filter's cut-off frequency is the vortex depinning frequency tunable by the dc bias as it diminishes the pinning effect induced by the nanopattern. The reported results unveil an advanced microwave functionality of superconducting films with asymmetric (ratchet) pinning landscapes and are relevant for tuning the microwave loss in superconducting planar transmission lines. Planar transmission lines made from superconducting thin films constitute elementary building blocks in today's circuit quantum electrodynamics Superconducting circuit elements exploited in magnetic fields are known to suffer from losses due to motion of Abrikosov vortices The dynamics of Abrikosov vortices at mw frequencies has been extensively studied both theoretically In this Letter, we report the design and performance of a dual cut-off, dc-tunable low-pass microwave filter. The device is made from a superconducting Nb microstrip in which the motion of Abrikosov vortices is strongly affected by a washboard pinning potential induced by a nanogroove array. Due to the asymmetric steepness of the groove slopes, the depinning currents for the positive and the negative branches of the current-voltage curve (CVC) differ and this is why the filter's cut-off frequency, which is mediated by the vortex depinning processes, al-ters under dc bias reversal. In addition, we show that the mw loss is minimal for the fundamental spatial matching of the vortex lattice with the underlying pinning landscape. The 150 × 500 μm 2 microstrips were prepared by photolithography from epitaxial (110) Nb films sputtered onto heated a-cut sapphire substrates Combined broadband mw and dc electrical measurements were done in a Figure In the present case, for the assumed triangular vortex lattice with lattice parameter a △ = (2Φ 0 /H √ 3) 1/2 and the geometrical matching conditions a △ = ka, the arrangement of vortices with respect to the underlying pinning nanolandscape is shown in Fig. Figure The reduction of the depinning frequency upon increasing the dc bias can be understood as a consequence of the effective lowering of the pinning potential well due to its tilt by the dc current. Indeed, the mechanistic consideration To further corroborate our claim above, the difference signal ∆S A,± 21 (f ) = ∆S 21 (j) -∆S 21 (-j) for sample A is plotted in Fig. To quantitatively describe the observed filter behavior, we fit the ∆S 21 (f ) curves to the expression ∆S 21 (f ) = 1/[1 + (f d /f ) n ] with the exponent n = 2 for 0 < j < 0.42 MA/cm 2 and n ≈ 1.85 for j ≃ j d for sample S. For the gentle-slope direction of sample A n ≈ 2.1 and for its steep-slope direction n ≈ 1.9. In addition, in both cases n drops by about 10% at close-to-depinning biases. In general Finally, in Fig. In summary, we have observed two major effects in nanopatterned Nb microstrips by combined dc and microwave measurements. These effects are (i) microwave loss reduction due to spatial commensurability of the vortex lattice with the underlying washboard nanopattern and (ii) a dual cut-off, dc-tunable microwave low-pass filter behavior of the sample with uniaxial asymmetric nanogrooves under the fundamental matching field condition. Since the effect of dc bias polarity-sensitive reduction of microwave losses may be exploited for tuning the properties of superconducting planar transmission lines, the reported results unveil an advanced microwave functionality of superconductors with an asymmetric (ratchet) pinning landscape. We furthermore an-ticipate that the observed filter behavior can be described by the results of Ref. OVD thanks Roland Sachser for automating the data acquisition and his help with the nanopatterning. Fruitful discussions with Valerij A. Shklovskij are gratefully acknowledged. This work was financially supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) through grant DO 1511/2-4 and conducted within the framework of the NanoSC-COST Action MP1201 of the European Cooperation in Science and Technology.