Tailoring the properties of correlated oxides is accomplished by chemical doping, pressure, temperature or magnetic field. Photoexcitation is a valid alternative to reach out-of-equilibrium states otherwise inaccessible. Here, we quantitatively estimate the coupling between a lattice distortion and the charge-transfer excitation in (La 2 CuO 4+δ ). We photoinduce a coherent La ion vibration and monitor the response of the optical constants in a broad energy range, providing quantitative information on the electron-phonon matrix element that can be compared to theoretical models. We propose the same methodology to probe electron-electron interactions in other materials. The non-trivial interplay between low-and high-energy degrees of freedom is one of the most distinctive characteristics of strongly correlated systems Since the most common mechanism to create coherent excitations involves Raman matrix elements where z is the ionic coordinate, ε is the dielectric tensor of the material and its derivative is taken at the pump-laser energy E L . The quantity |e • ∂ε ∂z • e * | 2 (e being a unit polarization vector) determines the cross section for spontaneous Raman scattering Assuming a single oscillator of mass M and frequency ω 0 , the impulsive force from Eq. ( where the fluence F measures the energy per unit surface arriving at the sample with each pulse. The dielectric tensor ε (pu) = e • ε • e * in Eqs. ( where ε pr is the dielectric tensor projected according to the polarization of the probe and t is the time delay between pump and probe. The first factor on the right hand side of Eq. ( To test these ideas, we performed ISRS experiments on a cuprate parent compound and we report a strategy to obtain the absolute coupling between low-and high-energy degrees of freedom using CLFS. An A 1g La-phonon is coherently excited in the (slightly doped) cuprate parent compound (La 2 CuO 4+δ , or LCO) by using fs pump pulses polarized parallel or perpendicular to the Cu-O planes. The consequent real-time oscillation of the optical reflectivity is monitored in the charge-transfer (CT) region to retrieve the energy and polarization dependence of its strength. In this situation, the Raman matrix elements carry microscopic information on the electron-phonon matrix elements A slightly doped single crystal of LCO was grown as described in the SI, oriented in a Laue diffractometer, cut along a plane containing the a-and c-axis and polished to optical quality. The Néel temperature was determined to be T N = 260 K, which corresponds to a doping hole content of 6 • 10 -3 or an oxygen content of δ = 3 • 10 -3 according to Ref. Static optical data between 0.5 eV and 4 eV with a resolution of 40 meV were obtained at room temperature using spectroscopic ellipsometry in a fixed polarizer geometry for 70 the oxygen 2p to a copper 3d x 2 -y 2 CT around 2.15 eV. Although not strictly of excitonic nature, Falck et al. For the time-resolved study the sample was excited at 1.55 eV, indicated by the vertical line in Fig. The dominant feature is a strong negative peak around 2.15 eV probe energy that decays within ∼ 0.5 ps, very similar to the dynamics observed by Novelli et al. We used a singular value decomposition (SVD) algorithm to separate the differential reflectivity matrix into an incoherent part and an oscillatory part (∆R/R) osc (t, E) as detailed in the SI. A damped oscillation was fitted to the dominant time traces in the SVD of the differential reflectivity matrix and the weight of each SVD trace was used to reconstruct the oscillatory part of the reflectivity. The reconstructed damped oscillation at a fixed probe energy is shown in Fig. The energy profile of the oscillation extracted from the SVD is shown in Fig. The energy profile for the same oscillation observed with the pump polarized in-plane is also shown. Due to the lower oscillation-to-background ratio, it can only be obtained at a few energy values, integrating over a wide energy range for each point. According to Eqs. We model the in-plane static dielectric function ε using an interacting polaron model as described by Falck et al. Here, the oscillator strength is parametrized by s = 4πe 2 x 2 eh /v Cu , where x eh is a dipole matrix element between the Wannier orbitals of the two bands and v Cu is the volume per Cu atom. We also define the electron-hole Green's function, where, due to the two-dimensionality of the system, we assumed a flat joint density of states D = 2/W confined to a band of width W above the gap energy E g . The bandwidth W of the absorption band is the sum of the electronic (single-particle) hole and electron bandwidths. The linewidth of the transition is given by half the (two-particle) phenomenological damping γ, which we assume has a simple linear dependence on the frequency, γ = a + b • ω. Notice that rigorously speaking the model is for a stoichiometric compound, while we have a small oxygen surplus. However, the doping is so small that its effect can be phenomenologically absorbed in small changes of the damping and other parameters. According to the Born-Oppenheimer approximation it is assumed that the electronic parameters of the model, like the density of states D and gap E g , depend parametrically on the coherent ionic motion excited by the pump. We find that we can simultaneously fit the equilibrium optical response in Fig. with only two parameter changes, δE g = 1.2 meV, δD = 8.7 • 10 -4 eV -1 . Physically, these are also the parameters expected to be most sensitive to the La motion. To check if this estimate is reasonable we use a simple ionic model and assume ∂E g /∂z is approximately given by the change of the difference in Madelung energy among planar Cu and O atoms when the La is moved in the z direction (see SI). We obtain ∂E g /∂z = 4.3 eV Å-1 , in reasonable agreement with the experimental value. We attribute the discrepancy to the strong covalency of the Cu-O bond which will make the CT energy less sensitive to the change of Madelung energy with respect to what the simplified ionic estimate suggests. To summarize, we have shown that coherent fluctuation spectroscopy can be used to determine absolute Raman profiles much easier than static Raman scattering. One potential application of the Raman profile is the manipulation of the electronic ground state by direct excitation of specific phonons We also show that the Raman profile can be described via changes in few key-electronic parameters describing the equilibrium optical properties, CT energy and density of states. This allows the microscopic electron-phonon matrix elements to be estimated in a correlated system, finding agreement with the upper limit given by a simple ionic model. As a bonus, we confirm that ISRS is the mechanism at work on generating the ionic motions. We are not aware of previous works where it was checked for a strongly correlated system that the amplitude of the oscillations is correctly given by this mechanism as our analysis implies. This is important given that other mechanisms have been proposed in the past The setup has an intrinsic noise level of about 0.1% RMS. The signal-to-noise ratio is improved statistically by repeating each measurement many times as well as binning the signal of several detector pixels, thus averaging in energy. In this way, relative reflectivity changes below 10 -4 can be observed. All broadband data presented in this paper have been numerically corrected for the group velocity dispersion experienced by the probe pulse. We present a general algorithm to separate differential reflectivity measured as a function of time delay and energy ∆R R (t, E) into its different physical components. We start by invoking the large separation of energy (or time) scales of the phenomena observed in real time ( ω < 0.1 eV) and the probed window ( ω > 1.5 eV) and in the spirit of the BornOppenheimer approximation we assume that the differential reflectivity at high energies can be taken as a parametric function of a set of "slow" variables ξ ν (t) describing the out-ofequilibrium state produced by the pump. Here, t represents the time delay from the arrival of the pump pulse. Examples of slow variables ξ ν are ionic displacements and "slow" charge and magnetic fluctuations, either coherent or incoherent. "Fast" fluctuations produced by the pump are either relaxed after the pump passage (∼ 50 fs) or not resolved. We can thus expand the differential reflectivity as a function of the high probe energy E and time delay Typically, the sum can be restricted to a small number N p of processes which contribute significantly. In particular, the sum can be partitioned into an oscillatory part ∆R R osc (t, E) and a relaxational part ∆R R rel (t, E). Eq. ( In principle one can obtain the decomposition by fitting the experimental data with a model of the form of Eq. ( The λ i ∈ R are the sorted singular values, λ 1 ≥ λ 2 ≥ λ 3 ≥ . . ., the ⊗ denotes the outer product, N is called the rank of the matrix ∆R R and u i (t) ∈ R(m) and v i (E) ∈ R(n) will be called the canonical time and energy traces, respectively. In the second form we have absorbed the singular value in the definition of the canonical time trace u i . By construction, the canonical traces are orthogonal, Restricting the sum over i in Eq. ( Inserting this into Eq. ( with V j (E) = Nc i=1 v i (E)a ij . We normalize Nc i=1 a ij 2 = 1 which implies unity norm for the physical energy traces, Eq. ( To get an accurate fit we need to introduce introduce a slight delay (18 fs) of the trace u 1 with respect to the trace u 2 . We attribute this is to a numerical error caused by small uncertainties in the correction for group velocity dispersion in the original data. Thus, we neglect this small difference in the analysis. The physical time traces U i (t) are shown in Fig. The estimates for the oscillation frequency mentioned above allow to identify the coherent oscillation present in our data as the A 1g phonon mode at 156 cm -1 present in static Raman data reported by Sugai for the orthorhombic phase of LCO The ionic displacement induced by the coherent phonon along the c-axis will affect the Madelung energies ε Cu and ε O of the copper and oxygen atoms in the ab-plane, changing the charge-transfer energy ∆ = ε Cu -ε O ≡ E g The energy ∆ is given by difference in Madelung energies of the Cu and O atoms, ∆ = ε Cu -ε O ≡ E g 