We consider a disordered quantum metamaterial formed by an array of superconducting flux qubits coupled to microwave photons in a cavity. We map the system on the Tavis-Cummings model accounting for the disorder in frequencies of the qubits. The complex transmittance is calculated with the parameters taken from state-of-the-art experiments. We demonstrate that photon phase shift measurements allow to distinguish individual resonances in the metamaterial with up to 100 qubits, in spite of the decoherence spectral width being remarkably larger than the effective coupling constant. Our simulations are in agreement with the results of the recently reported experiment The novel type of quantum metamaterials While the artificially made ensembles of superconducting qubits have an unavoidable spread of excitation frequencies, in contrast to identical natural atoms, they are easily tunable by varying an external magnetic flux. This fact makes possible observation of the fundamental phenomena as dynamical Casimir effect by applying of a non-stationary external drive The present work is motivated by recent experiments by Macha et al. We analyze the phase shift portrait for different number of qubits and various values of disorder in qubit excitation frequencies. We show that photon phase shift measurements are capable to resolve individual resonances for up to N = 100 qubits. Our simulations closely reproduce the experimental observations. Considering the interaction of N qubits with a photon in a resonator (see Fig. Bosonic operators a + , a in (1) correspond to the photon mode ω r in the cavity and the single i-th qubit is described in terms of uppering and lowering Pauli operators σ + i = |e g|, σ - i = |g e| acting on its ground and excited states. The first and the second terms in Eq. ( where I p,i is the i-th qubit nominal current The qubit-cavity coupling constants in Eq. ( written in the rotated basis |g , |e . Everywhere below we work with the effective constants. Under uniform flux biasing conditions, the spread in i depends mainly on qubit excitation gaps ∆ i , rather than I p,i , due to exponential dependence of on the E J /E C ratio which fluctuates from one flux qubit to another. The system under consideration In the experiment by Macha et al. The qubit dephasing in the system under consideration leads to smearing of the photon density of states which becomes not informative. However, the experimentally measured phase locking effect is quite prominent Considering approximately resonant regime where the excitation frequencies of qubits and resonator mode are close to each other we find a spectrum of the system in a regime of single excitation by means of exact diagonalization of the Hamiltonian. This regime is realized under experimental conditions due to small microwave probe power and low temperature of the system. Our solution corresponds to the fully quantum regime where all the variables σ - i , a are quantum fields. Below we introduce the basis of N + 1 states of approximately equal energies which are related to single excitation either in the photon cavity or in one of N qubits. Namely, the state where a single photon is excited and all qubits are in the ground state reads The excitation in 1-st, i-th or N -th qubits without the photon are given by |2 = |0; 1, 0, . . . , 0 , |i + 1 = |0; 0, . . . , 1, . . . , 0 and |N + 1 = |0; 0, . . . , 0, 1 . The Hamiltonian (1) in a matrix form H i,j = i|H|j in terms of this single excitation basis |i reads The photon Green function D ω is given by the first diagonal {1, 1} element of the resolvent matrix G G i,j = [ωδ i,j -H i,j -diag(iκ, iΓ φ , ...)] -1 . (5) This is the matrix of retarded Green functions, where the last term diag(iκ, iΓ φ , ...) introduced in order to take into account the damping in the cavity κ/2π = 715 kHz and dephasing of qubits. We note that the above expression for the photon Green function D ω and G i,j allowing us to calculate the phase shift coincides with the generic equations obtained earlier by Volkov and Fistul In our numerical studies, we model the system with large amount of qubits and in the presence of disorder between them. Namely, we fix metamaterial parameters and plot the phase shift increasing qubit number N , but keeping spread of ∆ i constant, see Fig. Figure Next, we compare experimental We theoretically studied the model of a flux qubit array coupled to a cavity, with disorder in qubit excitation frequencies. The system under consideration contains a finite number of qubits and operates in the intermediate regime where disorder range and decoherence rate exceed the effective qubit-cavity coupling. We calculated the photon Green function through the exact diagonalization of the Hamiltonian in the single excitation regime, assuming low power of external microwave driving. We found that the resonant phase shift of a transmitted probe signal shows quantitative correspondence with the experimental data This work was supported by the Ministry for Education and Science of Russian Federation under contract no. 11.G34.31.0062 and in the framework of Increase