One of the major puzzles regarding unconventional superconductivity is how some of the most interesting superconductors are related to an insulating phase that lies in close proximity. Here we report scanning tunneling microscopy studies of the local electronic structure of Cu doped NaFeAs across the superconductor to insulator transition. We find that in the highly insulating regime the electronic spectrum develops an energy gap with diminishing density of state at the Fermi level. The overall lineshape and strong spatial variations of the spectra are strikingly similar to that of lightly doped cuprates close to the parent Mott insulator. We propose that the suppression of itinerant electron state and strong impurity potential induced by Cu dopants lead to this insulating iron pnictide. A key task in unraveling the mystery of unconventional superconductivity is to disentangle the various phases that lie in close proximity to the superconducting (SC) phase. One of the most surprising discoveries in this regard is that the cuprate superconductors, which possess the highest transition temperature (T C ), have an insulating parent compound. How the high T C superconductivity emerges from doping charges into a Mott insulator has since become one of the greatest challenges in modern condensed matter physics An intriguing question inspired by this sharp contrast is whether there also exists an insulating phase in the iron pnictides where the electron correlation effect is essential. If the answer is yes, then this insulating phase may be the missing piece of the puzzle that links the pnictides to the cuprates. However, in most iron pnictides the effect of transition metal doping is to introduce charge carriers, suppress the spin density wave order, and induce superconductivity In this work we use scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to investigate the local electronic structure of NaFe 1-x Cu x As with varied Cu contents across the SIT. We find that Cu dopants induce a systematic depletion of the itinerant electron spectral weight. In the highly insulating regime the electronic spectra develop an energy gap with diminishing density of state (DOS) at the Fermi level (E F ), strikingly similar to that in lightly doped cuprates close to the parent Mott insulator. We propose that the suppression of itinerant electron state and strong impurity potential induced by Cu dopants lead to the insulating phase, in which electron correlation effect might be relevant. The 111-type NaFeAs is ideal for STM studies due to the charge neutral cleavage surface between two neighboring Na layers, on which the electronic structure reflects the intrinsic property of the bulk We next move to the weakly insulating x = 0.14 sample. The topography shown in Fig. Finally we reach the strongly insulating x = 0.30 sample. As shown in Fig. The large bias dI/dV curves shown in Fig. A more remarkable feature can be revealed by comparing the spectra of the x = 0.30 NaFe 1- x Cu x As with that of lightly doped cuprates close to the Mott insulator limit. Fig. The local electronic structure of insulating NaFe 1-x Cu x As and its striking similarity to lightly doped cuprates are remarkable features that have never been observed before in any iron pnictides. The key issue here is the origin of the insulating phase, and the first question to tackle is the effect of Cu doping on the electronic structure of NaFeAs. This is a highly nontrivial task given the fact that for most iron pnictides the low energy electronic structure originates from five partially filled Fe 3d orbitals lying near E F . Some of the orbitals are itinerant, hence are responsible for the Fermi surface formation and metallicity Although there are still controversies regarding the charge and spin state of Cu dopant in iron pnictides Similar spectral weight suppression has been observed in recent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements on NaFe 1-x Cu x As with x up to 0.14. Moreover, core level spectrum reveals an increase of high energy electronic state at binding energy of -4 eV Therefore, Cu substitution of Fe selectively reduces the spectral weight of the itinerant orbitals, and the extra electrons are injected into the localized orbitals. This is also consistent with the pronounced Curie-Weiss-type susceptibility due to enhanced local moments in the x = 0.30 sample (Fig. We note that the majority of iron pnictides show weak correlation effect and remain metallic across the whole phase diagram. In this sense the heavily Cu doped NaFeAs is an exception rather than the norm. The reason why this particular system possesses an insulating ground state can be understood from the two unique features of Cu substitution of Fe. The first is the systematic depletion of the itinerant electron spectral weight, which leads to the asymmetric lineshape over the large energy range. In contrast, in Co doped NaFeAs the peak at -200 mV is nearly unaffected by Co In summary, STM studies on Cu doped NaFeAs reveal a systematic evolution of the electronic structure from a superconductor to an insulator with spectral features strikingly similar to lightly doped cuprates. The insulating phase is most likely caused by the combined effect of reduced itinerant spectral weight and strong impurity potential due to Cu doping. These results suggest the relevance of correlation effect in Cu doped NaFeAs, which may serves as a link between the iron pnictides and cuprates. However, given the complexity associated with the dI/dV spectra of both the cuprates and iron pnictides, we cannot exclude other explanations for the similarities reported here. Other experimental probes, especially resonant inelastic x-ray scattering spectroscopy, are needed to confirm whether the correlation effect plays an essential role in the electronic structure of this insulating iron pnictide. 