The IrTe 2 transition metal dichalcogenide undergoes a series of structural and electronic phase transitions when doped with Pt. The nature of each phase and the mechanism of the phase transitions have attracted much attention. In this paper, we report scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy studies of Pt doped IrTe 2 with varied Pt contents. In pure IrTe 2 , we find that the ground state has a 1/6 superstructure, and the electronic structure is inconsistent with Fermi surface nesting induced charge density wave order. Upon Pt doping, the crystal structure changes to a 1/5 superstructure and then to a quasi-periodic hexagonal phase. First principles calculations show that the superstructures and electronic structures are determined by the global chemical strain and local impurity states that can be tuned systematically by Pt doping. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been intensively investigated in the past few decades owing to their rich electronic phases such as charge density wave (CDW) Among the van der Waals coupled TMD compounds, IrTe 2 has a relatively strong interlayer coupling and the electronic structure is more three dimensional (3D). It has a lower ratio of c/a = 1.372 (c and a are the inter and intralayer lattice constants respectively) compared to other layered CdI 2 -type materials Due to its power of visualizing the lattice structure and electronic states at the atomic scale, scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) is an ideal probe for clarifying the mechanism of structural transition and its relationship with the electronic phases. Moreover, IrTe 2 can be easily cleaved due to its layered structure and exposes a charge neutral surface, which is ideal for STM investigations. In this paper, we report STM/STS studies on both pure and Pt doped IrTe 2 single crystals, which reveal a series of superstructures and electronic structures with varied Pt content. Theoretical calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) confirm that the structural phase transition is mainly controlled by the chemical strain and impurity states induced by Pt doping. High quality IrTe 2 single crystals are grown by the self flux method Figure We further investigate the atomically resolved ground state superstructure and electronic structure of the 1/6 phase. As shown in the STM image in Fig. The observation of 1/6 phase seems to be inconsistent with various bulk measurements such as electron and X-ray diffractions at relatively high T We next turn to the Pt doped IrTe 2 with chemical formula Ir 0.97 Pt 0.03 Te 2 (PT3), which shows a structural phase transition at T s ~ 150 K and a SC transition at T c ~ 3 K. Fig. With further increase of Pt doping to Ir 0.95 Pt 0.05 Te 2 (PT5), the structural transition is totally suppressed and the SC transition T c is slightly lowered to ~ 2.8 K. The STM images in Fig. We then examine the local Pt doping effects by looking at Figure for PT5, which are roughly consistent with the nominal doping levels. Topographic images are acquired using different bias voltages from 2.0 V to -2.0 V, as shown in Fig. In order to better understand the mechanism of the structural transitions and the associated electronic states, we perform first principles calculations on each doping. For pure IrTe 2 , DFT calculations with GGA-PBE functional typically underestimates the Ir-Ir in-plane bonding that mainly contributes to the intralayer coupling For Pt doped samples, we compare the measured dI/dV spectrum on PT5 to the electronic DOS calculated based on the high T undistorted phase of undoped IrTe 2 (Fig. Our STM results on pure IrTe 2 demonstrate that the ground state is the 1/6 phase, and large bias dI/dV spectra supports the idea that the deformation of Ir 5d electronic state rather than the Fermi surface instability is the driving force for this phase transition. The excellent agreement between the experimental data and theoretical simulation using slab model in this phase highlights the crucial role of intralayer Ir-Ir dimerization regarding the structural transition We next discuss the effect of Pt doping on the structural transition and electronic structure. We notice that Pt doping barely inject charge carriers or change the overall dI/dV lineshape, and the charged impurity states are rather tightly bounded to the Pt sites. Therefore at small Pt concentrations, the induced chemical strain is the main effect, which compresses the out-of-plane and elongates the in-plane lattices Compared to the Ir ions, one additional 5d electron is bounded to each Pt site because no itinerant charge is injected. This localized electronic state and associated lattice distortion get more prominent with increasing Pt doping, which are visualized in the varied bias topographic images and dI/dV maps (Fig. The localized states start to stretch out by a few lattice constants and each has significant overlap with the nearest three ones. Compared to the Ir dimerization, this kind of distortion is more energetically favorable, which helps suppress the structural transition. However, the origin of such striking pattern is still an open issue and the possible candidates could be the formation of impurity band or orbital-ordered state. In summary, our STM/STS results combined with DFT calculations reveal that Ir dimerization is the main driving force for the structural transition in IrTe 2 . This dimerization could induce the interlayer Te-Te depolymerization, which greatly lowers the spectral weight at E F . The Pt dopants in these materials mainly serves as a source of chemical strain as well as local electronic and lattice perturbations, which cause the reduction of Ir dimer density and Te depolymerization. As a result, the DOS at E F is enhanced and the system becomes more three dimensional, making the SC ground state more favorable. 