Motivated by the ambiguous experimental data for the superconducting phase in silane (SiH4), which may originate from the platinum hydride (PtH), we provide a theoretical study of the superconducting state in the latter alloy. The quantitative estimates of the thermodynamics of PtH at 100 GPa are given for a wide range of the Coulomb pseudopotential values (μ * ) within the Eliashberg formalism. The obtained critical temperature value (TC ∈ 12.94, 20.01 for μ * ∈ 0.05, 0.15 ) agrees well with the experimental TC for SiH4 which may be ascribed to PtH. Moreover, the calculated characteristic thermodynamic ratios exceed the predictions of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory, implying occurrence of the strong-coupling and retardation effects in PtH. We note that our results can be of high relevance for the future studies on hydrides. Recent experimental results on the superconducting phase in H 2 S hydride at high pressure In this spirit, hydride materials, whose concept stems from the milestone works by Ashcroft From the scientific point of view, the irrefutable testimonies for the existence of the superconducting phase in the PtH and H 2 S alloys are equally important for pushing forward research in the discussed domain. However, in the case of PtH the already available results are not so clear and direct like in the case of the H 2 S hydride. In particular, in 2008 Eremets et al. conducted the * Electronic address: dszczesniak@qf.org.qa high-pressure experiment for silane (SiH 4 ) and stated that the induction of the superconducting state in this material is possible In order to address raised in the previous paragraph issues, we present complementary and comprehensive theoretical analysis of all of the most important thermodynamic properties of the PtH superconductor at the pressure of p = 100 GPa. This pressure value is chosen in order to match the conditions at which the highest value of the critical temperature has been obtained in the experiment of Eremets et al. The present paper is organized as follows, in the first section we briefly elaborate on the technical aspects of the Eliashberg formalism and applied numerical procedures. Next we present our numerical results obtained on the imaginary axis as well as in the mixed representation of the Eliashberg equations. Our paper ends with some pertinent conclusions. arXiv:1504.01349v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Apr 2015 The theoretical analysis presented in this paper based on the isotropic Eliashberg equations which are solved, at the imaginary axis and in the mixed representation, by using the iterative method given in Due to the uncertain experimental data we consider three distinct values of the Coulomb pseudopotential (μ * ) which models the depairing electron correlations and allows us to sample the superconducting phase of PtH. In particular, μ * = (0.05, 0.1, 0.15) and match the general estimations suggested by Ashcroft for the hydride superconductors in The precision of our numerical analysis is controlled by assuming the sufficiently high limit for the Matsubara frequencies: ω m ≡ π β (2m -1), where β ≡ 1/k B T is the so-called inverse temperature, and k B states for the Boltzmann constant. Our calculations are conducted then for the 2201 Matsubara frequencies, allowing us to estimate quantitatively the superconducting properties of the PtH for temperatures T ≥ T 0 ≡ 3 K. Finally, the cut-off frequency is set to be ω c = 10Ω max , where Ω max is the maximum phonon frequency equals to 193.25 meV. In the first step we analyze the temperature dependance of the order parameter (∆ m ) by conducting our numerical calculations on the imaginary axis. The obtained results are presented, for all considered μ * values and selected temperatures, in Figs. The value of the critical temperature is determined on the basis of the condition: ∆ m=1 (T C ) = 0, where ∆ m=1 denotes the maximum value of the order parameter. Supplementing functional dependance of the ∆ m=1 function on the temperature for the selected values of μ * is depicted in Fig. The results obtained on the imaginary axis and presented in Figs. where Z m=1 is the maximum value of the wave function renormalization factor and m e denotes the band electron mass. The wave function renormalization factor as well as its maximum value are presented in Figs. The determined dependance of the Z m=1 function on the temperature allows us next to calculate the normalized free energy difference between the superconducting and normal state as: In Eq. ( The ∆F/ρ (0) as a function of temperature for three considered μ * values is presented in the lower panels of Figs. Figs. Like in the case of the ∆F/ρ (0) function, the normalized thermodynamic critical field strongly depends on the assumed μ * value, and decrease together with increasing μ * . The H C / ρ (0) function and the specific heat for the normal state (C N ) given by: where γ ≡ 2 3 π 2 (1 + λ) is the Sommerfeld constant, can be next used to to estimate the first characteristic thermodynamic ratio, familiar in the BCS theory. In particular, the ratio of interest for the critical magnetic field is defined as: and takes the constant value of R BCS H =0.168 within the BCS theory Relations given in Eqs. ( where ∆C = C S -C N . In what follows, the specific heat of the superconducting state can be determined. In Figs. For the results given in Figs. Similarly like in the case of the R H ratio, the obtained R C values exceed the BCS limit. In particular, R C ∈ 1.88, 1.82 for μ * ∈ 0.05, 0.15 , whereas R BCS C = 1.43. FIG. The last remaining characteristic ratio, which corresponds to the energy gap value at the Fermi level (2∆(T ), where ∆ (T ) is the the order parameter on the real axis), can be calculated by solving the Eliashberg equations in the mixed representation (please see In Fig. where DOS S (ω) and DOS N (ω) are respectively the density of states of the superconducting and normal state, whereas Γ states for the pair breaking parameter and equals to 0.15 meV. As already mentioned, results presented in Fig. On the basis of the obtained results we first estimate the value of the the zero temperature energy gap at the Fermi level (2∆(0) ≡ 2∆(T 0 )). In the case of the PtH alloy at the pressure of 100 GPa the calculated values are: 2∆(0) ∈ 6.87, 5.31, 4.28 meV for μ * ∈ 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 . In the context of the BCS theory, the 2∆(0) parameter can be next used to determine the thermodynamic ratio for the zero temperature energy gap at the Fermi level (R ∆ ). In particular: Again, the BCS theory predicts constant value of the R ∆ ratio equals to 3.53, whereas our results for the PtH material under discussed conditions give R ∆ ∈ 3.98, 3.84 for μ * ∈ 0.05, 0.15 . In what follows, similarly like in the case of the R H and R C ratios, the R ∆ differ from the BCS suggestions. In the present paper we address the vague experimental data for the high-pressure silane superconductor given by Erements et al. in In the first place, the calculated values of the critical temperature for three different μ * present good agreement with the experimental data. In particular, it is shown that the experimental value of T C can be obtained for the μ * equal to ∼ 0.1. This is physically relevant value, which additionally agrees with the predictions of Ashcroft given for the hydrogen-dense materials in Our further calculations, allows us to determine other thermodynamic properties of the PtH at 100 GPa such as the thermodynamic critical field, the specific heat for the superconducting and normal state, the value of the energy gap at the Fermi level, and others. It is convenient to summarize these results by estimating the values of the characteristic thermodynamic ratios. We show that all calculated ratios exceed predictions given by the BCS theory. In particular R H ∈ 0.155, 0.167 , R C ∈ 1.88, 1.82 , and R ∆ ∈ 3.98, 3.84 , which correspond to the range of μ * ∈ 0.05, 0.15 . The differences between our estimations and the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory indicate a significant role of the retardation and strong-coupling effects in PtH at the pressure of 100 GPa. In what follows, the analysis of the discussed material cannot be conducted within the BCS theory, reinforcing the relevancy of our results and chosen theoretical approach. We note also, that the increase of the value of the Coulomb pseudopotential reduces mentioned discrepancies, which is the physically plausible effect.