The critical effect of disorder on the two-dimensional (2D) surface superconductor Si(111)-( √ 7× √ 3)-In is clarified by comparing two regions with different degrees of disorder. Lowtemperature scanning tunneling microscopy measurements reveal that superconductivity is retained in the less disordered region, judging from the characteristic differential conductance (dI/dV ) spectra and from the formation of vortices under magnetic fields. In striking contrast, the absence of those features in the highly disordered region shows that superconductivity is strongly suppressed there. Analysis of observed zero-bias anomalies in dI/dV spectra allows us to estimate the reduction in the transition temperature Tc, which explains the fate of superconductivity in each region. Recently, the emergence of superconductivity has been established for several kinds of silicon surface reconstructions with metal adatoms In the present Rapid Communication, we successfully clarify the critical influence of disorder on the superconductivity in the Si(111)-( 3)-In] using LT STM. Topographic STM observations show two surface regions with different degrees of disorder. In the less disordered region, superconductivity is found to survive judging from the characteristic differential conductance (dI/dV ) spec-tra and from the formation of vortices under magnetic fields. In striking contrast, these features are absent in the highly disordered region, showing strong suppression of superconductivity. Analysis of observed zero-bias anomalies in dI/dV spectra allows us to estimate the degree of disorder and the reduction in the transition temperature T c . The result satisfactorily explains the survival and disappearance of superconductivity found in each region. The ( √ 7× √ 3)-In surface was chosen as an archetypal superconductor made of a surface reconstruction The experiments were performed using a LT STM system. First a Si(111) substrate was flashed several times to prepare a clean surface with the 7 × 7 reconstruction. Indium was thermally deposited onto the surface at room temperature and annealed to obtain the √ 7× √ 3 phase. Here we employed an annealing condition of ∼400 • C for 5 min, which was lower than that of ∼570 • C for 3 s used in the previous study First, we characterize the morphology of the sample surface. Figure Figure The above findings were corroborated by observing ZBC images of the same area in different magnetic fields [Figs. 3(b) and 3(c)]. Thus the bright spots are attributed to vortex cores Considering the high degree of disorder in the rough region, this type of dip structure is ascribed to the zerobias anomaly (ZBA) originating from electron-electron interactions enhanced by electron scatterings Here, l is the elastic mean free path, τ ≡ l/v F the elastic scattering time, D ≡ (1/2)v F l the 2D diffusion constant, and κ ≡ e 2 ρ/(2ε 0 ) the 2D inverse screening length. In the energy range of 1-20 meV, the first logarithmic factor of the right hand side is roughly constant, and the ZBA has a ln(V ) bias dependence coming mainly from the second logarithmic factor tion of the dip structure as a ZBA. Assuming k F = 1.41 Å-1 and v F = 1.49 × 10 6 m/s as mentioned earlier The strong suppression of superconductivity in the rough region can be explained in terms of the combined effects of electron-electron interactions and disorder where T c0 is T c in the absence of disorder, γ ≡ 1/ ln(k B T c0 τ /h), and t ≡ 1/(πk F l). Using k F l obtained above and T c0 = 3 K, T c for the rough region is estimated to be 0.19 +0.15 -0.13 K. This value is sufficiently lower than the experimental temperature of T ∼ 0.5 K. Thus the absence of superconductivity in the rough region is rationalized. In contrast, T c for the flat region is estimated to be 1.4 +0.4 -0.6 K from a similar argument, consistent with the presence of superconductivity in that region. The finding is also in line with the observed suppression of the superconducting energy gap ∆ by ∼20%, since T c and ∆ are proportional in the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory. The discrepancy between the estimated reductions in T c and ∆ may reflect the limitation of the perturbation approach used in the ZBA theory Lastly, we estimate the influence of disorder on the coherence length ξ in the flat region. In a clean superconductor, ξ at T = 0 is approximately equal to the BCS value defined by ξ 0 ≡ hv F /(π∆). Here, ξ 0 = 694 nm is obtained from ∆ = 0.45 meV in the flat region and v F = 1.49 × 10 6 m/s. In the presence of disorderinduced scatterings, ξ is given by ξ ∼ √ ξ 0 l. Adopting l = 2.07 ± 0.56 in the flat region leads to ξ = 38 ± 5 nm. ξ is independently determined to be 36 nm from the half width at half maximum of the ZBC profile measured over a vortex core [Fig. In conclusion, we have revealed that superconductivity was retained in the flat region of the √ 7× √ 3 surfaces, judging from the presence of an energy gap and coherence peaks in the dI/dV spectra and from the formation of vortices under magnetic fields. In striking contrast, the absence of those features in the rough region showed that superconductivity was strongly suppressed there. Analysis of the zero-bias anomalies in dI/dV spectra allowed us to estimate the reduction in transition temperature T c , which explained the fate of superconductivity in each region. The present finding demonstrates the applicability of the existing theories to this class of surface 2D superconductors, and lays the groundwork for future studies on the influence of surface defects. This 