We report a study of the magnetic and electronic properties of the non-centrosymmetric half-Heusler antiferromagnet HoPdBi (T N = 2.0 K). Magnetotransport measurements show HoPdBi has a semimetallic behaviour with a carrier concentration n = 3.7×10 18 cm -3 extracted from the Shubnikov-de Haas effect. The magnetic phase diagram in the field-temperature plane has been determined by transport, magnetization and thermal expansion measurements: magnetic order is suppressed at B M ∼ 3.6 T for T → 0. Superconductivity with T c ∼ 1.9 K is found in the antiferromagnetic phase. Ac-susceptibility measurements provide solid evidence for bulk superconductivity below T c = 0.75 K with a screening signal close to a volume fraction of 100 %. The upper critical field shows an unusual linear temperature variation with B c2 (T → 0) = 1.1 T. We also report electronic structure calculations that classify HoPdBi as a new topological semimetal, with a non-trivial band inversion of 0.25 eV. The compound HoPdBi is member of the large family of half-Heuslers that crystallize in the non-centrosymmetric space group F 43m Recently, much research has been devoted to the band-inverted half-Heusler platinum and palladium bismuthides, notably because some of these superconduct at low temperatures Recently, we reported the observation of superconductivity (T c = 1.22 K) and antiferromagnetic order (T N = 1.06 K) in the half-Heusler ErPdBi. In addition, electronic structure calculations predicted a sizeable band inversion, which makes ErPdBi a first candidate for the investigation of the interplay of topological states, superconductivity and magnetic order. Another candidate proposed is CePdBi (T c = 1.3 K, T N = 2.0 K), however, here superconductivity develops in a small sample volume and is associated with a disordered phase Several single crystalline batches of HoPdBi were prepared using Bi flux. The high purity elements Ho, Pd and Bi (purity 3N5, 4N and 5N, respectively) served as starting material. First an ingot of HoPdBi was prepared by arc-melting and placed in an alumina crucible with excess Bi flux. The crucible was sealed in a quartz tube under a high-purity argon atmosphere (0.3 bar). Next the tube with crucible was heated in a furnace to 1150 • C and kept at this temperature for 36 h. Then the tube was slowly cooled to 500 • C at a rate of 3 • C per hour to form the crystals. The single-crystalline nature of the crystals was checked by Laue backscattering. After cutting the crystals in suitable shapes for the various experiments, the surfaces were cleaned by polishing. Powder X-ray diffraction confirmed the F 43m space group and the extracted lattice parameter, a = 6.605 Å, is in good agreement with the literature Magnetic and transport measurements were carried out in a Physical Property Measurements System (PPMS, Quantum Design) in the temperature range 1.8-300 K. The magnetization and susceptibility were measured utilizing a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer, while the resistance and Hall effect were measured using a standard four-point low-frequency ac-technique with an excitation current of 1 mA. The specific heat was measured down to 2.0 K on a crystal with a mass of 10 mg in the PPMS as well. Low temperature, T = 0.24 -10 K, resistance and ac-susceptibility measurements were made in a 3 He refrigerator (Heliox, Oxford Instruments) using a low-frequency lock-in technique with low excitation currents (I ≤ 200 μA). The coefficient of linear thermal expansion, α = L -1 (dL/dT), with L the sample length, was measured using a threeterminal parallel-plate capacitance method using a home-built sensitive dilatometer based on the design reported in Ref. In fig. Magnetic susceptibility measurements carried out in a field of 0.1 T confirm local moment behaviour of the Ho moments. For T > 50 K Curie-Weiss behaviour is observed with an effective moment μ ef f = 10.3 μ B and a negative Curie-Weiss constant Θ P = -5.7 K indicating the presence of antiferromagnetic interactions. These values are close to the ones reported in Ref. The magnetoresistance was measured in magnetic fields up to 17 T at low temperatures in the dilution refrigerator. A typical trace taken at T = 0.05 K is shown in fig. After the suppression of superconductivity, the kink at B M = 3.6 T locates the antiferromagnetic phase boundary. In fields exceeding 8 T we observed Shubnikovde Haas oscillations. Since the oscillatory component is rather small (∆ρ/ρ ∼ 0.1%) and superimposed on a non-monotonic background, it is difficult to extract the precise magnitude as a function of 1/B. In the lower inset of fig. In fig. The antiferromagnetic phase boundary has been determined by resistivity, magnetization and thermal expansion measurements, see fig. To understand the electronic properties, we have performed ab initio band structure calculations Figure Our systematic transport, magnetic and thermal properties study demonstrates that HoPdBi combines local moment magnetism and superconductivity and thus behaves very similar to the related half-Heusler compound ErPdBi A second, appealing explanation for superconductivity at 1.9 K is the occurrence of surface superconductivity associated with the topological surface states. Surface superconductivity at temperatures higher than the bulk T c was recently proposed by Kapitulnik et al. Local-moment antiferromagnetic order has been detected for most members of the REPdBi series The large contribution of antiferromagnetic order to the thermal properties (fig. The occurrence of superconductivity in a Ho-based compound is uncommon. Rare examples are found among the Chevrel phases We have investigated the transport, magnetic and thermal properties of the half-Heusler antiferromagnet HoPdBi. Electrical resistivity and ac-susceptibility data taken on flux-grown single crystals show superconductivity occurs below 1.9 K. We demonstrate HoPdBi is a bulk superconductor. However, the transition to bulk superconductivity, as indicated by a diamagnetic screening fraction close to 100 %, sets in at a lower temperature of 0.75 K. The Néel temperature T N is 2.0 K as determined by thermal expansion and dc-magnetization measurements. The superconducting and magnetic phase diagram in the B -T plane has been determined: superconductivity is confined to the antiferromagnetic phase. Electronic structure calculations show HoPdBi is a topological semimetal with a band inversion of 0.25 eV at the Γ-point. This is in-line with the semimetallic behaviour observed in the electrical resistivity and the low carrier concentration n h = 3.7 × 10 18 cm -3 extracted from the Shubnikov-de Haas effect. We conclude, HoPdBi belongs to the half-Heusler REPdBi series with a topological band structure and presents a new laboratory tool to study the interplay of antiferromagnetic order, superconductivity and topological quantum states 