Graphene-based Josephson junctions provide a novel platform for studying the proximity effect The superconducting proximity effect relies on penetration of Cooper pairs from a superconductor (S) into a normal metal (N) and is most pronounced in systems with transparent SN interfaces and weak scattering so that superconducting correlations penetrate deep inside the normal metal. Despite being one atom thick and having a low density of states, which vanishes at the Dirac point, graphene (G) can exhibit low contact resistance and ballistic transport on a micrometer scale Our SGS devices are schematically shown in Fig. For positive ∆V g (electron doping) and n >10 11 cm -2 , devices with the same W exhibit the same R n (∆V g ) dependence, independently of L (Fig. Ballistic SGS junctions. a, Top: Junctions' schematics. Bottom: Electron micrograph of a set of such junctions with different L. A few nm-wide graphene ledge (top drawing) is referred to as a nanostrip contact. b, Typical behavior for SGS junctions with different L but same W =5 μm. To avoid an obscuring overlap between four oscillating curves at negative ∆V g , we plot R n only for the two shortest junctions. For electron doping higher than ∼10 11 cm -2 , the four curves overlap within the line width. The dashed curve shows R Q . Inset: Changes in the differential conductance dI/dV. L =0.25 μm. Color scale: -1 to 1 mS. For hole doping, R n becomes significantly higher indicating smaller Tr because of pn junctions that appear at the Nb contacts and lead to partial reflection of electron waves. This effectively creates a Fabry-Pérot (FP) cavity After characterizing our SGS devices at temperatures T above T C , we turn to their superconducting behavior. All of them, independently of L, exhibited the fully developed proximity effect as shown in Figs. As a consequence of quantized transport in the normal state (Fig. In magnetic field B, our ballistic junctions exhibit further striking departures from the conventional behavior (Fig. where Φ = S×B is the flux through the junction area S = L×W. Marked deviations from eq. ( The random pockets of superconductivity found for B >> B * are unexpected because cyclotron motion strictly forbids Andreev bound states, beyond the suppression mechanism described by eq. ( Similarly The near-edge proximity effect is expected to be terminated only if the cyclotron radius r c becomes shorter than L/2. This condition is marked in Fig. The measurements were carried out in a helium-3 cryostat for T down to 0.3 K and in a dilution refrigerator, for lower T. All electrical connections to the sample passed through cold RC filters (Aivon Therma) and additional ac filters were on the top of the cryostats. The differential resistance was measured in the quasi-two-terminal geometry (using 4 superconducting leads to an SGS junction) and in the current-driven configuration using an Aivon preamplifier and a lock-in amplifier. To probe the superconducting proximity, we used an excitation current of 2 nA. Monolayer graphene was encapsulated between two relatively thick (typically, >30 nm) crystals of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) by using the dry-peel transfer technique as detailed previously Due to the large difference in the etching rates of graphene and hBN, the resulting edge profile was found to exhibit a step of, typically, 5 nm in width as depicted schematically in Fig. As superconducting contacts, we used 50 nm thick films of Nb with an adhesion sublayer of Ta (5nm). Also, a few nm of Ta were put on top to protect Nb from oxidation. The trilayer film was deposited by radio-frequency sputtering at a rate of 5 nm/min and a base pressure of ≈10 -9 Torr. The resulting films exhibited a sharp superconducting transition as shown in Fig. For ∆V g ≈10 V, we calculate Tr ≈0.82, that is, a highly transparent GS interface. The low contact resistivity and high transmission probability of our nanostrip contacts were found to be highly reproducible for different devices, even though the etching and metal deposition required transfer between different equipment and, consequently, exposure of the interfaces to air. The nanostrip contacts' quality can be attributed to the finite width of the graphene-metal contact area (compared to so-called one-dimensional contacts The term Fabry-Pérot (FP) interferometer refers to a cavity defined by two parallel semitransparent mirrors, in which monochromatic waves bouncing back and forth between the mirrors lead to interference and, therefore, resonances in transmission. The pronounced oscillations observed in resistance of our devices (Fig. For a pn junction with a smooth potential profile only incident waves almost perpendicular to the junction have a non-vanishing transmission probability Taking into account the energy-dependent contributions to the conductivity, GG(ε) = GG 0 + δGG sin In the calculations we used the cavity length found in (a) and a constant capacitance coupling to the back gate. The latter is ≈5×10 10 cm -2 per V as determined experimentally from the period of Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. Despite the overall agreement, the experiment shows notable deviations from the exact periodicity expected in eq. (S1). They are not important in the context of this report but probably worth of pointing out. The observed deviations are due to changes in the effective position of pn junctions with varying graphene's doping. Indeed, one can see in the inset of Fig. In our SGS devices, the critical current increased with decreasing L, and even our shortest junctions with L ≈0.15 μm were found not to be in the limit of short L, in which case I c,e should be independent of L. Figure In the high-flux regime, the supercurrent randomly changed with varying BB and ∆V g . Fluctuating patterns such as the one shown in Fig. Characteristic scales for the observed fluctuations in I c were calculated as follows. For a given set of NN resistance values RR ii measured at magnetic fields BB ii = BB 0 + iiΔBB where 0 ≤ ii < NN is an integer and ΔBB is the spacing in B between consecutive sweeps, the autocorrelation KK nn (BB) at a scale δδBB = nnΔBB (0 ≤ nn < NN is an integer) is given by Similarly, given a discrete set of NN resistances RR jj measured at Fermi energies εε jj = εε 0 + jjΔεε (where jj is an integer and Δεε is the spacing of energies) the autocorrelation KK nn Figure The supercurrent through a normal metal placed between two superconductors is mediated by a process known as Andreev reflection If e and h forming Andreev states have exactly opposite momenta (p = -p'), their phases acquired along trajectories inside the normal metal cancel exactly. Andreev bound states can also be formed by e and h with slightly different momenta, provided the carriers reside within the superconducting gap ∆ (that is, |p -p'|v F < ∆) and the phase shift acquired along the retracing e-h trajectories, δ = |p -p'|Λ/, is small. This leads to the known constraint, ∆ < v F /Λ = E T * . Andreev-type trajectories with longer effective length Λ do not contribute to the transfer of Cooper pairs. Following a consideration similar to the above, one can find that e and h involved in the formation of Andreev bound states do not have to retrace each other exactly and may have slightly misaligned trajectories as illustrated in the top part of Fig. , on the misalignment angle, δθ = θ -θ′, between ballistic e and h trajectories forming Andreev bound states (Fig. Another important requirement is that the ends of e-h trajectories should not be farther away from each other than max{ξ, λ F } (see Fig. In ballistic devices (that is, with large L), magnetic field curves e-h trajectories, leading to their misalignment such that Andreev-reflected electrons and holes can no longer retrace each other exactly For our ballistic SGS devices with submicron L, B * is a few mT. For B > B * , it becomes impossible for Andreevreflected electrons and holes to form closed loops that are necessary to transfer Cooper pairs. Accordingly, the supercurrent in the graphene bulk is suppressed. One may wonder whether Andreev bound states can be formed for B >> B * by a fortuitous combination of a number of segments of cyclotron orbits as charge carriers bounce between two superconducting contacts. The answer is No. As shown in Fig. Although closed Andreev trajectories are forbidden in the ballistic bulk for B >> B * , they are still allowed near graphene edges. Two examples of such orbits are shown in Fig. It was argued above and indicated in the main text (Fig. Note that high-B pockets of the superconducting proximity could not be observed for hole doping. Instead clear quantum oscillations cover nearly the entire interval of B and n (Fig. It has been shown in literature that zigzag segments at graphene edges may lead to enhanced conductance, even for strongly disordered, non-crystallographic egdes 