We analyzed the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetoresistance (MR) for overdoped Bi 1.6 Pb 0.4 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi-2212) single crystals using superconductive fluctuation theory, which considers the density-of-states (DOS) contribution in layered superconductors with the conventional s-wave pairing state. The out-of-plane results are well reproduced by the theory, implying that the large, negative out-of-plane MR as well as the sharp increase in the zero-field out-of-plane resistivityρ c near the superconducting transition temperature T c originate from the superconductive DOS fluctuation effect. On the other hand, the in-plane results are better reproduced without the DOS contribution (i.e., using only the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) contribution), which may be explained in terms of the d-wave superconductivity of the layered superconductors. The most well-known feature in the out-of-plane resistivityρ c of high superconducting transition temperature T c (high-T c ) cuprates is the semiconductive upturn and the associated negative magnetoresistance (MR) upon cooling We have recently shown, for various doping-controlled Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi-2212), that the onset temperature of the large, negative out-of-plane MR coincides with that of the large, positive in-plane MR upon cooling In this paper, we show the numerical analysis for both the in-plane and out-of-plane MR data of overdoped Bi-2212 using the superconductive fluctuation theory Single crystals of Bi 1.6 Pb 0.4 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ were grown in air using the traveling solvent floating zone (TSFZ) method. The obtained crystals were annealed under flowing oxygen at 400°C for 50 h to promote hole doping (T c = 60 K, p = 0.22). The T c was determined by the onset of zero resistivity. The doping level (p) was estimated using the empirical relation in ref. In general, fluctuation-induced MR is composed of four different contributions: the AL contribution, DOS contribution, regular Maki-Thompson (MT(reg)) contribution, and anomalous Maki-Thompson (MT(an)) contribution. Each fluctuation type is divided into two groups: one group originates from orbital motion, and the other group originates from spin interactions (i.e., the Zeeman effect). Because the Zeeman contribution is small compared to the orbital contribution in this experimental configuration (B || c), we ignored the Zeeman contribution. Furthermore, we ignored the MT(an) contribution because it may be very small in high-T c cuprates due to strong pair-breaking effects Here, we assume that the pseudogap-originated MC contribution is negligible in this magnetic field range. Indeed, our tentative measurements up to 17.5 T deviated from the fitting, suggesting that the pseudogap-originated MC contribution becomes appreciable under high magnetic fields above 12 T. We used the following parameter values for the calculation: v f = 2.1×10 7 cm/s, τ = 8.6×10 -15 s, J = 20 K, and T c0 = 64 K and 67 K for the out-of-plane and in-plane data, respectively. The T c0 value was determined by the midpoint of each resistive transition. Using the obtained parameter values with formulas shown in ref. Note that the γ 2 value agrees with the observed normal-state resistivity ratio at 100 K, ρ c /ρ ab = 2.6×10 3 . From these facts, we consider that all the used parameter values are reasonable. . The subtracted result no longer shows a steep upturn below 90 K. This result indicates that the steep upturn can be attributed to the superconductive DOS fluctuation effect, while the gradual upturn below a higher temperature is the pseudogap effect. Finally, we discuss the reason why the negative DOS fluctuation effect could not be recognized in our in-plane data (Fig. To investigate the origin of semiconductive upturn forρ c , we have analyzed the MC of overdoped Bi-2212 in the superconductive fluctuation regime using a simple model that considers the orbital AL, DOS, and MT(reg) contributions for layered s-wave superconductors. The results strongly suggest that the steepρ c upturn and the negative MR near T c are caused by the superconductivity, in addition to the pseudogap effect at a higher temperatures. For more complete analysis, we need a d-wave superconductive fluctuation theory for the out-of-plane transport.