Low-energy instabilities in the hole-doped cuprates include, besides short range antiferromagnetic fluctuations and superconductivity, also ubiquitous translational and rotational symmetry breakings. The overwhelming majority of interpretations of these possibly related properties rely on mappings onto three bands spanned by the three atomic orbitals Cu3d(x 2 -y 2 )(σ), O2p x (σ), and O2p y (σ), these three local orbitals spanning the Zhang-Rice band (ZRB), the lower Hubbard bands (LHB) and the upper Hubbard bands (UHB), respectively. Here we demonstrate by means of supercell Density Functional Theory (DFT) (a) how oxygen intercalation affects the structures of the buffer layers, and (b) how the attenuated crystal field pulls two additional oxygen bands in the CuO 2 plane to the Fermi level. The self-consistent changes in electronic structure reflected in the corresponding changes in external potential comprise formal properties of the Hohenberg-Kohn theorems. Validation of present days' approximate exchange-correlation potentials to capture these qualitative effects by means of supercell DFT is made by comparing computed doping dependent structural shifts to corresponding experimentally observed correlations. The simplest generalization of Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory is offered to articulate high-critical temperature superconductivity (HTS) from a normal state where crystal field causes states related to two non-hybridizing bands to coalesce at E F . Holes doping of the CuO 2 planes in the HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ superconductors, a representative of the cuprate class of superconductors discoverer three decades ago Table In order to clarify the nature of the new surfacing O2p(π) bands at E F we acknowledge the CuO 2 plane to constitute local quasi-linear Cu-O-Cu coordinations. For a local D 2h point group symmetry the non-bonding, bonding and anti-bonding Cu3d(x 2 -y 2 )(σ) related orbitals transform in the local Ag, B 3u , and B 3u irreducible representations respectively; both bonding and antibonding O2p x,y (σ) local orbitals transform in the local B 3u irreducible representation, while the two new oxygen orbitals O2p x,y (π) transform in the local B 2u irreducible representation. The out-of plane O2p z orbital transforms in the local B 1u irreducible representation. It is emphasized that the LHB, ZRB and UHB all belong to the σ category and thus they are protected from mixing/hybridization with the surfacing O2p(π) orbitals. These crucial properties and their possible connection to D-wave origin of HTS in the cuprates is provided in Figure The possibly crucial importance of these finding is in the coexistence of the σ and π bands at a common chemical potential providing support to understandings of HTS as an effective two-bands/two-gaps phenomenon, i.e., the opening of an antiferromagnetic AF gap in σ is related to a complementary opening of a charge density wave gap in π, cf. Were this to hold, then any theoretical effort attempting to model the superconductivity in the hole doped cuprates while employing the band structure of the non-doped cuprates, should be deemed inadequate. This is not because of the shortcomings of DFT but due to the lack of relevance of the non-doped HgBa 2 CuO 4 for describing the normal state of the doped HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ . This is consistent with the findings in In what follows the relevance to HTS of two bands coexisting at a common Fermi energy is discussed. In doing so, a cooperative electronic "gas-solid" instability is envisaged. At 0 K the two electronic subsystems display quantum analogs of two grand canonical ensembles, i.e., each acting "bath" for the other with respect to virtual quantum fluctuations reflecting the degeneracy at the Fermi level of an electron gas normal state and the effect of non-adiabatic electron-phonon coupling. When assuming particle-hole symmetry Equation (1) transforms into: where g is gerade and u is ungerade, referring to the lower and upper bands in the resulting reduced Brillouin zone. This Fermi surface nesting instability is employed in the present study to extend on the BCS approach. Thus we envisage two nesting instabilities, AF and CDW, at the common Fermi energy. It is shown explicitly in Figure where quasi-molecular type correlated pair and pair-broken states in the charge density wave channel comprise: and similarly, pair and pair-broken states in periodic quasi-molecular analog to the AF channel comprise: Said requirement of the two sub-systems being complementary quantum grand canonical ensembles implies: but also the inclusion of contributions from inter-subsystem virtual double-excitations: where the CDW band acts electrons acceptor and the AF band acts electron donor, while the global number of particles is a conserved quantity. By virtue of Equations ( It is crucially noted that the inter-band virtual double excitation contributions are possible only when the two subsystems display the same chemical potential i.e., have a common Fermi energy: where Q CDW and Q AF refer to the two corresponding superstructures. We observe that Equation ( one acting embedding for the other, implying superconductivity to emerge from cooperation rather than competition The inter-band Josephson term in Equation ( ... which is how three-dimensional superconductivity develops in the hole doped cuprates. The enhanced superconductivity in double-plane Hg1212 becomes a special case resulting from proximity between equivalent planes. The impact of introducing intervening CuO 2 planes, i.e., one in case of Hg1223, and two in case of Hg1234 can be appreciated from supercell DFT, cf. Figures 6. Again δ-O induced displacement of adjacent Ba 2+ ions is observed. It is noted however, that the different crystal fields acting on inner and outer CuO 2 planes cause the UHB of the inner CuO 2 plane to come close to the common Fermi energy. The gap between ZRB (outer) and UHB (inner) is still significant in case of Hg1223 causing a negligible or even positive effect on the superconductivity. For definitions, see again Figure What renders the superconducting state stable at high temperatures is the ambiguity in ways to satisfy the global quantum mechanical constraints accessible to the real system in its ground state, i.e., by inter-subsystem entangled coupled virtual quasiparticle excitations, cf. Equations ( The superconducting dome results from two antagonistic contributions: (a) oxygen doping increases the Hilbert space of virtual states accessible by electron correlation (competing with the thermal excitations across either of the two single particle gaps rendering said states real), and (b) the overstepping of the largest Q-value of a viable CDW instability upon overdoping. Irrespective of whether the CDW is of checkerboard form Superconductivity in the holes doped CuO 2 planes may emerge from a normal state possessing two mutually protected small-gaped bands at a common Fermi energy. Besides us, the potential importance of O2p(π) associated bands for superconductivity in the holes doped cuprates has previously been proposed mainly by Goddard DFT subject to the General Gradient Approximation (GGA) utilizing the Perdew Burke Ernzerhof (PBE) functional 