Combined microwave and dc electrical transport measurements at low temperatures represent a valuable experimental method in many research areas. In particular, when samples are conventional superconductors, a typical experiment requires a combination of helium temperatures, a wide range of magnetic fields, and the utilization of coaxial lines along with the usual dc wiring. We report on the general design features and the microwave performance of a custom-made low-temperature sample probe, with a measurement bandwidth tested from dc to 20 GHz. Equipped with 6 coaxial cables, a heater, Hall and temperature sensors, the probe fits into a ⊘32 mm shaft. We present our setup, analyze its microwave performance, and describe two representative experiments enabled by this system. The proposed setup will be essential for a systematic study of the dc and ac response of the vortex dynamics in nanopatterned superconductors subject to combined dc and microwave stimuli. Besides, it will be valuable for the investigation of a broad class of nonlinear stochastic systems where a combination of dc and high-frequency ac driving in a wide temperature range is necessary. Combined microwave and dc electrical transport measurements represent a valuable experimental method in many research domains. These include investigations of Josephson junctions An appealing subject for combined dc and microwave measurements is the dynamics of Abrikosov vortices in type II superconductors Typical issues one faces when designing a sample probe for an experiment in the radiofrequency and the lower microwave ranges are the following: First, along with the thermometry-related and conventional dc wiring, the probe should be equipped with coaxial cables for handling signals with a frequency up to a few tens of GHz. Second, in the case of low-T c superconductors, the probe should be suitable for measurements from room down to helium temperatures. Third, care must be taken for matching the impedance of the sample under study with that of the transmission line. Fourth, since measurements of the mixed state assume a magnetic field, the sample space is usually limited by the solenoid's inner hole diameter or the coil diameter. At the same time, the thinner the coaxial cables employed, the higher is the attenuation for a given frequency. A last but not least issue is that the heat leakage due to the transmission line should be minimized. The literature traces a considerable number of reports on the design and performance of various microwave sample probes and systems. We refer to Here, we present a custom-made insertable six-port and dc electrical transport measurements. Our setup successfully combines several well-established features present in other setups, refer to Table The paper is organized as follows. The mechanical assembly and the design features of the setup are addressed in Sec. II. The microwave performance of the sample probe is analyzed in Sec. III. Two exemplary experiments are presented in Sec. IV. Conclusions round up our presentation in Sec. V. The experimental setup is schematically shown in Fig. (a) The microwave signal is generated by an Agilent E5071C vector network analyzer (VNA). The VNA is placed in an instrumentation rack as close as possible to the top of the cryostat. This is done for keeping the overall length of the microwave transmission line as short as possible and, thereby, for reducing the damping of the microwave signal. The VNA is connected to the sample probe by a pair of flexible coaxial cables with a length of 1.2 m. Two detachable bias tees (b) The sample probe is placed in a variable temperature insert (VTI) of an Oxford Instruments heliumflow cryostat. A set of heaters and sensors in the VTI nominally allows the temperature to be set to any value from 1.5 to 300 K, with a stability within ∆T = 1 mK. The cryostat is equipped with a 14 T superconducting solenoid. For the sample probe we used an un-wired ⊘8 mm stainless steel rod ordered from the cryostat manufacturer. The insertable section of the sample probe is 1.5 m in length, which allows the sample to be placed in the geometrical center of the solenoid. For the temperature and magnetic field sensing a bus of dc wires has been wrapped around the rod. Care has been taken for reducing the thermal leakage by radiation along the rod by mounting a set of heat-reflective screens. For handling the microwave signal, the probe is equipped with 6 semi-rigid coaxial cables Once the sample is mounted, the top lid closes the housing. The whole construction is screwed onto the cold end of the sample probe. Then the heater and temperature sensing wiring is connected via a Fisher connector to the dc bus. Finally, the six semi-rigid coaxial cables are connected to the mini-SMP slots, electrical contacts of the sample are checked, and the setup is ready for measurements. To characterize the microwave performance of our setup, we use a thin-film test sample. In general, several planar geometries are suitable for microwave measurements on a thin-film sample. These include a hairpin line, a microstrip line, a coplanar waveguide, and their different modifications. All these geometries can easily be fabricated by photolithographic processes. Aiming primarily at studying the microwave-driven dynamics of Abrikosov vortices in nanopatterned superconductors, we have chosen the microstrip line for the experiment. It is this geometry which allows in the most simple way for adding in-plane leads for measuring voltage drops along and across the sample and thus, for straightforwardly controlling its transition to the normal state. Regardless of the selected geometry, matching of impedances of the bulk and the planar parts of the transmission line is crucial for microwave measurements. Accordingly, to satisfy this condition, the geometrical dimensions of the microstrip have been calculated as follows. The microstrip geometry is sketched in Fig. where the effective dielectric constant of the microstrip line ε e is given approximately by with W being the microstrip width and ε r the relative permittivity of the substrate material. The present experiment assumes the use of Nb films sputtered onto a-cut sapphire substrates with a relative permittivity ε r of about 9.3. Accordingly, to fabricate a 50 Ω-microstrip we had to solve a variational problem in which the "boundary conditions" were defined by both, the specifics of the focused ion beam milling (FIB) technique employed for the fabrication of artificial pinning landscapes and the availability of suitable sapphire substrates. One the one hand, from the viewpoint of the nanoprocessing by FIB, the microstrip geometrical dimensions should be as small as possible. This is due to the resolution limitations of the pattern generator and the pattern drift in the scanning electron microscope (SEM). With our SEM, the latter issue is getting obstructive for accurately writing predefined patterns when the nanoprocessing lasts longer than two hours. On the other hand, the substrates should be thicker than 0.1 mm for the sake of mechanical robustness and handling convenience. Reasonable values we have arrived at are a substrate thickness H of 150 μm and a microstrip width W of 150 μm. According to Eqs. ( Following the prescription arrived at in the previous subsection, the sample is made from a 50 nm-thick epitaxial Nb (110) film prepared by dc magnetron sputtering The microstrip was then nanopatterned by using the focused ion beam milling technique in a high-resolution dual-beam SEM. In the patterning process the beam parameters were 30 kV/ 50 pA in normal incidence and the dwell time was 1 μs. The nanopattern is an array of uniaxial straight grooves with a groove-to-groove distance a of 500 nm, a groove depth of 10 nm, and a full width at half depth of 80 nm. The grooves are aligned parallel to the long side of the microstrip, that is parallel to the dc transport current direction. The grooves have a symmetric profile in the cross-section and provide a washboardlike pinning potential landscape for vortices in the mixed state. From our previous experiments we know that the pinning potential induced by milled grooves The sample has a room temperature-to-9 K resistance ratio of about 7 and a residual resistivity ρ 9K of 16 μΩcm. The zero-field superconducting critical temperature T c determined at the transition midpoint is 8.62 K and the transition width is ∆T c = 0.14 K, see Fig. A first characterization of the setup consists in roomtemperature measurements of the frequency dependence of the insertion loss of all parts of the microwave transmission line. The purpose is to check whether some section of the line introduces unexpectedly high insertion losses or spurious resonances. The electrical connection is the following: The signal comes from the VNA and the experimentally accessible quantities, from which the absorbed microwave power can be deduced, are the forward S 21 and the backward S 12 transmission coefficients. Throughout the text we will use the notation S ij for referring not to the respective coefficient itself, but to its absolute value. Thus, S ij is the ratio (expressed in dB) of the microwave power measured at port j to the power transmitted at port i. For definiteness, we measure the forward transmission coefficient S 21 of a standard 50 Ω feedthrough iteratively included between different elements of the line. Then the 50 Ω feedthrough is connected as a sample under study and is cooled down to 10 K. The S 21 (f ) curve is a decreasing function of the frequency and does not exhibit sudden variations or modulations (not shown). The measured values of the insertion loss at 1 GHz and 10 GHz are in reasonable agreement with a sum of the nominal losses in the individual transmission line components, as stated by the manufacturers. The replacement of the feedthrough with the samplehousing box containing the Nb microstrip in the normal state (T = 10 K) shifts S 21 (f ) down at frequencies above 500 MHz by 0.3-3 dB below the curve for the 50 Ω feedthrough, with a qualitatively similar overall shape. The resulting frequency dependence of the forward transmission coefficient at 10 K is shown in Fig. where ε e is the effective dielectric constant given by Eq. ( The difference signal S 21 (f ) -S 12 (f ) plotted in Fig. The lowest temperature reached with the sample probe is 1.8 K. When the standard 50 Ω feedthrough was connected instead of the sample, we observed changes in S 21 (T ) while temperature sweeps from room temperature to 1.8 K. These changes were small, smooth, and reproducible for all three pairs of coaxial cables. This finding allowed us to save the measured frequency traces in VNA as a reference temperature-sweep-induced background and to present the following temperature dependences with it subtracted. The S 21 (T ) curves for a series of frequencies measured while cooling down are shown in Fig. In this subsection we will show how the dc CVC of the Nb microstrip is modified when a microwave excitation is superimposed onto the dc transport current. The mixed-state section of the unexcited dc CVC of the microstrip measured at the reduced temperature t = 0.98 and the fundamental matching field H = 7.2 mT is presented in Fig. The excited CVC exhibits Shapiro steps occurring at voltages Another source of important information on the mixed state and the pinning force is the microwave power absorbed by vortices. When the Lorentz force acting on the vortices is alternating, then depending on the microwave frequency two physically different regimes in the vortex motion ensue. The first regime is the localized mode when the vortex is oscillating within one pinning potential trough. In this regime the pinning force dominates and the response is weakly dissipative. This regime ensues at low frequencies. By contrast, at high frequencies the frictional force dominates and the response is strongly dissipative. Thus, the low-dissipative regime is separated from the strongly-dissipative regime by a characteristic crossover frequency which is called the "depinning frequency" f dp The S 21 (T ) curves for the Nb microstrip in the absence of dc current are shown in Fig. We have built and successfully tested an insertable cryogenic sample probe for combined microwave and dc electrical transport measurements in a 4 He cryostat. The setup works from 1.8 K to room temperature and allows for measurements of the dc and ac voltages and the absorbed microwave power at frequencies from dc to 20 GHz, the high end frequency available with the employed vector network analyzer. Though an attenuation of -30 dB of the microwave signal by the bias tees has been revealed at 10 GHz, the damping of the transmission line itself in conjunction with the power capability of the analyzer allows for microwave measurements at even higher frequencies and is limited by 26 GHz being the high end frequency of the employed SMA connectors. While the inaccessibility of temperatures below 1.8 K appears only as a negligible drawback for measurements on Nb microstrips (T c ≈ 8.6 K), for which, in fact, a couple of coaxial cables would suffice, the presence of the six cables is fortunate with regard to further extensions of the setup for more sophisticated experiments. When measuring the current-voltage curves, we realized that the temperature stability achieved with our bulk sample housing box is within ∆T = 1 mK, which is a factor of three better compared to conventional dc sample probes equipped with the standard sample holder. By the time of writing the sample probe has been used for one year and none of its components have had to be replaced. Further improvements of the experimental setup relate not to the sample probe, but should address the installment of a new two-contour temperature controller, due to a coarse-grain output voltage in the heater circuit of the currently available unit. This will allow for simultaneous tuning the temperature (i) by the heater/sensor in the VTI space and (ii) much more finely, by the heater/sensor mounted in the vicinity of the sample. * 