The Ginzburg-Landau theory is analyzed in the case of small dimension superconductors, a couple of orders of magnitude above the coherence length, where the theory is still valid but quantum fluctuations become significant. In this regime, the potential around the expectation value is approximated to a quadratic behavior, and the ground-state derived from the Klein-Gordon solutions of the Higgs-like field. The ground-state energy is directly compared to the condensation energy, and used to extract new limits on the size of superconductors at zero Kelvin and near the critical temperature. The Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory The size limitations and effects in superconductivity have been under study for several decades The Ginzburg-Landau ground-state energies, derived from the Klein-Gordon solutions, and the corresponding size limits predictions at absolute zero and near the critical temperature, are presented in this letter. In particu-lar, as the condensation energy vanishes near the secondorder phase transition, the lower size limit increases, possibly reaching macroscopic dimensions. At zero kelvin, the hamiltonian of the Ginzburg-Landau theory of superconductivity can be written as: with the order parameter ψ(x) = ρ(x)e iθ(x) , where ρ(x) and θ(x) are real fields, 2e is the electric charge of the Cooper pairs, and the real constants α and β give the strength of the quadratic and quartic terms, respectively. The vector field is represented by A. The ground state of the potential, V (ψ) = α|ψ| 2 + β 2 |ψ| 4 , is particularly interesting for a negative mass parameter α, corresponding to an infinite number of degenerate states. After the spontaneous symmetry breaking, i.e. fixing the gauge to θ(x) = 0, the energy density becomes The mass term of the vector field, resulting from the spontaneous symmetry breaking, and also known as the Meissner-Higgs mass term On the other hand, the scalar field mass term can be associated with the coherence length, Finally, the thermodynamic critical magnetic field can also be extracted from the condensation energy, i.e. the necessary energy to restore the vacuum symmetry, which leads to At finite temperature near T c , the quadratic parameter varies linearly with the temperature, THE QUADRATIC APPROXIMATION AND THE KLEIN-GORDON EQUATION SOLUTIONS As mentioned before, the quartic potential of the Ginzburg-Landau theory can be approximated to a parabola around the expectation value, by expanding it to the second order of Taylor series, where the fluctuations around the expectation value can be expressed in terms of a Higgs-like field, h(x) = ρ(x) -ρ 0 . The quadratic approximation around the expectation value is represented in Figure As such, in this approximation, the dynamic equation for the scalar field simplifies to a Klein-Gordon equation, It should be stressed, however, that this approximation is more favorable for temperatures near criticality, rather than at zero Kelvin, as the expectation value of the Higgs potential approaches to zero giving rise to a second order phase transition. In any case, it provides a good estimate on the magnitude of the ground-state energy one shall expect in such potential, even at low temperature. The plane wave solutions for the Higgs-like field are, therefore, of the type, where -|k| 2 + ω 2 = μ 2 . In the particular case the scalar field is constrained to a small sized three-dimensional box, like in a superconductor with small dimensions, the different energy levels are given by the solutions for the free particle of the infinite square potential In the particular case the box dimensions are much larger than the coherence length (L >> ξ), the second term in equation ( In small superconductors, but still larger than the coherence length, as the ground-state energy arises, it may surpass the condensation energy and restore the vacuum symmetry. As such, one can establish a limit on the size of the superconductor by imposing that the energy density of its ground-state is equal to the condensation energy, which leads to, or, At zero Kelvin, the size limit of a superconductor in the Ginzburg-Landau theory depends on both the coherence and penetration lengths, prominently on the first. For that reason, this result is only valid for clean superconductors with a Ginzburg-Landau parameter On the other hand, as the quadratic term vanishes near criticality, the ground-state energy of the scalar field at finite temperature in this regime is no longer in the nonrelativistic limit, As a result, the minimal allowed scale in the Ginzburg-Landau theory near the critical temperature is, or, It should be noted, as well, that since the minimum allowed scale near criticality also depends on both the coherence length and the London penetration depth, its temperature dependence near the critical temperature is expected to increase at a smaller rate than the coherence length. As such, the validity of this model is quite questionable for temperatures extremely close to the criticality, even in clean superconductors. The lower size limits of clean high-temperature superconductors were derived in the framework of the Ginzburg-Landau theory at zero Kelvin and near the critical temperature. The existence of a ground-state for the scalar Higgs-like field was predicted and derived, and compared with the condensation energy for extremely small superconductors. As result, the minimum allowed scale was found to depend on both the coherence length and the London penetration depth in both regimes, within the range of applicability of this model, limiting it to clean high-temperature superconductors. As the experimental results on the size limits of clean high-temperature superconductors are, to the best of our knowledge, currently quite limited, we would like to challenge experimental groups to test the predicted results obtained with this model. A concurrent result would provide additional to the already successful Ginzburg-Landau theory, while the opposite would oblige further scrutiny on its range of validity. This is only valid if the superconducting region is considered to have a local net zero charge density, corresponding to the macroscopic limit, i.e. the Ginzburg-Landau regime.