We discuss the possible existence a spin singlet excitation with charge ±2 (η-mode) originating the A 1g Raman resonance in cuprate superconductors. This η-mode relates the d-wave superconducting singlet pairing channel to a d-wave charge channel. We show that the η boson forms a particle-particle bound state below the 2∆ threshold of the particle-hole continuum where ∆ is the maximum d-wave gap. Within a generalized random phase approximation and Bethe-Salpether approximation study, we find that this mode has energies similar to the resonance observed by Inelastic Neutron Scattering (INS) below the superconducting (SC) coherent peak at 2∆ in various SC cuprates compounds. We show that it is a very good candidate for the resonance observed in Raman scattering below the 2∆ peak in the A 1g symmetry. Since the η-mode sits in the S = 0 channel, it may be observable via Raman, X -ray or Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy probes. The study of collective excitations of a condensed matter system can provide informations about the symmetries of an order parameter or the nature of the interactions between particles. The analysis of collective modes can also help us to understand the origin of high critical temperature superconductivity (SC) in cuprate compounds (see schematic cuprate compounds phase diagram on Fig. The existence of a collective spin excitation in the SC state of cuprates has been highlighted by Inelastic Neutron scattering (INS) experiments with the observation of a resonance at 41 meV in YBCO compounds and at similar energies in other compounds This INS resonance has initially been explained in the framework of the SO (5) emergent symmetry model for cuprates as a π-mode A resonance very similar to the Neutron resonance has also been observed in Raman scattering experiments in the A 1g symmetry channel In this paper, we present a coherent scenario that provides an answer to the latter questions. Our scenario builds on recent experimental developments In order to explain the A 1g Raman resonance, we assume the coexistence between a d-wave SC phase and a d-wave CDW ordered phase. The CDW phase has the same ordering vector as the observed one q c = (q x , 0) and q c = (0, q y ) with q x = q y ≈ 0.3π. This coexisting phase has been observed by STM in Bi2212 compound We note that in the references Here, we argue that the A 1g Raman resonance is the collective mode describing the proximity of the charge and pairing channels. Fluctuations between those two sectors are typically described by non-linear σ -models as in Refs The paper is organized as follows: in the section II, we present the theoretical model we use to reproduce the experimental Raman data. We explain how we describe the different phases of the Cuprates (section II A). We present the different susceptibilities we consider (section II B) and give details about the evaluation of the different Feynman diagrams (section II C). We also explain the calculations of the full Raman response (section II D). In the section III, we present the results of our theory and we compare them to the experimental data before to conclude (section IV). Explanations and information about the spin fermion model and the experimental setup are given in details in the appendix A and B respectively. A global explanation of the phase diagram of cuprates compounds is still lacking. For example, we still do not know whether the cuprates are fundamentally doped Mott insulators admitting a Coulomb energy repulsion of 1eV which is crucial to explain the emergence of superconductivity (see e.g Below T * , the PG phase critical temperature However, the CDW and PG phases are different phases as the CDW phase appears on the tips of the Fermi arcs after the antinodal zone has been gaped out (see Fig. A. Description of the system We consider a system of itinerant fermions interacting through an effective AF spin-spin coupling close to vector Q derived from spin-fermion approach where c p,α is the annihilation (creation) operator of an electron with spin α and impulsion p. ξ k is the one particle energy with a tight-binding form obtained to fit ARPES data In the following, we focus on the superconducting phase where the Raman A 1g resonance peak has been observed. We consider that the superconducting phase around optimal doping is a coexistence between a d-wave SC order and the dwave CDW order. Thus, we decouple the Hamiltonian (1) in the SC pairing channel and in the charge channel by introducing the two order parameters ∆ SC,k and ∆ CDW,k . ∆ SC,k is the superconducting order parameter which describes the dwave SC order. ∆ CDW,k is the CDW order parameter which describes the d-wave charge order with ordering vector q c . Applying the Hubbard-Stratanovitch transformation to the Hamiltonian (1), the effective Hamiltonian of the system can be written in the basis with ξ -k = ξ k . Note that the Green function inverse matrix is very similar to the one calculated in The Green functions of the system will be crucial to estimate the different susceptibilities of the system (see section II B). In principle, we have to solve the self-consistent equations to determine ∆ SC (k, ω) and ∆ CDW (k, ω). However, the goal of this paper is not to explain the (T,p) phase diagram. Based on experimental evidence that the charge is modulated inside the superconducting phase of cuprates In Bi2212, the SC order parameter decreases above optimal doping p = 0.16 and vanishes around doping p = 0.25 as mentioned in We assume a simple momentum and frequency dependence of the SC pairing 2σ 2 with a variance σ = X/1.177 ensuring a half width at half maximum equals to X. Recent STM experiments demonstrate the d-wave character of CDW order Above optimal doping, the phase diagram (fig The concept of emerging symmetries has first been introduced to explain PG phase of cuprates compounds. Particularly, in Ref. The lowering and raising pseudo-spin operators η + , η -= (η + ) † , and η z , follow the definition : The operators (7 form an SU(2) Lie Algebra. The SU(2) spin operators (7) rotate each component of the pseudo-spin (6) into another Typical approach to study this underlying SU(2) symmetry are non-linear σ models Such models have been proposed to explain the physics of cuprate superconductors B. Susceptibilities of the system In order to study the collective mode physics, we analyze the linear response for the two following operators. First, the INS resonance originates the excitation from the SC singlet state to the spin triplet at wave vector Q associated with the AF order which destroy a bosonic excitation at momentum Q with a 0 charge and spin 1 as presented in Fig. where q c is the ordering vector of the charge density wave (CDW) order. The η operator destroy a bosonic excitation at momentum q c with a 0 spin, a -2 charge and is fully symmetric as presented in Fig. We rewrite the Hamiltonian (1) with the spin operators (S ± of equation ( The magnitude of the interactions are J η = 3J -V in the η-mode channel and J S = 2J in the spin channel. We compare the spin susceptibility derived from the Random Phase Approximation (RPA) with χ S = -iθ (t) [S + (t) , S -(0)] as depicted in where χ 0 S is the bare polarization bubble for the spin mode (see Fig. In this section, we focus on the diagram calculation presented in Fig. In order to include the frequency dependence of the order parameters in the diagram calculation, we develop the order parameters depending on the internal frequency standing inside the summation terms around the external frequency, .., and we keep only the zeroth order term (with ε int(ext) the internal (external) Matsubara frequency). This implies that our susceptibility will be under-estimated at high-frequency. We also assume that the η-mode interaction J η and the spin interaction J S do not depend on the frequency and the momentum. This approximation allow us to decompose the ladder diagram of Fig. The bare polarization χ 0 is the response function of non local density operator : χ 0 = -iθ (τ) ρ q (τ)ρ q (0) with ρ q = 1/N ∑ k c † k c k+q . From the figure references where ω 1 is a bosonic Matsubara frequency. Note that we put J η outside of the expression (12). We do the internal Matsubara frequency and momentum summation by doing the change of variable k = k + q 1 and ω = ω 1 + ε. Then, χ 0 η (k, q, ω, ε) can be simplified as χ 0 η (q, iω) and becomes : The bare polarization in the spin and η channels in the SC/CDW coexisting phase are presented in Fig. On the other hand, the η-mode couples an electron with momentum k + q c to a counter propagating electron with momentum -k. Consequently, χ 0 η has an opposite sign of the one in the spin channel in both Fermi liquid and superconducting state (see Fig. Considering our initial approximation, we can factorize by the interaction J η and we determine, from the Green function matrix (2), that ). We do the internal Matsubara frequency and momentum summation by doing the change of variable k = k + q 1 and ω = ω 1 + ε. This susceptibility is proportional to the product of both SC and CDW order parameters ∆ CDW .∆ SC . Consequently, the ηmode susceptibility χ λ ,1 η only exists in a coexisting SC/CDW phase. A careful study of the symmetry of the η-mode response is done in the following section. We now argue that the η-collective mode is seen in the A 1g Raman channel only. The study of the Raman susceptibility requires a careful examination of the symmetries of the system. These symmetries are taken into account by considering vertices in the photon-matter interaction different from unity (see Fig. where A 1g probes the whole Brillouin zone, B 1g the antinodal zone and B 2g the nodal zone. Here we assume that there is no response in the A 2g symmetry where χ 0 γ λ γ λ is the bare Raman response (Fig. The value of χ λ η depends on the momentum dependence of the product γ λ k G ∆ CDW • G ∆ SC . The product of the two Green functions G ∆ CDW • G ∆ SC is proportional to the product ∆ SC .∆ CDW which is proportional to the square of the d-wave factor. The sum over the internal momenta in the FBZ of the square of the d-wave factor is finite. The sum over the internal momenta in the FBZ of the Raman vertex γ ). The sum over the internal momenta of the product γ λ k G ∆ CDW • G ∆ SC therefore vanishes in the B 1g and B 2g symmetry while it is non-zero in the A 1g symmetry. Consequently, the η-mode response only exists in A 1g symmetry. In addition long-range Coulomb interaction U ∼ 1/q 2 plays an important role in screening the Raman in the A 1g channel where χ 0 γ λ 1 is the Raman susceptibility with one of the vertex put to unitiy and χ 0 11 the bare polarization bubble. In the limit q → 0, the "Coulomb screened" susceptibility simplifies as χ λ coul = -χ 0 γ λ 1 χ 0 1γ λ /χ 0 11 . In the A 1g symmetry, the contribution of χ A 1g coul cannot be neglected η . Around optimal doping, we will see that the contribution of the η-mode (last term) is of the same order of magnitude as the bare screened A 1g Raman response (first two terms). By increasing the doping, because of the weakening of the CDW order we expect a decrease of the η-mode intensity and the A 1g spectra will be dominated by the bare screened Raman response. The Coulomb screening can be neglected in the B 1g and B 2g channels for symmetry reasons The theoretical spectra are calculated without solving the self-consistent equation derived from the spin-fermion model. As a consequence, we need to adjust the amplitude of the order parameters as well as the value of J and V to reproduce the experimental data. The parameters values are adjusted in the following way : the value of ∆ 0 SC is chosen to reproduce the Raman peak frequency in the B 1g channel. The value of ∆ 0 CDW is chosen to adjust the intensity of the resonance in the A 1g channel. Note that the value of ∆ 0 CDW does not influence the frequency of the η-mode. We adjust the value of J to fit the neutron resonance frequency and the value of V to fit frequency of the Raman resonance in the A 1g symmetry. A full self-consistent determination of the CDW and SC order parameter amplitude is not done here as our goal is to identify the main theoretical features necessary to explain the Raman resonance in the A 1g symmetry. The imaginary parts of the neutron spin susceptibility (spin response) and the full Raman susceptibility in the A 1g symmetry (Raman response) are presented in (a) and (b) panels of Fig. For this set of parameters, the calculated spin response exhibits a sharp peak at ω = 364cm -1 at the same energy than the energy of the calculated A 1g Raman resonance. Note that the frequency dependence of the CDW order ∆ CDW cuts the SC coherence peak at 2∆ 0 SC ∼ (510 cm -1 (63 meV ) in the A 1g channel but leaves the B 1g channel unaffected (see panel (c)). Fig. In the over-doped regime (p=0.23), the value of J = 65 meV decreases and the value of V is the same than at optimal doping. Experimentally above optimal doping, the frequency of the INS resonance at Q decreases with overdoping and scales with T c For these parameters the calculated spin and A 1g Raman responses exhibit peaks at different energies (187 cm -1 and 205 cm -1 respectively) ((see Fig. The η-mode also exists in the overdoped regime but the decreasing of ∆ SC and ∆ CDW completely weakens its intensity. The 2∆ SC coherence peak, which is not detectable in the optimal doped regime (see Fig. Before proceeding with the discussion, we briefly comment on the choice of parameters. In the AF state, ab-initio calculations determine a superexchange coupling J AF theo = 125 meV In this part, we discuss our theoretical results and the main experimental features that characterize the Raman spectra in the A 1g and B 1g channels in the cuprates. 1) The Raman experiments in the B 1g symmetry well established since a long time the presence of the superconducting coherent peak at the frequency of twice maximum of the dwave SC gap 2∆ 0 SC 2) In Raman experiments at optimal doping, the Raman A 1g resonance appears at a frequency below the superconducting coherent peak frequency 2∆ 0 SC 9-13 and at an energy very close to the INS resonance frequency at Q = (π, π) 4) In the underdoped regime, the transition temperature of the CDW order is greater than the superconducting critical temperature. Hence we can consider that the CDW order parameter amplitude becomes larger than the SC one ∆ 0 CDW > ∆ 0 SC . In our theory this regime implies a decreasing of the η-mode resonance intensity which will become undetectable at low doping. Existing Raman data seems to be consistent with a disappearance of the A 1g in the underdoped regime 5) To fit the Raman resonance in the A 1g symmetry, we propose an explanation based on the coexistence between two orders with a d-wave symmetry. This d-wave symmetry remains crucial to explain the resonance in the A 1g symmetry only. Moreover, the d-wave form factor of both SC and CDW orders has been observed by STM 6) Experimentally, the A 1g Raman resonance has been observed in the SC state and disappear at T c To conclude, we propose a coherent scenario to explain the resonance peak in the A 1g symmetry seen in Raman scattering. This scenario is based on the existence of coexisting d-wave SC and d-wave CDW orders in the SC phase of the Cuprates. The ubiquitous proximity of the CDW and SC states in the underdoped phase of the cuprates generates a collective "η-mode" allowing rotations between those two states. The η collective mode results from the coupling between the d-wave SC and the d-wave CDW state. This mode produces a response in Raman scattering spectroscopy solely in the A 1g symmetry and matches the spin triplet resonance at q = Q =(π, π) at optimal doping. Since the η-mode is a charge ±2 spin zero spin singlet excitation other probes like Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy and Resonant X-Ray techniques are also likely to show the resonance. over the fermionic degrees of freedom and find the mean field equations as in Ref. The matrix equation can be projected onto the different components. The exact solution of these equations goes beyond the goal of the paper. However, we directly see that the order parameters depend on the frequency as well as on the momentum. The frequency dependence is a key player of the theory. Then we solve the equation (A11) for the superconducting component ∆ ω,k only, putting CDW order parameter to zero (∆ CDW ω,k = 0). Considering a temperature of T = 0.001 and a paramagnon mass to m = 10 -6 with γ = 10 -5 and λ = 12, the frequency dependence of the SC order parameter at the hotspot is shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. 