Narrow-band invisibility in an otherwise opaque medium has been achieved by electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) in atomic systems . The quantum EIT behaviour can be classically mimicked by specially engineered metamaterials via carefully controlled interference with a "dark mode" . However, the narrow transparency window limits the potential applications that require a tunable wide-band transparent performance. Here, we present a macroscopic quantum superconducting metamaterial with manipulative self-induced broadband transparency due to a qualitatively novel nonlinear mechanism that is different from conventional EIT or its classical analogs. A near complete disappearance of resonant absorption under a range of applied rf flux is observed experimentally and explained theoretically. The transparency comes from the intrinsic bi-stability of the meta-atoms and can be tuned on/ off easily by altering rf and dc magnetic fields, temperature and history. Hysteretic in situ 100% tunability of transparency paves the way for auto-cloaking metamaterials, intensity dependent filters, and fast-tunable power limiters. Controllable transparency in an originally opaque medium has been an actively studied topic. Among those efforts, electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) in three-level atomic systems is one of the most compelling ideas Our macroscopic quantum superconducting metamaterial is made of Radio Frequency Superconducting QUantum Interference Device (rf-SQUID) meta-atoms. An rf-SQUID is a macroscopic quantum version of the split ring resonator in that the gap capacitance is replaced with a Josephson junction. The rf-SQUID is sensitive to the applied rf and dc magnetic flux, and the scale of this * dmchang@umd.edu response is the flux quantum Φ 0 = h/2e = 2.07 × 10 -15 Tm 2 , where h is Planck's constant and e is the elementary charge. The rf-SQUID combines two macroscopic quantum phenomena: magnetic flux quantization and the Josephson effect Here we demonstrate that in the intermediate rf flux range the rf-SQUID metamaterial develops self-induced broadband and tunable transparency that arises from the intrinsic nonlinearity of rf-SQUIDs. Both experiment and simulation show that the resonance of this metamaterial largely disappears when illuminated with electromagnetic waves of certain power ranges. We can adroitly control the metamaterial to be transparent or opaque depending on stimulus scanning directions. The degree of transparency can be tuned by temperature, rf and dc magnetic field. We also discuss analytical and numerical models that reveal the origin of the effect and how to systematically control the transparency regime. The nonlinear transparency behaviour should also extend to the quantum regime of superconducting quantum metamaterials interacting with a small number of photons We measure the transmission and reflection of our metamaterial samples positioned in a rectangular waveguide so that the rf magnetic field of the propagating wave is perpendicular to the SQUID loop (Fig. We define a normalized transparency level that quantitatively determines the degree of resonance absorption compared to the low rf flux absorption (see Supplemental Material). High transparency indicates a weak resonance absorption. The extracted transparency shows a clear onset rf flux for transparency and an upper critical rf flux determining the abrupt end of transparency (insets of Fig. Collecting rf-SQUID meta-atoms into a metamaterial preserves the self-induced broadband transparency performance. Fig. However, a reverse rf flux scan renders an opaque behaviour (Fig. The origin of the nonlinear transparency is the intrinsic bi-stability of the rf-SQUID. The gauge invariant phase difference of the macroscopic quantum wavefunction across the Josephson junction, δ(t), and its time dependence, determine essentially all properties of the rf SQUID and the associated metamaterial (see Supplemental Material). In simulation we found that δ(t) is almost purely sinusoidal; the amplitudes of the higher harmonics are less than 1% of the fundamental resonance amplitude for all drive amplitudes considered here. The amplitude of the gaugeinvariant phase oscillation on resonance as a function of rf flux for a forward stimulus sweep (δ LH ) is lower than the amplitude for a reverse sweep (δ HL ) above the onset of bi-stability (Fig. We can apply the Duffing oscillator approximation to analytically predict the onset of bi-stability. For intermediate drive amplitude an rf-SQUID can be treated as a Duffing Oscillator (Kerr Oscillator) The onset rf flux value for transparency depends on several parameters. Higher resistance in the junction, higher capacitance, and higher critical current all give a lower onset rf flux for transparency (Supplemental Material). Operating the metamaterial at a lower temperature increases the resistance and the critical current, thus decreasing the onset, explaining the modulation of onset by temperature observed in experiment and simulation (insets of Fig. The dc flux has a strong modulation of the transparency upper critical rf flux. Above the upper critical rf flux, the rf-SQUID experiences phase slips on each rf cycle and shows strong resonant absorption at the geometrical frequency ω geo /2π Also, at a fixed rf flux near the upper critical edge the sample can be resonantly absorbing at ω geo or be transparent in the broadband frequency window depending sensitively on the applied dc flux. Fig. Up to this point we have mainly discussed the results for a single rf-SQUID, because the transparency behaviour of the rf-SQUID metamaterial arises from the bi-stability of single meta-atoms. Disorder in the rf or dc flux can affect the degree of transparency in an rf-SQUID metamaterial but the effect is quite small. In experiments on an 11 × 11 array metamaterial, an intentionally introduced gradient of 0.11Φ 0 applied dc flux across the array changes the peak transparency value from 0.94 (for the uniform applied flux case) to 0.91. This means the transparency is quite robust against noise and disorder. However, simulation shows that increased coupling between meta-atoms reduces the transparency range The observed tunable transparency of the rf SQUID metamaterial offers a range of new previously unattainable functionalities, enabling new applications. The root cause of the tunable transparency comes from the intrinsic bi-stability of rf-SQUIDs, which can be controlled in a number of ways. Some of these applications capitalize on the effective three-terminal device configuration in which transmission is modulated via a parameter, namely the rf or the dc flux channel. For example, one can design an rf transmitter where the input rf bias signal modulates the main channel rf transmission. Such a transmitter can be used in quantum computing to shape rf pulses for qubit control The self-induced transparency modulation feature can also lead to the presently unattainable gain-control capability in SQUID arrays, which are the basis for highly sensitive quantum antennas Another application is in wideband directly-digitizing rf receivers, in which the rf SQUID metamaterial acts as an input power limiter to protect sensitive supercon-ducting wideband digital-rf receivers from strong jammers The remarkable sharpness of transparency modulation by dc flux at a fixed applied rf flux amplitude (Fig. In summary, we show that self-induced broad-band transparency is observed in single rf SQUID meta-atoms and in rf SQUID metamaterials. The transparency arises from the bi-stability of individual SQUIDs. The transparency is hysteretic and switchable, and can be tuned by temperature, dc and rf magnetic flux, endowing the metamaterial with an "electromagnetic memory". The transparency range and level can be enhanced through numerous parameters under experimental control. The flux quantization condition in an rf-SQUID relates δ and the total flux Φ tot through the loop: δ = 2πnΦ tot /Φ 0 , where Φ 0 = h/2e is the flux quantum and n is any integer. Here we take n to be 1 because any 2π added in δ is essentially an integral constant that can be ignored in the dynamics where the term in brackets is the total current through the junction, resistance R and capacitance C in the RCSJ model (see Fig. where φ dc = 2πΦ dc /Φ 0 and φ rf = 2πΦ rf /Φ 0 are the applied non-dimensional dc flux and rf flux, L , and β rf = 2πLI c /Φ 0 is the coefficient determining the degree of nonlinearity in an rf-SQUID. An array of N coupled rf-SQUIDs can be described as a system of coupled nonlinear differential equations where δ is an N -element vector describing the gauge-invariant phases of the N rf-SQUIDs, φdc and φrf are N -element vectors denoting the non-dimensional dc flux and rf flux applied to each rf-SQUID respectively, λ is an N × N coupling matrix determining the interactions between the meta-atoms We solve equation (S2) (or equation (S3) for an array) numerically to determine δ(τ ) in steady state. The timedependent part of δ(τ ) is very nearly sinusoidal, independent of the drive amplitude. With this, we calculate the dissipated power V 2 /R and the effective permeability μ r of a meta-atom (or a metamaterial). The transmission and reflection through a partially filled rectangular waveguide with the rf-SQUID medium can be calculated and compared to experiment (Section. IV) Under a fixed applied dc flux, the normalized transparency value is defined as a function of φ rf (Fig. where |S 21,res (φ rf )| is the transmission on resonance at a given rf flux, and |S 21,res (0)| is the transmission on resonance when the drive amplitude is low (Φ rf /Φ 0 < 0.001 for the single rf-SQUID meta-atom). When our sample is driven by a fixed rf flux amplitude, the normalized transparency value is a function of the varying dc flux (Fig. where |S 21,res (φ dc )| is the transmission on resonance at each dc flux, and min(|S 21,res (φ dc )|) is the minimum transmission on resonance as the dc flux varies. Given that sin δ δ -δ 3 3! for small argument, we get the equation of a single rf-SQUID in the Duffing oscillator approximation, which can be solved analytically: In the Duffing oscillator approximation, the natural frequency of the oscillating δ when φ dc = 0 is ω 0 = 1 + β rf ω geo ; it determines the resonant frequency of an rf-SQUID when the drive amplitude is very low. For the single meta-atom, ω 0 /2π = 19 GHz. The β rf /6 prefactor of the nonlinear term δ 3 will modify the resonance properties when the drive amplitude is high. We separate the dc and ac parts of δ(t) for analysis. With the ansatz δ = δ dc + δ rf in equation (S6), we get two coupled equations for δ dc and δ rf . - The non-zero φ dc gives rise to a non-zero δ dc , which adds a δ 2 rf term in the ac gauge invariant phase oscillation. Also, the resonant frequency at low drive with a non-zero dc flux is modified to If we make the ansatz that δ rf = b sin (Ωτ + α) where = ω -ω 1 is the difference between driving frequency and the natural frequency, and κ is the anharmonicity coefficient given by: The number of real roots of equation (S9) changes with driving frequency and driving amplitude. When the driving amplitude is very small, equation (S9) has one real root for b 2 throughout the whole frequency range. The peak value of b denotes resonance. As driving amplitude of the meta-atom increases, the resonance bends towards the lower frequency side, but is still single-valued. After the driving amplitude reaches a critical value φ rf,bi determined by equation (S9) has three real roots for b 2 in a range of frequencies (Fig. With a non-zero dc flux, the oscillating δ now has a dc part, and the natural frequency decreases to ω 1 , which further modifies the anharmonicity coefficient κ. Since the onset of transparency predicted by Eq. S11 is related the resonant frequency ω 1 and κ, we can tune the onset of transparency by dc flux. For example, with a dc flux of a quarter flux quantum, the single-SQUID has an onset φ rf,bi /2π that is 13% smaller than the 0-flux case. The magnetic susceptibility of the rf-SQUID metamaterial can be calculated as < Φ ac /Φ rf sin Ωτ >, where Φ ac is the time dependent part of the flux induced in the SQUID. Further we can calculate effective magnetic permeability by knowing the filling factor F of the metamaterial inside a waveguide. We calculate μ r as a function of frequency as the drive amplitude through the rf-SQUID metamaterial varies (Fig. The transmission through a partially filled rectangular waveguide can be calculated as where l is the effective length of the medium, is the wave number in the empty waveguide, c is the speed of light, a is the waveguide dimension, and γ = k μrk0 . Conversely, the effective μ r can be extracted from measured complex transmission data by employing equation (S13). The μ r extracted from experimental data shows the magnetically inert behavior in transparent regime as well. We evaluate the onset Φ rf /Φ 0 of transparency by the Duffing oscillator approximation, and the upper critical Φ rf /Φ 0 by methods discussed in In the bi-stability regime, a frequency scan and rf flux amplitude scan both result in a hysteretic transparency behavior. The fold-over resonance (Fig. In Fig. 