We report structural evidence of dynamic reorganization in vortex matter in clean NbSe2 by joint small angle neutron scattering and ac-susceptibility measurements. The application of oscillatory forces in a transitional region near the order-disorder transition results in robust bulk vortex lattice configurations with an intermediate degree of disorder. These dynamically-originated configurations correlate with intermediate pinning responses previously observed, resolving a long standing debate regarding the origin of such responses. In a wide variety of complex systems, competing interactions promote an order-disorder transition (ODT). Ordered phases are characterized by spatial correlations decaying weakly over distances larger than the relevant system scale, whereas disordered configurations are characterized by correlation lengths ζ of the order of the mean inter-particle distance a 0 . Configurations with intermediate degrees of disorder, strong enough to affect the system response, but still with ζ a 0 , have received attention recently In very low-pinning superconductors, such as clean NbSe 2 single crystals, most of the vortex field-temperature phase diagram is properly described by an ordered dislocation-free Bragg Glass (BG) phase To address this question, we performed an experiment in a clean NbSe 2 single crystal, combining small angle neutron scattering (SANS) with in-situ linear ac susceptibility measurements. In SANS imaging of a perfect triangular VL, first order Bragg peaks (BP) are expected to appear as six symmetric sharp spots, matching the reciprocal lattice vectors. This still holds for an ideal BG, where elastic disorder leads to slow decay of the correlations The experiment was conducted at the SANS-II beam line of the Paul Scherrer Institute's SINQ facility, using the MA11 cryomagnet. The geometry of the experiment is sketched in Figure Since the goal was to explore the connection between structure and dynamics, a non-invasive measurement of pinning was required. This was achieved by installing a sample holder with mutual inductance coils inside the SANS cryomagnet. By adding a small ac magnetic field h ac = 2.5 mOe (< 10 -6 H, f = 65 kHz), vortices were forced to perform small oscillations inside their pinning wells, without modifying their spatial configuration. These oscillations propagate through the sample due to the vortex-vortex repulsion, with a characteristic penetration depth λ ac that is related, in a mean field ap-proximation Figure (1,2) sh below the onset of the PE at T po 6.27 K. There is an unambiguous rise in λ ac after shaking, representing a reduction of the effective pinning. The agreement between both cooling χ (T ) curves after shaking is consistent with an equilibration procedure below T po . Reversibility is observed in the warming curve, with χ (T ) increasing with T up to T po , after which it drops due to the spontaneous pinning enhancement at the PE. In contrast, the absence of PE in the linear response during the cooling While shaking the VL at any T sh < T po leads to an ordered configuration, the consequences are strikingly different when the shaking field is applied in the narrow transitional region above T po . Figure (3) sh = 6.29 K > T po and shaken, partially reducing the effective pinning. The VL was cooled to T 0 and a narrow RC, still wider than w res was measured, indicating a bulk partial ordering. In contrast, applying the same shaking burst at the same T (3) sh (±3 mK) to an initially ordered VL had the opposite effect: The shaking field partially increased the effective pinning to a similar level and disordered the VL. The RC was broader than w res , but narrower than for the maximally disordered FC lattice. Because the response after shaking is strongly dependent on the temperature when T sh > T po , the process was carefully repeated within ∆T sh ∼ 3 mK, obtaining the same qualitative results. To rule out that the partial disordering was of thermal origin, a warming-cooling cycle up to T (3) sh but without applying the shaking burst was carried out for a replicated ordered VL. Although the cooling χ (T ) branch indicates higher pinning than the warming branch, it is lower than for VLs shaken above T po . Moreover, if there was any associated disorder, it was minor and below our SANS resolution. Therefore, the "intermediate" degree of disorder found before is only attributable to the shaking field applied at T sh were L res > ζ L > ζ L (FC) at the 75% confidence level. Thus, we state that shaking the VL in the transitional region results in bulk intrinsic configurations with intermediate degree of disorder. The total integrated intensity I 0 (the area under the RC) for the different configurations should remain roughly constant. Even so, the long-tail decay of the structure factor in the BG phase may lead to an underestimation of I 0 sh a FC (blue) and an ordered (green) VL, and after warming an ordered VL to T = T tions and in those obtained after shaking the VL in the transitional region, where disorder is probably mediated by dislocations. In the elastic BG, the in-plane correlation length ζ ⊥ can be derived from ζ L through the tilt and shear elastic constants c 44 and c 66 Our results show a clear connection between the linear ac response, related to the effective pinning, and the bulk spatial correlation of the VL. Configurations having correlation lengths much larger than the lattice parameter, but small enough to affect the global response, were observed after shaking the VL in the proposed transitional region. These observations support the existence of such region and represent the first evidence of a dynamic reordering, driven by oscillatory forces, which results in robust bulk configurations with intermediate degrees of disorder. A similar behavior was obtained in numerical simulations olution function. The former corresponds to the actual q-dependence of the structure factor, while the latter accounts for imperfect collimation and wavelength spread. For simplicity, the resolution function was assumed to be a Gaussian kernel with standard deviation w res /2. Since rocking curves are already integrated within the detector plane, only the longitudinal dependence of the structure factor is relevant. When spatial correlations of the VL decay strongly with certain characteristic length scale, the envelope of the correlation function can be modeled with an exponential function. So, the structure factor S(q L ) (the Fourier transform of the correlation function) must be Lorentzian-shaped, i.e. where ζ L is the corresponding correlation length. Therefore, we took the intrinsic distribution to be the Cauchy-Lorentz distribution centred at the Bragg angle θ 0 , multiplied by a proportionality constant I 0 . Then, its half width at half maximum (HWHM) γ is directly related to where Q 0 is the magnitude of one reciprocal vector of the VL. The resulting intensity profile is In the limiting cases of long correlation lengths Q 0 ζ L 1/w res , (i.e. when ζ L is beyond our resolution) the intrinsic distribution can be replaced by a Dirac delta, so and the experimental RCs can be just modeled by the Gaussian resolution distribution. Neutron count data were preprocessed by the software GRASP Statistical analysis was carried out using the software Octave 1. preliminary analysis, 2. resolution estimation, Non linear optimization often requires set of initial parameters close enough to the optimal in order to work properly. The aim of this stage was to obtain suitable estimates of the parameters for each rocking curve individually, to be used in later stages. We did this by fitting our convolution model individually to each rocking curve. Because of the convolution, the parameters w res and γ are expected to be highly correlated, making it difficult to fit both simultaneously. To overcome this issue, a rough prior theoretical estimate of w res , based on the experimental geometry The preliminary analysis showed that configurations shaken at low temperatures (examples are shown with red and violet symbols in 2(c)) were resolution limited (γ w res ). Therefore, we used the long-correlationlength approximation (Eq. 4) to model these rocking curves. In turn, it enabled us to make an independent estimation of the resolution based solely on neutron data. The resolution profile likelihood L w (w res ) was constructed by maximizing the global likelihood function (i. e., including all rocking curves), constrained to w res taking a series of fixed values. We obtained ŵres = (0.107 ± 0.004) deg, which is consistent with our prior estimate. This also revealed that the dependence of the estimated γ on the resolution width was common to all the curves. Examples of the resulting fitting curves are shown in full red and violet lines in Figure Next, we determined the minimum intrinsic width γ which could be eventually distinguishable from the zerowidth approximation. This was done by generating randomized rocking curves of different widths with the convolution model, using the above estimation of w res . Similar number of points and relative errors as in our experimental data were considered. After fitting Gaussian functions to generated data, a threshold of > 90% out of 200 replicates resulting in non-overlapping error bars (one standard deviation) between ŵres and the fitted width was applied. This resulted in γ 0.014 deg, or ζ L 40 μm ∼ L res (vertical dashed line in Figure Lastly, the profile likelihood of γ for each rocking curve was constructed by fitting only I 0 and θ 0 , while letting w res be the estimated above (fixed). This procedure reduced marginal errors in γ by ignoring the covariance with w res . Since a change in w res would only shift all estimated γ together, this approach is better suited for comparing different configurations instead of finding the exact correlation length. The resulting likelihood ratios L r (ζ L ) (curves in Figure As long as the elastic approximation is valid, the inplane characteristic lengths ζ ⊥ in equilibrium configurations can be estimated from the elastic ratio where c 66 and c 44 are the shear and tilt elastic VL moduli respectively. In the local approximation where λ is the London penetration depth and a 0 is the mean intervortex distance. In our case Far from the amorphous limit, the elastic approximation is still roughly valid for equilibrium configurations with dislocations ⊥ is limited by dislocations spaced in ζ ⊥ and ζ L in the transverse and longitudinal directions respectively. To calculate ζ ⊥ (ζ L ) we follow Eqs. ( and a non local approximation for the tilt modulus are λ-independent in this limit and the in-plane correlation lengths corresponding to the experimental ζ L result ζ ⊥ (FC) ∼ 9 a 0 and ζ ⊥ ∼ 18 a 0 for intermediate disordered configurations, slightly larger to that obtained in the elastic limits. Although these values are not quantitatively exact, these estimates could be useful to design future SANS experiments. A comment on total integrated intensities Equation ( First we note that the set of all the values of I 0 had far more dispersion (relative to their errors) than expected for a single mean value model (χ 2 = 42.48, df = 10, p < 0.001). In order to assess whether this excessive dispersion was connected to the different histories, the dispersion within sets of I 0 corresponding to each process was evaluated. All intensities corresponding to FC configurations were indistinguishable (χ 2 = 1.37, df = 2, p = 0.505) and intensities corresponding to intermediateorder configurations were only marginally distinguishable (χ 2 = 6.15, df = 2, p = 0.046). Moreover, merging the sets of intensities for FC and intermediate-order configurations did not increase the dispersion enough to reject a single mean intensity for both (∆χ 2 < 0.01, ∆df = 1, p = 0.938). On the contrary, BG configurations presented a higher degree of variability, beyond their estimated variance (χ 2 = 14.78, df = 4, p = 0.005) and the set of intensities for BG configurations could not be merged with FC and intermediate-order configurations without increasing the dispersion significantly (∆χ 2 = 20.18, ∆df = 1, p < 0.001). These results suggest that all RCs for FC and intermediate-order configurations share essentially the same value for the parameter I 0 . Instead, fits to RCs for BG configurations yielded statistically distinguishable values for the total integrated intensity, which averaged about 19% below the mean I 0 for FC and intermediateorder configurations. As mentioned in the main text, an underestimation of I 0 is likely to result from the long-tail decay of the structure factor in the BG phase, further supporting the observed structural differences. In this supplementary section, the vortex phase diagram corresponding to our samples is presented and some features are compared with those reported in the literature. The magnetic field and temperature ranges used in our experiments are also included. As the sample used in the SANS experiment (in the following, sample A) was too large to be measured in the 7-T MPMS XL Quantum Design or in our cryostats, another crystal from the same source (sample B, V ∼ 0.25 × 0.25 × 0.02 cm 3 ) and a smaller sample obtained by cutting an edge of sample A (sample C, V ∼ 0.1 × 0.1 × 0.02 cm 3 ) were characterized instead. Beyond the expected differences due to the larger area of sample B, results obtained from both samples are identical. In Figure The full bulk penetration of the shaking fields, with the consequent vortex displacements in distances larger than a 0 , is essential to justify our claim of a bulk dynamic reordering. The modification of the bulk VL structure factor observed in the SANS experiment is the main direct evidence of such a reordering. In this supplementary section, we present some numerical estimations, together with additional experimental results obtained by magnetization and non-linear ac susceptibility measurements, that provide a consistent scenario regarding this crucial issue. A simple calculation provides a rough estimation of the mean vortex displacement associated with the shaking field penetration. Under full ac field penetration, the maximum variation of the VL parameter a 0 during a cycle of the shaking field is ∆a 0 ∼ (a 0 /2)(h sh /B) ∼ (a 0 /2)(h sh /H). In our SANS experiments, h sh ∼ 7 Oe and H = 5 kOe, so ∆a 0 ∼ 0.05 nm. Therefore, near the centre of the sample, vortices only need to move short distances u ∆a 0 to accommodate to the change in the density. However, the propagation of the density change throughout the sample implies that the mean displacement increases with the distance r from the centre as u(r) ∼ r (∆a 0 /a 0 ) . Consequently, in our experiments we expect u(r) > a 0 for r > 100 μm, reaching u(r) as large as several microns near the edge of the sample (r ∼ 2.5 mm). In conclusion, during the shaking procedure, most vortices move long distances u a 0 , allowing a dynamic reorganization. On the other hand, vortices that enter and exit the sample crossing its edge during the shaking procedure are present only in a thin micrometric annulus near the sample boundary (less than 2% of the sample area) and may only marginally affect the average bulk structure. The claim that the small ac field h ac = 2.5 mOe, applied during the linear ac susceptibility measurements, does not modify the VL configuration, i.e. the technique is non-invasive, has been extensively discussed in previous publications The full penetration of the shaking field was previously confirmed by measuring the non-linear ac response in sample C, and results are shown is Figure The conclusions of the above paragraph are also consistent with results obtained by magnetization measurements. Figure 