We analyze the pump wavelength dependence for the photo-induced enhancement of interlayer coupling in La 1.885 Ba 0.115 CuO 4 , which is promoted by optical melting of the stripe order. In the equilibrium superconducting state (T < T C = 13 K), in which stripes and superconductivity coexist, time-domain THz spectroscopy reveals a photo-induced blue-shift of the Josephson Plasma Resonance after excitation with optical pulses polarized perpendicular to the CuO 2 planes. In the striped, nonsuperconducting state (T C < T < T SO ≃ 40 K) a transient plasma resonance similar to that seen below T C appears from a featureless equilibrium reflectivity. Most strikingly, both these effects become stronger upon tuning of the pump wavelength from the mid-infrared to the visible, underscoring an unconventional competition between stripe order and superconductivity, which occurs on energy scales far above the ordering temperature. Many materials in the cuprate family show spin-and charge-density-wave orders La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 (LBCO) is a prototypical high-T C "striped" superconductor, displaying charge and spin modulations that suppress superconductivity in a narrow doping range around x = 1/8 (see phase diagram in Fig. Recently, it was shown that superconducting interlayer coupling can be transiently enhanced for doping values below the 1/8 anomaly by excitation with near-infrared pulses polarized perpendicular to the CuO 2 planes 10 . This effect is different from the enhancement obtained by phonon excitation 11 , 12 , 13 , and descends from the weakening of stripe order by charge excitation 14 rather than by a deformation of the lattice 15, Here, we study the pump photon energy dependence of the enhanced superconducting coupling by tuning the pump wavelength between the midinfrared (5 μm) and the visible (400 nm). We focus our analysis on the x = 11.5% compound, which shows the most striking response of all doping levels studied 10 . In this material, superconductivity, spin and charge order appear at T C = 13 K, T SO ≃ 41 K and T CO ≃ 53 K respectively. The sample was a single crystal grown with the floating zone technique 25 , which was then cut and polished to give an ac surface 10 of ~5 mm The optically-induced dynamics was probed with single-cycle THz probe pulses, generated by illuminating a photoconductive antenna with a replica of the nearinfrared laser pulses used for excitation. The probe THz field was also polarized perpendicular to the CuO 2 planes and detected the time dependent interlayer coupling strength after photo-excitation. The frequency-resolved transient response was measured between ~150 GHz and ~3 THz by electro-optical sampling of the THz field reflected from the sample with a second replica of the 800-nm Ti:Sa pulses in a ZnTe crystal. The transient optical response was obtained as a function of pump-probe delay by measuring the pump-induced change in reflected THz electric field. The equilibrium optical properties, to which these transient spectra were referenced, were obtained 26 by comparing the THz reflected field measured at equilibrium with our setup at different temperatures against the c-axis broadband reflectivity reported in Ref. 27 (see broadband equilibrium spectra in Fig. Qualitatively similar but stronger effects were observed for 800-nm optical excitation, with a striking shift of the equilibrium JPR from ~200 GHz to ~600 GHz (panel c.1) for T < T C and a transient edge near 500 GHz for T C < T < T SO (panel c.2). Finally, in the case of 400-nm excitation, although a strong increase in the sample reflectivity was observed (panels d.1-d.2), no sharp edge was found. Two opposing trends can be identified when tuning the pump wavelength, both below and above T C . The transient photo-induced reflectivity edge becomes more pronounced and appears at progressively higher energies for shorter pump wavelengths. However, the "quality" of such edge, as identified by its size and width, also deteriorates for higher photon energy excitation, indicating that decoherence becomes progressively more important. To analyze the origin of these observations quantitatively, we first note that linear optical absorption in this compound increases with photon energy (as seen in the optical conductivity in figure The two competing phenomena of enhanced coupling (blue shift of the plasma edge) and increased width of the resonance (decoherence) can be better seen when analyzing the transient complex optical conductivity σ 1 (ω,) + iσ 2 (ω,) of the photoexcited material, where ω is the probe frequency and  is the time delay with respect to the pump pulse. We first discuss the complex response at one time delay immediately after excitation (= 1.5 ps). Representative conductivities at this time delay are shown in figure An increase of a positive σ 2 (ω) with decreasing frequency is connected with perfect transport and is typically taken as indicative of a transient superconducting response. Although σ 2 (ω) scales as 1/ω in an ideal superconductor, in the cuprates the imaginary conductivity is almost linear due to combined effect of the condensate and of quasiparticle tunneling For 800-nm wavelength excitation the same effect emerges even more clearly, with an enhancement in σ 2 (ω) (panels c.1, c. where ̃ crosses zero, that is, at the frequency of the plasma edge (see figure 25 M. Hücker, M. v. Zimmermann, G. D. Gu, Z. J. Xu, J. S. Wen, Guangyong Xu, H. J. Kang, A. Zheludev, and J. M. . 27 C. C. Homes, M. Hücker, Q. Li, Z. J. Xu, J. S. Wen, G. D. Gu, and J. M. Tranquada, "Determination of the optical properties of La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 for several dopings, including the anomalous x = 1/8 phase", Phys. Rev. B 85, 134510