As a new type of topological materials, ZrTe5 shows many exotic properties under extreme conditions. Utilizing resistance and ac magnetic susceptibility measurements under high pressure, while the resistance anomaly near 128 K is completely suppressed at 6.2 GPa, a fully superconducting transition emerges surprisingly. The superconducting transition temperature Tc increases with applied pressure, and reaches a maximum of 4.0 K at 14. Since the first report of topological insulator, an extensive attention in recent years has been focused on newly emergent Dirac materials including topological insulators (TIs) As one of the fundamental state parameters, high pressure is an effective clean way to tune lattice as well as electronic states, especially in quantum states Pressure-induced superconductivity. The crystals show a thin elongated rectangular shape, where the prismatic ZrTe6 chains run along the crystallographic a-axis and linked along the c-axis via zigzag chains of Te atoms to form two-dimensional (2D) layers, stacked along the b-axis into a crystal Figure As seen from Fig. There are a number of possibilities that may be responsible for this tiny resistance drop near 6.0 K. One of them is from the impurity or defect phase in the sample. Because the resistance drop reaches about 20%Rn, the impurity is almost unlikely in our single crystal sample but the pressure-induced disordering cannot be excluded. The second possibility is due to the occurrence of surface superconductivity associated with the topological surface state, since similar two-step-like transition behavior has also been reported in putative topological superconductor half-Heuslers 31 . Unfortunately, the surface state of ZrTe5 has not been verified yet. The third possible origin is that it is an independent superconducting phase induced by the pressure, but this phase is metastable and coexists with SC-I with different structures. To have a comprehensive understanding of the pressure-induced variations of physical properties of ZrTe5, we also performed the density functional theory calculations for the electronic band structures (see Supplementary Fig. Structure determination with in situ high-pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy. To confirm the structure stability and the predicted new phases, we have conducted in situ high-pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction study on the ZrTe5 sample up to 55 GPa. Angle-dispersive X-ray diffraction experiments were performed on powder ZrTe5 sample at room temperature. A sample chamber in the rhenium gasket pre-indented to 40-μm thickness followed by drilling a 100-μm hole in the center was filled with powder sample, ruby ball and pressure-transmitting medium for in situ high-pressure study. The series powder diffraction patterns are shown in Fig. We further performed Raman scattering measurements under pressure, as shown in Supplementary Fig. Note that these Ag modes are strongly related to the specific Te2 or Te3 atoms. Under external pressure above 0.6 GPa, the profile of spectra retains similar to that of ambient pressure, whereas the former three modes shift toward higher wavenumber except the mode Our calculations show that the pressure will change the crystal structure dramatically, and at around 6 GPa this compound becomes a metal. As shown in Fig. bands crossing the Fermi level for C2/m and P-1 structure, respectively. A timereversal-invariant topological superconductor requires odd-parity symmetry and the Fermi surface enclosing an odd number of time-reversal-invariant momenta (TRIM) The states at Fermi surface are contributed to Zr-4d and Te-5p. Since these bands are spatially extended, the electronic correlation should be quite small due to the strong screening effect. Consequently, one can expect the superconductivity discovered in this work is mainly mediated by the electron-phonon interaction. Although the intra-pocket phonon-mediated pairing, which may have singular behaviour of the electron-phonon interaction at long wavelengths, can possess odd-parity symmetry From the phonon dispersions of C2/m and P-1 structures at 10 GPa and 30 GPa, respectively, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, by combining experimental and theoretical investigations, we demonstrated the pressure-induced superconductivity in a Dirac topological semimetal ZrTe5 compound. The appearance of superconductivity at the critical pressure is accompanied by the complete suppression of the high temperature resistance anomaly around 128 K as well as a structural transition from Cmcm to C2/m. At pressures above 21.2 GPa, a second superconducting phase with P-1 structure manifests and coexists with the original C2/m. While our theoretical study rules out the possibility of topological superconductivity at low pressure, at high pressure (above 20 GPa) the system has complicated Fermi surface and a novel superconducting phase, thus deserving further study. Single-crystal growth and characterization. Single crystals of ZrTe5 were grown via vapor transport method in a two-zone furnace with elements Zr (99.99%), Te (99.99%), and iodine (transport agent) Experimental details of high-pressure experiments. High pressures were generated with a screw-pressure-type diamond anvil cell (DAC) made of non-magnetic Cu-Be alloy. The DAC was placed inside a homemade multifunctional measurement system (1.8-300 K, JANIS Research Company Inc.; 0-9 T, Cryomagnetics Inc.) with helium as the heat convection medium. Diamond anvils of 300-μm culets and T301 stainless-steel gasket covered with a mixture of epoxy and fine cubic boron nitride (cBN) powder were used for high-pressure transport measurements. Single crystals with typical dimension of 100 × 30 × 10 μm 3 were loaded without pressure-transmitting medium. The four-probe method was applied in the a-c plane of single crystal. Platinum (Pt) foil with a thickness of 5 μm was used for the electrodes. The high-pressure ac magnetic susceptibility was measured using magnetic inductance technique. The 800-μm diamond culets and nonmagnetic Be-Cu gasket were used. Raman scattering measurements were performed at room temperature in a BeCu-type Diacell ST-DAC using a Horiba Jobin Yvon T64000 spectrometer equipped with a liquid nitrogen cooled spacing of 0.03 Å -1 , and a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell was chosen for phonon calculation. The plane wave cutoff was 288 eV, and structure relaxation was carried out until all the atomic forces on each ion was less than 0.005 eV/Å. Electronic structures were carried out by using full-potential linearized augmented plane-wave (FP-LAPW) method implemented in the WIEN2k package weak antilocalization effect and large linear magnetoresistance in the putative topological superconductor LuPdBi. Sci. Rep. 5, 9158 (2015).