The layered transition metal chalcogenides have been a fertile land in solid state physics for many decades. Various M X 2 -type transition metal dichalcogenides, such as WTe 2 , IrTe 2 , and MoS 2 , have triggered great attention recently, either for the discovery of novel phenomena or some extreme or exotic physical properties, or for their potential applications. PdTe 2 is a superconductor in the class of transition metal dichalcogenides, and superconductivity is enhanced in its Cu-intercalated form, Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 . It is important to study the electronic structures of PdTe 2 and its intercalated form in order to explore for new phenomena and physical properties and understand the related superconductivity enhancement mechanism. Here we report systematic high resolution angleresolved photoemission (ARPES) studies on PdTe 2 and Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 single crystals, combined with the band structure calculations. We present for the first time in detail the complex multi-band Fermi surface topology and densely-arranged band structure of these compounds. By carefully examining the electronic structures of the two systems, we find that Cu-intercalation in PdTe 2 results in electron-doping, which causes the band structure to shift downwards by nearly 16 meV in Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 . Our results lay a foundation for further exploration and investigation on PdTe 2 and related superconductors. The transition metal chalcogenides have been a fertile land for studying new phenomena and properties in condensed matter physics, including the traditional study of charge density wave (CDW) and related superconductivity In this paper, we focus on the investigation of the electronic structures of PdTe 2 and its Cu-intercalated counterpart Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 . Few work has been reported in the literature except for some earlier scanning tunneling spectroscopy Multiple bands with strong dispersions are revealed over a wide energy range (0-6 eV), which give rise to a complex Fermi surface topology. We also performed detailed band structure calculations for PdTe 2 by considering the spin-orbit coupling effect. The calculated band structure exhibits strong three-dimensionality. The comparison with the theoretical calculations facilitates the assignment of the observed band structure and Fermi surface, with some observed features not accounted for in the bulk band calculations. While the overall electronic structure is similar between PdTe 2 and Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 , some delicate differences are identified. In particular, there is a downshift of band on the order of 16 meV observed in Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 , indicating the electron doping from Cu-intercalation in the system. High quality single crystals of Cu x PdTe 2 (x = 0 and 0.05) were obtained by the selfflux method. The ARPES measurements were performed on our lab photoemission system equipped with the Scienta R4000 electron energy analyzer. The electronic structure of PdTe 2 was calculated by employing the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) for the electron correlations. We used the code WIEN2k based on the full-potential linearized augmented-plane-wave method. The muffin-tin radii (R M T ) of 2.50 bohr were chosen for both Pd and Te atoms. The largest plane-wave vector K max was given by R M T K max = 7.0. Our calculation results are consistent with the previous reports.[ Figure The observed peaks can be indexed into (0 0 n)(with n being integers), indicating that the naturally cleaved surface is the basal plane. Based on the Laue diffraction pattern shown in Fig. Figure Overall speaking, the constant energy contours of PdTe 2 and Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 samples are quite similar; they both evolve strongly with the binding energy. Near the Fermi level, both compounds exhibit a complex Fermi surface topology with a three-fold symmetry. A couple of main features can be well resolved. A small electron-like spot appears around the Γ point, denoted as α. It is surrounded by six small electron-like spots (β and β ) located near the midpoint between Γ and K. There is a rather weak spectral weight that links in between the β and β spots. There is also a weak spectral weight extending out from each β spot to the M and M points, marked as δ and δ bands, respectively. These observations show some resemblance to that found in the parent IrTe 2 Figure All these observations suggest the multiband nature of the PdTe 2 system at low energy which should be considered in understanding its superconductivity and related properties. Our present work provides for the first time detailed information on the complex electronic structure of the PdTe 2 system. The T c enhancement in Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 (T c = 2.4 K) compared to its parent compound PdTe 2 (T c = 1.7 K) prompted us to investigate the change in the electronic structures induced by the Cu intercalation. Figure 5(a)-5(c), 5(g), 5(h)) systems measured at ∼ 20 K using both the 21.218 eV and 6.994 eV photon energies. Like the overall similarity of the Fermi surface shown in Fig. While only a weak electron-like α band is observed near the Γ point near the Fermi level in the 21.2 eV measurements (Figs. The band structure change induced by Cu-intercalation can be revealed by comparing the core level energy shifts. Figure On the other hand, using the high resolution vacuum ultra-violet laser ARPES, we can see obvious relative energy shifts in the EDCs at the Γ point between the doped and undoped PdTe 2 systems (Fig. In order to understand the electronic structure of PdTe 2 and have a direct comparison with the experiment, band structure calculations were carried out. Figure 