We report the results of our investigation of SrPt 3 P, a recently discovered strong-coupling superconductor with Tc = 8.4 K, by application of high physical pressure and by chemical doping. We study hole-doped SrPt 3 P, which was theoretically predicted to have a higher Tc, resistively, magnetically, and calorimetrically. Here we present the results of these studies and discuss their implications. In 2012, Takayama et al. Herein we report results of the chemical doping and high pressure effects on the properties of SrPt 3 P. In this study, the samples were prepared as follows. Stoichiometric amounts of platinum powder, phosphorus powder, and strontium pieces were mixed together in a glove box under an argon atmosphere with total O 2 and moisture level less than 1 ppm. The mixture was pressed into a small pellet and loaded into a Al 2 O 3 crucible. The crucible together with the pellet was then sealed in a clean quartz tube under vacuum. The whole assembly was then put inside a tube furnace for reaction. The reaction sequence is the same as reported by Takayama et al 1 . Xray diffraction characterization of the material was carried out using a Panalytical Xpert diffractometer, magnetic measurements using the Quantum Design MPMS, and specific heat measurements using the Quantum Design PPMS. Resistivity measurements were made using a Linear Research LR-400 AC Resistance Bridge operated at 15.9 Hz and a modified probe in the MPMS and high pressure resistivity measurements were made using a BeCu piston-cylinder cell with a quasi-hydrostatic pressure medium, Fluorinert77. The X-ray powder pattern of SrPt 3 P is shown in Fig. We began our investigation of the properties of SrPt 3 P by applying high physical pressure to the material. The temperature dependent resistivity measurements under pressure are shown in Fig. Chemical doping was also carried out for the SrPt 3 P compound. We selected Si as the dopant for two reasons: 1) the size of the Si is very close to that of P, minimizing any possible interference due to size difference with the formation of the material; 2) the doping of Si will likely introduce more hole carriers and will allow the study of hole-doping effects theoretically proposed by Nekrasov et al. Temperature dependent magnetization and resistivity measurements were performed on samples with x = 0 and x = 0.2. Figure From our resistivity measurements, we observe suppression of superconductivity with a magnetic field of 3 T to below the lowest temperature measured. The temperature dependent magnetization of x = 0.2 is shown in Fig. The apparent increase of N(ǫ F ) with Si doping is in agreement with previous electronic structure calculations showing the Fermi level located on a negative slope in the density of states In conclusion, we investigated the superconductivity in SrPt 3 P resistively, magnetically, and calorimetrically, including under the application of high physical pressure and with the partial replacement of phosphorus with silicon. The high pressure investigation yielded the result that the superconducting transition temperature increases by a maximum of approximately 0.14 K upon application of pressure up to 9.90 kbar, with an apparent decrease in T c beyond that pressure. Contrary to the previous predictions 