Superconducting spintronics has emerged in the last decade as a promising new field that seeks to open a new dimension for nanoelectronics by utilizing the internal spin structure of the superconducting Cooper pair as a new degree of freedom. Its basic building blocks are spintriplet Cooper pairs with equally aligned spins, which are promoted by proximity of a conventional superconductor to a ferromagnetic material with inhomogeneous macroscopic magnetization. Using low-energy muon spin rotation experiments, we find an entirely unexpected novel effect: the appearance of a magnetization in a thin layer of a non-magnetic metal (gold), separated from a ferromagnetic double layer by a 50 nm thick superconducting layer of Nb. The effect can be controlled by either temperature or by using a magnetic field to control the state of the remote ferromagnetic elements and may act as a basic building block for a new generation of quantum interference devices based on the spin of a Cooper pair. The ability to manipulate the spin degree of freedom of charge carriers is key to realizing future spin-based electronics. Integrating superconductors into spintronic devices can greatly enhance performance Here we report results obtained by high precision LE-μSR that are in conflict with the current theoretical predictions, and which yield instead a very surprising, hitherto unknown effect. We find a switchable magnetic moment to be induced remotely from the superconductorferromagnet interface, at a nonmagnetic superconductor-normal metal interface about 150 atomic layers away from the ferromagnet. The moment appears, however, not inside the S layer, but in an adjacent normal metal (N) layer. It first appears at the onset of superconductivity and increases as the temperature is lowered. This remote induced magnetic moment also exhibits a spin-valve effect: a significant change in magnitude (~20 times) depending on the mutual orientation of magnetization in the F layers in the NSFF multilayered structure. The effect almost disappears when switching the spin-valve into a collinear state of the F layers' magnetization, when LRTC are absent. This shows that LRTC in the ferromagnetic regions are a crucial ingredient contributing to the effect. For our experiments we use superconducting spin-valve structures Au(x) / Nb(50) / Co(2.4) / Nb(3) / Co(1.2) / IrMn(4) / Co(3) / Ta(7.5) / Si-substrate with numbers indicating the layer thicknesses in nm and x = 5 or 70. They consist of an S/F interface with an additional N layer atop the S, as well as a second F layer separated from the first by a thin normal metal spacer (n) creating a NSFnF device, shown schematically in Fig. To study the flux profile B(y) as a function of depth y in our superconducting spin-valves we use LE-μSR at low temperatures (3-10 K). During a muon experiment, low energy spin-1/2 muons (~4-26 keV) are implanted into the sample at normal incidence to the sample surface. The actual implantation profile depends on the muon energy (see Fig. A typical approach to fitting the muon data for a particular implantation energy is to use standard model functions characterized by the average flux 〈B〉 across that stopping profile The main results of the analysis of our LE-μSR data are presented in Fig. The temperature dependence of this effect which disappears above T c shows a clear correlation with the onset of superconductivity (see Fig. Nevertheless a small contribution of an additional positive magnetization (along the external magnetic field) was detected at the highest muon energy where muons also stop in the FnF region which thus contributes to the signal. Current theories do not account for our observed effect, and two main facts require explanation: 1) the remote magnetization provided by superconductivity of the interlayer, and 2) its dependence on the mutual orientation of the F layers magnetization. Here we propose potential mechanisms to understand these results (see supplementary information for further details). The first question to address is how a thick superconducting layer, itself not being magnetized, may provide the transfer of magnetization (or spin polarization) from the FnF region to the N layer. We envisage two possibilities: the first being spin transfer by crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) and elastic co-tunneling (EC) The second question to address is the observed spin-valve effect: the disappearance of the remote magnetization together with the LRTC at the collinear magnetic configuration. To transfer the observed negative magnetization into the N layer by the CAR or EC mechanism, some negative spin accumulation must exist near the S/F interface. Spin accumulation itself appears as a result of spin current decay In conclusion, our results demonstrate that the induced magnetization is directly connected to the presence of the LRTC, can be experimentally controlled by switching magnetization or temperature, and appears remotely (> 50 nm) from the interfaces that generate these spin triplet correlations. This motivates a re-evaluation of the theoretical mechanism leading to the observation of a measureable magnetization generated by spin triplets. In such spin valves largescale superconducting correlations together with spin-singletspin-triplet conversion provide this nonlocal magnetic effect. Our experiments demonstrate that a significant magnetization can be generated in a normal metal due to its proximity to a superconducting source, attributable to a spin triplet spin current that is controlled by a magnetic switch. This involves no charge current and no driving voltage. The magnetization in the N metal can only arise due to a net accumulation of excess spin. The separation of charge and spin currents and the induction of spin polarized electrons are building blocks of spintronic devices and our experiments provide a novel mechanism by which such devices might be realized. detector. The direction of the exchange field of the (free) F layer closest to the S layer is saturated along the applied field direction, while the second (pinned) F layer is always directed along the pinning direction from the anti-ferromagnet (H pin ). The sample orientations used were either with H pin aligned with H ext (collinear arrangement) or perpendicular to it (orthogonal arrangement). Muon stopping profiles are overlayed on the front face of the sample to indicate the probability distribution for muons with increasing energies between 4 to 24 keV with 4 keV steps. The higher the energy the further the muons penetrate on average into the sample, but this also broadens the profile. Up to 12 keV all muons stop within the N layer and only for higher energies an increasing fraction stops within the S layer. 