Superconductivity in strongly correlated systems is a remarkable phenomenon that attracts a huge interest. The study of this problem is relevant for materials as the high T c oxides, pnictides and heavy fermions. In this work we study a realistic model that includes the relevant physics of superconductivity in the presence of strong Coulomb correlations. We consider a two-band model, since most of these correlated systems have electrons from at least two different atomic orbitals coexisting at their Fermi surface. The Coulomb repulsion is taken into account through a local repulsive interaction. Pairing is considered among quasiparticles in neighbouring sites and we allow for different symmetries of the order parameter. In order to deal with the strong local correlations, we use the well known slave boson approach that has proved very successful for this problem. Here we are interested in obtaining the zero temperature properties of the model, specifically its phase diagram and the existence and nature of superconducting quantum critical points. We show that these can arise by increasing the mixing between the two bands. Since this can be controlled by external pressure or doping, our results have a direct relation with experiments. We show that the superconductor-to-normal transition can be either to a metal, a correlated metal or to an insulator. Also we compare the relative stability of s and d-wave paired states for different regions of parameter space and investigate the BCS-BEC crossover in the two-band lattice model as function of the strength of the pairing interaction. The study of superconductivity in strongly correlated electron systems (SCES) is one of the most exciting area in condensed matter physics. It encompasses many interesting materials and also those which are most promising for practical applications. The high T c cuprates, the iron pnictides and the heavy fermion materials are among the superconductors where the electronic correlations play an important role. The majority of these systems are multiband with electrons from different atomic orbitals coexisting at their common Fermi surface. A model to describe these materials must include this feature and also the strong local Coulomb repulsion among electrons of the narrow d or f -bands. The most favorable conditions for the appearance of superconductivity involve an attractive interaction which pairs quasi-particles in neighboring sites and in this way avoids the strong on-site repulsion. This type of pairing is often attributed to intersite exchange interaction. It allows for different symmetries of the superconducting order parameter and experimentally it is well known that in the case of the cuprates, they adopt a d-wave pairing in which on-site pairing vanishes. An interesting and challenging observation in strongly correlated superconductors is the existence of a new type of quantum phase transition associated with a superconducting quantum critical point (SQCP) In multi-band systems, hybridization, which is due to the overlap of wave functions, is sensitive to doping or external pressure. In this way it can be modified and to act as an important control parameter, which allows exploring the phase diagram of different materials. However, a complete description of a given system requires including additional ingredients in the model. For example, the k-dependence of hybridization is important: it is known both, experimentally The Anderson lattice model (ALM) is generally accepted as an appropriate model for describing both magnetic and superconducting instabilities We focus on different aspects of the problem, with special emphasis on the zero temperature phase diagrams and the existence and nature of any eventual SQCP. We also investigate the crossover in the lattice model from weak coupling BCS superconductivity to Bose-Einstein condensation of pairs, as a function of the inter-site attractive interaction. We obtain both s and d-wave stable SC states in different parameter regions, while most of the authors have studied only d-wave SC in the presence of strong local repulsive interactions It is not our purpose here to apply our results for any specific system but to identify general mechanisms that can destroy superconductivity in strongly correlated multi-band superconductors. Our study is limited to zero temperature properties and since the superconducting quantum critical points we discover are most probably above the upper critical dimension We consider a two-dimensional, inter-site attractive, two-band lattice model where local repulsive correlations are explicitly assumed between the f -electrons. Notice that f -electrons here refer generically to the quasi-particles in the narrow band. They can be either d-electrons as for the Fe and Cu superconductors, or f -electrons as for the actinides and rare-earth heavy fermions. The Hamiltonian of the model is given by, where c † iσ and f † iσ are creation operators for the c and f electrons in the wide, uncorrelated band, and in the narrow band, respectively. These bands are described by the dispersion relations, ǫ c k and ǫ f k , for c and f -electrons in an obvious notation. The i, j refer to lattice sites and σ denotes the spin of the electrons. U is the on-site repulsive interaction (U > 0) among f -electrons. The two types of electrons are hybridized, with a k-independent matrix element V Slave-boson formalism has been introduced to deal with strongly correlated systems under some constraints, considering a projection method that employs slave bosonic particles Let us now come to the derivation of the effective Hamiltonian in the KR slave bosons formalism. Considering a finite on-site interaction U , f -states can be empty, singly or doubly occupied on each site, i.e., the number of f -electrons per site, n f can be In order to describe all these states that the f -electrons can occupy, KR introduced four bosons e, d, p ↑ , and p ↓ , where e, d are associated with empty and doubly occupied sites, respectively, and the bosons p ↑ (p ↓ ) with a singly occupied site with spin component ↑ (↓). For the purpose of establishing a one-to-one correspondence between the original Fock space and the enlarged one, which also contains the bosonic states, the following constraints must be satisfied: where Eq. ( The square root term in Eq. ( Due to translation invariance these expectation values take the same value on all sites. Neglecting any form of magnetic order, the model given by Eq. ( where is the renormalized energy level of the f band, being ǫ f 0 its bare energy level. We have considered homothetic bands, such that γ = t f /t (γ < 1) is the ratio of the hopping terms in the c and f -bands, and the lattice parameter a = 1. Also in the 2D square lattice, η k = cos k x +cos k y and η k = cos k x -cos k y for s-wave and d-wave symmetries, respectively. The c k,σ and f k,σ destruction operators refer to conduction and f -electrons and obey the usual anti-commutation relations, N is the number of lattice sites and ∆ = Z 2 J N k η k f -k,-σ f k,σ represents the superconducting order parameter for s or d-wave symmetry. We have added also the chemical potential μ to fix the total electronic density, n tot . Besides, since we are interested in nonmagnetic solutions, we have neglected the Hartree-Fock correction, U n f to the energy of f -quasiparticles. To add this term simply will shift the energy level of the f -band, which in any case is determined self-consistently. Within a BCS decoupling for the many-body attractive interaction, the quasi-particle excitations in the superconducting phase of the model described by Eq. ( where Following the slave boson mean-field approximation, we replace all boson operators by their expectation values, such that, the Z operator given by Eq. ( respectively, yield a set of equations that will be solved self-consistently. From the solution of the self-consistent coupled equation we study the zero temperature phase diagram of the model taking into account both s-wave and dwave symmetries of the superconducting order parameter. In all figures below, we assume ǫ f 0 = 0, γ = 0.1. Furthermore, we renormalize all the physical parameters by the c-band hopping term t = 1. Figs. Figs. In the s-wave case it substantially reduces the range of occupations for which the system is superconductor. An extremely relevant question concerns the nature of the ground state that appears close to n tot = 2, as superconductivity is destroyed when hybridization increases. Is this a metallic or an insulating state? We delay the answer to this question to further below when we study in more detail the influence of hybridization on superconductivity. ∆ s n tot Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) show the zero temperature superconducting order parameters as functions of hybridization for several values of the filling n tot , considering U = 1 and J = -2 for s and d-wave symmetries, respectively. This phase diagram is of special interest, since hybridization can be tuned using pressure or doping For the s-wave case, Fig. Fig. The results above confirm and expand previous theoretical results For completeness we study the change from a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) to a Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) type of superconductivity that occurs in our model as a function of the strength of the attractive interaction. This may be crucial for the understanding of high T c -superconductivity We have shown above that a strongly correlated, hybridized, multi-band system may exhibit superconductivity of both s-wave and d-wave symmetries in a large region of its phase diagram. In particular, both phases can exist in the same region of the phase diagram. A general criterion to decide the stable phase and that avoids the calculation of the ground state energy is to compare the amplitude of the order parameters associated with different symmetries. Here we check the validity of this criterion by a direct comparison with the calculated ground state energies. The results are shown in Fig. In this work we have studied the superconducting properties of multi-band strongly correlated systems in the presence of nearest neighbors attractive interactions. We considered that the most important interactions leading to superconductivity are those among the quasi-particles in the narrow band (intra-band case). Our model is sufficiently general to account for many systems of actual interest as high-T c , Fe-pnictides and heavy fermion superconductors. Furthermore, it considers different symmetries for the order parameter. In order to treat the strong correlations we have used a generalized slave-boson approach that has proved to be very successful for this problem. Then, we could proceed with a thorough study of our problem that had to be dealt numerically due to its complexity (seven coupled self-consistent equations). Our concern in this paper was mainly with the zero temperature phase diagram of the model as a function of the different parameters of the model. One main motivation was to investigate the existence of SQCP that can be reached and studied in real systems. This lead us to consider the influence of the strength of the mixing between different orbitals on superconductivity. For condensed matter systems this is a parameter that can be easily tuned, either by applying external pressure or doping the system. Indeed, differently from cold atom systems, U and J are difficult to control in condensed matter materials. We have shown that hybridization can drive a superconducting instability to an insulator, a normal metal or a correlated metal with a peak in the DOS at the Fermi level. The superconductor-insulator transition was found to occur only at half-filling, i.e., for n tot = 2. For any other filling the hybridization driven superconductornormal phase transition is always to a metallic state. We have also investigated the effect of the local Coulomb repulsion in the superconducting state, even though this is not a realistic control parameter for condensed matter systems, as pointed out above. Its effect is deleterious to superconductivity, as expected, reducing the region for superfluidity in the phase diagram. We have shown the relevance of the concept of BCS-BEC crossover for our study. We pointed out that it can occur by increasing the strength of the attractive interactions, but probably more relevant, it can occur as a function of band-filling for fixed values of the attractive interaction. We have studied the stability of the superconducting ground states with respect to the normal state and for different symmetries of the order parameters. We have shown that, in general, the s-wave state is preferred for occupations near half-filling, while there is an exchange of stability for a d-wave superconductor as the occupation goes to n tot = 1 or n tot = 3. Finally, it would be very interesting to study this same problem in the presence of inter-band and pair hopping pairings since these pairing are affected dif-ferently by hybridization, and also the Fermi surface deformation 