We investigate the impact of impurity scattering on superconductivity in an anisotropic multiorbital model with spin-orbit coupling which describes the electron fluid at two-dimensional oxide interfaces. As the pairing mechanism is under debate, both conventional and unconventional superconducting states are analyzed. We consider magnetic and nonmagnetic spin-dependent intra-and interorbital scattering and discuss possible microscopic realizations leading to these processes. It is found that, for magnetic disorder, the unconventional superconductor is protected against interband scattering and, thus, more robust than the conventional condensate. In case of nonmagnetic impurities, the conventional superconductor is protected as expected from the Anderson theorem and the critical scattering rate of the unconventional state is enhanced by a factor of four due to the spin-orbit coupling and anisotropic masses in oxide interfaces. To understand the properties of many of the recently discovered superconductors The identification of a pairing state and mechanism constitutes a challenging task, in particular, in a multiband system. The behavior of superconductivity under the influence of different types of disorder can give important hints about the order parameter and pairing glue. In case of conventional s-wave superconductivity, the transition temperature is only very weakly affected by the presence of nonmagnetic impurities except for very strong disorder where the mean-free path l is comparable to or smaller than the Fermi wavelength k -1 F . This is usually referred to as the Anderson theorem However, several studies One example of a recently discovered superconducting 2 system where the multi-orbital character Consequently, it constitutes an important open question whether such an exciting new state of matter is indeed realized in oxide interfaces. An analysis of the impact of disorder on the superconducting states proposed in Ref. 25 is thus required. It is particularly important to perform a quantitative analysis beyond a simple one-orbital toy model calculation since experimental es-timates of the coherence length 2 ξ 70 -105 nm and the mean-free path In this paper, we consider impurity scattering in superconducting LAO/STO interfaces using a two-band model that captures the multi-orbital character, the spin-orbit splitting as well as the anisotropy of the masses. The resulting highly non-circular form of the Fermi surfaces and anisotropic textures of the wavefunctions are conveniently taken into account by introducing patches in the nested regions of the Fermi surfaces. Due to the strong anisotropy, the wavefunctions are approximately constant within each patch yielding results that only depend on a small set of parameters. We find that the spin and orbital polarization of the states at the Fermi surfaces enhances the stability of both the conventional and unconventional superconducting phase against impurity scattering. Furthermore, contrary to common wisdom, the unconventional superconductor is found to be, by a factor of two, more robust against magnetic scattering than the conventional condensate. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the clean model of superconductivity. The impurity configurations consistent with the symmetries of the system and possible microscopic realizations thereof are discussed in Sec. III. In Sec. IV, we present the approximations used to calculate the transition temperature in the disordered system. Finally, the results can be found in Sec. V. To describe superconductivity in oxide heterostructures, we use an effective Hamiltonian of the Ti 3d xz and 3d yz orbitals. To justify why these are the essential degrees of freedom, let us recall that the orbitals relevant for the electronic low-energy physics are the Ti 3d states of the t 2g manifold, i.e. the 3d xy , 3d xz and 3d yz orbitals. The states of the interface electron system derived from the 3d xy orbital mainly localize and possibly order magnetically Let us first focus on the non-interacting part of the effective Hamiltonian of these states, where ψ α,k and ψ † α,k describe the annihilation and creation of quasi-particles of crystal momentum k in state α, with α labeling the four distinct combinations of the two orbitals (3d xz , 3d yz ) and the spin orientations. The Hamiltonian is characterized by two ingredients, Firstly, the different overlap of the two orbitals along the x-and y-direction leads to anisotropic masses described by where the upper (lower) component refers to the 3d xz (3d yz ) orbital and σ 0 is the unit matrix in spin space. Experimentally, large anisotropy ratios m h /m l 15 . . . 30 have been reported Secondly, the properties of the electron liquid are strongly affected by spin-orbit coupling to the Hamiltonian. Here α i and β are real constants and σ i (τ i ) denote Pauli matrices in spin (orbital) space. We see that besides the usual Rashba coupling (∝ α 1 ), the multi-orbital character of the model also allows for the atomic spin-orbit term proportional to β and two Dresselhaus couplings (α 2 , α 3 ). Eq. ( The spin-orbit coupling (3) breaks inversion symmetry and removes the spin-degeneracy of the Fermi surfaces. For chemical potentials close (deviation < β) to the bottom of the spectrum of h, only two out of the four singly degenerate bands of Eq. (1) are relevant. As carrier concentration dependent studies In Ref. 25, it has been shown that the system can have two distinct superconducting instabilities: In case of a conventional, electron-phonon induced, pairing mechanism, the pairing field has the same sign on both Fermi surfaces, which will be referred to as s ++ in the following. If the superconductor is due to the exchange of particle-hole fluctuations, the sign of the order parameter will change between the Fermi surfaces. Correspondingly, this unconventional superconducting state will be denoted by s +-. At low energies, the relevant interaction channel that distinguishes between these two superconductors is pair hopping, i.e., the annihilation of a Kramers pair of electrons from one band and the creation of a Kramers pair in the other. Depending on the sign of the associated coupling constant, either the s ++ or s +-superconductor will be favored. As the sign conventions for this interaction term sensitively depends on the phase convention for the eigenstates of h, the mathematical formulation of the pair hopping interaction will be postponed to Sec. IV B. Here we discuss the possible impurity configurations that can be present in oxide interfaces. The most general (quadratic) Hamiltonian of a given disorder realization W reads where, for convenience, we have switched to a realspace representation with ψ α (x) and ψ † α (x) denoting the Fourier-conjugates of ψ α,k and ψ † α,k , respectively. In what follows, we not only allow for disorder configurations that are consistent with the point group of the system but also take into account impurities that locally break any subset of the point symmetries. We only require these symmetries to be preserved on average. For example, oxygen vacancies that locally break the fourfold rotation symmetry occur with equal probability on bonds along the two perpendicular directions parallel to the interface. This effect is most easily discussed on the level of correlation functions. Focusing on Gaussian-distributed disorder, the entire information about the statistics is contained in the correlator Here . . . dis represents the disorder average only taking into account Hermitian disorder configurations, W = W † . The latter constraint makes the averaging procedure equivalent to a Gaussian integration over a real-valued field. Within the replica approach Here, ψ r α , ψ r α are the Grassmann analogues of ψ α , ψ † α with the additional replica index r = 1, . . . , R, where R denotes the number of replicas. At the end of the calculation of physical quantities, the limit R → 0 has to be taken. We see that the correlator defined in Eq. ( For simplicity, we will restrict our analysis to spatially local disorder, i.e. x j = x j in Eq. ( To derive and classify the disorder configurations relevant for oxide interfaces, we have to analyze how the vertex Γ α1α 1 ,α2α 2 transforms under the point group operations and time-reversal. To begin with the former, consider an arbitrary operation g of the point group. The field operators transform according to where and R s (g) denoting the representation of g on vectors and pseudovectors, respectively. Here J represents the total angular momentum operator. From Eq. ( which immediately yields the transformation behavior of the correlator (5). As mentioned, while a generic given disorder realization W will break all point symmetries of the system, on average the full point symmetry of the normal state has to be restored. In other words, the correlator (5) must transform trivially which leads, within the approximation (7), to the constraint for all operations g. To distinguish between nonmagnetic and magnetic disorder, we have to take into account the properties under time reversal. Let us denote the representation of time reversal on wavefunctions by Θ = T K with unitary T and K representing complex conjugation. Within the basis used in Eq. ( Here we have already taken advantage of the Hermiticity of W which allows for a representation that does not explicitly involve complex conjugation. This is convenient as the restriction on time-reversal symmetric (TRS), σ = 1, or time-reversal antisymmetric (TRA), σ = -1, disorder realizations can then be reformulated in terms of the constraints on the disorder vertex. Note that it is sufficient to impose the condition in the first line as the second line automatically follows from the property which is a direct consequence of the definition (5). Because of the very different behavior of superconductivity in the two cases, we will discuss TRS and TRA disorder separately, which will be referred to as "nonmagnetic" and "magnetic" in the following. To write down the most general disorder vertex Γ α1α 1 ,α2α 2 satisfying Eqs. ( as a consequence of W † = W in Eq. ( characterized by six independent real coupling constants. To gain physical insight into Eq. ( To understand how the different terms can be realized microscopically let us investigate the schematic illustration of the crystal structure in Fig. To see how the latter can occur, let us now assume that a Sr atom is vacant, e.g., at position 4 in Fig. In case of magnetic disorder, i.e. σ = -1 in Eq. ( and five terms, where the magnetic moment is oriented perpendicular to the plane. As before, all coupling constants must be real due to Eq. ( Similarly to the nonmagnetic case, let us discuss some examples of how the terms in Eq. ( If, instead, a magnetic moment develops at a site that does not lie at a high symmetry point with respect to the Ti atoms, the symmetry constraints will be less restrictive. Assuming, e.g., a spin-magnetic moment along the z-axis with s-wave orbital symmetry (i.e. τ 0 σ 3 ) at the oxygen site 3 (3 ) in Fig. In this section, we provide details about how the critical temperature of the superconductors is calculated in the presence of disorder. Readers that are mainly interested in the results of this paper and the physical interpretation thereof can skip this part and directly proceed with Sec. V. For our calculation, it will be convenient to work in the eigenbasis of the normal state Hamiltonian h(k) in Eq. (1). For this purpose, we introduce new operators where φ α,k are the four eigenstates of h(k). By design, the normal state Hamiltonian (1) becomes diagonal, In the new basis, the momentum space representation of the impurity vertex in Eq. ( (20) which depends on all four external momenta. To simplify the analysis, we take advantage of the fact that, within each of the patches of the Fermi surfaces in Fig. We only keep the fermions from the patches as dynamical degrees of freedom characterized by a constant spin and orbital polarization in a given path. This is what we refer to as the "patch approximation". In Eq. ( Using the compact multi-index notation τ ≡ (λ, j, η), the disorder induced interaction (6) finally becomes within the patch approximation where, using the expansion ( In the second line of Eq. ( ∈ {0, 1}. Here we will not specify the explicit form of D. Let us only note that it crucially depends on details of the band structure. To see this, consider, e.g., the scattering process of an electron from (1, 2, +) to (2, 2, +) with an electron that starts and does not leave the patch (1, 4, -) in Fig. We emphasize that the vertex Γ PA contains the full information about disorder scattering within the patch approximation, combining knowledge about the microscopic structure (see Sec. III) of the impurities involved and the form of the eigenstates (see Fig. To have a well-defined representation of the superconducting order parameter in the eigenbasis of the normalstate Hamiltonian, it is essential to constrain the phases of the eigenstates φ α,k in Eq. ( which reads in the eigenbasis (18) as Here it has already been taken into account that we focus on order parameters that have no Fermi-surface offdiagonal elements where, for convenience, we have switched to the patch notation. The phase factor -i is actually arbitrary but has been chosen to reproduce the conventions of Ref. 25. Note that the sign factor η is necessary due to the property Θ 2 = -1 of the time-reversal operator. Imposing Eq. ( To classify the possible superconducting phases, it is essential to know how the order parameter transforms under the elements of the point group of the system. Applying Eq. ( Taking into account the phase convention (26) and using one more time that the Fermi surfaces are singly degenerate, it follows that the representation (25) of the order parameter transforms according to (again switching to the patch notation) where (λ , j , η ) denotes the patch obtained when applying the point group operation g on the subset of momentum space belonging to patch (λ, j, η). General symmetry and energetic arguments The microscopic calculation of Ref. 25 yields ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 and ∆ 1 = -∆ 2 corresponding to the s ++ and s +-superconductors as possible candidates. As already discussed in Sec. II, the crucial interaction leading to these two instabilities is pair-hopping, which is given by Within the phase convention (26), taking V < 0 (V > 0) leads to the conventional s ++ (unconventional s +-) superconductor. To determine the transition temperature of the superconductor, we first decouple the pair-hopping interaction ( Let us denote the free energy for a given disorder realization W in Eq. ( as ∆ λ → 0, where the coefficients are given by × j ,η ,p η f(λ ,j ,η ),p (τ ) f(λ ,j ,-η ),-p (τ ) 0 dis (33) in the path integral representation. Here . . . 0 denotes the expectation value with respect to the action associated with the normal state Hamiltonian (19). The transition temperature and the order parameter then simply follow from diagonalizing the quadratic form in Eq. ( From the diagrammatic representation, one observes that the impurity vertex Γ PA τ1τ 1 ,τ2τ 2 does not enter as a full tensor but only in form of the index combinations and in the self-energy and vertex correction, respectively. Here the patch momenta p and p have been added for later convenience and τ K = (λ, j, -η) denotes the Kramers partner of patch τ = (λ, j, η). In Eq. ( Note that this crucially reduces the complexity of impurity scattering as the tensor Γ PA with 16 4 possible index combinations is replaced by two scattering matrices S and V with only 16 2 entries each. More importantly, we directly see that the momenta p and p can freely run over all values within the associated patches since momentum conservation is fulfilled in the diagrams of Eqs. (34) and (35) for arbitrary and independent values of p and p . We emphasize that this crucial simplification is a consequence of the superconducting state being characterized by Cooper pairs with vanishing center of mass momentum and the absence of diagrams with crossed impurity lines in the diagrammatic expansion of Fig. In the explicit summation and evaluation of the diagrams, which can be found in the Appendix, the component of the patch momentum perpendicular to the Fermi surface is constrained by an energetic cutoff Λ. The longitudinal limits of the patches is absorbed by introducing the density of states ρ τ per patch. For simplicity, we assume that the density of states does not depend on τ and introduce ρ F = 8ρ τ , the density of states per Fermi surface. In Sec. V, we will also comment on the modifications in case of an imbalance in the density of states on the different Fermi surfaces. Finally, we note that the two scattering matrices in Eqs. (34) and ( Let us begin our discussion with the clean case. Calculating the Ginzburg-Landau expansion in the absence of any disorder reproduces the results of Ref. 25: For attractive (repulsive) pair hopping, i.e., V < 0 (V > 0) in Eq. ( with γ denoting Euler's constant. To proceed with the impact of disorder on superconductivity, we first focus on the case of nonmagnetic disorder which is characterized by the vertex in Eq. ( In case of repulsive pair hopping, V > 0, we still find that, as in the clean case, the s +-superconductor condenses. In accordance with the usual expectation that unconventional superconductors are less robust against impurity scattering, the transition temperature is now reduced by disorder. Despite the complicated form of the vertex (16), it turns out that the impurity distribution only enters the Ginzburg-Landau expansion and, thus, the transition temperature, in form of the combined scattering rate Note that γ III A1 , which describes the admixture of s-wave and spin-orbit disorder on the same site, does not enter at all. This follows from the strong orbital polarization of the wavefunctions in the patches (see Fig. The transition temperature T c is found from demanding that the corresponding eigenvalue in the disorder averaged Ginzburg-Landau expansion (32) changes sign. This leads to (see Appendix) where ψ 0 denotes the digamma function and Γ c = e -γ T c,0 /ρ F has been introduced for convenience. Eq. ( for Γ/Γ c → 0. The functional behavior for general values of Γ ≤ Γ c is shown in Fig. The enhancement Γ c = 4Γ c,0 of the critical scattering rate of s +-as compared to the reference model is due to the locking between the crystal momentum and the spin/orbital degree of freedom. To illustrate this point, consider the simplest case of spin-trivial s-wave impurities, i.e. only take the first term in Eq. ( Let us next discuss magnetic disorder which is, in its most general form, defined by the impurity vertex in Eq. (17). Similarly to the nonmagnetic case, the impurity distribution only enters in form of the single variable in the expansion (32) of the average free energy. This shows that also the impact of magnetic scattering on superconductivity does not depend on microscopic details of the impurities involved. It is even independent of whether the magnetic moments are aligned in-plane (first three terms in Eq. ( We find that, as before, V < 0 (V > 0) leads to pure s ++ (s +-) superconductivity. However, in case of magnetic impurities, both superconductors are affected by disorder with the transition temperature again following from Eq. (38) where Γ c = 2Γ c,0 and Γ c = 4Γ c,0 in case of s ++ and s +-, respectively. The resulting dependence T c /T c,0 = f (Γ/Γ c ) of the transition temperature on the scattering strength Γ in Eq. ( Interestingly enough, the unconventional s +-superconductor is (by a factor of 2) more robust against magnetic scattering than the conventional s ++ state. To understand this, we have again analyzed which type of scattering processes act pair breaking in the two superconductors. One finds that s ++ is suppressed both by interand intraband scattering, whereas the s +-state is only sensitive to intraband processes. This leads to the relative factor of 2 mentioned above. We refer to Ref. 18 for another example of the stability against TRA interband scattering of a superconductor with an order parameter that changes sign between two Fermi surfaces. The additional factor of 2 with respect to Γ c,0 is, again, due to reduction of possible scattering processes resulting from the spin and orbital polarization of the patch wavefunctions. Finally, a few remarks are in order that refer both to magnetic and nonmagnetic scattering. Firstly, taking the spin and orbital polarization of the patch wavefunctions to be perfect constitutes a very good approximation as can be seen in Fig. Secondly, having slightly different densities of states on the two Fermi surfaces would not crucially alter our conclusions. Again, the results would become less universal, since, already in the clean system, we would get an admixture of s ++ and s +-superconductivity. Then, e.g., for V < 0 and nonmagnetic disorder, the order parameter of the resulting superconductor would have identical signs on both Fermi surfaces but slightly different magnitudes. We would find that this superconductor is destroyed by disorder at some finite but very large critical scattering strength. Furthermore, we emphasize that we have discussed the most general model of local, δ-correlated nonmagnetic and magnetic disorder here. Any more specific model is thus covered by Eqs. ( To summarize, we have considered a model for the itinerant electrons at oxide interfaces that includes the Ti 3d xz and 3d yz orbitals which are expected to be most relevant for describing superconductivity To describe disorder scattering, we have taken the most general δ-correlated impurity distribution that is consistent with the spatial symmetries of the system (point group C 4v and 2D translation) as well as with timereversal symmetry. Note that these symmetries only have to be restored on average such that a single impurity can locally break any symmetry of the system. The combination of spin and orbital degrees of freedom leads to many different possible scattering channels as can be seen in the impurity vertices in Eqs. ( As very different behavior is expected, we have studied the impact of magnetic and nonmagnetic disorder on the two superconductors s ++ and s +-separately. In all cases, we find that, below the critical scattering rates, the form of the superconducting order parameter is unaffected by disorder. Despite the multitude of possible scattering channels, the information of the impurity statistics only enters in form of the combined scattering rates Γ defined in Eqs. ( This appendix provides details on the calculation of the coefficients d λλ (T ) in the disorder-averaged expansion of the free energy in terms of the order parameters as defined in Eqs. (32) and (33), and diagrammatically represented in Fig. In the presence of disorder, the full propagator (cf. where τ (p) denotes the disperson in patch τ . We consider weak disorder such that diagrams with crossed impurity lines are suppressed by a factor (k F l) -1 and calculating the self energy in Born approximation is sufficient. These assumptions result in the expression for the self energy in patch τ , where ρ τ is the density of states in patch τ , and the corresponding scattering matrix S τ τ of scattering processes contributing to the self energy in the patch approximation is defined in Eq. (34). As introduced in Sec. IV C, we assume that the density of states does not depend on τ and use ρ F = 8ρ τ in the remainder of this appendix. The expansion coefficients d λλ (T ) in the presence of disorder contain contributions of all possible noncrossing combinations of the allowed scattering processes of Kramers partners (cf. the definition of V τ τ in Eq. ( + . . . For within the patch approximation, the impurity vertex is a constant V τ τ for all scattering processes of Kramers partners from patch τ to patch τ , the momentum integrals in Eq. (A.3) decouple and it is useful to define which evaluates to , (A.5) where we used τ K (-p) = τ (p). Exploiting the patch approximation and following the notation introduced in Sec. IV C, the coefficients in the Ginzburg-Landau expansion can be written in the form d λλ = -δ λλ T 2 ωn j,η c (λ,j,η) (ω n ) -T 2 ωn j,j η,η ηη c (λ,j,η) (ω n )V (λ,j,η)(λ ,j ,η ) c (λ ,j ,η ) (ω n ) -T 2 ωn λ j,j ,j η,η ,η ηη c (λ,j,η) (ω n )V (λ,j,η)(λ ,j ,η ) c (λ ,j ,η ) (ω n )V (λ ,j ,η )(λ ,j ,η ) c (λ ,j ,η ) (ω n ) + . . . , This result can be staightforwardly applied to other multiband superconductors, if an analogous partitioning of the Fermi surface allows to formulate the problem in terms of scattering rates that are only characterized by respective patch indices and, apart from that, do not depend on the momenta of the scattered states. We investigate the different roles of intraband and interband scattering processes for nonmagnetic and magnetic disorder by artificially discriminating intraband (λ = λ ) and interband (λ = λ ) scattering processes by setting S (λ,j.η)(λ ,j ,η ) → χ intra S (λ,j,η)(λ ,j ,η ) , λ = λ , χ inter S (λ,j,η)(λ ,j ,η ) , λ = λ , (A.10) V (λ,j.η)(λ ,j ,η ) → χ intra V (λ,j,η)(λ ,j ,η ) , λ = λ , χ inter V (λ,j,η)(λ ,j ,η ) , λ = λ . (A.11)