The electronic structure of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O, a parent compound of the newly discovered titanium-based oxypnictide superconductors, is studied by photon energy and polarization dependent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). The obtained band structure and Fermi surface agree well with the band structure calculation of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O in the non-magnetic state, which indicating that there is no magnetic order in Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O and the electronic correlation is weak. Polarization dependent ARPES results suggest the multi-band and multi-orbital nature of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O. Photon energy dependent ARPES results suggest that the electronic structure of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O is rather two-dimensional. Moreover, we find a density wave energy gap forms below the transition temperature and reaches 65 meV at 7 K, indicating that Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O is likely a weakly correlated CDW material in the strong electron-phonon interaction regime. Layered compounds of transition-metal elements always show interesting and novel electric and magnetic properties and have been studied extensively. The discovery of basic superconducting layers, such as the CuO 2 plane 1 in cuprates and Fe 2 An 2 (An = P, As, S, Se, Te) layers 2 in iron based superconductors, have opened new fields in physics and chemistry of layered superconductors. Recently another class of layered compounds built from alternatively stacking of special conducting octahedral layers Ti 2 Pn 2 O (Pn=Sb, As) and certain charge reservoir layers [e.g., Na 2 , Ba, (SrF) 2 , (SmO) 2 ] have attracted much attention Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O is a sister compound to BaTi 2 Sb 2 O, which shows a phase transition at Ts~115 K as characterized by a sharp jump in resistivity and a drop in spin susceptibility 3 . The microscopic mechanism for this phase transition has not been determined, but it has been suggested to arise from the SDW or CDW instability driven by the strongly nested electron and hole Fermi surfaces (Ref. 18-23). However, the nature of the phase transition and its correlation with the superconductivity are still unknown. A recent DFT calculation In this article, we investigate the electronic structure of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O with angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Our polarization and photon energy dependent studies reveal the multi-orbital and weak three-dimensional nature of this material. The obtained band structure and Fermi surface agree well with the band structure calculation of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O in the non-magnetic state, which indicating that there is no magnetic order in Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O and the electronic correlation is weak. Temperature dependent ARPES results reveal that a density wave energy gap forms below the transition temperature and reaches 65 meV at 7 K, indicating that Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O is likely a weakly correlated CDW material in the strong electron-phonon interaction regime. Band Structure. The electronic structure of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O at 15 K is presented in Fig. The valence band structures of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O along Γ-M and Γ-X are present in Figs. , ∝ Ψ | ̂ |Ψ Since the final state of photoelectrons could be approximated by a plane wave with its wave vector in the mirror plane, is always even with respect to the mirror plane in our experimental geometry. In the s (or p) geometry, ̂ is odd (or even) with respect to the mirror plane. Thus considering the spatial symmetry of the Ti 3d orbitals, when the analyzer slit is along the high-symmetry directions, the photoemission intensity of specific even (or odd) component of a band is only detectable with the p (or s) polarized light. For example, with respect to the mirror plane (the xz plane), the even orbitals (d xz , , and ) and the odd orbitals (d xy ) and d yz ) could be only observed in the p and s geometries, respectively. The photoemission intensity plots of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O along the Γ-M and Γ-X high symmetry directions are shown in Fig. Kz Dependence. The calculated electronic structure of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O shows typical two dimensional character by the nearly kz-independent Fermi surface sheets around the X and M points, while the electronic structure exhibit significant k z dispersion at Γ point The theoretic predicted Fermi surface of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O shows cylinder Fermi sheets near M and X and strong k z dependent Fermi sheet near Γ Intriguingly, the photoemission spectrum of the electron band β around Γ shows a broad line shape without a sharp quasiparticle peak near E F , and the spectral weight increases slightly with deceasing temperature [Fig. It is crucial to understand the nature of the phase transition in the parent compounds of the newly discovered titanium-based oxypnictide superconductors, which is an essential step towards a thorough understanding of their superconducting mechanism. The SDW origin of the instability would favor an unconventional superconductivity with a possibly sign-changing s-wave pairing, while the CDW origin would suggest more conventional superconductivity with a simple s-wave pairing. Previous experimental and theoretical studies have evoked much controversy on the nature of the possible density wave transition. Our photoemission results are consistent with the density wave origin of the phase transition in Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O. Moreover, considering the qualitative agreement of the experimental results and the calculated electronic structure In summary, our experimental band structure agrees qualitatively well with the calculation 23 in the nonmagnetic state, excluding the existence of possible magnetic order in Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O. Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O shows obvious multi-band and multi orbital nature, which resemble the iron-based superconductors. The electron band at M and the hole band at X show weak k z dispersion, consistent with its layered crystal structure. We observe a large density wave gap of 65 meV which forms near the X point at 7 K, indicating that Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O is likely a CDW material. The weak renormalization of the overall band structure indicates weak electron-electron correlation, while the broad lineshape and large energy gap and spectral weight transfer suggest the system is likely in the strong electron-phonon interaction regime. Sample synthesis. Single crystals of Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O were synthesized by the self-flux method. A mixture of Na, Sb, Ti and Ti 2 O 3 with molar ratio of 18:18:1:4 is prepared and put into an aluminum oxide crucible sealed inside a Ta tube. The mixture is gradually heated to 800 °C and quenched to room temperature. Afterwards the mixture is heated at 1100 °C for 2 hours and cooled to 500 °C at 5 °C/hour before quenched to room temperature. ARPES measurement. The polarization and photon energy dependent ARPES data were taken at the surface and interface spectroscopy beamline of the Swiss Light Source (SLS), The temperature dependent ARPES data were taken with an in-house setup at Fudan University. All data were collected with Scienta R4000 electron analyzers. The overall energy resolution was 15 meV or better, and the typical angular resolution was 0.3 • . The samples were cleaved in-situ and measured under ultrahigh vacuum better than 3×10 -11 mbar.