We propose a new approach to understand the origin of the pseudogap in the cuprates. The nearsimultaneous softening of a large number of different q-bosons yields an ordering bottleneck, wherein the growth of magnetic correlations with decreasing temperature is anomalously slow, leading to extended ranges of short-range order. This effect is not tied to the Fermi level, but driven by a Van Hove singularity (VHS) nesting that is strongest near a temperature TV HS that scales as the energy separation between the Fermi energy and the energy of the VHS peak. By identifying TV HS as the pseudogap onset temperature T * , we explain many characteristic features of the pseudogap, including the observed transport anomalies and the termination of the pseudogap phase when EV HS crosses the Fermi level. The condensation bottleneck (CB) provides a new pathway for understanding strong correlation effects in the cuprates. We find that LSCO lies close to an anomalous disorder-free spin glass quantum critical point, where the frustration is due to the CB. To study this point we develop an approach to interpolate between different cuprates. Evidence is growing that the 'pseudogap phase' found in cuprates is actually home to one or more competing phases, including a variety of stripe, spin-, or charge-density wave (S/CDW) phases. Similar effects have arisen in the past. In Overhauser's theory of CDWs in alkali metals, We find that the phase diagram of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO) is different from that of other cuprates. To explore the transition between them, we simplify the first principles dispersions to equivalent 'reference family' dispersions, depending only on the three nearest neighbor hopping parameters, t, t , and t (Supplementary Material Section I). We find that all cuprates fall along a single cut in t /tt /t-space, namely t = -t /2, with LSCO characterized by a smaller value of t . A proper understanding of the CB involves two different issues: firstly, since Fermi surface (FS) nesting typically singles out only a few discrete q-vectors, what causes many q-vectors to soften together? Secondly, a formalism needs to be developed to handle the effects of bottleneck. Both of these issues are addressed here. Remarkably, in cuprates we find that the underlying source of strong mode coupling can be traced back to the Lindhard susceptibility χ 0 . In a typical calculation of classical or quantum phase transitions To properly incorporate fluctuation effects, this 'Stoner denominator' is then typically reduced to Ornstein-Zernicke (OZ) in terms of various deviations from the critical point (in q, ω, and a 'tuning parameter' which is proportional to ξ -2 , where ξ is the correlation length). Here z is a dynamic exponent and q is measured from the Q where the susceptibility has a peak. An important result of our calculation is that in cuprates, this OZ form must be treated carefully, since the coefficients of the deviation parameters can be strong functions of temperature and doping. In particular, we find that the susceptibility inverse curvature (coefficient of q 2 ) can diverge due to a competition between conventional Fermi-surface nesting and Van Hove singularity (VHS) nesting. Whereas many properties of a Landau Fermi liquid are determined by their values at the Fermi level, the susceptibility is an exception, having both bulk and Fermi surface contributions. While the FS part contributes a ridge to χ 0 that is a map of the FS at q = 2k F The imaginary part of the susceptibility can be thought of as the DOS of electronic bosons, electron-hole (e-h) pairs, which may become excitons when a Coulomb interaction is turned on. If the renormalized dispersion of a single electron is k with wave vector k, then an e-h pair at wave vector q has a dispersion ω q (k) = k+qk = -2 q-(k), where q± (k) = ( k ± k+q )/2, and a Pauli blocking factor ∆f k,q = f ( k+q )f ( k ). Then the corresponding pair DOS is D q (ω) = k ∆f k,q δ(ωω q (k)) = χ 0 (q, ω). For LSCO, the dominant pairs are those at q = Q ≡ (π, π), the AF nesting vector. The associated dispersion ω Q (π, π), plotted in Fig. The FS contribution thus arises from ω ∼ 0, while bulk contributions arise from peaks in the bosonic DOS, such as the b-VHS peak in χ 0 near (π, π). However, while the b-VHS is pinned at ω = 0, Fig. To demonstrate the close similarity to VHS effects, we also plot two characteristic features of the VHS. The crossover scales with both k B T V HS = E F -E V HS , dark red dashed curve in Fig. In conventional mode-coupling calculations Mode coupling modifies the bare Coulomb interaction U , producing a vertex-renormalized effective U , U sp = ΓU with Γ = 1/(1 + λ), while λ is found self-consistently from [see Methods section below] where A 0 = 12u/χ 0 (Q 0 , 0), χ 0 (Q 0 , 0) = max q [χ 0 (q, 0)], u is the mode-coupling parameter, and U c = 1/χ 0 (Q 0 , 0). Here, χ -1 0 , denoted by X -, is the variable of integration and we introduce a corresponding susceptibility density of states (SDOS) N -. In Section III of Supplementary Materials, we show that Eq. 3 is closely related to excitonic Bose condensation, with λ proportional to the effective number of bosons. Corresponding temperature dependence of correlation length ξ th . For x = 0, the red solid line with filled dots is ξ th calculated from the solid lines in (a), while the thin green dot-dashed line is based on the dashed lines in (a), showing that ξ th is relatively insensitive to the structures away from threshold. In contrast, the blue dashed line is based on the shape of the SDOS at T = 2000K, but shifted and renormalized to match the SDOS at lower T , illustrating sensitivity to the leading edge structure. The black dotted line illustrates the scaling ξ th ∝ T -1/2 . (c) Calculated ξ th replotted for x = 0 (red solid line with filled circles) compared with ξ (blue filled circles) and with experiment (green dot-dot-dashed line) Figure 2 ) is q-independent. In reality, the curvature increases with q, and the correlation length ξ obtained from the renormalized susceptibility half-width is typically a factor of 2 larger. Fig. Figure To understand the origin of the CB in region II, it is necessary to explore hopping parameter space away from the physical cuprates. To do this, we introduce the notion of reference states: states with simplified hopping parameters (only t, t , and t nonzero) but which match the phase diagram of the real cuprates in a well-defined way [Supplementary Material Section I]. This allows us to tune the system between LSCO and Bi2212, and explore phase space beyond these limits. We study two important cuts in t /tt /t space, a minimal cut (t = 0) and the Pavarini-Andersen [PA] cut (t = -t /2) -the latter seems to best capture the physics of the cuprates. By tuning t we unveil the origin of the CB as a localization-delocalization crossover tied to the crossover from (π, π)-to FS-nesting. As a byproduct, we gain insight into why LSCO is so different from other cuprates, and how cuprates evolve from the pure Hubbard limit (t = 0). Figure From the relationship between ξ th and the step height A 2 , Eq. 11 below, we see that a diverging A 2 will cause ξ th → 0. The divergence arises when the susceptibility at (π, π) crosses over from a maximum to a local minimum. In the latter case, the maximum intensity of χ(q, 0) is spread along a 'ring' in q-space surrounding (π, π), so that the inverse susceptibility resembles a 'Mexican hat'. Approximating the χ -1 -dispersion by a Mexican hat form Note that the SDOS-divergence resembles a 1D VHS in the conventional DOS, even though here the 1-D direction is the radial direction away from (π, π). The divergence of χ along a ring can be thought of as a 2D analog of Overhauser's effect A. Cuprate Pseudogap Figure 2(g) captures an essential aspect of pseudogap physics: an extended regime of phase space where correlations remain only short ranged. The reason that the C-I transition is so anomalous is that it is also an incoherent-coherent transition, with the bare susceptibility for small |t | dominated, not by FS nesting, but by a broad peak at (π, π) associated with a b-VHS, crossing over to conventional (coherent) FS nesting only for t < t c or for larger x. Mode coupling associated with self-consistent vertex corrections leads to a regime where the local and extended behaviors become strongly entangled, leading to a collapse of the magnetic correlation length and very slow growth of magnetic fluctuations. While the CB was explained by tuning parameter space, the results bear a striking resemblance to the temperature and doping evolution of the pseudogap phase. Experimentally, both LSCO and YBCO display C (π, π) long-range AFM order at x = 0, with T N dropping rapidly with doping below x = 0.03, crossing over into a regime of I (π, πδ) fluctuations and low-T spin glass behavior. Given the proximity of LSCO to the C-I transition, finding a quantitative model of its doping phase diagram may prove difficult. We can however note one plausible scenario. It has been predicted This broad T -and doping-regime of only short-range SDW order is a key characteristic of pseudogap physics. Indeed, T V HS is typically close to the measured pseudogap temperature T * in most cuprates. Identifying T * with T V HS can explain a number of puzzling features. In particular, it has been found that the pseudogaps in Bi2201 and Bi2212 terminate when T V HS → 0, i.e., at the conventional VHS, The presence of an excitonic VHS contribution to the incoherent susceptibility has a number of further consequences for cuprate physics. First, the VHS onset near T V HS combined with the C-I crossover at T coh ∼ T V HS /3 can explain the anomalous transport properties found near the pseudogap. Thus, the pink shaded region in Fig. The excitonic instability should be maximal when the susceptibility is approximately electron-hole (e-h) symmetrical in doping, and at T = 0 this happens when the VHS is at the Fermi level. The rapid thermal evolution of the (π, π)-VHS peak should be contrasted with the much smaller change in conventional VHS effects found near Γ. In particular, the DOS peak is dominated by near-FS physics, and hence displays a much weaker doping dependence, green long-dashed line in Fig. An additional consequence is that in cuprates with small t hopping, such as LSCO, the anomalous VHS susceptibility can dominate even at T = 0, leading to strong deviations from FS-nesting. Thus, in most of Fig. We recall that our self-energy formalism where -= ( k -k+q )/2 = -2t ̃ -. Thus, the difference in energy between any two spin configurations is a quantity of order J, so that when T ∼ J, the system gains entropy by mixing different q-states, and long-range AF order is destroyed. For more insight into the strong coupling limit, we note that in the two-particle self-consistent approach which leads to a saturation of U sp as U → ∞ (or < n ↑ n ↓ >∼ 1/U ). In our calculation, this saturation arises naturally, since U sp can never exceed U c . Quantum critical points (QCPs) in strongly correlated materials are often discussed in terms of deconfined QCPs (DQCPs), involving a non-Landau transition between two types of competing order, where a new form of excitation emerges exactly at the DQCP. This has been refined for cuprates into an underlying competition between Mott physics and Fermi liquid physics, masked by a low-energy order parameter of the FL In conclusion, we find that the pseudogap is driven by tendencies toward magnetic order at or near q = (π, π). Strong mode coupling effects drive the characteristic anomalies of the pseudogap, in particular the existence of a broad doping-and temperature-range of only short-to intermediate-range order. Finally, the underlying cause of the strong mode coupling is localization in particular the fact that the extended-to-localized transition is not a simple crossover but a competition between FS-dominated and non-FS dominated (VHS-dominated) physics. This competition across a manifold of q-states leads to a condensation bottlneck, which requires a new formalism for dealing with multi-q mode softening. The close similarity to heavy Fermion physics should be noted. This can be restated slightly differently. The original (t-only) Hubbard model is particularly difficult to solve, as three separate instabilities are simultaneously present at half filling: the Mott instability, FS nesting, and VHS nesting. A finite t shifts the latter two to finite doping. For large |t | the three instabilities become well separated, but for small |t | the two nesting instabilities overlap and compete, leading to frustration and pseudogap physics. Significantly, we approach the problem from the intermediate-coupling side, suggesting that the full crossover from half-filling to large doping could be explored. In turn, this sheds light on strong correlation effects in the cuprates, in particular Mott vs Slater physics. The localization associated with Mott physics has several manifestations. One is that coherent hopping is restricted to shorter range. That is consistent with stronger effects found at smaller t . Particularly for Mott physics, a second aspect is the breakdown of hybridization. The Cu-O hybridization in the cuprates spoils Mott physics [half filling does not imply one electron on each Cu]. Zhang-Rice singlet formation can be considered as a breakdown of hybridization [pure oxygen states at the top of the lower magnetic band, pure Cu at the bottom of the upper magnetic band], and is found more generally for (π, π) AFM fluctuations near half filling in a three-band model Rice et al. In Anderson's RVB picture, he envisaged a regime of Mott physics where the FS played a neglible role; instead, most experimental studies find clear evidence for a well-defined FS, with competing phases associated with FS nesting, and a QCP associated with FS reconstruction. Our results have a strong bearing on these competing scenarios: in parameter space, t is a relevant parameter tuning the system away from quasilocalized physics near t = 0, where the FS has a negligible role, into a delocalized regime dominated by FS physics. The crossover is marked by a regime of strong disorder, where the correlation length remains small down to very low T . Most families of cuprates lie on the delocalized side of this crossover, and hence are most easily understood from a FL-type picture. LSCO appears to be on the localized side of the crossover, but close to it, consistent with experiment. The VHS has been predicted to play a significant role in many materials, particularly in lower dimensional systems where χ diverges, but clear evidence for this remains sparse. Thus, VH nesting was introduced as a possible cause of CDWs in dichalcogenides It will be interesting to examine how the present results are modified by effects of disorder and interlayer coupling. An important issue is the extent to which the total number of QPs is conserved. More specifically, what is the relation between the number of incoherent electrons (1 -Z)N and the effective number of excitons N ef f ? Proximity to a spin glass phase could explain the failure of recent attempts to create an 'artificial cuprate from related nickelate compounds, and may suggest a path to improved analog states. Our calculation is a form of many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) based on Hedin's scheme. The scheme involves four elements: electrons are described by Green's functions G with DFT-based dispersions renormalized by a self-energy Σ; electronic bosons [electron-hole pairs] are described by a spectral weight [susceptibility] χ renormalized by vertex corrections Γ. Neglecting vertex corrections, the self energy can be calculated as a convolution of G and W = U 2 χ, the GW approximation. This approach has been used to solve the energy gap problem in semiconductors, where the Γ correction leads to excitons via the solution of a Bethe-Salpeter equation, and in extending DMFT calculations to incorporate more correlations [e.g., DMFT+GW, etc.]. Our approach here is to extend our previous GW calculations [quasiparticle-GW or QPGW 50 ] to include vertex corrections. In QPGW we introduce an auxiliary function , where the dressed, or QP dispersion is , and DF T k is the bare, or DFT dispersion. G Z behaves like the Green's function of a Landau-type QPa free electron with renormalized parameters that describes the low-energy dressed electronic excitations. However, this is a non-Fermi liquid type QP, since the frequency-integral of Im(G Z ) is Z and not unity. That is, the Z-QP describes only the coherent part of the electronic dispersion, and is not in a 1:1 correspondence with the original electrons. The importance of such a correction can be readily demonstrated. Since a Z-QP has only the weight Z of a regular electron, the susceptibility [a convolution of two Gs] is weaker by a factor of Z 2 than an ordinary bare susceptibility. To match this effect in the Stoner criterion requires introducing an effective U ef f = ZU . In contrast, MBPT calculations in semiconductors typically set the GW-corrected Green's function to G -1 GW = ω -QP k , where QP k is the average GW-renormalized dispersion The self-consistent parameter λ is found from a Matsubara sum of the susceptibility where N is the number of q-points, and the summation in Eq. 5 can be transformed: with a the in-plane lattice constant, The term λ1 introduces a small, nonsingular correction 33 to Eq. 5, which we neglect. In order to explore the role of susceptibility plateaus for realistic band dispersions, the self-consistency equation is evaluated numerically. For this purpose, we note that since χ -1 0 has dimensions of energy, a plot of χ -1 0 (q, 0) resembles a dispersion map. Hence we can define a SDOS: ) is controlled by anisotropy of the plateau edge between (π, πδ) and (πδ, πδ), while the sharp trailing edge corresponds to the local maximum of χ -1 0 at (π, π). For the ANN peak, its leading edge scarcely leaves any feature in N -, but a local maximum translates into a large peak in N -. Finite temperature, T = 100K (blue line) rounds off the cusp in χ -1 0 , Fig. Once N -has been calculated, Eq. 3 can be evaluated numerically. The singular part of the integral is treated analytically, and the remainder numerically, with u and U approximated as constants, u = 0.8eV -1 , while U = 2 eV unless otherwise noted. It is convenient to fix the SDOS at some temperature T , and then solve Eq. 3 for T (ξ th , T ), with self-consistency requiring T (ξ th , T ) = T . When the OZ form of χ is assumed, N -becomes a constant, which we denote N a , and Eq. 3 leads to long range order at T = 0 only, with correlation length ξ th /a = 1/ √ 4πN a δ given by where δ = U c -U sp , U c = 1/χ 0 (Q 0 , 0), T 2 = πA 2 λ/6Γua 2 , A i is the coefficient of q i , and q c is a wave number cutoff. The origin of the anomalous region II for undoped LSCO, Fig. where X c is the maximum of X -. The last term, which we denote I p , has two distinct limits. If X p << δ, then I p → N p X p /δ. This is equivalent to assuming that the plateau has a flat top, in which case N -can be represented as a δ-function, N -= N p X p δ(X --U c ), with N p X p the excess height of N at threshold, proportional to the area of the plateau at T = 0. As T decreases, δ also decreases, and the opposite limit for I p becomes appropriate, δ << X p , in which case I p = N p ln(X p /δ). From Eq. 3, I p ∼ 1/δ translates into ξ th ∼ 1/T 1/2 , dotted line in Fig. In this paper susceptibilities are calculated at intermediate coupling level, using Z-corrected firstprinciples dispersions to describe the coherent part of the quasiparticle-GW dressed carriers. Also, when referring to Figures or Equations in the main text, we will use a leading 'M', as in Fig. To understand differences between cuprates, and to gauge their proximity to the pure Hubbard model, it is necessary to add a third axis to the usual T -and dopingphase diagrams. Here we introduce a technique to reduce differences in band structure to the variation of a single hopping parameter. While DFT has been liberating in that it provides a parameter-free starting point for studies of materials, it can also be constraining, in that each material is defined as a single point in material parameter space, and it is hard to define connections between the members of a family of materials, such as cuprates or pnictides. What is needed is a form of materials genome, with an algorithm defining the relatedness of materials, the evolution from one material to another, and the probable route for extending the family to new materials. Here we propose such an algorithm for the cuprates -a 'cuprate genome'. The cuprates are particularly simple, in that their properties are dominated by a single CuO 2 band crossing the Fermi level, so their parameter space consists of hopping parameters, traditionally t, t , t , ..., which can be determined, e.g., by a Wannier-type downfolding of the DFT bands. In fact, since t sets an energy scale, the band dispersion is determined by the ratios t /t, t /t, ... In genetics, a family would be defined as a group lying on a low-dimensional surface in parameter space. The simplest genetics is associated with changes of a single gene, called Mendelian. Similarly, the simplest material family would lie along a single line in material space. We show that the cuprates correspond to such a Mendelian family, by introducing reference families depending only on t /t, t /t, and show that the cuprates lie along a particular cut in this 2D-space. To do this, we introduce a definition of equivalence: ideally, two materials are equivalent if they have the same phase diagram. However, the real phase diagrams are defined by interactions beyond the current scope of DFT theories. The best we can do is to say that they would have the same phase diagrams in the context of DFT. For weak and intermediately correlated materials, the ordered phases are generally determined from the Stoner criterion, and hence correlated with peaks in the Lindhard susceptibility at ω = 0, which can readily be calculated. Figure In Fig. (1) In all cases, there is a critical value of U = U 0 below which there is no phase transition at x = 0. For U < U 0 , the phase boundary is dome-shaped, but with a peak shifted away from the T = 0 value of x V HS to a value close to the line x V HS (T ), red-dashed line. For U > U 0 the phase boundary rapidly evolves to a strong coupling form where the highest T transition occurs near half filling. This is consistent with our finding in the main text that there is an apparent shift of the VHS toward x = 0 as T increases. In all cases, at sufficiently high T FS nesting is washed out and the dominant instability is at q = (π, π). An advantage of using the genetic algorithm is that it lets us systematically vary parameter space, to study the evolution from one cuprate to another, as in Fig. The origin of the 1D-behavior can be easily understood. For reference family a, the electronic dispersion has the form E = -2t(c x + c y ) -4t c x c y → -2t when t = -0.5t and either k x or k y = 0. [Here c i = cos(k i a), i = x, y.] That is, at the VHS the FS reduces to just the x and y axes. This explains the strong role of t , which breaks up this perfect nesting, and shifts the doping of optimal ANN nesting away from the VHS-doping. This causes the FS to split into two pockets, with the VHS corresponding to the topological transition where the pockets split, inset to Fig. Here we attempt to separate the two contributions to the susceptibility, from bulk and Fermi surface, and to clarify the origin of the bulk contribution. To our knowledge there is no standard way to do this, so we have developed simple schemes. Consider the expression for the ω = 0 bare susceptibil-ity that enters into the Stoner criterion, The denominator is largest if k = k+q , but in this case the numerator vanishes unless k is at the Fermi level. Even in this case, the term contributes little weight to the susceptibility integral unless the q-shifted FSs are tangent, which is generally satisfied if q = 2k F , giving rise to a folded map of the FS -the ridge of FS nesting. This can be seen by comparing a map of χ 0 , Fig. Two approaches are taken to eliminate the FS nesting features to see the background susceptibility by itself. First, raising T (violet long-dashed line in Fig. Finally, we demonstrate the connection between the bulk contribution to χ 0 and the (π, π) bosonic-VHS (b-VHS), by deconvolving the bare susceptibility, Eq. 2, into its various k components. To understand this procedure, recall that the VHS in the electronic dispersion arises when the Fermi surface crosses the Brillouin zone boundary near (π, 0) and related points, crossing from hole-like to electron-like. The electron-hole pairs associated with the VHS come in two kinds: intra-VHS pairs, where both carriers lie near the same VHS, so their relative momentum is near q = (0, 0) = Γ, and inter-VHS pairs, where an electron near (π, 0) and a hole near (0, π) have relative momentum near (π, -π). The latter pairs carry more weight, forming a b-VHS near q = (π, π). Thus, to confirm that the susceptibility peak at (π, π) is assiciated with the b-VHS, we analyze Eq. 2 for χ 0 , assuming that the electron is associated with k and the hole near k+q . We must demonstrate that, when q ∼ (π, π), the dominant contribution to χ 0 has k near the VHS at (π, 0) [or (0, π)] and k near E V HS . We divide the Brillouin zone into four patches, around the Γ, (π, 0), (0, π), and (π, π) points, and calculate separately the susceptibility due to each patch. In LSCO, the plateau is predominantly composed of equal contributions from the (0, π) and (π, 0) patches, as expected for a VHS. We then explore the distribution of values of k which contribute to the susceptibility in the (π, 0) patch at x = 0, Fig. where i runs over the four quadrants Γ, (π, 0), (0, π), and (π, π). There is a clear crossover from a dominant near-FS contribution ( k = 0) at low T to a dominant contri-bution at high-T coming from the VHS, caused by the breakdown of Pauli blocking, Fig. While this explains what happens at T > T V HS , the question remains why the broad peak at (π, π) persists to lower T [e.g., Figs. The low-T fadeout of the b-VHS is controlled by the Pauli blocking factor, where When the electronic VHS is at the Fermi level, x + = 0 and ∆f k,Q = tanh x -/2, while at lower doping the b-VHS is exponentially suppressed, cosh x + ∼ exp(T V HS /T )/2, which equals 1 when T ∼ T V HS /ln(2). In the conventional picture of Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC), the total number of bosonic modes must satisfy where n BE is the BE distribution function and D B is the bosonic density of states. As T decreases, the bosonic chemical potential μ must adjust to maintain the equality. However, the largest μ can be is zero, for which n BE → n P , the Planck distribution, and the RHS of Eq. 5 takes a fixed value. For lower T the equation can only be satisfied by putting a macroscopic number of bosons into the lowest energy mode. In the present situation, D B = q χ , and n P can be approximated as ∼ T /ω, in which case Eq. 5 becomes Comparing this to Eq. 5 in the main text, self-consistency has produced a number N ef f = N πλ/A 0 of excitons which can subsequently Bose condense. Whereas for 3D BEC the macroscopic occupation of the lowest bosonic mode must be added by hand, in 2D the self-consistent condition automatically causes the occupation of that mode to diverge as T → 0. As originally noted by McMillan, anomalously large ratios of 2∆/k B T c for any phase transition are generically associated with a dominance of bosonic entropy at finite T , associated with low-lying bosonic fluctuations. But from the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, the net fluctuations at a given frequency ω are equal to the dissipation D(ω) at that frequency, so the right-hand side of Eq. 6 is just the total dissipation at temperature T . In an ordered phase near T = 0, the dominant fluctuations will be associated with Goldstone modes, but to show this in a calculation requires extending the present results to full self-consistency between self energy and vertex corrections, as in a parquet calculation. In Bi2201 and most other cuprates, a larger ratio |t /t| expands the (π, π)-plateau, leading to a rich phase diagram, Fig. While many pseudogap-like features are similar to LSCO, Bi2201 has some novel properties associated with the ANN instability, which becomes a CDW when charge order is included in the model. Since the ANN susceptibility peak has a much larger intrinsic curvature, mode coupling effects are weak. Hence the ANN susceptibility peak grows rapidly at low temperature, and as doping increases, it can surpass the (π, π)-peak, thereby sharply cutting off the growth of near-(π, π) fluctuations. This is illustrated in Fig. The physics of semimetals is strongly influenced by the simultaneous presence of both holes and electrons, and the attractive interaction between them. In lightly doped semimetals this can lead to exciton condensation, an extension of the excitonic instability found in small gap semiconductors To clarify the connection to Kondo physics, we write a variational ground state for the singlet exciton as where c † k,σ [c k,σ ] are creation [annihilation] operators for an electronic state of momentum k and spin σ, and u k , v k are variational parameters. Here |F (π,π) > is a filled Fermi sea of the first (π, π)-superlattice Brillouin zone, and the excitonic order parameter is ∆ CDW =< c † k+Q,↑ c k,↑ + c † k+Q,↓ c k,↓ + c.c. >. This model is a direct generalization of Yosida's variational calculation of the screening of a Kondo impurity to a single-band Kondo lattice model. A comparison between our QPGW model and other 'DFT+' calculations was given in Ref. 1; here we dis-cuss this comparison specifically in regard to pseudogap physics. A number of groups are working on MBPTtype extensions of DFT calculations. However, DMFT and its cluster extensions are limited by a very low resolution in momentum q. In particular, this means that even if they capture Mermin-Wagner physics, they are typically limited to ξ < 7a However, some DMFT extensions [dynamic vertex approximation We further note that the parquet equations 27,28 could be quite useful, if the recently discovered divergences 25 can be overcome. The mutual self-consistency between the self-energy and vertex corrections will be necessary to extend the current results to low temperatures. Finally, in many strong-coupling calculations, it is implicitly assumed that Fermi surface nesting is irrelevant After our paper was posted [arXiv:1505.04770], we became aware of another paper 31 that also finds that strong bosonic fluctuations over a 'quasidegenerate distribution of 2p F ordering wave vectors' drives the pseudogap, although they find it is predominantly in the charge sector, forming a 'resonant Peierls excitonic state'.