A series of LiFe1-xCoxAs compounds with different Co concentrations have been studied by transport, optical spectroscopy, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance. We observed a Fermi liquid to non-Fermi liquid to Fermi liquid (FL-NFL-FL) crossover alongside a monotonic suppression of the superconductivity with increasing Co content. In parallel to the FL-NFL-FL crossover, we found that both the low-energy spin fluctuations and Fermi surface nesting are enhanced and then diminished, strongly suggesting that the NFL behavior in LiFe1-xCoxAs is induced by low-energy spin fluctuations which are very likely tuned by Fermi surface nesting. Our study reveals a unique phase diagram of LiFe1-xCoxAs where the region of NFL is moved to the boundary of the superconducting phase, implying that they are probably governed by different mechanisms. The normal state of high-temperature (high-T c ) superconductors is very unusual, with the electrical resistivity (or quasiparticle scattering rate) varying with temperature in a peculiar way that deviates significantly from the quadratic T dependence expected from Landau's Fermiliquid (FL) theory of metals Studies on high-T c cuprate superconductors IBSCs feature an intricate phase diagram with NFL behavior, superconducting phase, magnetic order, struc-tural transition, possible QCP(s) and nested Fermi surfaces interacting with each other. This complexity makes it quite challenging to distinguish the roles played by different orders or interactions. The LiFe 1-x Co x As system presents a simple phase diagram: LiFeAs exhibits superconductivity with a maximum transition temperature T c ≈ 18 K in its stoichiometric form In this article, through a combined study of transport, optical spectroscopy, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) on LiFe 1-x Co x As, we found that while superconductivity is monotonically suppressed with increasing Co concentration, the transport and optical properties reveal a prominent FL-NFL-FL crossover which closely follows the doping evolution of low-energy spin fluctuations (LESFs) and Fermi surface nesting. Our observations provide clear evidence that LESFs, which are likely tuned by FS nesting, dominate the normal-state scattering, and are thus responsible for the FL-NFL-FL crossover in LiFe NFL behavior is decoupled from superconductivity, suggesting that they do not share the same origin. High quality single crystals of LiFe 1-x Co x As with different Co concentrations were grown by a self-flux method Figures Further evidence for the FL-NFL-FL crossover can be revealed by the T dependence of the quasiparticle scattering rate obtained via optical spectroscopy where Z 0 377 Ω is the impedance of free space. The first term describes a sum of delocalized (Drude) carrier responses with ω p,k and 1/τ k being the plasma frequency and scattering rate in the kth Drude band, respectively. In the second term, ω j , γ j and Ω j are the resonance frequency, width and strength of the jth vibration or bound excitation. As shown in Fig. In order to gain insight into the origin of the anomalous FL-NFL-FL crossover in LiFe 1-x Co x As, we examine the evolution of LESFs with Co concentration by looking into the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 T , reflecting the summation of all different q modes of sub-meV LESFs weighted by a nearly uniform form factor, which can be determined from 75 As nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements Since an investigation into the FS may provide information on the nature of the LESFs, we then studied the evolution of the FSs in LiFe where the definitions of k F ele (θ), k F hole (θ) and Q are illustrated in Fig. FS nesting is improved, and is maximized when the hole FS matches the outer contour of the two electron FSs. Assuming v F is uniform on all FSs, the nesting factor F (Q) is proportional to the non-interacting single-orbital magnetic susceptibility at vector Q: where f p is the Fermi distribution and ε p is the quasiparticle kinetic energy. F (Q) is calculated by Eq. ( A comparison between the above observations (i) and (ii) strongly suggests that the FL-NFL-FL crossover in LiFe 1-x Co x As is induced by LESFs. Point (iii) in combination with (i) and (ii) implies that the integrated LESFs probed by NMR are dominated by, or at least scale with x and terminates at a critical value x ≈ 0.17. The normal state of LiFeAs is a Fermi liquid (blue regime at x = 0), where the T -dependent resistivity follows ρ(T ) = ρ0 + AT n with n = 2. A crossover from Fermi liquid to non-Fermi liquid is induced by Co doping. At x = 0.12, n reaches its minimum value of 1.35, indicating the most robust non-Fermi liquid behavior (red regime). Further doping results in a reversal of this trend until by x = 0.4, the Fermi liquid behavior is fully recovered (blue regime at x = 0.4). The green diamonds denote the spin-lattice relaxation rate at 20 K (1/T1T |T =20 K) measured by NMR for several representative dopings. 1/T1T |T =20 K reaches the maximum at x ≈ 0.12, signifying that low-energy spin fluctuations are optimized at this doping. The three inset panels depict the extracted Fermi surfaces for three representative Co concentrations: x = 0 (left), x = 0.12 (middle) and x = 0.4 (right). While the Fermi surface nesting is poor for x = 0 and 0.4, the nesting condition is significantly improved at x = 0.12. those near q ∼ Q which are most likely tuned by FS nesting. The fact (iv) does not directly support a magnetic QCP in the T -x phase diagram of LiFe 1-x Co x As. However, the pronounced NFL behavior observed near x = 0.12, which is usually considered as a signature of quantum criticality Determination of the doping level The molar ratio of Co and Fe of the LiFe 1-x Co x As single crystals was checked by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) at several points on one or two selected samples for each Co concentration. For each doping, the Co concentration measured by EDS is consistent with the nominal value. The electrical transport measurements of LiFe 1-x Co x As were carried out in a commercial physical properties measurement system (PPMS) using the four-probe method. To prevent sample degradation, the electrical contacts were pre-pared in a glove box and then the sample was protected by n-grease before transferring to the PPMS. Each sample was cut into a rectangular piece, so that its dimensions could be measured more accurately with a microscope. With these precisely-measured geometry factors, the resistivity can be easily calculated from the measured resistance. The resistivity determined from the transport measurements is then compared with the values determined from the optical conductivity to ensure the consistency between different techniques. Single power law fitting Figure In order to present the power-law behavior of the ρ(T ) curve more clearly, we plot ρ(T ) as a function of T n for each substitution in Fig. Reflectivity The temperature dependence of the absolute reflectivity R(ω) of LiFe 1-x Co x As has been measured at a near-normal angle of incidence for the stoichiometric material and 4 representative substitutions using an in situ overcoating technique Kramers-Kronig analysis The real part of the complex optical conductivity σ 1 (ω) is determined from a Kramers-Kronig analysis of the reflectivity. Given the metallic nature of the LiFe 1-x Co x As materials, the Hagen-Rubens form [R(ω) = 1 -A √ ω ] is used for the low-frequency extrapolation, where A is chosen to match the data at the lowest-measured frequency. Above the highest-measured frequency, R(ω) is assumed to be constant up to 1.0 × 10 5 cm -1 , above which a free-electron response R(ω) ∝ ω -4 was used. Optical conductivity Figure Measurements ARPES measurements were performed with a high-flux He discharge lamp. The energy resolution was set at 12 meV and 3 meV for the Fermi surface mapping and high resolution measurements, respectively. The angular resolution was set at 0.2 • . Fresh surfaces for the ARPES measurements were obtained by an in situ cleavage of the crystals in a working vacuum better than 4×10 -11 Torr. The Fermi energy (E F ) of the samples was referenced to that of a gold film evaporated onto the sample holder. ARPES intensity plots and energy/momentum distribution curves along the Γ-M direction ARPES intensity plots across the Γ point for five representative dopings and their corresponding energy distribution curves (EDCs) are shown in Fig. The evolution of the Fermi surface volume with doping is controlled by the Luttinger theorem: the total algebraic Fermi surface volume is directly proportional to the carrier concentration. We checked that this is the case in our study and we plot the results in Fig. Measurements We perform the 75 As nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements with the external field parallel to the a-b plane. The spin-lattice relaxation rate is measured by inversion-recovery method on the central transition and the recovery curve is fit with a standard double exponential form for an S=3/2 spin 1 -m(t) m(0) = 0.9 exp -6t Knight shift Figure 