A quantitative theory unveils unique synergy of phonons and electron correlations behind exotic pairing next to Mott phase. The alkali-doped fullerides are unique exotic s-wave superconductors with maximum critical temperature T c ~ 40 K, which is extremely high for the modest width of around 0.5 eV of the bands relevant to the superconductivity A variety of scenarios have been proposed to explain the superconductivity In this work we carry out such non-empirical analysis using a combination of density functional theory (DFT) and dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT), an approach which accurately describes the properties of many correlated materials In Fig. cc k k+ +q q cc k k bb q q + bb q q k k + ωω q q bb q q bb q q , q q (1) on the f.c.c. lattice where each site represents a C 60 molecule. H ( ) , UU, gg and ωω are the electron one-body Hamiltonian, the Coulomb interaction, the electron-phonon coupling, and the phonon frequency, respectively. They all have indices of the Wannier orbitals ii, jj, ii , jj , spin σσ, σσ , momentum k k,q q, and the phonons also have a branch index νν. We construct maximally localized Wannier orbitals In Fig. The success of our theory in reproducing the experimental phase diagram demonstrates the reliability of the whole scheme including the estimates of the interaction parameters. We are therefore in a position to disentangle the crucial ingredients leading to the proximity of s-wave superconductivity and a Mott insulator in the same diagram. The key quantities are the effective intramolecular interactions (intraorbital and interorbital density-density interactions U eff = U+U V +U ph and U' eff = U'+U' V +U' ph , and exchange term J eff = J+J ph ) between the t 1u electrons, which are employed as input interaction parameters for the E-DMFT calculation. Here, U, U' and J are the intramolecular Coulomb interactions screened by the high-energy electrons while U V = U' V and J V = 0 (U ph , U' ph , and J ph ) represent dynamical screening contributions from the intermolecular Coulomb (electron-phonon) interactions. These dynamical screening effects make the effective interactions dependent on electron's frequency ω. The solid curves in Fig. dotted and dashed curves in Fig. Table We find, through a detailed analysis (Section F in Supplementary Materials), the unusual multiorbital interactions indeed drives the exotic s-wave superconductivity: (i) U' eff > U eff and J eff < 0 around ω = 0 generate a singlet pair of electrons (leading to a Cooper pair) As we have discussed above, these unusual multiorbital interactions are caused by phonons. In this sense, phonons are necessary to explain the superconductivity. However, strong electronic correlations also play a crucial role, marking a substantial difference from conventional phonon-driven superconductivity This analysis clearly demonstrates that the superconductivity in alkali-doped fullerides is the result of a synergy between electron-phonon interactions and electronic correlations Also the normal state displays remarkable consequences of the cooperative effect of the various interactions. Figure This phenomenology also descends from U eff < U' eff and J eff < 0, which prefer onsite low-spin configurations with two electrons on one orbital (Fig. This unusual orbitally-degenerate Mott state is consistent with the experimental observation of a dynamical Jahn-Teller effect We have carried out a fully ab initio study of the phase diagram of alkali-doped fullerides, in which all the interactions of a multi-orbital Hubbard model coupled with phonons are computed from first principles with the only information of the atomic positions. The model is then solved by means of E-DMFT. We identify that a negative Hund's coupling arising from the electron-phonon interaction and the related condition U eff < U' eff which favors intraorbital pairs We apply the DFT+DMFT method Considering that the low-energy properties are governed by the isolated t 1u bands, we derive from first principles the lattice Hamiltonian [Eq. ( As the basis for the lattice Hamiltonian, we construct the maximally localized Wannier orbitals In the partition function for the lattice Hamiltonian [Eq. ( where Ω = 2nnnnnn is the bosonic Matsubara frequency and gg q q, ,νν = k k gg k k,q q k k with the number NN k k of k k-points. Here, the sum over the phonon branches runs from 1 to 189. In practice, we omit the lowest 9 branches [νν=1-9, which correspond to the acoustic modes, the librations, and the alkali-ion vibrations at the octahedral sites We solve the derived lattice Hamiltonian by means of the E-DMFT The frequency dependence of U V and U' V in Fig. We perform the analytic continuation onto ω+iη with η = 0.01 eV from the data along the Matsubara axis at 40 K for Cs 3 C 60 with VV C 60 = 762 Å . The spectral functions in Fig. Text (Sections A-F) Table In this study, we assume that the partially screened Coulomb interactions are static, i.e., U(ω) = U(ω=0), U'(ω) = U'(ω=0), and J(ω) = J(ω=0). This is because the calculation of the partially screened Coulomb interactions in the full frequency range for all the materials in Table As we show below, the frequency dependence is indeed weak below a frequency much larger than the bandwidth. We perform the cRPA calculation in the conditions described in Ref. Lorentzian smearing for the delta function with the full width at half maximum of 0.3 eV. Figure Therefore, the frequency dependences of the bare Coulomb interactions would not change the balance between the Coulomb and phonon-mediated interactions in Fig. Finally, we discuss the origin of the small frequency dependence at low energy. In general, the values of the screened Coulomb interactions change drastically around the plasmon frequency. In C 60 compounds, the most prominent plasmon peak in the loss function is seen around ω = 27 eV, which is the collective excitation involving all the valence electrons (41). This plasmon is largely responsible for the substantial reduction of the Coulomb interactions from their bare values (U = 3.32 eV, U' = 3.12 eV, and J = 0.10 eV) to those at ω = 0 (U = 0.94 eV, U' = 0.87 eV, and J = 0.035 eV) Within the E-DMFT for the electron degrees of freedom and for the auxiliary-boson degrees of freedom, respectively. Here, ΣΣ (Π), GG 00 (DD ), GG (DD) denote the self-energy, the Weiss function, and the impurity-site Green's function for the electrons (auxiliary bosons), where the bold symbols denote matrices with respect to orbital indices. ωω = 2nn -1 ππππ (Ω = 2nnnnnn) is the fermionic (bosonic) Matsubara frequency. μμ is the chemical potential. where nn = cc ccand nn = nn ↑ + nn ↓ . The second, third, and fourth terms on the r.h.s. of Eq. (S3) denote the density-type interactions. The fifth and sixth terms correspond to the spin-flip and pair-hopping terms, respectively. The dynamical screening terms appear in the seventh and eighth terms. The extended DMFT calculations are performed with the temperature mesh with the interval of 2.5 K. The lowest temperature reached in the calculation is 10 K. At each temperature, we calculate the dimensionless superconducting order parameter PP SC = cc ↓ cc ↑ . At 10 K, PP SC takes a value ~ 0.03 in the superconducting region in Fig. The resulting T c agrees well with the temperature region where the convergence of the E-DMFT self-consistent loop is very slow, which is a sign of the vicinity to T c . The error bars for T c in Fig. At 10 K, PP SC shows a dome-like structure as a function of VV C , which is consistent with the result for the three-band model In order to identify crucial factors for the superconductivity, we perform several additional calculations with flexibly changing the input parameters for the E-DMFT from the ab initio values. The results are summarized in Table This result clearly shows that the pair-hopping interaction is crucial for the superconductivity, despite its tiny value (~ -17-19 meV) compared to e.g., the bandwidth W ~ 0.5 eV and Hubbard U ~ 1 eV. The pair-hopping interaction allows the Cooper pairs to move from one orbital to another. The enhancement of the superconductivity through the interband scattering is known as the Suhl-Kondo mechanism We also perform calculations with putting the spin-flip interaction to zero and keeping the other parameters unchanged. In this case, the superconducting solution survives, or is more stabilized, suggesting a minor role of the spin-flip terms. Another important factor is the inequality U eff (iiΩ n ) < U' eff (iiΩ n ) 