Recently, noncentrosymmetric superconductor BiPd has attracted considerable research interest due to the possibility of being a topological superconductor. Here, we report a systematic high-resolution angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) study of the normal state electronic properties of BiPd. Our experimental results show the presence of a surface state at higher binding energy with the location of Dirac point at around 700 meV below the Fermi level. The detailed photon energy and temperature dependent measurements complemented by our first-principles calculations provide further evidence for the presence of the topological surface state at high binding energy. The absence of topological surface states near the Fermi level negates the possibility of the topological superconducting behavior in the surface of this material. Our first direct experimental discovery of a topological surface state in BiPd provides novel information that will guide the future search for topological superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric materials. Recently, noncentrosymmetric (NCS) superconductors (SCs) have attracted considerable research interest due to the possibility that they host several exotic properties Such convincing evidence may be obtained by angle-resolved photoemission, which provides an energy and momentum-resolved probe of electronic structure. The noncentrosymmetric superconductor BiPd provides a platform to study the interplay of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effects with superconductivity. This compound undergoes a structural transition from β -BiPd (orthorhombic ) to α -BiPd (monoclinic) at 210 • C and then becomes superconducting at transition temperature (T c ) ∼ 3.7 K In this paper, we report the first experimental discovery of topological surface states in the noncentrosymmetric material BiPd using ARPES. Our experimental results show the presence of a surface state at higher binding energy, with the Dirac node located at around 700 meV below the Fermi level. Our detailed and systematic measurements provide the necessary evidence to demonstrate that this surface state is topological. Our results are further supported by our first-principle calculations. The absence of topological surface states near the Fermi level of BiPd negates the possibility that this system hosts the topological superconductivity in the surface. Our results provide a new direction for finding topological superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric materials. The crystal structure of BiPd at low temperatures (< 210 • C) has a monoclinic unit cell with a = 5.63 Å, b = 10.66 Å, c = 5.68 Å, α = γ = 90 • , and β = 101 • with the b axis being its unique axis (see Fig. We study the overall electronic structure of BiPd. Figure Upon increasing the binding energy, the size of the pocket decreases and eventually shrinks to a point (the Dirac point) near E B ∼ 700 meV. Further increasing the binding energy, the nearly circular pocket formed by the lower Dirac cone is observed (see for E B ∼ 750 meV in Fig. Figure In order to test the robustness of the surface state observed in BiPd, we have performed a systematic temperature dependent measurement as shown in Fig. In order to better understand the electronic structure observed with ARPES, we perform first-principles calculations on the bulk band structure (see Supplementary Information) and slab calculation of BiPd using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) plus spin-orbit coupling (SOC) method (see Fig. The experimental realization of the topological insulator phase in a noncentrosymmetric crystal structure is an object of intense research. Such a system may be utilized in testing several proposed exotic phenomena such as crystalline-surface-dependent topological electronic states, pyroelectricity, and natural topological p-n junctions BiPd is a superconductor below T c ∼ 3.7 K. Since the topological surface states is located at high binding energy, it negates the topological superconductivity behavior in the surface at its native Fermi level. However, by electrical gating or surface deposition, the Fermi level can be tuned near the Dirac surface state, which provides an opportunity to realize the topological superconductivity in this noncentrosymmetic materials. Our discovery of the topological surface state in the BiPd sample points towards a new direction in the search for non-centrosymmetric TIs, promising novel applications based on topological states. Crystal growth and characterization. Single crystals of BiPd were grown by a modified Bridgman method as described elsewhere Electronic structure measurements. Synchrotron-based ARPES measurements of the electronic structure were performed at the Advanced Light Source (ALS), Berkeley at Beamline 10.0.1 and Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) at Beamline 5-4 both equipped with a high efficiency R4000 electron analyzer. The energy resolution was set to be better than 20 meV for the measurements with the synchrotron beamline. The angular resolution was set to be better than 0.2 • for all synchrotron measurements. Samples were cleaved in situ and measured at 10-80 K in a vacuum better than 10 -10 torr. They were found to be very stable and without degradation for the typical measurement period of 20 hours. First-principles calculations. The first-principles calculations were based on the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) 