The physical properties of hole-doped cuprate high-temperature superconductors are heavily influenced by an energy gap known as the pseudogap whose origin remains a mystery second only to that of superconductivity itself. A key question is whether the pseudogap closes at a temperature T * . The absence of a specific heat anomaly, together with persistent entropy losses up to 300K, have long suggested that the pseudogap does not vanish at T * . However, amid a growing body of evidence from other techniques pointing to the contrary we revisit this question. Here we investigate if, by adding a temperature dependence to the pseudogap energy and quasiparticle lifetime in the resonating-valence-bond spin-liquid model of Yang Rice and Zhang, we can close the pseudogap quietly in the specific heat. The physical properties of hole-doped cuprate hightemperature superconductors are strongly influenced, over a wide range of temperature and doping, by a depletion in the electronic density of states known as the pseudogap. In momentum-space it is manifest as a gapping of the large hole-like Fermi surface near the antinodal regions of the Brillouin zone, at (±π,0) and (0,±π), leaving behind ungapped "Fermi arcs" By way of introduction, the electronic entropy is defined as S(T ) = -2k B f w (E, T )N (E)dE The entropy decreases at a rate of about 1 k B per doped hole; ii) a collapse in the magnitude of the specific heat jump, ∆γ, at T c below a critical doping of 0.19 holes/Cu; and iii) a smooth downturn in the normal-state electronic specific heat with no specific heat jump at T * . These features were originally modeled by Loram in terms of a temperature-independent non-states-conserving V-shaped gap, pinned to the Fermi level (E F ) of a flat density of states. The gap widens with reducing doping In the following we will investigate the effects of a tightbinding density of states, thermal lifetime broadening, and the combination of these with a Fermi-surface reconstruction model for the pseudogap given by the resonating valence bond spin liquid ansatz of Yang, Rice and Zhang (YRZ) where is the pseudogap. The chemical potential μ p (x) is chosen according to the Luttinger sum rule. The doping-dependent coefficients are given by t 2 are the Gutzwiller factors. The bare parameters t ′ /t 0 = -0.3, t ′′ /t 0 = 0.2, J/t 0 = 1/3 and χ = 0.338 are the same as used previously where the energy-momentum dispersion is reconstructed by the pseudogap into upper and lower branches that are weighted by In the superconducting state there are four energy branches is the superconducting gap. The density of states (DOS), from which the entropy and heat capacity can be calculated, is given by are the Bogoliubov weights. The reason for choosing this model is because it successfully describes experimental data from a wide range of techniques Lifetime broadening can also affect the hightemperature heat capacity, and hence the entropy, by smoothing features in the DOS In fig. We now turn to the specific heat coefficient, γ. Figure To conclude, the absence of a specific heat jump at T * , together with persistent losses in entropy at high temperatures, has long been taken as evidence that the pseudogap does not close there. Driven by a growing body of evidence from other experimental probes pointing to the contrary we have explored this question. By adding a linear-intemperature scattering rate to a YRZ-like reconstruction model, it is possible to close the pseudogap quietly in the specific heat. A similar result is expected for the antiferromagnetic Brillouin-zone-folding Fermi surface reconstruction model 