We study optimally doped Bi-2212 (Tc = 96 K) using femtosecond time-and angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy. Energy-resolved population lifetimes are extracted and compared with single-particle lifetimes measured by equilibrium photoemission. The population lifetimes deviate from the single-particle lifetimes in the low excitation limit by one to two orders of magnitude. Fundamental considerations of electron scattering unveil that these two lifetimes are in general distinct, yet for systems with only electron-phonon scattering they should converge in the lowtemperature, low-fluence limit. The qualitative disparity in our data, even in this limit, suggests that scattering channels beyond electron-phonon interactions play a significant role in the electron dynamics of cuprate superconductors. Electron lifetime is a central quantity in condensed matter theories Electron lifetimes in cuprates have been studied in both the energy and time domains. In the energy domain, angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES) In this Letter, we employ trARPES and ARPES with high energy resolution to perform a detailed comparison between τ s (ǫ) and τ p (ǫ) in optimally doped Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca 0.92 Y 0.08 Cu 2 O 8+δ (OP Bi-2212, T c = 96 K) along the nodal direction We study the cut along the nodal direction in Bi-2212 as shown in Fig. trARPES measurements are also performed on the nodal cut. For the following analysis and discussion, we focus on the photoexcited electron population above E F [29]. We integrate over the whole momentum range of the cut as illustrated in Fig. We first examine the energy dependence of the population dynamics. A pronounced energy dependence is most clearly observed for the 10 μJ.cm -2 data at 20 K (Fig. We then study the excitation-density dependence of the population dynamics. The excitation density is characterized by the pump fluence which specifies the incident energy per unit area. At 20 K, the rising edges become gradually less delayed as the fluence increases. Moreover, the extracted decay rates display a pivoting behav- ior when tuning the pump fluence (Fig. We summarize the three key observations: (i) a ∼ 0.5 ps rising edge at the lowest fluence and temperature; (ii) an abrupt increase in decay rates near 60 ∼ 80 meV at the lowest fluence; (iii) a pivoting behavior for the rate curves when tuning the pump fluence. This complex energy and fluence dependences establish a multidimensional constraint for a microscopic understanding. A delayed rising edge is usually attributed to cascade processes which fill low-energy states using high-energy electrons The abrupt change and the pivoting point of τ p occur at the same energy ∼ 60 meV, which is reminiscent of mode energies revealed by ARPES measurements of τ s . The pivoting behavior of τ p due to electron-phonon coupling has been theoretically predicted While one may relate this discrepancy to unique scattering properties in cuprates, we notice that it is independent of particular material systems. As shown in Table Collision integrals ǫ k denotes the electronic state at momentum k on a band dispersion. f (ǫ k ) is the corresponding occupation. W k,k ′ stands for the probability of scattering from k to k ′ . The two integrals in Eqn. 1 represent the emptying processes from the state at ǫ k to other states, and the filling processes from other states back to the state at ǫ k . In equilibrium, all the scattering processes reach a detailed balance such that df (ǫ k )/dt = 0. In nonequilibrium and for perturbative excitations, f (ǫ k ) and Eqn. 1 is expanded to first order in δf to describe the evolution of photoexcited electrons On the other hand, in time-resolved measurements, the pump pulse can excite electrons into many different states independent of the probe pulse. Both δf (ǫ k ) and δf (ǫ k ′ ) are in general non-zero, which leads to Eqn. 3 for τ p (ǫ k ). Eqn. 3 demonstrates the general distinction between τ s and τ p without specifying the scattering mechanism. This result is consistent with a number of theoretical investigations which numerically Electron-impurity scattering. This channel is often considered to be elastic and energy-independent Notably, the electron-impurity scattering makes a nonzero contribution to ImΣ (Fig. Electron-electron scattering. A photoexcited electron can interact with another electron to redistribute energy and momentum (Fig. Electron-phonon scattering. A photoexcited electron can dissipate its energy by interacting with phonons of energy Ω (Fig. The three cases above demonstrate that τ p is in general distinct from τ s . Electron-phonon scattering is a special case where τ p converges to τ s in the low-temperature, low-fluence limit. Notably, when adding more scattering channels the total single-particle scattering rate increases additively. Yet this does not apply to the population decay rate. The main difference, as shown in Eqn. 3, is that certain scattering channels can contribute negatively to the total population decay rate due to filling processes, and slow down the overall population decay. Therefore, although we have a qualitative understanding for each individual scattering channel, understanding their inter-play in the population decay is nontrivial. For example, while electron-phonon coupling alone can give rise to a pivoting point of τ p , the origin of the pivoting point in our data remains unclear. The discrepancy between τ s and τ p in our data suggests that scattering channels beyond electron-phonon scattering have an appreciable contribution. Electronimpurity and electron-electron scatterings are likely to contribute. In the superconducting state W k,k ′ includes pair breaking and reforming processes, and a superconducting gap opens in ǫ k The unique energy-and fluence-dependences of our data serve as a basis for understanding scattering phenomena in cuprates. The delayed rising edges at low temperature reflect the anisotropic gap. The discrepancy between τ s and τ p suggests scattering channels beyond electron-phonon interactions. Within the formalism we utilize, our data provides a strong constraint for future theories exploring the specific form of W k,k ′ . Our work thus points to a new route to unveil the dominant scattering channels behind high-temperature superconductivity.