We investigated the evolution of the temperature-composition phase diagram of Fe 1+y Te upon Se substitution. In particular, the effect of Se substitution on the two-step, coupled magneto-structural transition in Fe 1+y Te single crystals is investigated. To this end, the nominal Fe excess was kept at y = 0.12. For low Se concentrations, the two magneto-structural transitions displayed a tendency to merge. In spite of the high Fe-content, superconductivity emerges for Se concentrations x ≥ 0.1. We present a temperature-composition phase diagram to demonstrate the interplay of structure, magnetism, and superconductivity in these ternary Fechalcogenides. In Fe-based chalcogenides and pnictides, many physical properties are strongly influenced by subtle changes in the crystal structure and stoichiometry. In the case of iron chalcogenides, the interstitial Fe plays a crucial role, and the delicate dependence of magnetic ground states on the exact concentration of excess Fe (y) in Fe 1+y Te is well documented The occurrence of superconductivity in proximity to an antiferromagnetic order suggests a pairing mechanism mediated by spin fluctuations Single crystals of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (nominal x = 0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.4, and 0.5) were grown by a modified horizontal Bridgman method following the same route as outlined in Ref. The XRD patterns recorded at room temperatures on finely powdered single crystals show the phase purity of our as-grown crystals. Within the limits of instrument resolution, the as-grown crystals exhibit a single crystallographic phase without traces of other secondary impurity phases. The effect of substitution on the lattice is studied by XRD. From these data, the lattice parameters are extracted using a Rietveld analysis within the FullProf code and assuming the structure model of an earlier work The results confirm that the room temperature crystal structure belongs to tetragonal space group P 4/nmm, typical of Fe chalcogenide superconductors. The variation of the lattice parameters and the unit cell volume as a function of Se substitution is presented in Figure As the Se content increases from x = 0.02 to 0.25, the magnetic transition shifts from 56 K to 16 K. In Figure A better understanding of the phase transitions is obtained from specific heat (C p ) measurements, see Figures The effect of Se substitution on the two transitions is even more pronounced for the x = 0.05 sample. At T N ≈ 45 K, the transition in specific heat turns into a broad hump which could either be the result of two weak transitions occurring at very close temperature or of a broad transition. Similarly, for x = 0.1, a weak hump is present near 36 K. The specific heat data of samples 0.02 ≤ x ≤ 0.10 are analyzed in detail with respect to the weak transitions: The lattice contribution is modelled using a combination of Debye and Einstein models as discussed in To elucidate the superconducting behaviour for intermediate Se content, we examined the electrical transport properties in detail. The zero field resistivities ρ are plotted in Figure ) and ρ(T ) drops to zero at T zero C . As the Se content increases further, T onset C changes from 12.8 K to 14 K whereas T zero C increases from 7.1 K to 10 K. We also measured the in-plane resistivity response to applied magnetic fields. The normal state resistivity did not show any significant dependency on H. Specifically, the transitions for samples x = 0 and 0.02 remain mostly unaffected (not shown). For samples exhibiting superconductivity, however, T C is influenced by H. Figures where H c2 (0) is the zero temperature upper critical field. The calculated values H c2 (0) increase with Se substitution, see Table The overall results and inferences obtained from our single crystals of pristine and substituted Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x are summarized in the T -x phase diagram shown in Figure Different groups have studied parts of the phase diagram of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x in detail The magnetic and superconducting properties of Fe 1.12 Te 1-x Se x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5) are explored by several measurement techniques on identical samples. By intentionally choosing a high Fe concentration in these Se substituted compositions, the multiple structural transitions are altered. The results of our measurements allow us to construct a comprehensive temperature-Se content phase diagram. The magnetic and structural transitions shift, and finally disappear, upon gradually increasing the Se content. With the disappearance of long range ordering, the structural transition is suppressed thus preserving a tetragonal symmetry. This is in good agreement with previous studies in which the low temperature structure of intermediate compositions was found to remain tetragonal. The intermediate composition region (0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.25) is studied in detail, and our investigations demonstrate the presence of short range magnetic fluctuations above T C . Superconductivity in this composition range is likely not of bulk nature. The results clearly corroborate the role of excess Fe in controlling the magnetic and superconducting properties of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x .