We investigate the dynamics of a phonon-mediated superconductor driven out of equilibrium. The electronic hopping amplitude is ramped down in time, resulting in an increased electronic density of states. The dynamics of the coupled electron-phonon model is investigated by solving Migdal-Eliashberg equations for the double-time Keldysh Green's functions. The increase of the density of states near the Fermi level leads to an enhancement of superconductivity when the system thermalizes to the new state at the same temperature. We provide a time-and momentumresolved view on this thermalization process, and show that it involves fast processes associated with single-particle scattering and much slower dynamics associated with the superconducting order parameter. The importance of electron-phonon coupling for the rapid enhancement and the efficient thermalization of superconductivity is demonstrated, and the results are compared to a BCS timedependent mean-field approximation. Light control of structural and electronic properties of solids is a tantalizing prospect of ultrafast materials science A lattice deformation can be induced that lasts for hundreds of femtoseconds Theoretically, the order parameter dynamics in purely electronic models has been investigated in BCS mean-field theories for superconductors In this work we investigate the nonequilibrium dynamics of a phonon-mediated superconductor induced by a transiently modified electronic structure through nonlinear phonon coupling. We consider a tight-binding el-ph Hamiltonian which contains both a retarded pairing in-teraction mediated by phonons as well as dissipation of heat into the lattice. The light-induced lattice distortion is accounted for by a change of the electronic hopping amplitude J 0 to a smaller value J f on a typical time scale of fractions of a picosecond. Due to this change the electronic density of states close to the Fermi surface is enhanced, which results in an increased equilibrium order parameter ∆ f (see Fig. Out of equilibrium, the order parameter is therefore expected to increase if the change is slow enough and not too much energy is deposited into the electronic degrees of freedom. Since typically the time scale of the lattice distortion -while much longer than the bare electronic time scale -is rapid compared to the slow collective dynamics of the superconducting condensate, understanding the response of the superconducting order parameter ∆(t) to such a relatively fast change is of great importance. We show that even for this rapid change of the lattice structure, the superconducting order parameter can be drastically enhanced. The dynamics can be separated into two different regimes: (i) the short time dynamics of the order parameter, which can approximately be described by BCS theory, and (ii) the intermediate to long time dynamics, where el-ph scattering and the relaxation of energy into the dissipative phonon bath dominate. Importantly, the phonon dissipative channel is essential for asymptotically reaching the final thermal value. Surprisingly, very fast nonadiabatic ramps are predicted to lead to quick enhancement of superconductivity on very short time scales in the presence of dissipation. The paper is organized as follows: Section II contains model and methods. In Section III the main results are presented. These results are put into context with conclusions and an outlook in Section IV. The Appendix contains more detailed information about the BCS formalism at finite temperature and additional results on the intermetiate time regime. We investigate the electron-phonon Hamiltonian with fermionic creation operators c † kσ for dimensionless momentum k = (k x , k y ) and spin σ = ↑, ↓ on a two-dimensional square lattice with dispersion ǫ(k, t) = -2J(t)(cos k x + cos k y ) at half-filling. This choice of band filling is made for numerical convenience. Away from particle-hole symmetric filling, the chemical poten-tial would have to be adjusted to keep the filling fixed at different temperatures, which we avoid. The time dependence of the electronic hopping amplitude J(t) mimics a deformation of the lattice induced via a nonlinear coupling to an IR active optical phonon driven by the THz light pulse The electrons are coupled to branches (γ) of phonons with bosonic creation operators b † q,γ , energy Ω γ , and electron-phonon coupling g γ . These quantum phonons model the different relaxation channels present in the material and should not be confused with the externally excited phonon mentioned above. We consider a dominant optical phonon at Ω opt = 0.1 eV, which induces superconductivity, and a continuum of acoustic low-energy phonons. The distribution of the acoustic phonons is given later. We use a reference set of electron-phonon couplings, labeled by set (i), and another set with the same spectrum but reduced coupling strengths labeled by set (ii). The parameters used for the different sets are listed in Table The important difference between BCS mean-field treatments, possibly including phenomenological damping, and the present approach is that we explicitly treat a double-time self-energy with nonzero imaginary part, which involves true correlation and memory effects and accounts for a frequency structure of the phonon spectrum. This will be shown to be important in this work in the context of absence or presence of low-energy acoustic phonons. From the point of view of superconducting pairing, the explicit treatment of the retarded self-energy also gives a frequency structure to the anomalous selfenergy and thus defines a natural energy cutoff to pairing while allowing for a fully gauge-invariant theory. Such a cutoff can be introduced in BCS-like theories as well, but is often neglected because it violates gauge invariance. The time evolution is obtained from solutions of the Kadanoff-Baym-Gor'kov equations using the dimensionless momentum-resolved anomalous expectation value f k (t) ≡ F < k (t, t) ≡ c -k↓ (t)c k↑ (t) . The initial value ∆ 0 = ∆(t = 0) and final value ∆ f are obtained from the anomalous component of the equilibrium self-energy, including energy band renormalization with quasiparticle weight Z due to el-ph coupling (see below). Our choice of a large el-ph coupling λ, which results in a large value of the order parameter compared to real materials 66 , is motivated by the times we can reach in the numerical simulations. Even though the Migdal-Eliashberg approximation is not expected to be quantitatively accurate in this regime, the generic effects observed should remain valid. We employ the Kadanoff-Baym-Gor'kov formalism and its application to the superconducting state in the el-ph model as described in Ref. 64. We utilize the standard two-time Keldysh formalism where t and t ′ lie on the Keldysh contour, and T C is the contour time-ordering operator. In the following, we use units with ≡ k B ≡ 1. The matrix equations of motion with a contour selfenergy ΣC to be specified below are with where τ0 is the identity matrix. On the Keldysh contour, the Langreth rules can be applied to separate the contour equation into the following components: the Matsubara (M ), lesser (<), and greater (>) Green functions, as well as the mixed real-imaginary ⌉/⌈ Green functions. The various components can be transformed or combined into others via the relations The equations of motion, letting the contour start at t min , are These equations are solved on the contour by using massively parallel computation and a time stepping algorithm for integro-differential equations as described in Ref. 65 and numerical details are given in Sec. II E. Note that we can also drop the spin index ↑, ↓ on the normal components of the Nambu Green function, since in the absence of magnetic order we have ). This relation is used for the calculation of the momentum-resolved normal and anomalous densities In this work, we employ the Migdal-Eliashberg approximation to electron-phonon coupling of electrons to the phononic relaxation channels which are explicitly treated in our calculation. These phonons should not be confused with the classical phonons involved in the THz driving and nonlinear phonon excitation processes. We use a perturbative treatment of the electronic self-energy at the self-consistent Born level Here τ3 is the z Pauli matrix in Nambu space, and ḠC loc (t, t ′ ) = k ḠC k (t, t ′ ) the local Green function. The quantum phonons are kept at fixed equilibrium temperature neglecting the phonon self-energy. The Keldysh propagator for a single phonon mode at energy Ω is given by where n B (x) is the Bose function n B (x) = [e x -1] -1 , β ≡ (k B T ) -1 the inverse temperature, and Θ C (t, t ′ ) is the contour Heaviside function. The relevant phonon spectrum in Migdal-Eliashberg theory is the Eliashberg function In practice, we use a model function with an optical branch modelled by a Lorentzian and an acoustic branch with proper Ω 2 behavior at low energy and a cutoff at 2Ω acou modelled by Finally, we estimate a dimensionless electron-phonon coupling parameter where Σ M 11 is the normal component of the Matsubara self-energy with imaginary frequency iω n = i(2n + 1)π/β. The renormalized quasiparticle weight reflects the effective mass change near E F induced by elph coupling. This renormalization is taken into account in computing the Bogoliubov dispersions used in Figs. where Σ M 12 is the anomalous component of the Matsubara self-energy. The individual contributions from the phonon modes are estimated via and equivalently for λ acou . Here we use the average electronic density of states N (E F ) in a window ±Ω opt around the Fermi level at the initial equilibrium. This expression is only strictly valid in the weak coupling limit, where the self-energy contributions from optical and acoustic branches add up to the total self-energy. The detailed parameters used for the runs in this paper are displayed in Table A few words are in order regarding the choice of the heat bath approximation for the phonons, leaving them at their initial thermal equilibrium. This can be justified by three arguments: (i) The THz-induced lattice modification leading to a change of the electronic hopping amplitude is a subtle excitation of the electrons, compared to the immediate optical excitation of electron-hole pairs with higher energy photons. Thus, the excess energy in the electronic subsystem is relatively small. (ii) We use a continuous spectrum of phonons rather than just a single sharp mode. The heat capacity of this spectrum of phonons is supposedly large, hence the heating of the phonons via the transfer of the small amount of excess energy is practically negligible. (iii) In reality, if there is heating of the phonons, the electrons will thermalize towards the enhanced lattice temperature -at least within an effective temperature description -before the excess heat is transferred from the irradiated sample surface to the bulk crystal. The heating of the lattice strongly depends on the sample and the precise experimental conditions, effects that are beyond the scope of our present model study. The two-dimensional Brillouin zone was discretized with a numerical grid of 80 × 80 momentum points. Calculations were performed on a reduced 1/8 zone with a total of 820 momenta. The Kadanoff-Baym-Keldysh contour was discretized, with step sizes of δ τ = 0.1 (eV) -1 and δ t ≈ 0.21 (eV) -1 ≈ 0.14 fs for imaginary and real times axes, respectively. This choice results for example in 1200 imaginary time points and 2800 real time points for the lowest temperature run at β = 120 (eV) -1 (T = 96 K), implying a total numerical grid of size 6800 × 6800 for a full double-time Keldysh contour Green function or self-energy. We checked that the numerical results were sufficiently converged as a function of time step size by adding runs with larger step sizes and extrapolating to zero step. Importantly, we used a 3rd order Adams-Bashforth scheme for the numerical integration of the differential equations together with a 6th order Gregory integration for the numerical integrals. The self-consistency cycle for the self-energy typically required a maximum of 5 iterations at each time step, using a standard predictor-corrector scheme Importantly, the achieved enhancement of superconductivity at short and intermediate times depends crucially on the initial order parameter and the distance from ∆ f . To demonstrate the systematics, Fig. In order to gain a deeper understanding of the different regimes of the dynamics, we compare our results to simulations of a BCS model (see Appendix A1 A) with parameters chosen to match ∆ 0 and ∆ f in Fig. The BCS dynamics captures the main features of the initial increase of the order parameter in agreement with the el-ph model. However, small deviations occur in particular for fast ramps, and the BCS model completely fails to account for the full thermalization on longer time scales. The reasonable agreement at initial times demonstrates that the dynamics of the order parameter at initial times is dominated by the change of the coherence factor relating the bare electrons to the Bogoliubov quasiparticles. In this regime, the main role of the phonons is to generate an effective attractive interaction between the electrons. The strong dependence of the order parameter dynamics on the ramp duration is already visible within BCS theory. Whereas the initial increase is strongly accelerated for shorter ramp durations, the reachable steady state value 67 increases with longer ramp durations, as shown in Fig. In contrast, the full el-ph model exhibits a very distinct behavior at intermediate and long times. The heat created in the electrons during the ramp is transferred to the phononic bath. As a consequence, the order parameter at long times reaches the expected thermal value independent of the ramp duration. Surprisingly, as seen in Fig. FIG. ph coupling in particular to the acoustic phonon branch, crucially depends on the el-ph coupling strength. Therefore we compare parameter sets at different temperatures for full (a) and reduced (b) el-ph coupling. Indeed, we observe that the slopes are the same for different curves within a panel, which have the same el-ph coupling, whereas the slopes are steeper for full compared to reduced el-ph coupling. In fact, the ratio of extracted slopes is 0.8 and matches approximately the ratio of the bare coupling values g 2 , despite the fact that the selfenergies are computed self-consistently and thus contain also higher orders in g 2 . The results clearly demonstrate the importance of el-ph coupling for the effective thermalization of the superconducting state at long times. In order to gain additional insight into the interplay of collective order parameter dynamics and single-particle scattering during and after a 100 fs ramp, we show in Fig. Initially the distributions show strong deviations from the final thermal distribution in a broad momentum range. Right after the ramp, the normal distribution far from the Fermi surface quickly approaches the thermal distribution in both cases. Large deviations remain in a narrow region close to the Fermi surface. In contrast, the relaxation dynamics of the anomalous densities is much slower. In particular, for the case of smaller ∆ 0 almost no change can be detected, whereas for the intermediate ∆ 0 the momentum region of large deviations shrinks faster. Thus, the time scales for the relaxation of the normal densities are much faster than for the anomalous ones. This is further supported by snapshots of effec- In order to highlight the nonthermal character of the instantaneous distributions, we plot in Fig. To emphasize the importance of the phonon spectrum, we compare in Fig. To reveal the underlying reason for this nonthermal behavior in the abscence of acoustic phonons, we show in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that nonequilibrium superconductivity can be enhanced on time scales reachable in pump-probe experiments with THz pump pulses. An enhanced electronic density of states around the Fermi level leads to strengthening of the effective pairing interaction, which dynamically enhances the superconducting order parameter during and after a ramp of the electronic hopping amplitude. The main features of the short-time dynamics are well described by a BCS model which means that the presence of the phonons mainly enters via the effective attractive interaction. In contrast, the presence of a phononic bath with a broad spectrum to which electrons can release energy is crucial to ensure that the thermal state is reached in which the superconducting order is fully enhanced to its expected equilibrium value after the ramp. Intriguingly, the phononic bath also enables the stabilization of the enhanced order parameter already for very fast ramps and thus opens an interesting route towards light-enhanced superconductivity on very short time scales. The strong dependence of the dynamical enhancement of superconductivity on the initial order parameter raises the question of how to induce superconductivity when starting above T c . A proper description of order parameter fluctuations, which trigger the symmetry breaking when starting in the normal state, is crucial in order to address this question (see Ref. 27 and references therein). Similarly, the nonequilibrium self-consistent update We thank A. Cavalleri, M. Kollar, P. van Loosdrecht, and A. Subedi for discussions, and H. van Pee for ad-ministrating the computer cluster on which the computations were performed. We acknowledge financial support of the DFG, and by the European Research Council (ERC-319286 QMAC, ERC-648166 Phon(t)on). As a simplified alternative to the full Migdal-Eliashberg theory, we also use time-dependent BCStheory in order to describe the initial evolution of the system. The BCS Hamiltonian is given by where U is the effective attractive interaction between the electrons, which is mediated by the electron-phonon interaction in the el-ph model. A mean-field decoupling in the Cooper channel leads to We define the normal and anomalous densities with real ( ′ ) and imaginary part ( ′′ ). The time-evolution equations for these densities are given by The self-consistency condition is where we have used that we chose the initial equilibrium solution to be real and given by Here E k (0) is the well-known Bogoliubov quasiparticle dispersion that is obtained from the diagonalization of the mean-field BCS Hamiltonian, where ∆ 0 is the selfconsistently determined initial equilibrium order parameter. The full solutions to the BCS equations are used in Fig. + O((ǫ(k, 0)t) (A14) This shows that for very short times t < t W , smaller than the inverse of the initial electronic half bandwidth (t W = 0.658 fs for W/2 = 4J 0 = 1 eV), the change in the momentum-resolved order parameter within BCS theory scales cubically in time for all momenta. For times t > t W the short-time approximation breaks down and the self-consistent feedback from other momenta becomes crucial for the dynamics. Nevertheless, the extracted scaling with ∆ 0 shown in Fig. At intermediate times we observe a quasi-linear behavior of the time-evolution of the order parameter, if its value is still far from final thermal value. This regime is reached, if the ramp duration is short compared to ∆ 0 , i.e. if τ ∆ 0 < . Using linear fits to the intermediate time ∆(t) (see Fig. 