Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments on single crystals of HgBa2CuO 4+δ are presented that identify two distinct temperature-dependent spin susceptibilities: one is due to a spin component that is temperature-dependent above the critical temperature for superconductivity (Tc) and reflects pseudogap behavior; the other is Fermi-liquid-like in that it is temperature independent above Tc and vanishes rapidly below Tc. In addition, we demonstrate the existence of a third, hitherto undetected spin susceptibility: it is temperature independent at higher temperatures, vanishes at lower temperatures (below T0 ≠ Tc), and changes sign near optimal doping. This susceptibility either arises from the coupling between the two spin components, or it could be given by a distinct third spin component. The high-temperature superconducting cuprates have long been known to exhibit complex electronic properties, yet there exists increasing evidence for Fermi-liquid behavior throughout much of the phase diagram. NMR is a powerful probe of local electronic degrees of freedom, and the complex properties of the cuprates manifest themselves in a unique dependence of NMR shifts on temperature and doping. The data in Fig. A long-standing fundamental question has been whether a single electronic fluid's temperature-dependent electronic spin polarization, S(T ) = χ(T )B 0 , in a magnetic field, B 0 , can explain these shifts. From the analyses of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.63 and YBa 2 Cu 4 O 8 shifts measured at planar copper and oxygen above and below T c it was concluded that this is the case Henceforth, NMR data have been interpreted largely in terms of a single electronic spin component. In contrast, early uniform susceptibility measurements above T c concluded on the presence of two spin components: a temperature-dependent component ("pseudogap-like"), and a temperature-independent component (Fermi-liquid-like) NMR shift experiments are rather reliable since χ(T ) must cause proportional spin shifts for all nuclear resonances. For a given orientation (η) of a crystal with respect to B 0 , we expect a spin shift K Sη (T ) = q η ⋅ χ(T ), where the anisotropy arises only from the effective hyperfine coefficients of each nucleus (q η ) since χ(T ) is believed to be isotropic. A few years ago, it was shown that the spin shifts at Cu and O in La 1.85 Sr 0.15 CuO 4 cannot be explained with a single spin component's χ(T ), but rather require two spin components with distinct temperature dependencies Two spin components, S 1 and S 2 , affect a nucleus through q 1η and q 2η , respectively, so that its spin shift is K Sη (x, T ) = q 1η ⋅ χ 1 (x, T ) + q 2η ⋅ χ 2 (x, T ). ( We note that, if S 1 and S 2 are coupled, χ 1 and χ 2 must be the sum of two terms each, i.e., χ 1 = χ 11 + χ 12 and χ 2 = χ 12 + χ 22 , where χ 12 is the coupling susceptibility that describes how S 1 responds to a magnetic field acting on S 2 Two new HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ single crystals with T c =45 K (UN45) and 85 K (UN85) were prepared following the method described previously In Fig. In Fig. where κ(x, T ) describes the temperature dependent offset between the parallel lines, which is plotted in the inset in Fig. We now discuss Fig. Next, we examine OP97 (for which κ ≈ 0, cf. Fig. We now turn to OV85. Going back to Fig. In this analysis, we assume that (1) the pseudogap shift is caused by χ 1 that obeys the scaling behavior discussed above; (2) for UN45 and UN74, the shifts are given by χ 1 and χ κ since there are no shift changes at T c ; and (3) that χ 2 is constant above T c . This leads to the results displayed in Fig. The left panel of Fig. If χ 1 is the susceptibility of S 1 and χ 2 that of S 2 , χ κ could be due to the coupling between S 1 and S 2 , i.e., q κη χ κ (x, T ) = 2q 1η χ 12 . As such, the sign change of χ κ with doping may indicate a change in sign of the electronic spin-spin coupling. However, since the anisotropies of q 1η and q κη are different, χ κ would have to be anisotropic. This may not be possible in the absence of spin-orbit coupling. Alternatively, χ κ could be the susceptibility of a new spin component (S 3 ). In such a case, coupling of S 3 to S 1 and S 2 could possibly be leading to a complicated shift scenario that can, however, be described in a rather simple way as shown here. We would like to point out that κ cannot be explained by a redistribution of NMR spectral weight with temperature within the rather broad Cu resonance. This is also seen from the Hg NMR linewidth The fact that the Cu nucleus couples to S 1 and S 2 with just one anisotropic q 1η is perhaps not surprising, but argues against a trivial picture of different Cu and O spins to which a Cu nucleus would couple with different angular dependencies. Perhaps, S 1 and S 2 relate to antinodal and nodal quasi-particles, respectively, which may be coupled to give χ κ While there can be no doubt about the existence of χ κ in HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ , the question arises whether it is of relevance for the other cuprates as well. Certainly, such a term could be present in NMR shift data, but pass unnoticed. First, χ κ is temperature independent at high temperatures and thus difficult to distinguish from orbital shifts, and from χ 2 ; at low temperatures, the diamagnetic response in the superconducting state obscures its temperature dependence (T c is often not very well defined and thus hard to distinguish from a smeared T 0 ). In addition, broad NMR lines and signal wipeout on the underdoped side of the phase diagram create uncertainties. It is no surprise that we discovered the new component with HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ single crystals, as most 63 Cu NMR shift studies involved systems for which 63 K S∥ (T ) ≈ 0 due to an accidental cancellation (e.g., La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+δ ). The two-component descriptions of La 1.85 Sr 0.15 CuO 4 and YBa 2 Cu 4 O 8 Bulk susceptibility data are only available above T c , and at low temperatures the data are often obscured by a Curie-like response The scenario found here reminds one of a quantum critical point near optimal doping To conclude, based on a detailed study of the local magnetic response of HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ single crystals we confirm that a description of the NMR shifts with a single, temperature-dependent spin component is not possible. Since this finding applies to three different classes of materials The data for UN45 are proof in favor of χ κ as well since the shift decrease starts far above T c (Fig. In addition, if we look at Fig. To summarize, we believe that there cannot be any doubt that the new shift component is due to a spin susceptibility that is temperature independent at high temperatures, but vanishes at low temperatures, with an onset temperature T 0 that can be very different from T c . Here we describe the decomposition of the experimentally determined 63 Cu magnetic shifts, 63 K ∥,⊥ (T ), that are displayed in Fig. If a single electronic spin component with susceptibility χ(T ) was causing the temperature dependence of the shifts, any nucleus (n) would experience a spin shift given by, where the anisotropy of the shifts, here just for the two principle axes (∥, ⊥) of the shift tensor (HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ is tetragonal), is given by the anisotropic hyperfine constants ( n q ∥,⊥ ). Thus, if we plot the shifts measured at any two nuclei (n, k) against each other (with temperature as an implicit parameter) we must have, and a straight line with the slope given by the ratio of the hyperfine coefficients should emerge. Since this was not the case, e.g., for La 1.85 Sr 0.15 CuO 4 with 17 K ∥ and 63 K ⊥ This expression was also used to discuss the 17 O NMR shifts in YBa 2 Cu 4 O 8 measured as a function of pressure If we are only interested in the Cu shift data (from now on we drop the nuclear label), a single-component behavior demands, and we see with Fig. where χ and χ κ are two susceptibilities from two different spin components. Note that Fig. for otherwise Eq. (S4) would still hold. For any two temperatures T 2 > T 1 we write for the corresponding changes in the shift ∆K η = K η (T 2 ) -K η (T 1 ), and we have with ∆χ = χ(T 2 )χ(T 1 ), etc., from (S5), Note that ∆K η ≡ ∆K Sη since we assumed that the temperature dependence of the total magnetic shift is only due to spin effects. Momentarily, we do not require K Sη (T → 0) ≈ 0, as is typically assumed (for spin singlet pairing). If we knew the coupling constants q η and q κη the system of equations (S7), (S8) could be solved for ∆χ and ∆χ κ (as long as the rank of the corresponding matrix is 2, i.e., the relation (S6) is obeyed). However, these values are not accessible from the NMR data alone. Nonetheless, knowledge of the ratios q ∥ q ⊥ and q κ∥ q κ⊥ does allow to solve (S7) and (S8) for the changes of the spin shift q η ∆χ and q κη ∆χ κ , i.e., Summing up all the incremental changes with temperature we obtain the total temperature-dependent spin shift contributions, i.e., q η χ κ (T ) and q κη χ κ (T ) (relative to our starting temperature). The system of equations (S7), (S8) can also be understood in terms of vector addition with relation (S6) meaning that the vectors q ∥ q ⊥ and q κ∥ q κ⊥ are linearly independent, c.f. Fig. online) Vector interpretation of system of equations (S7), (S8). In the case of two linearly dependent vectors ⃗ q and ⃗ qκ, a solution does not exists (dotted line). While q ∥ q ⊥ = 0.4 can be extracted from the common slope at high temperatures in Fig. We perform the decomposition according to Eqs. (S9) and (S10) with q κ∥ q κ⊥ as one parameter for both underdoped samples. For each value of this parameter, we then apply a linear regression of q η χ UN74 vs. q η χ UN45 and calculate the error as the sum the squares of all temperature points, with a = 1.7±0.2 -5 0 5 10 -0.14 -0.13 FIG. The shift component (q η χ) that remains after the subtraction of q κη χ κ differs widely between the samples. For the two underdoped samples (UN45 and UN74) we find q η χ(T ) to change slowly with temperature even throughout T c , i.e., T c is not noticeable, cf. also inset of Fig. We now focus on the extracted pseudogap shift given by q 1,η χ 1 (T ). Based on shift and linewidth data for UN74 and OP97 we concluded previously An experimental scaling relationship for part of the uniform spin susceptibility was introduced by Johnston In Fig. The pseudogap susceptibilities all fit the universal function F (T T max (x)) shown in Fig. Since we do not have measurements at very high temperatures, we use values of T max for UN45, UN74 and OP97 for the same doping as those deduced by Johnston and Nakano et al. for La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . For the overdoped OV85 sample we can calculate T max reliably 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0.8 from our data and we obtain 242(4) K. We note that our q 1,η χ 1 (x, T ) is in almost perfect agreement with the universal curve F (T T max (x)) as shown in Fig. We conclude that the scaling of the NMR shifts that we also reported for YBa 2 Cu 4 O 8 17