Recent investigations have shown that Fe1+yTe1-xSex can be made superconducting by annealing it in Se and O vapors. The current lore is that these chalcogen vapors induce superconductivity by removing the magnetic excess Fe atoms. To investigate this phenomenon we performed a combination of magnetic susceptibility, specific heat and transport measurements together with scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy and density functional theory calculations on Fe1+yTe1-xSex treated with Te vapor. We conclude that the main role of the Te vapor is to quench the magnetic moments of the excess Fe atoms by forming FeTem (m ≥ 1) complexes. We show that the remaining FeTem complexes are still damaging to the superconductivity and therefore that their removal potentially could further improve superconductive properties in these compounds. The interplay between magnetism and superconductivity in cuprate, heavy-fermion and iron-based superconductors has attracted intensive interest of the research community Reported studies have shown the enhancement of superconductivity by annealing iron chalcoginides with excess iron in different types of vapors, such as oxygen and selenium Here, we report that by annealing in Te vapor, the magnetic moment of the excess Fe impurities in the iron chalcogenide, Fe 1.05 Te 0.75 Se 0.25 , is reduced. The moment reduction appears to occur through an electronic hybridization of the excess iron with Te atoms from the vapor that results in the formation of a Fe-Te complex. The formation of this complex results in the recovery of bulk superconductivity. Local structure, electronic properties and the magnetic moment of impurities in the annealed Fe 1.05 Te 0.75 Se 0.25 sample in Te vapor (hereinafter referred to as "annealed Fe 1.05 Te 0.75 Se 0.25 sample") were investigated in detail by using scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S), density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and bulk measurements. Single crystals of Fe 1.05 Te 0.75 Se 0.25 are grown from the melt using a modified Bridgmann method To study the influence of the impurities on superconductivity, besides bulk superconductivity measurements, we perform local imaging and spectroscopy measurements using STM/S. Annealed Fe 1.05 Te 0.75 Se 0.25 single crystals were cleaved in ultrahigh vacuum at room tem- perature (RT) and loaded into the microscope stage to cool down overnight to low temperatures (the microscope stage cooled with liquid helium). The topographic STM images (Fig. We perform scanning tunneling spectroscopy to study the local electronic structure of the impurities. The image in Fig. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out to investigate these impurities. A single Fe interstitial atom on a FeTe surface (Fig. The adsorption energy of a single Te-atom on the FeTe surface is 1.20 eV, whereas it is more strongly adsorbed by 1.94 eV on the interstitial Fe-atom on the surface to form a FeTe-complex. This single FeTe complex on the surface of FeTe film has geometry as shown in Fig. Most interestingly, the Fe-atoms in FeTe complex are much less magnetic, with a moment of ∼0.2 μB, over 10-times less than ∼2.3 μB seen in an isolated excess Fe-impurity. As seen in supplementary Fig. To analyze the effects of the FeTe m impurities on the superconductivity, we perform scanning tunneling spectroscopy. In Fig. shown in the top curve in Fig. As demonstrated in the theory by Abrikosov and Gor kov Indeed the presence of in-gap impurity states is revealed in Fig. The area (shown in supplementary Fig. To summarize, we investigate the magnetic and superconducting properties of Fe 1.05 Te 0.75 Se 0.25 annealed in Te vapor. Using STM/S, theoretical calculations, and bulk measurements, we show that the moments of excess iron atoms are quenched due to the formation of FeTe m (m ≥ 1) complexes during the annealing process. Furthermore, the remaining FeTe m complexes still locally suppress the superconductivity. Therefore, we envision that in future experiments there is still room to further improve superconductive properties by not only removing the magnetic moments of the excess Fe impurities, but also the complexes themselves that they form with the Te impurities. Research was supported (W.L., B.C.S., S.V.K.) by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. This research was conducted (W.L., J.W., M.P., P.G., T.M., T.B.) at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is sponsored at Oak Ridge National Laboratory by the Scientific User Facilities Division, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy. T.B. was supported as a Wigner Fellow at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. This research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. WSxM software has been used to assist STM data analysis 