We have investigated the electronic structure of BiS2-based CeO0.5F0.5BiS2 superconductor using polarization-dependent angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), and succeeded in elucidating the orbital characters on the Fermi surfaces. In the rectangular Fermi pockets around X point, the straight portion parallel to the ky direction is dominated by Bi 6px character. The orbital polarization indicates the underlying quasi-one-dimensional electronic structure of the BiS2 system. Moreover, distortions on tetragonally aligned Bi could give rise to the band Jahn-Teller effect. Since the discovery of BiS 2 -based superconductors by Mizuguchi et al. According to the theoretical studies, in a typical RE(O,F)BiS 2 system, all the Bi 6p orbitals have almost the same band center (E = E F + 2.9 eV), and the Fermi surfaces are constructed from the p x and p y orbitals due to their much wider band widths than that of p z In this paper, in order to address these issues mentioned above (smaller Fermi surface, polaron, quasione-dimensionality), we have performed polarizationdependent high resolution ARPES measurement and band-structure calculation on CeO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 . High-quality single crystal of CeO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 has been prepared by CsCl flux method, and its details are given elsewhere where φ k i (φ k f ) is the initial-(final-) state wave function, and ε is the polarization vector of the incident photons. The final state φ k f is always even since it is in the mirror plane and can be approximately described by a plane wave. In the p-(s-) polarization setup, the term ε • r is even (odd), and the corresponding initial state should be even (odd) with respect to the mirror plane in order to give non-vanishing M k i,f . Therefore, the p x and p z orbitals are observable for the p-polarization setup, while the p y orbital for the s-polarization setup, as depicted in Fig. The Fermi surface map of CeO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 was taken by changing tilt angle with circularly polarized light as shown in Fig. 2(e) and (h) (in the present system with strong atomic disorder According to the scanning tunneling microscopy study, Bi defects have been found on the BiS plane, whose amount was approximately 3% of Bi site Figure According to the minimal model calculation by Usui, Suzuki, and Kuroki 24 , the band along Γ-X consists of well-hybridized Bi p X and p Y (namely, close to pure Bi p x or Bi p x ) whereas that along Γ-M is derived from pure Bi p X or p Y as in Figs. At the doping level of x = 0.5, the band along Γ-M crosses E F and forms almost strait Fermi surfaces with p X (or p Y ) character. Usui, Suzuki, and Kuroki proposed the Fermi surface nesting between the p X Fermi surfaces or between the p Y Fermi surfaces can enhance the spin fluctuations for the superconductivity Here, we have succeeded in the detailed orbital characterization; in the rectangular Fermi surface around (π, 0), the straight portion parallel to the k y -axis is dominated by Bi 6p x as schematically shown in Fig. In summary, we have studied the electronic structure of CeO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 by means of polarization dependent ARPES. From the circularly polarized photon, the doped electron has been estimated using Fermi surface as 0.22 electron per Bi in CeO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 , that is much smaller than the nominal value of 0.5. From the linearly polarized photons, we have succeeded in the observation of orbitally polarized Fermi surface. It indicates that the system has quasi-one-dimensional property, that could enhance the electronic correlation and/or electron-phonon coupling. This might be why the band dispersion obtained by ARPES has poor agreements with the ab initio calculation. We would like to acknowledge Prof. Yoshikazu Mizuguchi, Prof. Yoshihiko Takano, and Prof. Hidetomo Usui for the fruitful discussion. T.S. and D.O. acknowledge the support from JSPS Research Fellowship for Young Scientists. This work is partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant No. 15H03693). E.F.S. acknowledges financial support from the JSPS postdoctoral fellowship for overseas researchers as well as the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (Grant No. P13783). The synchrotron radiation experiments have been done with the approval of Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center (Proposal No.14-A-13 and No.14-B-24).