Original definition of the pseudogap In the recent time the topological states of matter, e.g. The motivation of our approach to the pseudogap problem, associated effects and experimental aspects can be found in papers The designation "pseudogap" is predominantly used discussing lowenergy excitations of high-temperature cuprate superconductors One observes here on the doping phase diagram a spectral gap evidently different from the superconducting gap. This "anomalous" gap exceeds markedly the superconducting dome described by the transition temperature (T c ) curve. It can be also detected inside of the superconducting region as observed in the normal state. The properties of these two type gaps demonstrate different behaviour with doping etc. In underdoped region the energy scales of them are also markedly different. Progressive doping washes out this dichotomy. At present there is a common conclusion that the superconducting gap (Δ) and the pseudogap are of different genesis and compete (in some sense). An enormous amount of experimental and theoretical work has been done without a full understanding of the pseudogap and its origin. We associate the pseudogap with a specific excitation in the multiband superconductivity scheme. Multiband superconductivity with appearing here interband pairing channels For our approach to the pseudogap event it is of primary significance that on the multiband background the position of the chemical potential can vary between various bands or combinations of them. The Fermi surface momentum space region for location of μ becomes decisive including the possible Fermi surface reorganizations. The chemical potential position can vary under given conditions with the developing electron spectrum "topology". There can be bands including μ, or not, in the full actual multiband complex. Eventual changes by doping and reorganizations of the electron spectrum rule this choice. The pairing mechanism can include essential contributions from the interband interactions. These interactions work effectively in the case of overlapping bands or small gaps between them. The doping process can include remarkable changes in the electron spectrum by changing the bands overlap In multiband superconductivity the quasiparticle energies have the Bogolybov form Here ξ α is the band energy and Δ α the superconducting gap induced in the same band. Our original definition with |ξ α -μ| min ≠ 0. Experimentally the insulator to metal type transition accompanying the vanishing of the pseudogap is well known in the normal state Consequently one is really dealing with the insulating properties of the momentum space region occupied by the pseudogap excitations. In the case where the reorganization of the spectrum allowes Because the interband pairing can be not very effective for the case where the gap |ξ α -μ| min ≠ 0 is far from zero, another parallel pairing channel is expected to occur. Then the pseudogap E α and a superconducting gap ∆ β can be simultaneously detected at the same doping level, but in different spectral windows. In the well exposed region of the pseudogap its slow temperature dependence stems from the superconducting contribution (2). The T*-line usually represented as the high-energy (temperature) limit for the presence of the pseudogap A three band model of cuprate superconductivity using the mentioned standpoints can be followed in Our representation (2) for the pseudogap excitation enables it to be conceptually connected with a topological interpretation. This gap is essentially associated with a normal state topological band insulator. The latter is protected by the location of the chemical position in the manifold of multiband superconductivity background. This work was partially supported by the European Union through the European Region Development Fund.