We demonstrated a laser depth imaging system based on the time-correlated single-photon counting technique, which was incorporated with a low-jitter superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD), operated at the wavelength of 1550 nm. A sub-picosecond time-bin width was chosen for photon counting, resulting in a discrete noise of less than one/two counts for each time bin under indoor/outdoor daylight conditions, with a collection time of 50 ms. Because of the low-jitter SNSPD, the target signal histogram was significantly distinguishable, even for a fairly low retro-reflected photon flux. The depth information was determined directly by the highest bin counts, instead of using any data fitting combined with complex algorithms. Millimeter resolution depth imaging of a low-signature object was obtained, and more accurate data than that produced by the traditional Gaussian fitting method was generated. Combined with the intensity of the return photons, three-dimensional reconstruction overlaid with reflectivity data was realized. Light detection and ranging (LIDAR) is a remote sensing technology that measures distance by illuminating a target with a laser and analyzing the time-of-flight (TOF) of the reflected light. This method is used to make high-resolution maps for many applications, including remote sensing, terrain mapping, and space debris tracking Most LIDAR applications with outstanding performance have been realized at wavelengths under 1000 nm using a Si avalanche photodiode (APD) In the last decade, superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) have attracted considerable attention because of their high DEs, low DCRs, no afterpulsing, and low-TJ. SNSPDs are considered as a promising alternative to conventional single-photon detectors (SPDs) and have been successfully used in near-infrared laser ranging In general, the depth resolution of an imager is predominantly determined by the TJ of the detector. SPDs with relatively low-TJs may not only provide a higher depth resolution but also improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Indeed, the noise count per time bin, contributed by the stray light, has a random feature and can be decreased by employing a smaller time bin. In extreme cases, the target signal can be determined if the noise count per time bin is no more than 1, and the signal count is greater than 2. In this way, no fitting or algorithm is necessary. However, a low-TJ system is a prerequisite for realizing this simple yet effective method. In this paper, we demonstrated a TCSPC depth imager operated at a wavelength of 1550 nm that incorporated a low-TJ SNSPD. The TJ of the optimized system was 44 ps full width at half maximum (FWHM). An 813-fs time-bin width was chosen for photon counting, which gave discrete noise of less than one count in indoor daylight condition and less than two counts in outdoor daylight condition for a 50-ms collection time. Because of the low-TJ SNSPD and sub-picosecond time bin, the depth information was determined directly by the highest bin counts, which produced more accurate data than the traditional Gaussian fitting method for the low-signature target. Combined with the intensities of the return photons, the indoor and outdoor depth imaging overlaid with reflectivity data for a target with a stand-off distance of 2.5 m were demonstrated. The experiment setup is schematically illustrated in Fig. To lower the TJ of the imaging system, we chose SPC-150 (Becker & Hickl GmbH) as the data acquisition module. This module had a lower TJ of 7.6-ps FWHM and was configured with a minimal time bin of 813 fs, as opposed to the popular TCSPC module PicoHarp 300 (PicoQuant GmbH), which had a TJ of 26-ps FWHM and a 4-ps time bin per channel. In addition, the TJs of the employed femtosecond-pulsed laser and its synchronization trigger were 60 fs and 4 ps, respectively. The retro-reflected photons were detected by the SNSPD, and the corresponding histograms were then recorded by the SPC-150 over a fixed integration time (with a time bin per channel of 813 fs). Figure We demonstrated a TCSPC imaging system that was operated at the wavelength of 1550 nm using a low-jitter SNSPD. The 44-ps system TJ, combined with a sub-picosecond time bin, allowed us to easily discriminate the signal counts from the noise signals at a very low return photon level. As a result, laser depth imaging was realized without the use of fitting or algorithms. The fine structural features of the target were registered in the 3D image both indoors and outdoors. This method is interesting for the ranging of low-signature targets and extending the ranging distance. By further decreasing TJ, ranging and imaging with only two retro-reflected signal photons will become possible.