We experimentally studied the dynamics of optically excited hotspots in current-carrying WSi superconducting nanowires as a function of bias current, bath temperature and excitation wavelength. We discovered that: (1) the hotspot relaxation is a factor of ~ 4 slower in WSi than in NbN; (2) the hotspot relaxation time depends on bias current, and (3) the current dependence of the hotspot relaxation time changes with temperature and wavelength. We explained all of these effects with a model based on quasi-particle recombination. When a photon is absorbed in a superconductor, it creates a non-equilibrium region referred to as a hotspot 1 . The optical excitation of hotspots underpins the operation of most superconducting single photon detectors, such as microwave kinetic inductance detectors (MKIDs) 2,3 , superconducting tunnel junctions (STJs) 4 , and superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs) 5 . If hotspot dynamics were understood and controlled, many of the current limitations of these detectors would be overcome, thus enabling disruptive technologies. Here we report a combined experimental and theoretical study of hotspots excited by single photons in current-carrying WSi superconducting nanowires. We observed for the first time that: (1) the hotspot relaxation time (t HS ) depends on the current carried by the nanowires; and (2) the current dependence of t HS changes with bath temperature and excitation wavelength. The agreement between theory and experiment provides new insight into the quasiparticle dynamics in superconductors and the photodetection mechanism of superconducting single photon detectors. Copyright 2015. All rights reserved. photoresponse count rate (PCR) and f rep . PCR was calculated as the difference between the count rate measured with the light source coupled to the detector (CR) and the count rate measured with the light source blanked with a shutter (background count rate, BCR) In the limit where only one-and two-photon detection events lead to a measureable count rate, the click probability can be written as where η 1 is the single-photon system detection efficiency (which we defined as the probability that a photon coupled in the SNSPD fiber created a response pulse), η 2 is the two-photon system detection efficiency (which we defined as the probability that two photon coupled in the SNSPD fiber created a response pulse), and n is the number of photons per pulse coupled to the detector system. η 1 and η 2 depend on the bias current, bath temperature, and excitation wavelength. Equation (1) ignores the effect of dark counts, since BCR had already been subtracted from the data. In the single-photon detection regime, η 1 >> η 2 and Equation (1) simplifies to we obtain the familiar approximation: P click (μ) ~ η 1 • μ. If the detector operates in the two-photon detection regime (where η 2 >> η 1 ) and η 2 • μ 2 << 1, Eq. (1) can be approximated by P click (μ) ~ η 2 • μ 2 / 2. Following the method described in Ref. To measure the hotspot relaxation time we illuminated the detector with the pulse-pair source and measured PCR as a function of t D over a range of 1 ns. Figure To gain insight into the mechanism that caused t HS to increase when I B was increased, we investigated how the bias dependence of t HS changed when changing T B and λ. As shown in Figure (2) the characteristic quasiparticle time of WSi (τ 0 , as defined in Ref. the experimental data. The effect we discovered provides new insight into non-equilibrium superconductivity and has important implications for superconducting detectors. A.G.Kozorezov et al. Quasiparticle recombination in hot spots in superconducting current carrying nano-wires. submitted (2015).