Conventional powder-in-tube (PIT) method has been the most effective technique for fabricating iron-based superconducting wires and tapes. Tremendous advances have been made during the last few years, especially for 122 family pnictide tapes. Here we review some of the most recent and significant developments in making highperformance iron-based tapes by the ex-situ PIT process, paying particular attention to several fabrication techniques to realize high-field Jc performance in terms of increase of core density and improvement of texture. At 4.2 K, the practical level transport Jc up to 0.12 MA/cm 2 in 10 T and 0.1 MA/cm 2 in 14 T have been achieved in the K-doped 122/Ag tapes. As for multifilamentary 122 iron-based wires and tapes, the highest Jc values reached so far are 61 kA/cm 2 and 35 kA /cm 2 at 4.2 K and 10 T, respectively for 7-and 19-core Sr-122 tapes. Recently, high Jc Cu-cladded and stainless steel/Ag double-sheathed 122 tapes have also been produced in order to improve either mechanical properties or thermal stability. More importantly, the scalable rolling process has been used for the first time to demonstrate high Jc values in 122 conductor tapes of 11 m in length. The discovery of superconductivity in iron-pnictides in 2008 The powder-in-tube (PIT) method is most widely used for the fabrication of 1111, 11 (FeSe) and 122-type superconducting wires and tapes using various sheath materials such as Fe, Ag, Nb and Ta In this paper, we review key properties and technical progress in developing high performance iron-based superconducting materials during the last few years. The article is aimed at providing a snapshot of these recent developments and a sense of their significance for high-field applications. The PIT process has advantage of the low material costs and the deformation techniques used are very simple. There are two PIT methods. One is an in-situ method, in which a powder mixture of precursor of 122 phase is used as a starting material. The other is an ex-situ method, in which powder of 122 phase is used. Currently, the most successful approach for fabricating pnictide wires was the so-called ex-situ PIT method, first used for 122 type by our group During the deformation process, as shown in figure In order to find optimal heat conditions, Lin et al. recently studied the effects of sintering temperatures on the phase formation, resistivity transition, critical current density and microstructure of Sn-added Sr-122 tapes Transition temperature Tc of Sr-122 tapes increases with increasing the heat treatment temperature. For the tapes prepared at 900o C, the onset Tc = 33 K and transition width T = 1.58 K was obtained. When at 950o C, although the onset Tc was 33 K, broad width T = 2.82 K was observed. This can be explained by more impurity phases induced by the higher temperature, as supported by the XRD data. Figure Microstructural analysis demonstrated that the sample sintered at 800o C had nonuniform particle sizes and irregular morphology because this reaction temperature is 100o C lower than the synthesis temperature of precursors, which is unable to completely recover the cracks and pores induced in cold deformation. As for tapes heated at 950o C, many black pores and white dendrite structures inside the matrix were existent, caused by the excessive loss of the volatile component of superconducting phase, such as potassium. The pores and also impurity phases resulted in a drastic Jc degradation, as further supported by XRD and R-T analysis. In summary, the sintering temperature between 850 and 900o C is most suitable to realize high Jc for 122 type wires. The typical PIT thermomechanical processing for 122 pnictide wires consists of one rolling step and one heat treatment step. The purpose of the rolling step is to densify 122 filaments with high density core and connectivity between grains is recovered after a final heat treatment. Therefore, optimization of the rolling process is also important for achieving high critical current density values through the fabrication well connected 122 crystal structure. Thus far, Ag and Fe are two sheath materials currently used for 122 wire fabrication. Ag looks the most appropriate sheath material for 122 phases, because Ag does not react with 122 superconductor, as first demonstrated by Wang et al. Figure On the other hand, as for the Fe-sheathed Sr-122 wires, like the case of Ag, the Jc also rapidly increased by the flat-rolling process, but reaching a maximum value at the thickness of 0.6 mm as shown in figure These thin reaction layers would consume some of the As within the filament, not only leading to an increase in porosity and impurities, thus a lowering of the transport Jc value, but also making the Fe sheath very brittle, reducing the mechanical properties of conductors. Nevertheless, Fe is still a valuable alternative to Ag sheath, due to low cost material. Indeed, the finally annealing temperature may become lower than 900o C after further optimization, thus this reaction layer is expected to be small. Therefore, Fe remains an interesting alternative for application. In a word, the transport Jc increases for smallest tapes thicknesses, a maximum being found for a tape thickness of about 0.3 mm and 0.6 mm for Ag and Fe sheathed 122 tapes, respectively, below which the formation of cracks in the filament limits the critical current. This can be understood that the optimum rolling thickness from different sheath materials was determined by the balance between improvement in density and initiation of microcracks which cannot be healed by final heat treatment. At an early stage of development, the transport Jc of PIT processed wires was quite low due to the poor grain linkage problem Important progress was achieved by Wang et al. Inspired by the above texturing process, Gao et al Recently, author's group has fabricated Fe-sheathed Sr-122 tapes showing a substantial enhancement of Jc after further optimizing the texturing process, e.g., the sausaging of the filament has been reduced by optimizing the thickness reduction between consecutive rolling steps. As shown in figure More encouraging result in enhancing Jc was achieved by Dong et al. Although the above 122 tapes have textured microstructure along the rolled metals, the anisotropy of Jc with the applied magnetic field angle is quite small, less than 1.5, not only for Fe-clad Sr-122 tapes Densification is another dominant factor that determines the critical current performance of the present PIT pnictide wire. Higher Jc in wire requires a high mass density of the superconducting filaments simply owing to the enhancement of the current flow path In the course of developing PIT Bi-2223 tapes, it was reported that cold pressing is more effective for the enhancement of transport Jc than flat rolling Just like the case of PIT Bi2223, it is interesting to follow the development of Jc, with the number of annealing, rolling and pressing cycles. Togano et al. We fabricated Ag-sheathed Sr-122 tapes and tried to improve the Jc properties by controlling the rolling, sintering and pressing steps through the improvement of the filament density and the crystal alignment of the 122 phase. As shown in figure The transport Jc reached 86 kA/cm 2 at 10 T and 4.2 K. This implies that high densification by rolling the wire several times and/or changing the pressure during pressing deformation process is effective in enhancing Jc. However, cold pressing always causes fatal micro-cracks inside the superconducting core, which cannot be healed by a subsequent heat treatment. More recently, a significant breakthrough in enhancing Jc of 122 type wires was achieved using hot pressing instead of usual heat treatment by our group The data on Sr-122 wires show a substantial increase of Jc after hot pressing. As shown in figure The transport Jc of hot pressed Sr-122 tapes was over 10 5 A/cm 2 in 10 T at 4.2 K. This value is by far the highest ever recorded for iron based superconducting wires and has surpassed the threshold for practical application. Also, the hot pressed 122 conductors have superior Jc than MgB2 and NbTi in field region over 10 T. The hot pressing was performed for the 60 mm long ex-situ processed Sr-122 tapes in an argon gas flow The flat rolled mono-and multifilamentary tapes were sandwiched between two pieces of metal sheets and pressed at ~30 MPa at 850-900 o C for 30 min. Figure More importantly, our results about the correlations between the Jc and the hot pressing temperature clearly demonstrated that the grain texture has a strong influence on the transport properties. As shown in figure Therefore, significant enhancements in Jc in hot pressed Sr-122 tapes is believed to stem mainly from an improvement of grain connectivity by either reducing weak links or increasing the core density. For applications, besides high Jc, there are many other performance requirements for conductors. Superconducting conductors for large-scale applications are multifilamentary round or tape-shaped wires in which one or more superconducting filaments are embedded in a matrix of normal metal, such as Cu or Ag, which provides protection against magnetic flux jumps and thermal quenching Towards practical applications of iron-based superconductors, fabricating multifilamentary wires and tapes is an indispensable step. The first production of multifilamentary 122 type wires has been report by Yao et al. In contrast to drawing, flat rolling can efficiently increase the mass density of the superconducting core thus significantly improving the transport Jc of the as-drawn wires. As shown in figure On the other hand, for multifilamentary 122/Ag wires and tapes it is found that hot pressing can also greatly improve their Jc performance. At present, the highest Jc values reached 6.1×10 4 A/cm 2 and 3.5×10 4 A/cm 2 at 4.2 K and 10 T, respectively for hot pressed 7-and 19-core Sr-122 tapes Pnictide superconductors showed weak decrease of critical current with increasing the external magnetic field T, and critical currents (Ic) have been simultaneously measured. As shown in figure In It should be noted that the Je has reached the widely accepted value of 10 4 A/cm 2 at 10 T needed for practical applications High Jc of 10 5 A/cm 2 at 4.2 K has been produced by several groups, such as Florida, NIMS, and the IEE group which is where the author is from. We can now routinely obtain critical current density of 10 5 A/cm 2 at 10 T for short tapes. However, all applications require not only high Jc conductors, but sufficient long length for winding the coils, or cabling as well. In particular, an easy and simple process is required to balance the high performance and the production cost of the long length wires. In August, 2014, the author's group announced the world first 11m long Sr-122/Ag tape by rolling Transport Jc at 4.2 K and 10 T measured along the length of the Sr-122 tape is shown in figure Clearly, an average Jc value of ~1.84×10 4 A/cm 2 at 10 T was achieved over the 11 meter length, demonstrating the high performance of long 122 tapes made by the scalable rolling process. For high magnetic field applications, fabricating longer multifilament 122 wires is indispensable. There is a high likelihood that 10-100 meter lengths of 122 conductor will be available for applications several years later. Wires and tapes of the 1111 family are appealing for applications as well due to its highest Tc among iron-based superconductors. However, less work has been carried out for the fabrication of 1111 wires and tapes, because of the difficulty in controlling O and F stoichiometry during heat treatments at high temperatures. Recently, Zhang et al. synthesized Fe-sheathed SmFeAsO0.8F0.2 tapes using a Sn-presintering process and achieved a high Jc of 34.5 kA/cm 2 at 4.2 K in the self field More recently, the Sefat group reported the first wire fabrication of non-arsenic Ba(NH3)Fe2Se2 iron-based superconductor by the PIT method For the 11 type iron chalcogenide compounds, represented by FeSe and Fe(Se, Te), the latest progress was reported by Palomno et al. In summary, ex-situ PIT method is now the most popular method to fabricate ironbased superconducting tapes and wires. As sheath materials, so far Ag shows no reaction with 122 phase, but Fe and Cu appear as a possible alternative, in particular if the final heat treatment temperature can be further reduced. Main problems encountered when producing 122 wires or tapes by the PIT method are the need for an improvement of grain connectivity, by either a densification of the filaments or a texturing process. In the past several years, rapid progress on 122 wire with a view towards its References NHFML: pressed Sr-122 wires at 700°C for 4 h in Ar atmosphere under pressure of 120 MPa.