The heavy fermion intermetallic compound URu 2 Si 2 exhibits a "hidden-order" phase below the temperature of 17.5 K, which supports both anomalous metallic behavior and unconventional superconductivity. While these individual phenomena have been investigated in detail, it remains unclear how they are related to each other and to what extent uranium f -electron valence fluctuations influence each one. Here we use ligand site substituted URu 2 Si 2-x P x to establish their evolution under electronic tuning. We find that while hidden order is monotonically suppressed and destroyed for x ≤ 0.035, the superconducting strength evolves through a dome that is centered near x ≈ 0.01 and terminates near x ≈ 0.028. This behavior reveals that hidden order depends strongly on tuning outside of the Uf -electron shells. It also suggests that while hidden order provides an environment for superconductivity and anomalous metallic behavior, it's fluctuations are not solely responsible for their progression. Materials that defy straightforward description in terms of either localized or itinerant electron behavior are a longstanding challenge to understanding novel electronic matter. In Fig. The resistive superconducting transition temperature T c,ρ (Fig. x and subsequently vanishes, with no evidence for bulk superconductivity above 20 mK for x > 0.02. While the value of T c,C extracted from heat capacity is in close agreement with T c,ρ for x ≤ 0.01, these values separate for x = 0.02 where T c,ρ > T c,C . We note that a similar discrepancy between T c,ρ and T c,C is seen for high quality single crystal specimens of the correlated electron superconductor CeIrIn 5 and may be an intrinsic feature of the unconventional superconducting state. These results are shown in Fig. Magnetoresistance data (Fig. We note that the actual value of the g-factor in the a-direction may differ significantly from the fitted g a (x) because of the increased importance of diamagnetic effects as the field rotates into the ab-plane. It remains to be seen whether these trends are consistent with recent theoretical proposals such as ref. Magnetoresistance measurements further highlight the non-monotonic evolution with x of the superconductivity and the underlying metallic state. Fig. Although much of the recent excitement surrounding URu 2 Si 2 has focused on the uranium electronic structure and the symmetry of the hidden order phase, a more fundamental question is the degree to which the f -electrons can be treated as being localized and the role of quantum fluctuations. The continuity of experimental information extracted from well-developed applied pressure (P ) and chemical substitution (x) series has proven essential to disentangle such effects in other correlated systems including high temperature superconducting cuprates, pnictides, and heavy fermion compounds. To some extent, URu 2 Si 2 has also benefited from such studies. For example, pressure drives a first order phase transition from hidden order into antiferromagnetism near P c = 0.5 GPa, with a simultaneous evolution of the Fermi surface, While in many theoretical scenarios for hidden order in URu 2 Si 2 the U-5f electrons are treated as having mostly fixed valence in a particular atomic crystal field state, Together these results point towards this series as a platform for unraveling the relationship between local and itinerant behavior in URu 2 Si 2 . The stark contrast in the evolution of the hidden order and superconductivity in URu 2 Si 2-x P x (monotonic vs. non-monotonic) further suggests that hidden order, although necessary, is not directly responsible for the superconducting pairing. Instead, the observation of a superconducting dome completely contained inside the hidden order region may indicate the presence of an independent collapsing phase boundary within the hidden order state, as is ubiquitous in other unconventional superconductors. This scenario is reinforced by the observed non-monotonic evolution of the normal state electrical transport, which is also common in correlated electron systems Finally, the existing theoretical landscape focuses on f -electron physics with no guidance regarding the specificity of the transition metal ion. It is especially puzzling that hidden order and superconductivity are only observed in the U-Ru duo. Examination of silicon site substituted transition metal analogues (UT 2 Si 2-x P x , T = transition metal), which can now be synthesized using molten metal flux growth, Single crystal synthesis using molten indium flux Single crystals of URu 2 Si 2-x P x were grown from elements with purities > 99.9% in a molten In flux, as previously reported. Magnetization M (T, H) measurements were carried out for mosaics of single crystals for temperatures T = 1.8 -350 K under an applied magnetic field of H = 5 kOe applied parallel to the c-axis using a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System. Magnetic susceptibility χ is defined as the ratio M/H. Zero magnetic field electrical resistance R was measured using the He3 option in Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System for temperatures 400 mK < T < 300 K. Several individual crystals were measured for each concentration, which revealed a high degree of batch uniformity. The angular dependence of the superconducting upper critical field was measured using the superconducting magnet (SCM-1) dilution refrigerator system at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory for H < 18 T and T = 20 mK. Additional magnetoresistance measurements were performed at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Tallahassee, up to magnetic fields of 35 tesla and at T = 50 mK. [41] Ohkuni, H., Inada, Y., Tokiwa, Y., Sakurai, K., Settai, R., Honma, T., Haga, Y., Yamamoto, E., Obarnuki, Y., Yamagami, H., Takahashi, S., and Yanagisawa, Y., Fermi surface properties and de Haas-van Alphen oscillations in both the normal and superconducting mixed states of URu 2 Si 2 . Phil. Mag. B 79, 1045 (1999). ρ(0,T ) vs. the reduced field H/R 0 for 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.028.