In this letter we study the effect of time-reversal symmetric impurities on the Josephson supercurrent through two dimensional helical metals such as on topological insulator surface state. We show that contrary to the usual superconducting-normal metal-superconducting junctions, the suppression of supercurrent in superconducting-helical metal-superconducting junction is mainly due to fluctuations of impurities in the junctions. Our results, which is a condensed matter realization of a part of the MSW effect for neutrinos, shows that the relationship between normal state conductance and critical current of Josephson junctions is significantly modified for Josephson junctions on the surface of topological insulators. We also study the temperature-dependence of supercurrent and present a two fluid model which can explain some of recent experimental results in Josephson junctions on the edge of topological insulators. Critical currents in the mesoscopic superconductingnormal-superconducting (SNS) Josephson junctions have been studied widely The presence of helical edge states on the boundary of TIs is by now well established. The surface state band structure which resembles massless fermions, provides a unique platform to realize phenomena previously studied in high energy physics, such as axions The low-energy effective Hamiltonian of TI surface states reads as where σ = (σ x , σ y ) are the Pauli matrices in the basis (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ ), with ψ σ being the electronic state with spin σ localized on the surface of the TI. The low-energy effective Hamiltonian describing a Josephson junction on the surface of the TI, with supercurrent along x, is given by taken to act on the electronic state of the form Here ∆ R (x) and ∆ I (x) are real and imaginary parts, respectively, of the induced superconducting gap ∆ = ∆ R + i ∆ I . In (1) and (2), v F is the Fermi velocity. As for the matrix structure, σ i act on physical spin space whereas the τ i act on the superconducting particle-hole space. As the Hamiltonian in (2) is invariant under translation along ŷ, the momentum k y in this direction is conserved. The low-energy Andreev states in the junction thus correspond to k y = 0 and k x close to the two fermi wave vectors, k x = μ vF for σ x = 1 and k x = -μ vF for σ x = -1. Notice that since σ x commutes with Hamiltonian (2) we can decouple the low-energy effective Hamiltonians into two independent sectors corresponding to electron-hole states close to right or left fermi points. Here we will focus on one of the effective Hamiltonians, but the other independent one can be similarly studied. Since we are aiming for the effect of temporal fluctuations it is more efficient to use the corresponding 1 + 1-dimensional action given by where with σ =↑, ↓, are the fermionic field operators for excitations close to the right or left Fermi points. The Fermi velocity has been set to 1 by scaling x, or equivalently, the momentum k x . The effect of charged impurities is captured by A 0 = V (x -a(t)) where a(t) identifies instantaneous position of the impurity. As we will see below, in order to capture the effect of impurities on the supercurrent in the junction, we should consider the natural fluctuations in the position of the impurity. For small fluctuations a(t) = a 0 + ξ(t), the impurity potential reads as As we will show below, the impurities can only affect the supercurrent as a result of their temporal fluctuations. We would like to note that such treatment of impurities and its effect on superconductivity in normal metals have been considered long before Since we are interested in localized impurities, both the impurity potential V (x -a) and the resulting electric field E(x) = ∂ x V (x -a) are localized in space and the dynamics of the impurities are captured by the harmonic oscillator action S osc (M I and ω are the mass and the harmonic oscillation frequency of the impurities). Coupling of Andreev states and the harmonic oscillations of impurities are captured in S int and will lead to a selfenergy correction in S 0 (see supplementary materials), leading to an effective action of the form To the lowest nontrivial order in perturbation theory, the self-energies can be calculated as What is important for us is not so much the specific formulae for these self-energies, but that the general form of the effective action is as given in Notice that the modification due to Σ 1 does not affect the spatial derivative term for the electrons. This is because the oscillator variable ξ(t) does not have a spatial dependence. Thus although the free fermion action Φ(iγ μ ∂ μ + M )Φ has a Lorentz-type symmetry (albeit with v F in place of the speed of light c) the interactions with impurities, and hence corrections, do not respect this symmetry. The temporal and spatial derivative terms can be renormalized differently, and then with a possible scaling of the field, the action can be brought to the form It is well known that for massless particles, propagating at the speed of light in vacuum, the primary effect of interactions is to generate a refractive index rather than a mass (which is usually forbidden for symmetry reasons). A similar situation is obtained even for massive particles in the ultrarelativistic limit. Our argument is that, for the surface states in a TI which have a Lorentzian symmetry (with c → v F ), again a refractive index is precisely what we should expect as the primary effect of interactions. The situation here is closely related, conceptually, to how interactions with matter modify neutrino oscillations as in the MSW effect We will now use the effective action where v(x) = v F /(1 + Σ 1 (x)) is the renormalized Fermi velocity. For constant ∆, there are two independent eigenstates with energy E given by To model the Josephson Junction, we consider the stepwise variation of ∆(x) in three regions x < 0 (region I), 0 < x < x p (region II) and x > x p (region III) given by The eigenstates can be expressed in each region as the superposition of ) where i = I, II and III, corresponding to the three regions. We define the transfer matrices: Ts (x) = e iκx 0 0 e -iκx where κ = E 2 -∆ 2 0 /v is the wave vector in the superconducting region, k x = E x ́x 0 du v(u) is the averaged wave vector in the normal (TI) region of the junction and φ I (x) = ́x 0 V (u-a0) v(u) du is the phase resulting from the static impurity. In terms of these matrices, the eigenstates in the three regions can be written as Ψ II (x) = Tn (x) The boundary conditions which determine the spectrum of the states in the junction are Ψ I (0 -) = Ψ II (0 + ) and Ψ II (x - p ) = Ψ III (x + p ). These continuity equations reduce to where the wave function on the two ends of the Josephson junctions are connected by TJ (E, ∆, φ 0 ) = TB (E, ∆ 0 ) -1 Tn (x p ) -1 TB (E, ∆ 0 e iφ0 ). The S-matrix for the junction must relate the incoming and outgoing states as A III B I = S A I B III ; this S-matrix can be written in terms of TJ (E, ∆, φ 0 ) as The supercurrent in the junction can be derived using the well-known relationship between the Josephson current of the junction and the spectrum I 1 is the contribution form the discrete spectrum of ingap states and I 2 is the contribution form continuum of states with energy above the gap with density of states ρ(E, φ) for the one spin state at each fermi point as we have for the helical metal. The third them I 3 vanishes for the phase independent gap and will be ignored in this letter. In For the states with energy E < ∆ 0 , κ is imaginary and as a result Ψ + E (x) in region I and Ψ - E (x) in III are not normalizable. Equation ( Tn (x p ) -1 TB (E, ∆ 0 e iφ0 ) A III 0 (21) and leads to the following equation determining the ingap energies: where is the effective length of the junction which is modified by fluctuations of the impurity. This is the new "optical length" of the junction. The phase factor φ I has cancelled out in As a function of Θ n , this has a maximum at Θ n = π/2, so that the critical current is It is important to note that by that the suppercurrent generated by in gap states decreases by increasing L which shows that impurities clearly affect the supercurrent. For the states above the gap, the density of states is given by the Krein-Friedel-Lloyd formula ρ(E) = 1 2πi ∂ ∂E (ln det S) where The supercurrent due to above-the-gap states then simplifies to We would like to emphasize two important features of the supercurrent contribution from states with energy above the superconducting gap: 1. For low temperatures T ≪ ∆ 0 , I 2 is only weakly T -dependent through the temperature dependence of superconducting gap ∆ 0 . 2. I 2 is also only weakly dependent on L, i.e, only weakly sensitive to impurities. To elucidate the second point, we first note that the second term in ( In conclusion we have shown that the supercurrent in Josephson junctions with helical metals, such as on the surface of three-dimensional TIs, is affected by impurities through their temporal fluctuations. However, this applies primarily to the supercurrent generated by ingap Andreev states. The supercurrent carried by the states above the gap will not be seriously affected by impurities. Based on our results, the supercurrent in the Josephson junctions on the surface of TIs can be interpreted as a superposition of two contributions, one which is strongly temperature-dependent and also sensitive to the impurities in the junction and one which is only weakly temperature-dependent and not sensitive to the impurities. Given new advances in controlling the level of disorder in TIs Evidently, the small q limit of Σ 1 will give a term of the form Φ(γ 0 ∂ 4 + M )Φ in the action, while the same limit of Σ 2 will correct the mass M . Higher order powers of q 4 in the expansion of Σ will give higher derivatives of the electron field; these are not important since we are interested in the low energy modes of the electron. Explicitly, Carrying out the K 4 integration, In the last line, we evaluated the remaining integral neglecting M * M in comparison to ω 2 , since the frequency of vibration for impurity atom is much larger than the the possible gap. In any case, we set M =) for the region II of our discussion in text to which this calculation is applied. We also made the continuation to real time by F 2 14 → F 2 10 = E 2 . The result (S13) agrees with what is quoted in text. In a similar way, We can include finite temperature effects by using Matsubara frequencies for k 4 = 2πn/β ≡ ω n and p 4 = 2π(n + 2 )/β, β = 1/(k B T ). The result is then Φe -iq•(x-y) Σ(q) Φ(y) As usual, we carry out the summation via contour integration. Writing ̨dz (e iβz -1) iγ 0 (q 4s -z) where the contour encloses the poles of the (e iβz -1) -1 factor. Folding the contours back to the upper and lower half-planes and evaluating the residues at the other poles, we find some terms which are independent of β (and coincide with what we have already done in (S8-S14)) and a set of terms which are β-dependent. The β-dependent part of Σ 1 is The key point is that, for us, ω ≫ k B T . As a result, the T -dependent correction is exponentially suppressed due to the e βω factor in the denominator. A similar argument holds for Σ 2 as well. Thus, in conclusion, the effective action is of the form as in Eq.( 