We study the fate of the so-called ΘII -loop-current order that breaks both time-reversal and parity symmetries in a two-dimensional hot spot model with antiferromagnetically mediated interactions, using Fermi surfaces relevant to the phenomenology of the cuprate superconductors. We start from a three-band Emery model describing the hopping of holes in the CuO2 plane that includes two hopping parameters tpp and t pd , local on-site Coulomb interactions U d and Up and nearest-neighbor V pd couplings between the fermions in the copper [Cu(3d x 2 -y 2 )] and oxygen [O(2px) and O(2py)] orbitals. By focusing on the lowest-energy band, we proceed to decouple the local interaction U d of the Cu orbital in the spin channel using a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation to arrive at the interacting part of the so-called spin-fermion model. We also decouple the nearest-neighbor interaction V pd to introduce the order parameter of the ΘII -loop-current order. In this way, we are able to construct a consistent mean-field theory that describes the strong competition between the composite order parameter made of a quadrupole-density-wave and d-wave pairing fluctuations proposed in Efetov et al. [Nat. Phys. 9, 442 (2013)] with the ΘII -loop-current order parameter that is argued to be relevant for explaining important aspects of the physics of the pseudogap phase displayed in the underdoped cuprates. The physics of the pseudogap phase of cuprate superconductors remains one of the most enduring open problems of condensed matter physics. There are recent pervasive hints that the pseudogap phase in most underdoped cuprate superconductors might involve one or more symmetry-breaking "hidden" orders, whose precise microscopic mechanisms are still elusive to this date. State-of-the-art experiments such as nuclear magnetic resonance In addition to these salient features taking place within the pseudogap phase, another form of "hidden" order representing potentially one of the driving forces of quantum criticality in these systems (that may even coexist with CDW order and d-wave superconductivity at lower temperature scales T < T * ) is suggested by a different set of equally groundbreaking experiments: spin-polarized neutron scattering On the theoretical front, the hot spot model emerges as an interesting, minimal low-energy effective model that captures qualitative aspects of the physics of the high-T c cuprates from a weak-to-moderate coupling perspective. In this respect, an important work by Metlitski and Sachdev In the present work, we will consider the relevant scenario in which yet another order parameter (the Θ II -loop current order) competes with the QDW/SSC order in an effective hot spot model. The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the possibility that, due to this competition, QSW/SSC is strongly affected by the Θ II -order parameter that breaks both time-reversal and parity symmetries, but instead preserves their product. This opens an interesting avenue for future research and could be an explanation as to why the charge-order signal in the cuprates is always observed along the axial vectors (i.e. Q x and Q y ) and never along the diagonal direction. In order to perform this investigation, we will construct a novel mean-field theory by including both Θ II -loop current order and the QDW/SSC composite order parameter in such an effective model. As will become clear shortly, we will confirm in this analysis the strong competition between Θ II -loop current order and the QDW/SSC entangled order, with one order parameter being clearly always detrimental to the other. Then we proceed to discuss the physical implications of this strong competition for the physics of the underdoped cuprates, in light of the recent experiments performed in these materials. Technically speaking, we will introduce a three-band model (Emery model) describing hopping of holes in the CuO 2 plane which includes two hopping parameters t pp and t pd , on-site U d and U p local interactions and nearestneighbor V pd couplings between the fermions in the copper (d x 2 -y 2 ) and oxygen (p x and p y ) orbitals. By focussing on the lowest-energy band, we will decouple the local interaction U d of the Cu orbital in the spin channel using a conventional Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation to arrive at the interacting part of the so-called spinfermion model. Then, we will follow closely the methodology explained in full detail in the paper by Efetov et al. This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we define the three-band model that we will be interested in and we show how to decouple the interactions to obtain the resulting mean-field equations describing the competition between the two orders. Since the interactions that promote QDW/SSC and Θ II -loop current order turn out to be different, this decoupling is unambiguous. In Section III, we solve numerically the self-consistent meanfield equations and then we discuss our main results. Finally, Section IV is devoted to our conclusions. We start this section by writing down both the noninteracting and interacting Hamiltonians of the so-called three-band (Emery) model following Refs. FIG. This model Hamiltonian describes the fermionic motion on the copper [Cu(3d x 2 -y 2 )] and oxygen [O(2p x ) and O(2p y )] orbitals that are located in the CuO 2 unit cell (see Fig. where the bosonic field φ i = (φ x i , φ y i , φ z i ) is the spindensity wave (SDW) order parameter at the antiferromagnetic wave vector Q = (π, π), v s is the spin-wave velocity, and m a is the spin-wave bosonic mass which vanishes at the quantum critical point (QCP) of the theory. The σ a (a = x, y, z) are the usual Pauli matrices. Notice that in Eq. ( with the field operators on the right-hand-side of the above equality being As first shown by Varma i,σ , A i,σ , and A i,σ lead to states with the presence of stationary-loop currents on the CuO 2 plane and, of course, to time-reversal symmetry breaking. The loop-current order with order parameter defined in terms of A (2) i,σ is conventionally called the Θ I -loop current phase, while the loop-current order with order parameter given in terms of A i,σ are known as the Θ II -loop current phase (see Fig. where i,σ is a complex order parameter. The mean-field value of the phase Θ II was determined in Ref. At this point, we would like to point out that we will consider only the lowest energy band of the noninteracting Hamiltonian defined in Eq. ( where spinors in the spin space σ. The symbols Σ, Λ, and L represent independent pseudospin spaces that are generated by the Pauli matrices where and both time and space coordinates have been collected in terms of the variable X = (τ, r). The matrices Γ1 , Γ2 , Γ1x(y) , and Γ2x(y) appearing in Eq. ( In addition to the fermionic fields defined above, we also introduce the charge-conjugated vectors as where τ 3 is the usual Pauli matrix defined in the τ space. Hence by making use of these last definitions, the action in Eq. ( In order to derive the thermodynamical properties of the present model, we should first integrate out the bosonic field in the functional integral Z = exp -S[P x , P y , Ψ, φ; n p , R II ] D[P x , P y , Ψ, φ] = exp -S[P x , P y , Ψ; n p , R II ] D[P x , P y , Ψ]. (15) However, before proceeding with that, we will neglect from now on the spin-density-wave interaction g in the present model, since this coupling effectively renormalizes to zero under the RG flow in the low-energy limit Here the function D(X -X ′ ) that appears as a potential function in the fermionic quartic interaction is the bare bosonic propagator. Its Fourier transform is given by with m a standing for the spin-wave boson mass that vanishes at the QCP, v s is the spin-wave velocity and ω denotes the Matsubara bosonic frequency. Next, we decouple the fermionic quartic term of the action in Eq. ( , where γ is naturally the Landau damping term. As a consequence, the lowenergy effective action that describes the present system may be represented as follows where we have written J(X -X ′ ) = 3λ 2 D ef f (X -X ′ ) instead of the spin-wave propagator in order to simplify the notation. The order parameter M (X, X ′ ) for the QDW/SSC composite order is given by Here ∆ + and ∆ -are, respectively, the d-wave singlet superconducting (SSC) and quadrupole density wave (QDW) components of the order parameter defined above. We also point out that the matrices ûτ belong to the SU (2) group The effective action in Eq. ( where the matrix G -1 (X, X ′ ) is the Fourier transform of G -1 (iε n , k). This latter function is given by The self-consistency equation for b(X, X ′ ) is derived by minimizing the free energy F [T, n p , R II , M ] with respect to this order parameter. As a consequence, we obtain the following equation By performing the trace operation over the space Σ ⊗ Λ ⊗ L ⊗ τ for the second term on the left-hand-side of the equation above, the order parameter b(X, X ′ ) can be simply expressed as where Π 3 is a projector for the three-band-model space which is defined as At this point, we will make use of the ansatz b(X, and Fourier transform Eq. ( In order to express b(ε n , k) in a convenient form, we need to evaluate the trace that appears in the above equation. This problem can be circumvented by using the following identity Then, by substituting Eq. ( where we have set We now turn our attention to the evaluation of det[G -1 (iε n , k)]. In order to do this, we will need to use the set of determinant formulas where Â and D are, respectively, n-and m-square matrices and det( Â) is different from zero. In this way, by neglecting the SSC sector of the QDW/SSC order parameter (∆ + = 0) and applying these reduction formulas to the matrix G -1 (iε n , k), we obtain, after some algebraic manipulations, that det[G -1 (iε n , k)] evaluates formally to where D (m) l (iε n , k) are well-behaved functions of the three-band-model parameters, which are computed in detailed form in Appendices B and C. Thus, by inserting the result displayed in Eq. ( We note that, since we have set ∆ + = 0, the above selfconsistency equation describes only the QDW sector of the fluctuations in the present system. As a consequence of the result in Eq. ( where we have set the volume of the system to unity. In order to self-consistently determine the mean-field order parameter R II , we need also minimize the free energy with respect to it. In this way, the self-consistency equation for R II in turn reads The solutions of both Eqs. ( In order to investigate the interplay between both Θ IIloop-current (LC) and QDW orders in the present three-FIG. band model, we solve numerically the mean-field equations for R II and b. The present numerical approach consists in the discretization of the Brillouin zone with a mesh of 320 × 320 points. We also make the assumption that the order parameter b(ε n , k) does not depend crucially on the frequency and momentum. In this way, we will only investigate the ground state properties of the present model, which therefore allows us to evaluate the Matsubara sums that appear in the mean-field equations exactly. We perform this calculation by either varying the spin-fermion coupling λ or the nearest-neighbor interaction V pd between O and Cu orbitals. In addition, we fix all other couplings in the theory. The corresponding results are shown in Figs. We can also analyze the behavior of the same order parameters as a function of spin-fermion coupling λ, when we keep instead the interaction V pd fixed. The corresponding results are depicted in Fig. In order to analyze the sensitivity of the above meanfield results to changes in the physical parameters of the three-band model, we have also investigated its properties with respect to varying both the spin-wave bosonic mass m a and the orbital-energy transfer ε d -ε p . As the strength of m a becomes larger (which corresponds naturally to shorter SDW correlation lengths), we obtain a clear tendency for both critical interactions (i.e. λ c and V c pd ) to increase even further in our numerical data. This result would of course lie beyond the regime of applicability of a mean-field approach to the present model and other complementary methods that include quantum fluctuation effects should be used to describe such a regime. In addition to this, we have also examined the dependence of our results with respect to changes in the orbital-energy transfer of the model. As a consequence, we were able to establish numerically that, as the difference ε d -ε p is reduced towards zero, the critical interactions λ c and V c pd also display a tendency to increase further within the present approach. In the present work, we have performed a consistent mean-field calculation for the three-band (Emery) model relevant to the phenomenology of the underdoped cuprates. We have shown that a low-energy effective description of this model may indeed exhibit both the Θ IIloop-current order first proposed by Varma We would like to point out that the mean-field values of the critical interactions to obtain these two phases are relatively large compared with some physical parameters of the three-band model. This is expected to be an artifact of the mean-field approach and, for this reason, other complementary methods (such as, e.g., renormalization group techniques that include quantum fluctuation effects) should be used in order to establish a quantitative agreement between the present model and the experimental data. It is also important to mention that there are other works in the literature, which analyzed threeband models using weak-coupling diagrammatic perturbative calculations One of us (V. S. de C.) would like to thank a fellowship from CAPES (No. 99999.000324/2014-00) under the program 'Science Without Borders'. He also acknowledges the kind hospitality of the IPhT in CEA-Saclay during his stay and useful conversations with Salviano Leão. H. F. acknowledges the support from FAPEG under the grant No. 201210267001167. This work was supported partly by LabEx PALM (ANR-10-LABX-0039-PALM), by the ANR project UNESCOS ANR-14-CE05-0007, as well as the grant Ph743-12 of the COFECUB which enabled frequent visits to the International Institute of Physics (IIP), in Natal. X.M. and T.K. also acknowledge the support of CAPES and funding from the IIP. In order to compute the Matsubara sum in Eq. ( (B1) where we have not written explicitly the full dependence of b(T ) to not clutter up the notation. There is a subtlety to obtain the analytic continuation of the effective bosonic propagator D ef f (ε n , k) since this function depends on |ω| which is not well-defined for complex numbers. To circumvent that, we make use of the two integral formulas As a result, the analytic continuation of D ef f (ε n , k) becomes As may be easily concluded, D ef f (-iz, k) is not analytic in the entire complex plane. Indeed, it possesses a branch cut (see Fig. (B1) may be rewritten as where we have used the result Here h As expected, a similar inequality holds for h . The main consequence of the result in Eq. (B6) is that we can have a series expansion of the form Then by substituting Eq. (B7) into Eq. (B5), we obtain that the mean-field equation for b(T ) assumes the (B10) The complex integral between brackets is computed by changing the integration contour from C 1 to C 2 (see Fig. (B14) In the limit of T → 0, the Fermi-Dirac distribution function n F (x) becomes the step function θ(-x). As a result, the integral in Eq. (B14) involving the Cauchy principal value evaluates to lim where we have used the identity θ(-x) = 1 2 [1 -sgn(x)] in order to simplify the above equation. ΘII -loop-current (LC) order parameter