Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is one of most powerful techniques to unravel the electronic properties of layered materials and in the last decades it has lead to a significant progress in the understanding of the band structures of cuprates, pnictides and other materials of current interest. On the other hand, its application to Mott-Hubbard insulating materials where a Fermi surface is absent has been more limited. Here we show that in these latter materials, where electron spins are localized, ARPES may provide significant information on the spin correlations which can be complementary to the one derived from neutron scattering experiments. Sr2Cu1-xZnxO2Cl2, a prototype of diluted spin S = 1/2 antiferromagnet (AF) on a square lattice, was chosen as a test case and a direct correspondence between the amplitude of the spectral weight beyond the AF zone boundary derived from ARPES and the spin correlation length ξ estimated from 35 Cl NMR established. It was found even for correlation lengths of a few lattice constants a significant spectral weight in the back-bended band is present which depends markedly on ξ. Moreover the temperature dependence of that spectral weight is found to scale with the x dependent spinstiffness. These findings prove that ARPES technique is very sensitive to short-range correlations and its relevance in the understanding of the electronic correlations in cuprates is discussed. The discovery of high temperature superconductivity in the cuprates has promoted a renewed interest for the study of electron spin correlations in quantum S = 1/2 spin systems. Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) We have chosen Sr 2 CuO 2 Cl 2 (SCOC), one of the best experimental realization of a spin S = 1/2 twodimensional (2D) antiferromagnet on a square lattice, as a test case for ARPES sensitivity to short range spin correlations. This material is characterized by a well defined order parameter and magnetic wave-vector q. Moreover, its in-plane AF correlation length, ξ, above the Néel temperature T N was studied using INS Many ARPES studies have been carried out on SCOC SCOC single crystals were grown from the melt according to the procedure described by Miller et al. In agreement with previous works we find no sharp peaks even at the lowest binding energy. The origin of the line broadening still needs to be clarified since numerical calculations based on the t-J-model actually predict sharp quasiparticle-like excitations. In order to reduce the correlation length we partially substituted S = 1/2-Cu 2+ -ions by spinless Zn 2+ -ions. In fact, it is well established that in La 2 Cu 1-x (Zn,Mg) x O 4 T N can be reduced by diluting the spin lattice In particular, at this substitution level T N is reduced to 180 K. The ARPES spectra of the the spin diluted samples, at all temperatures and at all Zn concentrations, still show intensity beyond the AF zone boundary. In particular, in Fig. In order to provide a quantitative estimate of that intensity we performed the following analysis. We integrate the intensity along the dispersion maximum on both sides of the (π/2, π/2)-point (dashed white line in Fig. In Fig. In order to further evidence the direct relationship between B/A ratio and the in-plane correlation length we quantitatively estimated ξ for different spin diluted samples. ξ can be conveniently derived from nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 , an approach successfully used in the analogous La 2 Cu 1-x Zn x O 4 compound with γ the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio and 1/β(ξ) = ξ 2 BZ d q/(1+q 2 ξ 2 ) a factor which preserves the spin sum rule. The temperature dependence of 35 Cl 1/T 1 , determined by using standard radiofrequency pulse sequences, is shown in Fig. Temperature dependence of 35 Cl 1/T1 in Sr2Cu1-xZnxO2Cl2 for x = 0, 0.16, 0.29 measured in a 5.6 Tesla magnetic field. TN is reduced by the Zn substitution as can be measured by following the peak position in 1/T1 as the Zn concentration is increased. x / a 1 0 0 0 / T [ K -1 ] FIG. relations. For correlation lengths larger than 15 lattice constants we observe almost no change in the spectra and hence it is not possible to distinguish the AF long range order from a fluctuating phase characterized by ξ of the order of tens of lattice constants. In conclusion, we have shown for the first time that the back-bended part of the highest occupied band changes upon decreasing correlation length. This can be seen as a proof that AF correlations are indeed responsible for this back-bending and that ARPES is a sensitive probe to very short-range AF correlations. Using Zn substitution and by suitably increasing the temperature we were able to control the correlation length down to 3 constants verified by NMR measurements. Even for the shortest correlation length the spectra surprisingly showed significant spectral weight beyond the AF zone boundary. The ARPES ability to detect short-range correlations has relevant implications also for other kind of orders. In particular, our findings suggest that the absence of the expected fingerprints of a CDW instability in the ARPES spectra of the under doped cuprates are not simply a consequence of the short range of the CDW correlations. R.W. acknowledges support by the BMBF through the Minerva Fellowship program.