In the iron based superconductors, one of the on-going frontier studies is about the pairing mechanism. The recent interest concerns the high temperature superconductivity and its intimate reason in the monolayer FeSe thin films 1-4 . The challenge here is how the double superconducting gaps 1 seen by the scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) associate however to only one set of Fermi pockets seen by the angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) 3,4 . The recently discovered (Li 1-x Fe x OH)FeSe phase 5-7 with T c  40 K provides a good platform to check the fundamental problems. Here we report the STS study on the (Li 1-x Fe x OH)FeSe single crystals. The STS spectrum clearly indicates the presence of double anisotropic gaps with maximum magnitudes of  1  14.3 meV and  2  8.6 meV, and mimics that The pairing mechanism and the superconducting gap structure have remained as the core issues in the study on iron based superconductors. Depending on the atomic structures, the Fermi surface topology changes significantly in different systems, varying from hole pocket dominated, to both hole and electron pockets, and to only electron pockets in the FeSe based systems The (Li 1-x Fe x OH)FeSe single crystals were made by following the hydrothermal ion-exchange method Scanning tunnelling microcopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) measurements provide key information on the electronic structure and the gap symmetry of the novel superconductors Since the cleaved surface is very stable and the lattice constant is very close to the expected value of Se-Se bond, together with the perfect STS measured (see below), we can reasonably assume that the terminated top layer is the Se-atom layer. Some bright spots with a dumbbell shape on the topography are observed and very similar to those from Cu or Co impurities in our previous works Fig. In Fig. p to fit the experimental data. From Fig. On the surface of the crystal, we can see some dumbbell-shape impurities. The spectrum measured on the impurity site has no well-defined superconducting coherence peaks as shown in SI-Fig. is comparable with our experimental data. From our experimental data, there is almost no intensity at a -vector which connects the  and M point in the FT-QPI image, this suggests no Fermi surface nor DOS near the Γ point. As shown in Figs. The magnitude of the outer circle in the central pattern (Figs. We then pay attention to the central pattern by measuring the QPI mapping in the larger real-space scale to get the detailed feature of the smaller -space view, and the evolution of the Z( , E) images is shown in Fig. This may rule out the existence of any gap nodes on the Fermi surface, since the FT-QPI images would show an intensity at the -vector connecting two nodal points if they would exist. This is consistent with the full gap structure of the STS spectrum. At an energy of 6.8 mV, a ring like intensity on the FT-QPI images can be observed, with the strongest intensity along the ΓM direction. At the energy of the small gap, namely 8.6 mV, the FT-QPI pattern looks similar to that at 6.8 mV. However, when the energy is further increased to the larger gap, i.e., 14.5 mV, besides the inner ring, a new set of segments appear at larger vectors, which gradually construct an outer ring. When we take the Z( , E) intensity along the contours of the inner and outer rings as shown in Figs. The STS spectra were measured with an ultrahigh vacuum, low temperature and high magnetic field scanning tunnelling microscope (USM-1300, Unisoku Co., Ltd.). The samples were cleaved in an ultra-high vacuum with a base pressure about 1×10 -10 torr. During all STM/STS measurements, tungsten tips were used. To lower down the noise of the differential conductance spectra, a lock-in technique with an ac modulation of 0.8 mV at 987.5 Hz was used. Here, f(ε) is the Fermi function containing the information of temperature, and  1(2) is the scattering factor of the larger (smaller) gap, and the result is shown in Fig. III. Impurity-induced in-gap state.