We report on terahertz time-domain spectroscopy on superconducting and metallic iron chalcogenides Rb0.75Fe1.6Se2-zSz. The superconducting transition is reduced from Tc = 32 K (z = 0) to 22 K (z = 1.0), and finally suppressed (z = 1.4) by isoelectronic substitution of Se with S. Dielectric constant and optical conductivity exhibit a metal-to-insulator transition associated with an orbital-selective Mott phase. This orbital-selective Mott transition appears at higher temperature Tmet with increasing sulfur content, identifying sulfur substitution as an efficient parameter to tune orbital-dependent correlation effects in iron-chalcogenide superconductors. The reduced correlations of the dxy charge carriers can account for the suppression of the superconductivity and the pseudogap-like feature between Tc and Tmet that was observed for z = 0. The concept of orbital differentiation has been suggested to offer a common ground to understand hightemperature superconductivity in iron-based superconductors and in the cuprates. In this work, we perform terahertz (THz) time-domain spectroscopy on single-crystalline Rb 0.75 Fe 1.6 Se 2-z S z that are superconducting for z = 0, 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0, and non-superconducting but metallic for z = 1.4. We observe a clear increase of the orbital-selective metalinsulator transition temperature from T met = 90 K to 170 K with increasing sulfur doping, showing that correlation effects for the d xy quasiparticles can be tuned by chemical pressure. In the z ≥ 0.25 systems, the preformed pairs above T c for z = 0 are suppressed and the opening of an electronic gap coincides with the onset of superconductivity. A phase diagram with orbital-selective Mott, metallic, superconducting, and pseudogap-like phases is established as a function of sulfur substitution. Single crystals of the iron chalcogenides were grown using a Bridgman method following the approach reported in Ref. 9. The phase composition close to Rb 0.75 Fe 1.6 Se 2-z S z was determined by wave-length dispersive electron-probe microanalysis. The dielectric constant ε 1 and optical conductivity σ 1 of Rb 0.75 Fe 1.6 Se 2-z S z are shown in Fig. Below the respective T met , the dielectric constant ε 1 of the superconductors with z = 0, 0.5, and 1.0 becomes negative [Fig. Figure In the case of 1/8 sulfur doping (z = 0.25), the isosbestic point of the dielectric constant is obtained at the superconducting transition temperature T c [Fig. Emergence of an isosbestic point is observed in various correlated systems. where the parameters can be obtained by fitting Eqs. ( for the dielectric constant ε 1 (T, 1/ω) and optical conductivity σ 1 (T, ω), the experimental curves ε1 (T, 1/ω i ) and σ1 (T, ω i ) for different frequencies (ω i ) are expected to collapse on a single master curve for the dielectric constant and optical conductivity, respectively. In the z = 0 system, the emergence of a metallic optical response below T met = 90 K was attributed to an orbital-selective Mott transition, The formation of a superconducting gap is usually reflected by the suppression of optical conductivity, since the spectral weight at finite frequency is transferred to the superconducting condensate at zero frequency. The frequency, at which the minimum of optical conductivity occurs, usually provides an estimate for the superconducting gap 2∆. In summary, using terahertz spectroscopy we have investigated the orbital-selective metal-insulator transition associated with quasiparticles with d xy orbital character in the iron-chalcogenide superconductors Rb 0.75 Fe 1.6 Se 2-z S z with z = 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0, and the metal with z = 1.4. In comparison to T met = 90 K in the undoped system, the orbital-selective metal-insulator transition temperature is strongly increased with increasing sulfur substitution up to 170 K for z = 1.4, while the superconducting transition is reduced and finally suppressed. This observation is a clear indication that the electron correlations in the d xy orbital channel are reduced by the isoelectronic substitution. Varying the correlation strength of the d xy orbital channel in Rb 0.75 Fe 1.6 Se 2-z S z can be regarded as an efficient way to tune the pairing in the d xy channel. We believe that the suppression of the pseudo-gap like feature is related to reduced spin fluctuations of the d xy quasiparticles.