We engineer a quantum bath that enables entropy and energy exchange with a one-dimensional Bose-Hubbard lattice with attractive on-site interactions. We implement this in an array of three superconducting transmon qubits coupled to a single cavity mode; the transmons represent lattice sites and their excitation quanta embody bosonic particles. Our cooling protocol preserves particle number-realizing a canonical ensemble-and also affords the efficient preparation of dark states which, due to symmetry, cannot be prepared via coherent drives on the cavity. Furthermore, by applying continuous microwave radiation, we also realize autonomous feedback to indefinitely stabilize particular eigenstates of the array. Ordinarily, uncontrolled dissipation destroys quantum coherence, but it is now appreciated that an engineered quantum bath is a valuable resource for quantum computation (state preparation Initially conceived and implemented in trapped ion systems The Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian The cooling protocol we develop here, based on Raman scattering processes, facilitates entropy and energy exchange between the qubit array and its bath while pre- For a given current, the flux through the two SQUIDs in the array differs by 2.5%; 17 mA roughly corresponds to a quarter of a flux quantum. Solid lines denote measured frequencies with fits to the 1D Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian shown as overlaid dashed lines. Red lines correspond to two-particle states; green lines are one-particle states. The inset shows raw data near the |E1 frequency, from which the darkness of the |G → |E1 transition discussed in the text becomes apparent. serving the total number of excitation quanta in the array. Essentially, this amounts to simulation within the canonical ensemble; a similar path to grand-canonical simulation via bath engineering (using photons) has recently been proposed theoretically by Hafezi et al In another related work, a cooling scheme similar to ours has been employed recently to measure the dynamic structure factor of a gas of cold atoms Our system is comprised of an array of three capacitively-coupled transmon qubits (1) (2) where a † and b † j are creation operators for cavity photons and excitation quanta of the j th qubit in the array, respectively. H cav is the Hamiltonian for the 7.116 GHz waveguide cavity, which couples dispersively to each qubit in the transmon array with strength g j , as described by H int . The array itself is described by H array : each transmon is a weakly anharmonic oscillator with |0 → |1 transition frequency ω j and (negative) anharmonicity α j . The three-qubit system is effectively an array of lattice sites on which particles-the transmon excitation quanta-can hop with nearest-neighbor tunneling strength J, and next-nearest-neighbor tunneling J 13 (set primarily by the capactive coupling Since the Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian conserves total particle number, eigenstates of the three-qubit array can be grouped into manifolds characterized by this quantum number. In our experiment, we work with the zero, one, and two-particle manifolds, comprising respectively one, three, and six states. We denote the zero-particle state by |G , the single-particle states by {|E i , i ∈ [1, 3]}, and the two-particle states by {|F j , j ∈ [1, 6]}, with increasing subscript value indicating higher-energy states. Due to the dispersive interaction between qubits and the cavity, a reflected microwave signal near the cavity resonance frequency acquires a phase shift dependent on the state of the array. Amplification of the readout signal via a Josephson parametric amplifier Using this dispersive readout, we first characterize the system by spectroscopically probing its energy levels as the edge qubit frequencies are tuned down via external magnetic flux. As shown in Fig. At an external field corresponding to 10 mA in the bias coil, the individual qubit frequencies approximately coincide-the detunings between neighboring qubits, 45 and 115 MHz, are lower than the tunneling rate J. At this bias we characterize-in the absence of engineered dissipation-the particle-loss dynamics resulting from coupling to the dissipative environment comprised of both the leaky cavity (κ/2π = 10MHz) and microscopic material imperfections. A coherent microwave pulse initializes the system to the desired |E i or |F j state, after which the resulting populations are measured as a function of time. As expected, these decay dynamics fit well to a model which only includes single-particle loss events: direct transitions from the |F i states to |G are suppressed, as recently observed with a single transmon qubit A striking feature of the natural decay dynamics is the discrepancy between decay times of different states in the same manifold. For example, |E 1 and |E 2 live for ∼ 30μs, while |E 3 decays much more quickly, in ∼ 3μs. This is due to the substantially different dipole transition matrix elements that each single-particle state |E i exhibits with respect to the final state |G . A related consequence of these dipole moments is shown in the inset of Fig. By altering the quantum noise spectrum of the bath interacting with the Bose-Hubbard chain, we can modify the system decay dynamics. In our cooling protocol, this alteration takes the form of an additional microwave drive incident on the cavity, red-detuned from the cavity resonance by an amount ∆ c , as illustrated in Fig. To characterize the cooling dynamics, we initialize the system into an |E i or |F j eigenstate and subsequently apply a cooling drive for a variable time and measure the state of the array. Cooling rates are extracted via a fit to a model similar to that used for the natural decays, with additional parameters to capture the induced intramanifold transitions. Because the cavity's density of states exhibits a Lorentzian profile with width κ, so will the transition rate as a function of cooling drive frequency, as shown for the |E 2 to |E 1 transition in Fig. For incident powers which cool at a rate Γ i→j much lower than κ, a Fermi Golden Rule calculation where do not interact strongly with the electromagnetic environment of the cavity on account of the symmetry of the states; this decoupling is responsible for their relatively long lifetimes. Correspondingly, however, it is difficult to coherently initialize these states via direct transitions, but our cooling scheme affords their efficient preparation. To illustrate this, consider the |G → |E 1 transition, which as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have realized a three-qubit transmon array and spectroscopically verified that it obeys an attractive 1D Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian up to the ten lowest-lying eigenstates, highlighting the use of circuit QED in simulating otherwise challenging quantum systems. Our developed cooling and stabilization protocols, based on quantum bath engineering-a well-studied phenomenon in quantum optics-afford effective control over this solid state system. The capabilities demonstrated here-engineering decay dynamics and stabilizing particular eigenstates-show that dissipation engineering can be a valuable tool as superconducting circuits scale up in complexity to complement simulators based on cold atoms and trapped ions. We thank F. Marquardt for motivating this line of research and acknowledge helpful discussions with U. Vool. VVR acknowledges funding via a NSF graduate student fellowship. Financial support for ongoing quantum circuit development was provided by AFOSR FA9550-12-1-0378 and the current experiment was conducted under a DOE Laboratory Directed Research and Development grant. Funding for theory support is acknowledged from NSF DMR-1301798 and ARO W911NF1410011. Supplemental Materials: Cooling and Autonomous Feedback in a Bose-Hubbard chain with Attractive Interactions Here we describe the theory behind the bath-engineering protocol implemented in the experiment. We first consider the general case of an array of L transmon qubits, each capacitively coupled to its nearest neighbors. After showing how, in such an array, an engineered bath can induce transitions between array eigenstates which conserve excitation number, we specialize to the case of a three-site array (L = 3) used in our experiment. As we will show, theoretical predictions are in qualitative agreement with experimental observations, with the single-mode approximation of the 3D microwave cavity likely contributing a large part of the discrepancy. A general array of L capacitively-coupled transmon qubits (j = 1, . . . L) is described by the Hamiltonian The first sum describes each individual transmon as an anharmonic oscillator with creation/annihilation operators b † j and b j . This is valid in the limit in which we work, where the Josephson energy of each qubit dominates the capacitive charging energy by roughly two orders of magnitude. Capacitive coupling, or dipole-dipole interaction, between the qubits gives rise to the second term in Eq. ( The array is coupled to a single-mode cavity H cav = ω c a † a (with a † and a the creation/destruction operators) via an interaction term . The coupling g j between qubit j and the cavity depends on the product of the strength of the electromagnetic field of the cavity mode at the location of qubit j and the transition dipole moment of that qubit, and hence varies from qubit to qubit. For example, in a setup such as the one used in the main text, where the array lies roughly in the center of the cavity, the qubit-cavity coupling to the lowest cavity mode will be largest in the center of the array. Since the operators which create and destroy transmon excitations satisfy the bosonic commutation relation [b j , b † j ] = 1, it is natural to view these excitations as bosons on a lattice, with each transmon embodying a lattice site. Each transmon has a negative anharmonicity α j < 0, representing an effective on-site interaction between the bosonic excitations. In the case where the transmon anharmonicity is uniform across the array, close to what we realize in the experiment, the array Hamiltonian in Eq. ( To complete the description of this circuit-QED system we add the drive term, representing an external classical drive applied to the cavity: H drive = (t)(a † e -iω d t + ae iω d t ), where (t) is the strength of the external drive and ω d the drive frequency. The full Hamiltonian of the system qubit-array and cavity is the sum of all the aforementioned terms: where we have introduced the detunings: ∆ c = ω c -ω d and ∆ j = ω j -ω d . In essence, this rotation gives new effective qubit and cavity frequencies while removing the oscillating time-dependence on the cavity operators in the drive term. Ignoring for a moment both the drive and the anharmonic transmon terms in H, the array-cavity system is simply a set of coupled harmonic oscillators which exhibits its own set of normal modes. To find these modes, we write the quadratic terms of the Hamiltonian, H 0 , in matrix form: where we have introduced the consisting of the annihilation operators for each oscillator, and the (L + 1) × (L + 1) matrix H 0 representing their frequencies and couplings. Now the normal modes of the coupled system are found simply by diagonalizing the matrix H 0 . We thus find the matrix M whose columns are the eigenvectors of , the corresponding change of basis W = N v gives the eigenmodes of the system. Writing these modes explicitly in terms of the matrix elements of N and M will be useful for later purposes-calling the new basis vectors W = (A, B 1 , B 2 , . . . B L ), we have: and their inverse transformations: The corresponding eigenvalues or normal-mode frequencies are denoted by λ i . In this new basis H 0 is, as expected, a sum of uncoupled harmonic oscillators: In the dispersive limit, where g j |ω c -ω j |, we expect the dressed mode A to largely consist of the cavity mode, with small contributions from each qubit. Equivalently, this means that M 0l and N 0l are each much smaller than M 00 and N 00 , which are both close to unity. Conversely, the B j modes are mostly linear combinations of transmon In this new basis the drive term becomes: Because of the mode mixing, the drive on the original cavity-mode a now excites all of the normal modes {A, {B j }}. However, since M 0l M 00 , we can neglect the B j terms in this operator unless the drive is close to resonance with one of the qubit-like modes. In that case, the coefficients M 0l determine how responsive the qubit-like mode is to a drive pulse, i.e., which states are dark and which are bright. We will return to this point later. Continuing onwards in solving the original Hamiltonian, we now put back the anharmonic transmon terms which we neglected when finding the linear eigenmodes. In terms of the new normal-mode operators, the anharmonic term is Invoking the rotating wave approximation to neglect terms which do not conserve excitation number, the remaining terms can be grouped into three categories: • self-Kerr corrections to the qubit-like operators: s , where we have defined the tensor: • a self-Kerr correction for the cavity: where we have defined the constant: • and a cross-Kerr term that couples together the A and B j operators: 4A † A lp η lp B † l B p , where we have defined the tensor: Now we have the full Hamiltonian in the new basis W: Next, we displace the new cavity-like operator A and write it as a classical part and a small quantum correction: by applying the unitary transformation: and the Hamiltonian HW transforms as: By direct substitution of A = Ā(t) + D into the Hamiltonian we find: and therefore: We choose Ā(t) by requiring the terms linear in D and D † to vanish so that we can eliminate the terms involving the drive. Eliminating the drive is equivalent to moving to a frame where the cavity evolves according to the usual Heisenberg equation Ȧ = i [H, A] -κ 2 M 00 A, and therefore solving for the classical part Ā(t) is equivalent to Eq. ( where we have included the correction due to the cavity damping rate κ. The final Hamiltonian then becomes: Ignoring the constant offset term λ 0 | Ā| 2 , we break the Hamiltonian up into the following pieces. We call H D the term involving only the dressed cavity operator: H B the one involving only the dressed qubit operators: with H D,B the interaction between dressed cavity and dressed qubits: Finally, we have H B,drive , the driving term on the dressed qubit operators: The final Hamiltonian is the sum of all of these terms: Cooling The term H D,B is the one we are most interested in. Depending on the detuning of the drive, this term can act either as a cooling term or as a term that induces a state-dependent shift of the cavity resonance and therefore allows one to detect the state of the system from a homodyne measurement. It is important to notice that this term preserves the U(1) invariance of the Hamlitonian H B and therefore conserves the total qubit excitation number N , thus allowing for cooling within a given excitation-number manifold. Let us focus on the cooling process first: we assume the loss rate of photons from the cavity to be high with respect to the dynamics involving H D,B . Therefore, we neglect the terms D † D and Ā D and we call the remaining operator the cooling term: Within our approximation, the dissipation makes V † cool ineffective. In Eq. ( If the pump is red-detuned from the cavity, then the cooling operator V cool scatters one qubit excitation to a lower energy state by creating a photon with higher frequency than the incoming one (strictly speaking, it scatters a pump photon up to the cavity frequency). Therefore the total number of qubit excitations is conserved, but some excess energy has been transferred from the qubit array to a cavity photon. To estimate the rate of cooling between two states we use the Fermi's Golden Rule: In the Hilbert space of the dressed excitations |qubits ⊗ |cavity , the initial state is |Ψ i = |ψ i , 0 . We consider the qubits initially in an excited state ψ i with energy E i and no photons in the cavity. The final state instead is , where the qubits are in a lower energy state ψ f with energy E f , and the excess energy E i -E f is carried away by a new photon. Therefore we have: where is the spectral density of the cavity field fluctuations. The square of the classical drive amplitude Ā(t) 2 is equal to the average photon number in the cavity: Ā(t) 2 = n, so we see that the cooling rate is linear in the photon number: In the stationary case (Eq. ( Beyond this regime the perturbative description of the cooling process is not appropriate anymore because the effect of the V † cool term will no longer be negligible, and will induce other processes besides the cooling Stark shift For low intracavity photon number, the frequencies ω i and ω f used above in Eqs. ( For the low photon number used in the experiment (at most five photons at steady state in the cavity), this perturbative correction is a good approximation to the exact solution. Measurement By performing a homodyne measurement, we can measure the shift of the cavity frequency depending on the state of the array: Therefore we introduce the operator χ describing the cavity pull: The expectation value of this operator on a generic state of the array S constitutes the observable that identifies that state: We point out an important difference in the behavior of the operator O B during the cooling process versus during the measurement. During the cooling process the pump drive is centered at a red detuning ∆ c = ω i -ω f given by the energy difference between the two states, initial and final, constituting the cooling transition. The operator O B then will induce transitions between states whose energy difference lies within a bandwidth ∼ κ centered on ∆ c . During the readout, instead, the drive is at the cavity frequency, i.e. at zero detuning, so to a good approximation we can neglect terms rotating faster than the linewidth κ of the cavity. For small lattice sizes and big coupling J, as it is the case in our experiment with L = 3, the excitation energies are big compared to κ and therefore the operator χ will not induce transitions between different states during the readout, and the measurement can then be considered quantum nondemolition (QND). For long arrays, L 1, and small hopping strength J, the energy levels will become closely spaced and therefore eventually the measurement will not be QND anymore. Once there exist pairs of states with energy difference ∆E less than ∼ κ, the measurement drive will (generically) cause transitions between them. This same physics will adversely affect the cooling process that we have discussed. The cooling process implements the removal of an amount of energy ∆E = (ω i -ω f ) (ω i > ω f ) that is well-defined up to the cavity linewidth κ. ∆E κ is easily achievable in small arrays. In the limit of long arrays, eventually ∆E ∼ κ or smaller and both Stokes and anti-Stokes processes become possible and the (non-equilibrium) quantum bath no longer has zero effective temperature Consider the simplest case in which all of the quits have uniform frequency and are coupled only to nearestneighbors. Neglecting initially the anharmonic terms, i.e. imagining a chain of coupled linear harmonic oscillators gives the simple Hamiltonian In this form the Hamiltonian becomes where (S44) The quartic interaction term becomes in this basis where α j sin(k m j) sin(k n j) sin(k p j) sin(k q j). (S47) Proceeding as before we can diagonalize the quadratic part of the Hamiltonian in the presence of a drive on the cavity and extract the cooling operator defined in Eq. ( We now discuss a protocol to cool towards the lower energy eigenstates of a general L-site array. We illustrate the basic idea using the single-excitation manifold as an example. Based on the band structure of the 1D tight-binding model, we know that the single-excitation manifold energies are spread around the bare qubit frequency ω 0 with a total width of 4J. The levels will be more densely spaced at the top and bottom of the band (see Fig. For simplicity we assume that all cooling matrix elements are generically non-zero. Suppose we start from a highenergy state E i and we set the drive such that the cavity detuning κ < ∆ c < 4J can cool between transitions within the bandwidth. As illustrated in Fig. It may occur that the above procedure fails because some particular matrix element in the cascade vanishes. This can be overcome by scanning cooling pump detuning ∆ c down and up multiple times to find a transition that allows escape from the trapped state. The cooling rate calculations used above for illustrative purposes are straightforward to carry out within the manifold of single excitations. Higher excitation manifolds will exhibit more complex and interesting dynamics because as energy is removed from the system by Raman processes, boson-boson collisions will further relax the particle distribution function. The dynamics will depend importantly on whether or not the underlying model is integrable. These considerations are well beyond the scope of the present experimental state-of-the-art, but could well become important in future realizations of quantum simulators. Δ c κ~T eff 4J FIG. S1: Illustration of the temperature limit for the single excitation subspace of a degenerate L-site chain. To be able to cool to the ground state we require J( π L+1 ) 2 > κ. We now specialize the above results to the case of L = 3 sites. The Hamiltonian H 0 in Eq. ( where we have also included the next-nearest-neighbor coupling J 13 between the 1st and 3rd sites. This Hamiltonian has the matrix form: ). As expected A ≈ a remains an operator that is mostly cavity-like, similarly the B j operators are mostly linear combination of qubits operators. This is ensured by the condition g j /(ω j -ω c ) 1 for each j. In the experimental setup we have: g 1,3 /(ω 1,3 -ω c ) ∼ 0.06 and g 2 /(ω 2 -ω c ) ∼ 0.12. If the couplings g 1 and g 3 were identical, the model would be symmetric with respect to the exchange of b 1 ↔ b 3 , and the operators A, B 1 , B 3 would be even under such transformation, while B 2 would be odd, transforming as B 2 ↔ -B 2 . In the experimental case, g 1 and g 3 are close but not identical and similarly, the qubit frequencies ω 1 and ω 3 are slightly different. This symmetry is thus broken in the experiment, but only weakly. We see this, for instance, in the matrix N that is almost, but not completely, invariant under exchange of b 1 ↔ b 3 . The matrix M = N -1 , that according to Eqs. Inspecting the elements of this matrix confirms that for this range of parameters our assumptions M 00 ≈ 1 and M 0l 1 are valid. The tensor η in Eq. ( The fact that the off-diagonal elements in the above matrix involving the operator B 2 (η 12 and η 23 ) are relatively small is a manifestation of the near-symmetry our system exhibits, described above. The operator V cool in Eq. ( Single-excitation subspace Let us consider first the eigenstates with only a single excitation in the array. For these states the nonlinear term in Hamiltonian Eq. ( A basis B for the Hilbert space of the one-excitation manifold is the following: We have introduced here the notation |m, n, l as a shorthand way of representing a normalized state with m excitations in the lowest eigenmode, n in the second mode and l in the third mode. Recall that the three modes do not correspond to the three lattice sites; each operator B j has in general a nonzero component on each site, as we found in Eq. ( , provided that we have ordered them from lowest to highest energy, λ 1 < λ 2 < λ 3 . Expressed in this basis, the operator O B in Eq. (S29) has the matrix form: The cooling rate in this manifold, for example, from |E 3 to |E 1 is easily evaluated from Eq. (S31) as: The cavity pull, or χ-shift, corresponding to each state is calculated via: Two-excitation subspace Let us consider the manifold consisting of states which have two excitations in the array. We define a basis for this manifold similar to that used for the single-excitation subspace, noting that because of the nonlinear terms, this basis is not an eigenbasis for the Hamiltonian: The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( expressed in the basis B has the matrix form: and the operator O B in Eq. (S29): To find the eigenstates of the two-excitation manifold we need to diagonalize the matrix: that represents The six eigenstates of the matrix HB correspond to the six F -states introduced in the main text, with corresponding eigenfrequencies j , j = 1, 2, . . . , 6. The cooling rate from |F i to |F j is evaluated from Eq. (S31) as: The cavity pull in a generic F j state is: As shown in Eqs. ( As noted above, the frequencies ω i and ω f in the above equation depend on the photon number via the Stark shift, an effect that was observed experimentally (see Fig. In Table We now refer back to the simple tight-binding model of free excitations hopping on the lattice (that we have analyzed above in Eq. (S39) and following), we expect this to apply well to the single-excitation manifold where the nonlinear terms are zero. On a three-site lattice the only allowed Fourier modes are: k 1 = π/4, k 2 = π/2 and k 3 = 3π/4; these correspond respectively to the momentum of the states: E 3 , E 2 , E 1 . Given that J > 0, the state with higher momentum has the lowest energy (here E 1 has momentum k 3 = 3π/4). In the case where the couplings obey g 1 = g 3 , they have parity symmetry. Hence cooling can be effective between states E 3 and E 1 because they have the same spatial parity. Conversely cooling is highly suppressed in the case of E 3 to E 2 or E 2 to E 1 because those transitions require a change of parity. This is clearly confirmed by the cooling rate experimentally measured between the states of the E-manifold (see lower part of Table We calculate the Purcell relaxation rate as the decay rate of a qubit-array state due to the action of the bare cavity operator a; this operator destroys a photon and induces transitions to lower states. In order to estimate the rate for such a process to occur, we compute the overlap between the |E i and |F j states and the bare cavity mode a. From Eq. (S7), we know the decomposition of each dressed qubit operator B j in terms of the bare operators: Since the single-particle states |E j are simply given by the dressed operator B j acting on the vacuum (with no excitations in either qubit or cavity), the overlap between the |E j state and the bare cavity mode is simply given by N j0 . Then, the Purcell-limited decay rate for this process is the square of this overlap times the cavity decay rate κ: The results for the |E j → |G decay times are shown in the top three rows of Table The analysis for the decay rates of the |F j states is similar with the decay rate of, say, an initial two-excitation substate to a single-excitation state given by To calculate these values we expand |F j in the basis B of states {|n } n∈ In most of the cases, the theoretical prediction for T 1 is of the same order of magnitude as the experimentally measured value. Nevertheless, there are some qualitative discrepancies. For instance, the theoretical T 1 times for the F -states are in general shorter than the measured ones. We attribute this to the limitation of the single-mode cavity model which can be shown to predict a shorter life-time than a model which takes into account higher modes of the 3D cavity. A more mundane discrepancy arises from the fact that as the |E 1 and |E 2 are almost dark states, their dominant decay channel is not Purcell decay via coupling to the cavity, but rather on-chip material losses. Coherently preparing an array eigenstate is accomplished via pulses applied to the same port of the cavity used to perform cooling and state measurement. Thus, the response of the system to this drive is contained in the operator H B,drive discussed in the previous section (see Eq. ( , so the relevant value(s) of M 0l for a particular eigenstate determine the magnitude of the response. For the single-excitation manifold, this is an easy calculation, as the operators B † l create a single-particle eigenstate from the vacuum. For the two-particle manifold the calculation is more involved, as the eigenbasis of B † l B l does not coincide with the two-particle eigenmodes. A second, equivalent method is to work in the bare basis and compute directly the matrix element of the operator H int = Our device consists of three transmon qubits Coupling between the transmons themselves comes from two sources: cavity-mediated interactions and direct capacitve (or dipole-dipole) coupling. Cavity-mediated interactions arise when both qubits couple to the cavity mode, as described in ref. We perform spectroscopy to extract, as a function of applied magnetic flux, the eigenergies of the nine lowest-lying excited states of the array with respect to the global zero-particle ground state. These nine states consist of three states in the single-particle manifold and six in the two-particle manifold. As in the main text, these states are denoted |G , {|E i }, and {|F i } respectively. We probe the array for coil currents between -2 and +17 mA. Since the qubit population without any excitation predominantly lies in |G , standard two-tone spectroscopy reveals the |G → |E 1 , |G → |E 2 , and |G → |E 3 transitions. To perform this spectroscopy, the reflected phase of a tone near the cavity resonance Extraction of the two-particle energies is more involved. For the |F 6 state, the energy can be directly measured via a two-photon transition from |G , as shown in Fig. From the extracted energies of the one-and two-particle manifolds (see Fig. with the qubit frequency as a function of flux described by ω(φ) = ω 0i cos (B i I + A) for the outer qubits with SQUIDS (for the middle qubit ω is constant). The parameters B i for each edge qubit are the ratio between the current applied to the coil and the flux threading the qubit's SQUID loop, and A is an overall offset due to potential flux trapped in the SQUID loops during cooldown. Due to the dispersive coupling between the qubits and the cavity, each array eigenstate induces a shift in the resonant frequency of the readout cavity. The frequency corresponding to the array in |G is measurable simply via the reflected phase measurement on a network analyzer, as the array is in its global ground state without excitation pulses. This frequency is 7.116 GHz when our system is biased up to 10 mA. To measure the resonator frequencies corresponding to the excited states, we use microwave pulses to prepare the array in the desired eigenstate |i , then measure the reflected phase θ i of a 7.116 GHz tone, referenced to the reflected phase with the array in |G . This measurement was done using our LJPA in phase-preserving mode. The standard equations for a reflected phase shift from a resonator yield that the frequency shift χ i for a given eigenstate is related to θ i by the equation χ i = κ/2 tan (θ i /2). The measured reflected phase angle θ exp and the corresponding χ exp are shown in Table V. In the same table are also shown the χ shifts calculated theoretically according to Eqs. (S60) and (S72). Except for |F 3 and |F 4 , all of the states are resolvable. In fact, by using the LJPA in phase-sensitive mode and adjusting the measurement frequency and amplification axis (phase of the detected quadrature), we can obtain additional separation between states of interest for a particular experimental run. To extract the population of a given state after a particular experimental sequence, we repeat the sequence several (∼ 1 million) times and histogram the measured phase or quadrature amplitude values. After the run, we take a set of calibration histograms, in which we prepare all ten states and immediately make a measurement with the same frequency and amplification axis used in the experiment. We then fit the measured histograms to a sum of Gaussians with the same mean and variances as the calibration histograms, and from the amplitudes of each Gaussian, extract the corresponding state's population during that run. See the next section for an example of this procedure. Natural decay dynamics were measured by coherently initializing the system in the state of interest, waiting for a time, then measuring the array state, as described above. We fit the population dynamics for each state to a decay model given by the matrix rate equation ∂ t c = Γ c, where c is a vector containing all of the state populations as a function of time and Γ a matrix with transition rates between states. This procedure is similar to that used by Errors in the fit, primarily at low population, occur likely due to effects such as spontaneous T 1 decay which cause the readout histograms to be skewed from their nominally Gaussian shape. See 