We analyse the role of the dynamical Casimir effect as a resource for quantum technologies, such as quantum cryptography and quantum metrology. In particular, we consider the generation of Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen steering and Gaussian interferometric power, two useful forms of asymmetric quantum correlations, in superconducting waveguides modulated by superconducting quantum interferometric devices. We show that, while a certain value of squeezing is required to overcome thermal noise and give rise to steering, any non-zero squeezing produces interferometric power which in fact increases with thermal noise. The first experimental observation of the Dynamical Casimir Effect (DCE) In particular, it has been shown that the photon pairs generated by the DCE display quantum entanglement In mixed states of bipartite systems, one can distinguish in fact different layers of quantum correlations, which in order of decreasing strength include: Bell nonlocality On one hand, we consider a computable measure of Gaussian quantum steering G A→B , which captures the EPR paradox, and quantifies to which extent Bob's mode can be steered by Alice's Gaussian measurements on her mode, in a two-mode entangled Gaussian state On the other hand, we consider a metrological figure of merit that captures a form of discord-type correlations, known as interferometric power Both quantities are therefore directly relevant for practical applications, and both admit simple closed formulae for two-mode Gaussian states, a fact which will be advantageous for our analysis. We remark that any separable or entangled Gaussian state can have a nonzero interferometric power In the following, we compute both the Gaussian quantum steering and the Gaussian interferometric power generated in the experimental setup employed for the observation of the DCE, namely a superconducting waveguide interrupted by a SQUID The structure of the paper is the following. In section II we briefly recall the formalism of the Dynamical Casimir Effect in superconducting circuits, and in particular we compute the covariance matrix of the system. In section III we show the results for both gaussian quantum steering and gaussian interferometric power. We conclude in section IV with a summary of the results and a discussion of possible applications. We will consider the same experimental setup as in The field can thus be written as: where a(ω) and b(ω) are the annihilation operators for photons with frequency ω propagating to the right (incoming) and left (outgoing), respectively. Here k ω = ω/v is the wavenumber, v is the speed of light in the waveguide, Z 0 is the characteristic impedance, and we have used the notation a(-ω) = a † (ω). As shown in that can be described by an effective length where L 0 is the characteristic inductance per unit length of the waveguide and we obtain an effective length modulation amplitude δL eff = L 0 eff , where L 0 eff = L eff (0). If the effective velocity v eff = δL eff ω d is a significant fraction of v, the emission of DCE photon pairs is sizeable. The DCE can be analysed using scattering theory which describes how the time-dependent boundary condition mixes the otherwise independent incoming and outgoing modes where δL eff √ ω -ω + /v is a small parameter. If we consider small detuning, then ω -ω + ω d /2 and Denoting the small parameter as f , we can write: Let us consider now the covariance matrix of the system V . Using the same convention as in where R T = (q -, p -, q + , p + ) is a vector with the quadratures as elements: Note that the quadratures of the outgoing modes can be written in terms of those of the ingoing modes, q 0± = (a ± +a † ± )/ √ 2 and p 0± = -i(a ± -a † ± )/ √ 2, by using Eq. ( We assume that the ingoing modes are in a weakly thermal, quasi-vacuum state characterised by a small fraction of thermal photons n th + , n th -as is the case for typical GHz frequencies and mK temperatures in a superconducting scenario. Then the ingoing covariance matrix is Note that since we are considering small detuning, ω + ω -ω d /2, it follows that n th + n th n th , that is, the states can be considered approximately symmetric under a swap of the two modes. Using Eqs. ( This is a two-mode squeezed thermal state characterised by the squeezing parameter 2f and its standard form is obtained just by replacing the Pauli matrix σ x with σ z in C. We are now ready to characterise the aforementioned two different forms of quantum correlations for the state described by the covariance matrix in Eqs. Using Eqs. ( Therefore, the DCE radiation exhibits non-zero Gaussian steering as long as Writing it explicitly in terms of the driving amplitude , we find that the onset of the Gaussian quantum steering occurs at: Let us analyse now the behaviour of the Gaussian interferometric power, whose expression is given by where Using Eqs. ( Therefore we note that, regardless the degree of thermal noise, the interferometric power is generated for any non-zero value of the squeezing parameter, and it further increases with the number of thermal photons. In Figs. steering is 0 for any sensible value of . Indeed, quantum steering is very fragile to thermal noise and is only different from zero below 32 mK for the value of achieved in Finally, in order to understand better the interplay between squeezing and temperature in the generation of quantum steering, we plot the measure G A→B in Fig. In conclusion, we have investigated the experimental scenario of the DCE demonstration in a superconducting waveguide terminated by a SQUID, focusing our attention on the nature of the correlations in the generated radiation. We studied in particular the ability of the DCE for the generation of EPR quantum steering We found that both correlations can be generated by the DCE in realistic experimental conditions, although they exhibit quite different behaviours. On one hand, steering is very fragile and disappears for moderate levels of thermal noise, even though the state of the radiation may remain entangled. On the other hand, interferometric power is always nonvanishing and is even enhanced by thermal noise. This shows that the DCE can be regarded as an effective and practical resource to generate useful correlations for entanglement-based 