We use determinant quantum Monte Carlo to study the single particle properties of quasiparticles and phonons in a variant of the two-dimensional Holstein model that includes an additional nonlinear electron-phonon (e-ph ) interaction. We find that a small positive non-linear interaction reduces the effective coupling between the electrons and the lattice, suppresses charge-density wave (CDW) correlations, and hardens the effective phonon frequency. Conversely, a small negative nonlinear interaction can enhance the e-ph coupling resulting in heavier quasiparticles, an increased tendency towards a CDW phase at all fillings, and a softened phonon frequency. An effective linear model with a renormalized interaction strength and phonon frequency can qualitatively capture this physics; however, the quantitative effects of the non-linearity on both the electronic and phononic degrees of freedom cannot be captured by such a model. These results are significant for typical nonlinear coupling strengths found in real materials, indicating that non-linearity can have a significant influence on the physics of many e-ph coupled systems. The electron-phonon (e-ph) interaction plays an important role in many systems including conventional metals and superconductors, 1,2 organic semiconductors, Almost all of our knowledge about the effects of the e-ph interaction has been obtained from linear models. The derivation of these models is standard. First, the e-ph interaction is expanded in powers of the atomic displacement. This is followed by a truncation of the expansion to linear order under the assumption of small lattice displacements. These same models, however, often predict the formation of small polarons or charge-densitywave (CDW) phases for sufficiently large e-ph coupling, which are characterized by large lattice displacements. For example, the displacements in the linear Holstein and Hubbard-Holstein models can be on the order of the lattice constant when CDW correlations are significant. It is important to note that the effects of the non-linear interactions observed in Refs. 20 and 23 are significant, even for relatively small non-linear interaction strengths. This is illustrated in Fig. [The degree of non-linearity is indicated by the ratio of the pre-factors of the quadratic (g 2 ) and linear (g 1 ) interaction terms ξ = g2 g1 , see Sec. II A.] Here, the charge susceptibility provides a measure of the strength of the CDW correlations. It is defined as where ρ(q) = i,σ e iq•Ri ni,σ , and Tτ is the time-ordering operator. In this case, the well-known where the c i,σ (p j,σ ) operators act on the TM 3d and O 2p orbitals, respectively. The hopping integral has a typical dependence t pd ∼ (d/d 0 ) -β , with β = 3.5. where . (The zeroth order terms are included in the non-interacting terms of the Hamiltonian). Taking typical values We study a variant of the Holstein model that includes additional non-linear interaction terms. The Hamiltonian is partitioned as where contains the non-interacting electronic terms, contains the non-interacting lattice terms, and contains the interaction terms to k th order in the atomic displacement. Here, c † i,σ (c i,σ ) creates (annihilates) an electron of spin σ on lattice site i; b † i (b i ) creates (annihilates) a phonon on lattice site i; ni,σ = c † i,σ c i,σ is the number operator; μ is the chemical potential; t is the nearest-neighbor hopping integral; M is the ion mass; Ω is the phonon frequency; Xi and Pi are the lattice position and momentum operators, respectively; and 2 is the strength of the e-ph coupling to k th order in displacement. The non-linear Holstein model is characterized by several dimensionless parameters, and the specific choice in parameterization is not unique. Here, we follow the convention used in previous works, We use DQMC to study the non-linear Holstein model. The details of the method are given in several references (see for example Refs. 37 -39) and the specifics for handling the lattice degrees of freedom can be found in Refs. 19, 20, and 32. In our calculations we keep g 1 > 0 without loss of generality. Furthermore, Ref. 23 examined terms to 4 th order in the interaction and found that the largest effect was produced by the 2 nd order terms. We expect a similar result here and restrict ourselves to k = 2 while defining ξ = g2 g1 . Throughout this work we examine twodimensional square lattices with a linear dimension N (a total of N × N sites) and set a = t = M = 1 as our units of distance, energy, and mass, respectively. We typically work on lattice sizes ranging from N = 4 to 8 in size. In general we do not observe significant finite size effects, The Holstein model and its non-linear extension do not suffer from a fermion sign problem. The DQMC calculation provides the phonon Green's function D(q, τ ) = T Xq (τ ) X-q (0) measured on the imaginary time axis. The phonon Green's function is related to the phonon spectral function on the real axis by the integral equation This equation also provides a normalization condition for B(q, ω). In section III C we examine the phonon spectral properties of the non-linear Holstein model, which requires that the phonon Green's function be analytically continued to the real frequency axis. This is accomplished with the Maximum Entropy method (MEM). Our results for the single-particle electronic and phononic properties of the non-linear Holstein model are presented in this section. We will begin by first examining the renormalization of the quasiparticles as a function of doping, temperature, and phonon energy. We then examine how the interplay between the quasiparticles and renormalized phonons affect the energetics of the system. Following this, results are presented for the renormalization of the phonons. Finally, after all of these effects are examined, we demonstrate that the simultaneous renormalization of the electronic and phonic subsystems cannot be quantitatively captured by an effective linear model. Combined, these results paint a more detailed picture of how both the quasiparticles and phonons are renormalized by the non-linear e-ph interaction, which cannot be obtained by examining only one of these subsystems. In the following sections we consider results for the case ξ > 0. Considerations of the ξ < 0 case are presented in Sec. III E. We begin by examining the polaron's quasiparticle reside Z(k) as a function of the non-linear coupling strength and doping. This quantity is related to the effective mass via Z -1 ∝ m * m . It can be obtained from the imaginary axis self-energy Σ(k, iω n ) using the relationship Here, we approximate b(k) by evaluating Eq. ( The formation and suppression of the CDW gap is also reflected in the spectral weight at the Fermi level, which can be obtained from the local imaginary time Green's function βG(r = 0, τ = β/2) ≡ βG β/2 . 45 Fig. In Fig. for the half-filled model. Here, results for Z(0, π) only are shown, since similar trends were found at all momenta. Focusing first on the linear model, we find that Z(0, π) decreases with temperature as the CDW correlations begin to set in. The average lattice displacement, however, does not exhibit the same temperature dependence (see inset of Fig. The Ω-dependence of Z(π, 0) and X for the same model are shown in Fig. From this section we conclude that the non-linear interaction with ξ > 0 acts to undress the quasiparticles and that this is a generic result, regardless of the values of Ω and β. The undressing, however, is much more pronounced at low temperatures, for smaller values of the phonon frequency, and near half-filling, where the CDW correlations (and subsequently the local lattice displacements) are largest in the linear model. The average kinetic energy of the electronic subsystem KE el = -t i,j ,σ c † i,σ c j,σ at β = 4/t is shown in Fig. The average kinetic KE ph and potential PE ph energies of the lattice are shown in Figs. (The factor of 1 2∆τ appearing in Eq. ( In the linear model we see a very weak variation in the phonon kinetic energy as a function of filling, with a slight decrease observed near half-filling when the CDW correlations increase. This is consistent with prior observations of the lattice kinetic energy in the vicinity of a CDW transition in the Hubbard-Holstein model. The energetics reported here are completely consistent with the conclusion that the non-linear interaction acts to harden the phonon frequency and weaken the effective linear interaction, which results in an undressing of the Holstein polaron for ξ > 0. In the linear Holstein model the formation of the CDW phase is accompanied by a softening of the phonon dispersion to zero energy at the nesting wavevector Q = 2k F = (π, π). In the non-interacting limit, B(q, ν) and N ph (ν) are delta functions centered at the bare phonon frequency Ω. In the presence of a non-zero linear interaction only, this distribution shifts to lower energy and broadens. This is illustrated in Figs. Two prominent changes occur when ξ = 0. First, the peak in the DOS shifts to higher energies, which verifies the hardening of the effective phonon frequency. This behavior is also clearly seen in the momentum resolved spectral functions, shown in Fig. As we have repeatedly seen, the non-linear e-ph interaction acts to renormalize both the bare linear interaction strength λ and the bare phonon frequency Ω. Both of these effects can be qualitatively understood at the mean-field (MF) level for the quadratic model, where an effective linear Hamiltonian is obtained by performing a MF decoupling of the interaction terms proportional to b † i b † i and b i b i . where Ω M F = Ω + 2g 2 and g M F = g 1 (1 -2g2 Ω+4g2 ) are the renormalized phonon frequency and e-ph coupling constants, respectively. One immediately sees that the quadratic e-ph interaction leads to a softening (hardening) of the phonon frequency and an increase (decrease) in the effective linear interaction strength g 1 for ξ < 0 (ξ > 0). These two effects combine to produce an overall increase (decrease) in the strength of the effective dimensionless coupling λ ef f ∝ Ω M F . The MF treatment of the non-linear interaction is consistent with the general trends reported here and in Refs. 20 and 23. We stress, however, that the MF description only provides a qualitative picture of the non-linear effects. To illustrate this, we compare our DQMC results for the full non-linear Hamiltonian against the predictions obtained from two sets of effective linear models. The first is the MF-derived model defined by Eq. ( We consider the MF-derived model first. Fig. We have shown that a positive (ξ > 0) non-linear coupling results in a hardening of the phonon frequency and a renormalization of the effective linear e-ph coupling to weaker values. But what about the case when ξ < 0, where the MF model predicts an enhanced effective linear coupling? Before examining this case, we note that a large negative ξ necessarily requires the inclusion of additional anharmonic terms in the lattice potential. Fig. We have examined the role of non-linear e-ph interactions in shaping the single-particle electronic and phononic properties of Holstein polarons at finite carrier concentrations and temperatures using DQMC. We find that the inclusion of a positive non-linear interaction term serves to undress the polaron leading to carriers with lighter effective masses. This leads to changes in the energetics of both the electrons and phonons, as well as the relaxation of the local lattice distortions surrounding each carrier. This is due to a simultaneous hardening of the phonon frequency and renormalization of the effective linear coupling to smaller values. We have also examined the case when the quadratic e-ph interaction has the opposite sign as the linear interaction, although this case cannot be explored in detail without the inclu-sion of additional anharmonic terms in the lattice potential. Nevertheless, in our limited range of accessible parameters, we find that a quadratic interaction results in an increased dressing of the carriers and an enhanced tendency towards the formation of a Q = (π, π) CDW ordered phase. While many of the effects we have discussed can be understood qualitatively at the mean-field level, we have demonstrated that the quantitative effects can only be captured by the full non-linear model. Specifically, the effective linear models fail to simultaneously capture the electronic and phononic properties. Therefore the full non-linear model must be retained if one wishes to accurately capture the properties of the electrons and the phonons. Our results are in good agreement with the results obtained in the single particle limit, 