We investigate how hybridization (single-quasiparticle scattering) between two superconducting bands induces odd-frequency superconductivity in a multiband superconductor. An explicit derivation of the odd-frequency pairing correlation and its full frequency dependence is given. We find that the density of states is modified, from the sum of the two BCS spectra, at higher energies by additional hybridization gaps with strong coherence peaks when odd-frequency pairing is present. Many materials have multiple bands close to the Fermi level. It is then not surprising that there also exist many superconductors with more than one superconducting band. Well-known multiband superconductors are MgB 2 Multiple superconducting bands allow for unusual coupling effects. Early, and much current, theoretical focus has been oriented towards studying the effects of Josephson coupling between different superconducting bands, i.e. the exchange of whole Cooper pairs between bands Theoretically, interband single-quasiparticle scattering results in both band hybridization and interband pairing, where the two electrons forming a Cooper pair belong to different bands. Straightforward effects of band hybridization were studied already quite early on The fermionic nature of the superconducting wave function usually renders a division into spin-singlet evenparity (i.e. s-, d-wave) or spin-triplet odd-parity (pwave) superconductors, but it can also be even or odd under time, or equivalently frequency In this work we derive the exact Green's functions for a generic multiband superconductor with singlequasiparticle scattering. We thus obtain the full frequency dependence of the interband pairing and find that the odd-interband pairing has odd frequency dependence, while the even-interband pairing is even in frequency. By studying the density of states (DOS) we also discover that finite band hybridization gives rise to an extra gap located beyond the original gap edges. This hybridizationinduced gap is not fully depleted, but has very pronounced BCS-like coherence peaks. Moreover, the hybridization gap disappears whenever the odd-frequency interband pairing is zero and is thus a directly measurable signal of odd-frequency superconductivity. To model a generic multiband superconductor we consider two bands, band 1 and 2, with dispersions ǫ k1 and ǫ k2 , where ǫ k = ǫ -k . For simplicity, we assume that the two bands independently develop conventional spinsinglet s-wave superconducting order parameters ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 , respectively, but one of them can also be zero. Finally, we add a small single-quasiparticle hybridization, or scattering, term proportional to Γ between the two bands, resulting in the Hamiltonian: where a (b) is the annihilation operator in band 1 Alternatively, the band hybridization can be interpreted as a coupling process in real space, with the a-and belectrons living to the left and the right of a junction or in different layers The minus sign before the second term is due to scattering of hole propagators (leftgoing arrows). The normal and anomalous propagators without the hybridization are as usual where and ω = ω n = π(2n + 1)k B T are the fermionic Matsubara frequencies. Using these expressions we arrive at ]. The next to leading order terms for F 12 are cubic in Γ. Further organizing the perturbation expansion of the interband pairing of a given order n in a systematic way, we find several recursion relationships where For the starting point of the recursion we use the first order anomalous interband Green's function F , which translates into: meaning that the series is always convergent for sufficiently small Γ, provided that ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 are both finite. This allows us to sum the infinite series and we arrive at 4 . The expression for F 21 is obtained by exchanging the band indices and we can also form the odd and even combinations of F 12 and F 21 with respect to the band index: The odd-band combination is directly seen to be odd in frequency, whereas the even-band combination has a conventional even-frequency dependence. This is fully consistent with Fermi-Dirac statistics for spin-singlet s-wave superconducting pairing. Furthermore, we see that interband pairing always requires a finite band hybridization and that the odd-interband pairing also requires ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 . Equations ( By forming an analogue of Eq. ( and the corresponding normal Green's function: The expressions for F 2 and G 2 are obtained by mutually exchanging band indices. The expressions for the normal Green's functions allow us to compute the DOS using the standard formula: Here the trace involves a sum over band and spin indices and an integral over k-space. We use similar expressions, but unsummed over the band index, to define the partial DOS N 1 and N 2 . The total and partial DOS offer a direct connection to experimental measurements on multiband superconductors. In Figs. We here especially showcase that unusual features in the DOS are only seen when the conditions Γ = 0 and ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 are both satisfied, which are exactly the two key criteria for odd-frequency pairing, see Eq. ( In summary, we have studied the effect of singlequasiparticle hybridization or scattering in a two-band superconductor. By performing perturbation theory to infinite order in the hybridization term, we have obtained the exact, fully frequency dependent, expression for the interband pairing, which can be divided up into odd-frequency odd-interband and evenfrequency even-interband pairing. The conditions for finite odd-frequency interband pairing are (a) finite singlequasiparticle hybridization and (b) a non-zero difference between the original superconducting gaps; no applied magnetic field, inhomogeneity, or interface is required. Furthermore, we have shown that the DOS develops nontrivial gaps features with distinct coherence peaks beyond the original gap edges only if the conditions for odd-frequency pairing are satisfied, otherwise the spectrum just a sum of two BCS spectra. Detecting such additional gaps thus provides experimental evidence of odd-frequency pairing in multiband superconductors. = Γ[∆ 1 ∆ * 2 -(iω -ǫ 1 )(iω -ǫ 2 )]/[(ω 2 + E 2 1 )(ω 2 + E 2 2 )]. From Eq. (3) we recognize that the Green's functions to infinite order can be written as a geometric series, where the quotient is a two-by-two matrix. The formal criterion for a matrix geometric series to be convergent is that the norm (i.e. the largest singular value) of the coefficient matrix is < 1. From this we arrive at the condition