We calculate the joint distribution P (S, Q) of the scattering matrix S and time-delay matrix Q = -i S † dS/dE of a chaotic quantum dot coupled by point contacts to metal electrodes. While S and Q are statistically independent for ballistic coupling, they become correlated for tunnel coupling. We relate the ensemble averages of Q and S and thereby obtain the average density of states at the Fermi level. We apply this to a calculation of the effect of a tunnel barrier on the Majorana resonance in a topological superconductor. We find that the presence of a Majorana bound state is hidden in the density of states and in the thermal conductance if even a single scattering channel has unit tunnel probability. The electrical conductance remains sensitive to the appearance of a Majorana bound state, and we calculate the variation of the average conductance through a topological phase transition. The quantum states of particle and anti-particle excitations in a superconductor (Bogoliubov quasiparticles) are related by a unitary transformation, which means that they can be represented by a real wave function. In this so-called Majorana representation the N ×N scattering matrix S at the Fermi level is real orthogonal rather than complex unitary The uniformity of the distribution requires ideal cou- pling of the scattering channels to the continuum, which physically means that the discrete spectrum of a quantum dot is coupled to metal electrodes by ballistic point contacts. If the point contact contains a tunnel barrier, then P (S) is no longer uniform but biased towards the reflection matrix r B of the barrier. The modified distribution P Poisson (S) is known in the CRE In the present work we apply this result to the scattering (Andreev reflection) in a superconducting quantum dot (Andreev billiard), see Fig. The joint distribution of S and Q is known for ballistic coupling The outline of the paper is as follows. The next two sections formulate the scattering theory of the Andreev billiard and the appropriate random-matrix theory. Our key technical result, the joint distribution P (S, Q), is given in Sec. IV. We apply this to the simplest singlechannel case (N = 1) in Sec. V, where obtain a remarkable scaling relation: For a high tunnel barrier (transmission probability Γ 1) the distribution P (ρ|Γ) of the density of states at the Fermi level is described by a one-parameter scaling function F (x): ) with a Majorana bound state, F (4ρ/Γ) without a Majorana. (2) The average density of states in the multi-channel case is calculated in Sec. VI. By relating the ensemble averages of Q and S we derive the relation for a mode-independent tunnel probability Γ. In the CUE and COE the average scattering matrix S is just equal to r B , so ρ remains equal to its ballistic value ρ ballistic , but the CRE is not so constrained. Applications to the thermal conductance g and the electrical (Andreev) conductance g A follow in Secs. VII and VIII. For ballistic coupling it is known that P (g) is the same with or without the Majorana bound state In the main text we focus on the results and applications. Details of the calculations are moved to the Appendices. These also contain more general results for other RMT ensembles, with or without time-reversal and/or spin-rotation symmetry. (Both symmetries are broken in the CRE.) II. SCATTERING FORMULATION Fig. The M × N matrix W couples the M energy levels in the quantum dot (mean level spacing δ 0 ) to a total of N M propagating modes in the point contact. We assume that degeneracies are broken by spin-orbit coupling in the topological insulator in combination with a magnetic field (perpendicular to the surface). All degrees of freedom are therefore counted separately in N and M , as well as in δ 0 . The electron-hole degree of freedom is also included in the count, but we leave open the possibility of an unpaired Majorana fermion -a coherent superposition of electron and hole quasiparticles that does not come with a distinct antiparticle. An odd level number M indicates the presence of a Majorana bound state in the quantum dot, produced when a magnetic vortex enters The N modes have an energy-independent transmission probability Γ n ∈ [0, 1] per mode. If we choose a basis such that the coupling matrix W has only nonzero elements on the diagonal, it has the explicit form Notice that the tunnel probability Γ n determines the reflection amplitude r n ∈ [-1, 1] up to a sign. The conventional choice is to take r n ≥ 0, when κ n = κ + n can be written as Alternatively, if r n ≤ 0 one has κ n = κ - n given by The two choices are equivalent for ballistic coupling, Γ n = 1 = κ ± n , but for a high tunnel barrier Γ n 1 one has κ + n → 0 while κ - n → ∞. The sign change of r n is a topological phase transition From the scattering matrix we can obtain transport properties, such as the electrical and thermal conductance, and thermodynamic properties, such as the density of states. If we restrict ourselves to properties at the Fermi level, E = 0, we need the matrix S(0) ≡ S and the derivative The unitarity of S(E) implies that Q is Hermitian, so it has real eigenvalues τ n with the dimension of time. The τ n 's are called (proper) delay times and Q is called the Wigner-Smith time-delay matrix For the thermal conductance we partition the modes into two sets, N = N 1 + N 2 , each set connected to a different terminal, and decompose the scattering matrix into reflection and transmission subblocks, A small temperature difference δT between the two terminals, at average temperature T 0 , drives a heat current J = G thermal δT . The thermal conductance G thermal in the low-temperature linear-response limit T 0 , δT /T 0 → 0 is given by The quantum G 0 is a factor-of-two smaller than in systems without superconductivity If we keep the two terminals at the same temperature but instead apply a voltage difference, we can drive an electrical current. We consider a situation where both terminal 2 and the superconductor are grounded, while terminal 1 is biased at voltage V . The current I from terminal 1 to ground is then given by the Andreev conductance in the zero-temperature, zero-voltage limit. In the last equality we used the particle-hole symmetry relation t = τ x t * τ x at E = 0, where the τ i Pauli matrices act on the electron (e) and hole (h) degree of freedom. For a statistical description we consider an ensemble of quantum dots, each with its own random Hamiltonian H. The mean level spacing δ 0 and coupling matrix W are kept fixed. If the wave dynamics in the quantum dot is chaotic, the ensemble is fully characterized by the presence or absence of certain fundamental symmetries. This is the universal framework of random-matrix theory. Superconducting systems are characterized by particlehole symmetry, The Pauli matrices τ x can be removed from the symmetry relation by a unitary transformation after which we simply have In this so-called Majorana basis the Hamiltonian is real antisymmetric, H = iA with A nm = A * nm = -A mn . If no other symmetries are imposed on the Hamiltonian we have the class-D ensemble of random-matrix theory The eigenvalues of the antisymmetric M × M matrix H come in ±E pairs, hence if M is odd there must be a nondegenerate eigenvalue E = 0 at the Fermi level, in the middle of the superconducting gap. This so-called Majorana bound state is the hallmark of a topologically nontrivial superconductor This can be seen directly from the definition (4) in the Majorana basis: For M even the matrix H = iA is invertible, so we have For M odd the bound state contributes to the determinant a factor for some vector v, so Det S = -1. The class-D ensemble of scattering matrices thus consists of two disjunct sets: The special orthogonal group SO(N ) ≡ O + (N ) of orthogonal matrices with determinant +1 in the topologically trivial case, and the complement O -(N ) of orthogonal matrices with determinant -1 in the topologically nontrivial case. For ballistic coupling (Γ n = 1 for all n) the matrices S and Q are statistically independent The class-D ballistic time-delay matrix has probability distribution where t H = 2π /δ 0 is the Heisenberg time and Θ(Q) restricts Q to positive definite real symmetric matrices. This constraint can be implemented more directly by defining with R n,m the set of n × m matrices with real elements. The distribution Remarkably, there is no dependence on the topological quantum number for ballistic coupling: Q has the same distribution irrespective of the presence or absence of a Majorana bound state. Tunnel coupling is described by a reflection matrix r B (from outside to outside) and transmission matrix t B (from outside to inside). In the Majorana basis these are real matrices, parameterized by As we derive in App. A, the matrix product 1 To transform from P (Q) to P (K) multiply by the Jacobians determines the joint distribution As a check, we can integrate out the time-delay matrix to obtain the marginal distribution of the scattering matrix, The Jacobian evaluates to [44] and we recover the class-D Poisson kernel The joint distribution so that the joint distribution of S and Q 0 factorizes, The transformation from Q to Q 0 removes the effect of the tunnel barrier on the time-delay matrix (see App. A). For ballistic coupling the distribution The unit step function θ(x) ensures that γ n > 0 for all n = 1, 2, . . . N . In the single-channel case N = 1 we can use the joint distribution [This definition of κ corresponds to κ + from Eq. ( The single-parameter scaling P (γ|κ, ν) = κ 1-2ν F (κ 1-2ν γ) is tested numerically in Fig. With ρ = (2π γ) -1 the distribution For ballistic coupling, integration of ρ = (2π ) -1 n γ -1 n with distribution for N ≥ 3. The ensemble average diverges for N = 1, 2. To calculate the effect of a tunnel barrier we write see Eq. ( so the average density of states (still for N ≥ 3) is given by (This is Eq. ( where again the + sign corresponds to ν = 0 (without a Majorana bound state) and the -sign to ν = 1 (with a Majorana bound state). We thus arrive at the average density of states, plotted in Fig. The 1/Γ divergence of the density of states for ν = 1 corresponds to the delta-function contribution from the Majorana bound state in the closed system. Without FIG. the Majorana bound state (ν = 0) the density of states at the Fermi level remains finite in the Γ → 0 limit, but it does remain above the normal-state value of 1/δ 0 . This midgap spectral peak is characteristic for a class-D superconductor We consider the thermal conductance in the simplest case N 1 = N 2 = 1 of a quantum dot with single-mode point contacts. These are Majorana modes, carrying heat but no charge. The scattering matrix S ∈ O ± (2) is parameterized by The Haar measure equals the same for both O + and O -. For the tunnel barrier we take the reflection matrix r B = diag (r 1 , r 2 ), with r n = √ 1 -Γ n ≥ 0. The Poisson kernel The dimensionless thermal conductance where as before, P + applies to ν = 0 and P -to ν = 1. The distribution is the result Quite remarkably, the distribution of the thermal conductance for two identical single-mode point contacts is unaffected by the presence of a tunnel barrier in the topologically nontrivial case. Fig. in words: The probability distribution of the thermal conductance becomes independent of the presence or absence of a Majorana bound state if the quantum dot is coupled ballistically to at least one of the scattering channels. In other words, ballistic coupling to a propagating Majorana mode hides the Majorana bound state. The proof is straightforward: If Γ n0 = 1 for one of the indices n 0 ∈ {1, 2, . . . N }, then the Poisson kernel ( This proof for the Poisson kernel extends to the entire joint distribution 4: Probability distribution of the thermal conductance g = G thermal /G0, see Eq. ( Because a Majorana mode is charge-neutral, no electrical current can be driven for N 1 = N 2 = 1. A nonzero current I is possible for N 1 = 2, when terminal 1 biased at voltage V has a distinct electron and hole mode. We investigate the effect of a tunnel barrier for N 1 = 2, N 2 = 1. In the Majorana basis the expression with r a 2 × 2 real matrix. The scattering matrix S ± ∈ O ± (3) can be conveniently parameterized using three Euler angles where we have defined The Haar measure on O ± (3) is given by In point contact 1 we take a tunnel probability Γ 1 , the same for the electron and hole mode, while in point contact 2 we have tunnel probability Γ 2 for the unpaired Majorana mode. Evaluation of the Poisson kernel plotted in Fig. In the limit r 2 → 1, when terminal 2 is decoupled from the quantum dot, we recover the result independent of Γ 1 . The conductance in this case is uniquely determined by the topological quantum number. In the opposite limit r 2 → 0 the distribution (53) becomes independent of ν, This is a special case of a more general result, for any where P 2 projects onto the modes coupled to terminal 2. Ballistic coupling, even for a single mode, to terminal 2 therefore removes the dependence on the topological quantum number. The proof of Eq. ( of P (g A ) remains for ballistic coupling to terminal 1 The appearance of a Majorana bound state is a topological phase transition. There is a search for this transition in a nanowire geometry, see Fig. Because the Majorana bound states emerge pairwise at the two ends of the nanowire, the topological quantum number ν of the entire structure remains 0 and the determinant Det S of the full scattering matrix remains +1 through the transition. What changes is the sign of the determinant Det r of the reflection submatrix. At the topological phase transition Det r = 0, implying a perfectly transmitted mode and a quantized peak in the thermal conductance We study the effect of the phase transition on the statistics of the electrical conductance, measured by contacting one end of the nanowire (terminal 1) to a metal electrode at voltage V , while the superconductor and the other end of the nanowire (terminal 2) are at ground. Terminal 1 is connected to the nanowire via a point contact, thus creating a confined region (quantum dot) with chaotic scattering. The minimal dimensionality of the scattering matrix S of the quantum dot is 3 × 3: One electron and one hole mode connected to terminal 1 and one Majorana mode connected to terminal 2. To minimize the number of free parameters we assume ballistic coupling through the point contact, so the matrix r B in the Poisson kernel ( (57) (The width ξ 0 of the transition is system dependent.) The corresponding coupling constant κ 2 in Eq. ( The probability distribution of the Andreev conductance (in units of e 2 /h) follows from Eq. ( The delta-function limits (54) are reached for ξ → ±∞ (keeping ν = 0, because the entire system is topologically trivial). Right at the transition, at ξ = 0, the distribution is uniform in the interval 0 < g A < 2. The average conductance varies through the transition as see Fig. In conclusion, we have investigated a variety of observable consequences of the fact that the scattering matrix of Majorana fermions is real orthogonal rather than complex unitary. Of particular interest is the identification of observables that can detect the sign of the determinant, since Det S = -1 signifies the presence of a Majorana bound state. The obvious signal of such a zeromode, a midgap peak in the density of states that the peak remains hidden if the coupling is ballistic (unit transmission) in even a single scattering channel. The thermal conductance is likewise insensitive to the presence or absence of a Majorana bound state, but the electrical conductance retains this sensitivity when the coupling is ballistic. These results for the effect of a tunnel barrier on the midgap spectral peak are derived from the distribution P (S, Q) of scattering matrix and time-delay matrix under the assumption of chaotic scattering, due to disorder or due to irregularly shaped boundaries. The appropriate ensemble in the absence of time-reversal and spin-rotation symmetry has symmetry class D in the Altland-Zirnbauer classification (B3) If the average of U would be over the entire unitary group, then all terms in the power series would vanish and we would simply have S = r B . But averages over orthogonal matrices do not vanish, in the nontrivial way calculated 1 + (-1) p 2 ± (-1) N +1 if p -N = 0, 2, 4, . . . 0 otherwise. (B4) We substitute Eq. (B4) into Eq. (B3) and sum the geometric series, to arrive at the average scattering matrix used in Sec. VI to obtain the average density of states in class D. In a similar way we can derive the average scattering matrix in other symmetry classes. We give the result for class C. The matrix U then varies over the unitary symplectic group Sp(2N ). Ref. For N = 1 this gives S C = (1 + Γ/2)r B , in agreement with Ref. The average density of states in class C follows from Eq. ( In the second equation we have substituted the ballistic class-C result from Ref. consistent with the class-C result for a closed system In most expressions for the probability distribution we write ∝ to indicate an unspecified normalization constant. The Poisson kernel (27) is normalized, P Poisson (S) dS = dS ≡ 1 with dS the Haar measure on O ± (N ), so we use = instead of ∝. The seven symmetry classes in TableIdo not exhaust the tenfold way classification of random-matrix theory: There are three more chiral classes We define t H = 2π /δ 0 , with δ 0 the mean spacing of nondegenerate levels. The ratio t 0 /t H then equals the degeneracy of energy levels divided by the degeneracy of delay times For the record, we note that Eq. (B4) differs from the formula in Ref. 53 by a minus sign (± instead of ∓).