Spontaneous breaking of time-reversal symmetry in superconductors with the px + ipy symmetry of the order parameter allows for a class of effects which are analogous to the anomalous Hall effect in ferromagnets. These effects exist below the critical temperature, T < Tc. We develop a kinetic theory of such effects. In particular, we consider anomalous Hall thermal conductivity, the polar Kerr effect, the anomalous Hall effect, and the anomalous photo-and acousto-galvanic effects. Introduction: One of the leading candidates for p-wave pairing in electronic systems is Sr 2 RuO 4 . There are numerous pieces of experimental evidence that the superconducting state of Sr 2 RuO 4 has odd parity, breaks time reversal symmetry and is spin triplet It should be noted that p-wave superconductivity exists only in the clean regime, l > ξ, where electron transport may be described semiclassically. Generally, in the semiclassical regime there are three contributions to anomalous transport phenomena: skew scattering, side jumps, and the intrinsic contribution. The side jump contribution arises from the shift of the center of mass of electron wave packets during the scattering events, while the intrinsic contribution is related to the anomalous velocity due to Berry curvature. The magnitude of these contributions is independent of the mean free path. In contrast, the magnitude of the skew scattering contribution is proportional to the quasiparticle mean free path l. As a result, the skew scattering contribution exceeds the intrinsic and side jump contributions by a factor ∼ p F l 1. Here p F is the Fermi momentum. Therefore in this article we will take into consideration only the skew scattering contribution. We focus on anomalous transport phenomena in the vicinity of the critical temperature, where quasiparticles play a major role. Kinetic scheme: Transport theory in conventional time reversal invariant superconductors was developed long ago (see for example reviews Refs. where In Eq. (2) m is the electron mass, while p s and Φ, are given by where χ is the order parameter phase, and φ and A are the scalar and vector potentials. From Eq. (3) one obtains the equation for the acceleration of the condensate, Equations ( and by the charge neutrality condition, that relates the gauge invariant scalar potential and the odd in ξ part of the quasiparticle distribution function, arXiv:1506.03071v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 9 Jun 2015 the self-consistency equation for the order parameter. Here dΓ = V d 3 p/(2πh) 3 (V is the volume of the sample) and v = dξ p /dp. We work in linear response to external perturbations, and neglect corrections to equilibrium value of |∆|. The collision integral I st = I (el) st + I st in Eq. (1) describes both elastic and inelastic scattering. We will assume that τ τ , where τ and τ are inelastic and elastic mean free time respectively. Therefore the main contribution to the aforementioned anomalous effects comes from elastic scattering, which is described by the collision integral Skew scattering of quasiparticles corresponds to the part of scattering probability in Eq. ( Here δ is the energy-dependent scattering phase shift. It is related to the s-wave scattering phase shift δ n in the normal state by We assume weak impurities, for which δ n ≈ tan δ n = -πνV 0 is small. Here ν is the density of states on the Fermi level and V 0 is the impurity pseudo-potential In this case W 0 and W 1 are given by Here τ -1 = 2πn i νV 2 0 , with n i being the impurity density, is the elastic scattering rate in the normal state. The coefficient represents the enhancement factor of the quasiparticle scattering crosssection over the normal state value. The first term in Eq. ( Below we consider linear response to several external perturbations and look for the quasiparticle distribution function in the form p , where n (0) is a locally equilibrium Fermi distribution, and n p describes the deviation from equilibrium. Noting that the collision integral ( where the specific form of the source S(p) depends on the type of perturbation. Anomalous Hall thermal conductivity: We first consider the Hall component of the thermal conductivity κ xy which describes the heat flux perpendicular to the direction (x-axis) of the temperature gradient. In this case the source term in Eq. ( The expression for the heat flux is Note that ∂ p /∂p = vξ/ is the group velocity of the quasiparticles while v is the bare velocity as in a normal metal, |v| = v F . The solution of Eqs. ( The Hall component of the thermal conductivity tensor, κ xy , is determined by α s ( ) in the above expression, which is given by α For weak impurities, |δ n | 1, we obtain, close to T c where κ = π 2 νT D/3 (with D = v 2 F τ /2 being the diffusion constant) is the normal state thermal conductivity. Polar Kerr effect: Next we consider a linearly polarized electromagnetic wave at normal incidence to the xy surface of p x + ip y superconductor. The reflected wave is elliptically polarized with the major axis rotated with respect to the incident one by the polar Kerr angle where n and κ are, respectively, the real and imaginary part of the refraction index and where σ xy is the complex ac conductivity. In this case the electric field is uniform in the direction parallel to the surface of the sample, Φ = 0, and the value of p s (t) is determined by Eq. ( where N s (T ) is the temperature dependent superfluid density and σ D = e 2 νD is the Drude conductivity. In contrast to the thermal conductivity consideration, in the present case p . The source in Eq. ( where the external electric field E is along x-direction. The nonequilibrium distribution n p has the form The Hall conductivity depends only on the function β s ( ), which is given by ( ) and b( ) being defined in Eq. ( where x = |ξ|/∆. At temperature close to T c and at low frequencies, ωτ 1, this expression yields This result was derived assuming p x + ip y symmetry of the order parameter. In the p x -ip y state the Hall conductivity σ xy has opposite sign. It also changes sign if the impurity potential V 0 changes from repulsive, δ n < 0, to attractive, δ n > 0, in agreement with Ref. There is another contribution to σ xy associated with the existence of the transverse component of the superfluid velocity v y ∼ ṗx , which is proportional to the condensate acceleration in the x-direction. It may not be obtained within the present formalism that is based on the Boltzmann kinetic equation for the quasiparticles. At T ∼ T c this contribution is smaller than the quasiparticle contribution, Eq. ( Hall effect for normal current injection: Let us now consider a normal metal/p x + ip y -superconductor junction, through which a steady current is flowing. At T ∆ this situation was considered in Ref. In linear response we write the quasiparticle distribution function in the superconductor in the form p . This yields the source term in Eq. ( At length scales in excess of the mean free path we may employ the diffusive approximation. With the aid of Eq. ( where na (ξ, x) is the antisymmetric in ξ part of the distribution function averaged over the momentum directions. The latter satisfies the diffusion equation with relaxation with energy dependent relaxation rate τ -1 where L Q (ξ) = Dτ Q (ξ) is the energy-dependent branch imbalance relaxation length. We work in the vicinity of the critical temperature T c , where for typical thermal quasiparticles ξ ∼ T , (|ξ| ∆), the relaxation lengths are long, L Q (ξ) = l|ξ|/∆ l. These quasiparticles diffuse into the bulk of the superconductor and contribute to the gauge-invariant potential Φ given by Eq. ( where E x (0) is the electric field in the normal metal generating the steady current. Here we used the fact that in the stationary case E = -∇Φ/e, which follows from Eq. ( where L Q = 2 ln 2(T l/∆) and the functions F n , are defined as and are plotted in Fig. Anomalous photo-and acousto-galvanic effects: When an electromagnetic or an acoustic wave propagates through a conductor it generates an anisotropic in momentum p distribution function. The induced current density is proportional to the rate of the the momentum transfer from the wave to the electron system Here I is the rate of momentum density transfer due to the wave adsorption, and x is the direction of the wave propagation. In p x + ip y superconductors an anomalous current in the y direction is generated. Considerations similar to those leading to Eq. ( Finally, we note that all anomalous transport phenomena discussed above are driven by the underlying symmetry of the superconducting state. Therefore they should exist in any superconductor whose order parameter breaks time reversal symmetry, see for example 