Ultrafast optical pump-probe spectroscopy is used to track carrier dynamics in the large magnetoresistance material WTe2. Our experiments reveal a fast relaxation process occurring on a sub-picosecond time scale that is caused by electron-phonon thermalization, allowing us to extract the electron-phonon coupling constant. An additional slower relaxation process, occurring on a time scale of ∼5-15 picoseconds, is attributed to phonon-assisted electron-hole recombination. As the temperature decreases from 300 K, the timescale governing this process increases due to the reduction of the phonon population. However, below ∼50 K, an unusual decrease of the recombination time sets in, most likely due to a change in the electronic structure that has been linked to the large magnetoresistance observed in this material. The recent discovery of large positive magnetoresistance (MR) in a number of nonmagnetic materials such as WTe 2 More insight into the physics of WTe 2 can be obtained using ultrafast optical spectroscopy, which tracks the relaxation of photoexcited carriers in the time domain as they return to equilibrium. Carrier relaxation depends sensitively on the band structure and scattering mecha-nisms in a solid Here, we present a detailed ultrafast transient reflectivity (∆R(t)/R) study on WTe 2 while varying the temperature (T ) and photoexcitation fluence (F ). Two distinct relaxation processes contribute to the recovery of the photoinduced change in reflectivity. We find that electron-phonon (e-ph) thermalization is responsible for the fast decay that occurs on a sub-picosecond (ps) time scale, which allows us to extract the e-ph coupling constant, an important material parameter, using a twotemperature model. Phonon-assisted e-h recombination between the electron and hole pockets then takes place within ∼5-15 ps, giving rise to the slow decay in the ∆R(t)/R signal. This process gradually slows down upon cooling due to the decreasing phonon population, but then becomes faster again below ∼50 K, which is likely caused by an electronic structure change that has been linked to the large MR in WTe 2 . High-quality WTe 2 single crystals were grown by solidstate reactions using Te as the flux. The starting materials W (99.9%, General Research Institute For Nonferrous Metals, Beijing, China) and excessive amounts of Te (99.999%, Alfa Aesar, U.S., lot. 10362) were mixed and placed in an alumina ampoule, then sealed in a quartz tube. The operation was conducted in a glove box filled with high-purity argon gas. The temperature was increased to 1000 • C over 10 h, after which the sample was heated in a furnace at 1000 • C for 5 h. After reaction, Typeset by REVT E X the system was cooled down to 800 • C at a rate of 1 • C/h, then to 700 • C in 20 h. The quartz tube was then inverted and quickly spun in a centrifuge to remove the Te flux. The transient reflectivity measurements were carried out using a Ti:sapphire femtosecond (fs) laser oscillator producing pulses with a center wavelength of 830 nm (1.5 eV), a duration of 40 fs and a repetition rate of 80 MHz. The spot sizes of the pump and probe beams at the sample were ∼65 and 32 μm in diameter, respectively. For F = 3.5 μJ/cm 2 , using the optical properties at 830 nm given in ref. Figure In this Letter, we will focus on the non-oscillatory response, i.e. the two relaxation processes, which provides pivotal information about the ultrafast dynamics of pho- toexcited carriers in WTe 2 . To gain insight into the origin of the two relaxation processes, a careful examination of the T and F dependence of τ f and τ s is indispensable. Figures In order to quantitatively study the T and F dependence of τ f and τ s , we extract their time constants by fitting the measured ∆R(t)/R signal to two exponential decays convoluted with a Gaussian function (representing the autocorrelation of the pump and probe pulses) at all measured temperatures and fluences. We also included the long time offset A 0 , which is usually related to heat diffusion out of the excitation volume on a timescale of several nanoseconds Electron-phonon thermalization is generally described by the two-temperature model (TTM) where γ is the electron specific heat coefficient. T e corre-sponds to the electron temperature after e-e thermalization, which is initially higher than the lattice temperature T l . H(T e , T l ) takes the form where with θ D and g ∞ denoting the Debye temperature and the e-ph coupling constant, respectively. T e can be calculated using where U l is the deposited laser energy density. It is well known that the TTM is not an appropriate model for e-ph thermalization at low temperatures (T ≤ θ D /5), where the e-e and e-ph thermalization times become comparable After e-ph thermalization (τ f ) takes place (schematically illustrated in Fig. Finally, we consider phonon-assisted e-h recombination, where the electron and hole recombine with the assistance of e-ph scattering between the electron and hole pockets, as illustrated by τ s in Fig. Both theoretical and experimental studies in graphene and Bi have shown that the phonon-assisted e-h recombination time strongly depends on temperature where ω corresponds to the frequency of the phonon mode assisting e-h recombination, τ 0 represents a Tindependent recombination time which varies with sample purity, and A is a parameter related to the density of states in the conduction and valence bands and the matrix element for interband e-ph scattering. The red curve in Fig. A comparison between our experimental results and the above observations therefore suggests that the decrease in τ s below 50 K is most likely associated with a change in the electronic structure. This is consistent with the fact that phonon-assisted e-h recombination is sensitive to the density of states in the conduction and valence bands as well as the matrix element for interband e-ph scattering Finally, by comparing τ s [Fig. In conclusion, we performed ultrafast transient reflectivity measurements on WTe 2 as a function of pump fluence and temperature. Two relaxation processes were clearly observed. We have ascribed the fast decay process (τ f ) to carrier cooling through e-ph thermalization, allowing us to use a two-temperature model to extract the e-ph coupling constant and the electronic specific heat coefficient. The slow decay process (τ s ) is due to phononassisted e-h recombination between the electron and hole bands. While τ s follows the expected T dependence quite well down to ∼50 K, a pronounced deviation of τ s from the expected behavior appears at low temperatures. A comparison with other experimental results indicate that the anomalous T dependence of τ s below ∼50 K is due to an electronic structure change, which likely plays a key role in promoting the large MR in WTe 2 .