We use epitaxial strain to spatially tune the bottom of the surface-state band ESS of Ag(111) islands on Nb(110). Bulk and surface-state contributions to the Ag(111) local density of states (LDOS) can be separated with scanning tunneling spectroscopy. For thick islands (≈ 20 nm), the Ag surface states are decoupled from the Ag bulk states and the superconductive gap induced by proximity to Nb is due to bulk states only. However, for thin islands (3-4 nm), surface-state electrons develop superconducting correlations as identified by a complete energy gap in the LDOS when ESS is smaller than but close to the Fermi level. The induced superconductivity in this case is of two-band nature and appears to occur when the surface-state wave function reaches down to the Ag/Nb interface. With the discovery of topological insulators The role of surface states of a bulk superconductor that do not hybridize with bulk states has become a new twist with the discovery of topologically protected surface states. Ginzburg already considered SC of electrons in two-dimensional (2D) surface states Single-crystalline (111)-oriented Ag islands deposited on Nb(110) at ambient or elevated substrate temperatures T S experience considerable thermal strain when cooled to low temperatures due to the different thermal expansion coefficients of Ag and Nb as reported earlier The experiments have been performed in ultra-high vacuum (base pressure p < 10 -8 Pa). Ag(111) islands deposited at T S = 600 K grow on a one-monolayer thick (0.236 nm) Ag wetting layer on Nb(110) Fig. In the following, we exemplarily discuss dI/dV spectra obtained with high resolution on three islands of different size. Fig. (for small voltages |V 0 | just above ∆ 0 /e) which in this case is 100 %. Vice versa, if the SS band edge is at V ≈ -8 mV (blue curve), GD ≈ 30 % perfectly agrees with the contribution from the bulk band to the total LDOS, cf. Figs. The gap in the SS band is even more pronounced when the island thickness is further reduced. Fig. Figure The inset of Fig. The main observation of Figs. 2(a) to 2(c) suggests that, due to the finite SS decay length β -1 , electrons in the SS become superconducting only for very thin Ag islands. The 2D SS and three-dimensional bulk states are orthogonal. In principle, interactions between electrons in these states could occur via scattering To corroborate our findings, we have investigated a large number of spectra and have determined the GD in dependence of the SS band edge E SS . Figure Let us summarize the experimental facts: (i) in the normal state, the density of SS is about two times larger than that of Ag bulk states, (ii) for thick islands, surface states do not participate in the proximity-induced SC leading to a GD of 100 % when SS are not occupied, but only 30 % when they are, (iii) if the Ag-film thickness is smaller than the SS decay length, these surface states do partake in SC provided that E SS ≤ E F is within a window of ≈ 10 meV of E F . Spin-orbit (SO) interaction cannot be the reason because the upper limit of the SO splitting is 1.9 meV The first possibility of interband pairing is that electron-phonon coupling between states of different bands is enhanced, while the Cooper pairs are still formed within a single band Furthermore, electron-phonon scattering is dominant over electron-electron scattering for SS close to E F In conclusion, we have shown that electrons in Ag(111) surface states become superconducting when the surfacestate wave function reaches down to the Nb/Ag interface which serves as a potential barrier for scattering, and, additionally, the lower band edge of the surface states falls within a range of 10 meV below E F . The enhanced electron-phonon interaction close to the Fermi level might facilitate interband pairing. Although a possible new collective phonon mode is hard to detect in the Ag nanoisland, superconductivity acts as a "smoking gun" proving the existence of such a mode. The presence of an interband pairing potential points to an electronic interaction between the bulk superconductor Nb and the Ag(111) surface states that differs from the usual proximity effect between bulk Ag and Nb. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Kompetenznetzwerk "Functional Nanostructures" of the Baden-Württemberg Stiftung and thank D. Beckmann, W. Belzig, H. Kroha, E. Scheer, J. Schmalian, R. Heid, and M. Wenderoth for several fruitful discussions.