We investigate properties of BaFe 2 As 2 (122) single crystals upon gold doping, which is the transition metal with the highest atomic weight. The Au substitution into the FeAs-planes of 122 crystal structure (Au-122) is only possible up to a small amount of ~3%. We find that 5d is more effective in reducing magnetism in 122 than its counter 3d Cu, and this relates to superconductivity. We provide evidence of short-range magnetic fluctuations and local lattice inhomogeneities that may prevent strong percolative superconductivity in Ba(Fe 1-x Au x ) 2 As 2 . High-temperature superconductivity (HTS) is among the most mysterious and elusive properties in condensed matter physics, which has now been unveiled in two Cu-and Fe-based families. Many transition-metal based, tetragonal structures with layers have attracted attention following the discovery of iron-based superconductors (FeSC) in LaFeAsO, an antiferromagnetic spin-density-wave (AF SDW) material. Compared to nominal Fe 2+ (3d Single crystals of Au-doped BaFe 2 As 2 were grown out of self-flux using a high-temperature solution-growth technique. x Au x ) 2 As 2 throughout this paper (Table Bulk phase purity of Au-122 crystals was checked by collecting data on an X'Pert PRO MPD X-ray powder diffractometer in the 10-70° 2θ range, on ground crystals weighing ~ 30 mg collectively. Lattice parameters were refined from full-pattern LeBail refinements using the program FULLPROF. The Bragg reflections were indexed using the tetragonal ThCr 2 Si 2 tetragonal structure (I4/mmm) without any contributions from impurity phases. Fig. The arsenic height from Fe layer (z As = 0.365 Å), refined from room temperature data and upon Au substitution from x = 0 to 0.031, only changes by less than 1 %. Magnetization measurements were performed in the Quantum Design magnetic property measurement system upon warming in a magnetic field. Fig. The electrical transport and heat capacity measurements down to 1.8 K were performed in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system. Electrical leads were attached to the crystals using Dupont 4929 silver paste and resistance measured in the ab plane in the range of 1.8 to 380 K. The resistivity at 380 K ranged from 0.1 to 1.2 mΩ cm for all x in Au-122. Fig. In conclusion, this work investigated the Au-doping effects on BaFe 2 As 2 single crystals for the first time. The T-x phase diagram can be constructed for the Ba(Fe 1-x Au x ) 2 As 2 system, shown in Fig. 