Establishing the appropriate theoretical framework for unconventional superconductivity in the iron-based materials requires correct understanding of both the electron correlation strength and the role of Fermi surfaces. This fundamental issue becomes especially relevant with the discovery of the iron chalcogenide superconductors. Here, we use angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to measure three representative iron chalcogenides, FeTe 0.56 Se 0.44 , monolayer FeSe grown on SrTiO 3 , and K 0.76 Fe 1.72 Se 2 . We show that these superconductors are all strongly correlated, with an orbital-selective strong renormalization in the d xy bands despite having drastically different Fermi surface topologies. Furthermore, raising temperature brings all three compounds from a metallic state to a phase where the d xy orbital loses all spectral weight while other orbitals remain itinerant. These observations establish that iron chalcogenides display universal orbitalselective strong correlations that are insensitive to the Fermi surface topology, and are close to an orbital-selective Mott phase, hence placing strong constraints for theoretical understanding of iron-based superconductors. Since the discovery of high temperature superconductivity in the iron pnictides (FePn), extensive research efforts have revealed many common properties of these materials. In the vast material base of the FePns, all parent phases are metallic, and the observed electronic structures are largely consistent with the prediction of ab initio LDA calculations There are currently three major classes of FeCh superconductors: FeTe 1-x Se x , K x Fe 2-y Se 2 , and FeSe film grown on SrTiO 3 . In the FeTe 1-x Se x family, superconductivity is achieved with isovalent substitution of Se for Te that suppresses magnetic order in the FeTe end Raising temperature drives the material to an orbital-selective Mott phase (OSMP) in which the d xy orbital completely loses spectral weight while other orbitals remain itinerant. Subsequently, such a temperature scale was also identified by THz spectroscopy In this work, we study systematically the optimal superconducting members of the three FeCh families, FTS, KFS, and FS/STO, using ARPES. We show that, in the low temperature state, in contrast to the FePns, all of the FeChs are in a strongly correlated regime where strong orbital-selective renormalization is observed on the d xy bands, despite having drastically different FS topologies. In addition, by increasing temperature, all of the FeChs crossover into a phase where the d xy orbital completely loses spectral weight while other orbitals remain metallic. These observations showcase the universally strong orbital-selective electron correlations in the FeChs, and that the superconductivity in the FeChs, which is insensitive to FS topology, occurs in proximity to an orbital-selective Mott phase, placing strong constraints on the theoretical understanding of the iron-based superconductors. The generic electronic structure of iron-based superconductors (FeSC) consists of three Γ-M. The relative positions of these bands with respect to each other as well as to the Fermi level (E F ) could vary with differences in lattice parameters and doping level. Hence, the Fermi surface topology among different FeSCs could be qualitatively different, as shown in Fig. Generally in FeSC, this degeneracy between the d xz electron band bottom and d yz hole band top at the zone corner is protected by the C 4 rotational symmetry, as seen in BFCA (Fig. Next, by raising temperature sufficiently high, we notice that in all three FeCh systems, the d xy orbital-dominated bands lose spectral weight completely (Fig. To examine this temperature dependence more carefully, we have quantitatively analysed the spectral weight of each FeCh system. For FTS, we track the d xy hole band slightly away from the Γ point where it is well separated from the d yz hole band (Fig. For all three FeCh superconductors studied, two observations are universal: i) strong orbital-dependent renormalization at low temperatures, ii) disappearance of d xy spectral weight with raised temperatures. Theoretically, these behaviours can be understood in proximity to an OSMP, as predicted by both a slave-spin mean-field method The orbital-selectivity arises from two factors Among the three FeChs, FTS is undoped, with n = 6, while FS/STO and KFS are electron doped, with n = 6.12 and 6.15, as estimated from Fermi surface volume counting. Fig. The strong orbital-selective behaviour in the FeCh family is a manifestation of its strong electron correlations, and suggests that they may serve as a bridge between the strongly correlated cuprates as doped Mott insulators and the weaker correlated FePns that are more itinerant. The OSMP of the FeChs can only occur when the overall electron correlations are strong. In that sense, the existence of an OSMP indicates the presence of strong correlations, such that the system is in proximity to a Mott transition. The latter links these materials to the cuprates, where optimal superconductivity develops not too far from a Mott insulating state. The linkage can be made more explicit by the Hunds-coupling-induced suppression of the interorbital coupling in the case of the iron-based materials High quality single crystals of K 0.76 Fe 1.72 Se 2 and FeTe 0.56 Se 0.44 were grown using the flux method ARPES measurements were carried out at beamline 5-4 of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource and beamline 10.0.1 of the Advanced Light Source using SCIENTA R4000 electron analyzers. The total energy resolution was set to 10 meV and the angular resolution was 0.3 ̊. Single crystals were cleaved in situ at 10 K for each measurement. The FeSe films were transported to the beamline under vacuum and further annealed before measurements. All measurements were done in ultra high vacuum with a base pressure lower than 4x10 The theoretical calculations were done using a slave-spin mean-field method on a fiveorbital Hubbard model , and multilayer FeSe film