We report the fabrication and characterization of an alternative design for a superconducting quantum interference proximity transistor (SQUIPT) based on a normal metal (N) probe. The absence of direct Josephson coupling between the proximized metal nanowire and the N probe allows us to observe the full modulation of the wire density of states around zero voltage and current via the application of an external magnetic field. This results into a drastic suppression of power dissipation which can be as low as a few ∼ 10 -17 W. In this context the interferometer allows an improvement of up to four orders of magnitude with respect to earlier SQUIPT designs, and makes it ideal for extra-low power cryogenic applications. In addition, the N-SQUIPT has been recently predicted to be the enabling candidate for the implementation of coherent caloritronic devices based on proximity effect. The superconducting quantum interference proximity transistor (SQUIPT) is a magnetic-flux detector alternative to the widespread superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) Since its original introduction, the SQUIPT has been exclusively implemented with a tunnel superconducting probe (S-SQUIPT) because of its sharper response and improved noise performance Here we report the fabrication and the magneto-electric characterization of Al/Cu-based N-SQUIPTs. After describing the different steps required to realize this device, we will a) Electronic mail: sophie.dambrosio@nano.cnr.it b) Electronic mail: francesco.giazotto@sns.it show the full electric behavior as a function of bath temperature. Our results are reproduced with the Usadel equations describing the proximity effect in the N wire. Moreover, the N-SQUIPTs are characterized by a maximum flux-to-voltage transfer function of ∼ 0.45 mV/Φ 0 and maximum flux-tocurrent transfer function of ∼ 12 nA/Φ 0 . Figure Figures Theory Theory state ∆ w 0 at Φ/Φ 0 = 0.5, where Φ 0 = 2.067 × 10 -15 Wb is the flux quantum. From the curves of the differential conductance displayed in Fig. The overall theoretical comparison to the experimental data of Figs. x γ 1,2 -hD where the first equation corresponds to the first index of γ and the second equation to the second index , and are dependent of the position x, the energy E, the flux Φ, and the temperature T as well. The DOSs in the normal proximized region can be expressed by The value Γ = 0.065 ∆ 0 is taken as input parameter, and describes the inelastic scattering present in the N region. Here the Nazarov boundary conditions where e is the electron charge, F 0 is the Fermi distribution function and N N (x, E, Φ, T) is calculated by solving Eqs. 1. The I (V ) curves shown in Fig. The color plot of dI/dV(V bias , Φ) shown in Fig. Figure The SQUIPT behaves as a flux-to-current or a flux-tovoltage transformer whose response efficiency can be quantified by the maximum absolute value of its flux-to-current (|dI/dΦ| Max ) or flux-to-voltage (|dV/dΦ| Max ) transfer functions, respectively We now discuss the noise-equivalent-flux (NEF) or flux resolution (Φ NS ) of the N-SQUIPT. The intermediate value of the tunnel junction impedance allows the devices to be operated either with voltage amplification under DC current bias or with current amplification under DC voltage bias. In the former configuration a maximum voltage responsivity |dV/dΦ| Max 0.45 mV/Φ 0 has been recorded with I bias 400 pA, corresponding to Φ NS = √ S V / |dV/dΦ| Max 3.4 μΦ 0 / √ Hz, where √ S V is the input-referred noise power spectral density of the preamplifier used in this setup As already noted, the N-SQUIPT can also be operated at zero DC bias, where its response can be linearized. In this configuration the operating power can be brought down to the aW range by applying a minute AC excitation, with the same technique which is used in resistance bridges adapted to cryogenic thermometry. The maximal zero-bias conductance responsivity estimated from the data shown in Fig. 