Hydrogen in metals has attracted much attention for a long time from both basic scientific and technological points of view. Its electronic state has been investigated in terms of a proton embedded in the electron gas mostly by the local density approximation (LDA) to the density functional theory. At high electronic densities, it is well described by a bare proton H + screened by metallic electrons (charge resonance), while at low densities two electrons are localized at the proton site to form a closed-shell negative ion H -protected from surrounding metallic electrons by the Pauli exclusion principle. However, no details are known about the transition from H + to H -in the intermediatedensity region. Here, by accurately determining the ground-state electron distribution n(r) by the use of LDA and diffusion Monte Carlo simulations with the total electron number up to 170, we obtain a complete picture of the transition, in particular, a sharp transition from short-range H + screening charge resonance to long-range Kondo-like spin-singlet resonance, the emergence of which is confirmed by the presence of an anomalous Friedel oscillation characteristic to the Kondo singlet state with the Kondo temperature TK well beyond 1,000K. This study not only reveals interesting competition between charge and spin resonances, enriching the century-old paradigm of metallic screening to a point charge, but also discovers a long-sought high-TK system, opening an unexpected route to room-temperature superconductivity in a Kondo lattice made of protons. Physics in the heavy fermion superconductors has been understood by the concept of quantum criticality in a system of regularly arrayed dense Kondo impurities (Kondo lattice) As first suggested by Debye and Hückel 10 , an atomic nucleus charge +Ze in a metal is screened by accumulation of metallic electrons which is regarded as a charge resonance and well described by the linear response theory. This concept of metallic screening is prevailing for a century, but because Z is not infinitesimally small, we need to consider nonlinear effects in the screening, including the contribution from spin fluctuations. The spin contribution will be enhanced, if Z is an odd integer, such as Z = 1 (case of a proton), in which a spin-polarized bound state might appear at the impurity atom. With the above basic scientific issues in mind, we have concerned with the problem of hydrogen impurity in metals which attracts long attention from a technological point of view The homogeneous EG with the average density n 0 is specified by a single parameter r s , defined by r s = (3/4πn 0 ) 1/3 in units of the Bohr radius a B . (We use atomic units hereafter.) Its characteristic energy is the Fermi energy ε F , given by k 2 F /2 (= 1.84r -2 s ) with k F (= 1.92r -1 s ) the Fermi momentum (Fig. Intuitively, for ε A ε F ε 1s , we can imagine a spinpolarized state made of a single electron with either up or down spin captured by H + , but in view of the concept of spin screening to form a Kondo singlet F , but for SSR, the Kondo-screening length ξ K is much longer than k -1 F , leading to an anomalous Friedel oscillation The Hamiltonian for IAM, H A , is written as 22 in second quantization with use of the annihilation operator c kσ for a conduction electron with wave vector k, spin σ and one-body band energy ε k , while c dσ is an operator to destroy a localized d electron with spin σ at the energy level E d . The d electrons not only interact to each other at the localized site with the strength U but also hybridize with the conduction electrons with the strength V dk . Based on H A , Ψ SSR is given as 27,28 where Φ 0 is the Slater determinant made of conductionelectron orbitals and the parameters, a 0 and a k , are to be determined variationally. As Eq. ( In our work, we are not allowed to employ this simple model H A . Instead, we have to start with the firstprinciples Hamiltonian H, described in atomic units as in first quantization. Here we have considered a neutral atom of atomic number Z at the origin of coordinates immersed into the jellium sphere of radius R and average density n 0 . The number of electrons contained in the jellium sphere is 4πR 3 n 0 /3 = (R/r s ) 3 , so that the total electron number N is equal to Z + (R/r s ) with θ(x) the Heaviside function and C Z N represents the Coulomb self-energy stemming from both nucleusbackground and intra-background interactions, given by In solving Eq. ( By comparing H in Eq. ( Usually, the first-principles Hamiltonian is solved by either diffusion Monte Caro (DMC) simulations or DFTbased methods. The former is an excellent method to obtain fairly accurate results for the ground state, but it can never directly treat Ψ SSR , because DMC simulations can be done only for finite-N systems in which all levels are discrete, while in constructing Ψ SSR , we need continuum conduction states which are allowed only in the bulk (N → ∞) system. The latter methods can easily treat the bulk system, but the ground-state physical quantities are calculated in terms of a single Slater determinant made of Kohn-Sham (KS) orbitals introduced in DFT, so that it is not clear at all as to how much the obtained quantities reflect the highly correlated many-body nature of Ψ SSR and how accurate they are, especially because in actual calculations we always have to resort to some approximation to the exchange-correlation energy functional E xc [n(r)] such as LDA. Faced with those difficulties, we have decided to focus on n(r) rather than the wave function Ψ SSR itself, mainly because DFT can, in principle, provide exact n(r) and the corresponding ground-state energy E 0 by projecting the real interacting many-body system to a fictitious auxiliary non-interacting system in which n(r) can be calculated with use of a single Slater determinant made of KS orbitals, even if we know nothing about Ψ SSR in the real system. This nontrivial assertion, one of the central theorems in DFT, is rigorously proved as long as the ground state is non-degenerate In implementing calculations of n(r), we adopt the following strategies: (i) In actual LDA calculations, we employ the local spin-density approximation (LSDA) In accordance with those strategies, we have investigated n(r) in finite-N systems in both LSDA and DMC to find spin-unpolarized ground states with a strong size effect and a series of magic numbers (10, 60, 170, • • • ) of N at which convergent results are easily obtained. These features can be explained in terms of the emergence of SSR with its long-range nature of ξ K . Its emergence is also signaled in LSDA at N → ∞ for r s 2 by the appearance of a strange shallow bound KS orbital below the conduction band bottom with an unusually long binding radius. In spite of the large size effect, for each N , n(r) in LSDA agrees very well with that in DMC. FIG. By summarizing the results thus calculated, we have obtained a ground-state diagram in (r s ,N -1 ) space, shown in Fig. In Sec. II, we explain the calculation methods in both LSDA and DMC. In Sec. III, we show the calculated results and in Sec. IV we discuss on the obtained results, together with their implications and future directions. Finally in Sec. V, we give a summary of this paper. Let us consider the neutral system of a single nucleus with atomic number Z embedded in the N -electron jellium sphere of radius R. Its Hamiltonian H is given in Eq. ( where ε iσ and φ iσ are the energy level and the normalized wave function for KS orbital i and spin σ, respectively, and v KS σ (r) is the KS potential, determined by where With use of the lowest-N σ KS orbitals, n σ (r) is given by and n(r) is the sum of n ↑ (r) and n ↓ (r). The spin density n σ (r) and consequently N σ with N = σ N σ should be determined by the self-consistent solution of Eqs. ( at |r| = R = (N -Z) 1/3 r s . By using those converged quantities, we can calculate E 0 (N, Z) the ground-state energy including the constant term C Z N by With use of the lowest-N KS orbitals thus obtained, we can define the Slater determinant Φ 0 (r 1 ,• • •, r N ), with which the trial many-body ground-state wave function Φ(r 1 ,• • •, r N ) for the VMC calculation can be constructed in the Slater-Jastrow type as 40 (12) where the Jastrow function J(r 1 ,• • •, r N ) contains the terms to describe electron-nucleus correlation u 1 (r i ), two-electron correlation u 2 (r ir j ), and three-body nucleus-two-electron correlation u 3 (r i , r j , r i -r j ) as The actual choice of the forms for u 1 (r i ), u 2 (r i -r j ), and u 3 (r i , r j , r i -r j ) as well as their optimization is done by adopting the CHAMP-code package 41 as it is. Then the expectation value A of an operator A is given by By putting A = n(r) = i δ(rr i ) in Eq. ( Starting with the variationally optimized wave function Φ thus determined, we can further improve on the ground-state wave function by considering the diffusion equation for Ψ(τ ) in the imaginary time τ as where E R is the reference energy to be adjusted to E 0 in the course of DMC simulations by removing the τdependence from the asymptotic form of Ψ(τ ) at τ → ∞. Note that the formal solution to Eq. ( where {Ψ n } is the normalized mutually-orthogonal complete set of eigen functions for H with the corresponding set of eigen energies {E n }. Then, as long as Ψ 0 |Φ = 0, the asymptotic τ -independent wave function Ψ is reduced to the true ground-state wave function Ψ 0 , apart from the normalization factor. It is appropriate to add a comment on the condition of Ψ 0 |Φ = 0 here; by invoking the Anderson's orthogonality theorem In order to avoid the notorious fermion sign problem, we employ the fixed-node approximation in DMC simulations. This approximation may bring about undesirable errors in Ψ, but we try to minimize them by seeking for N -independent results by exploiting the fact that the node positions depend on N in the fixed boundary condition, leading to the hope that unphysical nodeposition dependent effects will be removed by extracting the N -independent results. In performing actual fixednode DMC simulations at a fixed N , we adopt CHAMP again to obtain the stably converged asymptotic wave function Ψ(r 1 ,• • •, r N ). Then n(r) in DMC is estimated by a second-order approximation to the exact expectation value where n(r) VMC = n(r) VMC . Contrary to VMC and DMC, LSDA allows us to directly treat the bulk (N → ∞) system, in which almost all states in KS orbitals are continuum ones, for which we may write ε i = k 2 /2 with momentum k and φ iσ (r) = R klσ (r)Y lm (r/r) with the spherical harmonics Y lm (r/r) and the radial wave function R klσ (r) satisfying the following boundary condition at r (≡ |r|) → ∞ : (18) apart from a normalization factor, where j l (kr) and n l (kr) are the spherical Bessel functions and δ lσ (k) is the phase shift of angular momentum l to be determined under the condition of δ lσ (∞) = 0, ensuring that an electron behaves as a free particle at k (≡ |k|) → ∞. There is a possibility of finding bound states below the bottom of the conduction band (ε iσ < 0) among KS orbitals for which φ iσ (r) → 0 at r → ∞. The Levinson theorem The embedding energy δE is defined as the difference of the ground-state energies between the atom-embedded EG and the system of separated homogeneous EG and neutral atom. Usually this concept is relevant only to the bulk EG. Thus, denoting the ground-state energy of the isolated neutral atom as E Z a , we can obtain δE through Since δE is of the order O(1) in comparison with E 0 of the order O(N ), due care must be exerted in order to accurately evaluate δE at N → ∞. For this purpose, we rewrite Eq. ( where BS stands for the set of possible bound states. The difference in the contribution of KS energies from continuum states is treated by the consideration of change in the density of states, δ ′ lσ (k)/π. A. LSDA for the bulk system In line with the previous result For r s < 1.97, we obtain δ lσ (0) = 0 and thus N BS is zero, leading to the typical n(r) in CR with H + screened by metallic electrons in a short range. For r s ≥ 1.97, on the other hand, δ s (0) = π and thus N BS = 2, seemingly implying the sudden appearance of H -ion confined in EG at r s = 1.97 For 1.97 < r s 12.5, however, the "localized" electrons behave much differently; at r s = 4, for example, they extend long up to |r| ≈ 82 and concomitantly n L (0) is much smaller than n(0), indicating deep and massive penetration of itinerant electrons into the proton site, but such penetration would never be allowed due to the Pauli exclusion principle, if the closed-shell H -ion were firmly constructed. Thus, by remembering that KS orbitals in DFT are not necessarily tied with real physical entities but just introduced for mathematical convenience to correctly reproduce n(r), we can assume that this "local- ized" orbital does not represent a real localized state but just describes the long-range change of n(r) in the form of an envelope density over ξ K in SSR. Notice that δ s (k F ) in this density region lies between 0.7×(π/2) and 1.3×(π/2), which means that δ s (k F ) is close to π/2, a value expected in the Kondo resonance state in IAM Before going into a more detailed discussion on SSR, let us assess the accuracy of LSDA in comparison with DMC, specifically at intermediate densities. At r s = 4, for example, in Fig. As for N dependence or the size effect, we find that According to the cusp theorem where n cusp (r) exhibits strictly a linear change with r in semilog plots (the dashed lines in Fig. In Fig. In an extensive search for favorable N at which we can easily obtain the convergent ground state, we find that this jump becomes much enhanced at the magic numbers (10, 60, 170, • • • ) of N . Let us consider the reason for this fact; in LSDA, all KS levels are discrete at finite N and the stacking sequences of the occupied levels are: (1s, 2p, 2s), (1s, 2p, 2s, 3d, 4f, 5g, 3p, 3s), and (1s, 2p, 2s, 3d, 4f, 3p, 3s, 5g, 4d, 6h, 7i, 5f, 8k, 4p, 4s) for N = 10, 60, 170, respectively, reflecting the competition between the -r -1 and r 2 potentials in Eq. ( In calculating δE by use of Eq. ( with the coefficient α N-1 determined through E 0 (N-1, 0) and E 0 (N-2, 0) in LSDA. We have deduced this approximation scheme by considering that the leading term in E 0 (N-1, 0) is, in general, in proportion to (N-1) due to extensiveness of the total energy as well as the subleading term in proportion to (N-1) 2/3 due to the surface-energy contribution. In CR in which the outermost s orbital is empty even for the system with Z = 1 and N electrons, instead of E 0 (N -2, 0), we calculate E 0 (N, 0) in DMC, with which we estimate E 0 (N-1, 0) by a similar strategy. In Fig. Basically, the Friedel oscillation due to the presence of a proton at the origin is a concept defined in the bulk system, but if we try to discuss it with use of the data in DMC, we need to eliminate the sphere-boundary effect from n(r) obtained in finite-N systems. For this purpose, we adopt the following procedure In LSDA, we can employ Eq. ( where λ is a parameter to correct the difference in the sphere radius, defined as λ = [(N -2)/(N -1)] 1/3 , and the r-dependent exponent β(r) is determined with use of the data for the electron distribution in LSDA as An example of n(r) obtained through the above procedure at r s = 4 is given in Fig. In order to unambiguously confirm the emergence of SSR, let us examine the Friedel oscillation in n(r) in the light of its general behavior, known as Here only the s-wave contribution, which indeed dominates others in the present case, is considered and δ (0) s is the s-wave phase shift at the Fermi level produced by the potential scattering without the Kondo-resonance effect. In Eq. ( By appropriately choosing the branch of tan -1 x, we can rewrite Eq. ( with the amplitude A(r) and the phase δ(r), given by A(r) = 1-2F (r/ξ K ) cos(2δ the half period in CR. Because δ i+1 is slightly different from δ i , ∆ i is modified from ∆ (0) by the amount of (δ i+1 -δ i )/π. This anomalous Friedel oscillation or the oscillation-period modulation effect is an important consequence of the presence of SSR, but this modulation effect has not been well recognized even in the Kondophysics community due to the fact that the effect is totally absent for δ (0) s being equal to a multiple of π/2 (see the denominator in Eq. ( In Fig. Once the data for {r i } are known, we can independently calculate the modulation factors through Eq. ( FIG. The shortening effect in the Friedel-oscillation period is also found in LSDA, as seen in Fig 11, in which δn(r)r 3 is plotted for both Z = 1 and -1 in the bulk system at r s = 4. For large enough r outside the SSR binding radius ξ K , the Friedel-oscillation phase for Z = 1 coincides with that for Z = -1; the result with Z = -1 is plotted to represent the behavior for the fictitious very tightly bound H -ion confinement state in which the anomalous Friedel oscillation is absent. In LSDA, the modulation of the Friedel oscillation is brought about by the contribution from the "localized" density n L (r). Incidentally, the oscillation-period shortening factors in LSDA are much smaller than those in DMC; (δ 2 -δ 1 )/π = 0.0133 and all others are less than 0.004, indicating δ s between DMC and LSDA; because this phase shift is directly connected with the wave function, its accurate value will not be obtained by LSDA in which the wave function in the fictitious non-interacting system is qualitatively different from the true correlated SSR wave function. Due to δ (0) s ≈ 0 in LSDA, we cannot employ the diagram in Fig. Five comments on the present work are in order: (i) In SSR, we find a good semi-quantitative agreement between LSDA and DMC, but this is by no means fortuitous, because this can be understood by the long-range nature of ξ K which makes the density variation associated with the SSR state slow, validating the use of LSDA for the calculation of n(r). (ii) From our present perspective, we may regard our previous study in LSDA on the spin-polarized ground states for second-period atoms in Periodic Table (iii) In a short term, the immediate next target of research is a hydrogen molecule H 2 immersed in EG (iv) If the number of immersed protons is increased up to a macroscopic level and those protons are arranged into a lattice in a metal with the SSR-density region, we may obtain a Kondo lattice with high T K . Furthermore, if the lattice constant is so arranged as to tune the RKKY interaction to be about the same as T K for realizing the quantum-critical situation in the Doniach phase diagram (v) The basic reason for about hundred-times increase of T K and consequently T c in the hydrogen system compared with those in the f -electron heavy-fermion systems is the overall increase of energy scales as seen by the large difference in the magnitudes of 1s and 4f energy levels. For the same reason of increased energy scales, superconductivity with T c over 100K has been discussed in solid hydrogen at pressures of about 500GPa in the conventional phonon mechanism In conclusion, by employing both DMC and LSDA, we have revealed the emergence of SSR in the protonembedded electron gas by the confirmation of an anomalous Friedel oscillation characteristic to the Kondo-like spin-singlet state with quantitatively determining T K and emphasized its stability in embedding hydrogen into the electron gas. Our work necessitates to modify the paradigm of CR in metallic screening to a point charge of Z in the sense that, depending on the metallic electron density and Z, SSR takes the place of CR. This work also provides a first concrete example to show how the KS orbitals behave to represent the exact n(r) in strongly-correlated electron systems such as those describing Kondo physics, even though they are not always physically relevant. Finally, this work discloses a long-sought high-T K system, opening an unexpected route to room-temperature superconductivity in a Kondo lattice made of protons and motivating people engaged in hydrogen-based physics, chemistry, and technology to synthesize hydrogen alloys exhibiting high-T c superconductivity at ambient pressure.