Motivated by the recent discovery of superconductivity in the iron-based ladder compound BaFe2S3 under high pressure, we derive low-energy effective Hamiltonians from first principles. We show that the complex band structure around the Fermi level is represented only by the Fe 3dxz (mixed with 3dxy) and 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. The characteristic band degeneracy allows us to construct a four-band model with the band unfolding approach. We also estimate the interaction parameters and show that the system is more correlated than the 1111 family of iron-based superconductors. Provided the superconductivity is mediated by spin fluctuations, the 3dxz-like band plays an essential role, and the gap function changes its sign between the Fermi surface around the Γ point and that around the Brillouin-zone boundary. Since the discovery of superconductivity in fluorine doped LaFeAsO 1 , a variety of iron pnictides and chalcogenides have been found to exhibit superconductivity with high transition temperatures (T c ). In these compounds, Fe ions commonly form a two-dimensional (2D) network. This fact raises an intriguing and fundamental question whether the square network is essential for the high T c superconductivity and what happens in different geometries. In the case of the cuprates, it was discovered that the ladder compound (Sr,Ca) 14 Cu 24 O 41 becomes a superconductor under pressure ∼ 3 GPa. Recently, motivated by the experimental works on superconductivity in the single-layer potassium-doped iron selenide (110) film (which can be viewed as a weakly coupled ladder system) In Fig. We performed density functional calculation for the experimental crystal structure 21 with the quantum espresso package. Based on the band calculation, we further constructed Wannier functions for these bands using the wannier90 package In Fig. We plot the projected density of states for the 3d or- 25), and the orbital extends in the direction perpendicular to the Fe plane as d x 2 -y 2 in BaFe 2 S 3 does. So far, several studies have pointed out that d 3z 2 -r 2 in the 2D FeSC does not play a crucial role in the magnetism and superconductivity. We now further try to simplify the five-orbital (twentyband) model. We have found that the energy dispersion around E F can be represented by a two-orbital (eightband) model in which the Wannier functions are mainly composed of two orbitals, i.e. d x 2 -y 2 and d xz hybridized with d xy . We hereafter call the Wannier functions w x 2 -y 2 and w xz . To construct the Wannier functions, the inner (outer) window is set to be [-0.3 eV,0.2 eV] ([-1.2eV,1.5 eV]) with respect to E F . In the 2D FeSC, the Lindhard function χ 0 (q) has a peak around (π,0,0) and (0,π,0) in the extended BZ In Fig. On the other hand, for the inter-ladder correlation, χ 0 (q) is peaked at Y ′ , while the Bragg peak in experiment is observed to be located at 0.5b 1 +0.5b 2 (b 1 and b 2 are the reciprocal primitive vectors). Since the superconducting phase resides next to the antiferromagnetic phase, let us here assume that the superconductivity is mediated by spin fluctuations. Then the pairing interaction is strong at q ′ z = π, and favors a pairing gap function having different signs between the Fermi pockets α and β. The active band for superconductivity is w xz in this scenario, because both α and β are made from w xz . On the other hand, w x 2 -y 2 makes a pocket around q ′ z = ±π/2, but should be passive for the superconductivity. In the 2D FeSC, it has been proposed that d xy is important to understand the material dependence of the superconducting transition temperature. For 2D FeSC, the orbital fluctuation mechanism has been extensively studied. Let us move on to the electron correlations in BaFe 2 S 3 . By means of the constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) 