We describe a Josephson device composed of two superconductors separated by two interacting quantum dots in parallel, as a probe for Cooper pair splitting. In addition to sequential tunneling of electrons through each dot, an additional transport channel exists in this system: crossed Andreev reflection, where a Cooper pair from the source is split between the two dots and recombined in the drain superconductor. Unlike non-equilibrium scenarios for Cooper pair splitting which involves superconducting/normal metal "forks", our proposal relies on an Aharonov-Bohm measurement of the DC Josephson current when a flux is inserted between the two dots. We provide a path integral approach to treat arbitrary transparencies, and we explore all contributions for the individual phases (0 or π) of the quantum dots. We propose a definition of the Cooper pair splitting efficiency for arbitrary transparencies, which allows us to find the phase associations which favor the crossed Andreev process. Possible applications to experiments using nanowires as quantum dots are discussed. In superconductors, Cooper pairs provide a natural source of entanglement 1 in both spin and momentum space. If for some reason the constituent electrons of this pair are separated and are allowed to propagate in two different metallic leads or nanodevices such as quantum dots, one expects that the entanglement is preserved because the tunneling processes are spin preserving. This process is called cross Andreev reflection (CAR), and has been the focus of both theoretical and experimental investigations in the last two decades. The initial manifestation of CAR was proposed theoretically for nonlocal current, A seminal theoretical work has been suggested early on to circumvent these difficulties by proposing a Josephson equilibrium current geometry to test Cooper pair splitting. Secondly, it is established that when a quantum dot is embedded in a Josephson junction, away from the Kondo regime, the strength of the on-site repulsion, the coupling to the leads and the level position of the dot determine whether it constitutes a 0 or a π junction (positive or negative Josephson amplitude). This has been analyzed perturbatively, The two above points constitute the main motivations of the present paper. In this work, we employ the path integral formalism to model the AB setup without any restrictions on the transmission properties of the sample. Indeed, we provide results both in the tunneling and the high transparency regimes, and we propose a way to measure the efficiency of CAR processes in both cases, by analyzing the AB signal. We find that the CAR processes are optimized when the two quantum dots are in the same phase. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we provide a description of the device and of the model with which we describe it, and we give an expression of the partition function in terms of Grassmann variables. The free energy used to derive the Josephson current of this nanoSQUID in a non-perturbative manner is presented in Sec. III. In Sec. IV, we discuss the possible occupancy states of the dots. We propose the definition of a Cooper pair splitting efficiency in Sec. V which can be computed for arbitrary transparencies of the studied junctions. The AB signals are calculated first in the tunneling regime in Sec. VI and then in the non-perturbative regime in Sec. VII and all possible phase associations for the dots are considered. We discuss our results in Sec. VIII. The device is illustrated in Fig. σ i (i = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices that act in Nambu space. The Hamiltonian of the double Josephson junction reads H a is the Hamiltonian of the quantum dot a = U, D, characterized by its energy level ε a and its on-site Coulomb repulsion U a : with naσ = d † aσ daσ the dot occupation operator per spin. H j is the Hamiltonian of the superconductor j = L, R, with gap ∆ and chemical potential μ: Here ∆ is real, the phase difference between electrodes has been gauged out and instead appears in the tunneling Hamiltonian. If we denote by r ja the location of the injection point from lead j to dot a, the tunneling Hamiltonian H t reads The tunneling matrices involved in Eq. ( φ is the phase difference between the superconductors while α is related to the magnetic flux Φ inside the SQUID loop: α = 2π Φ Φ0 where Φ 0 = h/e is the flux quantum. For clarity, the phase shifts acquired by tunneling electrons are indicated in Fig. We employ a path integral approach in the Matsubara formalism in order to compute the partition function of the device. We introduce then the eigenvalues of the annihilation operators ψjkσ and daσ written as ψ jkσ and d aσ respectively. These are Grassmann variables and we consider also their conjugates ψ jkσ and d aσ as well as the collections in Nambu spinors d a and ψ jk defined in the same way as Eq. ( The partition function is given by a functional integration over paths that are β antiperiodic: The Euclidean action S E reads where the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian can be written as The expressions of H jk and H t,jka are readily obtained from Eqs. ( with εa = ε a + Ua 2 . As the lead degrees of freedom are quadratic in the Hamiltonian, they can be easily integrated out. The partition function is then expressed as a functional integral over the dot Grassmann variables: where c 1 is the determinant arising from the integration of the lead variables, which is independent of φ and α. The effective action in Eq. ( where the self-energy term involves the Green function of the leads G k (τ ) which verifies The quartic terms (d a d a ) 2 in Eq. ( Because both the Green functions G k and the Nambu spinor components d aσ are β antiperiodic, we use a Matsubara series expansion F (τ ) = p∈Z e -iωpτ F (ω p ) over the frequencies Rather than keeping track of a cumbersome device-specific position dependence of the self-energy, we choose to introduce a phenomenological parameter η. It extrapolates between the two most relevant cases: η = 0 for infinitely distant injection points (much more separated than the superconducting coherence length) and η = 1 for coinciding injection points (much closer than the superconducting coherence length). The dots are now integrated out and the partition function becomes where c 2 is a fermionic determinant arising from the dot variables integration. The effective action reads The decay rate is defined as Γ = π ν(0)(t 2 L + t 2 R ) where ν(0) is the density of states of the leads at the Fermi level. The contact asymmetry is given by γ The CAR process is due to the off-diagonal terms B p of the matrices M p the determinants of which we have to compute as a result of the Gaussian integrals over quantum dot degrees of freedom. In practice, these offdiagonal terms depend on the separation between injec-tion points R ≡ |r jU -r jD |. They have an exponential decay on the scale of the superconducting coherence length. With the microscopic tunneling Hamiltonian formulation of Eq. ( To evaluate the partition function of Eq. ( The current is finally obtained by differentiating the free energy with respect to the phase difference φ: The critical current, function of the flux α, is defined as For η = 0, it is π periodic. Indeed, in this case, there are no CAR processes and for a magnetic flux α, the current characteristic (current as a function of the phase difference φ) through the double junction is simply the sum of the current characteristics across the independent single junctions, one being shifted by -α, the other one by +α. Shifting α by π results in adding a phase shift -π for one of the two junctions [A p (φ -α) → A p (φα -π) in the top left block of Eq. ( As a first step, let us recall some known results concerning a single dot embedded in a Josephson junction. In this section, we summarize the properties of such a setup, and we determine under what condition the junction is in the 0 (0) , the π or the 0 In perturbative calculations, the Josephson current flowing through the quantum dot is the result of the tunneling of Cooper pairs, which requires a fourth order perturbative expansion in the tunneling amplitudes between a superconductor and the quantum dot. At this order, the current can be written as J = J 0 sin φ, where φ is the phase difference between the superconductors, and the sign of J 0 determines the 0 or π character of the junction. Providing a single occupancy on the quantum dot (0 < -ε U ) J 0 can be negative 32 unlike the case of an empty quantum dot. This phenomenon has been investigated numerically 33 for arbitrary transmissions between the dot and the superconducting leads. For a fixed quantum dot energy level ε < 0 and a fixed decay rate Γ, the current as a function of the phase difference φ between the superconductors undergoes a discontinuity as one tunes the Coulomb interaction U across a critical value. Computing the mean occupation number on the quantum dot in the (-ε, U ) plane reveals the presence of all three phases, as shown in Fig. In order to identify the optimal regime for observing signatures of CAR processes in the AB signal, we need to define a splitting efficiency. We start by discussing the case of low electron transmission, where intuition can be gained from simple perturbation theory. We then aim at comparing the results of our general approach for arbitrary transmission to those perturbative results for the AB signal. The fourth order perturbation expansion (23) Indeed, in the presence of a magnetic flux α = 0, an additional phase shift is acquired, depending on the path that each electron of the Cooper pair followed between the two superconducting leads. When the Cooper pair tunnels through the U (resp. D) quantum dot, it accumulates a phase shift -α (resp. +α) in addition to the superconducting phase difference and contributes to the Josephson current with an amplitude I U (resp. I D ). However, when the Cooper pair is delocalized on the two quantum dots (via the CAR process, thus contributing with an amplitude I CAR ), one electron gets a phase shift + α 2 while the other one gets a phase shift -α 2 , the pair accumulating as a result no additional phase shift. The critical current associated with the Josephson current Eq. ( which encodes the splitting efficiency of the double Josephson junction. It varies between 0 and 1. r t = 0 corresponds to a low efficiency of the CAR process while r t = 1 is obtained when this process of spatial delocalization of the two electrons of a Cooper pair is much more important than the tunneling processes of a whole Cooper pair through a single quantum dot. As already stressed out, the formalism developed in Secs. II-III is valid regardless of the strength of the coupling between the superconductors and the quantum dots. However, the above definition of the splitting efficiency relies on the expression Eq. ( This generalizes the concept of splitting efficiency to the case of arbitrary transmission, and coincides with the definition of Eq. ( We first focus on the tunneling regime, taking a low value of the decay rate Γ = 0.01∆. We choose to explore all the possible combinations for the phases of the two quantum dots (see Figs. The particle-hole symmetry ensures that the current is invariant under the change (ε U , εD ) → (-ε U , -ε D ). For the values of energy ε mentioned above, this implies that the critical current is identical for 0 (0) -0 (0) and 0 We first consider the critical current curves of a SQUID made of two independent single Josephson junctions, i.e. for η = 0. In this particular case, I CAR = 0 and consequently a = 0 in Eq. ( Increasing U results in a more pronounced filtering as the processes where the quantum dots are doubly occupied are less favored. This explains the observed decrease in critical current for the 0 (0) -0 (0) and π -π associations (Fig. Figure In order to monitor the emergence of CAR processes, we investigate in Fig. We display the splitting efficiency r given by Eq. ( and since the critical current in symmetric associations of 0 phases vanishes for α = π, we get I CAR /I = 1 and r t = 2/3. The advantage of the formalism developed in Secs. II-III relies on the possibility to address high transparency regimes of the double Josephson junction under study. The results presented in this Sec. are obtained for symmetric couplings γ = 0, at temperature β -1 = 0.02∆ and for a decay rate Γ = 2∆. The energies of the quantum dots are: ε = -4∆ for the π phase, ε = 4∆ for the 0 (0) phase and ε = -12∆ for the 0 The strategy is again to investigate all the possible combinations of phases for the quantum dots (which correspond to different mean occupation numbers), in order to reproduce the qualitative study of Sec. VI. Our goal is to determine what features are preserved and what has changed, and to compute the splitting efficiency r defined by Eq. ( From the results of the π -π association for η = 1, it is clear that we are no longer in the tunneling regime as the flux dependence can not be fitted by Eq. ( The critical current in Figs. 8-9 again presents a doubling of its period when switching η from 0 to 1. This is due to the emergence of nonlocal processes where both quantum dots are involved. For the π -π association, during this switching, α = 0 remains a local maximum (contrary to the tunneling regime). For 0 (0) -0 (0) and 0 (2) -0 For symmetric associations of phases, the evolution of the critical current with increasing U (Fig. metry. While there is still no noticeable effect of U on the 0 (0) -0 We introduce progressively nonlocal effects in Fig. Finally, we note that the energy levels of the dots can be easily varied experimentally using electrostatic gates. Varying the position of the energy level ε of a quantum dot at fixed decay rate Γ and fixed Coulomb on-site repulsion U changes the effective transparency defined as Thus, by varying the energy levels of the two dots, we can optimize the splitting efficiency by reaching the π -π phase at high effective transparency. We show on the top panel of Fig. We have studied a double Josephson junction consisting of two quantum dots connected to two superconductors as a tool to probe Cooper pair splitting. When the two single Josephson junctions which constitute our device are coupled to each other via CAR processes, the doubling of the period of the critical current measured in a nanoSQUID experiment is an evidence for the emergence of nonlocal phenomena in the electronic transport of the double junction. This type of diagnosis may prove more convenient than non-equilibrium scenarios involving a superconducting source of electrons and two normal leads/dots where either nonlocal conductance signal or noise cross-correlations are measured. While this device had been studied in the context of perturbation theory in the tunneling Hamiltonian coupling the dot to the leads, We first studied the tunneling regime where the usual perturbative expression for the Josephson signal allows us to fit our numerical results and to introduce a natural definition of the splitting efficiency. We were also able to generalize this quantity to arbitrary transparency, providing a criterion for the efficiency of CAR processes which is based on an analysis of the AB signal of the Josephson critical current. We thus studied the prominence of nonlocal phenomena depending on the phases of the quantum dots and found that the π -π association optimizes the splitting of the Cooper pairs that are emitted from one superconductor and recombined on the other one. Yet, our analysis shows that the 0 (0) -0 (0) and 0 The present treatment should only be valid if the superconductor-dots system is above the Kondo regime. Furthermore, we treated the CAR coupling parameter η in a phenomenological manner (varying it between 0 and 1), justifiably so because so far no experimental investigation of Cooper pair splitting in superconductingnormal metal "forks" out of equilibrium seems to find the power law suppression which is attributed to bulk 3D superconductors. This may be due to the fact that microscopic models have to be revisited, taking into account that electron emission/absorption in the superconductors is not point like, but should be averaged over some finite volume, reducing the effect of oscillations over the Fermi wavelength of the CAR parameter. Extensions of this work could be envisioned by going beyond the saddle point approximation of the Hubbard Stratonovich transformation. This transformation is exact in its functional integral form and neglecting the fluctuations of the auxiliary field and then using a method of steepest descent are approximations which were sufficient to exhibit the π-shift in a single junction A limitation of the present Cooper pair diagnosis resides in the fact that the nanoSQUID requires reduced dimensions so that the injection points to the dots on both superconductors are separated within a distance smaller than the coherence length. This imposes constraints on the separation of the quantum dots, and as a consequence, the area where the AB flux is imposed becomes reduced. Recall that in order to perform the AB diagnosis, a few flux quanta need to be introduced in this area, but if the imposed magnetic field needed to apply several flux quanta becomes larger than the critical field of the superconductors, the whole diagnosis breaks down. In order to optimize the surface area encompassed between the dots, we believe the best choice would be to work with nanowire/nanotube quantum dots, which have a large aspect ratio, and which nevertheless can achieve large charging energies even though their length may exceed several μm. While this work came to completion, we became aware of a current biased measurement 