We analyze superconductivity in the cuprates near the onset of an incommensurate charge density wave (CDW) order with momentum Q = (Q, 0)/(0, Q), as observed in the experiments. We first consider a semi-phenomenological charge-fermion model in which hot fermions, separated by Q, attract each other by exchanging soft CDW fluctuations. We find that in a quantum-critical region near CDW transition, Tc = Aḡc, where ḡc is charge-fermion coupling and A is the prefactor which we explicitly compute. We then consider the particular microscopic scenario in which CDW order parameter emerges as a composite field made out of primary spin-density-wave fields. We show that charge-fermion coupling ḡc is of order of spin-fermion coupling ḡs. As the consequence, superconducting Tc is substantially enhanced near the onset of CDW order. Finally we analyze the effect of an external magnetic field H. We show that, as H increases, optimal Tc decreases and the superconducting dome becomes progressively more confined to the CDW quantum-critical point. These results are consistent with the experiments. Understanding of the nature of charge order in high-T c cuprates and of its effect on superconductivity is essential for the full understanding of the complex physics in this materials. Charge order has been observed in the cuprates quite some time ago The discovery of the CDW order raised a number of questions about its origin In this paper we discuss another issue related to CDW -its effect on superconductivity. We take as inputs three experimental facts. First, T c , as a function of doping, has a dip or a plateau at around x ∼ 0.12, where the onset temperature of CDW is the largest The first two results can be naturally understood if we assume that CDW and d-wave superconductivity are just competing orders, i.e., when one order is at its peak, the other one is suppressed. The third observation, on the other hand, requires one to go beyond a simple "competing order" scenario because the presence of the dome of superconductivity on top of CDW QCP indicates that superconductivity is at least partly caused by soft fluctuations of CDW order which then must develop at larger energies than the ones related to superconductivity. In our analysis we explore CDW-mediated superconductivity in some detail. We perform our analysis in two stages. At the first stage we put aside the issue what causes CDW order, assume that this order develops below some critical doping, and consider a semiphenomenological model of fermions interacting by exchanging soft CDW fluctuations with momenta Q. This model is quite similar to the spin-fermion model, considered in earlier studies of spin-mediated superconductivity for cuprates, Fe-pnictides, and other correlated materials We perform quantitative analysis of the pairing within the charge-fermion model in the most interesting quantum-critical regime right above QCP for CDW order. In this regime, charge-mediated interaction gives rise to the pairing but also destroys coherence of hot fermions (the ones at the FS separated by Q). Superconducting T ch c is determined by the interplay between strong tendency towards pairing and strong pair-breaking effects associated with the self-energy. We compute Landau damping of soft bosons and fermionic self-energy, and then obtain and solve the linearized gap equation with renormalized fermionic and bosonic propagators. We show that in the quantum-critical region T c is finite and scales with the effective charge-fermion coupling constant ḡc : T ch c = A c ḡc , where A c ≈ 0.0025. At the second stage we consider the specific microscopic scenario for CDW order -the one in which CDW is a composite order parameter made out of primary (π, π) spin fluctuations. Within this scenario, spin fluctuations are assumed to develop first, at energies comparable to bandwidth, while CDW fluctuations develop at smaller energies and do not provide substantial feedback on spin fluctuations. This composite order scenario requires fermion-fermion interaction to be comparable to the bandwidth (otherwise spin fluctuations do not develop at high energies) and inevitably is partly phenomenological. We will not discuss a complementary, renormalization group-based, truly weak coupling scenario in which all fluctuations (spin, charge, superconducting) develop simultaneously at low energy and mutually affect each other Various versions of magnetically induced charge bond and site orders have been proposed over the last few years In an earlier work Whether this additional pairing interaction substantially affects superconducting T c depends on the inter- The CDW order develops only when the system is sufficiently close to a magnetic instability and terminates at doping x ch cr , different from x sp cr for antiferromagnetism. In the shaded region near x sp cr localization of electronic states (Mott physics) becomes relevant (Ref. 45), and spin-fluctuation approach needs to be modified. In this region, the onset temperature of CDW order drops. play between charge-fermion coupling ḡc and the coupling ḡs between fermions and primary spin fluctuations. The argument is that spin-fluctuation exchange by itself gives rise to superconducting pairing, and at large ξ s the corresponding T sp c scales with ḡs : T sp c = A s ḡs , where A s ≈ 0.007 (Ref. 46). As ξ s decreases, T sp c also decreases but remains finite. The two-dome structure of T c (x), observed in the cuprates in an applied magnetic field, can be understood within this approach only if near ξ s = ξ s,cr , T ch c ≥ T sp c . If this does not hold, i.e., T ch c is smaller than T sp c , the contribution to superconductivity from charge-mediated exchange is only subdominant to the one from spin fluctuations. In this situation, the only effect on T c from CDW is due to direct competition between CDW and superconducting orders. This competition may give rise to additional reduction of T c in a magnetic field, given the experimental evidence that CDW order increases in a field. However, it cannot give rise to a peak of T c above CDW QCP. We evaluate charge-fermion coupling ḡc within the RPA-type analysis of charge fluctuations near CDW QCP: ), and show that ḡc is comparable to spin-fermion coupling ḡs . This result may look strange because charge fluctuations, viewed as composite objects made out of spin fluctuations, develop only in a narrow range near the FS points separated by Q x or Q y , with the width in momentum space of order Λ ∼ ξ -1 s . As the consequence, ḡc ∼ U c ξ -2 s . However, the "bare" interaction in the charge channel, U c , is a composite object made out of two spin fluctuation propagators and two fermionic Green's functions (see Fig. To properly calculate the ratio ḡc /ḡ s one needs to do full-scale dynamical calculations, even if one restricts with ladder series of diagrams, like in RPA. In this work, we use a simplification and approximate the bare interaction in the charge channel U c by a constant within the momentum range Λ ∼ ξ -1 s around proper Fermi surface points (hot spots) and set it to zero outside this range. We compute the polarization operator Π c (q, Ω m ) and use RPA to obtain charge-mediated effective interaction within fermions. We use the condition for CDW QCP: 1 = U c Π c (Q) to fix Λ and obtain explicit relation between ḡc and ḡs . Within this approach, we find ḡc ≥ ḡs . We argue, based on this analysis, that the enhancement of superconductivity near a CDW QCP is substantial, i.e superconductivity in the cuprates comes from both spin and charge fluctuations. We present the schematic phase diagram in Fig. The pairing by charge fluctuations has been studied before. In the context of the cuprates, DiCastro, Castellani, Grilli, and their collaborators This pairing problem near CDW QCP has certain similarities to the pairing at the onset of a nematic order, which has been extensively studied in recent years The analysis of the electron-mediated pairing near a QCP for density-wave order is also quite interesting from a general perspective as it adds one important new element not present for the pairing away from a QCP. Namely, the same interaction which gives rise to strong attraction also destroys fermionic coherence and prevent fermions from developing supercurrent The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce and analyze charge-fermion model of itinerant electrons coupled to near-critical CDW fluctuations. In Sec. IIa we derive bosonic and fermionic self-energies. In Sec. IIb we study the pairing problem and obtain T ch c due to charge-fluctuation exchange near a CDW QCP. We show that T ch c scales with the charge-fermion coupling constant ḡc . In Sec. III, we relate ḡc and spin-fermion coupling ḡs within the magnetic scenario for CDW. In this scenario, a CDW order parameter field emerges as a composite object made out of two spin-fluctuation propagators. We show that ḡc is comparable to ḡs and may even exceed it. In Sec. IV we discuss in some more detail superconducting dome around CDW QCP. Finally in FIG. We begin with a semi-phenomenological analysis. We assume, without specifying the reason, that CDW order with momentum Q y = (0, Q) and/or Q x = (Q, 0), develops at some critical doping x cr c , and consider the model of 2D fermions interacting by exchanging near-critical, soft charge fluctuations. We dub this model as "chargefermion model" by analogy with the spin-fermion model which was introduced to describe a system near a magnetic QCP. As our goal is to describe low-energy physics (energies well below the bandwidth), we focus on momentum ranges around the CDW "hot" spots on the FS, defined as points which are separated by CDW momentum Q x or Q y . For a generic Q there are 16 CDW hot spots, eight corresponding to Q y and another eight cor-responding to Q x . For simplicity we consider the case when Q is such that CDW hot spots are at or near the crossing between the FS and symmetry lines in the Brillouin zone k x ± k y = ±π. Then hot spots from Q y sector merge with hot spots from Q x sector, and the total number of hot spots become eight. We label these points as 1-8 in Fig. We linearize the fermionic dispersion in the vicinity of a hot spot i as ǫ i, k = v i • ki , where v i is the Fermi velocity and ki is the momentum deviation from the hot spot i. We define the Fermi velocity at the hot spot 1 as v 1 = (v x , v y ), the velocities at other hot spots are related by symmetry. In the cuprates, the FS at the antinodal region is "flattened", and we have v x < v y (see Fig. The action of the charge-fermion model can be written as where c iα is a fermion field with i labeling hot spots and α labeling spin projections. Hot spots i and i + 1 are separated by CDW momentum Q y , and hot spots i and i + 4 are separated by Q x (see Fig. We assume, like it is done in the spin-fermion model, that static charge susceptibility comes from fermions with energies larger than the one relevant to superconductivity and approximate it by a simple Ornstein-Zernike form χ c = χ 0c /(q 2 x + q2 y + ξ -2 c ), where ξ c is the CDW correlation length. The prefactors for q2 x and q2 y may in general differ The coupling g c is a phenomenological charge-fermion coupling constant. The corresponding charge-mediated 4-fermion interaction term in the Hamiltonian is (we set Q = Q y for definiteness) with ( The effective coupling ḡc = g 2 c χ 0c , and the sign convention is such that the interaction appears with a factor -1 in the diagrammatic theory. The charge-fermion model is defined self-consistently when its fluctuations cannot modify the physics at lattice energies, and this requires that ḡc must be small compared to the fermionic bandwidth. For the computation of superconducting T ch c , mediated by charge fluctuations, we need to know normal state properties. We use Eq. ( The bosonic polarization operator for φ y is given by the diagram in Fig. For the contribution to Π from fermion pair (1,2) we obtain where the factor 2 comes from summation over spin indices. To simplify the notations we will drop the tildes on momenta hereafter. The Green's functions are given by G 1,2 = 1/(iω m -ǫ 1,2 ) and fermionic dispersions can be written as ǫ 1,2 = v 1,2 • k. We transform the momentum integral dk x dk y into dǫ 1 dǫ 2 by adding the Jacobian Because this Jacobian is independent of q, the polarization operator in this approximation is a function of frequency only. We subtract from Π 1 (Ω m ) its frequency-independent part Π 1 (0), which only renormalizes the position of the CDW QCP and is not of interest to us. The subtraction makes integral over internal frequency convergent, and evaluating the integrals we obtain at zero temperature This is a conventional Landau damping term. We do the same calculation for hot spot pairs (3,4), (5,6), and (7,8). Because the Jacobians Including the polarization operator into the propagators for φ x and φ y fields, we obtain where and we recall that ḡc = g 2 c χ 0c . The overall factor of 4 in the numerator of (7) is the number of pairs of hot fermions. To extend the model to large N one just has to replace 4 by N . We will use this extension below. The total dynamical interaction mediated by charge fluctuations can then be written as We now use Eq. ( The self-energy depends on the location of a fermion on the FS and on the distance to CDW QCP. Below we will be interested in superconductivity right at CDW QCP, hence we will need the self-energy right at this point. Accordingly, we set ξ -1 c = 0 in the charge fluctuation propagator. For the self-energy contribution to a fermion at hot spot 1 from Q y scattering, we have where k is the deviation from hot spot 1. We place k on the FS, i.e., set k ⊥ ≡ v1 • k = 0, which gives k y = -αk x . At T = 0, we rewrite Eq. ( where k ′ ⊥ and k ′ are perpendicular and parallel components of k ′ with respect to the Fermi surface at hot spot 2, i.e., k ′ ⊥ ≡ v2 • k ′ , and k and k⊥ are components of external k, defined relative to the FS at the hot spot 2, i.e., k⊥ ≡ v2 • k, where v 2 = (v x , -v y ). Using k y = -αk x we obtain k⊥ = 2αk /(α 2 + 1). (11) We integrate over k ′ ⊥ first, and complete the integration contour over the half plane with only one pole. We obtain We will see that typical internal frequencies ω ′ m are of the same order as external ω m . Then, at small enough frequencies one can safely neglect the |ω ′ m |/v F term in the denominator. With this simplification we obtain Plugging Eq. ( The self-energy from Q x scattering is obtained in the same way: As Fermi velocities at hot spot 5 and 2 are antiparallel, we have Comparing Eqs. ( It is easy to verify that this results holds for around all hot regions 1-8, and in each region k is the deviation from the corresponding hot spot along the FS. The functional form of the self-energy as in Eq. ( where ω 0c = (4/N )ḡ c /π × α/(α 2 + 1). Away from a hot spot, at k 2 ≫ γ c |ω m |, the self-energy Σ(ω m , k ) retains a Fermi liquid (FL) form at the smallest ω m , i.e., we have One can easily verify that the inclusion of fermionic selfenergy Σ(k, ω m ) ∝ i sgn(ω m ) will not change the polarization operator, i.e., Π(Ω m ) retains the same form even if we compute it using dressed fermions. To verify self-consistency of the calculations, we also computed the self-energy away from the FS. We found , where Λ is the upper cutoff in momentum integration. The presence of the logarithm implies that Fermi velocity also acquires singular renormalization at CDW QCP (Refs. 11 and 52). This singularity breaks self-consistency of one-loop calculation of fermionic and bosonic self-energies if we keep N finite, but self-consistent procedure still remains rigorously justified at this loop order if we set N → ∞. The situation gets more complex at higher loop orders due to special role of forward scattering and backscattering processes which give rise to the dependence of Σ on k ⊥ without the factor 1/N (Refs. 48, 50, 56, and 57). How important are these effects in unclear and in this work we restrict with one-loop self-energy. We now use the normal state results as inputs for the analysis of the pairing mediated by CDW fluctuations with momenta around Q x and Q y . To leading order in 1/N , the pairing problem can be analyzed without vertex corrections, by summing up the ladder series of diagrams in the particle-particle channel FIG. We first focus on the momentum region where hot spots 1,2, and 5 = -2, and 6 = -1 are located (see Fig. where k = (ω m , k) and k ′ = (ω ′ m , k ′ ) and k, k ′ are momentum deviations from the corresponding hot spots. The fermionic Green's function are given by G The equation for Φ 2 in terms of Φ 1 has the same form, and thus Φ 1 and Φ 2 have the same magnitude. Because the two kernels in the Eq. ( We now proceed with the calculation of T ch c . We assume and then verify that the Φ 1 (k) = Φ 2 (k) = Φ(k) are even functions of momentum k. The linearized gap equation (19), whose solution exists right at T = T c , then becomes In the right hand side of Eq. ( where β = (1 -α 2 )/(1 + α 2 ). This factor appears in the last term in (21) because k and k ′ are parallel components of momenta in different segments of the FS, namely near hot spots 1 and 2, respectively. A similar gap equation has been analyzed in the context of spin-mediated pairing near SDW QCP The first iteration gives where, we remind, ω 0c ∼ ḡc is the upper edge of NFL behavior. We note that neither the coupling constant ḡc nor 1/N directly appear in Eq. ( The exponential dependence is the same as in BCS formula, which is not accidental because in the limit ǫ ≪ 1 the main contribution to superconductivity comes from fermions away from the hot regions, where self-energy has FL form. However, in distinction to BCS formula, the prefactor ω 0c is not the upper cutoff for the attraction but rather the scale set by the coupling constant ḡc . The proportionality of T ch c to the coupling ḡc is the fingerprint of the pairing near a quantum-critical point For the physical case ǫ = 1, we expect from (23) T ch c ∼ ω 0c . To obtain the exact relation we solved Eq. ( For comparison, in the spin-fermion model the critical temperature at SDW QCP is Now even right at a hot spot (at k = 0) the self-energy has a FL form where The dimensionless charge fermion coupling λ c (the ratio of ḡc to typical fermionic energy v F ξ -1 c ) decreases when ξ c decreases. Once λ c ≤ 1, charge-relaxation scale ω cf becomes the upper energy cutoff for the pairing, and We present the numerical result for the behavior of T ch c as a function of ξ c in Fig. c is expected on the other side of CDW QCP, in the charge-ordered state. To compare the magnitudes of ḡc and ḡs we compute their ratio within a particular microscopic model for charge order in the cuprates. Namely, we assume, as in earlier works by several groups including us To this end, we consider a 2D itinerant electron system in which the primary interaction between fermions is mediated by soft collective spin fluctuations at the antiferromagnetic momentum Q π = (π, π). Such an interaction, shown as the wavy line in Fig. where where γ s is the corresponding Landau damping coefficient and the scale ḡs sets the magnitude of T sp c for spinmediated superconductivity. Except for special cases, there is no rigorously justified procedure to obtain Eq. ( One commonly used approach is to treat static part of spin-mediated interaction phenomenologically and just postulate Ornstein-Zernike form of the static χ s (q, 0) (this is the same procedure that we used in the chargefermion model). Once the model with static spinmediated interaction is established, one can compute the dynamical part of χ s (q, Ω m ) (the Landau damping term) within this model, as it comes from fermions with small energies. Within this approach, one cannot relate ḡs with U (r), but one can express Landau damping coefficient γ s via ḡs . The relation is where for comparison with RPA below we pulled out factor of 2 due to spin summation. A complementary approach is to treat U eff s as the charge component of the fully renormalized vertex function Γ αγ,βδ (q, Ω m ) at momentum transfer q near Q π . The vertex function Γ is the opposite of physical antisymmetrized interaction (a direct interaction minus the one with outgoing fermions interchanged). The vertex function can be obtained in RPA by summing up particular ladder and bubble diagrams which form geometrical series (for details see Ref. 69). The approach is best understood when U (r) is approximated as on-site Hubbard interaction U . The RPA gives σ αβ • σ γδ (31) where to split the vertex into spin and charge parts we used σ αβ • σ γδ = -δ αβ δ γδ + 2δ αδ δ βγ For a repulsive interaction U > 0, and the interaction in the spin channel is enhanced and at large enough U diverges at q, at which static Π(q, 0) > 0 is at maximum. We assume that the maximum of Π(q, 0) is at q = Q π . Near Π(Q π , 0) = 1/U , the interaction in the spin channel well exceeds the one in the charge channel, and one can keep only the spin component of the interaction, i.e., approximate the dressed interaction by Eq. ( Expanding the polarization operator near antiferromagnetic momentum and zero frequency, we obtain (the last term comes from fermions near the FS and the prefactor for Ω m term is known exactly). Substituting this form into (32) we obtain after simple manipulations the same U eff s (q, Ω m ) as in Eq. ( We see that the expression for the Landau damping coefficient is exactly the same as in the other (semiphenomenological) approach, the only new element of RPA is that ḡs = 1/(2C π ) is related to the behavior of the static polarization bubble. Formally, ḡs doesn't depend on U , but in reality C π is of the same order as Π(Q π , 0) (in units where lattice constant a = 1), and the latter is approximately 1/U near a SDW QCP. As a result, ḡs is fact is of order U . The interaction mediated by spin fluctuations gives rise to d-wave superconductivity and to fermionic selfenergy. In the FL regime, Σ(ω m ) ≈ λ s ω m , where λ s = 3ḡ/(4πv F ξ -1 s ). This self-energy gives rise to mass renormalization m * /m = 1 + λ s and to quasiparticle residue 1/Z = 1/(1 + λ s ). We will include this renor-malization into the calculations below. We now proceed to construct the interaction in the CDW channel. The CDW instability with the ordering momentum Q x = (Q, 0) and Q y = (0, Q) emerges in this approach as a preliminary collective instability at a finite ξ s , due to spin-fluctuation exchange. A way to obtain CDW instability is to introduce infinitesimal CDW field ∆ Q k , which couples to incommensurate component of charge density as , and compute susceptibility with respect to this field. This has been done There is no rigorous justification why one should restrict with only ladder diagrams, even at large N . The first non-ladder diagram is small numerically, but not parametrically, compared to the ladder diagram of the same loop order. Accordingly, there is no point to keep N as artificially large parameter, and in this section we set the number of pairs of hot spots N to their actual value N = 4. We present the diagrammatic representation of this set of equations in Fig. Alternatively, one can combine pairs of subsequent renormalizations of ∆ Q k into new effective interaction at small momentum transfer [see Fig. The corresponding term in the Hamiltonian is where subindices 1 and 2 indicate that the corresponding FIG. . We define the center-of-mass momentum of hot spots 1 and 2 as k0 and that of hot spots 3 and 4 as kπ. Panels (a) and (b): the coupled gap equations for ∆ Q k 0 and ∆ Q kπ . Panel (c): The gap equation for ∆ Q k 0 only, obtained by combining panels (a) and (b). We treat the composite object in the dashed frame as the effective interaction Uc (the prefactor -1 reflects that interaction appears in the diagram with the minus sign). momenta are near hot spots 1 and 2, and the spin factors originate from Only the first, We now turn to the calculation of the fermionic selfenergy and pairing instability. At a first glance, an in-FIG. teraction with a positive (repulsive) U c cannot give rise to the pairing instability with sign-preserving gap between the regions 1 and 2. On a more careful look, however, we notice that the interaction in Eq. ( Viewed this way, the effective interaction is attractive and is capable to give rise to pairing. Another, more standard way to verify that the densitydensity interaction with momentum transfer Q is attractive is to again extract it from the vertex function Γ αμ,βν (q, Ω m ). To second order in the spinfluctuation propagator, there are two direct and two antisymmetrized diagrams for Γ αμ,βν (q, Ω m ) which contain spin propagators with momenta near Q π . We show them in Fig. where the spin structure is obtained the same way as in Eq. (36). Associating the charge component of the vertex function with the effective density-density interaction, we reproduce Eq. (37). The effective interaction -(9U c /2)c † 2,α c 1,α c † 1,μ c 2,μ is the bare interaction at momentum transfer Q y , and in this respect 9U c /2 plays the same role as Hubbard U played for our earlier derivation of spin-mediated interaction within RPA. Just like we did for spin case, we now dress interaction by summing up series of RPA diagrams (see Fig. Expanding the polarization operator Π c near, say Q = Q y , we obtain Substituting this form into (39) we obtain the effective charge-mediate interaction the same form as in Eq. ( To proceed further we approximate the dynamical spin susceptibility χ s (q, Ω m ) by its value at q = Q π and Ω m = 0 and integrate over fermions within the momentum range of the width Λ around hot spots. Like we said above, the approximation of U c by a constant is valid when momentum deviations from a hot spot are at most of order ξ -1 s , so Λξ s is generally of order one. We also assume for simplicity that CDW order parameter has a pure d-wave form, i.e., set our parameter α to be one. Within this last approximation, the polarization operator has the same form between points 1-2 and 3-4. Evaluating the polarization operator Π c we then find near where Cy is of order one and we remind that λ = 3ḡ s /(4πv F ξ -1 s ) is the mass renormalization due to spinfluctuation exchange. The variable C y , which we introduced in ( Within the same approximation the composite interaction U c is given by Using the condition 9U c |Π c (Q y )| ≈ 1, we eliminate unknown scale Λ and obtain We see that within this approximation the ratio ḡc /ḡ s depends on the value of dimensionless parameter Cy . To obtain this parameter one needs to know more precisely system behavior at energies comparable to Λ. Still, if Cy (λ/(1 + λ)) 2 ≤ 1, then ḡc ≥ 2ḡ s , in which case superconducting T ch c from the exchange of near-critical charge fluctuations well may exceed T sp c from the spinfluctuation exchange. This is the central result of this section. A more quantitative analysis requires extensive numerical calculations and is beyond the scope of this work. We also emphasize that there is no known controllable procedure of the derivation of the effective interaction mediated by near-critical collective bosonic fluctuations, the RPA which we used is an uncontrollable approximation. And we also recall that the composite interaction U c (the convolution of two fermionic propagators and two spin propagators) does depend on external momenta and frequency, and already the calculation of T cdw requires one to solve integral equation for momentum and frequency dependent full ∆ Q k . Finally, we discuss the issue of how T ch c , mediated by collective degrees of freedom, evolves in the presence of an external magnetic field. For definiteness, we focus on the role of near-critical charge fluctuations and neglect the contribution to T c from spin fluctuations. It has been found experimentally We show that this behavior is reproduced within a quantum-critical CDW pairing scenario. The argument is rather straightforward -right at CDW QCP, T ch c is set by charge-fermion coupling ḡc , and to reduce T ch c one would need to apply a rather strong magnetic field μ B H ∼ ḡc . Away from CDW QCP, in the FL regime, T ch c is reduced and eventually follows BCS formula. In the latter case, a much weaker μ B H is needed to kill superconductivity. To see how this works in practice, we solved for chargemediated T ch c at a finite charge correlation length ξ c by assuming that the dominant effect of the field is Zeeman splitting of fermionic energies in the particle-particle bubble. Within this approximation, the linearized integral equation for the pairing vertex function Φ(ω m , k , ) (the one which has a solution at where the self-energy is given by Eq. ( In the FL regime, when λ c = ḡc /(2πv F ξ -1 c ) ≤ 1, Φ(k , ω m ) can be, to logarithmical accuracy, approximated by a constant Φ, and Eq. ( where ω cf ∼ ḡc /λ 2 has been introduced in (27). The superconducting T ch c becomes zero at a critical λ cr c , given by or, with logarithmical accuracy, at λ cr c ∼ 1/ log(ḡ c /μ B H). At smaller λ c , i.e., at larger deviations from CDW QCP, there is no charge-mediated superconductivity. We solved the gap equation numerically and obtained T ch c as a function of λ c and μ B H. We plot the results in Fig. Motivated by the observation of a static charge order in the cuprates and the enhancement of T c at its onset, we studied in this work the pairing mediated by charge fluctuations around the quantum-critical point towards an incommensurate charge order with momentum Q x = (Q, 0) or Q y = (0, Q). Our main goal was to understand whether charge-mediated pairing near a CDW QCP yields T c comparable to that obtained from spinfluctuation exchange. We first considered a semi-phenomenological chargefermion model in which hot fermions (the ones at the FS, connected by Q x or Q y ) interact by exchanging soft collective excitations in the charge channel. We obtained bosonic and fermionic self-energies in the normal state and used them as inputs for the analysis of the quantumcritical pairing problem. We found, in agreement with earlier works We next considered the microscopic model in which spin fluctuations emerge at higher energies than charge fluctuations and are therefore the primary collective degrees of freedom. Charge fluctuations emerge at smaller energies as composite fields, made out of pairs of spin fluctations. Within this model, we were able to express charge-fermion coupling ḡc via the underlying spin-fermion coupling ḡs and relate T ch c due to chargefluctuations near a CDW QCP to T sp c due to spin fluctuations. We found that, at least within RPA, T ch c due to charge fluctuations is comparable to T sp c that due to spin fluctations and may even exceed it, i.e., superconducting T c does get a substantial enhancement near a CDW QCP. Finally, we analyzed the behavior of charge-mediated T c in the presence of a magnetic field and found that the dome of T ch c around a CDW QCP indeed shrinks as magnetic field increases, because a field destroys superconductivity faster in non-critical regime than in the quantum-critical regime and hence enhances chargefluctuation component of T c near a CDW QCP. This result and the one that the contribution to T c from critical charge fluctuations can be larger than the contribution to T c from non-critical spin-fluctuations, despite that charge fluctuations are by themselves made out of spin fluctuations, may explain the experimental observation that in a magnetic field T c gets progressively confined to the doping range around the doping at which charge order likely emerges at T = 0.