We study the consequences of an electron-phonon (e-ph) interaction that is strongly peaked in the forward scattering (q = 0) direction in a two-dimensional superconductor using Migdal-Eliashberg theory. We find that strong forward scattering results in an enhanced Tc that is linearly proportional to the strength of the dimensionless e-ph coupling constant λm in the weak coupling limit. This interaction also produces distinct replica bands in the single-particle spectral function, similar to those observed in recent angle-resolved photoemission experiments on FeSe monolayers on SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 substrates. By comparing our model to photoemission experiments, we infer an eph coupling strength that can provide a significant portion of the observed high Tc in these systems. Introduction -A flurry of scientific activities has been generated by the discovery of an enhanced superconductivity in FeSe monolayers grown on SrTiO 3 (STO) substrates Determining the origin of the T c enhancement in these interface systems is critical. At the moment, proposals include charge transfer between the substrate and FeSe In this Letter we explore this possibility and examine the consequences of strong forward scattering in the e-ph interaction for superconductivity and the spectral properties of a two-dimensional system. By solving the momentum dependent Eliashberg equations, we show that a pronounced forward scattering results in a T c that scales linearly with the dimensionless e-ph coupling constant λ m (see below) in the weak coupling limit. This is in stark contrast to the usual exponential dependence predicted by BCS theory. Furthermore, this coupling produces distinct replica structures in the spectral function similar to those observed experimentally. By comparing our model to experiments Formalism -To model the FeSe monolayer we consider a single-band model for the FeSe electron pockets, which includes coupling to an oxygen phonon branch in the STO substrate. The Hamiltonian is given by where c † k,σ (c k,σ ) and b † q (b q ) are electron and phonon creation (annihilation) operators, respectively, ξ k is the band dispersion, Ω q is the phonon dispersion, and g(k, q) is the momentum-dependent e-ph coupling constant. We calculate the single-particle self-energy due to the e-ph interaction using Migdal-Eliashberg theory. Using the Nambu notation with fermionic Matsubara frequencies ω n = (2n + 1)π/β, where β = 1/T is the inverse temperature, the self-energy is Σ , where τi are the Pauli matrices, Z(k, iω n ) and χ(k, iω n ) renormalize the single-particle mass and band dispersion, respectively, and φ(k, iω n ) is the anomalous self-energy, which is zero in the normal state. In Migdal-Eliashberg theory, the self-energy is computed by self-consistently evaluating the one-loop diagram and is given by where is the bare phonon propagator, and Ĝ-1 (k, In what follows we parameterize the electronic dispersion as ξ k = -2t[cos(k x a) + cos(k y a)]μ with t = 75 meV and μ = -235 meV. This choice in parameters produces at Γ an electron-like Fermi pocket with k F = 0.97/a and a Fermi velocity v F = 0.12 eV•a/h along the k y = 0 line, where a is the in-plane lattice constant. This closely resembles the electron pocket at M point measured by ARPES experiment. Since first principles calculations indicate that the relevant oxygen phonon branch in STO is relatively dispersionless near the Γ-point Analytical Results -Before proceeding to full numerical solutions, we can gain some insight by first considering the case of perfect forward scattering, where the e-ph matrix element is a delta function |g(q)| 2 = g 2 0 δ q N with g 2 0 = λ m Ω 2 [34]. In the weak coupling limit, we further set Z(k, iω n ) = 1, χ(k, iω n ) = 0, and therefore φ(k, iω n ) = ∆(k, iω n ). With these approximations, the gap function on the Fermi surface is given by To determine T c we take the ansatz ∆(iω n ) = ∆ 0 /[1 + (ω n /Ω) 2 ] and follow the usual steps tion is linearlized by setting ∆ 2 0 = 0 for T ∼ T c and we set ω n=1 /Ω = 0. This results in the condition for . The Matsubara sum can be performed exactly, yielding our final expression For the case of FeSe, T c Ω, and the hyperbolic functions dominate. To the leading order, the critical temperature is quasi-linear in the coupling strength in the weak coupling limit, T c = λm 2+3λm Ω. (A similar result was obtained in Ref. The increased T c should be compared to the standard BCS value obtained for a momentum-independent coupling. In this case, the linearized gap equation simplifies to [34-36] where we have expanded at large Ω D /T c and ψ(z) is the digamma function Numerical Results for T c and the superconducting gap -In real materials the e-ph interaction is expected to have a finite range q 0 in momentum space Replica Bands -The above results show that, in principle, a modest coupling to a phonon with a forward scattering peak is capable of accounting for the large T c enhancement observed in FeSe on STO and BTO. The natural question is then how much of the experimental T c is accounted for by this coupling? The observed shape and intensity of the replica bands An intuitive picture for the intensity and energy splitting of the replica band can again be obtained in the limit of perfect forward scattering. On the real axis, the zerotemperature self-consistent equation for the self-energy in the normal state can be written as Σ(ω) = g 2 0 G(ω + Ω). For ξ k → 0 -, the lowest-order solution is Σ(ω) = The spectral weight of each pole is given by For small λ m = g 2 0 /Ω 2 , we find that the average energy separation between the poles is ∆ω = Ω[1+2λ m +O(λ 2 m )] and the ratio of the spectral weight is Z- Z+ = λ m +O(λ 2 m ), thus providing a direct measure of λ m . The spectral weight ratio and energy splitting between the main and replica bands can be extracted from our numerical simulations for finite values of q 0 . Fig. In Fig. We stress that our results do not exclude the presence of another unconventional pairing channel such as spin fluctuations. The predicted values of T c and ∆ will be reduced somewhat by the inclusion of the Coulomb pseudopotential μ * . This reduction, however, can be overcome by the combination of the e-ph and unconventional interactions, since forward scattering will contribute to Cooper pairing in most channels Finally, we note that e-ph coupling with a pronounced forward scattering peak has been studied in several contexts related to of unconventional superconductivity in the cuprates In this work we have solved the momentum-dependent Eliashberg equations and obtained the electron Green's function on the real axis, following the method in Ref. 1. Here, we briefly outline the main aspects of this approach. In the main text we introduced the electron self-energy in the Eliashberg equation on the imaginary axis with the Nambu notation where τi are the usual Pauli matrices, Z(k, iω n ) and χ(k, iω n ) renormalize the single-particle mass and band dispersion, respectively, and φ(k, iω n ) is the anomalous self-energy, which is zero in the normal state. In Migdal-Eliashberg theory, the self-energy is computed by self-consistently evaluating the one-loop diagram as shown in Fig. where is the dressed electron propagator, N is number of momentum grid points, and β = 1/(k B T ) is the inverse temperature. For the dispersionless optical phonon mode we study here, Ω q = Ω. For forward scattering the e-ph matrix element is independent of the fermion momentum k and is given by where f (|q|) is a function peaked at |q| = 0. For the perfect forward scattering, we take f (|q|) = N δ q where δ q is the Kronecker delta function. For a general forward scattering we take f (|q|) ∝ exp(-2|q|/q 0 ) with a proper normalization factor so that the result in the q 0 → 0 limit can be compared with the result obtained using the Kronecker delta function. To obtain the electron self-energy for real frequencies, one needs either to perform an analytical continuation by Padé approximants, or to solve the Eliashberg equations directly on the real axis. The latter method is cumbersome while the former is unreliable; however, Ref. 1 introduced a method whereby the real-frequency self-energy can be FIG. found iteratively by using the results on the imaginary axis. Given the imaginary axis Green's function Ĝ(k, iω n ), the real frequency self-energy is found by solving the iterative equation where B(z) = δ(z -Ω)δ(z + Ω) is the spectral function of the phonon, and η > 0 is a small number. For a specific momentum dependence f (|q|) in the coupling function |g(k, q)| 2 = g 2 0 f (|q|), we set the coefficient g 0 to fix the total dimensionless coupling constant λ m , formally defined as (see, for example, Ref. 2), For the relevant low temperature range T c T Ω, the temperature dependencies of the self-energy in the normal state and λ m are negligible, so we calculate λ m at T = 100 K, if not otherwise specified. Here, . . . denotes the average over the Fermi surface, and δ(ξ q ) is approximated by a Gaussian λ m is a measure of the mass enhancement due to electron-phonon coupling, m * /m = 1 + λ m , where m * is the effective electron mass. For a normal metal (that is, with a smooth coupling function g(q) and Ω E F ), Eq. ( where is the density of states per spin. For the forward scattering case, however, the mass enhancement λ m following Eq. ( Numerically, we solve the Eliashberg equations with a momentum grid of N = 64 × 64 grid points, a cut-off energy of 600 meV for the Matsubara and real frequencies with the real frequency discretized into 1 meV intervals, and a small-scale parameter η = 15 meV. For a given set of parameters, we start the computation with initial self-energies Z = 1, χ = 0 and a small anomalous self-energy φ = 0.7 meV. The Eliashberg equations are then iterated, where upon each iteration the chemical potential is adjusted as to fix the total number of electrons. When the difference between two consecutive self-energies is less than 10 -3 meV, we have reached the convergence. For comparison, we derive the standard BCS gap equation from the Eliashberg theory. An extended review of Eliashberg theory and the BCS limit can be found, for example, in Ref. 3. In the weak coupling limit, we can neglect the normal electron self-energy by setting Z(k, iω n ) = 1 and χ(k, iω n ) = 0. The anomalous self-energy is now equal to the gap function, φ(k, iω n ) = ∆(k, iω n ). For an isotropic s-wave gap, the gap function is momentum-independent. Under these assumptions the Eliashberg equation reduces to Unlike for the forward scattering, we now assume that |g(k, q)| 2 D (0) (q, iω niω m ) is momentum independent. Now the only momentum-dependent term in the Eliashberg equation is the electron dispersion ξ k+q . In this case, the sum over momenta can be replaced by an integral over the free electron density of states N ( ), Since most of the relevant physics happens close to the Fermi level, we replace the N ( ) by its approximate value N (0). The resulting integration over electron energies changes the 1/ω 2 m behavior into a 1/|ω m |, The coupling strength as a function of energy can be expressed as λ(iω ν ) = -N (0)|g| 2 D (0) (iω ν ) so that we recover the BCS gap equation, The critical temperature can be found by taking the limit ω n = 0 and assuming that λ(iω niω m ) and ∆(iω m ) are constants λ and ∆ 0 with a hard cut-off at the Debye frequency Ω D . The linearized gap equation with ∆ 2 0 = 0 now takes the form where we have expanded at large Ω D /T c and ψ(z) is the digamma function. The critical temperature is given by the exponential function of the total coupling constant λ This exponential suppression can be traced back to the integration over the electron energies. This, in turn, is possible because the vertex and phonon part of the gap equation are momentum independent. When the vertex has strong momentum-dependence, the integration over electron energies cannot be performed and the leading behavior is still 1/ω 2 m instead of 1/|ω m |, as will be shown when we consider perfect forward scattering. For the forward scattering with g(q) ∝ g 0 exp(-|q|/q 0 ), the Eliashberg equations can be solved analytically in the limit of perfect forward scattering, q 0 → 0. The results of this limit are discussed in the main text; here we provide a more detailed derivation of the proper coupling strength λ m and the corresponding critical temperature T c . The coupling for the perfect forward scattering is on a discrete lattice with total N grid points, where N δ q is the Kronecker delta function normalized to unity in the sum 1 N q N δ q = 1. (In the large N and continuum limit, N δ q → (2π) 2 δ(q), and the Dirac delta function δ(q) can be simulated with a peak function with finite width q 0 , as for the general forward scattering case.) The one-loop electron self-energy now reads where B(z) = δ(z -Ω)δ(z + Ω). The subscript "(1)" of the self-energy means we have performed a single iteration of the solving the Eliashberg equation, where we substitute in the bare electron Green's function instead of the dressed Green's function. At the Fermi surface, the electron energy vanishes (ξ k = 0) so the self-energy simplifies to Re Σ (1) which is momentum independent. In the low temperature limit, coth(Ω/2T ) ≈ 1, and by taking the derivative of the self-energy at ω = 0 we obtain the total coupling constant as defined in Eq. ( The numerical value of λ m from the self-consistently calculated self-energy is very close to the value given by the above equation. For a nearly perfect forward scattering with a peak width q 0 = 0.1/a, even after considering the small temperature dependence, the numerical value differs from the above result by a few percent. We now continue to derive the linear dependence of transition temperature T c in terms of the coupling strength λ m in the weak coupling limit for the perfect forward scattering. In this limit, we can neglect the normal electron self-energies, that is Z(k, iω n ) = 1 and χ(k, iω n ) = 0. We assume an isotropic s-wave gap. After summing over the momentum q, we obtain the self-consistent equation for the gap function φ(k, iω n ) = ∆(k, iω n ), To find the critical temperature, we take an ansatz for the gap function with the form Our numerical results verify that this shape properly represents the Matsubara frequency dependence of the gap. Setting ω n=1 /Ω = 0 and linearizing the gap equation with ∆ 2 0 = 0, we find the equation for the critical temperature, where the sum over Matsubara frequencies can be performed exactly by the method of contour integration. We finally obtain It is reasonable to assume that the critical temperature T c is much less than the optical phonon frequency, as Ω is typically of the order of 100 meV ≈ 1000 K. In this limit, the hyperbolic functions dominate and cancel each other in the numerator and denominator of the above equation. We find a critical temperature of This gives a remarkably high critical temperature, even for a modest coupling constant λ m because of the quasi-linear dependence. For example, λ m = 0.16 with Ω = 100 meV yields a critical temperature of T c = 75 K. By fitting ARPES data from Lee et al. -500 -400 -300 -200 -100 0 FIG. 