The frequency dependence of the AC conductivity is studied in a holographic model of a non-fermi liquid that is amenable to both analytical and numerical computation. In the regime that dissipation dominates the DC conductivity, the AC conductivity is described well in the IR by a Drude peak despite the absence of quasiparticles. In the regime where pair-production-like processes dominate the conductivity there is no Drude peak. A scaling tail is found for the AC conductivity that is independent of the charge density and momentum dissipation. Evidence is given that this scaling tail σ AC ∼ ω m appears generically in quantum critical holographic systems and the associated scaling exponent m is calculated in terms of the Lifshitz and conduction critical exponents. Insulators and superconductors are central concepts in strongly correlated electron materials giving rise to high T c superconductivity, Most holographic systems analyzed at finite density are translationally invariant. Exceptions also exist, using D-brane defects and magnetic vortices, The interaction with momentum dissipation agents has been discussed in rather general terms in The formula obtained for the holographic DC conductivity is a sum of two contributions, The first term, σ pc DC , has been interpreted, The second contribution in (1.1) is due to the effects of dissipating momentum. When translation-breaking operators are irrelevant, the system is expected to be metallic and this term is expected to give the leading contribution to the DC conductivity. Then, a description of momentum relaxation in terms of the memory matrix formalism is appropriate and shows that the conductivity takes a Drude-like form, though no quasi-particle description is assumed where Q is the charge density and Γ i are diffusion rates of the various diffusion mechanisms at play. It is strongly suspected that this result is general, This general form of the DC conductivity was seen already in pure metric backgrounds in giving results compatible with (1.1) in the regimes where pair creation or drag diffusion dominates the conductivity. In general, we expect a nonlinear formula that reflects the bulk action of the gauge field. In the probe DBI cases the momentum dissipation is due to the fact that charge degrees of freedom are subleading compared to uncharged ones. This means that there is a momentum conserving δ-function but its coefficient is hierarchically suppressed. In The general properties of holographic conductivity were further corroborated recently by a careful study of the holographic current-current correlators and the associated properties of their poles in the complex plane, In The above properties of holographic DC conductivity prompted the construction of holographic models with strange metal behavior, The T + T 2 behavior of the resistivity in In this paper we compute the AC conductivity of the holographic strange metal in There are two main regimes on the (t, J) plane, shown in the middle plot of figure We have defined a parameter q in We can vary the total charge density J to enter any of the two regimes. Inside each regime there are two regions with distinct behavior of the DC conductivity • In the Drude regime (q ≫ 1), when t ≪ 1 the resistivity is linear in t (and consequently in the temperature). We call this regime the linear regime. When t ≫ 1, the resistivity is quadratic in t. We call this regime the quadratic regime. • In the QC/PP regime, (q ≪ 1), when t ≪ 1 the resistivity behaves as ρ ∼ t -3 2 . We call this regime, the regime I. When t ≫ 1 the resistivity behaves as ρ ∼ t -1 2 . We call this regime, the regime II. In the t → 0 limit the theory has an effective Lifshitz exponent z = 2 while as t → ∞ it crosses over to an effective relativistic Lifshitz exponent, z = 1, 1. The characteristic temperature scale that controls the AC conductivity is an effective temperature T ef f (with an associated scaling effective temperature t ef f defined analogously). This is distinct from the system temperature T and is due to the existence of a hierarchy of interactions. Similar effects have been observed in electronic systems and in holography, The relation between t ef f and t is plotted in figure 2. In the small t regime t ef f ∼ 1 √ t while at large enough t, t ef f ≃ t. As was observed in 2. We define a generalized relaxation time τ by the IR expansion of the AC conductivity, In the presence of the Drude peak, this is the conventional definition of an associated relaxation time. When there is no Drude peak present, τ is still well-defined, although in that case the interpretation as a relaxation time is lost. We give an analytical formula for τ in while in the regime II (with t ≫ 1) it is set by the inverse of the temperature These behaviors are shown graphically in figure 3. In the Drude regime (q ≫ 1) where the dominant mechanism for the conductivity is momentum dissipation, there is a clear Drude peak as seen for example in figures 6. In the PP/QC regime it is also clear from the same figures that no Drude peak is to be seen in the IR of the AC conductivity. 4. At zero charge density (PP/QC regime) there is a scaling tail for the AC conductivity that behaves as For finite charge density this tail survives not only in the Charge Conjugation Symmetric regime but also in part of the Drude regime, as seen in the various plots of figure where ρ is the IR charge density (that is proportional to the UV charge density). In particular, for a metric with Lifshitz exponent z, hyperscaling violation exponent θ and conduction exponent ζ with d spatial boundary dimensions, we find that in general There are several constraints in the parameters of this formula that are detailed in section 6. Moreover this formula is valid when the associated charge density does not support the IR geometry. 6. There are some special cases of (1.8) that deserve mentioning. For an AdS 2 IR geometry, the exponent can be obtained by the z → ∞ limit in (1.8) giving m = 0. For hyperscaling violating semilocal geometries we must take θ → ∞, z → ∞ with θ z = -η fixed and obtain Finally, for the gauge field conformal case 7. We find that for two spatial dimensions, negative values for the exponent m are correlated with the sign of the Lifshitz exponent z and the strength of the gauge field interaction in the bulk. Parametrizing the IR asymptotics of gauge coupling function Z as in conformal coordinates, we obtain that zκ > 0 for negative values of m to be possible. 8. In the special case where the associated gauge field seeds the IR scaling geometry, κ in equation (1.10) is fixed as a function of z, θ and the exponent m takes the value and is always positive. The special case where the IR geometry is AdS 2 can be obtained from the z → ∞ limit of (1.11) giving m = 2. For hyperscaling violating semilocal geometries, we must take, θ → ∞, z → ∞ with θ z = -η fixed. In this case we obtain 9. An important issue is whether the scaling of the AC conductivity described above for the general scaling geometries is controlled by the dynamics of the charge density, or it is decided by the neutral system. What we find is as follows: the effective Schrödinger potentials that controls the calculation of the conductivity has two parts. One that is independent of charge density and one that is proportional to the square of the charge density. In the generic case it is the first that controls the UV scaling of the AC conductivity described above. Only if the charge density is supporting the IR geometry, then the second part is of the same order as the first and it is the sum that controls the scaling of the AC conductivity. This special case is also the only one we found where the exponent m in (7.6) is always positive. In the other cases it can also be negative, but unitarity implies always that m ≥ -1. These findings suggest that this is a generic source of scaling tails in the AC conductivity in holographic systems. Moreover, in generic systems this scaling is expected to be independent of the mechanism of momentum dissipation. The structure of this paper is as follows: In the next section we review the holographic model for a strange metal that we will study in this paper. In section 3 we derive the linearized equations leading to the calculation of the AC conductivity and establish the presence of an effective temperature for the charge dynamics. In section 4.1 we analyzed the equations for the AC conductivity and derive an analytic formula for the generalized relaxation time. In section 5 we derive analytic formula for the scaling regime and numerically compute the AC conductivity for different values of the model parameters. In section 6 we do a general analysis of AC conductivity scaling in generic quantum critical saddle points. Finally section 7 contains our conclusions and outlook. There are several appendices that provide technical details. Appendix A contains the effective DBI action and the equations of motion. Appendix B contains the computation of the open string metric while appendix C contains a change of coordinates in the world-sheet induced black hole metric. Appendix D derives in detail the equations for the fluctuations. In appendix E we present the computational details of the asymptotics of the AC DBI conductivity. Finally in appendix F we analyze theories with two charge densities and the associated scaling of the AC conductivity. In this section we will review the holographic model introduced in where g, R and l are the determinant of the metric, Ricci scalar and the length scale of the model which controls the cosmological constant, respectively. This solution is the standard AdS-Schwarzschild solution, A crucial ingredient of the approach in with the coordinates ordered as x M = (x + , x -, y, z, u). The components read where the blackening factor is In these coordinates the boundary is located at u = 0 and the horizon at u = u 0 . Notice that the radial coordinate u is dimensionless and to ensure the non relativistic scaling z = 2 we assign [b] = -1 (in mass units). Although the Ads-Schwarschild solution has the full conformal symmetry, in this coordinate system only the z=2 Schrödinger symmetry is manifest. Another peculiarity of the system is that the coordinate x + will be considered as the field theory time. Such background interpolates between a z = 1 CFT at high T and a z = 2 Lifshitz-like nonrelativistic system at T ∼ 0. The black-hole temperature is given by b The background is a 5-dimensional space time in light-cone coordinates x ± = x±t. The spatial coordinate x plays a special role. From a field theory viewpoint this coordinate frame can be seen as an infinite boost in the x direction. Therefore the x dependence disappears and the non-trivial dynamics happens in the two transverse spatial dimensions y, z, where g represents the background metric and F the gauge field dual to the U(1) conserved current. It is possible to find a solution of the DBI equations of motion of the form In the solution above, E represents an electric field in the y direction. In appendix A of reference where J + is the charge density and u ⋆ (E, u 0 ) is the critical point in the radial direction where both the numerator and denominator under the square root change sign, It will coincide, as we will show later-on, with the world-volume horizon. It is given as where u ⋆ (0, u 0 ) = u 0 is satisfied. To describe the key steps of the procedure to obtain (2.7) and (2.8), we remind the reader first that in the holographic set up, the boundary value of A (0) corresponds to a background gauge field switched on in the dual field theory. We also note that after inserting (2.6) in (2.5), the action will depend only on the radial derivative of h ± and h y . Therefore, the system will have three u-independent quantities that can be identified with the one-point functions of the conserved quantities of the dual field theory, J + is interpreted as the charge density, J -related to the particle number and J y with the electric current in the y-direction. The quantity inside the square root of the DBI action (2.5) is not positive definite. If we demand reality of the action at all the points of the bulk space-time. several conditions must be satisfied. The first condition is the emergence of a surface besides the horizon satisfying the following equation the second condition relates the particle number with the charge density as follows and the last one is Ohm's law with σ DC defined as in equation (2.7). The conductivity receives two independent contributions, therefore we will split it as follows with the following redefinitions (2.16) The term σ DR is proportional to the charge density. It has been interpreted, The term σ QC is present even in the absence of charge density and it is interpreted as a contribution to the conductivity due to pair creation of charges, We introduce scaling variables t, J to describe the temperature and charge density respectively The physical quantities depend on these variables. The conductivities, σ DR and σ QC read in term of t, J as The conductivity formula (2.13) has a complicated dependence on the parameter t. It can be however analyzed in different regions of the parameter space, depending on whether we are in a drag dominated regime (DR) or a pair-creation dominated Center: Location of the four regimes in the space of parameters (J, t) log-log scale. The black line q = 1, separates the DR respect to the QC regime. The magenta line represents the region with q = 10 -2 and the red one q = 100. Right: Contour Plot of the DC conductivity as a function of the scaling charge density and the temperature. regime (QC). To characterize the later we will define the ratio among Drude and QC conductivities, These two regimes are illustrated in the second log-log plot of figure . (2.21) We observe in the DR (large enough J) that conductivity is linear at low temperatures and becomes quadratic at higher temperatures. In general the DC conductivity for a background with dynamical exponent z is σ DC ∼ T 2 z , The theory has an extra parameter, the Electric field, E. This acts as an external parameter, that is similar to doping, pressure, electric and magnetic fields in strange metals. Varying E, from (2.17) we observe that this changes t and J and therefore affects the crossover of the conductivity from linear to quadratic. Indeed, in Here E → ∞ corresponds to optimal doping while E → 0 corresponds to the overdoped limit. The cross-over scale between linear and quadratic regimes asymptotes to zero as E → 0 while it diverges when E → ∞. In In addition to the resistivity and inverse Hall angle, very good agreement was also found with experimental results of the Hall Coefficient, magnetoresistance and Köhler rule on various high T c cuprates We will use linear response theory to study the electric properties of the system. To do so we need to switch-on fluctuations for the gauge field on top of the background discussed before A = A (0) + a with a infinitesimal. These fluctuations will evolve with a dynamics determined by the effective Lagrangian where f = da, the effective (open string) metric is defined as ) and the vector present in the Chern Simons is Notice that we are raising indices with the open string metric s M N . In particular the line element is where the exact form of the components of the world-volume metric are presented in appendix B in terms of the background metric and gauge field. Finally, the equations of motion for the fluctuation are We will now show that the open string metric has a horizon in a modified location with respect to the background horizon located at u 0 . In particular we will show that u ⋆ represents the location of the horizon for the effective metric s. As a consequence of this fact, the charged matter is at a temperature different than the bulk system. This can happen in other holographic systems, To show the previous statement we will diagonalize the metric and also rescale the radial coordinate as u → u ⋆ u. The full expression for the functions f 's can be found in appendix C. The diagonal metric becomes where again the component functions can be found in appendix C. From the new form of the metric we can find the location of the open string horizon and the effective temperature associated to this black hole. We find that sττ (1) = s-1 uu (1) = 0, which indicates that the new horizon is located at the position u = 1 or equivalently at u ⋆ . Expanding around this point we obtain the near-horizon expressions where we have introduced the redefinition J+ = Following The previous equation written in term of the scaling variables (2.17) reads We illustrate in Fig. It is worth mentioning that t ef f ≥ t always, as first observed for holographic systems in If we analyze t ef f in the four distinct regimes of the parameters J and t (defined in (2.21)) we obtain: 6 There is also a second minimum that satisfies t min → 0 when q → 0. In the previous section we derived the equations of motion for fluctuations on the black hole background with Schrödinger symmetry in equation (3.5). We will work in the new coordinates introduced in (3.6). As the background electric field is pointing in the y-direction we will switch-on a fluctuation in the z-direction which will be transverse. We will solve this equation and from the source and vev of the solution we will determine the two point function of the dual current and from it the AC conductivity using the Kubo formula. To compute the frequency dependence of the conductivity it is only necessary to study the time dependence in the fields. Without loss of generality we will switch on a fluctuation in the z direction a z = a z (u, x -, τ ) We therefore introduce the following plane wave ansatz to evolve the fields with the time The only non-trivial Maxwell equation is and the Chern-Simons term vanishes for this sector. In order to use the holographic prescription to compute the retarded Green function, we need to impose as a boundary conditions a z (0) = a 0 and to select the infalling mode at the horizon. Performing a near-horizon expansion of Eq. ( The near-horizon solutions are a z (u) ∼ (1u) ±iw , with the dimensionless frequency w defined as w = ω 4πT ef f . (4.5) Choosing the negative sign ensures the selection of the infalling boundary condition. Notice that the scaling frequency is naturally defined with T ef f . To solve the differential equation for arbitrary frequency it is necessary to use numerical tools. The low-frequency conductivity however can be obtained using perturbation theory. To do so we will expand the field a z up to second order in w and the infalling boundary condition will be set by expanding the appropriate solution of eq. ( Using the previous ansatz and the Kubo formula we can write the conductivity as In order for the system to have a finite DC conductivity A ′ (0) z (0) must vanish. We do know already that the present model has a finite conductivity, from its calculation in There is another transport coefficient with units of time that can be read off eq. (4.7). We write the AC conductivity as If the conductivity is gives as a sum over poles in the upper half plane, then τ is determined by the pole with the smallest imaginary part. In a regime which is of the Drude type, τ can be interpreted as the relaxation time. We will call it the generalized relaxation time. In other regimes bit cannot be interpreted strictly speaking as a relaxation time. To finally compute the conductivity and the generalized relaxation time it is necessary to calculate the boundary value of the derivative of the first and second order fields. Substituting the expansion (4.6) into eq. ( where the index i takes values i = 0, 1, 2. z is a source term depending on the solutions at lower order in the perturbative expansion, and with the first term vanishing S (-1) z = 0. The α functions are defined as 12) The function α(u) was normalized so that α(u) J + →0 , E→0 = 1. The source terms and the explicit calculation to solve the differential equation can be found in appendix D. The general solution for eq. ( the integration constants 2 are fixed demanding regularity for the solution at the horizon and 1 is directly identified as the non-normalizable mode. Finding the solution for 4.11 and substituting into Eqs. (4.8) and (4.10) we obtain the expected value for the static conductivity Eq. (2.13) and the following expression for the generalized relaxation time where The formula (4.14) gives an analytic expression for the generalized relaxation time. In the limit where both the charge density and the electric field asymptote to zero, the integrals vanish because p(u) = α(u) = 1. In this limit the generalized relaxation time takes the constant (QC) value When the charge density J = 0 there are also two interesting limits we can study. The first one is t ≪ 1 where and substituting these functions in (4.14) we can write the generalized relaxation time as (4.18) The other regime we can study is t ≫ 1 where the functions α and p read In this case the generalized relaxation time is given by Finally we summarize in the Table To understand the full frequency dependence of the optical conductivity it is necessary to resort to the numerical solution of the equation. In order to have analytical control we can study the high-frequency behavior using WKB techniques after writing the equation as a Schrödinger system. We will start this section by analytically studying the high-frequency regime of the system and then we will study the model for arbitrary frequency using numerical methods. In order to have an idea of the behavior of the conductivities at high frequency we can rewrite the equation of motion as the Schrödinger equation, from which we can read the effective potential that can provide insight on the solutions. To do so we rewrite Eq. ( with If we redefine the radial coordinate and the field as the equation can be rewritten as and the Schrödinger potential reads where the derivatives are taken with respect to the coordinate u. It is not possible to do an analytic integration of Eq. ( In the new coordinates the boundary and horizon are at 0 and ∞ respectively. We can write the asymptotic potential where the constant c(t, J) has a complicated dependence with t and J. Nevertheless the formula simplifies in the QC and DR , q(t, J) ≫ 1 . (5.12) In figure (5.15) with r ≈ 2 tan -1 ( √ u) + tanh -1 ( √ u) . From figure Having the asymptotic expansion of the potentials we proceed to solve the Schrödinger Eq. (5.5) analytically in these two regions (see figure The asymptotic solutions read (5.17) where we have fixed the integration constants in the near horizon solution selecting the infalling boundary condition and normalizing the solution as ψ(r → ∞) = e -irw . The constants a 1 and a 2 will be fixed by the matching conditions of the wave function. Before doing so, we will use Eq. (5.17) and the Kubo formula to write a formula for the optical conductivity in terms of the integration constants a 1 and a 2 The previous asymptotic solutions are valid for arbitrary frequencies. For frequencies that are much bigger than the lower value of the potential inside the region r ∈ (r 0 , r 1 ) (see fig. (5.20) Matching this solution with the wave function (5.17) we fix the constants Following the same matching process we can fix the constants a 1 and a 2 and we finally obtain the analytic expression for the wave function in the near-boundary region. (5.23) ) with x = r 0 w. Our analysis is valid for w 2 ≫ |V min |, although x can be either x ≫ 1 or x ≪ 1 because r 0 can become small if q is high enough. We expand Eqs. (5.23) and (5.24) for x ≪ 1 first 3 )+4(6ix-1)Γ( and obtain the AC conductivity of the form This behavior describes an intermediate regime for very small r 0 . In the opposite case, x ≫ 1 the constants asymptote to which produce the following expression for the UV optical conductivity (5.28) This last formula is the correct estimate for the conductivity for large enough ω. To compute the full frequency dependence of the conductivity it is necessary to find numerical solutions. In order to implement properly the infalling boundary condition at the horizon we must find first an approximate solution near the horizon a z (u) ≈ a s z (u). We redefine the gauge field as a s z (u) = (1u) -iw A z (u), and using the Eq. ( We then integrate numerically Eq. ( After doing the integration of the differential equation and using the holographic dictionary we extract the conductivities in the regimes of interest. In order to plot dimensionless quantities we normalized the conductivity as described below. The form of a Drude peak in the low frequency AC (ω ≪ ω U V ) conductivity is given by σ where σ DC is the DC value of the conductivity and τ is the relaxation time. If the validity of (5.29) extends to a region in which τ ω 0 ≫ 1 with ω 0 ≪ ω U V , the conductivity will obey the following power law in this regime (5. On the other hand, from the UV behavior of the system under consideration, the conductivity (5.28) satisfies a power law with exponent -1/3 and phase 30 • .We reproduce the asymptotic formula here, σ ≈ 2 2π 3 To infer the existence of a Drude peak in the IR, we estimate the value of ω 0 1/τ and we will compare it with the UV cut-off r 0 We now define ω U V ∼ 1/r 0 and we plot it in table 2 together with ω 0 for t = 1/30, 1/10, 2 in the QC and in the DR regimes In the following we will analyze the UV properties of the conductivities using our numerical results. In figure • We set first t = 1/30 (upper plots of figure • In the lower plots of figure From figure In the Drude regime we confirm the appearance of the Drude peak in the IR. However, unlike the QC, we observe a transition from the peak to a power law of the form ω -1/2 , indicating the existence of an intermediate regime which we were In the top figures the conductivity is plotted for different values of the parameter q ranging from the QC regime (q ≪ 1) to the DR regime (q ≫ 1) for a fixed value of the scaling temperature variable t with t ≪ 1. In the bottom plots q is again varied in the full range at a fixed value of t, with t > 1. The blue continuous line shows the Drude fit using the analytic computation of the generalized relaxation time. Straight black and dashed gray lines show the UV and the intermediate power law behavior of the AC conductivity. not able to extract analytically from the analysis of the Schrödinger potential. We note that we observe the appearance of the intermediate regime when a well in the Schrödinger potential is formed (see figure In Fig. In the QC regime, q ≪ 1, we observe a power-law decay with an exponent of -1/3 and a constant of proportionality independent of t and J consistent with Eq. (5.31). The phase approaches asymptotically the value of 30 • . This is again reminiscent of the power law seen in the cuprates, In the DR we observe that the bigger the value of q, the closer to 90 • the phase gets. We interpret this behavior as the consequence of the competition among the drag and the critical pair-production physics. As the drag contribution is dominating with the increasing q, the Drude description of the AC conductivity is becoming better. For q ∼ 10 3 (large), the conductivity behaves as ω -1 2 for ω > 100T ef f (linear regime and quadratic regime). Note that the UV behavior of the conductivity for such a large value for q in the linear regime is and in the quadratic regime it is (see Fig. In figure Our analytic computation of the high-frequency behavior of the conductivities shows an intermediate regime in which the real part of the conductivity behaves as a constant when r 0 w ≪ 1 but w ≫ 1 (Eq. (5.26)). To reproduce such a regime it is necessary to go deep in the DR (see Fig. We observe that in the linear regime (t < 1) a plateau in the real part of the conductivity is formed at ω > 100T ef f and the imaginary part has a ω -1 behavior as we showed in section 5.1 for a Drude behavior, and then presumably decreases to 45 • and stays there for some range of the frequencies because of the ω -1/2 behavior. The quadratic regime (t > 1) just shows the intermediate regime with conductivity scaling as ω -1/2 and phase 45 • . In summary, we associate the presence of the Drude peak to a regime in which the drag related dissipation associated with strongly coupled physics dominates over the quantum critical pair-production mechanism for conductivity. In the QC regime the scaling (UV) physics (σ ∼ ω -1/3 ) appears at relatively low frequencies compare with the associated UV scales of the DR (ω > 10 4 T ef f ). Consequently the scaling tail of the conductivity is controlled by the quantum critical physics. We will now consider the AC conductivity in holographic systems with a critical IR geometry characterized by a hyperscaling violating exponent θ and Lifshitz exponent z, The extremal hyperscaling-violating background is given by 1) Here d is for the number of space dimensions of the dual boundary field theory, z is the Lifshitz exponent, θ is the hyperscaling-violation exponent, ζ is the conduction exponent, It is a solution to the EMD action, where the background electric field generated by the boundary charge density is In generic scaling solutions, the bulk gauge coupling constant and scalar potential are r dependent as they depend on the running scalar. In the case where in the IR Z ∼ e γφ and V ∼ e -δφ , the dilaton φ behaves in the IR as φ ∼ α log r therefore κ = αγ, ρ = αδ. Then, the previous equation determines the conduction exponent, 1. There is always a scalar field that runs in the solution, φ = f r l and it is typically responsible for the nontrivial values of the exponents θ, ζ. 2. Physical observables are still scaling but they violate hyperscaling and/or naive scaling with d θ appearing as the effective spatial dimensionality. In this way S has physical dimension d. In some string theory examples, the hyperscaling violation scale l can be interpreted as a Kaluza-Klein scale, In the generic case, the hypescaling-violation scale l may be distinct from other UV scales that drive the flow of the theory. In the simplest possible gravitational example with a conventional relativistic (ie AdS) fixed point and a hyperscaling violating solution in the IR, we must have a potential in (6.2) with two exponentials and a gauge coupling function Z with one exponential. In that case the dynamical UV scale Λ U V can be mapped uniquely to the IR hyperscaling violating scale l. In all hyperscaling-violating solutions we will therefore denote l by Λ IR . In the near-extremal case there is also a blackness factor f (r) in the metric as well as an appropriate modification of the gauge field. From the Einstein equation we conclude that the only way for the gauge field to support Note that this inequality implies for EMD solutions that in the presence of a nontrivial charge density only the AdS 2 solution is truly scale invariant. All other solutions have hyperscaling violation. The fluctuation equation for a time-dependent gauge field δA i ≡ a i (r)e iωt is (after solving for the associated metric perturbation, δg ti , The last term is proportional to the charge density, as the charge Q enters in the invariant combination, , which is the charge density at any given r. It is responsible for the presence of a non-trivial Drude weight in the absence of momentum dissipation, In the near extremal scaling background (6.1) the fluctuations obey the equation We will absorb the positive constant B 0 into a redefinition of ω and Q, therefore from now on we set B 0 = 1. We will also set the temperature to zero (that sets f = 1 in (6.10)). This equation is of the form e A(r) a ′ ′ + e A(r)+2B(r) (ω 2 -G(r)) a = 0 The equation (6.11) now becomes a Schrödinger-like equation where a dot is a derivative with respect to u. For all gapless solutions described here the IR is either at r → ∞ or r → 0 and the Schrödinger coordinate u ∼ r z it will behave always as u → ∞. We now turn to our concrete problem in The leading form of the potential in the IR depends on the value of the charge density Q and the exponents. More precisely: In both of these cases the leading form of the potential will be and is scale invariant. The small ω behavior of the AC conductivity is, When this condition is satisfied the second term in the potential in (6.15) has the same u -2 behavior as the first term and in this case Note that in this case, the gauge field is contributing non-trivially to the IR equations of motion. Also the term Q 2 appearing in the exponent is not the UV charge density (that is a free parameter) but the IR charge density which in this case is fixed completely and is a function of z, θ, III The remaining case d θ + ζ > 0 is incompatible with (6.8) imposed by the equations of motion as we argued previously. In view of this classification we may now specialize (6.18) to two different cases: • The charged IR solution of there is an asymptotic dilaton potential e -δφ with and the charge of the solution is given by and the thermodynamic stability condition when satisfied it is correlated to the existence of a gapless spectrum at zero and finite temperature, For these solutions of EMD In this case, both terms in the potential (6.15) scale as 1 u 2 , the IR charge density Q is fixed from the equations of motion and is a function of the exponents z, θ and we are in case II above. A few special cases of (6.25) deserve to be mentioned. The AdS 2 case is obtained when z → ∞. In that case m = 2. The hyperscaling violating, semilocal geometries are obtained from the limit z → ∞, θ → -∞, with θ z = -η held fixed. For these geometries, In Fig. • The only other possibility that remains to be studied is when the second term in (6.15) is subleading to the first term. This happens when the relevant gauge field is subleading in the IR equations of motions and does not backreact to the IR geometry to leading order. To do this we will need at least two gauge fields in the holographic theory, one to seed a general scaling geometry and the other to be subleading (and therefore treated as a probe in the IR geometry) The gauge field action is now and the scaling of the conductivities has been extensively analyzed in appendix F. We report the results here and we distinguish two cases. 1. One of the gauge fields (say A) supports the IR geometry while the other (say V) is subleading in the IR. This was analyzed in F.1. In this case the conductivity σ A is as the previous example, (6.25) The conductivity for V , σ V scales differently. We define in particular we parametrize κ in the following way The exponent m in the conductivity σ V now reads θ and z must obey the Gubser and thermodynamic stability bounds (6.23), (6.24) as well as Note that the exponent m, written in terms of the two hyperscaling violation exponents θ, ζ, does not depend on θ. Therefore it is sensitive only to hyperscaling violation originating in the charge sector. A few special cases of (6.30) deserve to be mentioned. The AdS 2 case is obtained when z → ∞ and m = 0 in this case. The hyperscaling violating, semilocal geometries are obtained from the limit z → ∞, θ → -∞, with θ z = -η held fixed. For these geometries, and m is always positive. In figure In general m depends on z, θ, κ. The plot represents m for |κ -κ| = 3. It is always possible to obtain a region with negative values of m, either with κκ > 0 and z > 0 or κκ < 0 and z < 0 (see appendix F). Note that from Eq. (6.30) m = 0 for κ = 0 which is the case when the bulk gauge coupling constant flows to a constant value in the IR. We conclude that in order to have m < 0 in d = 2 two conditions must be satisfied: (a) The charge density in question must not backreact on the metric. (b) κ > 0, namely the bulk gauge coupling must be IR free for z > 0 and UV-free for z < 0. The inverse correlation to the sign of z is also correlated to the relative flow between energy and momentum, controlled by gtt gxx ∼ r 2 (1-z) . Taking into account the constraints this ratio for z > 1 vanishes in the IR while for z < 1 it diverges in the IR. the IR, but that their coupling constants, Z A and Z V , become different as one flows to the UV. In that cases Z A -Z V is much smaller than Z A + Z V in the IR. This cases was analyzed in F.2. What was found is that σ A and σ V contain at low frequency, a scaling term of the type shown in (6.25) and another as in (6.30). There is also a cross-conductivity σ AV that is partly negative and contains the difference of the two terms above. We have analyzed the AC conductivity in a holographic model of a strange metal proposed in 1. We define a parameter q that distinguishes the Drude regime (q ≫ 1) where the DC conductivity is dominated by dissipation and the Charge Conjugation symmetric regime (q ≪ 1) where dissipation is negligible. 2. The characteristic temperature scale that controls the AC conductivity is an effective temperature T ef f (with an associated scaling effective temperature t ef f defined analogously). This is a characteristic effect for the system in question and more generally for systems where charge is described by a D-brane system. It is not expected in more general cases. The effective temperature found is distinct from the system temperature T and is due to the existence of a hierarchy of interactions. Similar effects have been observed in electronic systems and in holography, 3. We have defined a generalized relaxation time τ by the IR expansion of the AC conductivity, In the presence of the Drude peak, this is the conventional definition of an associated relaxation time. When there is no Drude peak present, τ is still well-defined, although in that case the interpretation as a relaxation time is not clear. We gave an analytical formula for τ in (4.14). It takes a simple form for large and small values of the scaling temperature variable t. In the regime I (see fig. 4. In the Drude regime (q ≫ 1) where the dominant mechanism for the conductivity is dissipative, there is a clear Drude peak as seen for example in figures 6. In the Charge Conjugation Symmetric regime it is also clear from the same figures that no Drude peak is to be seen in the IR of the AC conductivity. 5. At zero charge density (Charge Conjugation Symmetric regime) there is a scaling tail for the AC conductivity that behaves as For finite charge density this tail survives not only in the Charge Conjugation Symmetric regime but also in part of the Drude regime, as seen in the various plots of figure 6. This scaling tail of the AC conductivity generalizes to more general scaling holographic geometries, as previously described in where ρ is the IR charge density and is proportional to the UV charge density. In particular for a metric with Lifshitz exponent z, hyperscaling violation exponent θ and conduction exponent ζ with d spatial boundary dimensions, we find that in general There are several constraints in the parameters of this formula that are detailed in section 6. 7. There are some special cases of (7.6) that deserve mentioning. For an AdS 2 IR geometry the exponent can be obtained by an z → ∞ limit in (7.6) giving m = 0. For hyperscaling violating semilocal geometries we must take θ → ∞, z → ∞ with θ z = -η fixed and obtain Finally, for the gauge field conformal case we obtain m = 0 when d = 2. 8. We find that for two spatial dimensions, negative values for the exponent m are correlated with the sign of the Lifshitz exponent z and the strength of the gauge field interaction in the bulk. Parametrizing the IR asymptotics of gauge coupling function Z as in conformal coordinates, we obtain that zκ > 0 for negative values of m to be possible. 9. In the special case where the associated gauge field seeds the IR scaling geometry, κ is fixed as a function of z, θ and the exponent m takes the value and is always positive. In the case where the IR geometry is AdS 2 can be obtained for z → ∞ limit of (7.9) giving m = 2. For hyperscaling violating semilocal geometries, we must take, θ → ∞, z → ∞ with θ z = -η fixed. In this case we obtain 10. An important issue is whether the scaling of the AC conductivity described above for the general scaling geometries is controlled by the dynamics of the charge density, or it is decided by the neutral system. In the example we have analyzed the effective Schrödinger potentials that control the calculation of the conductivity have two parts. One that is independent of charge density and one that is proportional to the square of the charge density. In the generic case it is the first that controls the UV scaling of the AC conductivity described above. Only if the charge density is supporting the IR geometry, then the second part is of the same order as the first and it is the sum that controls the scaling of the AC conductivity. This special case is also the only one we found where the exponent m in (7.6) is always positive. In other cases it can also be negative, but unitarity implies always that m ≥ -1. These findings suggest that there is a generic source of scaling tails in the AC conductivity in holographic systems. Moreover, in generic systems this scaling is expected to be independent of the mechanism of momentum dissipation. On the other hand, whether it is visible it depends on the details of the momentum dissipation mechanism. An important part of this story is the dependence of the T=0 result on scales. For this we must consider a hierarchy of cases as a function of the properties of the system. It also matters whether the charge density is interacting strongly with the gravitational system or is a probe whose backreaction on the system can be neglected. We will discuss all these cases in turn • In the truly scale invariant fixed points (ζ = θ = 0) with a general Lifshitz scaling exponent, z, the AC conductivity will scale with ω with the canonical dimension, σ ∼ ω d-2 (7.11) for any z and no intrinsic scale enters in this relation. Note that in the EMD case, apart from the AdS d+2 solution (z=1), there are no other such scaleinvariant solutions. To obtain general scale invariant Lifshitz solutions, one should use the more general EMD action, • In the presence of hyperscaling violation θ = 0, and/or ζ = 0, the IR theory contains a nontrivial scale Λ IR that appears in many relations and is responsible for the change of scaling exponents and the violation of hyperscaling, IR ω m (7.12) • In the cases where the charge density acts as a probe in the IR geometry (and its effects are therefore subleading), it introduces a new IR scale that is set by the associated charge density. However we have seen that this new scale does not enter to leading order in the scaling relation for the associated conductivity. We are therefore again in the situation described in the previous cases. • It is expected that hyperscaling violating geometries should have a resolution of the their naked singularities via an AdS 2 or a stringy geometry in the IR, and they will be only intermediate scaling regimes, To try and extend qualitatively our general scaling analysis of section 6 we must reason as follows: There are two further modifications to the setup above so that this result is embedded in a complete RG flow. The first step is to match these IR asymptotics to an AdS UV geometry. The second it to turn on finite temperature. We will now discuss such modifications in turn. The non-trivial RG flow at T = 0 introduces in the simplest of cases a transition scale Λ U V . In the hyperscaling violating geometries this is related to the characteristic scale of the IR geometry. In scaling geometries it is related to the UV operator that drives the flow. Quite generically this can be the charge density. Our general AC scaling found above is valid in the region ω ≪ Λ U V . In the presence of a finite temperature, T , it was shown in The theory is in the UV scaling region and the AC conductivity is characterized by the UV fixed point alone. • T Λ U V ≪ 1. In this case, there are three regimes for the AC conductivity as a function of frequency. -ω ≪ T This is the IR regime controlled by the properties of the blackhole horizon. In this regime the mechanisms of momentum dissipation and hydrodynamics are controlling the behavior, -T ≪ ω ≪ Λ U V . In this regime the scaling behavior found earlier, at T = 0 is prominent. As the power evolution of the AC conductivity is always ∼ ω m with m > -1, it will always dominate over the Drude 1/ω decay for large enough frequency. The only possibility where this will not be visible is if the cross over scale is of the order of or larger than Λ U V . -ω ≫ Λ U V . In this regime the AC conductivity is determined by the UV fixed point. The type of AC conductivity scaling described here is very reminiscent of the one seen in the cuprates in There are several problems that remain open in view of our results 1. We should back up our scaling analysis and the description of different regimes above with a complete calculation of the AC conductivity from numerical complete RG flows that connect AdS UV fixed to either IR or intermediate geometries with general scaling exponents (z, θ, ζ). 2. The analysis of scaling described here was based on geometries that preserve the U(1) symmetry. This analysis needs to be extended to the general class of U(1)-breaking extremal scaling geometries found in 3. Although the scaling tails described above are expected to be independent of the mechanism of momentum dissipation, it is interesting to study their interaction with momentum dissipation and different types of low-frequency behavior. In particular it would be interesting to study this in geometries with helical symmetry as the general class presented in 4. The scaling exponent of the AC conductivity is expected to depend on the charge interactions captured by the bulk (self)-interactions of the U(1) gauge bosons. Understanding how is an interesting question. 5. The eventual comparison with cases realized experimentally as in We are planning to address some of these questions in the near future. In this appendix we give the explicit expression of the open string metric in terms of the background metric and the other background fields. The charge density and the background electromagnetic field modify the induced geometry on the probe D-branes. Using eq. (3.4) we can write the non-vanishing components of the worldvolume metric as with i = y, z and where we use through all the appendices the notation Please do not confuse h with the blackening factor h(u) (see Eq. (2.4)). The components of the antisymmetric matrix are Finally having the components for s and θ we can compute the vector Q (A.6), which reads In this appendix we show the f ′ s functions appearing in the change of coordinates used to diagonalize the open string metric with the radial coordinate rescaled as u → u ⋆ u. The functions f ′ s read √ -s s--suu (ωa y (u) + ka τ (u)) = 0 , and in the transverse sector we obtain √ -ss zz ω 2 β 2 b 2 s--+ sττ + k 2 syy a z (u) = 0 , (D.6) notice that the Chern-Simons term vanishes in the last sector, because if E z = 0 the only non-vanishing component of Q points in the z direction Now it is possible to eliminate one of the equations in the longitudinal sector using the constraint (D.2) and the gauge invariant fields, ending with the same number of equations as propagating degrees of freedom. To do so, let us redefine the fields in term of its gauge invariant electric fields, now using the following combination for the equations and solving for a ′ y (u), a ′ -(u), a ′ τ (u) from Eqs. (D.2), (D.8) and (D.9) we obtain the two linearly independent equations for the longitudinal sector where the unknown functions c ′ s and d ′ s are the coefficients of the equations of motion and constraint, read it from Eqs. (D.2) -(D.6) as follow with i, j taking values -, τ, y. Notice that the equation for E z is no written because it remains the same as Eq. (D.6) In what follows we will explain the procedure to obtain the perturbative solution discussed in the subsection 4.1. This solution was useful to obtain the DC conductivity and the relaxation time Eqs. (2.13), First of all we plug in the ansatz (4.6) into the Eq. (4.3), so the system can be rewritten as follows where the index i takes values i = 0, 1, 2. The particular form of the sources up to second order in frequencies are with the zero-th order source S (-1) z = 0, and where we have defined The equations of motions for the background (6.1) read where Q 1 and Q 2 are the charge densities of A 1 and A 2 respectively. The gauge fields are given by where The fluctuation equations for the two gauge fields are At this point we shall try to find a hyperscaling-violating metric as a solution of the background equations. To do so, we substitute (6.1) into (F.2) and obtain These equations can be analyzed in two simplified regimes depending on the ratio of Z 1 and Z 2 in the IR. F.1 Background charged under a single gauge field (Z 2 ≫ Z 1 ) This configuration makes the gauge field A 2,t subleading in the IR region and non backreacting in the geometry. We will parametrize the couplings Z 1 and Z 2 in the following way where δκ will be required to be positive or negative depending whether the IR is at ∞ or zero respectively. The lagrangian parameters can be fixed in term of the parameters in the metric as follow. δκ is not fixed, but under the constraint δκ > 0 if the IR is at r → ∞ or δκ < 0 if the IR is at r → 0. The Gubser criterion for this solution is and the thermodynamic stability condition combined with the existence of a consistent near extremal black-hole is Having the background geometry we can write the equations for the gauge field fluctuations as Now we perform the following change of coordinates which allow us to write the equations in the following Bessel-like form where We are interested in the IR behavior of the AC conductivities. With the equations written in this form and using the fact that zδκ > 0, we can do perturbation theory expanding the fields as follows The zero-th order functions satisfy the homogeneous Bessel equations, with infalling boundary conditions. The solutions are where H n i (x) are Hankel functions of the first kind. The equations for the first order perturbations are again Bessel equations, however in this case they are inhomogeneous The solution for this system can be found using variation of parameters, and can be written as follows, a At this point we are not interested in solving exactly the integrals, but in checking whether this first order solution are in fact subleading respect to the zero-th order one, and the perturbative analysis is not breaking down. To do so, we will use the fact that the IR is at x → ±∞ and the asymptotic behavior of the Hankel functions is of the type H n (x) ∼ x -1/2 , (F.32) modulo oscillating functions for the amplitude. Using this scaling, we may check that the dominant part in the asymptotic expansion is of the form a i ∼ x -3 2 -δκ 2z , (F.33) which is consistent with the perturbative analysis. Finally, after knowing the system can be decoupled at leading order in the IR, we can follow the computation of As the IR geometry is supported by the charge Q 1 , the fluctuations of a 1 will feel this charge. That explains the same result for the conductivity as in the single charged gauge field Eq. (6.25). On the other hand the background is neutral for the second gauge field. Therefore, the conductivity depends on the background parameters z, θ and the exponent of the gauge coupling Z 2 = r κ(θ,d)+δκ , and the conductivity coincides with the one for a single neutral gauge field. We have plotted in figure F.2 Both charges equally backreact the IR geometry Z 2 ∼ Z 1 In this case we will parametrize the couplings as follows the parameters κ and κ will be chosen in such a way that Z is subleading in the IR. In other words, after the substitution of Z 1 and Z 2 into Eqs. (F.7) -(F.9), we obtain the following set of algebraic equations where ). The fluctuations in this limit obey the following equations of motion The form of the equations suggest the following redefinitions and to combine the equations as follows Q 1 eq 2 -Q 2 eq 1 and Q 1 eq 1 + Q 2 eq 2 . After doing so, we obtain the following set of equations where Notice that the factor r -2+cκ in the right-hand side of the previous equations is even more subleading in the IR than the right-hand side of the analogous equations (Eqs. (F. In consequence, both redefined gauge fields diagonalize the system and satisfy the same equation, however A 1 is neutral and the field A 2 has charge Q T . This fact implies that the normalizable modes of A will depend linearly only on its own source respectively, hence, A 19 Now inverting the change of variable (F.51) we can write the normalizable modes of a 1 and a 2 as follows 2 2 ) , (F.56) 2 2 ) , (F.57) which at the same time can be rewritten as 2 , (F.58) 1 . (F.59) Finally we can read from the previous formula the two point correlator which reads Using the results of section 6 we can find the conductivities for each A 1 and A 2 and then substitute the results in the previous formula to extract the desired conductivities associated to a 1 and a 2 . We obtain (F.61) It is important to emphasize that we are studying the IR behavior for the conductivities (ω ≪ 1), therefore, if the constraints on z, θ allow a negative value for m i this term will dominate in the frequency dependence for sufficiently small ω. Notice also that this computation has been done at zero temperature. On the other hand, at finite temperature we would expect this scaling, to appear as an intermediate scaling if T ≪ ω ≪ Λ, with Λ the interpolation scale for which the IR geometry flow to the conformal UV AdS geometry. In figure T ω m 1 (F.65) Notice that m 1 and m 2 coincide with n and m respectively in the previous subsection, after setting δκ = 0 in the formula for n. The reason for this similarity originates in the fact that in the previous configuration one of the gauge fields is charged and the charge of the second one is subleading in the IR, whereas in the present case the redefined gauge fields correspond to a configuration in which the background has charge Q T associated to the first gauge field, but is neutral respect the second one. Useful reviews for condensed matter physics applications can be found in of This corresponds to the bulk coupling constant function Z(φ) of the gauge field asymptoting to a non-zero constant in the IR. Details on the DBI action and its origin can be found in This hypersurface was called in the literature "singular shell" In appendix D we write the full system of equation of motion In any case we will solve the system and we will confirm that A ′ (0) z (0) = 0. From figure3we estimate the location r 0 where the potential deviates from its UV behavior V ∼ -5/(36r 2 ). Note that q(1/30, 10 4 ) ∼ 10 15 , q(1/10, 10 4 ) ∼ 10 13 and q(2, 10 4 ) ∼ 10 3 The continuous line in figure10represents the Drude fit. We do know however from Eq. (5.30) that at high frequencies the imaginary part of the Drude form asymptotes to ω -1 . We define l in general by substituting r → r/l in the metric (6.1). Note the here we take a more general definition for hyperscaling violation compared to the condensed matter literature: any physical observable that scales with an anomalous exponent, violates hyperscaling according to our definition. This means that the contribution of the gauge field is of the same order as the gravitational contribution to the bulk equations of motion. It was shown in Clearly this generalizes to several gauge fields, with similar quantitative conclusions. However there could be other possibilities for seeding the leading solution that we do not address in this paper. We have identified x + as the boundary field theory time, however the new temporal coordinate and the former time are related at the boundary through the transformations (3.6) as dx + = dτβb 2 dX -. Therefore, we evolve in the Fourier transformation along the direction of x + = τ -βb 2 X -. We have assumed Z i ∼ r κi and the background functions correspond to the hyperscalingviolating Lifshitz geometry(6.1) 