The observation by scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) of Abrikosov vortex cores in the hightemperature superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (Y123) has revealed a robust pair of electron-hole symmetric states at finite subgap energy. Their interpretation remains an open question because theory predicts a different signature in the vortex cores, characterised by a strong zero-bias conductance peak. We present STS data on very homogeneous Y123 at 0.4 K revealing that the subgap features do not belong to vortices: they are actually observed everywhere along the surface with high spatial and energy reproducibility, even in the absence of magnetic field. Detailed analysis and modelling show that these states remain unpaired in the superconducting phase and belong to an incoherent channel which contributes to the tunnelling signal in parallel with the superconducting density of states. The interaction responsible for high-temperature superconductivity in the cuprates has remained elusive until now. Various charge orders We study the low-energy spectral features of Y123 in very homogeneous conductance maps measured along the (001) surface at 0.4 K. Figure Applying a field of 6 T perpendicular to the Cu-O planes, we observe vortices as shown in Fig. Figure The good correlation between the SC peaks and σ SGS /σ SC and the absence of correlation between the SGS and σ SGS /σ SC imply that there is no correlation between the SGS and the SC peak, as we have verified in the experimental data. Figure An obvious question is whether the non-superconducting spectra shown in Fig. The derivation is given in Supplementary Note 1. Taking the spectra of Fig. A feature of the normal-state DOS at energy ξ indeed gets spread over an energy range [ξ, ξ 2 + ∆ 2 ] by the d-wave gap: high-energy features like the PG at ξ ∆ remain sharp, but low-energy features are typically smeared over a range ∆. Illustrations can be found in Supplementary Figure The picture emerging from our data is that the SGS exist independently of magnetic field and are not affected by the opening of the superconducting gap. Two possible scenarios are compatible with the latter observation: the SGS either belong to an atomic layer different from the superconducting copper oxide planes or they are confined to the nodal regions in momentum space in the superconducting layers. In the first scenario the tunnelling spectrum would be a superposition of two distinct contributions: one from non-superconducting electrons characterized by the robust and homogeneous SGS as well as the ubiquitous high ZB conductance, another from the superconducting condensate responsible for the fragile coherence peaks. Indeed the spectrum of Fig. The second scenario assumes the SGS coexist with the superfluid condensate in the copper oxide planes. Then the SGS have to be confined to the nodal regions in momentum space where the superconducting gap is small. Otherwise they would have to shift or broaden like in Fig. In summary, we report the observation by STM of lowenergy (±5 meV) particle-hole symmetric states in Y123. These states, seen previously only in vortex cores, are in fact a robust property of Y123, insensitive to the magnetic field and to the superconducting coherence. The subgap states often take the form of peaks in the tunnelling spectrum when the superconducting coherence peaks are absent, but thanks to high-resolution measurements we also see them as peaks even in spectra with superconducting coherence peaks. This new phenomenology redefines the question of the spectroscopy of vortices in the cuprates. Whether the new energy scale is a pairing scale, as its particle-hole symmetry suggests, whether it is connected to the Cu-O chains or has to do with some charge ordering, as suggested by similar features in Bi2212, remain open questions at this stage. The experiments were conducted on as-grown (001) surfaces of highly pure YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals, grown in BaZrO 3 crucibles. High resolution STS measurements. We used a home-built high vacuum variable temperature STM optimized for high energy resolution, with a base temperature of 0.4 K, and chemically etched tips made of pure iridium. Tunnelling spectra were acquired in zero magnetic field and in a field of 6 T oriented along the surface normal. The d I/dV curves, providing a measure of the electronic local density of states, were obtained by numerical differentiation of the measured I(V ) characteristics. For measurements done on as-grown surfaces, the junction resistance was increased to 12 GΩ when moving the tip over these surfaces (as opposed to 1.2 GΩ in the spectroscopy mode), in order to avoid that contaminants stick to the tip during its motion. For the etched surfaces the junction resistance was kept at 1.2 GΩ during scanning and spectroscopy. Both procedures result in atomically flat surfaces allowing reproducible imaging and spectroscopy. Two-channel model for the Y123 spectrum. We assume that the Y123 tunnelling spectrum gets parallel contributions from a two-dimensional band distorted by the coupling to spin excitations and subject to conventional BCS d-wave pairing, and from a non-superconducting incoherent bath: (2) may change the relative contributions of the two channels when the coherent band becomes normal and its mobility drops. We will assume that the spectrum measured in the vortex cores is a good approximation for the spectrum of non-superconducting regions. Eliminating N b (eV ) from Eq. ( We calculate N d (E) and N 0 (E) for a two-dimensional square lattice with a dispersion that reproduces the basic fermiology of Y123. We use the tight-binding parameters of the bonding band reported in Ref. 31. For simplicity we ignore the fourth and fifth neighbour hopping amplitudes and adjust the chemical potential in order to reach a hole concentration of 0.16. The resulting parameters are (t 1 , t 2 , t 3 , μ) = (-281, 139, -44, -356) meV. Y123 is a bi-layer material with both bonding and anti-bonding bands, but there is considerable uncertainty regarding the precise properties of the anti-bonding band. We add an antibonding band via a bilayer coupling t ⊥ and determine t ⊥ by least-square fitting. The two-band model for the dispersion is The interaction with the spin resonance is included using the approach described in Ref. 32. Beside its energy Ω s = 41 meV, the parameters which characterize the spin resonance are its energy width Γ s and momentum width ∆q. As the resonance is sharp in Y123 we set Γ s = 0. The resonance has a full width at half maximum 0.26 Å -1 ≈ 1/a with a the in-plane lattice parameter of Y123. We therefore take ∆q = 1/a. The only remaining free parameter is a dimensionless coupling α between the Bogoliubov-de Gennes quasiparticles and the spin mode. The opening of a superconducting gap changes the DOS into The quantity in brackets is the retarded single-particle Green's function of a BCS superconductor with a gap function ∆ k , and Γ is a Dynes broadening parameter representing residual impurity scattering. We restrict ourselves to two-dimensional models. Arbitrary isotropic normal state. We first consider a normalstate dispersion that is isotropic in the plane, ξ k = ξ |k| ≡ ξ(k), but otherwise arbitrary. The Fermi surface is circular, and the details of the normal-state DOS N 0 (E) are controlled by the dependence of the dispersion on the modulus of k. Any function N 0 (E) can in principle be parametrized by a monotonically increasing radial dispersion ξ(k), by solving the implicit equation 2πN 0 (ξ)ξ (k) = k(ξ). Our goal is to express the DOS (S2) in terms of the arbitrary function N 0 (E). For an s-wave gap, this is straightforward: Hence for any normal-state DOS function N 0 (E), the onechannel s-wave superconducting DOS for a gap magnitude ∆ can be computed by performing numerically the integral in (S3). If the superconducting state has d-wave symmetry, the situation is more complicated because of the angular dependence of the gap. An explicit expression can nevertheless be obtained if the gap has the functional form ∆ cos 2θ. Let us write Working in cylindrical coordinates, we note that Thus N d (z) can be rewritten as a two-dimensional integral without angular momentum in the integrand, and then expressed in terms of the normal-state DOS: This leads to Eq. (1) of the main text. Supplementary Equation (S4) shows that if the normalstate DOS has sharp structures, these structures are spread by the opening of the d-wave gap. To see this, take N 0 (ξ) = δ(ξ -E 0 ) and Γ = 0 + in (S4). The resulting superconducting DOS has three square-root divergences at E = E 0 and E = ±(E 2 0 + ∆ 2 ) 1/2 and a square-root singularity at E = -E 0 . The spectral weight of the delta peak is spread into the intervals between these two couples of singularities [Supplementary Figure Strongly anisotropic normal state with nodal peaks. The failure of the one-channel isotropic model to account for the tunnelling spectrum of Y123 suggests to devise a strongly anisotropic model in which the two low-energy peaks in the normal-state DOS would be related to features localized near the nodal directions in reciprocal space. These features would not be broadened by the opening of the d-wave gap and could survive in the superconducting spectrum. Such a model is somewhat contradictory. On the one hand, we need a structure with a well-defined energy to produce prominent peaks in the normal-state. This is usually associated with a localized state, a non-dispersing band, or any phenomenon with no dispersion in momentum space. But the absence of dispersion in momentum space is the quintessence of isotropy! We can escape this paradox if the two symmetric peaks in the normal-state DOS are due to a gap in the normal-state dispersion, which vanishes away from the nodal regions. We therefore introduce a normal-state gap , where θ is the Heaviside function. The parameter w controls the extension of the gapped region around the nodal lines, w = 0 corresponding to no gap and w = 1 to a fully gapped Fermi surface. The modified normalstate dispersion is ξk = sign(ξ k )(ξ 2 k + Θ 2 k ) 1/2 . We try this model on a two-dimensional square lattice with the same dispersion as for the two-channel model presented in the Methods section, Eq. ( The model with w = 0.1 indeed has two peaks from the normal-state DOS surviving in the superconducting DOS. A new energy scale appears below E 0 . This is because the superconducting gap at the edges of the gapped region is smaller than E 0 . Note that our choice of the function Θ k with the same functional form as ∆ k implies that the edges of the gapped region are iso-contours of ∆ k . At these edges we have simply ∆ k = w∆ = 1.9 meV. There are no Bogoliubov quasiparticles with energy lower than w∆, such that the superconducting DOS is completely gapped below this energy. Between w∆ and E 0 , the momenta outside the gapped region contribute to the DOS, which approaches the w = 0 curve from below, due to the missing states from the gapped regions. At E 0 we have the remnant of a normalstate square-root singularity of weight ∼ w due to the nearly flat dispersion of states inside the gapped region, and above E 0 the superconducting dispersion returns to conventional, and so does the DOS. For w = 0.5, the DOS vanishes below E 0 because w∆ > E 0 and E 0 is the smallest gap on the Fermi surface. There is no peak at E 0 , the energy of the gapped states near the nodes being spread between E 0 and [E 2 0 +(w∆) 2 ] 1/2 , where a weak peak remains. As seen in Supplementary Figure The model of Supplementary Figure 