Raman scattering can detect spontaneous point-group symmetry breaking without resorting to single-domain samples. Here we use this technique to study BaFe2As2, the parent compound of the "122" Fe-based superconductors. We show that an applied compression along the Fe-Fe direction, which is commonly used to produce untwinned orthorhombic samples, changes the structural phase transition at temperature Ts into a crossover that spans a considerable temperature range above Ts. Even in crystals that are not subject to any applied force, a distribution of substantial residual stress remains, which may explain phenomena that are seemingly indicative of symmetry breaking above Ts. Our results are consistent with an onset of spontaneous nematicity only below Ts. In the phase diagram of iron-based superconductors, superconductivity is commonly situated near the vanishing point of the phase boundary between tetragonal and orthorhombic crystal structures In order to address the "driver's seat" question, it is important to study various susceptibilities in the tetragonal phase High-quality single crystals of BaFe 2 As 2 were grown by a self-flux method Our variable-temperature Raman scattering measurements were performed in a confocal back-scattering geometry using a Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRAM HR Evolution spectrometer, equipped with 1800 gr/mm gratings and a liquid-nitrogen-cooled CCD detector. In order to achieve sufficiently high energy resolution, we used the λ = 785 nm line of a diode laser for excitation, and the laser power was set to 0.9 mW to reduce heating under the focal point which is about 5 microns in diameter. The sample temperature was controlled by a liquidhelium flow cryostat, with the sample kept under better than 5 × 10 -8 Torr vacuum at all times. In order to best detect the E g phonons, one of the incident and scattered light polarizations needs to be parallel to the c-axis and the other to the ab-plane, which requires measurements to be performed on a surface that is perpendicular to the ab-plane, i.e., on the side of the plate-like crystals. Highquality surfaces of this kind were obtained by cleaving the crystals right after freezing them in liquid nitrogen. To obtain high statistical precision, data acquisition for each spectrum took a minimum of twelve hours. A clear splitting of the low-energy E g peak below T s is demonstrated by the data displayed in Fig. Figure For regular phonons, their Raman peak widths are expected to decrease with decreasing temperature due to anharmonicity. A close inspection of the spectra above s in Fig. The above observations suggest an alternative, although relatively mundane, explanation for the anomalous broadening between 157 K and T s observed from spot A in Fig. free-standing sample. This indicates that we have largely detwinned the crystal, because our measurement of the stressed sample was carried out in the (ac)-polarization geometry, and in a fully detwinned sample we should not be able to detect the B 2g phonon at all. According to the data in Fig. The comparison in Fig. To conclude, our precise Raman scattering measurements of free-standing and stressed BaFe 2 As 2 single crystals show that a moderate uniaxial stress on the order of a few MPa is sufficient to induce appreciable orthorhombicity in the system over a substantial temperature range above T s . We further show that a hard-to-avoid distribution of residual stress on the order of 1-2 MPa is commonly present even in nominally free-standing single crystals, with typical "domain" sizes comparable or larger than the size of our laser spot (∼ 5 microns in diameter). Interpretation of measurements done with detwinning forces applied to samples or on small sample volumes, therefore, needs to take these facts into account.