Low-temperature specific heat (SH) is measured on the post-annealed Ba(Fe1-xNix)2As2 single crystal with x = 0.058 under different magnetic fields. The sample locates on the overdoped sides and the critical transition temperature Tc is determined to be 14.8 K by both the magnetization and SH measurements. A simple and reliable analysis shows that, besides the phonon and normal electronic contributions, a clear T 2 term emerges in the low temperature SH data. Our observation is similar to that observed in the Co-doped system in our previous work and is consistent with the theoretical prediction for a superconductor with line nodes in the energy gap. The superconducting (SC) state of a superconductor is protected by a energy gap. The symmetry and structure of the energy gap can be very different in different SC materials. For the conventional superconductors (e.g. metallic superconductors), the gap is isotropic in the k space which is called the s-wave symmetry Specific heat is a bulk tool to detect the quasiparticle density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, which can provide information about the gap structure. The variation of the electronic SH in the SC states (C sc ) versus temperature can be rather different for different gap structures where ∆ 0 is the magnitude of the energy gap. In order to segregate the pure electron SH from the measured mixed contributions, many methods have been tried In our previous work, we reported the clear presence of T 2 term in C el of the overdoped Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 from the raw data, giving a more solid evidence for the line-nodal gap structure The Ba(Fe 0.942 Ni 0.058 ) 2 As 2 single crystal was grown by the self-flux method We focus our attention on the SH data in the low temperature range to study the low-energy excitations. Generally speaking, in a system without magnetic order or magnetic impurities, the total SH is a simple integration of different components, The first term is the phonon SH, which is a very good approximation for the Debye model in the low temperature region. As mentioned in the introduction, the second term C sc is the electronic SH in the SC states excited by the thermal energy. This is the most important and concerned in our study, because its responding behavior to temperature supplies the information of the gap structure. The third term is quite complicated. Under zero field, it is a residual electronic term typically coming from small amounts of non-superconducting content in the sample or impurity scattering in some unconventional superconductors To further confirm the reliability of the analysis, we checked the obtained fitting parameters carefully. We show the field dependence of the parameters β, α, and γ in Figure The clear data and reasonable fitting parameters give us the confidence about the credibility of the present analysis process. More importantly, very few fitting parameters involve in this approach. However, we can't obtain the precise location of the line nodes, since SH measurements integrate the information from different directions of the Fermi surface. Most likely, the magnitude and structure of the gaps on different Fermi surfaces are rather different. We must emphasize that such a multi-band does not destroy the validity of our analysis results because the electronic SH from the Fermi pockets with line nodes will prevail that from fully gapped pockets in the low temperature limit. In summary, we studied the low-temperature specific heat on the Ba(Fe 1-x Ni x ) 2 As 2 single crystal with x = 0.058. Before measurements, the single crystals were carefully annealed to improve the sample quality. We found a clear evidence for the presence of T 2 term from the raw SH data, which is consistent with the theoretical prediction for the superconductors with line nodes. Our result is very similar to the previous reports on the Codoped system. Future investigations on other systems of the iron-pnictide superconductors are needed to check whether it's a common feature for the presence of line nodes on the overdoped sides of the electron doped 122 system.