The Meissner effect is analysed by using an approach based on Newton and Maxwell's equations, in order to assess the relevance of London's equation. The Hall effect is predicted. Two test experiments are proposed in detail to check the validity of this theory and to measure London's length. Superconductivity is characterized by two prominent properties where μ 0 , j, λ L stand for the magnetic permeability of vacuum, the persistent current, induced by the magnetic induction B and London's length, respectively. Eq.( where e, m, ρ stand for the charge, effective mass and concentration of superconducting electrons. The first one to question the validity of Eq.( • some authors • when a superconducting material is cooled in a magnetic field H, starting from its normal state, the latter is expelled However, nowadays all measurements of microwave energy absorption, carried out in superconducting materials Meanwhile a recent work by Hirsch The outline is as follows: Sections II and III deal with the Meissner effect. The validity of London's assumption, expressed by in Eq.1, is analyzed in Section IV. The case of the field cooled superconductor is addressed in Section V. An experiment, enabling one to assess the validity of this theoretical approach is detailed in Section VI, and the Hall effect is dealt with in Section VII. The experimental measurement of λ L is described in Section VIII. The conclusions are given in Section IX. Consider as in Fig. E θ induces a current j θ (t, r) along the field direction, as given by Newton's law where ρe 2 m E θ and -j θ τ are respectively proportional to the driving force accelerating the conduction electrons and a generalized friction term, which does not vanish in a superconductor, only if dj θ dt = 0. However the physical sense of τ in Eq.( The superconducting state, carrying no current, is assumed to comprise two subsets of equal concentration ρ/2, moving in opposite directions with respective mass center velocity v, -v, which ensures j θ = p = 0, where p refers to the average electron momentum. The driving field E θ causes δρ/2 of electrons to be transferred from one subset to the other, so as to give rise to a finite current j θ = δρev = eδp/m, where δp stands for the electron momentum variation. The generalized friction force is responsible for the reverse mechanism, whereby electrons are transferred from the majority subset of concentration ρ+δρ 2 back to the minority one ( ρ-δρ 2 ). It ensues from flux quantization and Josephson's effect whenever the inertial term ∝ dj θ dt in Eq.( E θ induces a magnetic induction B z (r, t), parallel to the z axis. B z is given by the first Maxwell equation as (3) The displacement vector D, is parallel to E θ and is defined as where ǫ 0 , u θ refer to the electric permittivity of vacuum and displacement coordinate of the conduction electron center of mass, parallel to E θ . The term ρeu θ represents the electric polarization of conduction electrons 27 . Because divE θ = 0 entails that divD θ = 0, Poisson's law warrants the lack of charge fluctuation around ρe. Thence since there is by definition j θ = ρe du θ dt , the displacement current reads Finally the magnetic field H z (t, r), parallel to the z axis, is given by the second Maxwell equation as E θ (t, r) , j θ (t, r) , B z (t, r) , H z (t, r) can be recast as Fourier series for t ∈]0, t 0 [ where ω 0 t 0 = 2π and f (t, r) , f (n, r) hold for B z (t, r), H z (t, r), E θ (t, r), j θ (t, r) and B z (n, r), H z (n, r), E θ (n, r), j θ (n, r), respectively. Replacing E θ , j θ , B z , H z in Eqs. (2,3,4) by their expression in Eqs. (5), while taking into account where μ (nω 0 ) = μ 0 (1 + χ s (nω 0 )) and χ s (ω) is the magnetic susceptibility of superconducting electrons at frequency ω, yields for n = 0 Eliminating E θ (n, r) from Eqs. (6) gives refer to skin depth and plasma frequency Because E θ (t > t 0 , r) = 0 in the permanent regime, the generalized friction force ∝ -j θ τ is no longer at work for t > t 0 , so that the transient current j θ (t < t 0 ) turns into the persistent one, j θ (t > t 0 , r) = j θ (t 0 , r), ∀r. Eqs.( The second Maxwell equation reads now Comparing Eqs. (4,9) reveals that H z (t 0 -, r) = H z (t 0 + , r). The penetration depth λ M is defined as At low frequencies such that ωτ << 1, one has |δ| ≈ λ L / √ ωτ . Given that λ L < 10 -7 m, the inequality r 0 >> |δ(nω 0 )| holds for any n under typical experimental conditions r 0 ≈ 1mm, ω 0 < 10 5 Hz. Using Eq.( where the sum is performed for n = 0 and |n|ω 0 < ω p . Thanks to Eq.( Eq.( which is identical to Eq.( by assuming j θ (t = 0, r) = A θ (t = 0, r) = 0 and taking advantage of E θ = -∂A θ ∂t , where the magnetic vector potential which is identical to Eq.( The expression of χ s is needed for Eqs.( associated with the current j θ (r)e iωt , flowing along the E θ direction (this latter induces in turn a magnetic field H z (r)e iωt , parallel to the z axis). The second Maxwell equation simplifies into ∂Hz ∂r = -2j θ because the term ∝ E θ in the third equation in Eqs. (6) shows up negligible with respect to that ∝ j θ for practical ω << ω p . As this discussion is limited to the case r → r 0 , both H z (r), j θ (r) are ∝ e r/δ(ω) , so that E K (r) is recast into Moreover there is the identity ∂EK ∂M = -H z , where M = μ 0 χ s (ω)H z is the magnetization of superconducting electrons. Actually this identity reads in general ∂F ∂M = -H z , where F represents the Helmholz free energy 29 ; however the property that a superconducting state carries no entropy 1,2 entails that F = E K . Equating this expression of ∂EK ∂M with that inferred from Eq.( As expected, χ s is found diamagnetic (χ s < 0) and |χ s (ω)| << 1 for ω << 1/τ . The calculation of χ s (0) proceeds along the same lines, except for the second Maxwell equation reading ∂Hz ∂r = -j θ and λ M showing up instead of δ(ω), whence Note that our definition of χ s = M(r) μ0Hz(r) , where H z (r), M (r) refer to local field and magnetization at r, differs from the usual 1,2,4,5 one χ s = M μ0Hz (r0) with H z (r 0 ), M being external field and total magnetization. While the sample is in its normal state at T > T c , the applied magnetic field H z penetrates fully into bulk matter and induces a magnetic induction where χ n designates the magnetic susceptibility of conduction electrons. It comprises 1 the sum of a paramagnetic (Pauli) component and a diamagnetic (Landau) one and χ n > 0 in general. Moreover the magnetic induction reads for T < T c (H z ) with χ s (0) < 0. Because of χ s (0) = χ n , the magnetic induction undergoes a finite step while crossing T c (H z ) where δt refers to the time needed in the experimental procedure for T to cross T c (H z ). Due to the first Maxwell equation (see Eq.( Noteworthy is that, though H z remains unaltered during the cooling process, the magnetic induction B is indeed modified at T c , as shown by Eq.( An experiment, enabling one to check the validity of this work, will be presented now. It consists of inserting the superconducting sample into a cylindrical coil of radius r 0 , flown through by an oscillating current I 0 (ω)e iωt . The coil is made up of a wire of length l and radius r c (see Fig. where E a (ω)e iωt , E θ (ω, r)e iωt , U s e iωt = -lE a (ω)e iωt , R are the applied and induced electric fields, both normal to the r, z axes, the voltage drop throughout the coil and its resistance, respectively (E a (ω), E θ (ω, r), U s (ω) ∈ C). Besides E θ (ω, r 0 ) is obtained from Eq.( where where j c (ω) = I0(ω) πr 2 c and E c (ω) = E a (ω) + E θ (ω, r 0 ) are both assumed to be r-independent. Moreover integrating Eq.( Combining Eqs. (18,19,21) leads finally to Inserting the measured value of U s (ω)/I 0 (ω) into that equation and checking that it is fulfilled for any ω, would eventually ensure the validity of this analysis. In addition Eq.( As already noted by Hirsch Moreover for t > t 0 , equilibrium is secured by the radial centrifugal force m r j θ (t0,r) ρe , exerted on each electron making up the persistent current j θ (t 0 , r), being counterbalanced by the sum of the Lorentz force and an electrostatic one eE r (r), with E r given by Owing to the second Maxwell equation j θ = -∂Bz μ0∂r , E r can be recast as ∂Bz ∂r μ 0 ρe . Bz λM , r 0 >> λ L and λ M >> λ L , the approximation E r (r) ≈ ∂B 2 z ∂r / (2μ 0 ρe) can be used for significant r >> λ L . For the Hall effect to be observed, a sample in shape of a cylindrical crown of inner and outer radius r 1 , r 0 , respectively, is needed (see Fig. is the static current flowing through the coil for t ≥ t 0 ) is worked out by integrating Eq.( This result validates Hirsch's prediction Most experiments Therefore it is suggested to work at higher frequencies, such that ω >> 1/τ, ω << ω p , because δ(ω) = λ L / √ 2 is independent from τ in that range. Typical values τ ≈ 10 -11 s, ω p ≈ 10 16 Hz would imply to measure light absorption in the IR range. Then for an incoming beam being shone at normal incidence on a superconductor of refractive index ñ ∈ C, the absorption and reflection coefficients A, R read 22 The refractive index ñ and the complex dielectric constant ǫ = ǫ R + iǫ I , conveying the contribution of conduction electrons, are related 22 by ñ2 = ǫ ǫ 0 = 1 -(ω p /ω) 2 1 -i/ (ωτ ) . At last we get where c refers to light velocity in vacuum. The same procedure could be applied in normal metals too; however due to τ ≈ 10 -14 s, the available frequency range would be much narrower : 10 14 Hz, 10 16 Hz versus 10 11 Hz, 10 16 Hz in a superconductor. This explanation of the Meissner effect resorts solely to macroscopic arguments. The applied, time-dependent magnetic field excites transient eddy currents according to Newton and Maxwell's equations, which turn to persistent ones, after the magnetic field stops varying and the induced electric field thereby vanishes. Those eddy currents thwart the magnetic field penetration. Were the same experiment to be carried out in a normal metal, eddy currents would have built up the same way. However, once the electric field vanishes, they would have been destroyed quickly by Joule dissipation and the magnetic field would have subsequently penetrated into bulk matter. As a matter of fact, the Meissner effect shows up as a mere outcome of persistent currents, the very signature of superconductivity. It is thence unrelated to any microscopic property of the superconducting wavefunction 