The single-particle spectral properties of the two-dimensional t-J model in the parameter regime relevant to cuprate high-temperature superconductors are investigated using cluster perturbation theory. Various anomalous features observed in cuprate high-temperature superconductors are collectively explained in terms of the dominant modes near the Mott transition in this model. Although the behavior of the dominant modes in the low-energy regime is similar to that in the two-dimensional Hubbard model, significant differences appear near the Mott transition for the high-energy electron removal excitations which can be considered to primarily originate from holon modes in one dimension. The overall spectral features are confirmed to remain almost unchanged as the cluster size is increased from 4 × 4 to 6 × 6 sites by using a combined method of the non-Abelian dynamical density-matrix renormalization group method and cluster perturbation theory. Cuprate high-temperature (high-T c ) superconductors, which are obtained by doping Mott insulators containing CuO 2 planes, 1 exhibit various features that appear anomalous from conventional viewpoints. Although this model can also be derived effectively from the 2D Hubbard model in the large-repulsion limit, We consider the 2D t-J model defined by the following Hamiltonian for t > 0 and J > 0: where ci,σ = (1 -n i,-σ )c i,σ and n i = σ n i,σ for the annihilation operator c i,σ and number operator n i,σ of an electron with spin σ at site i. Here, S i denotes the spin operator at site i, and i, j means that sites i and j are nearest neighbors on a square lattice. At half-filling (doping concentration δ = 0), the model reduces to the Heisenberg model. The t-J model can also be effectively obtained for J = 4t 2 /U by neglecting the three-site term In the ground state near the Mott transition, ferromagnetic fluctuations might be dominant in the very small-J/t regime In this paper, CPT is employed: G(k, ω) is calculated by connecting cluster Green functions through the first-order hopping process. The DDMRG method and CPT work well together because of the following reasons. (1) It is not necessary to repeat DDMRG calculations because CPT does not impose self-consistency. ( As shown in Figs. Mode i ′ corresponds to the doping-induced states observed in high-T c cuprates and in theoretical calculations Because mode v ′ bends back around (π/2, π/2) for ω > ∼ 0 [Figs. The bandwidth of mode ii ′ at half-filling [ε (0,0) ] [Fig. The properties around (π, 0) are primarily characterized by mode vi ′ , which corresponds to the flat band observed in high-T c cuprates and in theoretical calculations. Although mode iv ′ corresponds to mode iv, its spectral weights around (0, 0) and (π, π) are significantly smaller and larger, respectively, and its ω values around (0, 0) and (π, π) are significantly higher than those of mode iv near the Mott transition [Figs. For the electron operators with the no-doubleoccupancy constraint, c( †) i,σ , the spectral weight for each Because the spectral weight for ω < 0 (W -) is equal to (1 -δ)/2 in the t-J and Hubbard models, n -(k) around k = π in the t-J model becomes larger to compensate for the reduction around k = 0. Here, 0 and π respectively indicate 0 and π for 1D systems and (0, 0) and (π, π) for 2D systems. In the RPA from the decoupled-chain limit In this study, the single-particle spectral properties of the 2D t-J model for J/t ≈ 0.5 near the Mott transition were investigated. In contrast with conventional exact diagonalization studies, where the spectral weights were calculated only at available k and δ points depending on the cluster size and boundary conditions, the spectralweight distributions for continuous k and ω near the Mott transition with small intervals of δ were calculated using CPT, and how the peaks of the spectral weights form dominant modes and how the modes transform to those of the Mott insulator as δ gradually decreases were clarified in the 2D t-J model. In addition, through comparisons of the (4 × 4)-site CPT results with the (6 × 6)-site CPT results obtained by combining the non-Abelian DDMRG method, the cluster-size effects were confirmed to be small enough to allow discussion on the overall spectral features. Furthermore, the natures of the dominant modes in the 2D t-J model were clarified by investigating the δ and J/t dependences of the characteristic energies and spectral weights and by tracing the origins of the modes back to those of the 1D models. In terms of the dominant modes, various anomalous spectral features observed in high-T c cuprates, such as the doping-induced states, flat band, pseudogap, Fermi arc, spinon-like and holon-like branches, giant kink, and waterfall behavior, Although the spectral features of the 2D t-J model in the small-|ω| regime are similar to those of the 2D Hubbard model, significant differences appear in the large negative ω regime around (0, 0) and (π, π) near the Mott transition for the modes which can be considered to primarily originate from the 1D holon modes. In this study, the differences were interpreted as a consequence of the restriction on spectral weights. Because of the limited resolution, this study could not clarify the properties in the very small-|ω| regime, such as the nature of the excitation in the small-|ω| limit, the accurate gapless points of the single-particle spectrum, and the presence or absence of a long-range order in the ground state, although a superconducting ground state has been suggested in a considerable number of studies for the 2D t-J model. 