The iron-based intermetallic YFe2Ge2 stands out among transition metal compounds for its high Sommerfeld coefficient of the order of 100 mJ/(molK 2 ), which signals strong electronic correlations. A new generation of high quality samples of YFe2Ge2 show superconducting transition anomalies below 1.8 K in thermodynamic as well as transport measurements, establishing that superconductivity is intrinsic in this layered iron compound outside the known superconducting iron pnictide or chalcogenide families. The Fermi surface geometry of YFe2Ge2 resembles that of KFe2As2 in the high pressure collapsed tetragonal phase, in which superconductivity at temperatures as high as 10 K has recently been reported, suggesting an underlying connection between the two systems. Since the discovery of superconductivity in LaFePO Because initial experimental studies have failed to produce thermodynamic evidence for a bulk superconducting transition in YFe 2 Ge 2 , the possibility of filamentary superconductivity from alien phases, advanced also in Polycrystalline ingots of YFe 2 Ge 2 were obtained by radio frequency induction melting on a water-cooled copper boat in an argon atmosphere. To circumvent the formation of stable Y-Ge alloys, YFe 2 was first grown from the elements (Y 3N, Fe 4N). Together with elemental Ge (6N) this was then used to grow stoichiometric as well as slightly off-stoichiometric YFe 2 Ge 2 . The melt was quenched and then annealed in argon at 1250 • C for 1 hour, followed by further annealing in vacuum at 800 Correlation between superconducting transition temperatures and residual resistance ratio RRR = ρ(300 K)/ρ(2 K). Data points and error bars show resistive transition mid-point temperature and transition width, determined by an 80%/20% criterion. The RRR = 211 sample (Fig. to four times higher RRR than those reported previously The electrical resistance was measured using a standard four-terminal AC technique in an adiabatic demagnetisation refrigerator to 0.1 K and in a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) to < 0.4 K. Data were scaled at 300 K to the published high temperature resistivity At temperatures below 10 K, the electrical resistivity of all samples of YFe 2 Ge 2 displays an unconventional power-law temperature dependence of the form ρ(T ) ρ 0 + AT 3/2 (Fig. Although most samples show resistive superconducting transitions (Fig. Neither flux-grown samples of YFe 2 Ge 2 with RRR < 60 nor our previous generation of induction furnacegrown samples have shown a superconducting heat capacity anomaly The superconducting heat capacity anomaly is suppressed in applied magnetic field, allowing a view of the underlying normal state. The high field data show a nearly constant Sommerfeld ratio. This suggests that the slow rise in C/T shown in More detailed measurements to lower temperature will be necessary to distinguish between gap scenarios, but the present data already rule out alien phases as the origin of the superconducting heat capacity anomaly: powder x-ray diffraction limits alien phase content to less than 1 -2% even in the worst cases, of which the leading contribution is made by ferromagnetic Fe 0.85 Ge 0.15 Further information about the superconducting state can be inferred from its response to applied magnetic field. In our new generation of samples, the initial slope of the resistive upper critical field is determined as |dB c2 /dT | 1.75 T/K (inset of Fig. 3 T 120 Å, where Φ 0 = h/(2e) is the quantum of flux. Such a short coherence length is roughly consistent with the enhanced quasiparticle mass and consequently low Fermi velocity indicated by the high Sommerfeld coefficient of the specific heat capacity: we estimate the BCS coherence length from ξ BCS = ( v F )/(π∆) The expression for ξ BCS given above can be rewritten in terms of S F as ξ BCS = V 0 S F R/ 1.76 • 12π 2 γ 0 T c , where V 0 is the volume per primitive unit cell, R is the molar gas constant and γ 0 is the normal state Sommerfeld coefficient, giving ξ BCS 166 Å, in rough agreement with the estimate for ξ 0 obtained above from the critical field measurement. The mean free path in our samples can likewise be estimated (e.g. The present thermodynamic evidence establishes superconductivity in YFe 2 Ge 2 as an intrinsic bulk phenomenon, motivating a more careful look at the likely pairing mechanism. Two theoretical studies The calculated Fermi surface in YFe 2 Ge 2 is very similar to that expected for KFe 2 As 2 in the pressure induced collapsed tetragonal phase (Fig. Our experimental results demonstrate that YFe 2 Ge 2 undergoes a superconducting instability at T c 1.8 K out of a strongly correlated normal state with a high Sommerfeld ratio γ ∼ 100 mJ/(molK 2 ) and a non-Fermi liquid form for the temperature dependence of the resistivity, ρ(T ) ρ 0 +AT 3/2 . Together with the strong sensitivity to disorder of the resistive T c and of the heat capacity anomaly this suggests an unconventional pairing mechanism. Unconventional superconductivity is rare among transition metal compounds, and YFe 2 Ge 2 stands out for its comparatively isotropic, 3D Fermi surface, when compared to the cuprates, iron pnictides and chalcogenides, or Sr 2 RuO 4 . The electronic structure of YFe 2 Ge 2 resembles that of KFe 2 As 2 in the collapsed tetragonal phase, which can be induced by applied hydrostatic pressure and in which superconductivity with transition temperatures of the order of 10 K have been reported Superconductivity in the layered iron germanide YFe 2 Ge 2 Supplemental Material In order to extract estimates of the low temperature residual C/T , and thereby of the non-superconducting fraction of the sample, we have extrapolated the C/T data subject to an entropy balancing constraint commonly used in this situation: the normal state entropy just above T c has to match the entropy of the superconducting state just below T c . To obtain the normal state entropy, we integrate up the heat capacity in applied magnetic fields larger than the upper critical field, which can be approximated as S n (T c ) = γ 0 T c . Here, γ 0 is the Sommerfeld coefficient in the field-induced normal state, which is taken as constant (Fig. The superconducting state entropy has a known contribution within the measured temperature range, where T 0 is the lowest temperature measured. This integral is calculated from the measured data using the trapezoidal method. A further contribution, S 0 , then results from the extrapolation of the heat capacity data to lower temperature. It has to satisfy S 0 + S 1 = S n . Moreover, we constrain the extrapolation to join the measured data point at the lowest measured temperature T 0 : C 0 (T 0 ) = C(H = 0, T 0 ), where C 0 (T ) is the extrapolated heat capacity. For an initial analysis, we have chosen three forms for the temperature dependence of C 0 (T )/T : 1. Linear, corresponding to line nodes in the gap function: 2. Quadratic, corresponding to point nodes in the gap function: Here, α 1 , α 2 and α 3 denote the non-superconducting fractions of the sample in the three cases. The constraints mentioned above, namely (i) matching of normal state entropy and superconducting state entropy at T c , and (ii) matching of extrapolation function heat capacity and measured heat capacity at the lowest measured temperature T 0 , make it possible to fix α and β in the forms (1) and ( The inset of Fig. All data were collected in Bragg-Brentano geometry on a D8 Bruker diffractometer equipped with a primary Ge monochromator for Cu K α1 and a Sol-X solid state detector to reduce the effects of Fe fluorescence (Fig. Crystal structures of all phases were retrieved from the inorganic crystal structure database: YFe 2 Ge 2 (I4/mmm, ICSD reference code: 81745); Fe 0.85 Ge 0.15 (Im-3m, 103493); Fe (Im-3m, 64795); FeGe2 (I4/mcm; 42519). A spherical harmonic model was applied to correct for preferred orientation of YFe 2 Ge 2 within the powder. No structural parameter was refined when resolving the phase content. A shifted Chebyshev function with six parameters was used to fit the background. Peak shapes of all phases were modelled using Pseudo-Voigt functions.