We study the effect of the intrinsic (Rashba or Dresselhaus) spin-orbit interaction in superconductor-nanowire-superconductor (SNS) weak links in the presence of a spin-splitting field that can result either from an intrinsic exchange field or the Zeeman effect of an applied field. We solve the full non-linear Usadel equations numerically 1 and analyze the resulting supercurrent through the weak link and the behavior of the density of states in the center of the wire. We point out how the presence of the spin-orbit interaction gives rise to a long-range spin triplet supercurrent, which remains finite even in the limit of very large exchange fields. In particular, we show how rotating the field leads to a sequence of transitions between the 0 and π states as a function of the angle between the exchange field and the spin-orbit field. Simultaneously, the triplet pairing leads to a zero-energy peak in the density of states. We proceed by solving the linearized Usadel equations, showing the correspondence to the solutions of the full equations and detail the emergence of the long-range supercurrent components. Our studies are relevant for on-going investigations of supercurrent in semiconductor nanowires in the limit of several channels and in the presence of disorder. The antagonist nature of conventional singlet superconductivity and magnetism has been clearly illustrated in experiments studying supercurrents flowing through ferromagnetic weak links Besides using magnetic materials, the spin-splitting field can be realized via the Zeeman effect of an applied magnetic field. (Sec. IV). In particular, we show the dependence of the supercurrent vs. exchange field for varying magnitudes of the Rashba field. We also demonstrate in detail how the triplet supercurrent depends on the direction of the magnetic field applied in the plane of the wire. For strong spin-orbit coupling, we predict that changing the direction of the field drives the junction through a sequence of 0-π transitions. Besides supercurrent, we also study the local density of states in the junction in Sec. V. This is also the typical observable in the studies of Majorana physics. We find that spin-orbit interaction induces a zero-energy peak for a range of exchange fields. This peak originates from the induced long-range triplet amplitude of the superconducting pairing, and it is quite sensitive to the precise direction of the field and the amplitude of the SO coupling. We implement the spin-orbit interaction into the Usadel equation describing the quasiclassical Nambu-spin retarded Green's function ĜR in the diffusive limit (1) Here D is the diffusion constant inside the nanowire, ε is the energy, σ is a vector of Pauli matrices in spin space, h = (h x , h y τ3 , h z ) and ∇ ĜR = ∇ R ĜR -i Āτ 3 , ĜR is the gauge invariant gradient with Ā describing the SO coupling. The latter is specified below in more detail. where ε + = ε + iη, and η → 0 + is a small term specifying the location of the poles of the Retarded Green's function. Introducing a dimensionless position coordinate z = z/L and defining a Thouless energy E T = D/L 2 , where L is the length of the normal metal wire, we can work in energy units of ε = E/E T and h = h/E T and use the scaled vector potential Ās = ĀL. Moreover, below we assume the Zeeman field to lie in the substrate plane, and therefore h y = 0. Equations (1) and ( For equilibrium observables, we replace -i by the Matsubara frequencies ω n = πT (2n + 1). A generic spin-orbit coupling emerging in systems with broken inversion symmetry is of the form Āi = α j i σj . For a one-dimensional wire the symmetry is broken by the geometry in both directions perpendicular to the wire, and therefore the components α j i can be considered independent of each other. To describe a one-dimensional wire in the z direction placed on a substrate (see Fig. For a thin wire there are gradients only in the z direction, and therefore the only terms coupling linearly to the gradient are related to α 3 . The other terms can be non-vanishing and they contribute in general to the Dyakonov-Perel spin relaxation As we vary the direction of h, we fix Āz ∝ σ 1 , i.e., α 3 3 = 0. We vary the remaining term α = α 1 3 to observe the physics due to the intrinsic spin-orbit coupling. Note that the term ασ 1 ûz gives rise to the linear energy term of the form eασ 1 p z /m. Our term α is related to the (Rashba) terms of size α considered in the literature on Majorana fermions (e.g., where m is the effective mass of the electrons inside the nanowire. Our α hence has a dimension of h/(eL), where L is some length scale. In the numerics, the important dimensionless parameter is eαL/h, where L is chosen to be the distance between the two nanowiresuperconductor contacts. For example with the parameters of InSb discussed in Ref. 39 (m = 0.015m e and α = 0.2 eV Å, where m e is the electron mass), we get eα/h ≈ 4 • 10 6 1/m. These estimates are consistent with the recent experiments For the boundary conditions to the Green's functions, we assume clean NS interfaces. This assumption means that the parameters γ and γ are continuous across the interface and coincide with bulk BCS superconductor values in the real-time description (for Matsubara frequencies, replace by iω n ). The exact form of the boundary conditions depends on the chosen form of the Nambu vector. In the numerics, we express all the lengths in terms of the length L of the wire. In this case, the natural energy scale is given by the Thouless energy E T = hD/L 2 . We mostly concentrate on the limit of long wires, where L ξ 0 = hD/∆. This also means that ∆/E T = L 2 /ξ 2 0 1. The supercurrent through the junction is characterized by the spectral current density 41 In the Riccati parameterization, the spectral current density can be written as where γ = ∂γ/∂z. The supercurrent can be calculated as a weighted average of the spectral current density where R N = L/(Ae 2 Dν F ) is the Drude resistance of the nanowire in the normal state. Here L is the length, A is the area, D the diffusion constant and ν F the density of states at the Fermi level of the nanowire in its normal state. In the Matsubara technique, the integral can be calculated as a sum of the spectral current densities evaluated at the Matsubara frequencies ω n as In the numerics, we cut the Matsubara sum to the index after which the obtained supercurrent changes less than 1 %. The density of states (DOS) is given by 34 where N F is the DOS in the absence of superconductivity. In the Riccati parameterization, Besides supercurrent, the density of states is another way to characterize the excitation spectrum induced by the proximity effect from the supercurrent. It can be accessed via a standard tunneling measurement. In Sec. V we show how a combination of the finite exchange field and the Rashba spin-orbit coupling gives rise to a zeroenergy peak in the density of states. This is qualitatively similar to what one expects from the measurements in the Majorana wires, Below, we present numerical solutions of the supercurrent and density of states in a nanowire Josephson weak link exhibiting both intrinsic spin-orbit coupling and exchange field. To understand these results, let us first study what we expect to find in the limit of a weak proximity effect, Linearizing Eq. (3) yields Here we have discarded all the terms O(γ 2 ) and noticed that N = 1 due to the normalization condition ĜR 2 = 1. We separate the different spin components as and choose a specific SOC field Ās = ασ 1 ûz and direction of the magnetic field, h = h(0, sin(θ), cos(θ)). The resulting equations describe the interplay between the short-range and long-range pairing components. We can solve the resulting second-order boundary value problem by separating the short-range and longrange components f i , and using the previous to find effective boundary conditions for the latter. The details are given in Appendix B. As a result, we get the spectral supercurrent describing the long-range component. In the case of a perpendicular field and Ās (θ = 0), the result reduces to where φ is the phase difference between the two superconductors, and ωn = (ω n +2Dα 2 )/E T is the (dimensionless) Matsubara frequency modified by the pair-breaking effect from the spin-orbit coupling (ω n → -i in the realtime formulation with energy ). Note that the spin-orbit coupling α plays here a dual role: first, it induces the long-range triplet component of the (spectral) supercurrent, and second, it induces pair breaking effects. If we would include the ordinary spin-flip or spin-orbit scattering effects, they would (in the lowest order) induce the corresponding terms into ω. The observable supercurrent at a given temperature T is obtained by summing over the Matsubara frequencies or integrated over the real energies as in Eqs. (9,10). At low temperatures k B T < ∼ E T we may transform the Matsubara sum into an integral and obtain in the longjunction limit E T , e 2 hα 2 D ∆ (restoring e and h) Strictly speaking this is valid only for 2eαL/h > ∼ 1, but this approximation fits numerical results reasonably well also for low α. On the other hand, at high temperatures k B T E T , it is enough to include only the lowest Matsubara frequency and the result is where x = 2πk B T /E T + 2αLe/h. We compare the analytical result to the full numerics in Fig. For a non-zero θ ∈]0, π/2[, both long-range components f 0 and f 3 become non-zero. Due to their coupling, the supercurrent obtains terms oscillating with αLe sin(θ)/h. The resulting oscillations vs. θ for αLe > ∼ 1 signal transitions between 0 and π states, which would be observed as cusps in the dependence of the critical current on the field direction. This is qualitatively described in Appendix B and further explored in Fig. The effects of the spin-orbit coupling show up only in the presence of a non-zero exchange field in the wire. This exchange field can be established either in an intrinsically ferromagnetic wire, via the magnetic proximity effect in a wire in contact with a ferromagnetic insulator, or via the Zeeman field from an applied external magnetic field. In all these cases the (direct or stray) magnetic field generates also the orbital effect for the charge carriers. The relevance of this orbital effect depends on the aspect ratio of the wire The most straightforward experiment is to vary the magnitude of the exchange field. In Fig. FIG. Tokatly and Bergeret Besides supercurrent, the proximity effect from the superconductor on the normal wire can be characterized via a tunneling measurement of the density of states. In the absence of the exchange field or the spin-orbit field, the density of states in the proximity wire exhibits a phase-dependent minigap, The density of states is in general position dependent. To illustrate the proximity induced effects in a symmetry point, we present the results calculated in the middle of the normal metal. In Fig. For large h, the singlet component vanishes on a short distance ∼ m at the interface, whereas the long-range triplet components f 0,3 are much larger in the center of the wire. As a result, the latter yield N (0) > 1. As shown in the figures, this may signal the presence of a zero-energy peak, but not necessarily. The values of α where the transition from a peak to a dip takes place are similar to those yielding a maximum in the long-range supercurrent, Fig. The density of states can also be controlled by applying a supercurrent through the junction, so that the phase difference φ across the junction changes. Besides changing (and closing) the minigap for a vanishing exchange field, this changes the form of the density of states. The phase dependence is plotted in Fig. Let us furthermore demonstrate the connection between the triplet proximity effect and the zero-energy peak. In this work we have discussed the detailed effects of the Rashba/Dresselhaus -type intrinsic spin-orbit interaction on the supercurrent carried through a diffusive nanowire. We solve the full Usadel equation to obtain the supercurrent of the junction and the local density of states. We reproduce the long-range triplet proximity effect predicted before in the linearized limit and show how the resulting supercurrent depends on the direction of the applied field. Besides the complicated direction dependence and the predicted zero-energy peaks and dips in the local density of states, our results pave the way of quantitatively analyzing the experiments carried out in the nanowire Josephson junctions. To reach for example the topological regime and confirm the Majorana character of the excitations in the nanowires, it is important that the experimentalists are able to characterize their junctions in detail. Our work gives a fixed point for such a characterization, in the (non-topological) many-channel diffusive limit. We hence expect this work to be relevant as an intermediate step for establishing the experimental constraints for using such junctions in topological quantum computing. and the equations for fi parametrizing γ are obtained by substituting f i ↔ fi , h ↔ -h, and by taking a complex conjugate of the scalars. The boundary conditions read with φ having the opposite signs at x = 0 and x = L. For i = 0, 1, 3 the functions vanish at the boundaries, that is Linearizing the spectral current density (see Eq. ( Using the Pauli matrix expansion from Eq. (B2) and the general form for the SO coupling, Eq. (B3) we can simplify Eq. (B7) In the numerics we have chosen Ā = (0, 0, -ασ 1 ). On the other hand, the analytics becomes more straightforward by writing the f -function components in the basis dictated by the exchange field. Therefore, applying the rotation exp(iθσ y /2) to h, γ and Ā yields The corresponding equations for fj are obtained after replacing h ↔ -h and α ↔ -α. For h ω n , α, it is now straightforward to identify f 1 and f 2 as the short-range components, decaying within the length ξ m = 1/ √ 2h from the interfaces. These two components are the m = 0 triplet and the singlet component of the pairing amplitude, respectively. These components can thus be solved separately in a straightforward manner, but the resulting analytic expressions are too lengthy to be printed here. The short-range components generate boundary conditions for the long-range components f 0 and f 3 that decay within the length 0 = 1/ 2ω n + 4α 2 ), 3 = 1/ 2ω n + 4α 2 sin(θ) ξ m . First disregarding the coupling term between f 0 and f 3 , we get an analytic solution, This solution takes into account the boundary condition f 0 (0) = f 3 (0) = 0. The prefactors A 0,3 would be obtained from the other boundary condition f 0 (1) = f 3 (0) = 1. However, we concentrate only on the vicinity of the interface at z = 0, and disregard these terms. Note that both components vanish for θ = π/2, when the exchange field is collinear with the spin-orbit field, whereas f 3 = 0 for θ = 0. For 0 z ξ m , we may expand and get f 0 (z) ≈ 4iα cos(θ) The previous expression requires also one partial integration and using the fact that f 1 (0) = 0. The equation is written for f 3 (z) because only the derivative tends to a constant in this interval. Performing the integral yields We get rid of the second off-diagonal term by defining h = U (z) f = exp(-2iα sin(θ)σ x z) f . This satisfies h = (ω n + 4α 2 cos 2 (θ)) h -4α 2 cos 2 (θ)U (z)σ ↓ U † (z) h (B18) with h ( ) (0) = f (0), exp(2iα sin(θ)σ x ) h ( ) (1) = f (1). Be-sides Eq. (B18) we can hence transform the coupling terms to the boundary conditions. As the general solution to Eq. (B18) is lengthy, we first disregard this term. In this case, solving (B18) is straightforward. The full solution for h(z) is lengthy, but the spectral supercurrent is given by j s = 8iα 2 cos 2 (θ)c 2 sin(φ)I(α) with where ωn = ω n + 2α 2 cos 2 (θ). In particular, for θ = 0, where the above approximation of neglecting the σ ↓ term is not relevant, we get Eq. (15). For θ between 0 and π/2, the two long-range components mix and produce a supercurrent that can change sign for a fixed phase as the direction of the magnetic field is tuned. Such a sign change is described by the terms of the form cos(2α sin(θ)) that result from the above trans-formation between f and h. They show that the sign change takes place whenever α > ∼ 1. However, due to the approximation of neglecting the σ ↓ term, this result does not match very well the exact solution at arbitrary range of parameters. Therefore, it is better to use the rather straightforward solution of the full linearized equations for finding the supercurrent in this case. The code used for calculating the results in this paper will be made available upon the publication of this manuscript and before that can be requested from the authors.