Information about the pairing mechanism for superconductivity is contained in the spectral weight for the anomalous (Gorkov) Green function. In the most general case, this spectral weight can change sign on the positive real axis or even be complex in the presence of broken time-reversal symmetry. This renders impossible the direct analytic continuation with Maximum Entropy methods of numerical results obtained for the anomalous Green function either in Matsubara frequency or in imaginary time. Here we show that one can define auxiliary Green functions that allow one to extract the anomalous spectral weight in the most general multi-orbital spin-singlet or triplet cases with no particular symmetry. As a simple example, we treat the case of lead in Eliashberg theory: Maximum Entropy analytic continuation with auxiliary Green functions (MaxEntAux) allows us to recover spectral functions that change sign on the positive real axis. The approach can be extended to transport quantities. Not so long after the proposal of the phonon mechanism for superconductivity in BCS theory In the search for pairing mechanisms in unconventional superconductors, such as cuprates and organic superconductors, one must face the presence of stronglycorrelated physics, manifest through the proximity between the Mott insulating and superconducting phases. The discussion between P. W. Anderson The thorough theoretical study of this subject is not an easy one as it requires to have access to the frequency dependent pairing dynamics embodied in the anomalous self-energy or in the Gorkov function We first consider the simple case of singlet pairing in a one-band model and give an example of application with the gap function for lead where the answer is known. The more general case is considered at the end. Auxiliary Green Function for Analytic Continuation of F Green functions associating a creation or annihilation operator to its hermitian conjugate do have a constant sign spectral weight and can be analytically continued using Maximum Entropy methodology. With this in mind, following Ref. and the auxiliary Green function where the average is with respect to the grand canonical ensemble for Hamiltonian Ĥ and the imaginary-time ordering operator is Tτ . In terms of the original annihilation (creation) operators ĉ( †) , the auxiliary Green function is given by arXiv:1507.01956v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 7 Jul 2015 If the maximum-entropy analytic continuation is done from imaginary time, it suffices to analytically continue both G aux ( k, τ ) and Ĥ that have positive spectral weight and to extract the spectral weight for the offdiagonal terms (Gorkov functions) by taking the difference. This is possible because in the case considered, the Gorkov function F( k, τ ) = -Tτ ĉ k↑ (τ ) ĉ-k↓ (0) Ĥ and its complex conjugate have identical spectral weight. Indeed, for singlet pairing with time-reversal symmetry, the spectral weight A an ( k, ω) is real and odd in frequency, implying that the Gorkov function in Matsubara frequency is also real Hence, the Matsubara frequency result immediately translates into with no restriction to the particle-hole symmetric case, as assumed in Ref. An Example with Sign Changing Gap Function Let us focus on the analytic continuation of the solutions to the Matsubara frequency Eliashberg equations for lead. Usually, this analytic continuation is performed with Padé approximants. Here, we take published real-frequency results Consider the spline interpolation ∆(ω) of the gap function extracted from Ref. A an (ω) = C Re ∆(ω) where the square root is chosen such that the real part is odd in ω and the imaginary part even, C is the constant normalizing A loc (ω) to unity over the frequency interval [-ω c , ω c ], where the cutoff frequency is ω c = 25. Note that since the published real and imaginary parts of ∆(ω) extend only up to ω ∼ 7, the resulting spectral functions Figure Using the spectral representations Eqs. We add a gaussian noise to impose a relative error of 10 -4 on each Matsubara frequency component of the functions in Eq. [25] Using the Maximum Entropy code Omega-MaxEnt The imaginary parts of the local and anomalous Green functions are proportional to A loc (ω) and A an (ω) while their real parts are obtained using Kramers-Krönig relations. The gap function then follows from Gap function One can now compare the original gap function of Fig. Figure Even though some of the details are lost in the analytic continuation, the main features are preserved, namely the gap function has a maximum and becomes negative at sufficiently high frequency before vanishing. Gorkov function and Cumulative order parameter The top panel of Fig. The cumulative order parameter, exhibited in the bottom panel of Fig. where f (-ω ) = [1 + e -βω ] -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. In the limit ω → ∞, we find that this quantity is just the order parameter I F (∞) = Tτ ĉi↑ ĉi↓ Ĥ. At T = 0, Eq.( In the same way that the dependence of Tτ ĉi↑ ĉj↓ Ĥ on distance i -j tells us about the superconducting co-herence length, the frequency dependence at the same position informs us on the dynamics. Figure As can be seen form Fig. Auxiliary Green function for Analytic Continuation for General Multi-band Singlet or Triplet Pairing Define, where γ stands for both band and spin index. Again, define the mixed operator and the auxiliary Green function The Lehmann representation allows one to check that this Green function has a positive spectral weight and can thus be analytically continued using standard Maximum Entropy methods. From the imaginary-time definition, one finds The Lehmann representation of each of the last two terms, -Tτ ĉ kγ (τ ) ĉkδ (0) Ĥ = - Eq.( In practice, the auxiliary Green function in Matsubara frequency, that we need to analytically continue, would be computed using the results of Matsubara frequency calculations as follows: Eq.( To find the missing information, we define, by analogy with Eq.( and a corresponding second auxiliary Green function with positive spectral weight Then, by analogy with Eq.( The analytic continuation of the two auxiliary Green functions gives the corresponding real and positive spectral weights, which are formally given by A aux 2 γδ ( k, ω) = A γ ( k, ω) + A δ (-k, -ω) -i(A an γδ ( k, ω) -A an * γδ ( k, ω)). The normal spectral functions are also real and positive. So, from the above, one can easily extract the needed spectral weight A an γδ ( k, ω) via Recalling that γ and δ contain both spin and band index, this is valid for singlet or triplet pairing and for the multiorbital case, with or without inversion or time-reversal symmetry. The above results open the way to the systematic exploration of the pairing mechanism in nu-merical calculations for unconventional superconductors. Similar auxiliary functions can be defined to find, with Maximum Entropy methods, spectral functions of transport coefficients, such as the thermoelectric power, that do not have positive spectral weight.