The dark count rate (DCR) is a key parameter of single-photon detectors. By introducing a bulk optical band-pass filter mounted on a fiber-to-fiber optical bench cooled at 3 K and blocking down to 5 m, we suppressed the DCR of a superconducting nanowire single-photon detector by more than three orders of magnitude. The DCR is limited by the blackbody radiation through a signal passband of 20 nm bandwidth. The figure of merit, system detection efficiency, and DCR were 2.7 × 10 11 , 2.3%, and 10 -3 Hz, respectively. Narrowing the bandwidth to 100 GHz suppresses the DCR to10 -4 Hz and the figure of merit increases to 1.8 × 10 12 . Superconducting single-photon detectors (SNSPDs or SSPDs) based on ultrathin superconducting nanowires are now widely recognized as high-performance singlephoton detectors in the near-infrared region. The high detection efficiency (), low dark count rate (DCR), wide detection wavelength, and small timing jitter (t) of SSPDs are now invaluable for many fields such as quantum information, quantum optics, free space laser communication, and biological applications One of the key parameters of the SNSPD is the DCR. The system DCR is the sum of an intrinsic DCR and DCRblack In this paper, we report an SNSPD with the ultimate low DCR, which is obtained by completely blocking the blackbody radiation except in the signal passband using a bulk band-pass filter mounted on a fiber-to-fiber optical bench cooled at 3 K. We also study the effect of reducing the passband on the system DCR. Figure The SNSPD device is fabricated as follows. NbN thin films 7 nm in thickness were synthesized on a thermally oxidized Si substrate by reactive DC magnetron sputtering. The SiO2 layers on both sides of the Si substrate are about 260 nm thick and serve as an antireflection layer and a front-side cavity structure at telecom wavelengths, respectively. The NbN meander pattern was fabricated with a standard e-beam process using a negative resist (SNR-M5) and C2F5 dry etching. The size of the meander is 15 × 15 m 2 with a line and space width of 100 nm. A backside cavity structure was also formed on the meander using a standard photolithography process to enhance the detection efficiency. The backside cavity is composed of a 260-nmthick SiO2 layer, 2-nm-thick Ti, and 100-nm-thick Au. For optical characterization, we used a 3 He cryocooler with a base temperature of 0.38 K. A continuous-wave tunable laser was used to measure  and the DCR. The power was strongly attenuated to 10 6 photons/s and was focused on the device from the substrate side of the device using a lensed optical fiber. To focus the beam on the meander pattern, we observed the optical spot using an infrared microscope. The wavelength was fixed at 1545.6 nm, which was the highest transmission of the filter at 3 K. The output signal from the SNSPD was amplified by two room-temperature rf amplifiers with a total gain of 60 dB and sent to a gated photon counter. To measure the jitter, we used a femtosecond fiber laser with a repetition rate of 100 MHz and a time interval analyzer. Details of our jitter measurement system were published earlier Figure SiO2 thickness. As the bulk band-pass filter cooled to 3 K is introduced before the device, the system  decreases to 12% owing to the loss of the filter (blue squares) and decreases to 10% as the DWDM filter is added (red circles). The bias current dependence of the system DCR is shown in Fig. The bias current dependence of the timing jitter (t) is shown in Fig. The figure of merit of a single-photon detector is known to be well represented as /(DCRt) Hz. There are two ways to further increase the figure of merit of the SNSPD. One is to increase the  value by refining the fabrication process. The other is to reduce the loss of the cold optical filters. This can be achieved by designing and fabricating a low-loss filter with the appropriate rejection properties and passband on the device instead of introducing commercial filters. In conclusion, we demonstrate that introducing a cold optical filter with an appropriate passband is quite effective for reducing the system DCR of an SNSPD. By completely blocking the blackbody radiation except in the signal passband of 20 nm, the system DCR can be suppressed by more than three orders of magnitude. An SNSPD with a figure of merit of 2.7 × 10 11 ,  = 2.3%, and DCR = 10 -3 Hz is obtained. By narrowing the passband to 100 GHz using a cold DWDM filter, an SNSPD with a figure of merit of 1.8 × 10 12 ,  = 1.5%, and DCR = 10 -4 Hz is also obtained. 