We study the effect of disorder on the London penetration depth in iron-based superconductors. The theory is based on a two-band model with quasi-two-dimensional Fermi surfaces, which allows for the coexistence region in the phase diagram between magnetic and superconducting states in the presence of intraband and interband scattering. Within the quasiclassical approximation we derive and solve Eilenberger's equations, which include a weak external magnetic field, and provide analytical expressions for the penetration depth in the various limiting cases. A complete numerical analysis of the doping and temperature dependence of the London penetration depth reveals the crucial effect of disorder scattering, which is especially pronounced in the coexistence phase. The experimental implications of our results are discussed. Measurements of the magnetic penetration depth λ L as a function of temperature, doping, magnetic field, and crystal orientation provide invaluable information about the nature of superconductivity and the symmetry of the underlying order parameter (see e.g. reviews [1,2]). In a single-component clean s-wave BCS superconductor, with order parameter ∆ and a fully gapped Fermi surface, the low-temperature behavior of the London penetration depth δλ L (T ) = λ L (T ) -λ L (0) shows an exponential decrease with temperature Even though nonmagnetic disorder does not directly affect ∆, it does modify the value of λ L , which becomes λ -2 L (T ) ∝ ∆(T )σ tanh[∆(T )/2T ], where σ is the normalstate conductivity. The power exponent of the low-temperature behavior is very sensitive to disorder scattering, such that δλ L crosses over to quadratic behavior, δλ L (T )/λ L (0) (T /∆) The emergent complexity of FeSCs with competing superconducting and magnetic instabilities, which may coexist in a certain region of the phase diagram, Theoretical studies of the penetration depth in FeSCs were discussed in Refs. [34-37] for clean samples based on the band model. The effects of disorder on the phase diagram, including pair-breaking scattering, and on the penetration depth were investigated in Refs. [38-44]. We study the effect of disorder on λ L in a systematic way and analyze its behavior in the part of the phase diagram where the SC and SDW phases coexist. On the technical side, we develop a formalism that enables us to study the doping and temperature evolution of the penetration depth in the whole parameter space of the phase diagram. Recently electron irradiation was used to introduce disorder into FeSC systems in a controlled way. In this section we introduce the minimal model for iron-based superconductors in which doping acts as a source of disorder and produces a region of coexistence between superconductivity and magnetism. Furthermore, right from the outset, we consider the case of nonzero external magnetic field that acts on orbital electron motion, but assumed to be weak enough not to affect spin. We discuss the ground state properties of this model in zero field within the quasiclassical approximation, which we use later to compute the penetration depth across a wide doping range from the coexistence region to the purely superconducting state. Following the discussion in Refs. [41,42], we consider a model with two cylindrical Fermi surfaces. One Fermi surface has electron-type and another one has hole-type excitations. We introduce the following eight-component spinor where ψa (r) = (ψ † a↑ (r), ψ a↓ (r)) (a = c, f ) is a Gor'kov-Nambu spinor, and ψ † aσ (r) are the creation operators for the electron (a=f ) and hole (a=c) fermionic excitations at point r in real space with a spin component σ =↑↓. The full Hamiltonian for the problem at hand consists of kinetic part and interactions Ĥ(r) = Ĥ0 (r) + Ĥmf (r). ( In the limit of weak magnetic field the noninteracting Hamiltonian matrix [ Ĥ0 (r)] αβ can be compactly written as Here, τi , ρi , and σi with i = 0, 1, 2, 3 are sets of Pauli matrices acting correspondingly in the band, Gor'kov-Nambu, and spin spaces; τ0 ,ρ 0 ,σ 0 are unit matrices, A(r) is the vector potential, ξ = -∇ 2 /2m -μ, and μ is the chemical potential. Interactions between the quasiparticles on the electronand hole-like Fermi surfaces lead to the development of superconducting and spin-density-wave orders. Within the mean-field theory approximation, the corresponding expression for the interaction part of the model Hamiltonian Ĥmf reads Ĥmf = Ĥ∆ + ĤM , Here, ∆ is the superconducting order parameter, while M is the spin-density-wave order parameter. We explicitly assume that the magnetic field is weak enough so that we can ignore the spatial dependence of both SC and SDW fields [see discussion after Eq. ( Let us now introduce a disorder potential. In what follows we consider two types of disorder scattering: the first type is intraband disorder with potential U 0 , which scatters quasiparticles within the same band, while the second type with potential U π accounts for interband scattering. Thus, in the basis (3) for disorder potential we write (9) where the summation goes over impurity sites. We assume that concentration of impurities is x imp . We will treat the effects of disorder within the selfconsistent Born approximation. Specifically, we introduce a single-particle Green's function in the Matsubara representation 3 as a solution of the following matrix equations where ωn = πT (2n + 1)τ 0 ρ0 σ0 , T is a temperature, Î = τ0 ρ0 σ0 δ(r 1 -r 2 ), and R = (r 1 + r 2 )/2 is the centerof-mass coordinate. In order to write down an explicit expression for the self-energy Σ(iω n , R), in addition to the center-of-mass coordinate we introduce the relative coordinate r = r 1 -r 2 , and consider the matrix Green's function (10) as a function of R and r. Furthermore, we perform the Fourier transformation with respect to the relative coordinate r, and in what follows we consider the function Ĝ(iω n , R, p). Then, assuming that disorder is uncorrelated, upon averaging over various disorder configurations 3 we find the following expression for the self-energy (hereafter = c = 1): where the cross terms ∝ U 0 U π vanish; ν is the single particle density of states, Γ 0 = πνx imp |U 0 | 2 /4, and Clearly, the fully self-consistent computation of the order parameters ∆ and M along with the self-energy Σω (R) is a challenging problem. However, this problem can be solved efficiently using the quasiclassical approach. The quasiclassical approximation is justified when the characteristic quantities for the problem at hand vary significantly on length scales that are much longer than the Fermi wavelength λ F . In the context of iron-based superconductors, the quasiclassical approximation works well since both superconducting and magnetic correlation lengths greatly exceed λ F . To derive an equation for the Eilenberger function Ĝω (R, n) in a weak external magnetic field, one needs to eliminate the single-particle dispersion via a series of algebraic manipulations (see Appendix A for details). Taking into account that the relevant values of the quasiparticle momentum p are close to the Fermi momentum p F , so that p/m ≈ v F n, we find the following equation for Ĝω : where the square brackets denote a commutator. Since we consider the limit of a weak magnetic field, we can look for the solution of this equation by perturbation theory, namely restricting ourselves to corrections linear in powers of the vector potential A. This is why we could neglect the dependence of ∆ and M on R, since the corrections that render both order parameters spatially inhomogeneous are of the order of O(A 2 ). In this section we first review the ground-state properties of the model ( Without loss of generality we choose the SDW magnetization to be along the z-axis, M = M e z . Then, the solution of (15) has the following form: where the functions g ω , f ω , and s ω are determined by the solution of the following system of algebraic equations: Temperature, T/T c0 Temperature, T/T c0 FIG. Here we introduced the total scattering rate Γ t = Γ 0 +Γ π . In addition, the functions g ω , f ω , and s ω satisfy the normalization condition g 2 ω -f 2 ω -s 2 ω = 1. Subsequently, superconducting and SDW order parameters can be found from where g sc and g m are the coupling constants, and Λ is an ultraviolet cutoff. In the clean system, there is a phase transition from the paramagnetic to the SDW state at critical temperature T s0 = 1.13Λe -2/νgm provided that g m > g sc . If g sc > g m , the ground state is a superconductor with a critical temperature T c0 = 1.13Λe -2/νgsc . We consider T s0 > T c0 , so that without disorder, the SDW phase develops at a higher temperature. We solve Eqs. ( . As the ratio Γ π /Γ 0 increases, both Γ (sc) 0 and Γ (sdw) 0 decrease. In Fig. In this section we solve the Eilenberger equation ( The field-induced correction to the Eilenberger function ( which is found from ( We look for a solution of this equation in the following form Ĝ( The matrix form for the first two terms follows from solving Eq. ( Using condition (20) we obtain for the functions g ω , f with where Γ s = Γ 0 -Γ π . Equations ( The expression for the current density in terms of the original Green's function is given by 3 where the last term guarantees the gauge invariance of the normal state. We can now use the same approximation that we have already employed in our derivation of the Eilenberger equation: since the main contribution to the current comes from a narrow energy region around the Fermi surface, in the integral above we approximate p ≈ p F n. It follows that where we used the definition (12); angular brackets denote averaging over directions of unit vector n. Using our solution of the Eilenberger equation together with the equations ( where the auxiliary function z ω is defined by Eq. ( and then (ω Curiously, the function s ω does not enter explicitly into the final expression for the current. Thus, for the London penetration depth we have which is the main result of this paper. Next we analyze various limiting cases. In the clean limit, Γ t = 0, it is easy to show that in agreement with earlier studies. where we have introduced the parameter γ = Γ t /∆. For small enough values of ∆, such that γ 1, it follows that for the moderate range of x ∼ O(1) we can simplify x + 2γg(x) ≈ 2γg(x). Furthermore, the dominant contribution to the integral (32) comes from the region of x where g(x) ∼ x. Thus, for sufficiently small ∆, we approximately obtain for the integral In the opposite limit, and still at zero temperature, another analytical result for λ L as a function of the scattering rates and ∆ can be derived (see Appendix B for details) where we introduced the following parameters for brevity γ s = 2Γ s /∆, and γ π = 2Γ π /∆. Note that when interband scattering becomes negligibly small, then the term of Eq. ( Our complete numerical analysis of equation ( for various values of Γ 0 across the phase diagram [see inset (a) in Fig. In this paper, we obtained the phase diagram of doped iron-pnictide superconductors and calculated the magnetic penetration depth at different temperatures under the assumption that doping introduces disorder but does not affect the band structure. In several limiting cases we have been able to reproduce previously known results. Our main finding concerns the behavior of λ L in the coexistence phase that has not been systematically analyzed before in the presence of disorder scattering. Our modeling shows that starting from the overdoped side, λ -2 L grows with the reduction of the scattering rate induced by doping up to an optimal doping where superconducting order is maximal. Once the system enters the coexistence phase, the inverse square of the penetration depth, which is proportional to the superfluid density, exhibits a kink followed by a sharp falloff. In that region, disorder primarily affects magnetic order rather than superconductivity. In sharp contrast with the clean case, where λ -2 L ∝ ∆ 2 near the end-point of the superconducting dome from the side of the pre-existing SDW, within the disorder model we find a completely different scaling law λ -2 L ∝ ∆. Another important observation concerns the low temperature dependence of δλ L (T ). The log-log plot presented in Fig. and g ω is a functional of f ω , Eq. (B4). Clearly, for Γ t = 0 we find Q(∆, M ) = ∆ 2 /(M 2 + ∆ 2 ). When M = 0, the expression for Q(∆, M = 0) simplifies to: This integral can be evaluated exactly, and it gives Eq. ( 