We study charge transport of a topological superconductor connected to different electromagnetic environments using a low-energy description where only the Majorana bound states in the superconductor are included. Extending earlier findings who found a crossover between perfect Andreev reflection with conductance 2e 2 /h to a regime with blocked transport when the resistance of the environment is larger than 2e 2 /h, we consider Majorana bound states coupled to metallic dots. In particular, we study two topological superconducting leads connected by a metallic quantum dot in both the weak tunneling and strong tunneling regimes. For weak tunneling, we project onto the most relevant charge states. For strong tunneling, we start from the Andreev fixed point and integrate out charge fluctuations which gives an effective low-energy model for the non-perturbative gate-voltage modulated cotunneling current. In both regimes and in contrast to cotunneling with normal leads, the conductance is temperature independent because of the resonant Andreev reflections, which are included to all orders. There is currently a large attention towards topological superconductors, which are expected to host zero-energy states with interesting properties. These states, known as Majorana bound states (MBSs), constitute half fermions in the sense that two MBSs are needed to define a single fermionic level, where the degree of freedom of this fermion corresponds to the parity of the fermion number. Thus, if the MBSs are well separated in space the parity degree of freedom is a topologically protected quantity, which can potentially be used for quantum computation Promising candidate systems are hybrid materials where s-wave superconductors are used to proximitizes other materials with strong spin-orbit coupling An important diagnostic tools to verify the presence of MBSs is tunnel spectroscopy for which the zero-energy bound states are predicted to give resonant Andreev reflection and hence a low-temperature conductance of 2e 2 /h Another interesting situation is when the Majorana bound state is tunnel coupled to an interacting quan- 1. Illustration of the three types of junctions considered here. In (a) there is a junction between a topological superconductor (SC) and metallic lead with its electromagnetic environment modeled by an impedance Zenv(ω). In (b) the environment is replaced by a metallic island connected to the drain by a quantum point contact. In (c) is a junction between two topological superconductors, where the junction consists of a metallic Coulomb blockaded island. tum dot In this paper, we analyze the transport properties through MBSs via different types of environments, namely (a) a general linear electromagnetic environment, (b) a metallic quantum dot with a quantum point contact drain, and (c) a metallic dot with a second topological superconductor as a drain. See Fig. The above transitions occur when the isolated MBSmetal junction resistance and the environment resistance are equal. This motivates the study of situation (c) in Fig. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the key elements of the models, namely a single MBS coupled to a fermion bath and the bosonic electromagnetic environment, and show how these elements are bosonized. In Sec. III, the effective low-energy actions is derived and used to identify the crossover impedance. The tunneling limit is treated in detail in Sec. III B. The case of a quantum point contact is included as special case in Sec. III C. Next, the Coulomb blockade of a metallic island coupled to two MBSs is analyzed in Sec. IV using the dual bosonized representation. Finally, conclusions are given in Sec. V We start with the Hamiltonian of a MBS tunnel coupled to a normal-metal lead, with the inclusion of an displacement of the environment charge which accompanies the tunneling event where and where k are the quantum numbers for the normalmetal eigenstates that couple to the MBS, γ, and H env is the Hamiltonian of the linear environment. The operator α is the canonically conjugate operator to the environment charge Q, i.e. [α, Q] = i. Therefore e ±iα creates/annihilates a charge in the environment respectively. The current operator is given by Because the MBS couples to a particular spin projection of the lead and map H el to a 1D chiral electron gas with and L =2πρ 0 v F playing the role of a normalization length. In this language, the tunneling Hamiltonian becomes where This 1D Hamiltonian can now be bosonized in the standard way, for example by folding into a half-infinite wire, such that ψ(x > 0) = ψ R (x) and ψ(x < 0) = ψ L (x). Following Fidkowski et al., we integrate out all x = 0 degrees of freedom, which then gives the action where Θ(τ ) relates to current at x = 0 in the halfwire language (Fidkowski et al. In this section, we study a MBS coupled to two different environments: firstly a general linear impedance and then secondly a quantum point contact (QPC). The environment action describes the dynamics of the field α and thus after the integration over all other environment degrees of freedom, it can be expressed as where α's Green's function is defined as G αα (τ ) = -T τ α(τ )α(0) . The α correlation now follows from classical circuit theory, analogous to the environmental-Coulomb-blockade theory where G V V and G II are the voltage-voltage and currentcurrent correlation function, respectively, which by the Kubo formula are related to the total impedance of the network as t . We thus get an expression for G αα in terms of the total environment impedance The network consists of the junction capacitor and the environment impedance in parallel (see Fig. where Z env is the impedance of the network connecting the junction to the voltage source. Now, from the action with and the non-quadratic part is given by Eq. ( Let us now study the case where the environment impedance can be approximated by a constant real impedance. For small frequencies the Green's function where we have defined γ = 2e 2 Z env /h. The environment model is thus identical to the situation of a MBS coupled to a Luttinger liquid with the replacement K → (1+γ) -1 . Thus, when the environment impedance exceeds h/2e 2 , corresponding to γ > 1 and K < 1/2, there is a transition from resonant Andreev reflection to insulator behavior at low temperature and low voltage. It is also interesting to discuss the finite-voltage lineshape of the peak in differential conductance, because this is most often the experimental signature used to conclude on the presence of MBSs in the superconductor. The tunneling current is calculated to second order in t by standard perturbation theory: After some algebra, we then obtain where f (ω) = 1/(exp(βω) + 1) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function where we sat the reference chemical potential of the superconductor to zero, Γ = 2πe 2 t 2 ρ (with ρ being the density of states in the normal-metal contact) and where is the usual "P (E)-function" which at zero temperature reduces to Interestingly, the normal-metal-MBS junction thus measures the P (ω), in contrast to the usual metallic junction where the differential conductance is given by the integral of P (ω) Next, we consider a special kind of environment, namely a metallic dot with connections to a MBS and quantum point contact with N open channels to the drain electrode, see Fig. where Q is the conjugate field to α, counting the number of charges passing through the Majorana-bound-state junction, and φ i is the boson field describing the charge that passed from lead to dot through mode i in the QPC This shows that the there is a crossover between full normal reflection and full Andreev reflection at N = 2. Finally, we consider the device setup in Fig. with where r = L, R labels the two ends of the quantum dot, which have independent quantum numbers labeled by k, and the MBSs are denoted by γ L,R . The current operators at the two contacts are For weak tunneling and away from N g being a halfinteger, the dot has a well defined charge and current is therefore blocked as in the usual Coulomb blockade. In this situation, current is carried by cotunneling, which is via virtual states with one additional charge. Secondorder perturbation theory then gives the following result for the conductance at T E C where We note that the cotunneling current is independent of temperature at low temperatures. The cotunneling conductance diverges near the charge degeneracy points N g = ±1/2. To understand the behavior near these points, we follow the discussion by Fu We can also express the tunneling Hamiltonian in terms of the fermion f . This is done by observing that f . The Hamiltonian that governs the system projected onto the two charge states, 0 and 1, can thus be written as Likewise, the current operators becomes The projected Hamiltonian describes a resonant level, f , coupled to electron reservoirs, r = L and r = R. The conductance is then simply given by the conductance of a resonant level where Γ 2 = Γ 2 L + Γ 2 R . Eq. ( (37) The non-perturbative result in (36) was derived under the assumption that the charge fluctuations are suppressed to the two charge states closest in energy, or in other words, E C Γ r . In order to investigate the opposite limit where contacts have large transparency, we describe the Majorana junction in terms of a dual representation, which is an expansion around the perfect Andreev fixed point where the fields Φ r give the charge that passes through junction r. It is natural to introduce a total-charge field Φ + = Φ R +Φ L and a difference field Φ -= Φ R -Φ L , which is related to current via I = -i∂ τ Φ -/2π. For E C λ r and at low energies |ω n | E C the mode Φ + gets pinned at πN g . We can therefore integrate out the total-charge field by replacing the cosine terms in the action (38) by their averages over Φ + . This is valid, when E C , Λ λ r , where Λ is the high-energy cut-off parameter. This leaves the following effective low-energy action for the difference field where λbs = λ L,bs e iπNg + λ R,bs e -iπNg e iΦ+ 0 . (41) The expectation value e iΦ+ 0 appears after integration over Φ + and it becomes where Λ = v F /a is the cut-off energy. The model ( and hence where λ 2 bs = λ 2 L,bs + λ 2 R,bs . We also define an device asymmetry angle for the weak backscattering limit: sin θ dual = λ R,bs /λ bs and cos θ dual = λ L,bs /λ bs , so that We see that in both the weak tunneling and in the weak backscattering formulations the conductance peaks at the charge neutrality points and reaches e 2 /h for a symmetrically coupled dot, agreeing with the expectation for the series resistance of two resistors each having resistance h/2e 2 . However, in the general case they have different lineshapes. Fig. It is interesting to note that the conductance for the metallic dot coupled to two MBSs does not depend on temperature, even though it is an inelastic process. This is in contrast to the usual inelastic cotunneling in metallic dots, where the conductance is proportional to temperature squared, even in the strong-coupling limit Tunneling spectroscopy is an important diagnostic tool for determining the presence and properties of MBSs. In this paper, we have studied the influence of interactions with the surrounding circuit on the measured currentvoltage characteristics. Confirming the results of Ref. 20, we obtain a transition from perfect Andreev reflection to an isolating state of the normal-metal-MBS junction which can be controlled by the resistance of the circuit. When the environment resistance exceeds h/2e 2 , the linear conductance goes to zero at low temperatures. We studied two types of environments, namely one that can be described by a linear impedance and a quantum point contact, which allows for direct tuning of the transition. /h] FIG. Moreover, we introduced an interesting setup where two MBSs are coupled to a metallic island. This system has the property that the linear cotunneling current is temperature independent, which is very different from the usual cotunneling current through a metallic dot coupled to two metallic electrodes. In the latter case, the cotunneling current is proportional to temperature squared due to the phase space of final states with an electronhole pair created at each contact. In contrast, with two MBS junctions connecting the dot, the integral over final states involving a single electron-hole pair also involves the divergent resonant Andreev reflections and, as a result, produces a temperature independent conductance. The metallic dot case is related to Coulomb blockade of a topological superconducting island considered by Fu 