We analyze the competition of magnetism and superconductivity in the two-dimensional Hubbard model with a moderate interaction strength, including the possibility of incommensurate spiral magnetic order. Using an unbiased renormalization group approach, we compute magnetic and superconducting order parameters in the ground state. In addition to previously established regions of Néel order coexisting with d-wave superconductivity, the calculations reveal further coexistence regions where superconductivity is accompanied by incommensurate magnetic order. Introduction. The two-dimensional Hubbard model is a prototype system for competing order in layered transition metal oxide compounds. Shortly after the discovery of high temperature superconductivity in cuprates, it has been proposed as a key model describing the valence electrons in the copper-oxygen planes While the magnetic order is captured already by conventional mean-field theory The magnetic order is not necessarily of commensurate Néel type, that is, with antiparallel spin orientation between adjacent sites. The possibility of magnetic order with generally incommensurate wave vectors away from (π, π) has been explored by several mean-field studies In the fRG flow spontaneous symmetry breaking is signaled by diverging effective interactions at a critical energy scale Λ c . In principle, the flow can be continued below the instability scale Λ c to compute order parameters in the ordered phase Here we present novel results for the two-dimensional Hubbard model, allowing, for the first time, magnetic order with arbitrary wave vectors and superconductivity. In addition to the previously established regions of Néel order coexisting with d-wave superconductivity, we find new coexistence regions where superconductivity is accompanied by incommensurate magnetic order. Method. Our results are based on the fRG+MFT method formulated in Ref. . We denote the spin and momentum dependence of the vertex at scale Λ by Γ Λ σ1,σ2;σ3,σ4 (k 1 , k 2 ; k 3 , k 4 ), where the indices 1,2 refer to outgoing, and 3,4 to incoming particles. Spin-singlet pairing is driven by the singlet component of the vertex in the Cooper channel (zero total momentum), where Γ Λ s = Γ Λ σ,-σ;-σ,σ -Γ Λ σ,-σ;σ,-σ . Magnetic instabilities with a momentum Q are generated by the magnetic component of the vertex with momentum transfer Q, that is, Note that Γ Λ σ,-σ;σ,-σ = Γ Λ σ,σ;σ,σ -Γ Λ σ,-σ;-σ,σ due to spin rotation invariance. In the second step, the irreducible vertices in the relevant channels are computed by solving the corresponding Bethe-Salpeter equations where G ΛMF (p 0 , p) is the propagator at the scale Λ MF , and p is a short-hand notation for d 2 p (2π) 2 dp0 2π . The irreducible magnetic vertex ŨQ;kk is determined from In this work we neglect self-energy contributions to the flow, so that G ΛMF is just the regularized bare propagator G ΛMF 0 . Finally, the superconducting and magnetic order parameters are computed by solving the mean-field Hamiltonian with the irreducible vertex parts Ṽkk and ŨQ;kk as effective interactions. The superconducting order parameter is given by the gap function where p k = a -k↓ a k↑ is the Cooper pair annihilation operator. The phase of the superconducting order can be chosen such that ∆ k is real. Concerning the magnetic order, we restrict our analysis to spiral states, as described by the order parameter where m k = a † k↑ a k+Q↓ . For Q = (π, π) the spiral order is equivalent to Néel order with a staggered magnetisation in the xy-plane. There are several mean-field studies of spiral magnetic order in the two-dimensional Hubbard model A mean-field decoupling of the reduced effective interactions yields the mean-field Hamiltonian For the Hubbard model with nearest and next-to-nearest neighbor hopping on a square lattice, the dispersion ), the mean-field Hamiltonian can be written in the form , where M k is a hermitian 4 × 4 matrix. H MF can thus be diagonalized by a 4 × 4 unitary (generalized Bogoliubov) transformation, and the resulting gap equations can be solved numerically by iteration. Occasionally two distinct locally stable solutions of the gap equations are found. One then has to compute the corresponding free energies to discriminate globally stable from metastable states. Results. We have computed the magnetic and superconducting order parameters in the ground state of the two-dimensional Hubbard model at and near half-filling for weak to moderate interaction strenghts U/t = 2, 3, 4 for a small next-to-nearest neighbor hopping amplitude t /t = -0.15, and for U/t = 3 also for the special particlehole symmetric case t = 0. We now present our results The amplitude of the magnetic gap function obtained from a purely magnetic solution is also shown for comparison, with corresponding hole and electron pockets at n = 0.96 and n = 1.05 in the left and right insets, respectively. First order transitions (see broken lines near n = 0.9 and n = 1.06) lead to small density intervals where no homogeneous solution exists. for U/t = 3 and t /t = -0.15, and subsequently discuss similarities and differences found for the other choices of U and t In Fig. The maximal gap amplitude at "optimal" hole-doping is significantly larger than the maximal gap on the electron doped side, in agreement with the gap hierarchy in cuprate superconductors. The maximal gap on the hole-doped side is situated slightly above van Hove filling, where the magnetic order is already quite weak. The gap decreases smoothly in the "overdoped" regime, due to a decrease of the pairing interaction and the density of states. The leading order parameter is often guessed from the leading divergence of the effective interactions in the fRG flow upon approaching the critical scale Λ c A major novel result of our work is the coexistence of superconductivity with incommensurate magnetic order in a regime where a purely superconducting state was expected, since the hole-doping is already quite large. It is therefore interesting to look at the condensation energy gained by symmetry breaking in the incommensurate regime. In Fig. Let us now compare the above results to those obtained for other choices of U , as presented in our Supplementary Material For t = 0, the Hubbard model is particle-hole symmetric, that is, the properties for densities n and 2 -n are equivalent. Due to perfect nesting the system is a Néel antiferromagnet at half-filling for any U > 0. There is no homogeneous solution in a density range around halffilling, both on the electron and hole-doped side. For larger doping there is a small region exhibiting incommensurate magnetism in coexistence with d-wave superconductivity, and a broader purely superconducting region. While the magnetic order parameter at half-filling has almost the same size for t = 0 and t = -0.15, the largest achievable pairing gap (at optimal doping) is much smaller for t = 0. A sizable next-to-nearest neighbor hopping thus helps to promote superconductivity with a large gap. This was already revealed in a previous fRG study Summary. We have analyzed the competition between magnetism and superconductivity in the ground state of the two-dimensional Hubbard model, including the possibility of incommensurate spiral magnetic order. Using a combination of fRG and mean-field theory, fluctuation driven order is captured without any bias for a specific instability. Charge, spin, and pairing channels are treated on equal footing. Away from half-filling, magnetic order always coexists with superconductivity, as a consequence of a Cooper instability in electron or hole pockets. For t < 0, both magnetism and superconductivity exhibit a pronounced particle-hole asymmetry. On the hole-doped side, superconductivity has larger maximal gaps and it coexists with incommensurate magnetism at moderate doping, except at van Hove filling, where magnetic order is fully suppressed by pairing. The incommensurate magnetic order is "gossamer-like" in the sense that it is stabilized only by a tiny energy gain with respect to a purely superconducting state. Rather fragile incommensurate magnetic order has actually been observed at the bottom of the superconducting dome in La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 Our analysis was restricted to weak and moderate interaction strengths. The method may be extended to strong interactions by using dynamical mean-field theory as a starting point for the fRG flow We now turn to the special case with pure nearest-neighbor hopping (t = 0) for comparison. The Fermi surface at half-filling is perfectly nested in that case. Hence, at half-filling the system is a Néel antiferromagnet for any U > 0. The system is particle-hole symmetric, that is, the properties for densities n and 2 -n are equivalent, so that we can restrict ourselves to the hole-doped region. We have computed the magnetic and superconducting order parameters for U = 3. At half-filling the system is purely antiferromagnetic with a magnetic order parameter A = 0.36. No homogeneous solution is found in the density range 0.875 < n < 1. Hence, a system with an average density in that interval will undergo phase separation in regions with distinct densities n = 1 and n = 0.875. The magnetic and superconducting order parameters for n < 0.875 are shown in Fig. 