The complex interdigitated phases have greatly frustrated attempts to document the basic features of the superconductivity in the alkali metal intercalated iron chalcogenides. Here, using elastic neutron scattering, energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy, and resistivity measurements, we elucidate the relations of these phases in Rb 1-δ FeySe2-zSz. We find: i) the iron content is crucial in stabilizing the stripe antiferromagnetic (AF) phase with rhombic iron vacancy order (y ≈ 1.5), the block AF phase with √ 5 × √ 5 iron vacancy order (y ≈ 1.6), and the iron vacancy-free phase (y ≈ 2); ii) the superconducting phase (z = 0) evolves into a metallic phase (z > 1.5) with sulfur substitution due to the progressive decrease of the electronic correlation strength. Both the stripe AF phase and the block AF phase are Mott insulators. Our data suggest that there are miscibility gaps between these three phases. The existence of the miscibility gaps in the iron content is the key to understanding the relationship between these complicated phases. The discovery of superconductivity in the iron chalcogenides has generated a great deal of interest. The simplest PbO-type bulk FeSe superconducts below 8 K and 36.7 K under ambient and 8.9 GPa pressure, respectively, whereas single-layer FeSe films on a SrTiO 3 substrate have been reported to have superconducting (SC) transition temperatures (T c ) as high as 109 K 1-3 . Intercalation of alkali-metals (A = Li, Na, K, Rb, and Cs) or molecular spacer layer could enhance the T c in bulk materials up to 46 K For these purposes, we have synthesized different com- positions of Rb 1-δ Fe y Se 2-z S z single crystals to study the effects of varying the Fe content and the Se:S ratio on the magnetic and superconducting phases. Firstly, using elastic neutron scattering, we find that the 234 phase and the 245 phase exist in all three insulating nominal compositions of Rb 0.8 Fe 1.5 Se 2 , Rb 0.8 Fe 1.5 SeS, and Rb 0.8 Fe 1.5 S 2 The nominal composition of Rb 0.8 Fe 2 S 2 exhibits a single phase with randomly distributed iron vacancies at high temperatures. At temperatures below T s = 554 K, it separates into two phases in a first order transition: the insulating 245 phase with √ 5 × √ 5 iron vacancy order and a metallic iron vacancy-free phase, which evolves into the SC phase in Rb 0.8 Fe 2 Se 2 with replacement of S by Se. The first order structural transition and the significant difference of the bond lengths of the two phases is consistent with the existence of a miscibility gap between the 245 phase and a metallic phase at y ≈ 1.6 and 2, respectively. The resulting phase diagrams show that the iron content is a key parameter in tuning between and stabilizing the insulating and metallic phases, while the Se:S ratio is important for inducing superconductivity from the non-magnetic metallic phase of Rb 1-δ Fe 2 S 2 . We carried out the neutron scattering experiments on the HB-1A triple axis spectrometer at the High-Flux Isotope Reactor, Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The details about the single crystal growth, resistivity measurements, and configurations of neutron scattering experiments have been described elsewhere We first present neutron diffraction data in Fig. , where S ⊥ is the perpendicular component of in-plane ordered moments to momentum transfer Q and F(Q) is the magnetic form factor of Fe 2+ demonstrating that they are magnetic. The temperature dependence of the peak intensities at Q = (3/8, 3/8, 1) shows a transition at T 234 N = 220 K, suggesting that the new set of peaks has the same magnetic origin as the stripe AF order. One possible explanation is that the 234 phase exhibits a super iron vacancy order in addition to the rhombic iron vacancy order. Kinks are clearly observed in the intensities of the peaks associated with the 234 phase at the transition temperature T 245 s,N = 400 K of the 245 phase, demonstrating the mobility of the iron vacancies between the two phases. A transition-like behavior in the peak intensities at Q = (0.5, 0.5, 3) at 400 K that is much higher than the Néel temperature of T 234 N = 220 K indicates that the peak intensities have a combination contribution from the nuclear reflection of the super iron vacancy order and a √ 2 × √ 2 Rb vacancy order between 220 K and 400 K, and a pure √ 2 × √ 2 Rb vacancy order at temperatures above 400 K To elucidate the role of the iron content, we carried out additional neutron diffraction measurements on the crystal with nominal composition of Rb 0.8 Fe 2 S 2 . The real composition as revealed by EDX is Rb 0.75 Fe 1.85 S 2 . The diffraction data are presented in Fig. The results of measurements of the resistivity on samples with nominal compositions of Rb 0.8 Fe 1.5 Se 2-z S z , z = 0, 1, 2, are presented in Fig. In Fig. Our results demonstrate that the rhombic iron vacancy ordered phase is energetically stable for compositions with iron content y ≤ 1.5. The associated stripe AF order forms at temperatures below T 234 N . The pure stripe phase is achieved in samples with a refined composition of Rb 0.78 Fe 1.35 S 2 The effects of disorder are always more significant in quenched samples and at interfaces. Not surprisingly, some compositions within the miscibility gaps are reported in quenched samples. A scanning tunneling microscopy study reveals a 278 phase with y = 1.75 in some areas of SC K x Fe y Se 2 Our studies on both the Se-based and S-based Rb x Fe y Se 2-z S z compounds result in phase diagrams in Fig. 