Specific heat measurements have been successfully used to probe unconventional superconducting phases in one-band heavy-fermion and organic superconductors. We extend the method to study successive phase transitions in multi-band materials such as iron based superconductors. The signatures are multiple peaks in the specific heat, at low temperatures and high magnetic field, which can lead the experimental verification of unconventional superconducting states with non-zero total momentum. Ideal diamagnetism is one of most striking properties of superconductors, which is manifested by the Meissner effect, the complete expulsion of a magnetic field from the volume of a superconductor. Conversely, magnetic fields with relatively large value can destroy superconductivity. In most real (II type) superconductors it may take place in two ways -by orbital or paramagnetic effects. The orbital pairbreaking is connected with the rise of the Abrikosov vortex state in superconductors, while paramagnetic pair-breaking originates from the Zeeman splitting of electronic energy levels. Both effects determine the upper critical magnetic field, in which the relative importance of the orbital and paramagnetic effects in the suppression of the superconductivity is described by the Maki parameter α = √ 2H orb c2 /H P c2 In most superconductors, the orbital pair-breaking effects are more disruptive than the diamagnetic ones, thus H P c2 is usually larger than H orb c2 (α ≪ 1) and superconductivity disappears when vortex cores begin to overlap. When α ≥ 1, superconductivity is destroyed by the Zeeman effect (Pauli paramagnetism), and systems exhibiting this property are called Pauli limited materials. In absence of an external magnetic field, superconductors are found in the Bardeen-Cooper-Shrieffer (BCS) state Although the FFLO phase was already theoretically described in the 1960s, the experimental search is still ongoing and riddled with difficulties. They come as a consequence of the physical properties of this inhomogeneous phase: it can occur only in Pauli limited superconductors at low temperature and high magnetic field (LTHM) regime. Only in the last decade systems have appeared in which we expect an experimental verification of this phase, such as heavy-fermion superconductors In experiments on the ordered phases (such as superconducting or magnetic), measurements of the anomalies in the specific heat C are one of the most sensitive tools Because the experimental evidence to confirm the FFLO phase in iron-based superconductors (IBSC) is still needed, the description of the theoretical properties of this phase is paramount. In this paper we discuss experimental consequences multiple phase transitions induced by the FFLO phase in Pauli limited multi-band iron-based superconductors at low temperature and high magnetic field. IBSC are chemical compounds possessing layered structure, with a characteristic Fermi surface (FS). In order to explain the FS features in IBSC, various two-orbital To realistically describe e.g. FeAs layers, five 3d-orbitals of iron ions need to be retained in the model. However, the band structure calculations suggest the importance of itinerant electrons from the d xz and d yz orbitals. Influential in the formation of the FS are also the d xy orbitals. For this reason, in our calculations we use for simplicity the three-band model proposed by M. Daghofer et al. In general, the momentum-dependent tight-binding non-interacting Hamiltonian of the multi-orbital IBSC in orbital space is be given by: where c αkσ (c † αkσ ) annihilates (creates) an electron with momentum k and spin σ in the orbital α. The hopping matrix elements T αβ k correspond to the kinetic energy of a particle with momentum k changing the orbital from β to α, they are given by the effective tight-binging model of the two-dimensional FeAs planes in the selected model. We use the model of IBSC proposed by M. Daghofer et al. in Ref. + 4t 12 cos(2k x ) cos(2k y ), In Ref. Here d εkσ (d † εkσ ) annihilates (creates) an electron in band ε. The total number of particles in the system αkσ c † αkσ c αkσ = εkσ d † εkσ d kεσ is adjusted by the chemical potential μ. We neglected orbital effects, which is equivalent to assuming that the external magnetic field h is parallel to the FeAs layers. For simplicity and readability we assume the existence of only the superconducting phase in the system. However, it should be had in mind that in many IBSC systems superconductivity can coexist with magnetic order. where ∆ εk = ∆ ε η(k) = U ε η(k) d ε,-k+qε↓ d εk↑ is the SOP in band ε for the TMCP q ε and amplitude ∆ ε . The structure factor given by η(k) captures the symmetry of the SOP, related to the effective interaction in real space The total Hamiltonian H = H ′ 0 + H ′ SC , formally describes a system with a three independent bands. For this reason, the eigenvalues of H in the band representation are given by standard Bogoliubov transformation where The grand canonical potential can be calculated explicitly from its definition Ω ≡ k B T ln{Tr[exp(-H/k B T )]}, which for given (fixed) parameter h and T can be treated as function of the SOP ∆ ε and TMCP q ε in each bands. In case of intraband superconductivity, the grand canonical potential is given as Ω = ε Ω ε , where: Detail calculation can be found in Ref. where subscript e labels the equilibrium values of the SOPs ∆ ε and TMCPs q ε . From the equilibrium condition, we have: ∂Ω ε /∂∆ ε | e = ∂Ω ε /∂q ε | e = 0 for all ε, since Ω(∆ ε , q ε ) is at a minimum. Hence S =ε ∂Ω ε /∂T | e , or a priori: where f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. The specific heat is then defined in the usual manner by: It should be noted that the grand potential (and also SOPs and TMCPs) depend on temperature in a nontrivial manner, which forces the calculation of S and C to be carried out by numerical derivatives. The global ground state can be obtained, at fixed values of the parameters (temperature T and magnetic field h), from the minimization of the grand canonical potential Ω with respect to the SOP ∆ ε and TMCP q ε , at the same time determining the optimal values of the latter parameters. All calculations have been performed on NVIDIA GPUs, in momentum space on a square lattice grid k x × k y = 10000 × 10000, using the algorithm described in Ref. Above h BCS , at temperatures below some characteristic T + , the FFLO phase arises In the case of BCS, we can find a typical h-T phase diagram (Fig. Usually the superconductivity in IBSC is described by an s ± -wave symmetry, where the gap changes its sign between the hole and electron pockets of the Fermi surface For different compounds, the quantity of specific heat peaks can depend on the number of bands forming the Fermi surface and supporting the FFLO state in the LTHM regime, with the detailed band structure influencing only quantitatively the jump heights. In this paper we show that the presence of the FFLO phase, in multi-band materials like IBSC, can be experimentally ascertained by the appearance of multiple phase transitions, which is in turn manifested by multi-discontinuities in the shape of the specific heat. In the context of Pauli limited superconductors, we can speak about two scales of temperature. The former is the critical temperature T C , at which Solid lines denote the phase transitions between BCS state and normal or FFLO state, while red, green and blue lines phase transitions inside the FFLO state, described in the main text. (b) Specific heat along the cut line (violet dotted line in panel a). Bold black line is the total specific heat while red, green and blue solid lines are the partial specific heats for the first, second, and third band respectively. Dotted lines display the form of the specific heat for the normal state. Arrows mark the locations of phase transitions. the superconductivity vanishes in zero external magnetic field. The latter is the temperature T + , in which phase transitions from the superconducting to normal state change kind, from first to second order. T C is reported as 2.3 K and 3.5 K for CeCoIn 5 and KFe 2 As 2 respectively, while in both cases T + can be approximated as 0.31 T C Relevant experimental data have been presented in the literature for KFe 2 As 2 