We study numerically nonuniform quantum turbulence of coflow in a square channel by the vortex filament model. Coflow means that superfluid velocity v s and normal fluid velocity v n flow in the same direction. Quantum turbulence for thermal counterflow has been long studied theoretically and experimentally. In recent years, experiments of coflow are performed to observe different features from thermal counterflow. By supposing that v s is uniform and v n takes the Hagen-Poiseiulle profile, our simulation finds that quantized vortices are distributed inhomogeneously. Vortices like to accumulate on the surface of a cylinder with v s ≃ v n . Consequently, the vortex configuration becomes degenerate from three-dimensional to two-dimensional. Quantum turbulence is one of the most important issues in low temperature physics and has been studied theoretically and experimentally for thermal counterflow where superfluid and normal fluid flow oppositely. In recent years, experiments of coflow where superfluid and normal fluid flow in the same direction are performed to observe different features from thermal counterflow According to the two-fluid model, superfluid 4 He at a finite temperature consists of an intimate mixture of a viscous normal fluid component (density ρ n and velocity v n ) and an inviscid superfluid components (density ρ s and velocity v s ) We perform numerical simulation for coflow in a square channel; superfluid velocity is prescribed to be uniform flow and normal fluid velocity to be Hagen-Poiseuille flow. Vortices are distributed inhomogeneously and like to accumulate through the mutual friction on the surface of a cylinder where superfluid velocity equals normal fluid velocity. As a result, the vortex configuration becomes degenerate from three-dimensional to two-dimensional. How strongly the vortices accumulate depends on temperature and the averaged velocity. The contents of this paper are as follows. In Sec. 2, we shall clarify the formulation of the model and introduce the equation of motion. In Sec. 3, we show the results for coflow. Section 4 is devoted to the conclusion and the future work. We perform numerical simulation by using the vortex filament model with the full Biot-Savart law where α and α ′ are the temperature-dependent mutual friction coefficients, and the prime denotes derivatives of s with respect to ξ. The first term of the right-hand side of Eq.( Here v s,ω is the velocity field caused by vortex filaments, v s,b the boundary induced field, v s,a the applied uniform velocity field. The velocity field v s,ω is represented by the Biot-Savart law where s 1 refers to a point on the vortex filament and the integration is performed along the vortex filaments. The velocity field v s,ω is obtained by a simple procedure; it is just the field produced by an image vortex that is constructed by reflecting the filament into the surface and reversing its direction. The second and third terms of the right-hand side of Eq.( We prescribe the Hagen-Poiseuille profile u p for v n , though the normal fluid flow in the experiment where u 0 is a normalization factor and a and b are halves of the channel width along the y and z axes, respectively To characterize the development of vortices, we introduce the vortex line density (VLD) as where the integral is performed along all vortices in the sample volume Ω. In this study, our calculation is performed under the following conditions. A vortex filament is represented by a string of discreet points. The numerical space resolution, namely the minimum distance between neighboring points, is ∆ξ = 8.0×10 -4 cm, the time resolution is ∆ = 1.0×10 -4 s, and the computing box is 0.1 × 0.1 × 0.1 cm 3 . We consider the case of vn = vs , where vn and vs are the spatially averaged normal fluid velocity and the spacial average of the applied superfluid velocity v s,a , respectively. The periodic boundary conditions are used along the flow direction x, whereas the solid boundary conditions are applied to channel walls. The effects of reconnection is artificially performed, whenever two vortices approach more closely than ∆ξ. The initial state consists of eight randomly oriented vortex rings of radius 0.023 cm (Fig. We perform numerical simulation for coflow in a square channel and find two different states of vortices, namely the diffusive state and the localized state. The features of two states are shown in the figures; Fig. )!*"+,-$ . /!*0. [a] [b] In the localized state, the development of the vortices consists of two stages. As shown in Fig. The vortex distribution of coflow is different from that of nonuniform thermal counterflow Whether the vortices are localized or diffusive depends on the parameters. We introduce a dimensionless variable L in /L out to characterize the behavior of the vortices; Here L in is obtained by the integration along all vortices L in in the cylindrical region of the radius 0.045 cm whose central axis is along that of the pipe and, L out is obtained by the integration along all other vortices L out . The time development of L in /L out is shown in Fig. We found that the vortex development of coflow has two states; one is diffusive and the other is localized. At the localized state, the vortices accumulate on the surface of cylinder where the mutual friction does not work. Whether the vortices are localized or diffusive depends on temperature and the averaged velocity. The future work is to perform a numerical simulation of coflow under turbulent normal fluid flow. In the experiment 