We investigate the Andreev transport through double quantum dot Cooper pair splitters with ferromagnetic leads. The analysis is performed with the aid of the real-time diagrammatic technique in the sequential tunneling regime. We study the dependence of the Andreev current, the differential conductance and the tunnel magnetoresistance on various parameters of the model in both the linear and nonlinear response regimes. In particular, we analyze the spin-resolved transport in the crossed Andreev reflection regime, where a blockade of the current occurs due to enhanced occupation of the triplet state. We show that in the triplet blockade finite intradot correlations can lead to considerable leakage current due to direct Andreev reflection processes. Furthermore, we find additional regimes of current suppression resulting from enhanced occupation of singlet states, which decreases the rate of crossed Andreev reflection. We also study how the splitting of Andreev bound states, triggered by either dot level detuning, finite hopping between the dots or magnetic field, affects the Andreev current. While in the first two cases the number of Andreev bound states is doubled, whereas transport properties are qualitatively similar, in the case of finite magnetic field further level splitting occurs, leading to a nontrivial behavior of spin-resolved transport characteristics, and especially that of tunneling magnetoresistance. Finally, we discuss the entanglement fidelity between split Cooper pair electrons and show that by tuning the device parameters fidelity can reach unity. Quantum dots coupled to superconducting and normal leads provide very promising systems to study the interplay between the superconducting correlations and the mesoscopic electronic transport. (Color online) Schematic of a double quantum dot Cooper pair splitter with ferromagnetic leads. The left (right) dot is coupled to the left (right) lead with the coupling strength Γ σ L (Γ σ R ) and each dot is coupled to a common superconducting lead with coupling Γ S L and Γ S R for the left and right dot, respectively. The magnetizations of the ferromagnetic leads can form either parallel or antiparallel magnetic configuration. The level energy and Coulomb repulsion in dot i are denoted by εi and Ui, while t and ULR describe the hopping and the Coulomb correlations between the two dots. perconductor and to two ferromagnetic contacts, can exhibit a considerable tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) and generate large spin current. Therefore, such nanostructures are also interesting for spin nanoelectronics and understanding their magnetoresistive properties is of great importance. Transport properties of quantum dots attached to ferromagnetic leads have already been broadly investigated both experimentally The paper is organized in the following way: Sec. II contains the description of the DQD model and the method used in calculations. The numerical results and their discussion in the crossed Andreev reflection regime are presented in Sec. III. In Sec. IV we analyze how the splitting of Andreev bound states affects the transport properties. The next section is devoted to the analysis of transport in the full parameter space where both CAR and DAR processes are present. The behavior of entanglement fidelity on bias and gate voltages is studied in Sec. VI and, finally, the paper is concluded in Sec. VII. We consider double quantum dot Cooper pair splitter, which is schematically displayed in Fig. where the first term, H β , describes the left (β = L) and right (β = R) ferromagnetic electrodes in the noninteracting quasiparticle approximation, Here, c † kβσ (c kβσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron with the wave vector k and spin σ in the lead β, whereas ε kβσ denotes the corresponding single-particle energy. The second term in Eq. (1) describes the s-wave BCS superconducting (S) lead in the mean field approximation with ε kSσ denoting the relevant single-particle energy and ∆ standing for the order parameter of the superconductor, which is assumed to be real and positive. The third term of the Hamiltonian (1) describes the two single-level quantum dots and acquires the follow-ing form: where d † iσ creates a spin-σ electron in dot i of energy ε i , ) is the Coulomb correlation energy of the left (right) dot, and B z denotes external magnetic field in units of gμ B ≡ 1 with S iz = (n i↑ -n i↓ )/2. U LR and t stand for the interdot Coulomb repulsion and the hopping between the dots, respectively. The last term of the Hamiltonian describes tunneling of electrons between the leads (L, R, S) and the two dots ), for i = L, R, denoting the relevant tunneling matrix elements between the two dots and ferromagnetic leads (the superconducting lead). In the following, we assume that these matrix elements are k and σ independent, V i kσ ≡ V i and V S ikσ ≡ V S i . The coupling of the dots to respective ferromagnetic leads can be parametrized by, Γ σ i = 2π|V i | 2 ρ σ i , where ρ σ i is the spindependent density of states of lead i. Within the wide band approximation these couplings become energy independent and constant. Introducing the spin polarization of the i-th lead, , where ρ + i (ρ - i ) is the spin majority (minority) density of states, the couplings can be written in the form, Γ σ Generally, each dot can be coupled to its lead with different strength and the two leads can have different spin polarizations, here, however, we restrict our analysis to symmetric systems and note that the presented results are also qualitatively valid for systems with weak asymmetry in the couplings. We thus assume p L = p R ≡ p and Γ L = Γ R ≡ Γ/2. Moreover, we also assume that the dots' levels are degenerate ε L = ε R ≡ ε and the dots' Coulomb energies are equal, U L = U R ≡ U , unless stated otherwise. Since in this paper we are only interested in Andreev transport, we can take the limit of an infinite superconducting gap, ∆ → ∞. Then, the quantum dot system coupled to the superconducting lead can be described by the effective Hamiltonian 60 where Γ S LR = Γ S L Γ S R . The superconducting proximity effects are included in the last two terms of Eq. (5). The first term describes local proximity effects on each dot and arises due to direct Andreev reflection, whereas the second term describes creation of nonlocal entangled states between the two dots. These nonlocal correlations are responsible for crossed Andreev reflection. The effective pair potential Γ S i (i = L, R) is the coupling strength between the i-th dot and superconducting electrode and acquires the form, Γ S i = 2π|V S i | 2 ρ S , where ρ S denotes the density of states of the superconductor in the normal state. We assume that the couplings between the dots and superconductor are equal, Γ S L = Γ S R ≡ Γ S . The device is biased in the following way: The electrochemical potential of the superconducting lead is assumed to be grounded, μ S = 0, see Fig. We would like to note that while the assumption of infinite superconducting gap allows us to exclude normal tunneling processes and study only the Andreev transport, it needs to be taken with some care. This is because in real systems the gap can be large, but is clearly finite. In order to calculate the transport characteristics of the considered system, we employ the real-time diagrammatic technique (RTDT), where the elements W χ,χ ′ of the self-energy matrix W describe transitions between the states |χ and |χ ′ on the Keldysh contour, with |χ denoting the many-body eigenstate of H eff DQD , H eff DQD |χ = ε χ |χ . P is the vector of diagonal density matrix elements P χ = χ|ρ|χ , which can be found from Eq. ( where W Ii denotes the modified self-energy matrix W, which takes into account the number of electrons transferred through the junction i. To find the occupation probabilities and the current, we perform the perturbation expansion of the selfenergies, occupation probabilities and the current with respect to the coupling strength to ferromagnetic leads Γ. In our studies, we consider the weak coupling regime and take into account only the first-order tunneling processes, which correspond to sequential tunneling. We first determine the self-energies using the respective diagrammatic rules We also note that when Γ ≪ Γ S , as considered in the present paper, and taking into account only the lowestorder tunneling processes in the coupling to ferromagnetic leads, the reduced density matrix becomes diagonal in the eigenbasis of the effective Hamiltonian. The main quantity of interest is the current flowing through the system due to Andreev reflection processes. By calculating the currents I L and I R flowing through the left and right junctions, the total current flowing into the superconductor can be simply obtained from the Kirchhoff's law together with the corresponding differential conductance, G S = dI S /dV . Since the normal leads are ferromagnetic, the Andreev current depends on the magnetic configuration of the device, which is assumed to be either parallel or antiparallel. We thus also calculate the tunnel magnetoresistance associated with the change of magnetic configuration of the system, which is defined as 18 where I P S and I AP S denote the Andreev current flowing into the superconductor in the parallel and antiparallel magnetic configurations, respectively. Note that this definition is opposite to that in the case of the Julliere model. When the charging energy of each dot is much larger than Coulomb correlations between the dots and the applied bias voltage, the rate of direct Andreev reflection is suppressed and only CAR processes are possible. This condition is in fact one of the main requirements for the system to work as Cooper pair beam splitter. In the limit of infinite intradot correlations, double occupation of each dot is forbidden and only nine states (out of 16) of the effective Hamiltonian (5) are relevant for transport. These are the following states: empty state |0, 0 , four singly occupied states |σ, 0 , |0, σ , and four doubly occupied states |σ, σ ′ for σ, σ ′ =↑, ↓, where |α, β ≡ |α L |β R , with |0 i and |σ i denoting empty and singly occupied states of dot i. Due to the hopping and additional terms in Eq. ( being linear combinations of empty state and singlet state, We note that the triplet states become decoupled from the superconductor since Cooper pairs consist of two electrons with compensated spin, i.e., S pair = 0, and there is no coupling between the singlet and triplet states. The corresponding eigenenergies of the eigenstates given by Eq. ( The Andreev bound state (ABS) energies are defined as 22 where α, β = ±. These energies are the excitation energies between doublet and singlet states of the double dot decoupled from the ferromagnetic leads. Due to the assumption, U → ∞, double occupancy of each dot is forbidden and direct Andreev tunneling becomes totally suppressed. The only way to transfer charge between the double dot and the superconductor is by crossed Andreev reflection, the process which involves two electrons with opposite spins coming from different ferromagnetic leads. For eV > 0, the two electrons tunnel to the superconductor, while for eV < 0, the Cooper pairs are extracted from the superconducting electrode and entangled pairs of electrons are transmitted to ferromagnetic leads (each electron ends in different lead). In Fig. , where E ABS -+ = E ABS +-= 0 and the corresponding Andreev bound states are at resonance. With increasing the bias, the current starts flowing once As the Andreev reflection becomes optimized for parameters corresponding to particle-hole symmetry point, the Andreev current reaches maximum value for small detuning, δ ≈ 0. These two features are similar to those observed in a tree-terminal system including a single quantum dot. Figure Except for the asymmetry due to the triplet blockade, one can also notice another asymmetry of both the current and differential conductance with respect to the bias reversal, which is visible for large detuning δ, see e.g. δ/U LR = 2 in Figs. For bias voltages such that E ABS +-< eV < E ABS -+ , there are no Andreev levels in the transport window and the current flowing into/out of the superconductor is suppressed. When eV crosses one of those levels, either for positive or negative bias, the current starts to flow and a peak appears in the differential conductance, see Figs. For a better visualization of the behavior of the Andreev current and related differential conductance in different transport regimes we also plot the cross-sections of transport characteristics for two values of detuning parameter δ. Figure The Andreev current and differential conductance as a function of bias voltage in the absence of detuning are shown in Fig. To observe more subtle differences between the parallel and antiparallel magnetic configurations one needs to use quantity which is more sensitive to a change of magnetic alignment of ferromagnetic leads. In Fig. and for the bias voltage E ABS +-< eV < E ABS -+ . For this transport regime however the first-order processes are suppressed and to obtain correct value of TMR higherorder tunneling events should be considered. As has been shown recently, Since the TMR takes well-defined values for parameters corresponding to plateaus in the current, it is possible to find some approximate analytical formulas for the TMR. This can be done assuming very low temperatures when the Fermi functions can be replaced by step functions. The formula for TMR in the transport regime corresponding to δ/U LR = 2 and describing the TMR at the plateau U LR /2 eV 3U LR /2 is given by while the TMR for bias voltages eV -U LR /2 can be approximated by For δ/U LR = 2, the first coefficient, 8(1 + ε A )/(7 + 9ε A ), is very close to unity, while the second coefficient, 2(ε A -1)/(3ε A -1), is close to zero. These two distinct values can be clearly seen in Fig. , the TMR has a plateau of width √ 2Γ S and is given by For positive bias voltage and for δ = 0, the TMR exhibits a plateau for √ 2, at which it is given by TMR = 8 9 Note that the TMR is always positive and smaller than 2p 2 /(1 -p 2 ), Results presented in previous sections were obtained in the limit of infinite Coulomb correlations in the dots, so that the Andreev current was mediated only by CAR processes. We now relax this condition and allow for finite intradot Coulomb correlations, and study their influence on the Andreev current and the TMR, focusing on the triplet blockade regime. Finite Coulomb correlations allow for nonzero current due to DAR processes, which can lead to a nonzero leakage current in the triplet blockade. Thus, once the current is finite, one can analyze the behavior of the TMR, which is now well defined in the whole range of considered bias voltage. Before proceeding with the discussion of the TMR, in Fig. The dependence of the TMR on the bias voltage is presented in Fig. We now study how the transport properties of the DQD Cooper pair splitters change when one allows for finite splitting of Andreev bound states. Such splitting can be induced in various ways, e.g. by detuning the DQD levels, allowing for hopping between the dots where ∆ε = ε L -ε R denotes the detuning of DQD levels, γ, δ = ±, and E ABS αβ is given by Eq. (11). Note that the splitting of ABS results only from the splitting of single-electron states, while the states |+ and |-are not affected. Moreover, one can also notice that finite level detuning ∆ε can have a similar effect as finite hopping between the dots when ∆ε = 2t. In the presence of either level detuning or hopping each of the four ABS states splits into two, which results in eight Andreev bound states. When external magnetic field is additionally present, these states split again and there are sixteen ABS states. One can thus expect that the consequences of ABS splitting will reveal as nontrivial features in transport characteristics. In the following we study the spin-resolved transport properties for finite detuning, hopping and, finally, for finite magnetic field. Although we focus on transport regime where doubly occupied states play negligible role, in calculations we assume large but finite intradot correlations to be able to determine the detuning and bias voltage dependence of the TMR in the considered parameter space. We thus assume U/U LR = 10, if not stated otherwise. From Eq. ( First of all, one can see that the number of peaks in differential conductance has doubled due to the two-fold splitting of ABS states. Because of that, the current as a function of the bias voltage for given detuning δ exhibits more Coulomb steps compared to the case in the absence of ABS splitting. The region of the triplet blockade can be clearly visible for both finite ∆ε and t, see Figs. 9(a) and 10(a). The main difference with the case shown in Fig. Although there are small differences in the behavior of the current and differential conductance in the case of nonzero ∆ε and t, the behavior of the TMR is essential the same in both cases, see Figs. 9(c) and 10(c). One can observe a large TMR in the triplet blockade, TMR > 1, while in the case when doublet states are relevant for transport the TMR is close to TMR = 2p 2 /(1 -p 2 ), cf. Fig. Here, we release the assumption about the smallness of external magnetic field B s needed to switch magnetic configuration of the ferromagnetic leads. Now, we assume that this field is strong enough to induce splitting of the ABS states, which can be achieved using ferromagnets with sufficiently large coercive field. The splitting caused by external magnetic field has a larger influence on spin-resolved transport compared to the splitting due to either finite ∆ε or t. The Andreev current, differential conductance in the parallel configuration and the TMR for finite B z are shown in Fig. The bias voltage and detuning dependence of the TMR is shown in Fig. To complete the analysis of Andreev transport through DQD Cooper pair splitters, in this section we extend the discussion to the full parameter space. Figure Due to finite Coulomb correlations in the dots, there are more Andreev states available for transport, which generally reveals as steps in the bias dependence of the current and corresponding peaks in the differential conductance. One can clearly see the regime of the triplet blockade, which occurs for (δ + U LR )/2 eV (δ + U LR +2U ) and δ 0 or δ -2U -2U LR . Note that there is a relatively large leakage current in the triplet blockade due to finite intradot correlations, which allow DAR processes to participate in transport. Interestingly, there are also another regions where the current becomes suppressed and negative differential conductance occurs, see Figs. 12(a) and (b). To present and discuss these effects in more detail, let us show the relevant cross-sections of Fig. The current and differential conductance in both magnetic configurations as well as the resulting TMR in the case of δ/U LR = -3 are shown in Fig. The above-described behavior is present in both magnetic configurations, however, in the parallel configuration there is a strong spin accumulation in the doublet states and the current is more suppressed compared to the antiparallel configuration. This is reflected in the behavior of the TMR on the bias voltage, which is shown in Fig. When moving away from the particle-hole symmetry point, δ = δ ph , there is a large change in the transport characteristics, see Fig. The Andreev current as a function of bias voltage is shown in Fig. In this transport regime DAR processes are suppressed and transport is mainly due to CAR processes. With increasing the bias voltage, I S increases for eV /U LR ≈ 5/2 to drop again once eV /U LR ≈ 4, where the DQD becomes mainly occupied by the state |d, d . Then, the rate of both Andreev reflection processes becomes decreased. Similar features can be observed for negative bias voltage and the mechanism leading to current suppression and negative differential conductance is basically the same. The first negative differential conductance occurs due to enhanced occupation of the doublet state [| ↓, 0 -|0, ↓ ]/ √ 2 (for -1/2 eV /U LR -3/2), while in the second suppression region the DQD is in the state |0, 0 (for eV /U LR -2). Interestingly, in regions of current suppression due to enhanced doublet occupation, the TMR exhibits rather large values, see Fig. One can also note that CAR processes become relevant not only in blockade regions, but also for 1/2 eV /U LR 3/2, that is at the first plateau for positive bias voltage, see Fig. Another interesting feature is the negative TMR, which occurs at very low positive bias voltage, see Fig. It is this state that allows for finite Andreev current in the parallel configuration, giving rise to negative TMR effect. In this section we study the entanglement fidelity between split electrons forming a Cooper pair. Since the Cooper pair is split and each electron tunnels to different arm of the device in a CAR process, we again focus on the transport regime where DAR processes are excluded by assuming infinite intradot Coulomb correlations. To analyze the fidelity let us consider the Werner state, where F denotes Werner fidelity. For F ≤ 1/2, the Werner state is unentangled, whereas for 1/2 < F ≤ 1, there exist purification protocols, which can extract states with arbitrary large entanglement. Werner fidelity for the considered system is given by the formula, 73 where P T = P T0 +P T ↑ +P T ↓ and P S are occupation probabilities for the triplet and singlet states, respectively. The latter can be expressed by P ± = ±|ρ|± as with α = (1/ √ 2) 1 -δ/(2ε A ) and β = (1/ √ 2) 1 + δ/(2ε A ). Roughly speaking, when P S ≫ P T , fidelity reaches its maximal value F ≈ 1, while in the opposite situation it is suppressed. Fidelity in the parallel magnetic configuration as a function of δ and eV is shown in Fig. The situation becomes more complex when finite detuning of DQD levels is present. In this case the map of fidelity possesses richer structure, see Fig. In this paper we have studied the spin-resolved Andreev transport through double quantum dot-based Cooper pair splitters with ferromagnetic leads. The considered device consisted of two single-level quantum dots coupled to a common s-wave superconductor and each dot coupled to its own ferromagnetic lead. The calculations were performed with the aid of the real-time diagrammatic technique, assuming weak coupling between DQD and ferromagnets and taking into account the sequential tunneling processes. We have analyzed the bias voltage and DQD level dependence of the Andreev current and the differential conductance in the parallel and antiparallel configurations, as well as the resulting tunnel magnetoresistance. In the case of infinite correlations in the dots, we have discussed the behavior of spin-dependent characteristics in the transport regime where only crossed Andreev reflection processes are possible. For certain DQD levels' configuration and applied bias voltage, the current is then suppressed due to the triplet blockade. We showed that even relatively large intradot correlations can lead to finite leakage current in the triplet blockade. We found an enhanced TMR in the triplet blockade, which indicates the role of CAR processes in transport. We have also analyzed the effect of splitting the Andreev bound states by either finite DQD level detuning, finite hopping between the dots or finite magnetic field. While in the first two cases each Andreev bound state becomes split into two, finite magnetic field further splits the ABS, resulting in more complex transport characteristics, with negative differential conductance and negative TMR occurring in certain transport regimes. Moreover, assuming finite correlations in the dots, we have studied transport properties in the full parameter space, where both DAR and CAR processes are relevant. We found transport regimes where additional current suppression accompanied with negative differential conductance occurs. These suppression regimes are due to enhanced occupation of certain many-body DQD states, which diminishes the rate of either CAR or DAR processes, depending on transport region. Finally, in the CAR transport regime we have also analyzed the entanglement fidelity between electrons forming Cooper pairs. We showed that the fidelity of split Cooper pair electrons can be tuned by bias and gate voltages and for certain parameters F can reach unity. Consequently, DQD-based Cooper pair splitters, by properly tuning the device parameters, can be sources of fully entangled pairs of electrons that are extracted from superconductor and transmitted to normal leads.