It is thought that strong electron correlation in an insulating parent phase would enhance a critical temperature (T c ) of superconductivity in a doped phase via enhancement of the binding energy of a Cooper pair as known in high-T c cuprates. To induce a superconductor transition in an insulating phase, injection of a high density of carriers is needed (e.g., by impurity doping). An electric double-layer transistor (EDLT) with an ionic liquid gate insulator enables such a field-induced transition to be investigated and is expected to result in a high T c because it is free from deterioration in structure and carrier transport that are in general caused by conventional carrier doping (e.g., chemical substitution). Here, for insulating epitaxial thin films (~10 nm thick) of FeSe, we report a high T c of 35 K, which is four times higher than that of bulk FeSe, using an EDLT under application of a gate bias of +5.5 V. Hall effect measurements under the gate bias suggest that highly accumulated electron carrier in the channel, whose area density is estimated to be 1.4×10 15 cm -2 (the average volume density of 1.7×10 21 cm -3 ), is the origin of the high-T c superconductivity. This result demonstrates that EDLTs are useful tools to explore the ultimate T c for insulating parent materials. Prediction of new high critical temperature (T c ) superconductors is one of the most difficult issues in condensed matter physics, although theories and calculation methods have recently been very rapidly advancing In 2014, we first reported an electric field-induced phase transition in the iron-based insulator TlFe 1.6 Se 2 Very thin (~10-nm-thick) FeSe epitaxial films are an interesting material to investigate field effects and to explore high T c because thin FeSe films exhibit insulator-like behavior In this study, we focused on EDLT-based field effects of ~10-nm-thick FeSe epitaxial films and observed an insulator-superconductor transition with a highest T c of 35 K under a gate bias of V G = +5.5 V. The origin of this superconductivity is also discussed. Fig. However, in the case of the thin films (11 nm thick, see Fig. We fabricated EDLTs using a thin insulating FeSe layer, as shown in After applying V G = +4 V, I D returned to the initial value when V G was decreased to 0 V. A large hysteresis loop is observed because of the slow response of ion displacement in the ionic liquid. Notwithstanding there is a slight parallel shift in the second I D V G loop and I D becomes almost double, 84 A at V G = +4 V; its origin is considered to be the slow response of ion displacement, which is the same as the hysteresis loop. This is because the shape and hysteresis width in the second loop are very similar to those in the first loop. In addition, we confirmed that there was no change in the IV characteristics in the channel layer at V G = 0 before and after the cyclic measurements (see Fig. Fig. To confirm high-density carrier accumulation in the EDLT, we performed Hall effect measurements under applying V G up to +5.5 V. Fig. However, to roughly estimate the electron density accumulated in the channel surface by positive V G , we subtracted the 1 / eR H value (corresponds to the carrier density for a single band model) at V G = 0 V from all the 1 / eR H values on an assumption that the linear decrease in R H with increasing V G in the V G range from 3.75 to 5.5 V corresponds to the increase in the sheet density of the accumulated electrons [N e = (1 / eR H (V G = x) where t is thickness of the FeSe channel (8.3 nm).]. Then we built a phase diagram (Fig. The above observation suggests that applying a gate bias changes the structure and/or the electronic state of the FeSe epitaxial films. Thus, we would like to discuss the origin of this high-T c superconductivity. First, we discuss the possibility of a chemical reaction between the FeSe channel and the DEME-TFSI ionic liquid. Fig. In summary, we grew high-quality ~10-nm-thick FeSe epitaxial films on STO (001) substrates by MBE and confirmed their insulating electrical property. Using the high-quality thin film as a channel layer, we fabricated an EDLT to induce high-T c superconductivity. Upon applying V G = +5.0 V, an insulator-superconductor transition was induced with an onset T c = 24 K. The highest T c of 35 K was obtained by applying V G = +5.5 V. This T c value is significantly enhanced compared with the value of bulk FeSe (T c ~ 8 K). Note that the origin of the superconductivity is not in the STO substrate because the T c of STO is as low as 0.2 -0.4 K even if an EDLT structure is employed Heteroepitaxial FeSe thin films were grown on (001)-oriented STO single crystals by the MBE technique. To obtain an atomically flat substrate surface, we performed wet etching of as-received STO using a buffered HF solution, and then thermally annealed at 1050 °C just before film growth The film thicknesses were ~10 and 110 nm, which were determined by least-squares fitting to a fringe pattern obtained by X-ray reflectivity spectroscopy using Cu Kα 1 monochromated by a Ge (220) crystal. The surfaces of the STO substrates and the FeSe films were observed by in situ RHEED and atomic force microscopy (AFM) in ambient atmosphere. The structures of the films, such as the crystal orientation, were precisely examined by XRD (source: monochromatic Cu Kα 1 ) with an analyser crystal located in front of the detector. The -coupled 2θ scans in the out-of-plane XRD measurements provided the crystallographic orientation of the film normal to the substrate surface. The tilting angle of the crystallites was obtained by 2θ-fixed  scans (out-of-plane XRC). The in-plane crystallographic orientation (i.e., orientation parallel to the substrate surface) was determined by -coupled 2θ  scans. A 2θ  -fixed  scan also provided the rotational symmetry of the lattice/crystallites in the film plane. All of the axis relations of XRD can be found in ref. Approximately 10-nm-thick FeSe epitaxial films on the STO (001) substrates were used as the transport channel of the EDLT. The FeSe channel layer with a six-terminal Hall bar geometry (channel size: 500 m long and 200 m wide) and the Au pad electrodes were deposited using shadow masks. After bonding metal wires to the Au pads with In metal, the channel region was covered with a silica-glass cup (fixed with an epoxy adhesive) to add the ionic liquid. We used the ionic liquid DEME-TFSI as the medium for the gate insulator. The ionic liquid was poured into the silica-glass cup, and then a Pt coil was inserted into the ionic liquid to serve as the gate electrode. All of these device setup processes were performed without exposure to air. The device structure is shown in Fig. Transfer curves (i.e., the V G dependence of the drain current I D ) were measured with a semiconductor parameter analyzer at 220 K. The temperature dependences of the resistivity and sheet resistance (ρ-T and R s -T), and transverse resistance (R xy , i.e., Hall effect) at 40 K of the films and EDLTs were measured by the four-probe method under external magnetic fields of up to 9 T under an applied gate bias (V G ) from 0 to +5.5 V. V G was applied at 220 K because chemical reaction between FeSe layers and DEME-TFSI occurs at higher temperatures Electric Double Layers of Ionic Liquids. Adv. Funct. Mater. 19 