Single crystals of tetragonal β-Fe1.00Se were grown from polycrystalline material by chemical vapor transport reaction at temperatures below 723 K using AlCl3 as transport additive. The plate-shaped single crystals have edge lengths up to 4 mm. The single crystals display complete diamagnetic shielding factor 4πχ ≈ 1 below the superconducting transition. Since the discovery of superconductivity in the iron-based compound LaO1xFxFeAs with a critical temperature Tc of 26 K, The synthesis of β-FexSe in polycrystalline or single crystalline form is a challenging task because of the peritectoid formation of the phase. Above 730 K, β-FexSe decomposes into Fe-deficient δ-Fe1-ySe and α-Fe [solid solution Fe(Se)]. Sample preparation: Polycrystalline samples were prepared by solid state reaction of iron pieces (Alfa Aesar, 99,995 %) with selenium shots (Chempur, 99,999 %) in substance amount fractions close to 1:1 (typically Fe:Se between 0.98 and 1.02). Glassy carbon crucibles with lids were filled with Fe/Se mixtures and placed in quartz ampoules which were sealed under vacuum. For the synthesis route, the procedure of an earlier study was optimized. In the presence of Al2Cl6, the formation of gas complexes might be relevant for chemical transport: In case of the chemical transport yielding β-FexSe, the commonly used HCl source NH4Cl is not suited since the partial pressure of the hydrogen chloride is insufficient at temperatures below 700 K. For transport experiments, evacuated, sealed quartz ampoules (diameter 20 mm, length 100 mm) were filled with mixtures of typically 1 g of FeSe powder and ~ 20 mg of AlCl3 before being placed horizontally inside a two-zone furnace at temperatures from T2 = 673 K to T1 = 573 K. Typically, crystals were grown for 2 months. Finally, the ampoule was quenched in water. The product, which contains plate-shaped single crystals with edge lengths up to 400 μm perpendicular to the c-axis, was washed with ethanol several times to remove remaining condensed gas phase, dried under vacuum and stored in argon-filled glove boxes. By extending the growth time to one year, larger single crystals with dimensions up to 4  2  0.03 mm 3 were grown. X-ray and electron diffraction: Samples were investigated by Xray powder diffraction (Huber Image Plate Camera G670) using Co Kα1 radiation (λ = 1.788965 Å). The lattice parameters of samples were calculated with TiO2 (rutile, a = 4.59393(4) Å, c = 2.95887(3) Å) as an internal standard using the program package WinCSD. The synthesized ingots and single crystals were characterized by wavelength dispersive X-ray spectroscopy on an electron microprobe (WDXS, CAMECA SX 100, with FeGe and Se as standards). Chemical analysis by the inductively coupled plasma method (ICP-OES, Varian, VISTA RL) reveal that oxygen and carbon impurities are below the detection limit of 0.05 mass % and 0.06 mass %, respectively. Differential thermal analysis (DSC) was performed with a Netzsch instrument DSC 404 C in the temperature range from 298 to 823 K with heating rates between 2 and 5 K/min. The polycrystalline materials for investigation were sealed in special quartz crucibles under vacuum. Physical property measurements: Specific heat, Cp(T), was measured using a Quantum Design physical properties measurement system (PPMS) with a heat-pulse relaxation technique. The electrical resistivity, ρ(T), measurements were carried out with the same device using the standard four-probe method from 2 K to room temperature at zero field. The magnetic susceptibility, χ(T), was obtained by means of a SQUID magnetometer in magnetic fields of 20 Oe. The amount of α-Fe impurities (actually Fe(Se) solid solution) was estimated from isothermal magnetization loops at 300 K in fields from 10 to 10 kOe assuming the saturation magnetization of α-Fe of 217.6 emu/g at 10 kOe and 300 K. X-ray powder diffraction experiments exhibit that the prepared polycrystalline samples contain mainly -FexSe. Before annealing, both hexagonal Fe7Se8 and δ-Fe1-ySe are present besides unreacted iron (Fig. Figure Figure Backscattering Laue diffraction measurements along the [001] direction evidence the single-crystalline nature even of the largest grown individuals (Figure These FeSe4/4 tetrahedra condense via sharing of edges into infinite layers. Concerning the anisotropy of the atomic displacement, the ratio U33/U11 amounts to 1 for Se and 1.7 for Fe. Similar elongations of the displacement ellipsoids along the c-axis are reported for refinements of synchrotron radiation diffraction data on powder of β-FexSe. Figure The inset of Figure The temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity of a -FexSe single crystal is shown in Figure The specific heat of a -FexSe single crystal as a function of temperature is displayed in the upper inset of Figure The phase -FexSe forms in the narrow homogeneity range 1.000(5) ≤ x ≤ 1.010 (5). The phase is stable up to roughly 733 K before a peritectoid decomposition into δ-Fe0.96(1)Se and solid solution Fe(Se) occurs. Chemical vapor transport reaction with AlCl3 yields single crystals of tetragonal -Fe1.00Se at temperatures below 723 K. Although the CVT technique is a slow process which requires long growth times for -FexSe, it is possible to synthesize highquality plate-shaped single crystals with up to 4 mm edge lengths. Magnetization measurements indicate that the crystals contain only 4 ppm magnetic impurities. The magnetic susceptibility and specific heat measurements evidence bulk superconductivity in -Fe1.00Se single crystals with onset temperatures up to 10 K. Supporting Information (see footnote on the first page of this article) Differential Scanning Calorimetry Data of -Fe1.00Se as well as X-ray powder diffraction data of -Fe1.00Se and the products after peritectoid decomposition. Refinement results of the orthorhombic low-temperature modification of Fe1.00Se are shown and the essential crystallographic data are listed. Cif-files of refined crystal structures have been deposited at the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre with the assigned numbers CCDC 977900-977903.