Electronic Raman scattering with in and out of (ab) plane polarizations have been performed on HgBa2Ca2Cu3O 8+δ in a slightly underdoped single crystal with a critical temperature Tc=122 K. We find that the d-wave pairing gap at the antinodes is higher in energy (14 kBTc) than in other cuprates and that it varies very slowly up to Tc. This hints at a strong coupling nature of the pairing mechanism. Interestingly, we reveal that the pairing-gap feature in the Raman response displays a complex peak-dip-hump structure, in a fashion reminiscent of what observed by angle resolved photo-emission spectroscopy in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O 8+δ (Bi-2212). We detect two other distinct superconducting peaks at ≈ 5kBTc and ≈ 7kBTc when probing respectively around the nodes and on the whole Fermi surface. Finally we establish that the pairing gap at the antinodes is detected both for (ab) plane and for c-axis light polarizations. This shows that the quasiparticle dynamics along the c-axis is intimately connected to the antinodal one in the (ab) plane. The discovery of the three-copper-oxide-layer compound HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 8+δ (Hg-1223) by A. Schilling et al. Here we present new electronic Raman scattering studies on Hg-1223, which greatly improve our previous results (fifteen years ago) We reveal a weakly temperature-dependence of the pairing gap 2∆ on a large temperature-range up to T c . We also show that the pairing gap is associated with a peak-dip-hump structure in the Raman response, similarly to what observed by angle resolved photo-emission spectroscopy (ARPES) in Bi-2212 The measurements have been performed on slightly underdoped (UD) Hg-1223 single crystal grown by a single step synthesis In fig. In fig. The temperature dependence of the SC pairing gap is displayed in fig. Branch In the A 1g +B 1g spectrum (panel (c)) we also observe an intense SC electronic peak at 555 cm -1 (called the A 1g peak) whose FWHM is sharp enough (unlike the B 2g one) to track its temperature evolution (see fig. We have found in fig. We finally turn to the Raman measurements with light polarization perpendicular to the (ab) plane i.e: along the c-axis. In fig. In conclusion, by performing electronic Raman scattering on Hg-1223 single crystal over a wide energy range we reveal spectral features previously overlooked. We succeeded to detect three distinct SC electronic peaks at 1135, 555 and 430 cm -1 respectively in the B 1g , A 1g and B 2g symmetries, obtained from in and out of plane polarizations. The 1135 cm -1 peak is assigned to the dwave pairing gap at the antinodes. Its huge energy value ≈ 14 k B T c and its weak temperature dependence below T c hints at a strong coupling pairing state. Remarkably the 1135 cm -1 peak is also detected in A 1g symmetry along the c-axis which confirms the intimate connection between the quasiparticles dynamics at the antinodes within the (ab) plane and along the c-axis in the SC state. Finally, we find that the 1135 cm -1 superconducting peak displays a peak-dip-hump structure in the electronic background of the antinodal Raman spectrum similar to the one detected by ARPES in Bi-2212. Identify its origin requires a more deeper study which will be addressed in a near future. We are grateful to M. Civelli, I. Paul, A. Auer-bach and A. Georges for fruitful discussions. Correspondences and requests for materials should be ad-