We present a local probe study of the magnetic superconductor, ErNi2B2C, using magnetic force microscopy at sub-Kelvin temperatures. ErNi2B2C is an ideal system to explore the effects of concomitant superconductivity and ferromagnetism. At 500 mK, far below the transition to a weakly ferromagnetic state, we directly observe a structured magnetic background on the micrometer scale. We determine spatially resolved absolute values of the magnetic penetration depth λ and study its temperature dependence as the system undergoes magnetic phase transitions from paramagnetic to antiferromagnetic, and to weak ferromagnetic, all within the superconducting regime. In addition, we estimate the absolute pinning force of Abrikosov vortices, which shows a position-and temperature dependence as well, and discuss the possibility of the purported spontaneous vortex formation. The interplay between magnetism and superconductivity has caught the attention of many condensed matter scientists. Once thought to be mutually exclusive, several materials have since emerged in which a coexistence of magnetic order and superconductivity can be found. From an applied point of view, the pinning of Abrikosov vortices in type-II superconductors is a central issue, as increased pinning forces F P can greatly enhance both critical currents J c and critical magnetic fields H c2 . The rare earth borocarbides RNi 2 B 2 C (with R = Dy, Ho, Er, and Tm) exhibit magnetism within the superconducting phase. 1 Conspicuously, their superconducting and magnetic transition temperatures are comparable, suggesting similar energy scales for magnetism and superconductivity. Here we present a magnetic force microscopy (MFM) study on ErNi 2 B 2 C at He-3 temperatures and with a high spatial resolution. We observe magnetic stripelike features at T = 500 mK, that arise from twin domain boundaries. Their pronounced temperature behavior supports the spontaneous vortex formation scenario. Using the magnetic moment of the tip we estimate the pinning force of a single vortex. In addition, a spatially resolved determination of the penetration depth λ is presented, which reveals a close relation between λ and the microscopically varying intrinsic magnetism. A single crystal of ErNi 2 B 2 C was grown via Ni 2 B flux growth technique. We first discuss the origin of magnetic stripes and the local variation of the magnetic penetration depth, before moving on to the pinning force. Synchrotron x-ray scattering experiments on ErNi 2 B 2 C revealed a structural tetragonal-to-orthorhombic distortion upon entering the antiferromagnetic phase at T N = 6 K. This leads to the formation of twin domain boundaries below T N along [110] and [1 10], In order to probe the influence of the varying internal magnetic field on the superconductivity in the sample, we performed local measurements of λ across two stripes along the blue arrow in Fig. The temperature dependence of λ [see Fig. , where λ(0) is the penetration depth at T = 0 K. The fit yields λ(0) ≈ 190 nm and T c ≈ 9.1 K. Our directly obtained penetration depth λ(0) is larger than those previously reported from bulk probe experiments, 10,25 while T c is slightly below the reported value of 10.5 K. Aside from the different experimental approaches, it is known that the T c of as-grown samples is lower than that of annealed samples. In addition to the magnetic stripes, we clearly see four separate vortices in Fig. In order to study the depinning of vortices in ErNi 2 B 2 C, we manipulate the separate, stray field induced vortices via the tip-sample interaction. In Figs. When increasing the temperature from 1.5 to 4.5 K and thereby moving from the weak ferromagnetic phase into the antiferromagnetic phase, the magnetic stripes vanish while the twin boundaries remain [see Figs. Moving from the magnetically ordered (T < T N ) into the paramagnetic superconducting regime (T > T N ), we study the vortex dynamics as a function of temperature at a constant LH of 700 nm (see Fig. Our MFM images also allow us to comment on the issue of the coexistence mechanism in ErNi 2 B 2 C. It is believed that magnetism and superconductivity can coexist under two possible scenarios: (i) a spontaneous formation of vortices In summary, we have presented an MFM study of the magnetic superconductor ErNi 2 B 2 C down to sub-Kelvin temperatures. We introduced a straightforward method for locally determining the vortex pinning force F P , as well as demonstrated a spatially resolved measurement of the penetration depth λ. Our measurements yield λ(0) ≈ 190 nm. Below T W F M , λ varies locally by more than 20% on a micrometer scale, while following closely changes in the intrinsic magnetic field. The pinning force of stray field induced vortices shows a strong temperature dependence that is related to the existence of various magnetic phases. We estimate the pinning forces to be around 1 -8 pN, depending on the temperature. At the same time we find that F P varies locally, and easy vortex manipulation directions exist in the magnetic phases, but are absent above T N . Finally, a micrometer scale magnetic background detected at T =500 mK that coincides with the twin domain boundaries and vanishes above T W F M supports the scenario of spontaneous vortex stripe formation in ErNi 2 B 2 C.