Recently, new Cr-based superconductors, A 2 Cr 3 As 3 (A = K, Rb, Cs), have gained a strong interest because of their one-dimensional crystal structures and electron correlations. Here we report the crystal structure and physical properties of two related materials ACr 3 As 3 (A = Rb, Cs) which are synthesized via a soft-chemical A + deintercalation in A 2 Cr 3 As 3 . The new compounds remain one-dimensional (Cr 3 As 3 ) ∞ linear chains, and the interchain distance can be tuned by the incorporation of the alkali-metal cations with different sizes. The physical-property measurements indicate a local-moment behavior at high temperatures, and the moments freeze into a cluster spin-glass state below 5~6 K. No superconductivity was observed in both materials. We also found that, with increasing the interchain distance, the Cr effective moments increase monotonically, accompanied with the enhancement of semi-conductivity. Our results shed light on the understanding of occurrence of superconductivity in A 2 Cr 3 As 3 . The recent discovery of superconductivity in quasi-one dimensional compounds A 2 Cr 3 As 3 (A = K, Rb, Cs) The A 2 Cr 3 As 3 superconductors are very air sensitive, probably due to the existence of "crowded" A1 atoms in the crystal structure Here we report the synthesis and characterizations of two new members in the ACr 3 As 3 series with A = Rb and Cs. Our measurements show that all the "133" compounds, including previously synthesized KCr 3 As 3 , have similar physical properties with a cluster spin-glass ground state, just like that the "233" family all superconduct at low temperatures. Nevertheless, some variations of some physical quantities, such as the resistivity value and magnitude of the local moments, are also evident, which suggests the importance of dimensionality (or interchain coupling). Our results supply helpful references, which may shed light on understanding of the superconductivity in A 2 Cr 3 As 3 . Polycrystalline samples of ACr 3 As 3 were synthesized by reacting A 2 Cr 3 As 3 polycrystals with water-free ethanol, similar to the previous report Powder XRD experiments were carried out at room temperature on a PANalytical x-ray diffractometer (Empyrean Series 2) with a monochromatic CuKα 1 radiation. The electrical resistivity was measured using standard four-terminal method. The polycrystalline samples were cut into a thin rectangular bar, and silver paste was used to attach gold wires onto the samples' surface. The magnetizations were measured on a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS-5). The specific-heat capacity was measured by a relaxation technique on a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS-9) using a thin square-sharp sample. The heat-capacity addenda from the sample holder and grease were deducted. Based on the previous studies (1) 2A + 3Cr + 3As → A 2 Cr 3 As 3 (~700°C in vacuum); (2) A 2 Cr 3 As 3 + C 2 H 5 OH → ACr 3 As 3 + AOC 2 H 5 + 1/2H 2 ↑. The second reaction keeps the identical (Cr 3 As 3 ) ∞ linear chains (see below). Therefore, the reaction is actually a deintercalation process, which is in general a topotactic transformation without breaking the main framework of the crystal structure. Thus it is expected to produce single crystals using the similar route in the future. Fig. The crystal structure of the ACr 3 As 3 system is shown in Fig. shown by a very recent calculation for KCr 3 As 3 Similar to that in KCr 3 As 3 Below 100 K, the resistivity shows a semiconducting-like behavior. However, the ρ(T) data do not obey a thermally-activated relation, ρ(T)=ρ 0 exp[-E a /(k B T)], where E a denotes the excitation energy. Neither do they follow the variable-range hopping formula originally proposed by Mott It is expect that the intrinsic electrical transport is highly anisotropic, given the quasi-one-dimensional crystal structure. Namely, the conductivity along the chain direction would be larger, and the conductivity perpendicular to the c axis would be relatively small. Assuming metallic conductions along the chains (because of non-zero density of state at the Fermi level evidenced by the related band-structure calculations Very similar behavior was observed, which points to the spin cluster freezing below 5 K. The high-temperature susceptibility (not shown here) indicates a larger effective moment of 1.6 μ B /Cr, which is consistent with the weakest interchain coupling in CsCr 3 As 3 . Fig. No specific-heat jump associated with a superconducting transition can be seen, consistent with the above electrical and magnetic measurements. The prominent feature is the broad round-shape C/T vs T 2 relation, instead of an essentially linear region in their superconducting "cousins" A 2 Cr 3 As 3 Notably, the C/T value at 2 K shows the similar tendency. Given the same "doping level" in ACr 3 As 3 (the apparent Cr valence is +2.67), such changes should be mainly ascribed to the interchain coupling. In general, the reduced interchain coupling enhances spin fluctuations, Anderson localizations, and electron correlations (the related bandwidth is narrowed). Therefore, the results can be qualitatively interpreted in terms of an enhanced one dimensionality. The latest first-principles calculations for KCr 3 As 3 In summary, two new quasi-one-dimensional Cr-based compounds, RbCr 3 As 3 and CsCr 3 As 3 , were successfully synthesized. The crystal structure remains the characteristic (Cr 3 As 3 ) ∞ linear chains. Meanwhile, the interchain distance increases appreciably owing to the large size of Rb + and Cs + cations. Like their sister compound KCr 3 As 3 , both materials do not superconduct, but show a cluster spin-glass state below 5~6 K. Importantly, the Cr localized moment increases with the expansion of interchain distance. This further confirms the existence of Cr local-moment components in the "133" system, which implies the relevance of spins to the novel superconductivity in "233" materials. Cr-Cr Bond distances (Å)