I study the effects of disorder on the superconductivity of a three-band model with repulsive interband pairing. Such a model can support several possible superconducting order parameters, including a complex time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) state. Impurity scattering suppresses the critical temperature of all these states, but the complex state survives, and remains a part of the phase diagram of the model even in the presence of moderate amount of disorder. This means that the TRSB states could be experimentally accessible in multiband materials like iron pnictides and chalcogenides. The discoveries of MgB 2 Most of the research on TRSB states was done in the clean limit, ignoring the effects of the (unavoidable) impurities and defects. However, it has been long recognized that even nonmagnetic impurities can be detrimental to multiband superconductivity It is interesting to note that disorder-induced interband scattering can continuously change the order parameter of a two-band superconductor from s ± to s ++ INTERBAND PAIRING I consider a system described by the following Hamiltonian: arXiv:1508.01517v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Aug 2015 Here i and j are band indicies, running from 1 to 3. The bands are parabolic, with partial and total densities of states (DOS) N 1 , N 2 , N 3 and N t = N 1 + N 2 + N 3 respectively. For simplicity I assume they are identical, i.e., N 1 = N 2 = N 3 = N 0 . The first term in Eq. 1 is the kinetic energy of the electrons, while the second term is due to impurities, which introduce both intraband and interband scattering. The scattering rates are parametrized by γ ij . The interband terms (i = j) can be written as γ = N 0 Γ, with Γ = n imp π(u imp ) 2 , where n imp and u imp are the impurities' concentration and potential respectively (assuming u imp is the same for each (i, j) combination). Since point defects, such as atomic substitutions or vacancies, can scatter carriers with large momentum change, the intraband and interband scattering rates are expected to be comparable Superconductivity is driven by the pairing potentials u sc ij , which can scatter Cooper pairs within the same band (i = j), or between different bands (i = j). Note that the Cooper pairs themselves are always composed of electrons from the same band. In general, there are six independent pairing interactions. For simplicity, I ignore the inraband terms u sc ii . Furthermore, I reduce the remaining three interband terms u sc ij to two, by assuming that u 12 = u 13 . Finally, the interaction potentials are converted to dimensionless constants by using the DOS: The last inequality is true for systems with only repulsive interband pairing interactions. All the coupling constants can be combined into a 3 × 3 symmetric matrix I study the phase diagram of the model, assuming that η is fixed, and varying λ from 0 (only two bands are coupled) to λ η (a pair of bands is much weaker coupled). Of special interest is the region around the degeneracy point λ = η. In the superconducting state there are three gap parameters ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 and ∆ 3 , describing the superconducting condensate in each band. They can be written as ∆ i = |∆ i |e iφi ; the phases φ i are gauge-dependent, but their differences φ ij = φ i -φ j are physically meaningful, gauge-invariant quantities. Note that the superconducting state breaks only the overall U (1) symmetry. The system with λ given in Eq. 2 has obvious frustration: each pair of gaps (i, j) prefers to have φ ij = π, due to the repulsive λ ij pairing. However, since there are three such pairs, there is no way to satisfy this preference for all gaps simultaneously. Thus, the different possible solutions compete, and this competition is the source of the TRSB state. In the clean limit the gap parameters obey three coupled nonlinear self-consistency equations: where ω = πT (2n + 1) is the Matsubara frequency, and ω 0 is a high-energy cut-off (e.g., the Debye frequency). When disorder is present, it leads to additional interband scattering and coupling of the gaps, and the selfconsistency equations become considerably more complicated (see, e.g., Ref. 38). However, close to the critical temperature these equations can be simplified by expanding them in powers of |∆ i |. In the presence of impurities this can be done systematically, starting from the Usadel equations where we have kept only terms up to quartic order in ∆. The intraband terms F i look like three copies of standard single-gap GL theory, but with coefficients modified by disorder. In contrast, in F ij there are many new terms appearing due to scattering from impurities. It can be written as: For processes that contribute to these terms see Fig. This term is solely due to impurities, and it disappears in the clean limit (see Fig. FIG. F EM combines the electromagnetic field energy, and the derivative terms that couple ∆ i to the electromagnetic vector-potential. For the rest of this paper uniform order parameter is assumed, and no field, so I will ignore F EM . It is important to emphasize that the microscopically derived mean-field equations are the main object of our theory, and the free energy given in Eq. 4 is secondary. Although it may seem unnecessary to distinguish them, there are at least two problems in taking F GL as a starting point. First, the region of validity of the multiband GL theory is a matter of ongoing debate At T c only the linear terms in the self-consistency equations are important, and the problem can be reduced to a simple matrix one: where I have defined the column vector ∆ (with transpose ∆T = (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 )). M is a 3 × 3 symmetric matrix: Here I have introduced , and The matrix is written in a form that separates the effects of the interband impurity scattering. In the clean limit we have I 2 → I 1 = γ 0 ln(2ω 0 /πT ), (with γ 0 being the Euler constant), and I γ → 0, thus recovering the equations obtained earlier 8 . Also, note that the intraband scattering rate does not appear at allthis is a consequence of the Anderson theorem 47 . The eigenvectors of M represent the possible order parameters that can condense, and the corresponding eigenvalues determine their respective transition temperatures. There are two possible order parameters, as in the clean case, with the third eigenvector having unphysical transition temperature (as already mentioned, the presence of this passive superconducting channel has important consequences The first eigenvector represents a two-gap solution, in which there is a sign change between the two bands that become superconducting; the third band stays normal. The other eigenvector has gaps on all three bands, with two of them having the same sign. These solutions represent different compromises for the underlying frustrated system. The critical temperatures do depend, of course, on γ, and are given by: So how do the impurities affect the critical temperature? We plot the T c lines for both superconducting states as function of λ for several values of γ (shown on Fig. At the point λ = η the two-gap and the three gap solutions are degenerate, and any linear combination of them is a possible order parameter. In particular, a complex state can be constructed It was shown in the preceding section that there are two possible order parameters that can condense. Which one is leading depends on the ratio λ/η. Below T c the situation becomes considerably more complicated, and when λ ≈ η the system may prefer a complex admixture of the two real states. To study this possibility we write a general complex order parameter ( ∆(3) ) T = ∆ 0 (-κ, e iφ , e -iφ ) (it incorporates the 2 ↔ 3 symmetry of the problem). Note that φ = φ 23 /2. By appropriate choice of gauge ∆ 1 is made real (which is always possible). Unlike the other two order parameters, however, ∆(3) is intrinsically complex (for κ = 0). This signifies the spontaneous breaking of the time-reversal symmetry of the system by the order parameter. It is caused by FIG. It is important to understand the difference between the s ++ + is ± states in the two-band The intrinsic instability of the three-band model can be used to simplify the calculation. Close to T c the most important terms in the self-consistency equations are linear (i.e., the terms with coefficients a i and a ij ). Thus, we can concentrate on the effects of impurities on those terms, and neglect all impurity induced terms, which are small anyway. (This is equivalent to only keeping a ij from F ij , and completely ignoring F ijk . The other two equations are more illuminating if written in terms of the GL coefficients a i and a ij , where we have a 1 = η/(2λ 2 ) -I 2 , a 2 = a 3 = 1/(2λ) -I 2 , a 12 = a 13 = -(1/λ + 2I γ ), and a 23 = -(1/η + 2I γ ). (Note that a ij are negative, which seems to directly contradict the idea of phase frustration. It is, however, just a sign that the naïve GL theory is unstable, and more care is needed in order to construct a proper GL free energy in the case interband pairing dominates and Alternatively, these equations can be obtained from ∂F GL /∂φ = 0, ∂F GL /∂κ = 0 and ∂F GL /∂∆ 0 = 0. Analyzing these equations provides a lot of useful information. First, note that they reduce correctly to the clean limit results 8 for I γ → 0. From Eq. 10 we see that nonzero κ leads to φ = π/2. Thus, if we start from two-gap state (κ = 0, φ = π/2) the system can continuously transform only to the TRSB state, but not directly to the three-gap one. Also, note from Eq. 11 that the two-gap solution with κ = 0 is always possible. However, if the right side is positive the equation can have also non-trivial κ solution. Since a 23 < 0 the second term in the brackets is negative. On the other hand, a 1 is positive at high temperatures, and only changes sign and turns negative for finite temperature below T c . Thus, the expression in the brackets can turn negative at some T below the critical temperature, and the TRSB state with κ = 0 and φ = π/2 emerges. To demonstrate this, I solved Eqs. 10, 11 and 12 numerically, on both sides of the degeneracy point λ = η. Results are shown on Figs. FIG. In this paper I considered the influence of disorder on a simple three-band model with repulsive interband pairing interactions. This model is known to support a complex TRSB superconducting state in the region where the competition between the real two-gap and three-gap order parameters is strongest. As expected, the presence of impurities tends to suppress the critical temperature of all states, and for some finite value of disorder superconductivity is completely destroyed. However, the complex state remains possible in parts of the phase diagram even in the presence of moderate disorder, as long as there are two real superconducting channels. The considered model and the derived results have to be taken with some caution. The three-band system is quite simple, and does not represent well the situation in iron-based superconductors (which, at the very least, have more bands at the Fermi level). This simplicity is the reason behind some artificial results, like the presence of ungapped band in the two-gap phase. This phase would likely disappear in a more realistic, and less symmetric cases, in agreement with the general argument in Ref. 50. Furthermore, the results are derived using expansion of the mean-field equations, valid only close to the critical temperature. In addition, I have neglected some quartic terms, with the assumption that they will not change the structure of the phase diagram (at least close to T c ). In spite of the simplifications, these results are clear indication that TRSB states, if present in the iron-based superconductors, can be relatively robust against disorder, and thus experimentally accessible. The discussion in this paper has been mostly concerned with the stability of the TRSB state. Once it is present, equally important and interesting questions are of the physical properties and the possible manifestations of this state. Its presence requires a superconductor-tosuperconductor transition, which may be detected in bulk thermodynamic property like the specific heat. Once inside the complex state, its time-reversal nature can lead to induced currents and spontaneous magnetization close to impurities and edges 5 (in the bulk the breaking is a consequence of interband Josephson currents, which do not lead to observable magnetization). Collective modes of the TRSB state are also quite interesting, as they consist of mixed phase-amplitude fluctuations of different gaps (see, for example, Refs. 15, 51-53). Another interesting consequence of the discreet symmetry breaking is the possibility of domain walls, whose presence can be used as a signature of this state I acknowledge many useful discussions with Alexei Koshelev. This research was supported by DOE-BES DESC0001911, and Simons Foundation.