Superconductivity and magnetic order strongly compete in many conventional superconductors, at least partly because both tend to gap the Fermi surface. In magnetically-ordered conventional superconductors, the competition between these cooperative phenomena leads to anomalies at magnetic and superconducting phase boundaries. Here we reveal that in Pr2Pt3Ge5 superconducting and multiple magnetic order are intertwined within the same HT -phase space, but remain completely decoupled. Our thermal conductivity measurements provide evidence for normal electrons in the superconducting phase from which magnetic order emerges with negligible coupling to electron bands that contribute to superconductivity. The coexistence of magnetic order and superconductivity has been investigated ever since Ginzburg theoretically studied the possibility of ferromagnetic superconductors over half a century ago Coexistence of magnetic order and conventional superconductivity has been observed in metallic materials featuring localized magnetic moments. In such systems, the magnetic ions are well isolated from the electrons of the conduction bands and the direct exchange between the magnetic ions and the electrons at the Fermi level is weak. This reduces scattering of Cooper pairs so that conventional superconductivity and magnetism can coexist Pr 2 Pt 3 Ge 5 belongs to the family of compounds with the general formula R 2 M 3 X 5 , where R is a rare-earth element, M a transition metal and X a s-p metal Single crystals were synthesized using a Pt-Ge mixture as self-flux Electrical resistivity, magnetization and neutron diffraction were measured on the same single crystal of size 1.2 x 1.2 x 5.3 mm 3 and mass m ≈ 64 mg. The single crystal used for thermal conductivity measurements had a mass of m ≈ 12 mg with a shape of 0.7 x 0.9 x 3.35 mm 3 . Electrical resistivity measurements were performed using a four-probe method in a Quantum Design PPMS. Magnetization data were recorded for magnetic fields μ 0 H = 0 -7 T with H||[100], [010] and [001] using a Quantum Design MPMS-XL SQUID magnetometer. Simultaneous measurements of the resistivity and the magnetization were made in the MPMS magnetometer. Thermal conductivity results were obtained using the one-heater-two-thermometer steady-state method. The heat current was fixed along the crystallographic [001] direction, whereas the magnetic field could be rotated in the ab-plane. In order to exceed the superconducting critical field of indium solder joint that affixed the crystal to the thermal base, conductivity was measured at a minimal field of μ 0 H = 50 mT at temperatures below 1 K. Single crystal neutron scattering was performed using the diffractometers DMC and TriCS as well as on the triple-axis spectrometer TASP at the Swiss Spallation Neutron Source (SINQ) at the Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland. Diffraction experiments on DMC were carried out between T = 1.8 -10 K with a neutron wavelength λ = 3.808 Å. The investigations on TriCS were performed with λ = 2.316 and 1.175 Å in a temperature range T = 1.7 -10 K using either a 4-circle cryostat with a Joule-Thompson insert or a vertical 6 T magnet for fields applied along The field dependence provides further insight in the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. We define ∆κ = κ(H) -κ SC where κ SC denotes the thermal heat conductivity in the superconducting phase at minimal magnetic field, and κ N the thermal conductivity for H = H c2 . Fig. Using neutron diffraction we observed magnetic reflections below T N1 and T N2 at Q = G ± q with G a nuclear wave-vector. Representative data around the reciprocal lattice position (0, 2, 1) are shown in Fig. Fig. The crystal structure of Pr 2 Pt 3 Ge 5 is displayed in Fig. The CM structure refinement at 2.1 K = T < T N1 reveals a non-collinear AF structure shown in Fig. S q 1 (-x,-y,z) (Mx, My, 0) (-Mx, -My, 0) (Mx, -My, 0) (-Mx, My, 0) TABLE I: Complex-valued basis vectors, S q i j , of the commensurate and the incommensurate structure for q1 = (0, 1, 0), q2 = (0, 0.852, 0), j substitues (x, y, z) = (0.26874, 0.36898, 0), (x1, y1, z1) = (0.26874, 0.36898, 0) and (x2, y2, z2) = (0.7313, 0.6310, 0). ulated structure with a local magnetic arrangement as in the CM phase. The two magnetic orbits are shifted by a relative angle φ R = -19.3 Remarkably, the magnetic moments in the ICM phase point exactly along the direction of the Pt atoms in the basal ab-plane (see Fig. In order to investigate the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism in Pr 2 Pt 3 Ge 5 , we explored its HT -phase diagram (in Fig. For H||[100] the AF phases are partly inside and partly outside the superconducting phase (see Fig For H||[010], ∆κ/(κ N -κ SC ) is the same as for the other field directions, with the exception for fields close to T N . This is strong evidence that the electrons that participate in the antiferromagnetic order are not involved with superconductivity. If the same electrons contributed to both superconductivity and antiferromagnetic order, one would expect an increase of thermal conductivity in the antiferromagnetically ordered phase with respect to the purely superconducting phase. From the field dependent resistivity measurements a Ginzburg-Landau coherence length of ξ 0 ≈ 148 Å is estimated using μ 0 H c2 (0) = Φ 0 /2πξ 2 0 , with Φ 0 the magnetic flux quantum In Pr 2 Pt 3 Ge 5 , there is no effect on the magnetic transition temperatures when the material becomes superconducting. Furthermore, thermal conductivity results reveal normal state electrons within the superconducting phase. This suggests that the Fermi surface that is involved in the formation of long-range order through the RKKY interaction does not contribute electrons into the superconducting condensate and remains ungapped below T c . To our knowledge Pr 2 Pt 3 Ge 5 is the first conventional superconductor in which a competition between superconductivity and magnetism is completely absent. In summary, thermal conductivity results provides evidence for a large density of normal state electrons within the superconducting phase of Pr 2 Pt 3 Ge 5 and suggests multigap superconductivity. Neutron diffraction data reveal a second-order phase transition at, T N2 < T c , into a magnetically-ordered phase inside the superconducting phase. For temperatures T N1 < T ≤ T N2 and zero field an incommensurate, amplitude modulated non-collinear antiferromagnetic structure with q 2 ≈ (0, 0.85, 0) is found, for which the magnetic moments are confined in the abplane with μ(3.5 K) ≈ 2μ B . With decreasing temperature the magnetic structure transforms, at T N1 , into a commensurate, non-collinear antiferromagnetic structure with q 1 = (0, 1, 0) and μ(2.1 K) ≈ 2.3μ B , without any detectable effect on superconductivity. The phase transition at T N1 is of a first-order with a similar moment configuration as in the incommensurate phase. As the key result of this study, we observe no significant anisotropy of H c2 (T ) as a function of field direction, but a substantial anisotropy of the magnetic phases for different field directions. The interpenetrating HTphase diagrams and field dependent thermal conductivity results along different crystal axes demonstrate that superconductivity and magnetism emerge from two separate, completely decoupled mechanisms. Thermal conductivity results suggest that different sheets of the Fermi surface are responsible for the superconducting pairing mechanism and for the RKKY interaction in Pr 2 Pt 3 Ge 5 .