The newly discovered superconductors A 2 Cr 3 As 3 (A = K, Rb, Cs), with a quasi-one-dimensional crystal structure have attracted considerable interest. The crystal structure consists of double-walled tubes of [Cr 3 As 3 ] 2-that extend along the c axis. Previously we reported measurements of the change in London penetration depth of polycrystalline samples of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 using a tunnel diode oscillator based technique, which show a linear temperature dependence at low temperatures, giving evidence for line nodes in the superconducting gap. Here we report similar measurements of the penetration depth for polycrystalline Rb 2 Cr 3 As 3 and several single crystals of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 , prepared by two different research groups. The single crystal measurements show similar behavior to polycrystalline samples down to 0.9-1.2 K, where a downturn is observed in the frequency shift for all single crystal samples. These results give further evidence for nodal superconductivity in K 2 Cr 3 As 3 , which indicates that the superconducting pairing state is unconventional. The different low temperature behavior observed in samples which have deteriorated after being exposed to air, emphasises that it is necessary to properly handle the samples prior to being measured because the A 2 Cr 3 As 3 compounds are extremely air sensitive and evidence for nodal superconductivity from penetration depth measurements is only observed in the samples which display a sharp superconducting transition. Therefore further work is required to improve the quality of single crystals and to identify the origin of the downturn. Superconductivity in Cr-based compounds has recently attracted attenton after the discovery that CrAs becomes superconducting with T c ≈ 2 K under an applied pressure of p c ≈ 0.8 GPa, where antiferromagnetism is suppressed A number of interesting properties of the normal state of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 have been reported such as a linear temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity between 7 and 300 K It is therefore of interest to establish to what extent the superconductivity can be regarded as q1D and what is the nature of the pairing state in these compounds. The calculated electronic structure of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 is complex, with two one-dimensional Fermi surface sheets (α and β) and one anisotropic three dimensional sheet (γ) Linear behavior of the penetration has also been predicted to occur in measurements of polycrystalline superconductors as a result of Josephson coupling between different grains Polycrystalline samples of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 and Rb 2 Cr 3 As 3 were prepared by a solid state reaction described in Refs. Figure In addition, we cannot rule out the possibility of multi-band superconductivity in K 2 Cr 3 As 3 and if this is the case, our results imply that at least one of the gaps has line nodes. Measurements of a sample of Rb 2 Cr 3 As 3 are also shown in Fig. It can be seen that for both samples there is no evidence for BCS-like saturation of ∆f (T ) and below 1.4 K, there is a linear decrease, much like the measurements of polycrystalline samples. It should be noted that for an isotropic, weakly coupled BCS superconductor, the signal is expected to saturate at approximately 0.2T c and since the jump in the specific heat ∆C/γT c ∼ 2.2 We are not able to definitively determine the origin of the low temperature downturn in the single crystal samples. It is unlikely that this anomaly arises due to decomposition from exposure to air. As shown by sample No. 2 in Fig. To summarize, we have measured the frequency shift ∆f (T ) of single crystals of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 , which is proportional to the change in the London penetration depth. At low temperatures there is no evidence for the saturation behavior expected for fully gapped superconductors and below about 1.4 K, a region of linear behavior is observed, in agreement with measurements of polycrystalline samples. This is a strong indication that the linear temperature dependence measured on polycrystalline samples is not due to Josephson coupling but from line nodes in the superconducting gap, indicating that the pairing state is unconventional. However, in all single crystal samples, a downturn in ∆f (T ) is observed at low temperatures, with an onset in the range of 0.9 to 1.2 K. Further work is required to improve the quality of single crystal samples and to understand the cause of the low temperature downturn. We also reported measurements of ∆λ(T ) for polycrystalline samples of Rb 2 Cr 3 As 3 , which display a broad superconducting transition and a ∆λ(T ) ∼ T n dependence at low temperatures with n > 1. This is similar behavior to that observed in samples of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 which have partially decomposed due to exposure to air, but measurements of high quality polycrystalline and single crystal samples are required to determine whether there is the same linear temperature dependence at low temperatures.