In the past few years there has been a significant rise in the short-circuit current levels in transmission and distribution networks, it due to the increasing demands on power and the addition of sources of distributed generations. It leads to the need of integration of novel protection systems such as the superconducting fault current limiters (SFCLs), as the installation of these devices into the electric network aims to improve the overall system stability during normal and fault conditions, whilst the upgrading costs associated to the increasing demand for integration of renewables to the power grid are minimized. SFCL models on the electric distribution networks largely rely on the insertion of a step or exponential resistance that is determined by a predefined quenching time. However, beyond the framework of these models, the study of the performance, reliability, and location strategy for the installation of sole or multiple SFCLs in power grids still lacks of proper development leading to the utter need of comprehensive and systematic studies on this issue. In this paper, we expand the scope of the aforementioned models by considering the actual behaviour of a SFCL in terms of the temperature dynamic power-law dependence between the electrical field and the current density. Our results are compared with step-resistance models for the sake of discussion and clarity of the conclusions. Both SFCL models were integrated into a power system model built based on the UK power standard, and the impact of these protection strategies on the performance of the overall electricity network was studied. As a representative renewable energy source, a 90 MVA wind farm was considered for the simulations. Three fault conditions have been simulated, and the figures for the fault current reduction predicted by both fault current limiting models have been compared in terms of multiple current measuring points and allocation strategies. Consequently, we have shown that the incorporation of the E -J characteristics and thermal properties of the superconductor at the simulation level of electric power systems, is crucial for reliability estimations and optimal location of resistive type SFCLs in distributed power networks. Our results may help to the decision making by the distribution network operators about investment and promotion of the SFCL technologies, as a maximum number of SFCLs for different fault conditions and multiple locations has been determined. W ITH the tremendous increase on the electricity de- mands, the scale of both power grids and renewable energy generation systems is being expanded For the safe operation of power systems, various strategies for mitigating the fault current levels have been implemented in the power industry, such as, construction of new substations, split of existing substation busses, upgrade of multiple circuit breakers, and installation of high impedance transformers. Nevertheless, all these operational practices involve a not negligible degradation of the systems stability and their performance, what ultimately means the occurrence of significant economic losses and further investment Superconducting fault current limiters (SFCLs), are considered as the most promising alternatives to the conventional protective methods due to the remarkable features of the superconducting materials According to the report provided by Morgan Stanley on Smart Grids, the potential market for fault current limiting devices may reach 5 billion dollars per year by 2030 On the other hand, a more advanced model for resistivetype SFCL was presented in Ref. In this paper we present a comprehensive study about the performance and optimal location analysis of resistive type SFCLs in realistic power systems, starting from the simplest consideration of a single step-resistance for the activation of the SFCL, up to considering the actual electro-thermal behavior of the superconducting component. We have simulated the performance of the SFCL under the scheme provided by two different models: (i) as a nonlinear resistance depending on time and, (ii) as a dynamic temperature-dependent model with the actual E -J characteristics of the superconducting material. The applied power grid model which has interconnected dispersed energy resource was built based on the UK network standard. Through the simulations of the system behaviors under three fault conditions (two distribution network faults in different branches, and one transmission system fault), the optimum SFCL installation schemes were found from all the feasible combinations of SFCLs. In addition, a detailed comparison between the figures obtained for each one of the abovementioned cases has been performed, proving that the nonlinear resistor model is insufficient for an accurate estimation of the reliability figures and optimal location of the SFCL, as the complex thermal and electrical behaviors of the superconducting material during its transition to the normal state cannot be simplified to a single step-resistance. This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces topologies and configurations of the power system. In Section III, the two proposed resistive type SFCL models are described, and the comparisons between their performances are demonstrated. Then, the optimum installation schemes of the SFCL models are presented in Section IV, proving the importance of considering the thermal and electrical behaviors of superconductors. Furthermore, the need and effectiveness of implementing a switch strategy for improving the recovery characteristics of the SFCL is shown. Then, a comprehensive study about how the optimal location of multiple SFCLs can be determined in a large scale electrical grid is the purpose of Section V. Finally, the main conclusions of this paper are presented in Section VI. The modelled power system was built based on the UK network standard The power system has a 120 MVA conventional power plant emulated by a three-phase synchronous machine, which is additionally connected to a local industrial load of 40 MW located 5 km away from the main power plant. Afterwards, the voltage level is boosted from 23 KV to 275 KV by a step-up transformer (TR1), from where the conventional power plant is connected to an upstream power grid rated with a short circuit level of 2GW through 130 km long distributedparameters transmission line. Then, the 275 KV high-voltage transmission system is split into two distribution networks. First, after voltage level stepped down to 33 KV by substations TR2 and TR4, the upper branch (industrial branch) supplies power to three industrial loads which rated power are 55 MW, 15 MW, and 10 MW, separately. Likewise, the lower branch (domestic branch) is also connected to two step-down substations TR3 and TR7, with 70 km distance between them. The role of these two substations is reduce the voltage of the lower sub-grid to 33 KV, as it is the same voltage level rated by the 90 MVA wind farm after being boosted by TR10. This offshore wind power plant is composed of twenty-five fixedspeed induction-type wind turbines each having a rating of 3.6 MVA, and it is located 30 km away from its connecting point with the lower distribution network. After integration, the lower branch and the wind farm together provide electric energy to four domestic loads with rated power of 50 MW, 15 MW, 12 MW and 10 MW, separately. In addition, it is worth mentioning that the industrial branch and the domestic branch are connected through a bus-bars coupler, and the power system is balanced in a way that the current flowing through the bus-tie is only of a few amperes during normal operation. It is generally accepted that the three-phase (symmetric) short-circuit fault provokes the highest fault current among all possible faults, since it will cause the most drastic decrease of the system impedance. In order to ensure safe operation, the maximum current and electrodynamic withstand capabilities of electrical equipment are primarily designed according to this situation. Therefore, it is essential to simulate the behavior of the power system under three-phase short-circuit fault. The symmetric faults were initialized at three potential locations marked as Fault 1 (132 KV), Fault 2 (33 KV) and Fault 3 (275 KV), which represent prospective faults occurring at the industrial branch, the domestic branch, and the transmission system, respectively (see Fig. It is worth mentioning that due to insufficient margin of short-circuit capacity in some MV grids, nowadays the dispersed power plants have to be directly connected to the HV grids through expensive generator transformers. However, this considerable investment could be avoided by installing the SFCL at the port of the distributed generation (Location 2) Several designs of SFCLs have been developed in the past, which can be categorized into resistive type, inductive type, and hybrid type devices. In this paper, we focus on the resistive type due to its compactness and stability compared with other designs Current limiting performance of the developed step resistance model is dominated by five predefined parameters of the SFCL: (i) triggering current, (ii) quenching resistance, (iii) quenching time, which has been assumed equals to 1 ms accordingly with Refs. The structure of the step resistance model is illustrated in Fig. On one hand, compared with the instantaneous current, the RMS calculation always has certain delay due to the nature of integral operation, which may cause the SFCL incapable to limit the first peak of fault current. On the other hand, if the quenching activation solely depends on the absolute value of instantaneous current, it could lead to fault switching when the flowing AC current close to zero in one period. Cooperation of these two different strategies could enable the SFCL model to quench and recover not only in a fast but also in a stable fashion. The fundamental operation principle of the resistive type SFCLs relies in the almost immediate insertion of a high resistance into the power grid, once the superconducting material is fully quenched. Therefore, the sudden change in the SFCL resistance is mainly due to the electrical properties of the superconductor, which can be macroscopically simplified into the so-called E -J power law where, (2) For the modeling of the superconducting state we use the power index n = 9 in accordance with Refs. Finally, the temperature developed by the superconducting material is calculated based on the intensity of flowing current, the heat capacity of the Bi2212 bulk, and its thermal resistance, in a constant bath of liquid nitrogen at 77K. Then, under assumption that the superconducting composite is homogeneous, the thermal modeling of the SFCL considers the first order approximation of the heat transfer between the superconductor and the liquid nitrogen bath as follows: where R SC stands for the thermal resistance from the superconducting material to its surrounding coolant, C SC is the superconductor heat capacity that in our case corresponds to the specific heat of Bi2212 For the SFCL installed at different locations, the superconductor is generically modeled as a cylindrical wire whose length l SC is adjusted in order to limit the prospective fault current to the desired level, and the diameter d SC is regulated to ensure that the SFCL not only remains into the superconducting state during normal operation, but also quenches within a few milliseconds once a short-circuit fault occurs at some location into the grid. In practice, despite the wire diameter cannot be modified after fabrication, one can connect several wires in parallel to achieve the expected current limiting performance In order to compare the fault current limitation properties of the two SFCL models, a three-phase to ground fault with negligible fault resistance was initialized at the domestic loads network (Fault 2) in the grid model shown in Fig. Fig. Initial tests without integration of the SFCL model have confirmed that the power system operates at rated state during normal operation. Then, under occurrence of three-phase to ground faults at Fault-1, Fault-2 and Fault-3 (see Fig. where I m is the amplitude of the rated current of the power grid, φ and φ kl represent the impedance angles before and after the fault, respectively; α defines the fault inception angle, I pm states the magnitude of periodic component of the short-circuit current which is defined by the source voltage and circuit impedance, and finally τ k stands for the time constant of the circuit. Thus, the fault currents achieve their maximum values when α-β kl = π(n+ 1)/2 with n ∈ Z. Therefore, in order to consider the most hazardous fault scenarios that could occur into the grid, the considered short-circuit faults are initialized under this condition, when one or multiple SFCLs are installed to the network. When a 200 ms three-phase to ground fault is applied at the industrial branch, also called branch 1 in Fig. However, when a SFCL is installed at Branch 1 (Location 1), its high resistance state facilitates the SFCL to dissipate the excess generator power during the fault condition, hence improving the energy balance of the system and reducing the variation of the rotor speed effectively. Furthermore, with consideration of the conventional equal-area criterion for stability issues A 200 ms short-circuit fault was initiated in Branch 1 (Fault 1) in order to study the relationship between the current limiting performance of SFCL and the maximum normal resistance. Firstly, without the protection of the SFCL, simulation results have shown that the first peak of current flowing into Branch 1 reaches ∼ 3.8 kA, which means ∼ 6.8 times higher than the rated value (560 A). Then, after installing the SFCL into the power grid, a considerable reduction of the fault current is observed as shown in Fig. With the normal resistance of the step SFCL model increasing from 0.2 R to 2 R (R = 30Ω), the peak value of the fault current gradually decreases from ∼ 3.8 kA to ∼ 1.2 kA with a small displacement of the peak values. However, in the case of the E -J power law based SFCL model, a noticeable kink appears at about 2.5 kA, when the maximum resistance of the SFCL is greater than 1 R. This kink, distinctive of the E -J power law based model studies, can be interpreted as the threshold value for the maximum reduction of the fault current, i.e., for instance, in the present case of study the greatest current reduction that the E-J model could achieve is ∼ 1.3 A lower than the result acquired from the step model. This significant difference between the performances of the two SFCL models is therefore, caused by the superconductor's electrical characteristics and thermal properties. After the current flowing through the SFCL exceeds the critical limit of the superconducting material, the developed resistance rises exponentially with a factor n depending on the material choice, n = 9 in the case of Bi2212, and finally enter to the normal conducting state. This transition occurs within 1 ms and thus enables the SFCL to limit the first peak of the fault current. Nevertheless, certain amount of time is always demanded for heat accumulation, quenching process, and resistance rise. We have determined that on the instant that the kink appears, the resistance developed by SFCLs of different sizes only present small differences, so the current curves approximately overlap at about 2.5 kA. Afterwards, the SFCLs that have higher capacities keep increasing their resistance, leading to sudden drops of currents, accordingly. Similar behavior is also observed when the SFCl is located ot other different positions, such as at bus-tie (Location 5), as shown in Fig. The analysis above demonstrates that when the internal performance of the SFCL is emulated by using the E -J power law based model, this strategy is more suitable for performing current limiting studies, because the step resistance model may overestimate the actual performance of the SFCL significantly. Furthermore, the use of the E -J power law based model allows to determine in a more accurate way the optimal normal resistance of the SFCL devices given the occurrence of the kink phenomenon. In terms of economic figures, it represents a very valuable result for the distribution operators as it allows to state a maximum threshold for the estimation of the actual need for enlarging the SFCL's capacity. Thence, excessive investments can be avoided, as beyond this threshold no further reduction of fault currents can be achieved. The passive transition of the superconducting material and the high normal resistance enables the SFCL to considerably limit the prospective fault current even before the first peak. However, when modeling the SFCL by considering its physical properties into the E -J power law based model, in some cases the recovery characteristics need to be improved because the SFCL may need several minutes to restore to the superconducting state under load conditions. For instance, if a single SFCL located at the domestic branch fully quenches to limit a fault, it will then cost more than 300 seconds to recover from its resistive state after the fault cleared. Therefore, in order to decrease the recovery time of the SFCL we have connected a bypass switch parallel to the superconductor and the shunt resistance as shown in Fig. Fig. In order to obtain an accurate estimation of the optimal strategies for installation of SFCLs, all possible SFCL combinations according to the five proposed locations depicted in Fig. Fig. The simulations performed, based on both SFCL models, generally show a negative impact on the reduction of the fault peak at certain integration points when the SFCL is installed at Location 1 or Location 2, i.e., on these cases the fault current may actually increase by the insertion of a SFCL. In more detail, when the SFCL is installed besides the wind farm (Location 2), a sudden increase of fault current flowing through the integrating point under the Fault 2 condition (at the domestic branch) is caused by the abrupt change of power system's impedance. This SFCL enters the normal state reducing the current output of the wind farm due to its rapid rise in resistance and hence, the conventional power plant and the upstream power grid are forced to supply higher current to the faulted branch. Similar behavior is obtained under the fault conditions F1 and F2 when the SFCL is installed at Location 2 and the current is measured at the integrating point (see Figs. On the other hand, for determining the optimal location where a single SFCL must be installed, the final decision has to be made under the circumstance of having a twofold conclusion. Firstly, the decision can be made accordingly to the highest total reduction on the fault current passing through different points and under different fault circumstances as shown in Fig. For incorporating a dual strategy of protection by means of the installment of two SFCL, in Fig. On the other hand, if the system operators measure the optimal strategy for the installation of the SFCLs in terms of the number of limited cases, different conclusions can be obtained under the framework of different physical models, i.e., when the step-resistance or E -J power law based model is considered. Firstly, according to the step model, installing the SFCLs at Locations 1 & 2 or Locations 4 & 5 both can positively response to all eight measured fault conditions. In fact, when the SFCLs Locations 1 & 2 are considered, a better performance is obtained as the total reduction in the fault current achieved under this arrangement is 40% greater than the performance obtained when the SFCLs are installed at Locations 4 & 5 (290%). Secondly, when the E -J power law model is assumed rather than the simplified step resistance model, placing the SFCLs at the Locations 1 & 2 would increase the magnitude of current at the integrating point under the occurrence of a fault in the domestic branch (Fault 2), it due to the unsuccessful triggering of the SFCL at Location 1 as explained in the previous subsection. Thus, from the point of view of the system operators the Locations 4 & 5 can be considered as the most reliable solution as it is the only combination capable to limit all fault conditions and in all the considered scenarios. As shown in Fig. Nevertheless, in order to verify our previous statement, we have studied also the influence of considering even more SFCLs, as there is a total of five prospective locations for the SFCLs in the conventional power grid displayed in Fig. Table Then, a systematic study on the prospective strategies for the installation of a sole or multiple SFCLs has been performed. Thence it has been proven that the concomitant cooperation of three SFCLs each installed at the Locations 2, 3, and 4, respectively, can be seen as the best protection strategy in terms of both the performance and the reliability figures of the overall grid within a minimum investment scheme vs maximum benefit. For achieving this conclusion all the potential combinations between two, three, four, and five SFCLs have been studied under a wide number of fault scenarios and measuring strategies. TABLE I: Optimal installation strategies for SFCLs according to the step-resistance and E-J power law models. The maximum fault current reduction (FCR) value (per case) has been calculated as the sum of the percentage reductions of the fault current measured at the wind farm output, the integrated point, and branches 1 and 2, for the three fault conditions shown in Fig. 