We study superconductivity in spin-orbit-coupled systems in the vicinity of inversion symmetry breaking. We find that due to the presence of spin-orbit coupling, fluctuations of the incipient paritybreaking order generate an attractive pairing interaction in an odd-parity pairing channel, which competes with the s-wave pairing. We show that applying a Zeeman field suppresses the s-wave pairing and promotes the odd-parity superconducting state. Our work provides a new mechanism for odd-parity pairing and opens a route to novel topological superconductivity. Over the last few years, the search for unconventional superconductors has received a new impetus from the study of topological phases of matter. After early works on superfluid Helium-3 The parity of the pairing order parameter is tied with its spin. In the absence of spin-orbit coupling, odd-parity pairing is spin-triplet and vice versa. It has long been known from studies on superfluid He In this Letter, we propose an alternative mechanism for odd-parity pairing in the vicinity of nonmagnetic, inversion-symmetry-breaking phases in spin-orbitcoupled systems. In the presence of spin-orbit interaction, such parity-breaking orders directly couple to electron's spin texture on the Fermi surface In this work, we consider parity-breaking orders that are time-reversal invariant and carry zero momentum. Such order may originate from an unstable odd-parity phonon or the electron-electron interaction. The order parameter can be represented by a Hermitian fermion bilinear operator Q with the same symmetry, which takes the form Here α, β are pseudospin indices for the two degenerate states at every k. In spin-orbit-coupled systems, these states are not spin eigenstates, but remain degenerate in the presence of time-reversal (Θ) and inversion (P ) symmetry Different types of parity-breaking orders are classified by their transformation properties under crystal symmetry operations, which act on electron's spin and momentum jointly. Before proceeding to the symmetry analysis, we emphasize that the form factors for physical observables, such as Γ(k) for Q, depend on the basis for the doubly degenerate energy band. For the purpose of this work, it is most convenient to choose the "manifestly covariant Bloch basis" (MCBB) where k * = gk is the star of k, ǫ αβ is the Levi-Civita symbol, and U (g) is the U (2) matrix that represents the action of g on the pseudospin, in the same way as it acts on the spin of a free electron. It then follows from the symmetry transformation laws (2, 3) that the form factor Γ(k) of time-reversal-invariant and parity-breaking orders satisfies the condition and hence takes the general form where σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) denotes Pauli matrices in pseudospin space. The d-vector field d k defines the pseudospin splitting in the ordered state, whose magnitude and direction vary over the Fermi surface. It may seem counter-intuitive that nonmagnetic paritybreaking orders, such as structural distortion and orbital order, couple to electron's spin. As we show by example in Supplementary Material In a system close to a parity-breaking instability, the effective interaction arising from the order parameter fluctuations is given by where Q(q) = Q † (-q) is the Fourier transform of the order parameter field in real space: Within the random-phase approximation (RPA), V q can be expressed in terms of the q dependent susceptibility: V q = I/(1 + χ(q)I). V q is enhanced and has a maximum at q = 0 close to a q = 0 instability. Restricting the effective interaction (6) to the Cooper pairing channel with zero total momentum, we obtain the pairing interaction Using ( To proceed, we expand V k±k ′ in the pairing interaction (9) in terms of spherical harmonics on the Fermi surface: , where V e contains the product of components with the same momentum: and V o contains the cross terms: Note that V e (V o ) is an even (odd) function of k, k ′ , and antisymmetric (symmetric) under exchanging the pseudospin indices either αβ or γδ. Therefore, V e and V o correspond to the even-parity pseudospin-singlet and oddparity pseudospin-triplet pairing channels, respectively. The above pairing interaction can be decomposed into different superconducting channels that belong to different representations of the crystal symmetry group. Before proceeding, we describe the general classification of time-reversal-invariant superconducting order parameters, taking the form where the form factor F (k) satisfies the symmetry con-dition Moreover, it follows from (3) that ǫ βγ c † kα c † -kγ has the same transformation law under crystal symmetry operations as c † kα c kβ . This implies every time-reversalinvariant superconducting order parameter has a counterpart in the particle-hole channel, with the same symmetry. In particular, odd-parity superconducting order parameters, which have F (k) = -F (-k), admit the same classification as particle-hole orders Q described earlier. To proceed with the classification, it is instructive to first consider the most symmetric group O(3), the group of all joint 3D rotations and reflections of spin and momentum, from which all point groups descend. In this case, all possible odd-parity orders defined by the form factor (5) are classified by the total angular momentum J and the orbital angular momentum L (which must be odd) As expected from the one-to-one correspondence between particle-hole and particle-particle orders, these form factors also classify odd-parity pairing symmetries of spin-orbit-coupled superconductors. For example, the pairing order parameter with the isotropic form factor Γ 1 = k • σ coincides with a particular choice of order parameters for the Balian-Werthamer phase of He-3 We now use the effective interaction H eff given by Eq.( where Ŝ † = (1/2) k,αβ ǫ αβ c † k,α c † -kβ is the s-wave superconducting order parameter, and F μ † n denotes various odd-parity order parameters defined in Eq.( TABLE II: Decomposition of the different types of interaction into different pairing channels, see Eq. attractive interaction in the corresponding pairing channel. From Table Although fluctuations of multipolar orders in rotationally invariant systems do not lead to pairing in any oddparity channel, the situation becomes different in real ma-terials where the crystal symmetry is taken into account. In any crystals, the five components of rank 2 tensor Γ 3 invariably split into more than one representations of the point group. For example, for O h point group, the diagonal and off-diagonal components of Γ 3 split to form e g and t 2g representations, which have 2 and 3 independent components respectively. For many point groups such as D 4h , Γ4 also splits into one-dimensional representations, with form factors k x σ x -k y σ y and k x σ y + k y σ x respectively. We find fluctuations of such multipolar orders of reduced symmetry generate attractive pairing interaction in the odd-parity channel of the same symmetry. The interaction strength is weaker than the s-wave channel in the case of e g and t 2g orders, and is equal to the latter in the case of Ising type Γ4 orders The above finding of odd-parity pairing meditated by parity fluctuations in spin-orbit-coupled systems is the main result of this work. It is interesting to make a comparison with the mechanism of triplet pairing meditated by spin fluctuations. In that case, the effective interaction is given by q V (q)s(q) • s(-q), where s is the spin operator and V (q) = I/(1 + Iχ s (q)) is determined by the spin susceptibility χ s (q). Importantly, to obtain the pairing interaction in the triplet channel requires χ s (q) to have a nontrivial q-dependence. Approximating χ s (q) by its zeroth spherical harmonic, which is a constant, does not generate triplet pairing, simply because two electrons at the same spatial location cannot form a triplet. In contrast, we obtained odd-parity pairing in this leadingorder approximation, without relying on any special features of the susceptibility of parity-breaking order. Given that the pairing interaction we found has comparable or even identical strengths in the s-wave and oddparity channels, small residual interactions or external perturbations become important in lifting the degeneracy and eventually determine which one of the two competing pairing symmetries is realized. An in-depth study of the effects of residual interactions necessarily involve material-specific details, which is beyond the scope of this work. Nonetheless, it should be noted that Coulomb interaction is most repulsive and pair-breaking in the swave channel, which can make the odd-parity pairing energetically favorable. This role of Coulomb interaction in the competition between s-wave and odd-parity pairings has been recognized In addition to Coulomb interaction, the s-wave pairing is suppressed by a magnetic field B that splits the spin degeneracy, which is pair-breaking and sets the Pauli limit for the upper critical field. However, Zeeman spin splitting has variable effects on odd-parity superconducting states in spin-orbit-coupled systems, as we show now. First, let us consider how the doubly degenerate bands at every k, or the pseudospin, split under a Zeeman field. The coupling of pseudospin to Zeeman field takes the general form The g-factor g ij (k) is a function of k, and can be expanded into different spherical harmonics over the Fermi surface. Importantly, since the pseudospin operator σ j is defined in the manifestly covariant Bloch basis and has the same symmetry as electron's spin, g ij (k) generally has a dominant zeroth spherical harmonic component g 0 ij . Assuming g ij (k) ≃ g 0 ij , we obtain a uniform spin splitting over the Fermi surface, with a spin quantization axis in the direction of h i = g 0 ij B i . The Pauli limit will be absent for the odd-parity pairing if its d-vector d(k) is perpendicular to h, for all k on the Fermi surface. For example, in 2D systems with rotational symmetry, an in-plane field B induces a spin splitting in the direction parallel to the field. The odd-parity pairing with Γ3 (k) = (k x σ z , k y σ z ), whose d-vector is out of plane, is not Pauli limited. Therefore, Zeeman field is an effective way of tuning the competition between different pairing symmetries and promoting certain types of odd-parity superconductivity for which the Pauli limit is absent or largely enhanced. Finally, we propose candidate materials for odd-parity superconductivity in the vicinity of parity-breaking order. First, the pyrochlore oxide Cd 2 Re 2 O 7 undergoes a continuous parity-breaking phase transition at T p = 200K Another candidate system is inversion-symmetric heterostructure of doped SrTiO 3 with intrinsic spin-orbit coupling Throughout this work, we have stayed away from the immediate neighborhood of the quantum phase transition point, where long-wavelength and low-frequency fluctuations of the parity-breaking order pile up and the RPA type effective interaction used in this work is inapplicable. The physics in the quantum critical regime is an interesting topic which is left to future study. for such a bilayer Rashba system, up to first order in k, is given by: where μ is chemical potential, τ i and s i are Pauli matrices in the layer and spin space, correspondingly. Without loss of generality, we assume the chemical potential lies in the conduction band. Since the superconducting gap is much less than chemical potential, it is convenient to consider the conduction band only, and completely ignore valence band. To do that, we need to expand creation and annihilation operators ψ + k , ψ k in terms of the eigenstates of the conduction and valence bands, and then simply omit the contribution of the valence band. This expansion takes the form where i = c, v labels conduction/ valence band, and α = 1, 2 denote band eigenstates in the MCBB. In this basis, eigenvectors a c kα corresponding to the states of the conduction band, which is the two-orbital analog of Bloch wavefunctions in the continuum, have the form where k± = kx ± i ky , and Mathematically, the mapping onto conducting band simply implies that in (S2) we keep a c kα only, and omit terms with a v kα . Now, we consider an inversion-symmetry-breaking charge order: an electron density imbalance on the two layers, (n 1 -n 2 )(r) = ψ + (r)τ z ψ(r), which does not involve electron's spin. After the mapping onto the conduction band, this expression can be rewritten in the form which exactly coincides with the Fourier transform of Γ2 (see Table It is also instructive to present the correspondence between p-wave pairing order parameters in single-band model and in 2-band model considered in [S1, S3, S7]. We demonstrate the derivation of the correspondence on the example of the two-component order parameter, ∆i k = ψ kα (iτ y s i s y ) αβ ψ -kβ . To establish the correspondence we, again, perform mapping onto conduction band using MCBB, Eq. ( where + (-) sign corresponds to i = x (i = y). The correspondence between other pairing orders can be obtained analogously. The result is shown in Table Here we show the detailed derivation of Eq. ( We start with the case of rotationally invariant interaction. We demonstrate the details of the calculation using gyrotropic interaction in 3D as an example, and then present the results for all other types of interaction in 3D and 2D. The task is to decompose the effective interaction into different p-wave superconducting channels, classified in Table For the case of gyrotropic interaction, the Hamiltonian has the form This interaction corresponds to the choice d k = k in Eq. ( V e αβγδ (k, k ′ ) = -V 0 8 i,j ( ki kj + k′i k′j )(σ i αδ σ j βγ -σ i αγ σ j βδ ). (S9) This term describes s-wave pairing and corresponds to the first term in Eq. (S6). Indeed, using the identity σ i αδ σ j βγ + σ i βγ σ j αδ -σ i αγ σ j βδ -σ i βδ σ j αγ = -2(iσ y ) αβ (iσ y ) + γδ δ ij (S10) we find V e αβγδ (k, k ′ ) = V 0 4 (iσ y ) αβ (iσ y ) + γδ , (S11) therefore, a 0 = 1, and we have attraction in the s-wave pairing channel. Next, the second term in the vertex is the bilinear function of different momenta and has the form ( ki k′j + k′i kj )(σ i αδ σ j βγ + σ i αγ σ j βδ ). (S12)