Significant advances in coherence have made superconducting quantum circuits a viable platform for fault-tolerant quantum computing. To further extend capabilities, highly coherent quantum systems could act as quantum memories for these circuits. A useful quantum memory must be rapidly addressable by qubits, while maintaining superior coherence. We demonstrate a novel superconducting microwave cavity architecture that is highly robust against major sources of loss that are encountered in the engineering of circuit QED systems. The architecture allows for near-millisecond storage of quantum states in a resonator while strong coupling between the resonator and a transmon qubit enables control, encoding, and readout at MHz rates. The observed coherence times constitute an improvement of almost an order of magnitude over those of the best available superconducting qubits. Our design is an ideal platform for studying coherent quantum optics and marks an important step towards hardware-efficient quantum computing with Josephson junction-based quantum circuits. The ongoing quest to build a quantum computer demands sustaining the coherence of quantum states while scaling up the system size. Superconducting quantum circuits have experienced enormous improvements in coherence over the last decade, making them a leading contender for the implementation of practical quantum information processing devices. State-of-the-art Josephson junction qubits reach coherence times, T 2 , of up to one hundred microseconds A promising route forward is to supplement superconducting qubits with additional, highly coherent systems for quantum state storage Here we demonstrate a novel microwave cavity quantum memory that stores quantum states with millisecond relaxation and pure dephasing times. A superconducting transmon qubit is strongly coupled to the cavity mode, allowing for quantum control of the resonator state on the MHz-scale. We characterize the coherence of the resonator with superpositions of its lowest two Fock states, finding T 2 = 0.72 ± 0.03 ms. We find that the coherence time of the resonator is somewhat reduced from the value anticipated from measurements on uncoupled resonators of this type. By modifying the decay rate and excited state population of the transmon in situ, we fully trace that enhancement of decoherence rates back to the qubit-resonator coupling. HIGH-Q COAXIAL λ/4 RESONATOR Superconducting microwave cavities can achieve low energy decay rates, κ/2π = (1-100) Hz, for single microwave photons 1 kHz In order to avoid this seam dissipation we design our system as sketched in Figure In addition to the high quality factors achievable, the small mode volume makes this quarter-wave resonator particularly attractive for integration with transmon qubits. By inserting a sapphire chip holding the qubit as shown in Fig. For evaluating the resonator as a quantum memory it is essential to quantify its coherence time, T 2 , by the decay of quantum states. The coherence time is bounded by the relaxation time, T 1 = 1/κ, as 1/T 2 = 1/(2T 1 ) + 1/T φ . Analogously to the case of a two-level system, the pure dephasing time (transversal relaxation time), T φ , is the time constant with which the coherence between a pair of Fock states, n and n + 1, decays in the absence of energy relaxation (longitudinal relaxation). T 1 , T 2 can be measured directly by monitoring the time evolution of the resonator after generating the Fock state |1 or the superposition state (|0 + |1 ) / √ 2, respectively. We first determine the decay time T 1 of the Fock state |1 . In our cQED system, arbitrary Fock states (and their superpositions) can be generated in the resonator by a combination of appropriately chosen cavity mode displacements and number-state selective phase gates on the qubit (Fig. In order to find the coherence time of the resonator, we prepare the mode in the state (|0 + |1 ) / √ 2 and measure the decay of coherence between |0 and |1 (Fig. It is critical for our understanding of the cavity memory's performance to identify decoherence mechanisms that are introduced together with the coupling to the qubit. We expect that photon-loss in the resonator should be affected by the dissipation of the transmon as consequence of the hybridization between the modes. This is analogous to the 'bad-cavity' limit of cavity QED, where an atom's emission is enhanced by Purcell coupling to a low-Q cavity For a quantitative analysis we perform a numerical finite element simulation of our system, predicting an enhancement of κ q ≈ γ/600 In our sample we estimate an excited state population in equilibrium of ∼ 0.8%, corresponding to an effective temperature of 80 mK (Fig. We have demonstrated a long-lived superconducting cavity resonator that can serve as a quantum memory for superconducting quantum circuits, outperforming the best Josephson junction-based qubits available to date. An important conclusion from our data is that any decoherence beyond that of a bare resonator not coupled to a qubit can be explained by the Hamiltonian and qubit properties alone, and is not caused by other technical difficulties that arise from integration. We emphasize that therefore, with given properties of the cavity and the qubit as well as the coupling Hamiltonian, the coherence properties of the memory are optimal, and can only be improved by employing better qubits or cavities. It can be expected that this observation of the couplinginduced decoherence will be useful for ongoing efforts to harness hybrid quantum systems for enhancing the coherence times in superconducting circuits Because our device reaches the strong dispersive regime of cavity QED, control and measurement can be conducted on fast timescales set by t = π/χ. The resonator presented shows little degradation on this timescale, with χT 1 ≈ 3000, suggesting that quantum operations with very high fidelities can be performed The resonator geometry described in the main text includes a section of waveguide below cutoff to separate the resonant mode from contact dissipation. The resonator couples to several circular waveguide modes in the section directly above the transmission line (Fig. In order to estimate the maximum quality of our coaxial transmission line memory, we measure the frequency response of a second, empty resonator with a VNA. We use the shunt-resonator technique to separate the internal quality factor (Q int ) from the external coupling quality factor (Q ext ) In the absence of a transmon or sapphire chip, these coaxial λ/4 resonators are observed to have single-photon quality factors of Q int = 5 -7 × 10 7 . At large circulating field strengths, corresponding to millions of photons in the resonator, we find that these resonators can have higher performance Q int = 2 × 10 8 , corresponding to a lifetime of 7 ms. The saturable nature of this dominate loss mechanism indicates that material defects [S5-S8] are a limiting factor for this particular cavity as a memory at the T 1 = Q int /ω ≈ 3 ms level. This is consistent with the T 1 = 1/κ 0 = 2 ms extracted in the main text for the internal loss-limit of the device used in the quantum memory experiment. The VNA measurements allow us to place a bound on the quality of the dielectric (Q diel ) and conductor (Q mag ) surfaces for our high purity aluminum by assuming that all loss comes from either a dielectric loss (Q int ∝ Q diel ) or conductor loss (Q int ∝ Q mag ). By finite element simulations, we calculate the normalized field-energy stored in the surface layer of our cavity. These calculations allow us to estimate the participation ratios The transmon qubit is fabricated on a 430 μm thick sapphire wafer with a standard Dolan bridge process. A bilayer of resists (MMA/PMMA) support a suspended structure at the Josephson tunnel junction location and are completely stripped where the antenna is to be deposited. Both exposures are completed in a single step of electronbeam lithography. Before deposition, the sapphire surface is cleaned with ion etching, an Ar/O 2 descum at 250 V for 30 s. We deposit aluminum with double-angle evaporation (±28 • ) with thicknesses of 20 nm and 60 nm, exposing the chamber to oxygen in between these depositions (720 seconds in 2000 Pa static pressure of a gaseous mixture of 85% argon and 15% oxygen) and again before removing the sample (600 seconds, 400 Pa). We liftoff aluminum deposited on undeveloped resist. Our transmon's junction has a normal-state resistance of 3.5 kΩ at room temperature, corresponding to a Josephson inductance of L J = 4.5 nH, or a Josephson energy of E J = Φ 2 0 /((2π) 2 L J ) = 150 μeV , at 15 mK. The geometry of the transmon's dipole antenna pads are relatively long, approximately 2 mm each, to achieve strong coupling to both resonators and narrow, 50 μm, to maintain a large anharmonicity. Our measurement set up is shown in Supplementary Figure The qubit state is encoded in the phase of a signal transmitted through the readout cavity. This signal passes through an eccosorb filter, two circulators, and into the ∆ port of of a hybrid connected to the JPC. The JPC acts as a nearly quantum limited phase preserving amplifier Our system shares the nonlinearity of a single Josepnson junction across the three coupled modes: two nearlyharmonic modes (resonators) and an anharmonic (qubit) mode. Each is well within the weak nonlinearity limit (transmon limit) of the coupled Hamiltonian where we label the operators of storage cavity as a, transmon as b, and the readout mode as c. We provide values for the self-Kerr nonlinearities (K i 's) and cross-Kerr nonlinearities (χ ij 's) in Table In the main text, we limit our consideration of the storage cavity to its lowest two levels, and therefore, K a does not enter into our analysis. However, we measure the mode's nonlinearity to be small (K a = 450 Hz), which is encouraging for error correction schemes, or quantum optics experiments, that access the full Hilbert space of the resonator. To make a |1 Fock state, we implement the pulse sequence experimentally demonstrated in In a dissipationless system, this type of sequence can prepare an |1 Fock state with 99% fidelity To make a superposition of |0 -|1 Fock states, we modify the pulse sequence above, as outlined in We estimate the effect of the qubit's dissipation on the resonator by finite element simulations. We use an eigenmodetype solver (HFSS), which is capable of capturing the hybridization between the system's modes and can handle dissipative circuit elements. We add a parallel shunt resistor to the linear inductor that represents the Josephson junction in simulation. The only loss in the calculation arises from currents passing through the inductor. Thus, the ratio of the resulting quality factors is expected to be the scaling between an otherwise perfect cavity's lifetime and the lifetime of the imperfect qubit. In the main text, we present temperature dependent data which agrees with these simulations, assuming that the only dissipation in the cavity mode that is temperature dependent is caused by the qubit. However, because the cavity is superconducting, its own BCS temperature dependence might be expected to be observed in this experiment. We have also performed temperature dependence on an empty resonator for comparison (Sup. Fig. An exact model for the pure-dephasing of a qubit due to thermal photons in strongly coupled, lossy resonators has been developed for the dispersive regime of cQED in which we operate where P e is the excited state population of the qubit and γ is the qubit's decay rate. Expanding this expression in the strong dispersive limit (χ γ) gives The quadratic term is of order 1×10 -4 and thus neglected in our analysis. The error bounds on all quoted lifetimes in the main text are taken from bootstrapping 