We analyze the magnetization at the interface between singlet and triplet superconductors and show that its direction and dependence on the phase difference across the junction are strongly tied to the structure of the triplet order parameter as well as to the pairing interactions. We consider equal spin helical, opposite spin chiral, and mixed symmetry pairing on the triplet side and show that the magnetization vanishes at φ = 0 only in the first case, follows approximately a cos φ behavior for the second, and shows higher harmonics for the last configuration. We trace the origin of the magnetization to the magnetic structure of the Andreev bound states near the interface, and provide a symmetry-based explanation of the results. Our findings can be used to control the magnetization in superconducting heterostructures and to test symmetries of spin-triplet superconductors. Introduction. Attempts to combine dissipationless transport in superconductors with the control of spin currents has driven many recent studies of superconducting heterostructures The alternative pathway to spin control by superconductivity is via utilizing compounds that support spintriplet pairing. The number of known triplet superconductors (TSCs) has been growing steadily, and now includes UPt 3 From energetic considerations most of the nonmagnetic superconducting compounds that support triplet pairing should have a unitary order parameter In this Letter we show that the magnetism in singlettriplet superconducting heterostructures is fundamentally linked to the nature of the triplet pairing. We consider a microscopic model for a high-transparency interface between a singlet and a unitary triplet (or mixed parity, see below) superconductor, and self-consistently solve the corresponding Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations to obtain the energy spectrum. In all cases we find spin-splitting of the Andreev bound states (ABS) near the interface, leading to a magnetization parallel to the spin-triplet d-vector. However, the variation of the magnetization M with the phase difference φ across the junction is non-trivial, and depends on the nature of the pairing interaction on the triplet side. Our main results are summarized in Fig. These results show that the phase difference can be used to control interface magnetization. In addition, the interface magnetization probes the spin structure of the pairing interactions. This finding is especially relevant for Sr 2 RuO 4 . There is no consensus on the exact form of the triplet pairing in this system, and NMR Knight shift measurements Model and formalism. We consider a two-dimensional lateral heterostructure made of two superconductors, SC1 and SC2, having spin-singlet (SC1) and spin-triplet or mixed-parity (SC2) pairing. The x and y planar directions are perpendicular and parallel to the SC1/SC2 interface, respectively. The system is uniform along the y axis, so that the translational symmetry is broken only in the x direction. The Hamiltonian is then defined on a square lattice of size L × L (the lattice constant is unity), with periodic boundary conditions along y, with H m (m = 1, 2) being the Hamiltonians of each superconducting side and the interface term, Here the lattice sites are labelled by i ≡ {i x , i y }, with i x and i y integers between -L/2 and L/2, i, j denote nearest-neighbor sites, and μ is the chemical potential. Labels 0 = {0, i y } and ±1 = {±1, i y } denote the sites at the interface and their nearest-neighbors, respectively. The attractive interaction -V σσ m (V m > 0) can be chosen to be effective in the S z = 1, 0, -1 projections for the the TSC and/or in the S = 0 singlet sector. The local attractive term -U m (U > 0) only promotes spin-singlet pairing. For simplicity we take t 1 = t 2 = t ⊥ = t, and use the hopping parameter t as a unit of energy. Below, in the description of the results we discuss the qualitative consequences of relaxing this assumption. To investigate the model of Eq. ( These expressions yield the spin singlet (S) and triplet (T ) components in the S z = 0 sector, ∆ S,T = (∆ ↑↓ ij ± ∆ ↑↓ ji )/2, and the triplet pairing in the S z = {1, -1} sectors, ∆ σσ T = ∆ σσ ij . They define in turn the superconducting pair amplitudes with s-or p-wave symmetry, i.e. , which are then determined self-consistently By suitable choices of the interactions V σσ and U we can therefore model interfaces between superconductors with different symmetries of the order parameter. We take the most conventional SC1 with U = 0, V σσ = 0, and compare the results for three different choices of SC2. Case a) is equal spin triplet pairing, V ↑↑ =V ↓↓ = 0; V ↑↓ = U = 0. In the bulk this corresponds to the helical state, ) and ∆ ij is the order parameter in spin space defined above. Case b) is a TSC with S z = 0 and a subdominant extended s-wave pairing, V ↑↑ =V ↓↓ = U = 0; V ↑↓ = 0. Finally, case c) is a TSC with S z = 0, V ↑↓ = 0, but possible local s-wave pairing, U = 0, while V ↑↑ =V ↓↓ = 0. For the last two situations the most favorable pairing state due to the V ↑↓ depends on the electron density, n, and the chiral k x + ik y order is stabilized in the region between low doping μ 1.2 and high (low) density (|μ| 2.25) Results and discussion. The interface breaks the translational symmetry in the x direction, and is therefore pair-breaking for the k x component of the triplet pairing. The differences between the three investigated cases stem from the consequences of this suppression for the interface magnetization. Case a) corresponds to the usual proximity coupling with step-like change of the symmetry of the pairing interaction across the junction, where the reduction of the amplitude of the p x component simply changes the effective coupling between the two sides, see Figs. The origin of this dependence is easy to understand from the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) expansion of the free energy density, with the relevant terms f = am 2 + i b m(ψ η x -ψη x ). Here a > 0 is the inverse susceptibility, ψ (η x ) are the amplitudes of the singlet (triplet k x ) order, and m is the component of the magnetization along the d-vector coupled to k x , in our case y. Near the interface where both ψ = |ψ|e -iφ/2 and η x = |η x |e iφ/2 coexist, linear coupling to the magnetization ensures that the mimimum of the free energy is at m ∝ sin φ. The GL analysis is valid near T c where indeed a sin φ-like shape develops from the step-like behavior of the same symmetry. In general the magnetization linearly couples to the component of the d-vector for which the surface is pair breaking, and hence will be along the z axis for the remaining two situations. The phase dependence also becomes more complex if there is pairing in the subdominant s-wave channel on the triplet side, as in cases b) and c). Recall that we have a chiral triplet order stabilized in the bulk. Reduction in the triplet k x component near the interface generically implies ∆ ↑↓ i,i+ x = -∆ ↑↓ i,i-x , and allows for admixture of singlet pairing. The difference from the well-known case of subdominant pairing near the surfaces in d-wave superconductors and promote m ∝ cos φ phase dependence of the magnetization (a similar term was found in the microscopic theory In principle both sin φ and cos φ contributions should be present in such a junction, leading to a non-trivial phase dependence. However, we believe that in case b) the competition with the subdominant pairing on the SC2 side causes the triplet components to decay more rapidly towards the interface and save energy via singlet pairing (compare Fig. Finally, inclusion of the on-site s-wave pairing for case c) dramatically extends the range of coexistence of triplet and singlet pairing in SC2, see Fig. Analysis of the energy spectrum, Fig. Conlcusions. We showed that the magnetic properties of singlet-triplet heterostructures are extraordinary sensitive to the type of triplet pairing, and to subdominant pairing channels. The dependence of the magnetization on the phase distinguishes between helical and chiral pairing. Vice versa, our results allow control of the interface magnetization by the phase difference. We con-sidered an interface of high transparency and identical band structure on both sides. Relaxing this assumption will reduce the amplitude of the leaking superconducting component. In the first two cases we expect a reduction in the amplitude of M (φ), while in the last example the magnetization is weakly sensitive to the interface mismatch except near φ ∼ π. Finally, our results suggest that such junctions act as possible spin pumps. A voltage bias across the heterostructure would make the phase difference time-dependent, φ = 2eV t, and the dynamics of the magnetization is determined by this driving force as well as damping. If damping is small, for our last case of mixed-parity superconductor in contact with a conventional s-wave system, the magnetization oscillations do not average to zero over a period of π/eV . Detailed investigation of this effect is left for future work. I.V. acknowledges support from NSF Grant DMR-1105339. M.C. and P.G. acknowledge support from FP7-EC programme under FET-Open grant number 618083 (CNTQC).