We study the instabilities towards (exotic) superconductivity of mixtures of spin-1/2 fermions coupled to scalar bosons on a two-dimensional square lattice with the Dynamical-Cluster-Approximation (DCA) using a numerically exact continuous-time Monte-Carlo solver. The Bogoliubov bosons provide an effective phononic bath for the fermions and induce a non-local retarded interaction between the fermions, which can lead to (exotic) superconductivity. Because of the sign problem the biggest clusters we can study are limited to 2 × 2 in size, but this nevertheless allows us to study the pairing instablilities, and their possible divergence, in the s-and d -wave channels as well as the competition with antiferromagnetic fluctuations. At fermionic half-filling we find that d-wave is stable when the mediated interaction by the bosons is of the same order as the bare fermionic repulsion. Its critical temperature can be made as high as the maximum one for s-wave, which opens perspectives for its detection in a cold atom experiment. Mixtures of bosons and fermions are ubiquitous: They are fundamental in particle physics, where bosons are the carriers of forces between fermionic matter particles. In condensed matter systems, they appear in the context of superconductivity, where the conventional pairing mechanism consists of phonons inducing an effective retarded attractive interaction between electrons leading to the formation of Cooper-pairs, as well as in mixtures of 3 He and 4 He in which the inter-and intra-isotope interactions are of comparable magnitude. Cold-atom systems are uniquely suited to simulate this physics as they allow fine experimental control over the interactions as well as the tunelling amplitudes 1,2 . The optical lattice system does not have phonons. Nevertheless, pairing mechanisms with cold fermions in an optical lattice can be investigated by quantum simulation. Bosons deep in the superfluid phase have a linear dispersion 3 which can play the role of phonons as in conventional superconductors (when fermions form an electron gas) but, as we will see, they can equally well couple to spin density wave fluctuations (relevant when the charge of the fermions is near localization). Spin density wave fluctuations induce an attractive interaction between electrons in a spin-singlet, with the pair wavefunction changing sign between different regions of the Fermi surface Quantum degenerate mixtures of bosonic and spinpolarized fermionic species have first been realized experimentally with Theoretically, the interactions mediated by superfluid bosons In this work we restore some momentum fluctuations compared to the aforementioned DMFT study by studying mixtures in the Fermi liquid regime in a DCA framework in two dimensions and monitor the pairing susceptibilities. We assume that the bosons are deep in the superfluid phase which allows to find (exotic) pairing channels (unlike single-site DMFT) and the interplay with anti-ferromagnetic fluctuations but it rules out charge density wave order. We find that the bosonic condensate can enhance both s-and d-wave pairing. Just as in conventional superconductors s-wave pairing is possible for weakly repulsive bare fermions. However, as the lattice effects and the bare Hubbard repulsion grow in importance, d-wave takes over and can be the dominant pairing channel. Atomic Bose-Fermi mixtures thus effectively display two different pairing mechanisms, relevant for superconductors. Our system is described by the fermionic action S = S f + S ret , with It describes a fermionic Hubbard model with hopping amplitude t f , on-site repulsion U ff and chemical potential μ f coupled to bosons deep in the condensed phase with condensate density n 0 via an on-site densitydensity coupling U bf . The bosons are treated in the Bogoliubov approximation and subsequently integrated out, giving rise to the chemical potential shift n 0 U bf and the non-local retarded density-density action term S ret with kernel is the dispersion of the Bogoliubov quasi-particles, εk = ε k -ε 0 the lattice dispersion of the bare bosons, shifted to be positive, and U bb the repulsion between the bare bosons on the lattice. The chemical potential μ b was fixed to give unit filling for the bosons (its density is unimportant in the superfluid regime). The explicit construction from the underlying Hamiltonian is performed in Appendix A. This treatment neglects any back-action of the fermions on the bosons, in particular, bosonic charge order is excluded, which might be mediated from the fermionic sector by the density-density coupling between bosons and fermions. However, for fast bosons (amounting to t b > t f ) which we consider, charge-density ordering was found to be suppressed and superconductivity to be favored in DMFT -1 , with ξ = t b /(2U bb ) as obtained in bf /U bb . The bosonic dispersion E k can only have an influence on the fermionic system if ξ is comparable to the lattice spacing, which is satisfied for NaK. To numerically study the action Eq. (1) we use the dynamical cluster approximation (DCA) Here, the sums run over the cluster degrees of freedom, G is the unknown cluster-excluded Green's function of the impurity problem which has to be determined selfconsistently. The local Hubbard interaction U ff remains unaffacted by the DCA mapping, but the non-local induced interaction is coarse-grained, i.e., D ij in S ret is replaced by Dij , which is the Cluster-Fourier transform of the coarse-grained interaction kernel D(i -j). To solve the impurity problem, we use a generalized weak-coupling solver To obtain transitions to a superconducting state we need to consider the two-particle Green's function for opposite spin pairing in the particle-particle channel × e i[(ωn+ν)τ1-ωnτ2+ω n τ3-(ω n +ν)τ4] T τ P (•) where we adopt the notation k = (k, iω n ), k = (k , iω n ) and q = (q, iν n ) where g(k) is the form-factor for the corresponding symmetry. The pairing susceptibility is then given by where Π is the coarse-grained version of Π g,g obtained by inverting the coarse-grained Bethe-Salpeter equation as described in We now turn to the investigation of the fermionic instabilities, which is reflected in the behavior of susceptibilities in the particle-hole and particle-particle channels, specifically the antiferromagnetic susceptibility χ AF at momentum transfer q = ((π, π), 0) and the pairing field susceptibility P g as defined in Eq. ( The s(d)-wave pairing fields with the linear fits are shown in the upper (lower) panel of Fig. Upon increasing U ff s-wave-pairing is suppressed and d-wave is the dominant instability as seen in the right panel for U ff /t f = 1 where no s-wave instability is found for the range of V shown. This is easily understood in the instantaneous limit where W scales with V = U 2 bf /U bb and for |W | < |U ff | no s-wave pairing is possible. In the case of s-wave pairing the vertex peaks at a zero momentum transfer leading to a homogeneous real space structure whereas for d-wave a strong peak develops for a momentum transfer K -K = (π, π) leading to oscillatory behaviour in real space. Based on the extrapolated transition temperatures we obtain the phase-diagram in Fig ( The critical temperatures for s-and d-wave pairing along cuts in the phase-diagram are shown in Fig ( Next we consider the instability towards an antiferromagnetic state. In the thermodynamical limit antiferromagnetism is allowed at zero temperature only but in selfconsistent cluster approaches such as DCA it can be found at finite temperature as well, rather accurately reproducing correlations at short distances but missing their fluctuations at long distances. The spin susceptibility χ AF (T ), corresponding to an instability in the spin sector of the particle-hole channel, is shown in Fig. Based on the extrapolated transition temperatures for the divergence of the antiferromagnetic susceptibility χ AF , we obtain a transition to an AFM state as shown in the corresponding phase diagram in Fig ( From these observations it emerges that increasing V enhances both s-and d-wave (with s-wave being dominant for nearly-free fermions). Increasing U ff increases the spin density wave fluctuations and suppresses s-wave pairing, as a result of which d-can become dominant over an extended regime in parameter space. This suggests that T c for d-wave can be increased by increasing both V and U ff and staying near the line where s-wave becomes subdominant compared to d-wave. In the static mean-field study of Ref. 3 the highest T c for a NaK mixture was found at ξ = 0.6. For those parameters we find a maximal T c /t = 0.17. Whereas Migdal-Eliashberg theories usually do not have a built-in mechanism that puts a limit on T c , the gain stops here when U bf is too large compared to U ff and U bb causing a mechanical instability towards phase-separation In this work we studied the antiferromagnetic und superconducting instabilities of Bose-Fermi-Mixtures in the limit where the bosons can be treated within the Bogoliubov approximation. We used a weak coupling Monte-Carlo cluster solver within the DCA-framework allowing us to distinguish between s-and d-wave pairing in the fermionic sector. The dominant pairing mechanism is determined by the relative sizes of the repulsive fermi-fermi interaction U ff and the interactions induced by the bosons scaling with V = U 2 bf /U bb leading to the phase diagram shown in Fig ( In the Bogoliubov approximation the bosonic Hamiltonian H b takes the form As usual the coefficients are given by u k = cosh φ k and v k = sinh φ k where tanh 2 φ k = n 0 U bb /(ε k +n 0 U bb ). The Bogoliubov spectrum is given by E with εk = ε k -ε 0 , the lattice dispersion of noninteracting bosons shifted to be positive. We emphasize that this treatment neglects any backaction of the fermionic sector on the bosons, in particular we assume that the bosons do not charge order, which limits our approach to the case of fast bosons. Rewriting the coupling term H bf in momentum space we obtain where N 0 is the macroscopic number of bosonic atoms in the condensate, N s is the number of sites in the lattice and the primed sum indicates that the k = 0 terms should be omitted. In the following we will neglect the last term as it is suppressed by a power of √ N 0 compared to the second term. The first term corresponds to the shift in the fermionic chemical potential present in Eq. 1 whereas the second term represents the linear coupling of bosons to the fermions that will be integrated out. Next, we reexpress the second term in the Bogoliubov boson operators to obtain which clearly shows that the Bogoliubov bosons couple linearly to the fermionic density with momentum dependent couplings. Employing coherent states for both the bosons and fermions the action reads as S = S f + S bog + S bf where the fermionic action S f has already been defined in Eq. 1 and Finally, integration over the quadratic bosonic Bogoliubov action yields the non-local, retarded densitydensity interaction, i.e. e -Sret = d( ᾱ, α) e -S bog -S bf with (A7) which combined with S f gives the total action S = S f + S ret of the effective model in Eq. 1 and the kernel D ij has been defined in Eq. 2. f (b) i