Superconductivity (SC) or superfluidity (SF) is observed across a remarkably broad range of fermionic systems: in BCS, cuprate, iron-based, organic, and heavy-fermion superconductors, and superfluid helium-3 in condensed matter; in a variety of SC/SF phenomena in low-energy nuclear physics; in ultracold, trapped atomic gases; and in various exotic possibilities in neutron stars. The range of physical conditions and differences in microscopic physics defy all attempts to unify this behavior in any conventional picture. Here we propose a unification through the shared symmetry properties of the emergent condensed states, with microscopic differences absorbed into parameters. This, in turn, forces a rethinking of specific occurrences of SC/SF such as cuprate high-T c superconductivity, which becomes far less mysterious when seen as part of a continuum of behavior shared by a variety of other systems. Superconductivity and superfluidity are collective phenomena owing their existence to many-body interactions; the corresponding emergent states are not related perturbatively to the parent state. Thus, characterization of SC and SF through microscopic properties of the parent system fails on two levels: (1) It cannot provide a unified view, since microscopic physics differs fundamentally between fields. Conventional understanding of SC and SF is built on the idea of a Fermi liquid, for which single-particle states of the interacting system are in one-to-one correspondence with those of the non-interacting system. Superconductivity is assumed to develop from a Fermi-liquid parent through the Cooper instability, in which two fermions outside a filled Fermi sea can form a bound state for vanishingly small attraction The Cooper instability was developed into a many-body theory by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) postulate that the SC state is a coherent superposition of fermion pairs in a weak coupling limit BCS theory in condensed matter and nuclear physics involves quite different interactions operating on energy and distance scales differing by many orders of magnitude. However, emergent SC/SF properties were unified through sharing the same form for the BCS wavefunction, which implied a common pseudospin symmetry of the effective Hamiltonians that could be expressed elegantly in terms of an SU(2) Lie algebra By the early 1970s all cases of fermionic SC and SF were thought to be understood in these conventional BCS terms. This unity was shattered by a series of discoveries beginning with 3 He superfluidity in 1972 It is thought that SC or SF in all these systems results from condensation of Cooper pairs in parent states that may not be Fermi liquids, through interactions that may not be mediated by phonons and may differ from the s-wave form of conventional BCS theory (unconventional pairing). This calls into question whether the BCS paradigm, even generalized to accommodate unconventional pairing, can describe the diversity of SC and SF behavior. The issue is how the Cooper instability emerges from a variety of parent states that need not be Fermi liquids, enabled by highly diverse fermion-fermion correlations. Let us begin with a brief survey of SC and SF behavior. Our aim is to highlight the simultaneous microscopic diversity but emergent-level unity of superconductivity and superfluidity. Tests of conventional BCS are well known so we shall emphasize more complex behavior, with BCS viewed as a limit of this more complex behavior. Phase diagrams for cuprate superconductors are rather universal, with features similar to those of Fig. A phase diagram for a heavy fermion superconductor is displayed in Fig. A phase diagram for an organic superconductor is displayed in Fig. A generic nuclear correlation energy diagram at zero temperature is shown in Fig. A theory accounting for this diversity of behavior must exhibit several emergent-state properties: (1) A robust Cooper instability arising in both Fermi-liquid and other contexts, depending only through parameters on microscopic physics. (2) Accommodation of SC/SF and other emergent modes, with quantum phase transitions among these modes. (3) Limits corresponding to pure SC and to the pure collective modes that compete with SC. (4) Limits corresponding to conventional BCS. ( Unless we assume the great similarity of SC/SF across many disciplines to be mere coincidence, the data suggest that superconductivity and superfluidity must have a description that can be approximately separated into two parts: (1) A universal part describing the essential emergent properties of SC/SF that is largely independent of microscopic specifics for the weakly interacting parent systems. (2) A system-specific part that can vary from case to case and parameterizes the quantitative differences between SC/SF cases, without altering substantially the essence of the emergent properties. The distinction is similar to that between a class and instances of that class in object oriented computer programming. The class has a generic description specifying the essence of the class that may include parameters having unspecified values; various instances of that class then correspond to specific implementations (instantiations) of the class with different parameter data sets. Then different instances all inherit the same generic properties of the class but may differ from each other quantitatively because they have different parameter values. As a simple example of this concept, consider a class specified by the minimal definition of a 2D sphere, with properties corresponding to the radius, location, and color defined but with unspecified values. Then multiple instances may correspond to spheres having different locations, radii, and colors. The instances differ, yet in a deep sense they are the same, since intuitively the specific values of instance parameters for color, radius, and location are secondary to the essence of being a sphere. A theory embodying these features cannot be based directly on microscopic properties, since these differ essentially between fields. The only properties that these systems share are that (1) SC/SF involves Cooper pairs of fermions, possibly occurring in the presence of other collective modes, and (2) the normal system has many degrees of freedom but the SC/SF state is phenomenologically simple and so must have only a few effective degrees of freedom. This implies that the SC/SF state results from an enormous truncation of the Hilbert space to a simple collective subspace. The similarity of the SC/SF implies that this subspace is in some sense the same subspace across these varied disciplines. The observed similarities across diverse systems can be ensured if the collective subspaces corresponding to SC/SF have the same symmetries of the Hamiltonian (dynamical symmetries). Then matrix elements (observables) can be similar across fields because they are determined by the symmetry, even if the microscopic content of the wavefunctions and operators (not observables) has little similarity between disciplines. Thus, we propose that all fermionic superconductivity and superfluidity results from a spontaneous reorganization of the Hilbert space that transcends microscopic details of the normal system. The generic structure of this reorganized space accounts for SC and SF in its myriad forms. Normal-state physics influences the reorganized space, but only parametrically. The pair condensate competes for Hilbert space with other emergent modes, suggesting that conventional BCS states are highly atypical, representing limiting cases where the space factorizes and SC/SF decouples from other emergent modes. The most powerful means of implementing this space truncation is to identify dynamical symmetries expressed through Lie algebras and associated Lie groups Such theories are designed to describe the low-energy collective states and are likely to fail outside that domain. Furthermore, on physical grounds the effective interactions should vary smoothly with control parameters such as doping, so rapid local fluctuations reflecting inadequacies of the dynamical symmetry simplification may not always be captured. Thus, such approaches are best suited to provide simple descriptions of global behavior for highly collective states. But that is precisely what is required for our hypothesized universal part of the SC/SF description. One might fear that such dynamical symmetry methods imply non-unique candidate Lie algebras, but their "quantized" nature (algebras close only for certain generator numbers) and generic properties of SC and SF states severely restrict options. Bound states imply compact groups and the number of low-dimensional compact Lie groups is small. (Physically, the collective degrees of freedom fit together consistently only in highly-constrained ways.) Furthermore, a pair condensate is FIG. required, so the algebra must contain both fermion particleparticle and particle-hole operators, constraining possibilities further. A lower limit on generator number follows from counting physical operators. SC requires spin singlet (or triplet) pairs. But collective modes carrying angular momentum (magnetism or quadrupole fields) mix pairs of different spin. In condensed matter this implies both singlet and triplet pairs, and a minimum of 8 generators (creation and annihilation operators with spin degeneracy). In nuclear physics, this corresponds minimally to 12 generators, counting total angular momentum J = 0 and J = 2 pairs. An AF field adds 3 generators, a quadrupole field adds 5, and conservation of charge and spin or total angular momentum implies 4 additional generators. Adding up, we require minimally 15 generators for condensed matter and 21 for nuclear physics applications. An upper limit may be estimated by noting that previous applications to topics as complex as high-T c SC and the structure of heavy nuclei required no more than 28 generators The only candidate algebras meeting these conditions with more than 10 and less than 35 generators are SO We have outlined a universal classification of superconducting and superfluid behavior, but we also require matrix elements for observables. Calculation of observables is documented extensively in the references but we give here representative examples from condensed matter and nuclear physics. Figure Quantum phase transition between SC ground states having finite AF correlation and those having vanishing AF correlations. with SU(4)-model calculations Highest symmetries having multiple dynamical symmetry subchains imply competing ground states and quantum phase transitions. The SU(4) model of cuprate SC illustrates. Because of SU(4) symmetry, the SC order parameter ∆ satisfies where x is doping and x q is a critical doping predicted by the theory: the undoped AF Mott state is unstable against condensing pairs with infinitesimal doping for finite attractive pairing Our proposal has an abstract similarity to general relativity, where gravity is a universal consequence of spacetime structure, not of interactions between particles in spacetime. In like manner, the universality observed for superconductivity and superfluidity across disciplines derives from the structure of a common Hilbert subspace selected by dynamical symmetries. There also is an analogy with renormalization group flow, since the dynamical symmetries distinguish between "relevant operators" characterizing the collective subspace and "irrelevant operators" that differentiate microscopic systems but enter only parametrically into the collective behavior. The "flow" is in the dimensionality of the generator space; as it is decreased from that of the full Hilbert space toward that of the collective subspace, the influence of irrelevant operators falls aside, leaving only relevant operators to define the SC/SF Hilbert subspace. Universality is implied because differences between fields are represented by irrelevant operators but the relevant operators define SC/SF subspaces having common algebraic structures across fields. Finally, we note that the global view advocated here may illuminate specific occurrences of SC and SF in particular subfields. For example, high-T c cuprate superconductivity becomes far less mysterious when viewed as part of a continuum of behavior shared with many other systems. The question of why cuprates differ so much from conventional BCS SC becomes inverted in the present view: it is the conventional BCS superconductors that should more properly be viewed as anomalous, in that they represent only a special limit where we may neglect other collective modes competing with SC. In summary, a unified understanding of superconductivity and superfluidity cannot focus on microscopic properties of the normal state, which are not connected analytically to properties of the emergent state and may differ radically between disciplines. Nor can it focus on Fermi-liquid instabilities, since these phenomena do not require Fermi-liquid parentage. A common algebraic structure for the matrix elements is arguably the only framework that can unify at the emergent level but depend only parametrically on microscopic details in such diverse systems. We propose that all fermionic superconductivity and superfluidity results from a generalized Cooper instability manifested through fermion dynamical symmetries. All cases examined thus far in condensed matter and nuclear physics derive from two highest symmetries, SO 