Pressure effects on a recently discovered BiS 2 -based superconductor Bi 2 (O,F)S 2 (T c = 5.1 K) were examined via two different methods; high pressure resistivity measurement and high pressure annealing. The effects of these two methods on the superconducting properties of Bi 2 (O,F)S 2 were significantly different although in both methods hydrostatic pressure is applied to the sample by the cubic-anvil-type apparatus. In high pressure resistivity measurement, T c linearly decreased at the rate of -1.2 K GPa -1 . In contrast, the T c of 5.1 K is maintained after high pressure annealing under 2 GPa and 470°C of optimally doped sample despite significant change of lattice parameters. In addition, superconductivity was observed in fluorine-free Bi 2 OS 2 after high pressure annealing. These results suggest that high pressure annealing would cause a unique effect on physical properties of layered compounds. Since the discovery of superconductivity in Bi 4 O 4 S 3 1) , various layered superconductors with rock-salt type BiS 2 layer have been reported. BiS 2 -based superconductors have varied blocking layers such as fluorite-type RE(O,F) layer (RE = La 2) , Ce (Sr,La)F layer Some of the BiS 2 -based superconductors show increase of T c by applying high pressures (HP). In HP resistivity measurement, La(O,F)BiS 2 shows sudden increase of T c at ~1 GPa from ~3 K to ~10 K Structural analysis at room temperature suggests that structural phase transition from tetragonal (P4/nmm) to monoclinic (P2 1 /m) structure would be responsible for the increase of T c 10) . Other RE(O,F)BiS 2 (RE = Ce ~ Nd) Similar increase of T c is also obtained by "HP annealing". In HP annealing, the as-synthesized samples undergo heat treatment in HP synthesis apparatus and physical properties are measured under ambient pressure. In La(O,F)BiS 2 , T c increase from ~3 K to 10.6 K after HP annealing at 2 GPa, 600°C . Ce(O,F)BiS 2 . Recently, superconductivity in Bi 2 (O,F)S 2 (i.e. Bi(O,F)BiS 2 ), which is isostructural with . T c varies with changing F-doping level in the underdoped region and reaches to 5.1 K in the optimally-doped sample, while it is impossible to obtain overdoped sample due to the solubility limit of F -for the O 2-site Hydrostatic high pressure resistivity measurement is performed for the optimally-doped Bi 2 (O,F)S 2 polycrystalline bulk sample with T c = 5.1 K. The temperature dependence of resistivity under pressures of 0~11 GPa is shown in Fig. Under higher pressures than 2 GPa, superconductivity is disappeared. Instead, two other anomalies, marked T a1 and T a2 in Fig. The sudden increase of T c at a certain pressure observed in RE(O,F)BiS 2 (RE = La~Nd) , and Eu 3 Bi 2 S 4 F 4 . We note that crystal structure of Bi 4 O 4 S 3 and Bi 3 O 2 S 3 phase is still controversial High pressure (HP) annealing was performed for the as-synthesized Bi 2 (O,F)S 2 with different F-content. Here we discuss the effects of HP annealing on two types of samples; underdoped sample with T c = 3.0 K, and optimally-doped sample with T c = 5.1 K. shows powder XRD patterns of Bi 2 (O,F)S 2 samples before and after HP annealing at 470°C and 2 GPa for 1 h. After HP annealing, constituent phases were almost unchanged and the peaks for Bi 2 (O,F)S 2 were well indexed to the space group P4/nmm as well as the as-synthesized samples. a-axis length and c-axis length slightly increased and largely decreased, respectively, suggesting uniaxial contraction of the lattice along the c-axis as in the case of La(O,F)BiS 2 . We note that the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the XRD peaks were broadened after HP annealing, suggesting introduction of lattice strain. The Zero-Field-Cooled (ZFC) magnetizations of these samples are shown in Fig. Assuming that F-content of the sample is not changed by HP annealing, the uniaxial contraction of the lattice discussed above is supposed to be responsible for the increase of T c . In contrast, in the optimally-doped sample with T c = 5.1 K, T c almost unchanged even after HP annealing despite significant change of lattice parameters. The ZFC curve of the HP annealed sample seems to be somewhat shifted to lower temperatures. However, the onset of diamagnetic transition is kept at 5.1 K and perfect diamagnetism is achieved even at slightly higher temperature, indicating sharpening of the superconducting transition by HP annealing. The maintenance of T c at 5.1 K is rather similar to the case of Nd(O,F)BiS 2 , which also maintains T c of ~5 K before and after HP annealing HP annealing is also performed for undoped Bi 2 OS 2 synthesized under ambient pressure. As shown in Fig. As-synthesized Bi 2 OS 2 did not show large diamagnetism due to superconductivity above 0.47 K. We note that the magnetization curve for as-synthesized Bi 2 OS 2 shown in Fig. In contrast, HP annealed Bi 2 OS 2 showed superconductivity. The onset of diamagnetic transition is ~4 K, a kink in ZFC curve is at 1.8 K and large diamagnetism is observed below this temperature. HP synthesis was also tried to obtain Bi 2 OS 2 from Bi 2 O 3 and Bi 2 S 3 at 470°C, 2 GPa for 1 h. Bi 2 OS 2 was obtained as the main phase while the amount of impurity phases increased compared to HP annealed samples. Lattice parameters and magnetization of the HP synthesized Bi 2 OS 2 were almost equivalent to those of HP annealed sample. This sample showed small diamagnetism from ~4 K and large diamagnetism is achieved below 2.1 K, as shown in the inset of Fig. The decrease of T c in HP resistivity measurement might be explained by the tendency shown in Fig. High pressure (HP) resistivity measurement and HP annealing were performed for a BiS 2 -based superconductor Bi 2 (O,F)S 2 , which caused different variation of T c . In HP resistivity measurement, T c linearly decreased at the rate of -1.2 K GPa -1 . In contrast, by HP annealing at 2 GPa and 470°C, T c increased in undoped and underdoped samples, and maintained at 5.1 K in optimally-doped sample. In HP resistivity measurement high pressure is applied in-situ at low temperatures, while HP annealing quenches the high pressure and high temperature phase to ambient pressure. Although in both cases hydrostatic high pressure is applied to the sample by a cubic-anvil-type apparatus, the difference between the two methods should be considered carefully. HP annealing technique have been mainly developed on BiS 2 -based superconductors, but this method can cause unique effects on physical properties of various layered compounds. 