The superconducting critical temperature, Tc, of FeSe can be dramatically enhanced by intercalation of a molecular spacer layer. Here we report on a 77 Se, 7 Li and 1 H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) study of the powdered hyper-interlayer-expanded Lix(C2H8N2)yFe2-zSe2 with a nearly optimal Tc = 45 K. The absence of any shift in the 7 Li and 1 H NMR spectra indicates a complete decoupling of interlayer units from the conduction electrons in FeSe layers, whereas nearly temperature-independent 7 Li and 1 H spin-lattice relaxation rates are consistent with the non-negligible concentration of Fe impurities present in the insulating interlayer space. On the other hand, strong temperature dependence of 77 Se NMR shift and spin-lattice relaxation rate, 1/ 77 T1, is attributed to the hole-like bands close to the Fermi energy. 1/ 77 T1 shows no additional anisotropy that would account for the onset of electronic nematic order down to Tc. Similarly, no enhancement in 1/ 77 T1 due to the spin fluctuations could be found in the normal state. Yet, a characteristic power-law dependence 1/ 77 T1 ∝ T 4.5 still comply with the Cooper pairing mediated by spin fluctuations. The discovery of superconductivity in a layered iron oxypnictide 1 has triggered an intensive research activity to optimize the unconventional superconducting properties of iron-based superconductors. Changing the composition of iron-based superconductors led to two distinct families, iron pnictides and iron chalcogenides that share the same structural motif of electronically active layers composed of FeAs and FeQ (Q=Se,Te) tetrahedra, respectively. A binary Fe 1+δ Se adopts a particularly simple PbO-type structure, The two main candidates that may drive the electronic nematic order are electron spin and orbital degrees of freedom. Pronounced splitting of 77 Se nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra in high quality FeSe single crystals below T s has a characteristic order parameter temperature dependence and has been associated with the symmetry lowering due to the orbital ordering. Here we report a systematic 77 Se, Samples were prepared according to standard procedures described in detail in Ref. 20. Powder x-ray diffraction confirmed that the samples were composed of Li-and ethylenediamine-co-intercalated Li x (C 2 H 8 N 2 ) y Fe 2-z Se 2 with some minor unreacted FeSe impurity. The lowfield magnetization measurements disclosed two superconducting transitions, the first at T c = 45 K belonging to i-FeSe and the second due to non-intercalated FeSe impurity at T c = 8 K. The room-temperature 1 H and 1 H and 7 Li spin-lattice relaxation rates divided by temperature, 1/ n T 1 T (here n = 1, 7 stands for 1 H and Establishing the absence of conducting electron hyperfine fields in the interlayer space, one can expect that the spin-lattice relaxation in this layer will be governed by other mechanisms usually encountered in insulators. In the case when spin-lattice relaxation is determined by the ethylenediamine molecular motions, the Bloembergen-Purcell-Pound (BPP)-type relaxation mechanism applies and 1/ 1 T 1 should display strong thermally activated (Arrhenius-type) temperature dependence with a maximum at the temperature where the correlation time τ for the molecular motion matches the inverse Larmor frequency, i.e. when ω L τ = 1. The shift of the 77 Se NMR spectra, 77 K, in i-FeSe corresponds to 4250 ppm at room temperature and is significantly larger compared to FeSe where it amounts to 3760 ppm. On cooling, 77 K(T ) shows a very strong temperature dependence [Fig. where ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. When ǫ F is positioned somewhere in the middle of the conduction band, where g(ǫ) does not change significantly over the energy range of k B T , the above expression predicts temperature independent K s , which is proportional to the density of states at the Fermi level g(ǫ F ). However, K s can become temperature dependent, if g(ǫ) changes substantially in the energy interval |ǫ -ǫ F | ∼ k B T . In FeSe, this condition seems to be fulfilled for the hole-like pockets α, β and γ with band-edges very close to ǫ F according to the recent ARPES study. A very similar conclusion is derived also from the 77 Se spin-lattice relaxation rates [Fig. predicts temperature independent 1/T 1 T rates only for the cases when band edges are far away from ǫ F . Therefore, a very steep increase of 1/ 77 T 1 T with increasing temperature for T > 100 K implies that the relaxation rate is enhanced because at least one of the the hole-like pockets α, β and γ has features very close to ǫ F . Again, the temperature dependence of 1/ 77 T 1 T in i-FeSe is more pronounced than in FeSe thus corroborating the conclusions derived from the discussion of the Knight shift data. Slight shifting of the hole-like pockets α, β and γ in i-FeSe compared to FeSe samples may also be responsible for an important difference between the temperature dependencies of 1/ 77 T 1 T in the two samples below T ≈ 100 K. Namely, in FeSe 1/ 77 T 1 T starts to increase with decreasing temperature in the electronic nematic phase below the structural phase transition T s = 91 K [Fig. Comparative NMR study of i-FeSe and FeSe in the normal state discloses some important electronic differences between the two compounds: (i) at least some of the hole-like pockets in i-FeSe shift closer to ǫ F , (ii) there is a suppression of spin fluctuations probed at the nuclear Larmor frequency and (iii) (within the resolution of present powder experiments) there is also a suppression of nematicity in i-FeSe. These differences are expected to be reflected also in the superconducting state. For instance, if spin fluctuations mediate the Cooper pairing, the system is predicted to develop an unconventional s ± superconductivity. Below T c , 1/ 77 T 1 adopts a power-law temperature dependence, 1/ 77 T 1 ∝ T n . Such a power-law dependence can be found for most iron-pnictides We remark that the presence of additional temperature-independent relaxation channel in i-FeSe introduces some uncertainty to the extracted fitting parameters in the superconducting state. Nevertheless, most of the NMR data still seems to be compatible with the Cooper pairing mediated by spin fluctuations. This may be in apparent contradiction with the observation of suppressed spin-fluctuations in the normal state [Fig. In conclusion, Li x (C 2 H 8 N 2 ) y Fe 2-z Se 2 with a superconducting critical temperature T c = 45 K has been studied with 77 Se, * denis.arcon@ijs.si 1 Y. Kamihara, T. Watanabe, M. Hirano, and H. Hosono, Journal of the American Chemical Society 130, 3296