Coherent controlization, i.e., coherent conditioning of arbitrary single-or multi-qubit operations on the state of one or more control qubits, is an important ingredient for the flexible implementation of many algorithms in quantum computation. This is of particular significance when certain subroutines are changing over time or when they are frequently modified, such as in decision-making algorithms for learning agents. We propose a scheme to realize coherent controlization for any number of superconducting qubits coupled to a microwave resonator. For two and three qubits, we present an explicit construction that is of high relevance for quantum learning agents. We demonstrate the feasibility of our proposal, taking into account loss, dephasing, and the cavity self-Kerr effect. The ability to coherently control and manipulate individual quantum systems lies at the heart of modern quantum technologies and applications in quantum information In addition, the progress in controlling superconducting (SC) quantum systems Notwithstanding these developments, a paradigm with respect to which all of the above implementations are typically deemed successful is the realization of the unitaries of a universal set of quantum gates, see, e.g., Refs. Here, we propose a modular and adaptive implementation of coherent controlization in a superconducting system of transmon This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we briefly review the basic concepts for our proposal: A definition for coherent controlization is given in Sec. II A, illustrated by an application to learning agents in quantum artificial intelligence in Sec. II B, before we give a short description of the superconducting transmon qubits that we consider here in Sec. II C. The conceptual centrepiece, the coherent controlization protocol for two superconducting qubits, is introduced in Sec. III, where we first discuss the idealized basic protocol, before turning our attention to the influence of the Kerr effect and decoherence. Finally, we extend our protocol to three qubits and beyond in Sec. IV. At the heart of many quantum computational algorithms lie subroutines in which operations of choice on a finite-size register of qubits are performed conditionally on the state of a control qubit. This is the case, for instance, in Kitaev's phase estimation subroutine It would hence be highly desirable to have access to fixed global operations, let us call them A and B, on the target and control registers which allow turning an unspecified local operation U (φ) into its controlled version ctrl -U (φ), such that AU (φ)B = ctrl -U (φ). However, this requirement cannot be met by any fixed A, B for all U (φ), see Following Ref. for some (orthonormal) basis {| i } c of H c , as well as to any specific physical realization of such mappings as coherent controlization. In the following, we shall discuss how general coherent controlization can be implemented in superconducting qubits, providing a modular and adaptive architecture for quantum computational tasks. For a detailed analysis of the feasibility and scalability of our proposal, we provide a concrete example for an application of coherent controlization in the decision process of learning agents, where the adaptive character of our proposal is of particular relevance. In the model of projective simulation (PS) A particular variant of the PS that we shall focus on now, is reflecting projective simulation (RPS) The physical system that we consider in our proposal is an array of superconducting transmon qubits Here, we shall focus on the transmon qubit, introduced in Ref. For our investigation, several such transmon qubits shall be considered to be capacitively coupled to a su-perconducting resonator. To good approximation (see, e.g., the Appendix), the Hamiltonian for this dispersive interaction may be written as where ω r and ω qi are the (angular) frequencies of the resonator mode and the i-th qubit, respectively, with the corresponding ladder operators a, a † , b i , b † i . For the remainder of this paper, higher excitation numbers are ignored for the qubit-modes. Due to the coupling of the qubits to the resonator, the latter also acquires an anharmonicity, which causes the undesired self-Kerr effect The terms proportional to χ qir can be interpreted as conditional frequency shifts: Depending on the number of excited qubits, the resonator frequency ω r can be regarded as shifted by the sum of the corresponding values χ qir . Conversely, the frequency of the i-th qubit can be considered as being shifted by the product of χ qir and the number of photons in the cavity. In the strong dispersive regime In the protocol for coherent controlization that we propose here, the phase space of the resonator mode serves as a bus between the qubits. It enables the conditioning of operations on particular subspaces of the qubit Hilbert space by separating the resonator states corresponding to different qubit subspaces in phase space. The mechanism for this separation is the free time evolution of coherent states with different frequencies. Recall that the resonance frequency of the cavity depends on the state of the qubits. Similar to the procedures used in • Unconditional displacements D α : A very short pulse (a few ns), that is, sufficiently broad in frequency (of width i χ qir ), so as not to distin-guish between the state-dependent frequencies of the resonator, displaces the cavity state independently of the state of the qubits. • Free time evolution U (t): During the free time evolution of the cavity mode, governed by the corresponding parts of the Hamiltonian in (2), coherent states of the resonator corresponding to different qubit states rotate in phase space at different speeds. Appropriate waiting periods can hence be used to separate or recombine different coherent states. • Conditional qubit operations: When the (average) photon number in the resonator is n, the (mean) qubit frequencies ω qi are shifted to ω qiχ qir n with a spread χ qir √ n. Addressing the qubits with signals sufficiently narrow in frequency around ω qi therefore conditions the single-qubit operations on the cavity vacuum state | 0 r . Unconditional qubit operations can be realized by appropriately broad (or multi-frequency) pulses. With these operations available we shall now specialize to the case of two qubits. Let us first analyze an idealized situation where the cavity Kerr effect due to H K / = -χrr 2 a † a 2 and any loss due to interactions with the environment can be disregarded. Once we have set up our protocol for two qubits in this idealized setting, we shall consider the robustness of the protocol under the influence of the mentioned harmful effects. Irrespective of this restriction, the cross-Kerr interaction term H I / =i χ qir a † a b † i b i (in the strong dispersive regime) splits the cavity resonance frequency into 4 well-resolved spectral lines ω 00 , ω 01 , ω 10 , and ω 11 , corresponding to the two-qubit basis states | 00 q , | 01 q , | 10 q , and | 11 q . By selecting the qubit-cavity cross-Kerr coefficients χ q1r /2 = χ q2r = ∆ω ≈ 1 -5 × 2π MHz, the spectral lines are equally spaced, i.e., which can be abbreviated to With the resonator prepared in the vacuum state | 0 r , we now construct a protocol that implements coherent controlization for a set of three single-qubit unitaries {U (θ i )} i=1,2,3 to realize the probability unitary represented by the circuit-diagram in Fig. (a) Ideal two-qubit protocol (i) The first (unconditional) single-qubit unitary U (θ1) is applied to qubit 2, mapping the initially (pure) state | ψ q | 0 r to c00 | 00 q + c01 | 01 q + c10 | 10 q + c11 | 11 q | 0 r , where the coefficients cmn = cmn(θ1) depend on the initial state and U (θ1). (ii) An unconditional displacement Dα maps | 0 r to | α r . (iii) In the frame rotating with ω00 = ωr, the coherent state components for the qubit states rotate with (angular) frequencies 0, ∆ω, 2∆ω, and 3∆ω for | 00 q , | 01 q , | 10 q , and | 11 q , respectively. That is, the time evolution UI = e -iH I t/ is governed by the cross-Kerr interaction term HI . A waiting period of ∆t = π/∆ω hence results in the state c00 (iv) Another unconditional displacement Dα shifts the coherent state components for the subspace (v) During another waiting period of duration ∆t the second single-qubit unitary U (θ2) is applied conditionally on the cavity being in the vacuum. Meanwhile, the coherent state components | 00 q | α r and | 10 q | α r complete 0 and 1 revolution, respectively, returning to the initial position of step (v). (vi) An unconditional displacement by -2α exchanges the roles of the subspaces | 0 q 2 and | 1 q 2 . (vii) During the penultimate waiting period of ∆t, which rotates | 01 q + | 11 q | -2α r to | 01 q + | 11 q | 2α r , the third single-qubit operation U (θ3) is applied conditionally on the cavity vacuum state. Given that the initial (unconditional) qubit rotation U (θ 1 ) can be performed very rapidly (≈ 10 ns), the overall gate time T 2QB is approximately T 2QB ≈ 4∆t = 4π/∆ω = 400 ns to 2 μs [for χ q2r /(2π) between 5 MHz and 1 MHz], compared to typical With increasing coupling between the qubits and the resonator, the influence of the anharmonicities of the transmon qubits on the resonator mode becomes ever stronger. The ensuing cavity Kerr effect distorts (and displaces) the shape of the phase space distributions (5) During steps (iv) and (vi), the coherent state components |ψ (iv) 01 r , |ψ (iv) 11 r and |ψ (vi) 00 r , |ψ (vi) 10 r , corresponding to the subspaces | 1 q2 and | 0 q2 , respectively, are required to significantly overlap with the vacuum to achieve the conditioning of U (θ 2 ) and U (θ 3 ). Finally, after being disentangled from the qubits in step (ix), all resonator states |ψ (x) mn r (i, j = 0, 1) should ideally return to the vacuum in step (x). The resonator states at these various stages can be obtained by applying the displacements and waiting periods as described in the Fig. |ψ (vi) mn r |mn q = D -2α U I,K (∆t) |ψ (iv) mn r |mn q , (6b) where U I,K (t) = U I (t)U K (t) = e -iH I t/ e -iH K t/ and ∆t = π/∆ω. Note that the operations U I can be eliminated from Acting on a state with fixed m, n, one therefore has where the rotating frame frequencies are ω mn = ω mnω r = -(2m + n)∆ω. The U I (∆t) can hence be easily commuted with the displacements D α (at most changing the signs of the displacement parameters for (m, n) = (0, 1), (1, 1)). In the parameter regime that we have chosen, one further has χ rr ∆t/2 ≈ 6.5×10 -3 -3×10 -2 1, where the couplings of the two qubits to the cavity contribute to the cavity Kerr term approximately (see the Appendix) as χ rr ≈ (χ 2 q1r + χ 2 q2r )/(4χ qq ). We may therefore expand U K (∆t) into a power series for small ≡ χ rr ∆t/2, i.e., where O(x) is a quantity such that O(x)/x is bounded in the limit x → 0. Since D -α = D † α = D -1 α , we can then use the simple identities D -α a † D α = a † + α * and D -α aD α = a + α. With some tedious but straightforward algebra we arrive at the estimates for the desired overlap after step (iv), i.e., where n = |α| 2 and we have used the shorthand Similarly, we find the overlaps after steps (vi), and for step (x) for all m, n = 0, 1: The explanation for the revival of the fidelity from step (vi) to (x) lies in the leading order Kerr effect. As discussed in [44, App. B], to linear order in , the Kerr effect does not distort the shape of the coherent states, but adds an amplitude-dependent rotation and global phase factor to each coherent state, that is Although the phases e -i n2 appear as relative phases between different qubit states, our protocol is designed in such a way that all qubit states acquire the same (and hence a global) phase: in steps (iii) and (ix) all components have the same amplitude |α|, and the phases picked up by | 00 q and | 10 q in step (v) are compensated by those acquired by | 01 q and | 11 q in step (vii). The additional rotation(s) from α to e i (2n+1) α, on the other hand, are only partially compensated in the protocol of Fig. To completely compensate for the contribution of the linear order Kerr effect, the displacements after each period of free time evolution are adjusted by angles φ γ = (2|γ| 2 + 1), where γ is the maximal displacement of the coherent state components during the time evolution. Alternatively, this may be seen as a suitable change of basis in the phase space, as illustrated in Fig. For the evaluation of the fidelities, we hence include the transformations U φ (γ) = exp(-iφ γ a † a), that is Proceeding as before, we arrive at the corrected fidelities for the overlap with the vacuum after steps (iv), (vi), and (x), given by The fidelity of the protocol as quantified by F (x) mn (not yet taking into account decoherence) hence also depends on the displacement via the average photon number n = |α| 2 . Crucially, these values have to be chosen such that the overlaps between the different coherent state components remain small in steps (v) and (vii). For values n = 1.5 and 2 one finds | 0| 2α | 2 = exp(-4|α| 2 ) ≈ 2.5×10 -3 and 3.3 × 10 -4 , respectively. For χ qq /(2π) = 300 MHz and n = 1.5, one may reach fidelities F (x) mn between 99% and 94% for qubit-cavity cross-Kerr coefficients ranging from χ q2r /(2π) = 1 MHz to 3 MHz, see Fig. Before we finally turn to the extension to three (and more) qubits, let us remark on additional possible sources of decreases in fidelity. In a similar way, in which the cavity inherits the Kerr term from the anharmonicities of the qubits, the qubits are also coupled via the cavity, even if direct capacitive coupling can be avoided by arranging the qubits to be spatially well-separated. The corresponding term of the form χ q1q2 b † 1 b 1 b † 2 b 2 leads to additional phases that are acquired by the components |ψ (k) 11 r | 11 q during the time evolution. This effect is at most of a size comparable to the cavity Kerr effect, which is required to be small to achieve high-fidelities. However, when the effect becomes non-negligible, it can be corrected by applying an appropriate phase gate along with U (θ 2 ) during step (v). In a regime where this becomes necessary, additional measures are further required to compensate the cavity Kerr effect beyond the linear order corrections that we have considered so far. If required, this can be achieved by a scheme, recently proposed in Ref. Another potential source of errors lies in imperfections in the circuit fabrication that may cause a small deviation from the desired ratio χ q2r = χq 1 r 2 of the qubitcavity cross-Kerr coefficients, that is, one may encounter a situation where χ q2r = χq 1 r 2 (1+δ) for some small (real) |δ| 1. This causes an additional rotation for the coherent state components corresponding to | 01 q and | 11 q in steps (iii), (vii) and (ix), but not for the components corresponding to | 00 q and | 10 q . For steps (iii) and (vii) this effect can be compensated by modified displacements in steps (iv), (vi) and (viii). However, to recombine all coherent state components in step (ix), an "echo"-type operation is required. That is, step (ix) is amended in the following way: after a waiting time t = π χq 1 r ( 2+δ 1+δ ) < ∆t an unconditional π-pulse Let us now discuss the extension of our protocol to 3 qubits and beyond. We will consider the ideal-three qubit protocol for the realization of a probability unitary U j as a proof-of-principle example from which the construction of the protocol for any number of qubits may be inferred. To extend the previous protocol, first note that the cross-Kerr interaction H I / =i χ qir a † a b † i b i again splits the resonator frequency into spectral lines for all the qubit states. The sidebands are equally spaced by ∆ω by selecting χ q1r /4 = χ q2r /2 = χ q3r = ∆ω. The ideal protocol, detailed in Fig. Increasing the number of qubits hence brings about exponential scaling of several quantities of interest -as expected when exponentially increasing the dimension of the state space that we wish to explore. To separate the coherent state components corresponding to all different subspaces, larger displacements and finer graining of the rotation angles in phase space are required. That is, in addition to rotations by half-periods, for three qubits also quarter periods are necessary, and for n-qubits, rotations by 2π/2 n-1 are needed. In addition, waiting periods 2∆t corresponding to the full period become obligatory when applying the conditional qubit rotations. Starting from an ideal n qubit protocol (for n ≥ 3), an additional qubit may be added by inserting 2 n-1 sequences of operations between each pair of conditioned unitaries on the qubit previously labelled q 1 (e.g., U (θ 4 ) and U (θ 5 ) for n = 3). Each sequence consists of (at most) 4 displacements and two conditioned unitaries on the new qubit and the waiting periods after the 4 new displacements are of duration ∆t/2 n-1 , 2∆t, 2∆t and 2∆t(1 -2 -n ), respectively. We hence find that, in an ideal n-qubit protocol, the number of displacements is N D (n ≥ 3) = 2 n+1 -4, the number of qubit unitaries is N U (n) = 2 n -1, and the overall duration is T (n ≥ 3) = (3 × 2 n -11)∆t. In a nonideal protocol, correction operations have to be included as well. For instance, for each conditioned qubit unitary 2 echo pulses (as discussed in Section III D) may need to be added, increasing the total number of qubit operations to 3 × 2 n-1 , but leaving the gate time unchanged. The exponential increase in dimension hence carries over to the scaling of the number of conditional qubit operations, and to the overall gate time. Since increases in gate times, displacements and qubit-cavity cross-Kerr coefficients χ qir all lead to increased disturbance due to the cavity Kerr effect, its compensation using photon-number selective phase gates Nonetheless, it should be mentioned that such chal- ijk r (i, j, k = 0, 1) corresponding to the qubit states | ijk q for the steps l = (i), . . . , (xxiv) of the ideal three-qubit protocol. lenges for the scaling of quantum computational architectures are expected for every physical platform, and are hence not specific to our proposal. For our three-qubit protocol, simulations (using the QuTiP library We have introduced a protocol for coherent controlization, that is, adding control to (a set of) unspecified or unknown unitaries, using superconducting qubits coupled to a microwave resonator. This task is of interest for the flexible realization of quantum computational architectures, but also of great importance for the adaptiveness of quantum-enhanced learning agents We have given explicit protocols for the realization of these unitary operations using transmon qubits barrier separating two pieces of superconducting material) creates a non-linearity in the system that allows identifying two energy levels as the qubit levels. The Hamiltonian is then modified to where the junction inductance L J is typically expressed via the Josephson energy E J , that is, L J = Φ 2 0 /E J , with the magnetic flux quantum Φ 0 = /(2e), and Φ/Φ 0 is the phase difference across the junction. The original capacitance and the Josephson junction now form a superconducting island -a Cooper-pair box (CPB)with capacitance C Σ = C + C J , which can be written in terms of the charging energy E C = e 2 /(2C Σ ). The charge in the CPB depends on n, the number of transferred Cooper pairs (with charge 2e), and the effective offset charge 2en o , i.e., Q/(2e) = n -n o . With the replacement Z → Z J = L J /C Σ one may define raising and lowering operators in full analogy to (A.2). To remove the strong dependence of the energy-level splitting on the (environmentally induced) offset charge, an additional shunting capacitor with large capacitance C B can be inserted into the circuit in parallel with the Josephson junction to create the transmon Inserting the ladder operators q and q † (with Z → Z J ) into Eq. (A.3) and expanding in powers of E C /E J we arrive at Within the rotating wave approximation, the Hamiltonian of Eq. (A.4) can be truncated to the effective transmon qubit Hamiltonian where is the transmon qubit frequency and β ≡ E C / is the anharmonicity. Next, we are interested in describing a transmon qubit that is capacitively coupled to a microwave resonator. Within the rotating wave approximation the joint system is described by the Hamiltonian where g is the qubit-cavity coupling, ω R and ω Q are the frequencies of the isolated qubit and cavity, respectively, and the operators c and c † are the resonator ladder operators satisfying [ c , c † ] = 1. The terms in H qr that are quadratic in the mode operators can be diagonalized by a Bogoliubov transformation. That is, one introduces the dressed operators a and b, such that c = cos θ a + sin θ b , q = -sin θ a + cos θ b , (A.7) with tan 2θ = 2g/∆, where ∆ ≡ ω Q -ω R is the qubitcavity detuning. The excitations of the dressed modes can no longer be uniquely attributed to just the resonator or just the qubit. However, in the strong dispersive regime, where g/∆ 1, the mixing angle is small, θ ≈ g/∆ and excitations created by c † (q † ) are associated "mostly" with the cavity (qubit). The Hamiltonian transforms to where the dressed mode frequencies are given by The terms in the square bracket can be seen to oscillate rapidly, and we may therefore remove these terms in another rotating wave approximation. With the notation χ qr ≡ (β/2) sin 2 (2θ), χ qq ≡ β cos 4 θ, and we then arrive at the Hamiltonian of a single transmon qubit coupled to a resonator in the dispersive limit where ω r = ωr +χ rr /2 and ω q = ωq +χ qq /2. The dressed qubit anharmonicity χ qq , the qubit-cavity cross-Kerr coefficient χ qr , and the cavity self-Kerr coefficient χ rr can be expressed directly via the coupling strength g and the detuning ∆ as (A.12c) When two transmon qubits are coupled to the cavity, we may write an analogue expression to Eq. (A.6). That is, in the rotating wave approximation we have the Hamiltonian where we have neglected any direct coupling of the qubits to each other. In the two-qubit case (and beyond), an analytical diagonalization of the harmonic part (terms quadratic in the mode operators) becomes infeasible. However, using numerical methods and following similar arguments as presented in the previous Sec. A.II one arrives at the effective Hamiltonian Assuming that the transmons can be fabricated such that χ qiqi ≡ χ qq for all qubits, we have numerically checked that the cavity self-Kerr coefficient χ rr can be approximated as Appendix B: Simulations of coherent controlization using transmon qubits In this section we present the simulations of our protocol for coherent controlization with two and three qubits. In the simulations, which were coded in PYTHON using the QuTiP library For the simulation we truncate the Hilbert space of the resonator to be spanned by the Fock states | n r of photon numbers n = 0, 1, . . . , 100. This is a good approximation since the maximal average photon number of the coherent states in our protocol is nmax = |2α| 2 = 14 (n max = |4α| 2 = 32) photons for 2 (3) qubits and the overlap with photon numbers larger than 100 is hence negligible. For the Hilbert space of the transmon qubits we will each only consider the lowest two eigenstates, i.e., the qubit levels. The effective Hamiltonian in the frame rotating with ω r and ω q for the resonator and qubit Hilbert spaces, respectively, is given by where σ ± j = σ x j ± iσ y i are the raising/lowering operators of the i-th qubit. In addition to the free time evolution we will include corrections for the linear order of the Kerr effect by including rotations U φ (γ) = exp(-iφ γ a † a) after each period of time evolution, where γ is the maximal displacement of the different coherent state components in the preceding step of the protocol. The conditional single-qubit operations will be represented by where the single-qubit Y -rotations on the second (and third) of the two (three) qubits are realized by a timedependent drive U (θ j ) = exp(-i θj 2 σ y t T ). The durations T of these drives are taken to be the durations of the waiting periods in the corresponding protocol steps (T = ∆t for two qubits). On top of the unitary time evolution, unconditional displacements, and conditional qubit operations, all of which will be assumed to be perfect, we will consider decoherence in the system. In particular, we assume that the dynamics of the overall state ρ of the joint cavity-qubit system during the waiting periods of the protocol is governed by the master equation As the output of interest of the simulations we consider the fidelities F r for the resonator, i.e., the squared overlap with the vacuum at the final step of the protocol, given by F r = r 0 | Tr q ρ | 0 r , and F q for the qubits, i.e., the squared overlap with the target state | ψ q , given by F q = q ψ | Tr r ρ | ψ q . We evaluate these two fidelities separately because the success of the protocol is ultimately only determined by achieving a large overlap of the reduced qubits state with the desired target state, irrespective of the final cavity state. On the other hand, the cavity fidelity gives a more detailed overview of the errors incurred by the Kerr effect in the resonator. Therefore, both F r and F q are quantities of interest for our protocol. In addition to the final fidelities, we include plots of the Wigner function W (x, y), where of the reduced resonator state ρ r = Tr q ρ, where | x are the eigenstates of the quadrature operator Φ with eigenvalue x, and plots of the absolute values of the density matrix elements | q μν| ρ q |mn q | of the reduced qubit state ρ q = Tr r ρ throughout the steps of our protocol. For two qubits, the qubit-cavity cross-Kerr coefficients χ qr ≡ χ q2r = χ q1r /2 are chosen in a range from 1.5 × 2π MHz to 3 × 2π MHz. According to the approximation in Eq. (A.15), we further set χ rr = 5χ 2 qr /(4χ qq ), where χ qq is fixed to 300 × 2π MHz. The coherence time for the resonator is set to τ r = 100 μs throughout. For the simulation results presented in Fig. Finally, note that the parameters χ qir , χ qiqi and χ rr are derived from the quantities E Ci , E Ji , ω R , and the cavity-qubit couplings g i for i = 1, 2. Achieving the exact required ratio χ q1r = 2χ q2r hence relies on the fine tuning of these quantities. For instance, to approximately achieve the parameters of the simulation in Fig. For three qubits, the qubit-cavity cross-Kerr coefficients χ qr ≡ χ q3r = 2χ q2r = 4χ q1r are chosen in a range from 0.2 × 2π MHz to 0.4 × 2π MHz. According to the approximation in Eq. (A.15), we further set χ rr = 21χ 2 qr /(4χ qq ), where χ qq is fixed to 300 × 2π MHz. The coherence times for the resonator and the qubit (dephasing and amplitude damping) are set to 100 μs. For the simulation results presented in Table # χqr [MHz] α | ξ q θ1 θ2 θ3 θ4 θ5 θ6 θ7 Fr Fq s1 0.3 × 2π 1 | ξu 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.671 0.296 s2 0.3 × 2π 1 |010 π 2 π 0 0 π 0 π 2 0.505 0.449 s3 0.4 × 2π 1 |000 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.832 1.000 Three-qubit simulations: The table shows the results of the numerical simulations for three qubits for various system parameters, rotation angles θj, and initial states, where | ξu is the uniform superposition overall three qubit computational basis states. The last simulation, s12 was executed for the same parameters as s11, but assuming that the cavity Kerr effect has been corrected (here: χrr ≡ 0) using the photon-number selective phase gates 