The electronic structure of FeSe thin films grown on SrTiO 3 substrate is studied by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). We reveal the existence of Dirac cone band dispersions in FeSe thin films thicker than 1 Unit Cell below the nematic transition temperature, whose apex are located -10 meV below Fermi energy. The evolution of Dirac cone electronic structure for FeSe thin films as function of temperature, thickness and cobalt doping is systematically studied. The Dirac cones are found to be coexisted with the nematicity in FeSe, disappear when nematicity is suppressed. Our results provide some indication that the spin degrees of freedom may play some kind of role in the nematicity of FeSe. The discovery of high temperature superconductivity in single unit-cell (UC) FeSe film grown on SrTiO 3 (STO) substrate has attracted extensively attention Another intriguing issue in condensed matter physics nowadays is the massless Dirac fermion states in materials, such as graphene In this paper, we report an ARPES investigation of the low-energy electronic states of FeSe thin films grown on STO substrate. We reveal the existence of Dirac cone band dispersions in FeSe thin films thicker than one unit-cell below the nematic transition temperature. The Dirac cones sit at the small spots of high photoemission intensity at the Fermi surface, whose apexes are located -10 meV below Fermi energy, leading to small electron Fermi pockets. The Dirac cone band structure disappears above the nematic transition temperature and barely changes as a function of film thickness. Upon Cobalt doping in multi-layer FeSe films, the nematicity is suppressed significantly and the Dirac cone disappears simultaneously. High-quality FeSe single crystalline thin films were grown on the TiO 2 terminated and Nb-doped SrTiO 3 (0.5%wt) substrate with the MBE method following the previous reports The electronic structure of 50 UC FeSe thin film at 30 K is presented in Fig. The Fermi surface topology of 50 UC FeSe at 30 K is very similar to those observed in BaFe 2 As 2 The band structure evolution at Λ' point(cut 8) as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. Theoretically, it has been predicted that nonmagnetic impurities do not affect the Dirac-cone states. Previous studies on the Nernst effect in Eu(Fe 1-x Co x As) 2 In iron-arsenide compounds, the parent state is a collinear antiferromagnet. A theoretical research Similar to BaFe 2 As 2 , a recent DFT calculation In summary, We reveal the existence of Dirac cone band dispersions in FeSe thin films thicker than 1 Unit Cell below the nematic transition temperature. The Dirac cones sit at the small spots of high photoemission intensity at the Fermi surface, whose apex are located -10 meV below Fermi energy, leading to small electron Fermi pockets. The Dirac cone band structure disappears above the nematic transition temperature and barely changes as a function of film thickness. Upon cobalt doping in multi-layer FeSe films, the nematicity is suppressed significantly and the Dirac cone disappears simultaneously. The Dirac cone states show close relationship with the nematicity, which are predicted to exist in the antiferromagnetic ground state of FeSe similar to the Dirac cones found in BaFe 2 As 2 in the SDW state. Our results provide some indication that the magnetic degrees of freedom may play some kind of role in the nematicity of FeSe, at least strong interplay between the magnetic and orbital degrees may exist in FeSe.