We analyze the form of static charge susceptibility χ(q) in underdoped cuprates near axial momenta (Q, 0) and (0, Q) at which short-range static charge order has been observed. We show that the momentum dependence of χ(q) is anisotropic, and the correlation length in the longitudinal direction is larger than in the transverse direction. We show that correlation lengths in both directions decrease once the system evolves into a superconductor, as a result of the competition between superconductivity and charge order. These results are in agreement with resonant x-ray scattering data [R. Comin et al., Science 347, 1335 (2015)]. We also argue that density and current components of the charge order parameter are affected differently by superconductivity -the chargedensity component is reduced less than the current component and hence extends deeper into the superconducting state. This gives rise to two distinct charge order transitions at zero temperature. Introduction.-Understanding charge order (CO) in high-T c cuprates and its interplay with superconductivity is essential for the understanding of the complex phase diagram of these materials. An incommensurate charge order, accompanied by spin-order, was originally discovered in La-based cuprates The origin of the CO is still a subject of intense debates A way to distinguish between these scenarios is to use the existing experimental data, particularly the ones for which the data analysis does not involve fitting parameters. Recent x-ray scattering data in underdoped YBCO, reported in Ref. 11, can be used for this purpose. The data shows that the momentum structure of the charge susceptibility χ(q) near Q x and Q y is anisotropic, and the longitudinal correlation length is larger than the transverse one, i.e. if χ(q) at q = Q + q is approximated by a Lorentzian χ -1 (q) ∼ ξ -2 + A 2 q2 + A 2 ⊥ q2 ⊥ , then A > A ⊥ . In this paper, we verify whether this condition is reproduced within the two itinerant scenarios -the magnetic one and the phonon one. Exploring the Mott scenario is beyond the scope of this work. The charge susceptibility of itinerant electrons, χ(q), is generally related by a RPA-type formula to the static particle-hole polarization bubble between low-energy fermions separated by q ("hot" fermions). The difference between the two scenarios is that in the magnetic one the interaction is peaked at momentum K = (π, π) and connects fermions from two different hot regions. Specifically, magnetic interaction moves the center of mass momentum of a pair of hot fermions from k 0 to k π = k 0 + K. Then, one needs to apply spin-fluctuation mediated scattering twice to move fermions back to the same hot region (see Fig. The polarization bubbles Π k0 (q) and Π kπ (q) depend on the Fermi surface geometry in the vicinity of the hot spots and also on the choice of the upper cutoff in the momentum deviations from the hot spots. The presence of the cutoff, Λ, reflects the fact that the interaction in the charge channel can be approximated by a constant (U or Ū) only in a finite range around a hot spot, outside of which it drops rapidly. In particular, within spinfluctuation scenario, Λ depends on the distance to the magnetic QCP -it tends to a constant at the QCP and scales as inverse magnetic correlation length ξ -1 s , when ξ s drops below a certain value We report the results of analytic computations of Π k0 (q) and Π kπ (q) using a hard cutoff (to be defined below). In the magnetic scenario, the longitudinal charge correlation length turns out to be larger than the transverse one, in agreement with the data We also consider how charge susceptibility χ(q) gets modified once the system becomes a d-wave superconductor. We find that the key effect of superconductivity is the reduction of Π k0 (Q) and Π kπ (Q) due to competition between CO and superconducting order parameters. As a result, both longitudinal and transverse CO correlation lengths get smaller in the superconducting state. A more subtle result is that the reduction of the bubble is different for density and current components of CO. The two are symmetric and antisymmetric combinations of the incommensurate charge order parameters The current component changes sign under time-reversal and once it develops along with the density component, the CO spontaneously breaks time-reversal symmetry We impose hard cutoff by requiring that momentum of each fermion in the particle-hole bubble Π k0 (q) and Π kπ (q) differs from the corresponding hot spot by no more than Λ by amplitude. In the hot region with center of mass momentum of a pair near k 0 we define k 1,2 = k 0 ± (Q y + q)/2 + k, and the condition reads | k ± q/2| < Λ. The analogous condition holds in the hot region with center of mass momentum of a pair near k π . We assume that Λ is small compared with inverse lattice spacing, in which case we can expand the dispersion of a hot fermion to linear order in deviation from a hot spot. Under these condition, we obtained analytical expressions for the polarization bubbles Π k0 (q) and Π kπ (q) to leading order in q = q -Q y . The calculation is lengthy but straightforward 31 , and the result is It is interesting to note that the singular terms proportional to |q x,y | are independent of the cutoff, Λ. The case of hard cutoff is somewhat special because the expansion of polarization bubbles in q is non-analytic and holds in powers of |q x | and |q y | rather than in q2 x and q2 y . We verified that the quadratic dependence emerges immediately once we soften the cutoff. Still, even for strictly hard cutoff one can analyze the anisotropy of the inverse charge susceptibility χ -1 (q) by comparing the prefactors for longitudinal (|q y |) and transverse (|q x |) momentum dependencies. By continuity, the anisotropy should survive upon softening of the cutoff. To analyze the anisotropy, we use v y ≫ v x and expand Π k0 and Π kπ in small v x /v y limit 31 . In the magnetic scenario we find χ x log v y /v x and the ellipses denote higher order terms in qx,y . We remind that q = Q y + q, hence qy is longitudinal component. Taking the ratio C y /C x we immediately see that . This is consistent with the data In the phonon scenario we obtain χ -1 (q) ∝ C0 + Cy |q y | + Cx |q x | + ..., where now, to logarithmic accuracy, Cy / Cx = (π/2 + 1)/ log (v y /v x ). Then Cy / Cx is smaller than one, at least when v y /v x is large enough. For v y /v x ≈ 13.6, we obtained, without expanding, ξ /ξ ⊥ = 0.98. We also computed Π k0 (q) and Π kπ (q) numerically for a specific Lorentzian cutoff, which we imposed by inserting into the integrands for the bubbles an additional factor, Λ 2 /(Λ 2 + ( k + q/2) 2 ) × Λ 2 /(Λ 2 + ( k -q/2) 2 ), but not restricting integration over momentum. One can immediately make sure that in this case the expansion in q holds in powers of q2 . We again find that in a magnetic scenario ξ /ξ ⊥ > 1. However this ratio is much larger. From this perspective, the hard cutoff gives better agreement with the data. Superconducting state.-The polarization operators Π k0 (q) and Π kπ (q) in the superconducting state are obtained in a conventional way, by combining bubbles made out of normal and anomalous fermionic Green's functions (Fig. A more subtle issue is the magnitude of superconductivity-induced shift. Near T c (i.e., for relatively small ∆ sc ), the shift originates from * terms in the Free energy, where, we remind, ∆ Q k is fluctuating CO field (not the condensate), and k i is either ±k 0 or ±k π . Since the superconducting pair has zero total momentum, it couples to fermions located only within one corner of the Brillouin zone; hence coupling terms for ±k 0 and ±k π can be considered separately. At the same time, superconductivity pairs fermions with opposite momenta, hence both For definiteness, let's set, as before, Q = Q y and focus on the region where center of mass momentum of charge order parameter is ±k 0 . The Free energy is We see that the shift of χ -1 (Q y ) due to superconductivity is generally different for symmetric density and antisymmetric current components of CO (∆ d and ∆ c , respectively). The couplings β 11 and β 12 can be evaluated either by using Hubbard-Stratonovich (HS) formalism, or by expanding particle-hole bubbles to order ∆ 2 sc . In the HS formalism, these two terms are given by square diagrams made out of four fermionic Green's functions in the normal state (shown in Fig. We computed β 11 and β 12 for a model with hard cutoff and found that the dominant piece in each is a cutoffindependent term, which scales as 1/T . At the lowest T , the expansion in powers of ∆ sc does not hold, and 1/T divergence is cut by 1/|∆ sc |. Upon a more careful look, we found that universal (i.e., cutoff-independent) 1/T terms in β 11 and β 12 come with exactly opposite coefficients, i.e., 1/T terms cancel out in β 11 + β 22 . This cancellation has not been noticed before. From mathematical perspective, this cancellation is similar to the cancellation between vertex and self-energy corrections to uniform density-density correlator. In the latter case, however, the cancellation is exact and it enforces Ward identity associated with particle number conservation. In our case, the cancellation is not required by symmetry and is not exact -only the leading 1/T terms cancel out in β 11 + β 12 . The subleading terms do not cancel. These subleading terms are, however, much smaller, and the correction to χ -1 (Q y ) from the superconducting order is given by α|∆ sc | 2 /Λ × log(Λ/T ) (α > 0). The outcome is that the mass of the density component of charge order parameter (the one measured by x-ray) goes up in the presence of superconductivity (and the correlation length, which scales as inverse mass, goes down); however this effect is small. A small coupling between competing charge density and superconducting orders also implies that the order which appears first does not rapidly destroy the other one, hence CDW and superconductivity co-exist over a sizable range of dopings. sible for the breaking of time-reversal symmetry (TRS), its absence over some doping range where the density component of CO is present implies that in this range CO cannot be the source of TRS breaking. Alternatively speaking, if TRS breaking is caused by charge order, the end point of TRS breaking transition should end up at T = 0 at a smaller doping than the onset of CO. It would be interesting to test this in Kerr and elastic neutron scattering measurements in the superconducting state Summary.-In this paper we considered three aspects associated with uni-axial charge order in the underdoped cuprates. First, we analyzed the anisotropy of the charge order correlation length in the normal state, detected in recent x-ray measurements. Our goal was to investigate whether these data allow one to distinguish between magnetic and phonon-based mechanisms of CO formation. We argued that the magnetic scenario yields results consistent with the data in Ref. 11. Second, we argued that both longitudinal and transverse charge correlation lengths decrease in the presence of a true superconducting order, primarily because this order increases the mass of the charge order propagator. Finally, we found that the mass increase is different for the density and the current components of CO (symmetric and antisymmetric components with respect to the flip of a center of mass momenta of fermions which form CO). The mass increase is strong for the current component and is parametrically weaker for the density component. As a result, under the umbrella of superconductivity, the density component of CO exists in a wider range of doping compared to the current component. Since the current component of CO is responsible for TRS breaking, we propose to use this fact to test whether TRS breaking is associated with incommensurate charge order. neapolis and PITP, Waterloo, where a part of this work was completed. AC and DC acknowledge hospitality of MPI-PKS, Dresden. We now evaluate the bubble near hot spots 1 and 2 with a hard momentum cutoff. We first evaluate this integral for q = q x . Performing the summation in frequency we have, where f (ǫ) is the Fermi function. In the last step we have approximated f (ǫ) by the step function, and we have used the linear dispersion ǫ 1,2 (k) = v x k x ± v y k y . The integration region C is given by {ǫ 1 (k + q x /2)ǫ 2 (k -q x /2) < 0}∩{|k±q/2| < Λ}, which we depict in Fig. where C ′ is now given by {|x| < |y + 1|} ∩ {|x| < vx vy Q 2 -y 2 -1}. We take the limit |q x | ≪ Λ, and hence Q ≫ 1. By dimensional analysis, the integral from Eq. ( , where The integration limits for I 1 comes from the condition |y + 1| < (v x /v y ) Q 2 -y 2 -1 and has been expanded up to next leading order in Q. The evaluation of I 1 is trivial, which, to next leading order in large Q, gives For I 2 + I 3 we have In the second line above we have kept terms only up to next leading order in Q. Note, however, that the above result is not an approximation in the small v x /v y limit but rather for an arbitrary v x /v y . Combining the results for I 1,2,3 , and using Π k0 (q x ) = |q x |/(16π 2 v y )(I 1 + I 2 + I 3 ), we find in original variables The first term of Eq. ( Next we evaluate the same bubble with momentum deviation q = q y from the CDW momentum Q. Similar to Eq. ( The integration region D is given by {ǫ 1 (k + q y /2)ǫ 2 (k -q y /2) < 0} ∩ {|k ± q/2| < Λ}, which we depict in Fig. For simplicity of presentation, we drop the bars in the rescaled variables below. From Fig. We then integrate over y first and obtain where the integration limits on x is obtained by expanding the solution of |x + 1| = (v y /v x ) Q 2 -x 2 -1 up to next leading order in Q. Evaluating Eq. ( where the first term in the bracket is of order Q, which corresponds to Π k0 (Q), and the last four terms are of order one. The second Evaluating the integrals, we obtain Combining Eqs. (10,15), we get the full expression Finally, we move to the evaluation of Π kπ , defined as the particle-hole bubble for fermions near hot spots 3 and 4. Similar to Eq. ( We remind that Using the fact that the integrations over k x and k y are symmetric, we then see that Π kπ (Q + q) and Π k0 (Q + q) are simply related by v x ↔ v y , therefore As a quick check, in the limit v x ≪ v y , the q independent term becomes Π kπ (Q) = Λ/(2π 2 v y ). This is consistent with results previously obtained 2 . Eqs. (16,18) are the two main results of this Subsection. When v y ≫ v x we can expand Π k0 and Π kπ in small v x /v y , Using a hard cutoff, we found that the leading order q dependence of the polarization bubbles has a non-analytical form ∼ |q|. This |q| dependence gets "softened" to a q 2 one, if we use a soft upper cutoff instead of a hard one. For example, one can replace the integration limit (k ± q/2) 2 < Λ 2 with a multiplier Λ 2N /(k + q/2) N + Λ N )/(kq/2) N + Λ N ) and integrate over infinite range. This multiplier is fully analytical, hence the leading order q dependence should be ∼ q 2 . For large N , this multiplier almost looks like a step function, which restores the hard cutoff. As a result, the coefficient of q 2 term increases, which diverges at N → ∞ and gives a ∼ |q| behavior in the hard cutoff case. We have verified that the ratio between coefficients for q 2 x and q 2 y for a large but finite N connects smoothly to the ratio between |q x | and |q y | coefficients obtained previously using a hard cutoff. For completeness, in this subsection we perform a calculation of the bubbles for N = 2, which is a Lorentzian cutoff. Namely, we define Using )), such that in Eq. ( where, as before, we have summed over frequency. To obtain the quadratic coefficients in q's, we can expand the Lorentian multipliers in q x and q y 's. The result will then have the form Π k0 (Q + q) = Π k0 (Q, r) + D x (r)q 2 x + D y (r)q 2 y , where we keep the r = v y /v x dependence explicit, and Like we did before, Π kπ and Π k0 are related by x + D y (1/r)q 2 y . In the magnetic scenario, the spatial anisotropy of CDW correlation length ξ /ξ ⊥ is given by the ratio of q 2 coefficients in Π k0 (q)Π kπ (q), which means We used the experimental ratio r = 13.6 and evaluated all the coefficients numerically, and we obtained ξ /ξ ⊥ = 27.3. This ratio, however, is much larger than the experimental value ∼ 1.5. We next compute the effect of feedback from the superconducting (SC) order parameter ∆ sc to the density and current component of the charge order (CO) parameter. We use two approaches. First, we compute the coupling between CO and SC perturbatively by evaluating the square diagrams (see Fig. We start by doing perturbation theory. At lowest order the coupling between ∆ sc and ∆'s are given by square diagrams shown in Fig. Like the bubbles, the square diagrams should also be evaluated for ∆'s with center of mass momenta at both ±k 0 and ±k π . However, the ratio between ∆ Q k0 and ∆ Q kπ is fixed since they are coupled by the antiferromagnetic interaction where Both integrals have been evaluated in Refs. 2 and 4 with linear dispersion ǫ 1,2 and infinite limits on momentum integration. However, an overall sign of β 12 was overlooked. The revised results are of the form, Plugging these into Eq. ( The SC gap ∆ sc can then be naturally included into the fermionic dispersion as where τ x and τ z are Pauli matrices in Nambu space, and for simplicity we have taken ∆ sc to be real. From the above, we can write down the Green's functions as, , where We now couple the fermions Ψ's to charge order parameters ∆ d and ∆ c . Using the fact that ∆ d(c) is the even (odd) combination of the CO parameters ∆ Q ±k0 , we have where τ 0 is an identity matrix. We evaluate the bubbles for ∆ d,c , and the coupling between ∆ d,c and ∆ sc can be obtained by expanding these bubbles in powers of ∆ sc . For ∆ d , we find At this step if we expand in the integrand with respect to ∆ sc to quadratic order, the coefficients we get are precisely β 11 + β 12 . As we have seen, both β's scale as ∼ 1/T and cancel out. Here we do something slightly different to show the same cancellation. Namely, we take the T → 0 limit and replace the Matsubara sum with an integral, then To compute the effect of ∆ sc , we subtract from the above integral its ∆ sc -independent part, namely 2Π k0 (Q). To obtain leading order contribution, which we know comes from the infrared, we can evaluate Eq. ( where we have defined ε 1,2 = ǫ 1,2 /|∆ sc |. Naively, this means the leading order renormalization to the bubble for charge order is of order ∼ |∆ sc |. This |∆ sc | scaling is nothing but the reminiscence of the |∆ sc | 2 /T at zero temperature. However, a direct evaluation of the integrals yields, Therefore, at leading order, δ Πd k0 (Q y ) = 0. This reproduces our previous result on the cancellation of leading order couplings between ∆ d and ∆ sc . Now we repeat the above procedure for ∆ c , the odd component of ∆ Q k0 . The bubble is given by The only difference between Eq. ( where in the last line we have inserted the value of the two integrals in Eqs. (37) in the bracket. Since the leading order coupling between ∆ d and ∆ sc vanishes, we need to go beyond leading order to compute their "residual" coupling, and we need to verify that this coupling is indeed repulsive. This can be done if one explicitly keeps the upper momentum cutoff Λ in evaluating β 11 and β 12 . However the analytical computation for the β's with a circular hard or soft momentum cutoff is more difficult than the computation of the bubbles in the normal state. Here we consider a case when a cutoff Λ1 , Λ2 is imposed on ǫ 1 and ǫ 2 respectively. We have evaluated the β's with more realistic cutoff's numerically and have found that the result is qualitatively the same. We start from Eq. ( We integrate over ǫ 1,2 first, The major contributions to both Matsubara summations come from the infrared, therefore we can expand the summand as Laurent series of |ω m |/ Λ1,2 . Up to next-leading order, we have where • • • stands for terms that are not divergent in 1/|ω m |. The first terms in both summands give the same results as shown in Eq. ( while the bi-quadratic coupling between ∆ c and ∆ sc , at leading order, is Eq. ( 