Leakage errors occur when a quantum system leaves the two-level qubit subspace. Reducing these errors is critically important for quantum error correction to be viable. To quantify leakage errors, we use randomized benchmarking in conjunction with measurement of the leakage population. We characterize single qubit gates in a superconducting qubit, and by refining our use of Derivative Reduction by Adiabatic Gate (DRAG) pulse shaping along with detuning of the pulses, we obtain gate errors consistently below 10 -3 and leakage rates at the 10 -5 level. With the control optimized, we find that a significant portion of the remaining leakage is due to incoherent heating of the qubit. Accurate manipulation of the states in a quantum two-level system (qubit) is a key requirement for building a fault tolerant quantum processor However, total fidelity is not the only metric that determines the viability of QEC because certain errors are more deleterious than others. Specifically, leakage errors are known to be highly detrimental for error correcting codes such as the surface code, because interactions with a qubit in a leakage state have a randomizing effect on the interacting qubits In this Letter, we characterize single qubit leakage errors in a superconducting qubit. To estimate leakage errors, we use randomized benchmarking (RB) Our experiment uses Clifford based randomized benchmarking For our testbed we use a single Xmon transmon qubit We operate the qubit at a frequency f 10 of around 5.3 GHz, and the anharmonicity ∆ = ω 21ω 10 is 2π × -212 MHz. Microwave (XY) control is achieved using a capacitively coupled transmission line driven at the qubit frequency. We generate control pulses using a custom arbitrary waveform generator, and the pulses are shaped with a cosine envelope. We measure the qubit state using a dispersive readout scheme To illustrate our novel use of RB, we begin by measuring how DRAG suppresses leakage and phase errors. We use the simplified version of DRAG described in Refs. where α is a weighting parameter. Fourier analysis Simultaneously, we characterize leakage errors in our gateset from the dynamics of the |2 state measured while performing RB, as shown in Fig. where p |2 (m) is the |2 state population as a function of sequence length m, γ ↑ and γ ↓ are the leakage and decay rates per Clifford, and p 0 is the initial |2 state population. Using Eq. ( where δf is the detuning of the pulse from the qubit frequency. We also redefine the anharmonicity parameter in Eq. ( To optimize the detuning parameter δf , we sweep the detuning of a π-pulse while performing the psuedoidentity operation of a π-pulse followed by a -π-pulse along the same rotation axis We now explore in more detail the dependence of fidelity and leakage on α. In Fig. Next, we optimize the detuning of the pulses for each value of α using the method described in Fig. With gate fidelity now independent of α, we are free to implement DRAG solely to minimize leakage. Without detuning, the minimum leakage rate is 1.82 ± 0.07 × 10 -5 for α = 1.1. After detuning the pulses for optimal fidelity, we see shifts in the leakage rates. For α > 0.4, we detune the pulses towards the 1↔2 transition [16] which tends to increase the leakage rate. Nevertheless, we can still suppress leakage to the same level as the undetuned pulses by increasing α to 1.4. Using these parameters, we achieve both high fidelity (8.7 ± 0.4 × 10 -4 error per Clifford) and low leakage (1. Having characterized 10 ns pulses in detail, we now examine the dependence of leakage on pulse length. As noted in Fig. To measure the incoherent leakage rate, we prepare the qubit in the |1 state and measure the dynamics of the three qubit states, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have used single qubit randomized benchmarking to study leakage errors in a superconducting qubit. Using RB, we show that simple DRAG correction alone cannot minimize leakage and total gate error simultaneously, but by detuning our pulses, we obtain gates with both high fidelity and low leakage. We also measured the dependence of leakage on pulse length, and found that heating of the qubit is a significant source of leakage in our system. Because RB is platform independent, this method should be applicable to other systems provided they have high fidelity measurement of their leakage states. This method should also be extendable to two-qubit gates, where entangling interactions can be a significant source of leakage We thank Tobias Chasseur, Felix Motzoi, and Frank Wilhelm for valuable discussions. This work was sup-ported by Google. Z. Chen and C. Quintana also acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowhship under Grant No. DGE 1144085. Devices were made at the UC Santa Barbara Nanofabrication Facility, a part of the NSF-funded National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network, and at the NanoStructures Cleanroom Facility. as might be expected because the transitions are at different frequencies, and T1 in our system is highly frequency dependent [29] X. Y. Jin, A. Kamal, A. P. Sears, T. Gudmundsen, D. Hover, J. Miloshi, R. Slattery, F. Yan, J. Yoder, T. P. Orlando, et al., Phys. Rev. The measurement setup is largely as described in the supplementary information for Ref. Readout parameters for this device have previously been detailed in Ref. In Fig. Equation 2 contains both a leakage rate and a decay rate of the |2 state back into the computational subspace. We show in Fig. In Fig. To verify the heating rate measured in Fig. Reference 8 notes that for long pulses and large anharmonicity, leakage can be suppressed using a DRAG-like technique with higher order derivatives. For example, DRAG correction with the second derivative takes the following form: where α 2 is a weighting parameter. Note that unlike DRAG with first derivatives, the second derivative correction is applied to the in-phase component, which means that it does not have any effect on phase errors. We perform the same experiment as in Fig. Because we have increased the dimension of our parameter space, performing full RB characterization by measuring leakage population versus sequence length for each set of parameters would take a prohibitively long time. Instead, we measure the leakage population for many random sequences but only for a single, large sequence length. We aim to measure the leakage state population near saturation, which is correlated with the leakage rate if the decay rate of the |2 state is mostly independent of the parameters under consideration. In Fig. However, using such a large α would also require a large detuning to compensate for phase errors, which will increase leakage. Thus, while our data suggests that there are still gains to be made in leakage performance, simultaneously optimizing for fidelity and leakage while using second derivative DRAG is non-trivial and an ongoing topic of research.