We analyze the thermalization of a photoexcited charge carrier coupled to a single branch of quantum phonons within the Holstein model. To this end, we calculate the far-from-equilibrium time evolution of a pure many-body state and compare it with predictions of the thermal Gibbs ensemble. We show that at strong enough carrier excitation, the nonequilibrium system evolves towards a thermal steady state. Our analysis is based on two classes of observables. First, the occupations of fermionic momenta, which are the eigenvalues of the one-particle density matrix, match in the steady state the values in the corresponding Gibbs ensemble. This indicates thermalization of static fermionic correlations on the entire lattice. Second, the dynamic current-current correlations, including the time-resolved optical conductivity, also take the form of their thermal counterparts. Remarkably, both static and dynamic fermionic correlations thermalize with identical temperatures. Our results suggest that the subsequent relaxation processes, observed in timeresolved ultrafast spectroscopy, may be efficiently described by applying quasithermal approaches, e.g., multi-temperature models. Equilibration and thermalization of closed quantum many-body systems Time-resolved optical experiments may, however, photoexcite charge carriers on extremely short time scales The dynamics in a short time window is usually governed by excitations that couple most strongly to carriers (we denote this time regime as primary relaxation). On the other hand, the full equilibration process requires redistribution of the excess energy over the whole environment, which is significantly slower than the primary relaxation time. A natural question thus arises, at which time scale is one justified in describing the dynamics by using theories that rely on the assumption of (quasi)equilibrium distributions (e.g., the so-called multitemperature models The part of the environment responsible for the pri-mary relaxation may depend on a particular material. The dominant relaxation channels are usually phonons where the last term is the electron-phonon interaction [we define the terms of Eq. ( We contrast the outcome of unitary quantum time evolution with predictions of statistical mechanics. If the electron excitation is strong enough, the system approaches a steady state. Observables in the steady state are, at a given total energy, independent of initial conditions. We show that the eigenvalues of the electronic oneparticle density matrix (i.e., the occupations of fermionic momenta) approach the ones in the Gibbs ensemble. This result is consistent with thermalization of static electronic observables. We test thermalization separately using the nonequilibrium optical conductivity (and more generally, dynamical current-current correlations), which in the steady state as well approach a thermal form. Our results indicate that, for photoexcited systems at small photodoping, it is very likely that the subsequent (sec-ondary) relaxation processes can be efficiently described by applying quasithermal approaches. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the model, numerical methods, and the quench protocols to study relaxation and thermalization. Thermalization of electronic one-particle observables is studied in Sec. III. In Sec. IV we study dynamical correlation functions and their approach to a thermal form. We conclude in Sec. V. Details of the numerical methods and definitions of dynamical correlation functions are given in Appendices A-B and C-D, respectively. We consider an electron on a periodic one-dimensional lattice with L sites where t 0 is the nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude and ĉj is a fermion annihilation operator on site j. We use the Peierls substitution to couple the electron to an external dimensionless electric field F (related to the electric field F as F = e 0 Fa/t 0 , where e 0 is the unit charge and a is the lattice constant where bj is the phonon annihilation operator. The electron is coupled to phonons via a Holstein-type interaction of strength g, If not specified otherwise, we set L = 16. The dimensionless electron-phonon coupling is given by λ = g 2 /(2t 0 ω 0 ). We construct two qualitatively distinct initial states, which are not eigenstates of Ĥsys . In the first case, the initial state at t = 0 consists of an electron at momentum k=π and no phonons. By suddenly switching on a finite value of electron-phonon interaction, we time evolve the system under Ĥsys . Here, φ(t)=0 for all times. Such a state initially possesses the maximal electron kinetic energy E kin (t=0) = Ĥkin (t=0) = 2t 0 , which equals the total energy E sys = Ĥsys . We refer to this setup as the interaction quench, and the relaxation dynamics emerging from this initial state has been recently studied in The second initial state is prepared by switching on a uniform dc electric field F in a time window [-t i , 0]. We refer to this setup as the field quench. At t = -t i , we set φ(t=-t i ) = 0, switch on F and propagate the ground state of Ĥsys with φ(t) = -[(t + t i )/τ ]F at chosen λ, ω 0 and the total momentum K=0 In all cases under consideration, the system energy is conserved for t > 0 ( Ĥsys is time independent) and the dynamics is described by the pure state |ψ(t) = e -i Ĥsyst |ψ 0 , where |ψ 0 is the initial state. Results from the time propagation are compared with the predictions of the thermal Gibbs ensemble, described by the density matrix with the partition function We set the Boltzmann constant k B = 1 hereafter and measure T in units of t 0 . We apply the Lanczos-based diagonalization We first study equilibration of the electron kinetic energy E kin for different initial states and electron-phonon coupling strengths. Figure Time evolution of the electron kinetic energy at λ = 0.5 and ω0/t0 = 0.75. (a) E kin for different initial states and the same total energy Esys = 2t0. The quench protocols are the interaction quench (i-Q) and the field quench (f-Q) for different values of the electric field F . (b) E kin for the field quench at F = 1.0, corresponding to different total energies Esys. Inset: E kin and Esys versus t for the field quench at F = 1.0. The data are shown during the driving (t < 0) and during equilibration (t > 0), such that at t = 0 we reach the target energy Esys = 2t0. of E kin -1.35t 0 . Other observables such as Ĥph and Ĥe-ph show qualitatively the same behavior (not shown here). In the steady state and for the parameter regime under investigation, tiny oscillations around the average vanish in the limit L → ∞ On the other hand, quench protocols that generate distinct total energy lead to distinct steady-state values. Figure If the observed collapse of the data in Fig. To gain additional insight into the steady-state properties beyond the information gained from calculating a few selected observables ω 0 /t 0 = 0.75 hence defined as ρele = Tr ph {ρ tot }, where ρtot denotes the density matrix of the total system. (Note that ρtot may be obtained from the pure state, ρtot = |ψ(t) ψ(t)|, or from the Gibbs ensemble, ρtot = ρsys .) This selection of ρele is different from the one where the subsystem is physically separated from the environment. In the case of a single electron studied here, ρele is equivalent to the one-particle density matrix with the matrix elements ĉ † j ĉl . Due to translational invariance, ρele is diagonal in the momentum representation and its eigenvalues are occupations of the momentum states k|ρ ele |q = n k δ k,q . In the nonequilibrium calculation, we therefore need to calculate the average value of n k (t) in the steady state nk = n k (t) t , where is the time-dependent momentum distribution function and ... t denotes the time averaging. A necessary criterion for thermalization requires a single set of nk for all initial states with equal energy We also present a comparison of log nk with the equilibrium results log n k (T ) in the Gibbs ensemble (5) ob-tained using the FTLM. We have chosen the timeaveraged electron kinetic energy in the steady state E kin t to determine the temperature T in the Gibbs ensemble through the equation E kin t = Tr{ρ sys Ĥkin }. (The reason for this choice is that within the FTLM, finite-size effects due to the limited number of phonon configurations affect E kin less than E sys . See also Fig. Our results for other parameters indicate that thermalization is visible as long as the system energy relative to the ground state considerably exceeds the phonon energy ω 0 . An example where this is not fulfilled is shown in Fig. Thermalization of eigenvalues of electronic one-particle density matrix implies thermalization of all observables defined in terms of fermionic operators. This, however, does not immediately extend to dynamical two-particle observables like the optical conductivity σ(ω). The latter quantity is defined as a Fourier transform of the currentcurrent correlation function (t)(0) The time-resolved optical conductivity provides access to the dynamical properties that are measured in pumpprobe experiments where σ (ω, t) = [σ(ω, t)], also holds far from equilibrium where the nonequilibrium dynamical susceptibility is defined as and  denotes the current operator Details of the calculation are presented in Appendix D. We mimic the probe pulse of pump-probe experiments by a gaussian envelope with a width comparable to current experiments in strong contrast with the interaction quench discussed before. Nevertheless, when entering the steady state at longer times, optical conductivities for different initial states display a very similar frequency dependence. The results from Sec. IV A give rise to an obvious question: to what extent does σ (ω, t) resemble the linear response of a system in thermal equilibrium? To answer this question, one could in principle follow the same procedure as in Sec. III, i.e., construct the corresponding Gibbs ensemble and compare the resulting thermal σ (ω) with the time-resolved σ (ω, t) in the steady state. Instead, we show in the following that a simple manipulation of the dynamical correlations allows one to test whether their form is thermal without explicitly carrying out calculation in the Gibbs ensemble. If the answer is affirmative, one can also extract the corresponding perature of the Gibbs ensemble. To demonstrate this idea we first note that in thermal equilibrium, the regular part of the optical conductivity can be expressed from the standard linear-response theory where the dynamical current-current correlations are defined as t /τ = 3,4, T ele is the temperature in the Gibbs ensemble obtained such that its electron kinetic energy matches the one in the steady state of the time-evolved state (as explained in Sec. III). T is the temperature, obtained by fitting R(ω) with the thermal form R(ω) = tanh[ω/(2T )] from Eq. ( As a central step, one can manipulate C(ω) to construct the function which allows for a direct extraction of the temperature. Here, C(ω) is derived by using the Gibbs density matrix Our goal is to calculate a coefficient similar to the one in Eq. ( where the Fourier transform of the time-resolved currentcurrent correlation is defined as We calculate C(ω, t) numerically with the same method as the time-resolved optical conductivity σ (ω, t) (see also Appendix D for details). Figures It is plausible, but by no means obvious that (i) the temperature obtained from the Gibbs ensemble by matching the static one-particle electronic correlations in the steady state (as done in Sec. III), and (ii) the temperature obtained from fitting the dynamical correlations R(ω, t) t with the thermal form tanh[ω/(2T )], are equal. Figure We studied thermalization of a photoexcited electron coupled to quantum phonons using a state-of-the-art numerical method. Even though in the simple Holstein model the relaxation channel is represented by a single (optical) phonon branch, many indicators for thermalization are fulfilled provided that the excitation energy is much larger than the phonon frequency. First, we calculated all elements of the electronic one-particle density matrix, as well as the occupations of fermionic momenta, which are the corresponding eigenvalues. We showed that in the steady state all those eigenvalues agree with the ones in the Gibbs ensemble, indicating thermalization of electronic correlations on the entire lattice. This leads to the conclusion that the standard view of thermalization, which takes place only in a subsystem physically separated from the environment, is too restrictive. Recently, a complete thermalization of one-particle observables towards predictions of the generalized Gibbs ensemble was reported for two integrable models Second, we have shown that the entire spectral distribution of the nonequilibrium dynamical current-current correlation function approaches in the steady state the thermal form. The latter allows one to extract the temperature of the corresponding Gibbs ensemble. Remarkably, the temperature obtained from the dynamical two-particle correlation function agrees with the one in the Gibbs ensemble that describes static one-particle electronic observables. From the point of view of time-resolved experiments, our model provides a reasonable description of the initial photocarrier relaxation through a single branch of bosonic excitations. We denoted this process as the primary relaxation. Thermalization of electronic oneparticle observables implies that the optical sum rule becomes, at a given excitation density, independent of the initial state. In addition, the approach of the dynamical current-current correlation function to a simple thermal form, given by Eq. ( While our investigation focused on the primary relaxation regime in the context of pump-probe experiments, the current time resolution of many experiments (e.g., the time-resolved ARPES Further details about the method can be found, e.g., in Ref. We demonstrate the efficiency of calculation within the LFS in Fig. In Fig. (N h ) k