We propose a physical realization of a commuting Hamiltonian of interacting Majorana fermions realizing Z2 topological order, using an array of Josephson-coupled topological superconductor islands. The required multi-body interaction Hamiltonian is naturally generated by a combination of charging energy induced quantum phase-slips on the superconducting islands and electron tunneling. Our setup improves on a recent proposal for implementing a Majorana fermion surface code [1], a 'hybrid' approach to fault-tolerant quantum computation that combines (1) the engineering of a stabilizer Hamiltonian with a topologically ordered ground state with (2) projective stabilizer measurements to implement error correction and a universal set of logical gates. Our hybrid strategy has advantages over the traditional surface code architecture in error suppression and single-step stabilizer measurements, and is widely applicable to implementing stabilizer codes for quantum computation. Superconducting qubits based on Josephson junctions provide a promising platform for the implementation of a large-scale, fault-tolerant quantum computer In addition to having a phase degree of freedom, superconductors host fermionic quasiparticles. In particular, quasiparticles with energies inside the superconducting gap can be localized in superconducting weak links or vortices. The quasiparticle occupation number could be exploited as an internal degree of freedom to encode information in a Fock space, opening up the possibility of fermionic quantum computation. Of particular interest are Majorana fermions, excitations which arise as a spatially-localized "half" of a zero-energy fermionic quasiparticle in a topological superconductor Several important considerations motivate us to study schemes for robust quantum computation using fermionic quasiparticles in superconductors. From a quantum information perspective, it has been theoretically shown that fermions have more computational power than bosons In this work, we propose a physical implementation of a quantum error-correcting code using an array of Majorana fermions as the underlying physical degrees of freedom, which was recently introduced and termed a Majorana fermion surface code Our hybrid strategy is particularly adapted to providing the error correction capability that is required for a scalable quantum computing architecture. For any quantum computer operating at non-zero temperature, a finite density of spurious excitations will be thermally excited, interfering with encoded information and leading to the failure of fault-tolerance in the absence of active error correction. As a result, Hamiltonian-only approaches to quantum computation, including those based on non-Abelian topological phases, will be unable to proceed correctly in the absence of measurement-based error correction. In contrast, our Hamiltonian-measurement hybrid approach achieves scalability and fault-tolerance in two ways. First, engineering an ideal stabilizer Hamiltonian naturally provides error suppression at temperatures below the energy gap, and remarkably permits single-step measurements of multi-body stabilizer operators, which minimizes readout errors. Furthermore, as the interactions between the physical degrees of freedom are described by the stabilizer Hamiltonian in our setup, we are able to take non-idealities in stabilizer measurements into account in a controlled fashion. Second, the constant projective measurements of stabilizers can detect unwanted excitations (i.e., stabilizer flips) that do occur. By collecting measurements at several time-steps, an error can be optimally decoded and used to correct a logical qubit during readout as in the conventional surface code, leading to a scalable quantum computing architecture This paper is organized as follows. First, we introduce a commuting Hamiltonian of interacting Majorana fermions that exhibits a Z 2 topological order of Fermi systems, as thoroughly described in We begin by introducing a commuting Hamiltonian that realizes a fermionic Z 2 topological order. Consider a square-octagon lattice with one Majorana fermion per lattice site, as shown in Figure where O (1) α is the product of the four Majorana fermions bordering a square plaquette α, while O (2) β is the product of the eight Majoranas around an octagonal plaquette β. Any pair of Majorana fermions (γ) anti-commute and satisfy γ 2 = 1. Therefore, each of the operators appearing in the Hamiltonian squares to the identity, and has eigenvalues ±1. Furthermore, as any pair of operators in the Hamiltonian overlap on an even number of Majorana fermions, all terms in the Hamiltonian mutually commute, and constitute a complete set of stabilizer operators. The ground state satisfies O β |Ψ gs = |Ψ gs for all plaquettes α, β. The Hamiltonian (1) belongs to a family of solvable "Majorana plaquette models" in two dimensions We propose an exact physical realization of the Hamiltonian (1) using an array of square and octagonal islands of two-dimensional (2D) topological superconductors, which can be realized by coupling s-wave superconductors to topological insulator (TI) surface states We now engineer the 4-body and 8-body interactions in the Hamiltonian The first term describes the Coulomb energy due to the excess charge on an island, which is capacitively coupled to ground and to the other islands in the array. Here n g is an offset charge that can be continuously tuned by a gate voltage. The second term describes the Josephson coupling of neighboring islands with energy E J , with a jj tuned so as to produce the superconducting phase configuration in Figure A small charging energy E c E J induces quantum fluctuations of the superconducting phase on the square island. Small fluctuations result in a harmonic oscillator spectrum with level-spacing 0 ∼ √ E J E c . As originally found in ( The braiding of Majorana fermions in charing-energy induced quantum phase slip processes is crucial to our implementation of the Majorana fermion surface code and enables a new way of detecting the non-Abelian statistics of Majorana zero modes Here 0 is the on-site energy of the lowest harmonic oscillator state associated with each potential minimum, FIG. Quantum phase-slips on the square islands generate a four-Majorana interaction that couples the zero modes at the adjacent tri-junctions. By making the size of the octagonal islands sufficiently small, the wavefunction overlap of the zero modes generates an eight-Majorana interaction (e.g. O (2) while t α is the tunneling amplitude between nearest neighbors, given by the amplitude of a 2π phase slip t α ∝ e - √ 2E J /Ec . The offset charge n g produces a Berry phase e 2πing in the effective Hamiltonian. Importantly, in our setup the phase particle carries an internal 2 4/2 = 4dimensional Hilbert space resulting from the four Majorana fermions at the vertices. Here Û is the unitary operator that implements the braiding of Majorana fermions in a 2π phase slip process, as described in (3), and is given by Substituting ( where we have eliminated the U (1) phase factor of t α by shifting n g by a constant. From now on, we set 2n g to integer values by tuning the gate voltage, so that H α is exactly the 4-body interaction on square plaquettes needed for the Majorana plaquette model To further implement the 8-body interaction on the octagonal islands, we consider the electron tunneling between adjacent square islands via nearest-neighbor Majorana fermion zero modes at tri-junctions. Such tunneling processes are described by Majorana bilinear operators such as iδγ 4 γ 5 in Figure where O (2) β is the product of the 8 Majorana fermions on the vertices of an octagonal island β. The sum of the 4body interaction (6) and the 8-body interaction (7) in our setup of the topological superconductor array precisely yields the commuting Hamiltonian (1), whose ground states and excitations will hereafter be used to encode quantum information, leading to a Majorana fermion surface code. Physical realizations of Majorana plaquette models have been previously proposed in other platforms for Majorana fermions. In Ref. As proposed in Ref. Logical qubits are encoded by stopping the measurement of two stabilizers of the same type (A, B or C) in subsequent cycles, so that the presence or absence of an anyon (= stabilizer flip) in the resulting "hole" defines the two states of the encoded qubit. A set of gates required for universal quantum computation (CNOT, Hadamard, S and T ) may be implemented by performing a sequence of measurements that have the effect of moving the logical qubits. A detailed description of gate and measurement protocols for the Majorana surface code is provided in We now describe how to perform projective measurements of the commuting stabilizers in our setup. As discussed in α can be determined by exciting the square island α with microwave photons and measuring the energy gap to the next harmonic oscillator level As in the case of square islands, a small charging energy on an octagon island induces quantum phase slips that permutes the eight Majorana zero modes at the vertices. As shown in Figure This transformation is implemented by the unitary operator Ŵ = O 1 O 2 where In the presence of a charging energy, the effective Hamiltonian for an octagonal island acquires terms due to phase-slip events φ β → φ β +2πm, in addition to the ringexchange term = - up to an overall constant. Here, t β is the amplitude for a 2π phase-slip on octagonal island β, and V β (n g ) is a sum of quartic Majorana operators. Note that t β is time-dependent; as a function of time, t β increases as the charging energy for the octagonal island β is slowly turned on during the stabilizer measurement and decreases as the charging energy is slowly turned off after the measurement has been completed. As illustrated in Figure (2) β , as in the case of square islands. After the measurement, we decrease the charging energy on the octagonal island sufficiently slowly, on a time-scale τ t 3 α /δ 4 , so that the many-body state of the system evolves adiabatically back into an energy eigenstate of the ideal stabilizer Hamiltonian with O (2) β = ±1 as determined by the projective measurement. We emphasize that this adiabatic measurement protocol is made possible by our Hamiltonian-measurement hybrid approach. The physical Hamiltonian for our square-octagon lattice of Majorana fermions is precisely the ideal Hamiltonian (1) whose eigenstates define the set of computational states. Therefore, even if stabilizer measurements are imperfect, the many-body state of the system will, after a sufficient interval of time, return to the computational basis with the desired stabilizer eigenvalue. This is in contrast to "measurement-only" approaches such as the ordinary surface code, where measurement errors cannot be handled in a controlled manner, as physical qubits are only coupled by measurements instead of a static interaction Hamiltonian. FIG. In summary, we have improved on a recent proposal of implementing a Majorana fermion surface code in an array of topological superconductor islands 