Experimental quantum information processing with superconducting circuits is rapidly advancing, driven by innovation in two classes of devices, one involving planar micro-fabricated (2D) resonators, and the other involving machined three-dimensional (3D) cavities. We demonstrate that circuit quantum electrodynamics can be implemented in a multilayer superconducting structure that combines 2D and 3D advantages. We employ standard micro-fabrication techniques to pattern each layer, and rely on a vacuum gap between the layers to store the electromagnetic energy. Planar qubits are lithographically defined as an aperture in a conducting boundary of the resonators. We demonstrate the aperture concept by implementing an integrated, two cavity-modes, one transmonqubit system. Circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) Circuit QED has been developed in two platforms: fully planar (2D) circuits, which benefit from the geometric precision and parallel production of established micro-fabrication technologies, and 3D circuits involving conventionally machined cavities, but with superior coherence times. Through improved design and material optimization, 2D qubits and resonators have significantly progressed, with internal quality factors (Q i ) exceeding 10 6 (Refs. We propose to lithographically pattern qubits and resonators in multiple planes separated by vacuum gaps used to store the electromagnetic energy. Thin-film aluminum resonators built in this multilayer planar way recently demonstrated low-losses (Q i > 3 × 10 6 ) at the single photon level In the 2D and 3D platforms, coupling is achieved by inserting the qubit metallic structure onto the insulating region of the resonator. In a perturbative description of the coupling, the electric field of the resonator mode is aligned with the electric dipole of the qubit mode (Fig. To demonstrate the feasibility and advantages of our multilayer planar platform for cQED, we present in this letter the implementation and coherence properties of an integrated system composed of two standing modes coupled to a qubit, a now standard configuration for many basic cQED experiments Figure The transmon qubit was directly patterned in the thinfilm of the ring in layer 1, as shown in the inset of Fig. The resonator is now represented as a section of a multilayer whispering gallery mode resonator The spatial mode orthogonality of the two WG modes allowed us to implement the long lived storage (D ⊥ ) and over-coupled readout (D ) modes of a quantum register within the same physical structure. In the following, we refer to these two modes simply as "storage" and "readout," with nominal coupling Q S c > 10 8 and Q R c = 1.8 × 10 4 (see Appendix A), respectively. The sample holder was thermally anchored to the 15 mK stage of a dilution unit. We used the standard cQED measurement setup (See Appendix B) with the addition of a phase preserving, quantum limited, Josephson parametric amplifier For dispersive coupling between a transmon qubit (q) and a resonator mode (r), the strength of the cross-Kerr χ qr depends primarily on the detuning ∆ = ω r -ω q , aperture geometry, and the resonator fields at its position. In order to quantify the aperture coupling independently of the potentially tunable ∆, we define the effective coupling rate g qr = ∆ χ qr (∆)/E C 1 and for weak interaction g ∆. In 2D and 3D, the coupling strength g can be understood as arising from an interaction between the bare electric field of the resonator and the electric-dipole-like charge distribution of the qubit. Here, in our multilayer structure where the qubit is patterned in an aperture in one of the layers, the coupling mechanism is more involved. Figure The interplay of the capacitive (charge overlap) and inductive (current overlap) coupling is shown in Fig. Microwave spectroscopy revealed the transmon qubit, storage (D ⊥ ), and readout (D ) modes at 4.890 GHz, 7.070 GHz, and 7.267 GHz, respectively, in 1% agreement with the HFSS numerical simulations of the sample Figure From spectroscopy of the storage at photon number n ≈ 10 2 , we measure a linewidth ∆ω S /2π = 4 kHz which includes self-Kerr broadening in addition to dephasing. From this linewidth, we infer an approximate lower bound on the storage coherence time: T S 2 > ∼ 2/∆ω S = 80 μs. To measure the storage lifetime T S 1 in the single-photon regime (see Fig. We summarize the two cavity modes, one-qubit device interaction strengths and lifetimes in Table The measured coherence times are on par with those of two-cavity, one-qubit devices using 3D rectangular cavities We demonstrated at least three orders of magnitude separation in I/O coupling Q between the storage and χq/2π (MHz) -0.25 0.30 TABLE readout, which not only share the same physical footprint, but differ by only 200 MHz in frequency. This type of spatial mode control is advantageous when dealing with cross-talk and frequency crowding in devices with increased complexity. The measured device is a suitable candidate for a quantum register The qubit-resonator coupling geometry presented in Fig. We have implemented a multilayer superconducting device for quantum information processing that combines the benefits inherent to the precise geometry control of 2D micro-fabrication with those of the coherence in 3D qubits and resonators. In particular, the qubitresonator mode couplings can be precisely adjusted. We believe that the quality of the measured coherence in the present work resulted from the confinement of electric fields within the vacuum gap separating lithographically defined layers. The design principles illustrated by our work can be extended to devices with more than two layers, each layer corresponding to a specific function: qubits, control lines, resonators, amplifiers, etc. In particular, the aperture based coupling method introduced here can be generalized to inter-layer coupling in such multilayer devices. Furthermore, the TEM mode structure and the separation of layers provides a favorable geometry for hybrid systems, such as spin-ensembles with cavities As illustrated in the inset of Fig. Fabrication. We micro-fabricated both layers on the same 430 μm thick, double-side-polished, c-plane sapphire wafer. Using a 100 kV Vistec electron beam pattern generator, we defined the WG resonator and qubit in a single lithography step on a PMMA/MAA resist bilayer. We then performed a double angle Al evaporation, 20 and 30 nm thick, in a Plassys UMS300 at a pressure of 5 × 10 -8 Torr. Between these two depositions, an AlOx barrier was formed by thermal oxidation for 6 minutes in a static 100 Torr environment of 85% argon and 15% oxygen. Chips were diced to 15.5 × 25.4 mm. Qubit design details. The qubit island inside is connected to the ring by a 1 μm thin wire and a 130×700 nm Josephson junction with E J /h = 12 GHz. The value E J /E C = 44 yields a maximum offset-charge dispersion of 30 kHz. Sample holder. The chips are placed inside the bottom piece on ledges that are machined in the Al walls. The sample holder top piece has four legs which use indium to secure the chips against the sample holder bottom. Measurement setup. An aluminium and permalloy shield protected the sample from stray magnetic fields. The SMA input lines had thermalized cryogenic attenuators (20,10,30 dB) at the 4 K, 0.1 K and 15 mK stages of a Cryoconcept DR-JT-S-200-10 dilution refrigerator, respectively. The sample holder output connected to a Josephson parametric converter (JPC) amplifier At room temperature, we used a Tektronix 5014C arbitrary waveform generator, an Agilent E8257D vector generator, and several Vaunix Lab Brick generators to generate the qubit and cavity tones. Qubit coherence. The inset of Fig. I/O coupling. Over several cooldowns, we progressively decreased the I/O coupling by shortening the coupling pin lengths. However, while the over-coupled readout lifetime increased by a factor of two to the value in Table Experimental method of parity measurement and calibration. To measure the storage photonnumber parity presented in Fig. Calibration theory. During the measurement, the readout mode remains unpopulated, and we can ignore its contribution to the system Hamiltonian from Eq. A1. In the rotating frame of the storage and qubit, the system Hamiltonian takes the form: H/h = -χ qs a † a |e e| . For a system starting in the ground state, the calibration Ramsey signal of Fig. e -(t/T2) 2 -n(1-cos(χqst)) (cos(n sin(χ qs t)+∆t)-1) , where n is the average photon number in the storage mode, ∆ is the pulse detuning from the qubit frequency, and 1/T 2 is the incoherent dephasing rate. We numerically simulated the qubit design shown in Fig. 