We demonstrate that 3.5-MeV oxygen irradiation can markedly enhance the in-field critical current of commercial 2 nd generation superconducting tapes with an exposure time of just one second per 0.8 cm 2 . The speed demonstrated here is now at the level required for an industrial reel-to-reel post-processing. The irradiation is made on production line samples through the protective silver coating and does not require any modification of the growth process. From TEM imaging, we identify small clusters as the main source of increased vortex pinning. Increasing the current carrying capacity of 2 nd generation (2G) YBCO high temperature superconducting (HTS) wires in the presence of high magnetic fields is critical for the commercialization of HTS based rotating machine applications such as lightweight and compact off-shore wind turbines and motors as well as various HTS magnet applications In recent years, impressive advances in the in-field performance of short-length samples have been achieved An alternative to increase the critical current density by modifying the chemical synthesis is afforded by particle irradiation, which may be applicable to all superconducting materials. Depending on the mass and energy of the ions and the properties of the superconducting material, irradiation enables the creation of defects with well-controlled density and topology, such as points, clusters or tracks. Their effect on vortex pinning in superconductors as diverse as HTS single crystals and epitaxial films Here we show that the irradiation of current production-line coated conductors with 3.5 MeV oxygen ions more than doubles their critical current density in high magnetic fields in a process that covers ~0.8 cm 2 of coated conductor per second. These results are achievable with a standard accelerator capable of delivering an ion beam current of 1 μA of 16 O 3+ at a terminal voltage of 1.15 MV. These specifications are fairly easily achieved, and ion-irradiation of coated conductors could join a global trend of new usage of particle accelerators in advanced manufacturing Samples of Dy-doped YBCO conductors, 50 mm long and 11 mm wide, were cut from standard 46 mm wide production strips manufactured by American Superconductor Corp (AMSC). The superconducting films were deposited onto a Rolling Assisted Bi-axially Textured Substrate (RABiTS) using metal organic deposition MOD The samples were irradiated using the 6.0-MV tandem Van de Graaff accelerator at Western Michigan University with 16 O 3+ ions beams oriented along the normal of the film plane (c-axis). Gold/carbon foils and collimators were used to shape the beam into a uniform round spot of 0.8 cm 2 . In our study, beam energy of 4.6 MeV is required in order to compensate for the energy loss in the gold/carbon foils and achieve energy of 3.5 MeV on the sample. In a dedicated industrial accelerator, beam rasterizing could be employed instead of a foil to achieve uniformity, thus further reducing the terminal voltage requirements. The sample holder was cooled to -10 °C to prevent excessive heating of the samples by the beam The critical current density J c was determined from the magnetization hysteresis measured with a commercial SQUID magnetometer on 1.5x1.5 mm 2 square samples. The flux creep rates were obtained from the time decay of the hysteretic magnetization over a period of 1 hour. The squares were patterned using photolithography and Ar-ion milling at different positions along the length and width of the tape samples, and all showed robust and consistent superconducting properties. The characterization of the defect structures was carried out using high-resolution and diffraction contrast TEM. The TEM samples were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) lift-out methods followed by back-side low-energy Ar ion milling. This approach minimizes artifacts due to specimen preparation. Several TEM samples were prepared from different regions of each sample (irradiated and unirradiated control) to ensure that results were representative of each condition. Simulations using the SRIM-TRIM software package The field-dependence of the critical current density, as obtained from the Bean critical state analysis of the magnetization hysteresis, is displayed in Fig. The dose dependence of the enhancement of J c after oxygen irradiation is presented in Fig. Fig. The images in Fig. The inset of Fig. According to the classic Anderson-Kim model of vortex creep Coincidentally, the temperature dependence of J c of coated conductors in a field of several Tesla displays a cross-over around 25 K from a regime of steep decrease of J c (T) at low temperatures to a regime of weaker decrease at high temperatures In summary, we have demonstrated the doubling of the critical current density of state-of-theart production-line REBCO coated conductors in fields of 6 T || c at 27 K, using a 3.5 MeV oxygen beam with an exposure time of the order of one second. This doubling of J c within one second or less, opens an industrially viable approach to address the challenge in HTS conductor development, namely their greatly reduced performance in even modest applied magnetic fields. TEM images reveal that the enhanced critical current is due to finely dispersed small clusters approximately 5 nm in diameter and with anisotropic shape. The major effect of the irradiation-induced defects is the reduction of the field-dependence of J c , which we attribute to the mixed pinning landscape composed of strong pre-existing pin sites and the finely dispersed irradiation-induced defects. Fig. 