The energy levels of the fermions bound to the vortex are considered for vortices in the superfluid/superconducting systems which contain the symmetry protected plane of zeroes in the gap function in bulk. The Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon branches with different angular momentum quantum number n approach zero energy level at pz → 0. Such condensation of the energy levels is the consequence of the bulk-vortex correspondence in topological superfluids/superconductors. In a given case this is the connection between the Dirac line of zeroes in the bulk spectrum and the level condensation in the vortex core. The density of states of the bound fermions diverges at zero energy giving rise to the √ Ω dependence of DoS in the polar phase of superfluid 3 He rotating with the angular velocity Ω and to the √ B dependence of DoS for superconductors in the (dxz + idyz)-wave pairing state. The spectrum of the low-energy bound states in the core of the symmetric vortex with winding number m = ±1 in the isotropic model of s-wave superconductor was obtained in a microscopic (BCS) theory by Caroli, de Gennes and Matricon, Here p z is the momentum of the bound states along the vortex line, and n is related to the angular momentum quantum number L z . This spectrum is two-fold degenerate due to spin degrees of freedom. The level spacing -the so called minigap -is small compared to the energy gap of the quasiparticles outside the core, ω 0 ∼ ∆ 2 /E F ∆. For the chiral superfluid/superconductor with an odd winding number of the phase of the gap function in momentum space (i.e. ∆(p) ∝ (p x + ip y ) N with odd N ), the spectrum of fermions in the symmetric vortex is modified, 2,3 see Fig. The spectrum contains the zero energy states at n = 0. In the two-dimensional case the n = 0 levels represent two Majorana modes. The n = 0 level with the flat band appears also in spin-singlet superconductors with (d xz + id yz )-wave pairing. 9 This is because the gap function ∆(p) ∝ p z (p x + ip y ) has an odd chirality number N = 1 and the Weyl points in bulk. Such pairing has been suggested in the heavy-fermion compound URu 2 Si 2 . Examples are provided by vortices 1: Illustration of the spectrum of fermion bound states on symmetric singly-quantized (m = ±1) vortices. (Left): bound states in the nontopological s-wave superconductors and in the system with even chiralty number N = 2k. (Right): bound states on the most symmetric vortex in the chiral Weyl superfluid 3 He-A. The spectrum contains the flat band, which terminates on the projections of two Weyl points in bulk to the vortex line. zeroes, Here σ z is the Pauli matrix for conventional spin. The polar phase contains topologically protected Dirac line in the spectrum, at p z = 0 and p = p F , which gives rise to the flat band of the surface fermions according to the bulk-surface correspondence, see reviews where z, r, φ are the coordinates of the cylindrical system with the axis z along the vortex line; m = ±1; ∆ 0 is the gap amplitude far from the vortex core. In the half quantum vortex observed in Ref. Using standard procedure 2 one obtains the minigap in the polar phase: where is the wave function of the bound state. Illustration of the spectrum of fermion zero modes at |pz| pF on vortices in the polar phase of superfluid 3 He (left) and in the chiral (dxz + idyz)-wave superconductor (right). The branches with different n approach zero-energy level at pz → 0. In addition, the vortex in (dxz + idyz)-wave superconductor contains the flat band at n = 0. 9 For small p z p F the minigap in the polar phase has the following form: where ω 00 has an order of the minigap in the conventional s-wave superconductors. The spectrum is shown in Fig. At p z → 0 the size of the bound state wave function diverges and becomes larger than the core size, but still the spectrum corresponds to the bound state, since it is within the bulk gap at fixed p z if nω 00 p 2 z /p 2 F < ∆ 0 |p z |/p F . The critical size of the bound state wave function, at which the consideration fails, is the inter-vortex distance in the vortex lattice, when the wave functions on neighboring vortices overlap. The effect of squeezing of all energy levels n towards the zero energy at p z → 0 can be called the condensation of Andreev-Majorana fermions in the vortex core. The condensation leads to the divergent density of states (DoS) at small energy. In the vortex cluster with the vortex density density n V the DoS is In calculation of Eq.( According to Eq.( : the size of the wave function of the bound state ξp F /|p z | approaches the intervortex distance when |p z | ∼ p F ξ/r V . This cut-off leads to the following dependence of DoS on the intervortex distance: The result in Eq.( The phenomenon of the level condensation emerges in a superfluid/superconducting system with the symmetry protected planes in momentum space at which the superconducting gap ∆(p) = 0 (see Ref. The concentration of levels at p z → 0 and the corresponding anomaly in DoS come from the region outside the vortex cores. That is why the anomaly in DoS can be described using the Doppler shifted semiclassical spectrum E(p, r) = ( p + |∆(p)| 2 + p • v s (r), where v s (r) is the superfluid velocity of the current circulation around the vortex. As is known, in the systems with the Dirac nodal lines in the spectrum (or with the Dirac points in the 2D system) the Doppler shift effect gives rise to the √ B behavior of DoS. This work has been done during NORDITA Scientific Program "Physics of Interfaces and Layered Structures". I thank Vladimir Eltsov for discussions. The work has been supported in part by the Academy of Finland (project no. 284594), and by the facilities of the Cryohall infrastructure of Aalto University.