We report systematic 31 P-NMR study on iron (Fe)-based superconductors SrFe2(As1-xPx)2 (Sr122AsP), in which a superconducting (SC) transition temperature Tc at x=0.35 increases from Tc=26 K up to 33 K by annealing an as-grown mono-crystalline sample. The present NMR study has unraveled that Tc reaches a highest value of 33 K at x=0.35 around a quantum critical point at which antiferromagnetic (AFM) order disappears. When noting that the SC transition disappears at x=0.6 where the AFM spin fluctuations (SFs) are no longer present, we remark that the onset and increase of Tc are apparently associated with the emergence and enhancement of AFM-SFs, respectively. In the SC state, the residual density of state (RDOS) at the Fermi energy EF in the SC state becomes much smaller for the annealed sample than for the as-grown one, suggesting that some inhomogeneity and/or imperfection for the latter increases RDOS as expected for unconventional SC state with nodal gap. These findings in Sr122AsP are consistent with the unconventional s±-wave Cooper pairing state that is mediated by AFM-SFs. We also discuss other key-ingredients besides the AFM-SFs to increase Tc further. The discovery of iron (Fe)-based superconductor has triggered numerous research works on Fe-based layered compounds with various chemical composites and different blocking layers. Mono-crystalline samples of SrFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 were synthesized by self-flux method. Figures By contrast, the 1/T 1 T s for x ≤ 0.5 in Fig. where the first term is a contribution relevant with AFM-SFs at a finite wave vector with either Q AF =(0,π) or (π,0). This (1/T 1 T ) AFM significantly develops upon cooling. (1/T 1 T ) 0 is a q-independent contribution dominated by single-particle excitations near Figure As shown in Fig. Next we compare this P-substitution change in N (E F ) with those of Ba122AsP and La1111AsP as in Fig. Although K(T ) for all the samples stays constant in the normal state, (1/T 1 T )s for 0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.5 are markedly enhanced due to the development of low-energy AFM-SFs upon cooling as seen in Fig. The parameter a is a measure of the spectral weight of AFM-SFs at q=Q AF at low energies, that is, χ(Q, ω 0 )/ω 0 | ω0→0 . When a * (Ba) was evaluated from a(Ba) 7 using the ratio of (A Sr hf /A Ba hf ) 2 , the a(Sr) and a * (Ba) at x=0.35 for both the compounds are estimated to be comparable. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. The T c at x=0.35 is significantly enhanced from 26 K up to 33 K by annealing the as-grown sample. Next we deal with the annealing effect on the SC properties of Sr122AsP at x=0.35. Figure ). This distribution in T 1 may be attributed to the spatial distribution of electronic states in the vortex state. Here we assume tentatively a two-component model with T 1S and T 1L . The respective values of N S res /N 0 and N L res /N 0 are estimated to be 0.56 and 0.2 from 1/T 1S T and 1/T 1L T . Namely, the result demonstrates that the respective fractions of RDOS at 31 P site around and far from vortex cores are spatially distributed from 0.56 to 0.20. The RDOS may be largely induced in the vicinity of the vortex cores where the order parameter is remarkably depressed. We note that N L res /N 0 ∼0.2 far from the vortex cores is roughly consistent with N γe res /N 0 =0.18 estimated from the residual electronic specific heat N γe res at low T limit at zero field without the vortices. The present NMR study has unraveled that T c reaches the highest value of 33 K at x=0.35 in the presence of the enhanced AFM-SFs around QCP, and no SC transition takes place for the sample at x >0.6 without any trace of AFM-SFs. Consequently, the onset and increase of T c are apparently associated with the emergence and enhancement of AFM-SFs in the vicinity of AFM order, respectively. In this section, we discuss the relationship between the electronic states and the local lattice parameters of Fe-P n layer. Figure in LaFe(As,P/Sb)O Next we address on additional key-factor to raise T c further in Fe-based pnictides, including the extra electron-or hole-doped compounds. The role of AFM-SFs for enhancing T c has been widely recognized in various Fe-pnictides such as Ba(Fe,Co/Ni) 2 As 2 , 28,50 , Fe(Se,Te), In this context, we remark that the AFM-SFs play an important role for the onset of superconductivity in Fepnictides widely, but they are not an unique factor for reaching T c =55 K in these compounds. When noting that the highest value of T c in Fe-based pnictides occurs when the local structure is optimized with the regular FeAs 4 tetrahedron, some multiorbital-derived SFs may play an important role due to the high degeneracy of 3d orbitals. Recently, one scenario is theoretically proposed that the high-energy multiorbital-derived SFs due to the orbital degeneracy is a mediator for the sign reversal s ± -wave superconductor in high T c Fe-based pnictides. V. SUMMARY Systematic 31 P-NMR studies on the single crystallines SrFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 have revealed that the normal-state property is dominated by the development of AFM-SFs for the compound at x=0.35, but not for the compound at x=0.6 that exhibits no SC transition. We remark that the onset and increase of T c are apparently associated with the emergence and enhancement of AFM-SFs, respectively. The T c for the sample at x=0.35 is enhanced from 26 K up to 33 K by annealing the as-grown sample, resulting in the significant reduction of RDOS. The fact that the RDOS remains finite even for the annealed one indicates that the subtle impurity scattering may induce the RDOS at E F even in the very clean sample of Sr122AsP. These normal and SC properties are consistently accounted for by the s ± -wave Cooper pairing model mediated by the AFM SFs. 