We present time-of-flight neutron-scattering measurements on single crystals of La2-xBaxCuO4 (LBCO) with 0 ≤x≤ 0.095 and La2-xSrxCuO4 (LSCO) with x = 0.08 and 0.11. This range of dopings spans much of the phase diagram relevant to high temperature cuprate superconductivity, ranging from insulating, three dimensional (3D) commensurate long range antiferromagnetic order, for x ≤ 0.02, to two dimensional (2D) incommensurate antiferromagnetism co-existing with superconductivity for x ≥ 0.05. Previous work on lightly doped LBCO with x = 0.035 showed a clear resonant enhancement of the inelastic scattering coincident with the low energy crossings of the highly dispersive spin excitations and quasi-2D optic phonons. The present work extends these measurements across the phase diagram and shows this enhancement to be a common feature to this family of layered quantum magnets. Furthermore we show that the low temperature, low energy magnetic spectral weight is substantially larger for samples with non-superconducting ground states relative to any of the samples with superconducting ground states. Spin gaps, suppression of low energy magnetic spectral weight as a function of decreasing temperature, are observed in both superconducting LBCO and LSCO samples, consistent with previous observations for superconducting LSCO. There are several important similarities between different families of high temperature superconductors, which can also be common to certain low temperature superconductors The 214 family of cuprate superconductors is the original family of high temperature superconductors to be discovered Both LBCO and LSCO lose their three dimensional commensurate (3D C) antiferromagnetic (AF) order quickly on doping with holes at finite x Independent of whether the AF order is C or IC, the quasi-2D spin excitations are known to be centered on two dimensional magnetic zone centers (2DMZCs), which are wave-vectors of the form ( 1 2 , 1 2 , L), and equivalent wave-vectors. This notation implies a pseudotetragonal unit cell that is both convenient and appropriate given the relatively small orthorhombicity present in these materials In this paper, we extend these and related time-offlight neutron scattering measurements to other dopings in the LBCO and LSCO family, including several samples with sufficiently high doping to have superconducting ground states. These results show that the same phenomenology of resonant enhancement of the magnetic spectral weight at the low energy crossings of the very dispersive spin excitations with the weakly dispersive optic phonons, primarily at ∼ 15 and 19 meV, is a common feature across the phase diagram studied, from x = 0 to x = 0.11. We further show a common form for the energy dependence of χ (Q, hω) across this series at low temperatures, with non-superconducting samples showing greater weight at relatively low energies only, compared with samples with superconducting ground states. We also present evidence for a suppression of the low energy magnetic scattering within the superconducting ground state relative to the same scattering within the higher temperature normal state for both LBCO and LSCO. We interpret these results as the formation of superconducting spin gaps, consistent with previous reports for LSCO. High-quality single crystals of La 2-x (Sr, Ba) x CuO 4 were grown by floating zone image furnace techniques using a four-mirror optical furnace. The growths followed the protocols already reported for the nonsuperconducting samples LBCO samples at low doping, x ≤ 0.05, such that they possess non-superconducting ground states, display orthorhombic crystal structures with space group Bmab 27,28 at all temperatures measured in these ex-periments. At higher doping, x > 0.05, such that both LBCO and LSCO samples possess superconducting ground states, both orthorhombic and tetragonal crystal structures are observed over the temperature ranges measured Neutron scattering measurements were performed using the ARCS and SEQUOIA time-of-flight chopper spectrometers, which are both located at the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory SEQUOIA was used to measure the x = 0 and 0.05 LBCO samples. In these measurements, we employed SEQUOIA's 700 meV high flux chopper to select the incident neutron energy, 60 meV, resulting in an energy resolution at the elastic position of ∼ 1 meV. Measurements swept out 141 degrees of single crystal sample rotation, collected in 1 degree steps. Measurements at ARCS were performed on the LBCO x = 0.035 and 0.095 and both LSCO samples. Here we employed ARCS' 100 meV chopper single crystal sample rotation in one degree steps. All data reduction and analysis for this work were carried out using Mantid 37 and Horace 38 , as appropriate. Our time-of-flight neutron data sets span all four dimensions of energy-reciprocal space. As a result, in order to view projections of the scattering in different scattering planes, we must integrate about out-of-plane directions, as appropriate. Scattering planes, or so-called slices, are obtained by integrating the master data set about two out-of-plane directions. Constant-energy or constant-Q cuts are obtained by integration of the master data set about three directions We first present energy vs. HH maps of the scattering for all the single crystals measured at base cryostat temperature, which are between 5 and 7 K. These maps are obtained by integrating from -0.1 to 0.1 in H H and from -4 to 4 in L, and are presented in Fig. From Fig. Common to all six maps in Fig. We now turn to constant energy slices of the HK plane in Fig. Consider first the left column of Fig. Turning to the HK slices at 19 meV, shown in the right column of Fig. Figure Taken together, Figs. 1-3 show consistent phenomenology across the underdoped region of the 214 cuprate phase diagram, out to almost x = 1 8 . We now focus on a quantitative analysis of the energy dependence of the spectral weight emanating from the 2DMZCs and the resonant enhancement of this spectral weight coincident with crossings of the spin excitations and low-lying optic phonons, as previously reported for LBCO with x = 0.035 where is commonly referred to as the Bose factor 46 . To compare the dynamic susceptibility appropriately, one must remove background contributions to the scattered intensity. We employ the same form of background subtraction as was previously used for LBCO, x = 0.035 We focus on the lowest 2 ) position, and employ a relatively wide integration in L, from -4 to 4, so as to effectively capture the quasi-2D scattering. We also compare data sets taken on ARCS only, as there are four such data sets that span the key range of the 214 cuprate phase diagram, and these allow us the most "like-with-like" comparison of our data sets. Figure Figure ), while open symbol data sets correspond to data from Q = (-5 2 , - . Error bars represent one standard deviation. superconducting ground state, x = 0.035, agrees with the other samples very well above ∼ 12 meV, but shows enhanced magnetic spectral weight at energies below ∼ 12 meV. The overall phenomenology is clear; the integrated dynamic susceptibility, χ (Q, hω) at low temperatures is very similar for underdoped LBCO and LSCO at all doping levels measured, with the proviso that there is enhanced low energy (< 12 meV) magnetic spectral weight for the non-superconducting x = 0.035 sample. The quantitative agreement between the integrated dynamic susceptibility, χ (Q, hω) at low temperatures and below ∼ 35 meV across over such a large range of doping in both LBCO and LSCO is remarkable. Combined with the earlier observation from Figs. 1-3 that the breadth in Q of the enhancements track with the incommensuration about the 2DMZC, while staying centred on the energies of the low lying optic phonons, we are led to an interpretation of the enhancement that depends on both the spin and phonon degrees of freedom. Such an effect would likely involve a hybridization of quasi-2D spin degrees of freedom with optic phonons, as opposed to a solely magnetic origin. As was done previously for LBCO x = 0.035 Finally, we address the issue of whether or not a spin gap, a suppression in the magnetic spectral weight at low energies, occurs in underdoped LBCO and LSCO on reducing temperature and entering the superconducting state. As can be seen in Fig. In this context, a spin gap is identified as excess integrated dynamic susceptibility, χ (Q, hω), occurring at low energies in the higher temperature normal state, as compared to the lower temperature superconducting state. While the effect of the spin gap is subtle, our data is consistent with a spin gap of ∼ 8 meV for x = 0.11, falling to ∼ 2 meV or lower for x = 0.08. Presumably, the spin gap energy should fall to zero at the low x onset of superconductivity in these families, which is x = 0.05. We note that the superconducting spin gap we observe in LBCO x = 0.095 is similar but ∼ 1 meV lower than that displayed in LSCO x = 0.11. Our results show consistency between the LBCO and LSCO families, as expected as their physical properties are so similar. The observation of a spin gap in LBCO resolves a long-standing puzzle that LBCO had not previously shown a spin gap, while LSCO had We have carried out comprehensive inelastic neutron scattering measurements using single crystal sample rotation and time of flight techniques on samples of the underdoped 214 cuprate superconductors, LBCO and LSCO, for doping levels between x = 0 and x = 0.11. All of these samples show a resonant enhancement of the inelastic spectral weight at 2DMZCs and at energies which correspond to crossings of the highly dispersive spin excitations with weakly dispersive optic phonons. These results are quantitatively similar to those previously reported for non-superconducting LBCO with x = 0.035, but which are now extended well into the superconducting part of the LBCO and LSCO phase diagrams. This enhancement is therefore a generic property of these families of quasi two dimensional, single layer copper oxides. While it is possible that the enhanced spectral weight as a function of energy at 2DMZCs is a purely magnetic effect, as was postulated earlier for LSCO with x = 0.085 and 0.016 If the requirements for this resonant enhancement are indeed dispersive spin excitations and quasi-two dimensional optic phonons capable of coupling strongly to the spin degrees of freedom, then we do expect this same phenomenology to persist across the copper oxide phase diagram, to samples with superconducting ground states, as we are reporting. This opens up the very real possibility that such an enhancement should exist in other families of high T C oxides, and the more speculative possibility that such a hybridized spin-phonon excitation plays a role in superconducting pairing. We further show that the quantitative form of the low temperature, integrated dynamic susceptibility, χ (Q, hω) at the 2DMZC is very similar as a function of doping, at least out to x = 0.11 in both LBCO and LSCO. The main changes that occur on doping is the suppression of magnetic spectral weight for energies less than ∼ 12 meV at low, non-superconducting dopings compared with higher, superconducting dopings and the development of a superconducting spin gap for x > 0.05 for both LBCO and LSCO.