We present a planar qubit design based on a superconducting circuit that we call concentric transmon. While employing a straightforward fabrication process using Al evaporation and lift-off lithography, we observe qubit lifetimes and coherence times in the order of 10 μs. We systematically characterize loss channels such as incoherent dielectric loss, Purcell decay and radiative losses. The implementation of a gradiometric SQUID loop allows for a fast tuning of the qubit transition frequency and therefore for full tomographic control of the quantum circuit. Due to the large loop size, the presented qubit architecture features a strongly increased magnetic dipole moment as compared to conventional transmon designs. This renders the concentric transmon a promising candidate to establish a site-selective passive direct Ẑ coupling between neighboring qubits, being a pending quest in the field of quantum simulation. Quantum bits based on superconducting circuits are leading candidates for constituting the basic building block of a prospective quantum computer. A common element of all superconducting qubits is the Josephson junction. The nonlinearity of Josephson junctions generates an anharmonic energy spectrum in which the two lowest energy states can be used as the computational basis In this paper, we present the design and characterization of a superconducting quantum circuit comprising a concentric transmon qubit The schematic circuit diagram of the concentric transmon is depicted in Fig. We operate the device at a fundamental qubit transition frequency ω q /2π = 6.85 GHz, away from any flux sweet spot and far detuned from the readout resonator to reduce Purcell dissipation. The Josephson energy E J /h = 29 GHz dominates the charging energy E C /h = 0.24 GHz, yielding E J /E C = 120. This assures the circuit to be inherently insensitive to charge noise and features an intrinsic self-biasing Since coherence is relaxation limited, T 2 ≤ 2T 1 , taking effort in increasing T 1 typically results in an increase in T 2 . To accomplish this, we engineered the concentric transmon to have a reduced sensitivity to its major loss channels, namely spontaneous Purcell emission, radiative dipole decay and loss due to surface defect states. Losses due to quasiparticle tunneling processes typically impose a T 1 limitation at around ∼ 1 ms 13 , having no considerable effect on the lifetime of our circuit. Relevant contributions leading to qubit decay are summarized in Tab. I. The coupling limited quality factor Q L = ω r /κ of the dispersive readout resonator at ω r /2π = 8.79 GHz is 2.1•10 3 , close to the design value. The qubit lifetime is potentially Purcell limited by spontaneous emission into modes that are nearby in frequency. Major contributions are the dispersive single-mode decay into the capacitively coupled readout resonator as well as emission into the flux bias line The multi-mode Purcell limitation due to inductive coupling of the qubit to the flux bias line of impedance Z 0 = 50 Ω is Γ 1,ind = ω 2 q M 2 /(LZ 0 ) = 1/32 μs, with M = 2.3 pH being the gradiometric mutual inductance and L = 6.3 nH the total qubit inductance. This rather stringent loss channel can be reduced further by decreasing the coupling to the flux bias line. By an analogous approach to account for Purcell decay due to capacitive coupling to the flux bias line (C c ∼ 0.1 fF), we calculate The presented values are approximations and give a rough estimate of the expected Purcell loss. A more stringent analysis would require a full 3D electromagnetic simulation of the circuit and a blackbox quantization The coplanar concentric transmon is embedded in a microstrip geometry, where the ground reference on the device side of the substrate is substituted by a backside metalization. The largest fraction of the electric field energy is stored in the substrate, and the field strength at incoherent and weakly coupled defects residing in surface and interface oxides of the sample is reduced due to an increased mode volume. Highest fields in the geometry appear in the gap between the center island and the ring of the concentric transmon within the substrate. From the vacuum energy of the transmon we extract a weighted mean electrical field strength | E| = 2.3 V/m in the surface and interface oxide of an estimated effective volume of V = 50•10 -18 m 3 . We assume a maximum defect dipole moment | d 0 | = 1.6 e Å, reported in literature As pointed out in Ref. [10], radiative loss becomes apparent for qubits with a large electric dipole moment. Radiative decay is reduced as the dipole of the mirror image, induced by the ground plane of the microstrip geometry, radiates in antiphase, leading to destructive interference. Our circular geometry brings about an additional decrease in radiated power by strongly reducing the electric dipole moment of the qubit. We analyze this by simulating the dissipated power in a conductive plane placed 1.5 mm above our geometry in the medium far field and compare the result to a conventional pad architecture. The internal quality factor of the qubit eigenmode indicates a radiative contribution of Γ -1 1,rad 100 μs. The radiative dissipation of a comparable qubit in pad geometry exceeds this value by more than an order of magnitude. The dissipative dynamics of the investigated concentric transmon is depicted in Fig. In continuous lifetime measurements, we observe temporal fluctuations in T 1 down to about 2 μs. We conjecture that this is attributed to discrete TLF dynamics of individual TLF, located in the small oxide volume at the leads to the Josephson junctions, where the electric field strength is enhanced. The spin echo dephasing time is T 2 = 10 μs, see Fig. Figure We propose the concentric transmon as a suitable candidate to establish a direct inductive Ẑ coupling between neighboring qubits. Since the area of the magnetic flux loop is large, the magnetic dipole moment of our qubit is strongly enhanced as compared to conventional transmon designs where it is typically negligible. For two concentric transmon qubits separated by 50 μm, we estimate an inductive Ẑ coupling in the range of g ind z /2π ∼ 1 MHz for an operation point where the flux dependent qubit spectrum has a large slope 25 . The mutual inductance is calculated by applying the double integral Neumann formula In conclusion, we introduced a planar tunable qubit design based on a superconducting circuit that we call concentric transmon. The observed qubit lifetimes and coherence times are in the order of 10 μs and thereby competitive with conventional transmon geometries. The qubit lifetime is Purcell limited by its readout resonator and the flux bias line. Radiative loss, which is an intrinsic loss channel to the geometry, is demonstrated to be limiting only above ∼ 100 μs, evincing the potential of the reported architecture. A major advantage of our approach is the straightforward fabrication process. We demonstrated full tomographic control of our quantum circuit and discuss the high potential of the presented qubit design for the implementation of a direct site-selective Ẑ coupling between neighboring qubits, being a pending quest in quantum simulation. The quantum circuit is mounted in an aluminum box and is cooled down to about 20 mK in a dilution refrigerator. Its sample box is enclosed in a cryoperm case a) Electronic mail: jochen.braumueller@kit.edu. for additional magnetic shielding. The base stage of the cryostat is surrounded by a radiation shield having its inner surface coated with blackbody-absorbing material to shield the sample from stray infrared radiation generating quasiparticles S1 . The schematic diagram of the measurement and microwave setup is depicted in Fig. The qubit transition frequency is adjusted by a DC current applied to the on-chip flux coil. High frequency noise is filtered at the 4 K stage with RCR type π-filters at about 25 kHz and on the base plate via an RC-element enclosed in copper powder S2 . Fast flux pulses for Ẑ control of the qubit are sent through a separate microwave line and combined with the offset current by means of a bias tee located at the base plate. The chosen attenuation in the Ẑ pulse line sets the effective electron noise temperature in the center conductor to ∼ 6 mK above the base temperature. The geometric inductance of the large loops in the concentric transmon architecture forms a notable contribu- tion to the total qubit inductance. To account for this, we derive a generalized system Hamiltonian modeling our circuit. The lumped element representation of the qubit circuit is depicted in Fig. We eliminate φ 2 using Eq. (S1) and insert in Eq. ( introducing the notation An approximate solution to Eq. (S4) can be written as which is exact when φ 1 1 or c 1. Plugging into Eq. (S1) and writing φ 1 ≡ φ, we reduce the set of equations to a single equation of motion: With the Euler-Lagrange equation we obtain the Lagrange function Employing the definitions of the Josephson energy E J = 2e I c , and the inductive energy 2Lg , the parameter c becomes Using the conjugated variable for the charge number n = C (2e) 2 φ, we arrive at the Hamiltonian with charging energy E C = e 2 /2C. and we can find the energies E 0m of transmon levels |m to be (S17) Figure The effective critical current I tot c,ef f (Φ) of both Josephson junctions is dependent on the external magnetic flux Φ, induced by the flux bias line. I tot c denotes the total critical current of the concentric transmon at the flux sweet spot, Φ = 0 and ∆Φ is a phase offset. The square root term in Eq. (S18) accounts for a relative asymmetry between the Josephson junctions S3 , specified by the parameter d = Ic,1-Ic,2 Ic,1+Ic,2 . A separate fit of the qubit spectrum indicates an asymmetry parameter of d = 0.32, causing a decrease in tunability range of the circuit. The minimum qubit frequency of the investigated sample is 6.3 GHz. Table We want to point out that the presented model may be considered as a semi-quantitative approach to model the concentric transmon circuit. Within this framework, the assumptions made and the renormalization of parameters is justified by the good agreement of measured data and simulated data with the model. To validate the microscopic analysis of defect loss contributing to qubit decay, we conduct a finite element simulation of the concentric transmon geometry. We model the sample by assuming an oxide layer thickness of 3 nm, formed by AlO x (ε r = 11.5), surrounding the central island and the concentric ring electrode of the qubit. For the interface between substrate and aluminum we assume an effective dielectric constant of r = 6, accounting for the contribution of SiO 2 (ε r = 4) in the interface oxide. The simulation yields an electric field energy fraction of 2.8 • 10 -4 residing in the oxide volume. With a phenomenological loss tangent S4 δ AlOx = 3 • 10 -3 of AlO x , this leads to a total effective loss tangent of δ T LF = 8.4 • 10 -7 attributed to dissipation by surface and interface oxide defects. Due to errors in δ AlOx , the oxide layer thickness and ε r , this value is to be considered exact within a factor of two. δ T LF can be calculated to limit T 1 at Γ -1 1,T LF = 28 μs which is in good agreement with the microscopically extracted value for ω q /2π = 6.85 GHz. In the same spirit we can extract a relative electric field energy ratio in the silicon substrate of 0.92. With an intrinsic silicon loss tangent δ Si < 1 • 10 -7 , dissipation in the substrate can be neglected. This small value is suggested for instance by very high quality factors measured for TiN resonators on intrinsic silicon S5 . Purcell defects radiation reciprocal sum Γ -1 1,sm Γ -1 1,ind Γ -1 1,cap Γ -1 1,T LF Γ -1 1,rad Γ -1 Σ