The European Research Council has recently funded HOLMES, a project with the aim of performing a calorimetric measurement of the electron neutrino mass measuring the energy released in the electron capture decay of 163 Ho. The baseline for HOLMES are microcalorimeters coupled to Transition Edge Sensors (TESs) read-out with rf-SQUIDs, for microwave multiplexing purposes. A promising alternative solution is based on superconducting microwave resonators, that have undergone rapid development in the last decade. These detectors, called Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors (MKIDs), are inherently multiplexed in the frequency domain and suitable for even larger-scale pixel arrays, with theoretical high energy resolution and fast response. The aim of our activity is to develop arrays of microresonator detectors for X-ray spectroscopy and suitable for the calorimetric measurement of the energy spectra of 163 Ho. Superconductive multilayer films composed by a sequence of pure Titanium and stoichiometric TiN layers show many ideal properties for MKIDs, such as low loss, large sheet resistance, large kinetic inductance, and tunable critical temperature T c . We developed Ti/TiN multilayer microresonators with T c within the range from 70 mK to 4.5 K and with good uniformity. In this contribution, we present the design solutions adopted, the fabrication processes, and the characterization results. The HOLMES In addition to the HOLMES experiment, there are currently two other experimental activities aiming at measuring the neutrino mass using the EC decay of 163 Ho: NuMECS Recent high-precision Penning-trap measurements 3 set the 163 Ho EC Q-value at 2833 eV. This means for HOLMES a 90% confidence level statistical neutrino mass sensitivity greater than 1 eV TESs with SQUID read-out demonstrate their scalability to large arrays in several applications by using different multiplexing techniques: Time Division (TDM) An alternative solution to realize large-pixel arrays with a large-multiplexing factor is based on MKIDs detectors. The natural multiplexing capability of a MKID in the frequency domain allows to read-out up to thousand detectors using a single pair of coaxial cables and a single HEMT amplifier. Comparing the same number of pixels of rf-SQUID coupled TESs, MKIDs use simpler cryogenics and read-out schemes since they do not need the bias and the ramp modulation lines. Besides, MKIDs do not require the use of SQUIDs, and are built as single or few layers of superconducting thin film, simplifying the fabrication process. MKIDs have demonstrated their scalability in several experiments. The running experiment ARCONS employs 2024 MKID pixels MKIDs are a cryogenic detector technology proposed for the first time in 2003 The thermal mode is a variation on the MKID classical way of operation that has generated interest in recent years. As demonstrated in Gao et al. where k is the Boltzmann constant, C the heat capacity of the absorber, and T the bath temperature. Considering the intrinsic properties of a metal absorber (i.e. Gold) 200 × 200 μm 2 wide and 2 μm thick working at T = 50 mK, it is possible to have resolution around 1 eV at 6 keV. A recent work demonstrated an encouraging preliminary energy resolution of 75 eV at 6 keV For both the operating modes, the time resolution depends on the resonance frequency ( f r ) and quality factor (Q) of the resonators. Designing a quality factor around Q 10 4 corresponds to a resonator response time of τ r = Q/π f 0 which sets the rise time of the detector. Considering individual microresonator frequencies distributed in the (1 ÷ 6) GHz range, rise time around 1μs or less is achievable. The goal of our R&D activity is to realize superconducting microresonator arrays with energy and time resolution around 1 eV and 1 μs respectively, suitable for next generation neutrino mass measurement experiments. To achieve this goal, we are studying and testing different design geometries, and we are optimizing the sensor fabrication. To date we have produced two different families of chips with two different critical temperatures: films with high T c to study the athermal mode and films with low T c to study the thermal mode. As high T c we targeted a value around 1.5 K in order to have slower recombination time, with respect stoichiometric TiN film (T c = 4.5 K), and a low energy gap, more than 3 times less than the Tantalum one (∆ = 0.67 meV). As low T c we targeted a value around 500 mK in order to maximize the variation of the resonance frequency shift ∆ f r as a function of the temperature. In this work, we present a preliminary production of Ti/TiN multilayer microresonator 2 × 8 pixel arrays with not implemented absorbers. Since it was the first time we tried to realize multilayers with very low critical temperatures, the aim of this fabrication run was to validate the production processes and the correct behavior as resonators. Superconducting microresonators without absorber are not able to resolve a monochromatic energy, as also reported in our previous work The main important requirements for our superconducting films are a very low transition temperature (T c 500 mK) for the thermal mode and an energy gap 3 -4 times lower than the Tantalum energy gap for the athermal mode. These requirements can be satisfied by employing microresonators built in Ti/TiN multilayer technology The produced chips were placed in a dilution fridge (Oxford MX 40) and cooled down to temperatures as low as 100 mK. For each resonator, we estimated the critical temperature (T c ), the resonance frequency ( f 0 ) and the quality factor (Q i ) by measuring and fitting the forward transmission S 21 as a function of the temperature, figure To evaluate the noise of the produced resonators, we acquired long baselines and performed a rejection trigger to avoid pulse events. The trigger threshold was set just above the noise maximum value. The obtained spectra were compared with the expected noise caused by the HEMT amplifier. In all the cases, the noise resulted to be limited by the HEMT, with an excess noise observed at low frequency. The shape of the low frequency noise does not change when varying the temperature (figure We fabricated and characterized superconducting films in two different families measuring all the relevant parameters. Results prove that the superconductive transition for Ti/TiN multilayers can be tuned in the temperature range from 70 mK to 4.6 K by choosing properly the Ti and TiN thicknesses with a good reproducibility and uniformity. The high T c devices satisfied all the design requirements except for a low kinetic inductance fraction α, probably due to a not optimized design geometries. The low T c devices presented a steeper variation of the resonant frequency as a function of the temperature, as required for the thermal mode, but lower internal quality factors. At last, the measured rise time was close to the designed value of 1 μs for both the families. Considering these results, the future plans are the optimization of the microresonator geometry in order to improve the kinetic inductance fraction also in case of high T c and, since the internal quality factor worsens with lower critical temperature, to find a compromise between the resonant frequency variation and internal quality factor in the case of low T c device. Finally, the absorber coupled microresonator will be implemented. and as a function of the temperature (left) 