Evolutionary algorithms (EA) coupled with Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations have been used to predict the most stable hydrides of phosphorous (PHn, n = 1 -6) at 100, 150 and 200 GPa. At these pressures phosphine is unstable with respect to decomposition into the elemental phases, as well as PH2 and H2. Three metallic PH2 phases were found to be dynamically stable and superconducting between 100-200 GPa. One of these contains five formula units in the primitive cell and has C2/m symmetry (5FU-C2/m). It is comprised of 1D periodic PH3-PH-PH2-PH-PH3 oligomers. Two structurally related phases consisting of phosphorous atoms that are octahedrally coordinated by four phosphorous atoms in the equatorial positions and two hydrogen atoms in the axial positions (I4/mmm and 2FU-C2/m) were the most stable phases between ∼160-200 GPa. Their superconducting critical temperatures (Tc) were computed as being 70 and 76 K, respectively, via the Allen-Dynes modified McMillan formula and using a value of 0.1 for the Coulomb pseudopotential, μ * . Our results suggest that the superconductivity recently observed by Drozdov, Eremets and Troyan when phosphine was subject to pressures of 207 GPa in a diamond anvil cell may result from these, and other, decomposition products of phosphine. The pressure variable can be used to synthesize materials with unique stoichiometries, and properties that would not be accessible otherwise Recently, new exciting experiments have revealed that pressure-induced high-temperature superconductivity may be found in other hydrides of a p-block element. Drozdov, Eremets and Troyan measured superconductivity in phosphine, PH 3 , which was liquefied in a diamond anvil cell and subsequently compressed A priori crystal structure prediction calculations were carried out using the open-source evolutionary algorithm (EA) XTALOPT Release 8 and 9 Geometry optimizations and electronic structure calculations were performed by using density functional theory as implemented in the Vienna Ab-Initio Simulation Package (VASP) versions 5.2 and 5.4.1 Phonon calculations were performed using the Quantum Espresso (QE) where ω log is the logarithmic average frequency and μ * is the renormalized Coulomb potential, often assumed to be between 0.1 and 0.2. PHn: Pressure Induced Decomposition of PH3 Because the phases that PH 3 adopts under pressure are unknown, we have carried out evolutionary searches to predict the global minima configurations up to 200 GPa. A detailed analysis will be published elsewhere, but the coordinates for the most stable structures found at P ≥ 100 GPa are provided in the SI. Briefly, the 100 GPa phase is made up of layers of PH and hydrogen, whereas the 150 and 200 GPa structures consist of 1-dimensional (1D) PH 3 -PH 3 networks that resemble those present in the most stable PH 2 structure at 100 GPa discussed below. The computed enthalpies of formation, ∆H f , of PH 3 with respect to the most stable structures of solid hydrogen 2 )H 2 + PH 3 (where n = 3 -6), as shown in the left and right hand sides of Fig. Fig. Above ∼160 GPa two structurally related PH 2 phases, 2FU-C2/m (Fig. In both the C2/m and I4/mmm phases of PH 2 each phosphorous is octahedrally coordinated by four phosphorous atoms in the equatorial positions, and two hydrogen atoms in the axial positions. The difference between the two structures is that whereas in I4/mmm all of the atoms assume the ideal octahedral angles, in 2FU-C2/m the hydrogens are canted with respect to a line that lies normal to the phosphorous square net. At 100 GPa the canting angle is negligible (<0.1 • ), and the P-P and P-H bond lengths in the two structures are nearly identical (Table Similar to 5FU-C2/m, regions of high ELF in 2FU-C2/m and I4/mmm are found only along the P-P and P-H bonds and the Bader charges in Table I are indicative of charge transfer from phosphorous to hydrogen. Both of these phases are good metals with g(E F )= 0.045-0.048 eV -1 /valence electron at 200 GPa, which is close to the value computed for a free electron gas with the same bandwidth, 0.054 eV -1 /valence electron. Their DOS plots display many features in common with the DOS calculated for 5FU-C2/m: they are indicative of H/P hybridization and the character at the Fermi level is primarily hydrogen s-like, with substantial contributions from phosphorous p-states. Phonon calculations revealed that these two structures are dynamically stable at 100, 150, and 200 GPa. Because of the structural similarity between the 2FU-C2/m and I4/mmm phases, we wondered if they may be connected via a low energy pathway. The NEB method was employed to find the barrier and transition state between the two structures. The computed barrier was ∼270 meV/atom at 200 GPa, implying that these phases likely lie within two distinct wells on the potential energy surface. The transition state (whose coordinates are given in the SI) can best be de-scribed as the average of the two PH 2 phases. Within the NEB method, the positions of the individual atoms within the starting and ending structures must match as closely as possible to avoid large geometric changes that may result in unrealistic barriers. In order to do this the I4/mmm structure has to be reduced down to its primitive triclinic cell and then a 2 FU supercell in the crystallographic b-direction direction must be constructed. In the transition state structure the perfect 90 • square phosphorus nets described above have been distorted to diamonds with internal angles of 67 and 113 • resulting in nearest and second nearest neighbor P-P distances of 1.885 and 2.581 Å (c.f. Table We also wondered if tilting the octahedra to different angles would yield other structures not found in our evolutionary runs whose enthalpies were similar to I4/mmm and C2/m. In order to test this hypothesis we relaxed structures constructed to have canting angles of 45 • , as well as geometries where hydrogen atoms were placed at random positions within the phosphorous lattice at 200 GPa. No unique low enthalpy structures were found. In addition, a closer inspection of the evolutionary runs showed that structures similar to those we constructed by hand had been generated and optimized during the EA searches, but their enthalpies were significantly higher than 5FU-C2/m, 2FU-C2/m and I4/mmm PH 2 . Because the ZPE may be large for extended systems containing light elements, we computed the enthalpic differences between these three PH 2 phases including the ZPE corrections at pressures where they were dynamically stable. The open symbols in Fig. Above 5 GPa superconductivity has been observed in black phosphorous, the most stable allotrope at ambient conditions. The experimentally measured T c depends on the path taken in the pressure/temperature phase diagram. Recent experiments, and DFT calculations using the Allen-Dynes modified McMillan equation, both showed that for the simple cubic phase of phosphorous T c decreases with increasing pressure How would the incorporation of H atoms within the phosphorus lattices, in the most stable PH 2 geometries, affect the ω log , λ and T c ? To answer this question we computed the superconducting properties of the previously discussed PH 2 phases, at pressures where they were found to be dynamically stable, and the results are given in Table Because of the structural similarities between C2/m and I4/mmm at 150 GPa, their critical temperatures should be nearly identical, and T c was calculated as being 51 K for the I4/mmm structure. The aforementioned canting of the octahedra results in geometric changes between these two structures at higher pressures, which could potentially affect the superconducting properties. Indeed, at 200 GPa the electron phonon coupling of I4/mmm was calculated as being somewhat larger than for C2/m, but ω log was nearly 175 K larger for C2/m because the vibrational modes arising primarily from hydrogen atoms are, on average, found at higher frequencies in this phase. The canting results in a larger number of hydrogen atoms that are found within a distance of 2 Å of a given hydrogen in C2/m, thereby increasing the frequencies associated with their vibrations. For example, whereas I4/mmm has four H-H distances at 1.486 Å, in C2/m the H-H measures are 1×1.497 Å, 1×1.507 Å, 2×1.585 Å, and 2×1.775 Å. Because of the opposing effects of ω log and λ on the critical temperature, the T c values computed for the C2/m (76 K) and I4/mmm (70 K) phases at 200 K are very similar despite their structural differences. At 200 GPa the most significant contribution to λ in the 2FU-C2/m and I4/mmm PH 2 systems stems from vibrational modes between 500-1750 cm -1 that involve hydrogen and phosphorus motions. The electron phonon coupling arising from modes above 1750 cm -1 , which consist primarily of the motion of hydrogen atoms with a small share from the phosphorous atoms, are also substantial components of the total λ. Vibrations below 500 cm -1 , which are the result of phosphorus motions, play a small, but non-negligible role in the electron-phonon coupling. The computed T c of the PH 2 phases are significantly larger than for monoatomic phosphorus because hydrogen increases both ω log and λ. The electron phonon coupling is in-line with the values typically computed for compressed hydrogen-rich phases, 0.5-1.6 The superconducting critical temperatures we compute for the I4/mmm and 2FU-C2/m phases of PH 2 are somewhat lower than the experimentally measured value of 103 K at 207 GPa The decrease in T c with pressure of all of the PH 2 phases considered herein correlates with the markedly lower critical temperature, 30 K, measured by Drozdov and co-workers at 83 GPa. In future work we will focus on predicting the structures of PH n phases at pressures where vdW interactions may be important, and interrogate their bonding and superconducting properties. Recent experiments revealed that when PH 3 is compressed to 207 GPa, it becomes superconducting below 103 K Two PH 2 structures with C2/m and I4/mmm symmetry were computed to have a superconducting critical temperature, T c , of 76 K and 70 K, respectively, at 200 GPa. Between 150-200 GPa the non-ZPE (zero point energy) corrected enthalpies of these phases differed by only a few meV/atom, and their structures both consisted of square nets of phosphorous atoms. In the I4/mmm structure the phosphorous atoms were octahedrally coordinated, with two hydrogen atoms in the axial positions. In the C2/m phase the hydrogens are slightly canted from the ideal octahedral angles allowing the distance between the planes of phosphorous atoms to decrease, and reducing the volume of the structure. A five formula unit phase with C2/m symmetry (5FU-C2/m), which consists of 1-D PH 3 -PH-PH 2 -PH-PH 3 oligomers, was also identified in our evolutionary searches, and it has the lowest non-ZPE corrected enthalpy at 100 GPa. At this pressure it's T c is computed to be 49 K. Upon decreasing the pressure, the T c of all of the PH 2 phases decreased. Our results provide another example of how pressure can lead to the formation of compounds with stoichiometries and properties that would not be predicted based upon our experience at 1 atm. Comparison of the observables computed for these PH 2 phases with results obtained experimentally will unveil which phase, or mixture of phases, give rise to the superconducting properties observed by Drozdov and coworkers Supplementary Information Available: Details of the structure searches, band structures, structural parameters, DOS plots, phonon DOS plots, absolute energies in Hartree, phonon convergence plots, and Nudged Elastic Band results. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.