While strong topological insulators (STI) have been experimentally realized soon after their theoretical predictions, a weak topological insulator (WTI) has yet to be unambiguously confirmed. A major obstacle is the lack of distinct natural cleavage surfaces to test the surface selective hallmark of WTI. With a new scheme, we discover that Bi4X4 (X=Br, I), stable or synthesized before, can be WTI with two natural cleavage surfaces, where two anisotropic Dirac cones stabilize and annihilate, respectively. We further find four surface state Lifshitz transitions under charge doping and two bulk topological phase transitions under uniaxial strain. Near the WTI-STI transition, there emerges a novel Weyl semimetal phase, in which the Fermi arcs generically appear at both cleavage surfaces whereas the Fermi circle only appears at one selected surface. The discovery of topological insulators We propose to realize the WTI in a van der Waals (vdW) material that is a periodic stack of one dimensional atomic chains. Such a WTI possesses two natural cleavage planes, enabling respective observations of stabilization and annihilation of distinct surface Dirac cones. We discover that β-Bi 4 X 4 (X=I, Br) can be such a class of WTI. Markedly, with a chemical formula as simple as the prototype STI Bi 2 X 3 (X=Se, Te), β-Bi 4 X 4 (X=I, Br) are real crystalline solids rather than artificial periodic heterostructures. β-Bi 4 I 4 has been successfully grown as a large crystal before Both Bi 4 I 4 and Bi 4 Br 4 have stable α and β phases. The two phases crystallize in the same monoclinic space group C 3 2h (C2/m), and differ only in the way their building blocks are stacked We employ the HSE hybrid functional method [24], which is believed to be more sophisticated and accurate than the GGA and LDA methods, to carry out our density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the electronic band structures of β-Bi 4 I 4 and β-Bi 4 Br 4 . The vdW corrections We now study the band structure of β-Bi 4 Br 4 , which share evident similarities to the case of β-Bi 4 I 4 . However, the band inversion occurs at both M and L points in β-Bi 4 Br 4 , as shown in Figs. The (100) surface states of β-Bi 4 Br 4 also exhibit prominent anisotropy, for the reasons that we have discussed above. The direction with the much larger Fermi velocity is along b, in which the atomic chains are aligned. Moreover, the two surface Dirac points at Ḡ and Ā are at different energies. These two features enrich the Fermi surface topology of the (100) surface states. Fig. We note by passing that, in sharp contrast to the case of β phase, both α-Bi 4 I 4 and α-Bi 4 Br 4 are normal insulators (NI) We now construct an effective model for the β phases. The time-reversal-invariant M and L points have the little group C 3 2h with two independent symmetries, spatial inversion P = τ z and mirror reflection M y = iσ y . Here τ and σ are the orbital and spin Pauli matrices. By convention we choose the time-reversal operator T = iKσ y with K the complex conjugation. Given the three symmetries, to the linear order the k • p Hamiltonians near L and M may be written as [29] where i refers to the M or L point, v are the velocities, c is the energy offset, and m is the energy gap with m < 0 denoting an inverted gap. For β-Bi 4 I 4 only m M is negative; for β-Bi 4 Br 4 both m M and m L are negative. With Eq. ( where λ ij are deformation potentials, and δH i 0 is a rigid shift of all bands with a form similar to that in the parentheses. Clearly, applying strain along the a, b, or c axis would change the direct gaps and hence the band inversions at the M and L points. Moreover, the direct gaps should exhibit linear dependence on the small strain, and the inversion symmetry is respected in the deformation. It follows that the topological phase transitions among NI, STI, and WTI can be tuned by the uniaxial strain in β-Bi 4 X 4 (X=I, Br). This prediction can be verified by our DFT calculations In the presence of both P and T symmetries, all bands are doubly degenerate and a Dirac point accounts for the NI-STI trainsition. The Dirac point is unstable unless there is a symmetry protection One may wonder whether β-Bi 4 I 4 and β-Bi 4 Br 4 are TCIs β-Bi 4 X 4 (X=I, Br) can be prototype WTI and offer a new platform for exploring exotic physics with simple chemistry. In addition to the strain-induced topological phase transitions and CWSM phase, the two (100) surface states is particularly appealing, e.g., the spin texture, the Landau level crossing, and the exciton condensation triggered by the nesting of the electron and hole pockets. In the thin-film QSHI limit, the small velocity along the a or c axis can be utilized to study the helical Luttinger liquid Finally, WTI have been proved to be strong against disorder Our DFT calculations are performed using the projector augmented wave method implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) In studying the surface states, we first use the bulk DFT results and the Wannier90 code Under strain, the atomic positions are allowed to be optimized until the force on every ion is less than 0.01 eV/ Å by employing the vdW corrections 