We report the impact of Ni doping on superconductivity of PdTe superconductor. The superconducting parameters like critical temperature (T c ), upper critical field (H c2 ) and normalized specific-heat jump (C/γT c ) are reported for Ni doped Pd 1-x Ni x Te. The samples of series Pd 1-x Ni x Te with nominal compositions x=0, .01, 0.05, 0.07, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3 and 1.0 are synthesized via solid state reaction route. All the studied samples of series Pd 1-x Ni x Te (x = 0.0 to 1.0) are crystallized in hexagonal crystal structure within the space group P6 3 /mmc. Unit cell volume shrinks almost linearly upon Ni doping in Pd 1-x Ni x Te. The normal state residual resistivity increases with Ni substitution on Pd site. Both the electrical resistivity and magnetic measurements revealed that T c decreases with increase of Ni concentration in Pd 1- x Ni x Te and is not observed down to 2K for x=0.30 i.e., 30% of Ni doping at Pd site. Interestingly, this is unusual for magnetic Ni doping in a known type-II BCS type superconductor. Magnetic Ni must suppress the superconductivity much faster. Interestingly, the isothermal magnetization measurements for NiTe revealed that Ni is non-magnetic in Pd 1- x Ni x Te structure and hence the T c depression is mainly due to disorder. The magnetotransport measurements revealed that flux is better pinned for 20% Ni doped PdTe as compared to other compositions of Pd 1-x Ni x Te. The magnetic field dependence of specific heat of Pd 1-x Ni x Te for x=0.01 was studied and the estimated value of the normalized specificheat jump, C/γT c , is found to be 1.42, which is under BCS weak-coupling limit. Summarily, we report the impact of Ni doping in Pd 1-x Ni x Te superconductor and conclude that Ni substitutes at Pd site, suppress superconductivity moderately and is of non magnetic nature in this system. To best of our knowledge this is the first study on Ni substitution in PdTe superconductor. The discovery of new superconductors always attracted enormous interest from both experimental and theoretical condensed matter physics community. For the meantime, the already discovered superconductors keep on motivating to understand the underlying physics of them. For example, the impact of magnetic impurities in known superconductors has been of great interest for a long time. Adding magnetic impurity to a superconductor does provide an avenue to induce interesting new class of matter and to probe the fundamental mechanism of exotic ground states of strongly correlated electron materials Recently, a new superconductor PdTe came into existence in both single crystal and bulk polycrystalline form As far as the coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism is concerned, there is so far no one theory detailing the interaction between superconducting and magnetic order parameters. In some experimental reports, it has been suggested that the T c decreases linearly with increasing magnetic impurity concentration in superconducting systems Keeping in view, the wider interest of the condensed matter physics community in doping of magnetic impurities in known superconductors, here, we report on synthesis and characterisation of series samples of Pd The bulk Polycrystalline Pd 1-x Ni x Te (x=0, .01, 0.05, 0.07, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3 and 1.0) samples were synthesized by the solid state route via vacuum encapsulations. The essential elements Pd (99.9%-3N), Te (99.99%-4N) and Ni (99.99%-4N) from Sigma Aldrich are mixed in a stoichiometric ratio in an argon filled glove box and then pelletized by applying uniaxial stress of 100kg cm -2 . The pellets sealed in an evacuated (<10 -3 Torr) quartz tubes were kept in a furnace for heating at 750°C at a rate of 2°C min -1 for 24hours. The obtained samples were dense and shiny black. For different physical property measurements, the samples were broken into desired pieces. For the structural analysis we have used a Rigaku xray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation of 1.5418Å. Electrical, magnetic and heat capacity (C P ) measurements were carried out on a Quantum Design (QD) Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-14Tesla)-down to 2K. Powder x-ray diffraction patterns are recorded for as prepared samples at room temperature. Figure Low temperature heat capacity under various magnetic fields for Pd 1.99 Ni 0.01 Te is shown in Figure In summary, we successfully synthesized Ni doped PdTe compounds, the XRD pattern for the Pd 1-x Ni x Te (x=0, .01, 0.05, 0.07, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3 and 1). Superconductivity (T c ) decreases with increase in Ni content and is completely disappeared at above 20% Ni doping. Interestingly, Ni is found to be of non magnetic nature in Pd 1-x Ni x Te, and hence the T c depression is mainly due to disorder alone. The H c2 (0) value for 20% Ni doped PdTe is significantly higher than the pristine PdTe sample, suggesting possible pinning. The value of the normalized specific-heat jump (C/γT c ) of 1.42 is estimated from the analysis of specific heat data of Pd 1.99 Ni 0.01 Te, suggesting a simple BCS weak-coupling limit. This is first study on Ni doping in PdTe superconductor. The authors would like to thank the Director of NPL-CSIR India for his passionate curiosity in the present work. This work is financially supported by a DAE-SRC outstanding investigator award scheme on the search for new superconductors. RG thanks UGC, India, for providing her research fellowship. PdTe PdTe-Ni1% PdTe-Ni5% PdTe-Ni7% PdTe-Ni10% PdTe-Ni15% PdTe-Ni20% PdTe-Ni30% PdTe-Ni100% (a) (-cm) PdTe PdTe-Ni1% PdTe-Ni5% PdTe-Ni7% PdTe-Ni10% PdTe-Ni15% PdTe-Ni20% 