The influence of disorder, both structural (non-diagonal) and on-site (diagonal), is studied through the inhomogeneous Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) theory in narrow-band disordered superconductors with a view towards understanding superconductivity in boron doped diamond (BDD) and borondoped nanocrystalline diamond (BNCD) films. We employ the attractive Hubbard model within the mean field approximation, including the Coulomb interaction between holes in the narrow acceptor band. We study substitutional boron incorporation in a triangular lattice, with disorder in the form of random potential fluctuations at the boron sites. The role of structural disorder was studied through non-uniform variation of the tight-binding coupling parameter where, following experimental findings, we incorporate the concurrent increase in structural disorder with increasing boron concentration. We illustrate stark differences between the effects of structural and on-site disorder and show that structural disorder has a much greater effect on the density of states, mean pairing amplitude and superfluid density than on-site potential disorder. We show that structural disorder can increase the mean pairing amplitude while the spectral gap in the density of states decreases with states eventually appearing within the spectral gap for high levels of disorder. This study illustrates how the effects of structural disorder can explain some of the features found in superconducting BDD and BNCD films such as a tendency towards saturation of the Tc with boron doping and deviations from the expected BCS theory in the temperature dependence of the pairing amplitude and spectral gap. The interplay of superconductivity and disorder close to the Anderson-Mott transition has long been of significant fundamental interest in understanding quantum phase transitions and emergent phenomena As an unconventional, disordered covalent superconductor boron doped diamond is of fundamental interest in studying the superconductor-insulator transition. Boron doped diamond is a type II superconductor, with a T c as high as 10 K Diamond is intrinsically a high band-gap insulator with a band-gap of 5.5 eV . Boron can be substitutionally incorporated in diamond, creating a deep, narrow acceptor band 0.37 eV above the valence band Photoemission studies of polycrystalline boron doped diamond have revealed a superconducting gap in the range expected for a weakly coupled Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) superconductor while the characteristic broadening of the spectra is attributed to disorder Theoretical studies employing the coherent potential approximation, with disorder in the form of a random potential at the boron sites, predict an exponentially increasing T c with boron concentration In this study, we address the role of structural and on-site disorder within the narrow boron acceptor level. We consider a triangular lattice with a single boron acceptor band employing the inhomogeneous BdG theory. Disorder is treated in the form of random potential fluctuations at the boron sites as well as structural disorder in the form of a non-uniform hopping integral in the tight-binding term between adjacent sites. The level of structural disorder is correlated to the atomic boron concentration as this disorder is expected to increase due to local changes in bond length between C -B bonds and surroungding C -C bonds. We include the Coulomb interaction between holes in the acceptor band as it is a narrow band so the effect of the Coulomb interaction needs to be recknoned with We solve a tight-binding model considering a triangular lattice, incorporating the Coulomb interaction between acceptor states within the attractive Hubbard model. We employ the mean field approximation and generate the Hamiltonian using the BdG theory. The Hamiltonian is given by where i is the potential at each site, μ i is the chemical potential at each site with c † iσ (c iσ ) being the fermion operators of creation (annihilation) at each site. The hopping integral between adjacent sites is t ij while the strength of the Coulomb interaction between adjacent sites is W ij . ∆(r i ) is the local order parameter with coordinate r i at site i and is given by ∆(r i ) = -U c i↑ c i↓ where U is the interaction strength. This Hamiltonian is rendered diagonalizable through the Bogoliubov-Valatin transformations for the fermion operators The local order parameter can then be expressed as where f (E n ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. The local occupation number is given by The resulting Hamiltonian is of the form which is diagonalized self-consistently until sufficient convergence of the order parameter. We work with a triangular lattice of 25 × 25 sites, having found this to be sufficiently large to overcome finite size effects. All energy scales were normalized to the hopping integral. The chemical potential of the boron sites (relative to the carbon sites) was determined by calculating self-consistently the chemical potential which would give the correct occupation. The local density of states is given by where N is the total number of lattice sites. The superfluid density is calculated to study the rigidity of the superconducting phase with a kinetic energy density (diamagnetic response) and paramagnetic current density The charge current density operator is given by the functional derivative The superfluid weight ρ s , defined as the superfluid density divided by mass, is then given by The average over the paramagnetic current density can be expressed, in the interaction representation, as The long-wavelength, zero frequency limit yields the superfluid weight in the direct current regime which is studied here. Using the relation H = -d 3 rj p x (r i )A(r, t) the thermodynamic average over the paramagnetic current density can be reduced to This is evaluated in the Matsubara formalism as a current-current correlation function x (q, τ )j p x (-q, 0) (14) Finally, the superfluid weight can be expressed as A. The incorporation of disorder We study two broad classes of disorder. Initially, we consider disorder in the form of random deviations in the local on-site potential energy at the boron sites only. We assume a normal distribution about some mean value which corresponds to the correct chemical potential to set the correct occupation. The full width at half maximum of the normal distribution is referred to as the disorder parameter, σ. The disorder parameter is quoted in terms of the tight binding hopping parameter, t, as all energies are normalized to this scale. We also study the case of random on-site disorder at each lattice site in order to directly compare the characteristics of on-site disorder to those of structural disorder. We then study the influence of structural disorder. We assume that bond length disorder results in changes in the tight-binding hopping integral through a deformation potential We also study a form of correlated structural disorder where the structural disorder parameter changes as the boron atomic concentration changes. Experimental studies have shown that boron incorporation in diamond and nanodiamond is accompanied by microstructural changes in the films due to slight modification of the local bonding invironment in the region of the boron impurities A. On-site potential disorder Although the upper limit of the boron doping concentration in diamond is relatively low (up to around 5 %), we focus on doping concentrations from 0 % up to 15 % to highlight the effects of disorder. The inset in Fig. Figure indicates that where the on-site energy is reduced, the pairing amplitude increases. To determine the effects of on-site disorder we study the mean pairing amplitude, spectral gap, density of states and the distribution of pairing amplitudes for different disorder parameters while the boron concentration is held fixed, initially assuming on-site potential fluctuations at the boron sites only. The on-site disorder parameter (σ) is varied from 0.5 to 1.5. Figure The spectral gap decreases with increasing disorder however the overall change is not very large, as illustrated in Fig. The density of states (Fig. Figure We then assume that there are on-site potential fluctuations at all sites in the lattice, as opposed to only where boron is incorporated. Figure We now study the effects of structural disorder in the form of a random distribution of the tight-binding hopping parameter (non-diagonal disorder) about a constant mean value for all lattice sites in the absence of on-site disorder. We assume that the structural disorder parameter (σ) can increase either linearly, exponentially or inverse exponentially as shown in Fig. Figure FIG. To illuminate the influence of structural disorder, we study the mean pairing amplitude, the distribution of pairing amplitudes, the spectral gap and the density of states while the boron concentration is fixed at 15 % and the structural disorder parameter is varied (assuming no on-site disorder). Figure The distribution of local pairing amplitudes (Fig. In this section structural disorder is combined with onsite disorder while the Coulomb interaction parameter is finite (W = 3t). The variation of the mean pairing amplitude as a function of the boron concentration for different cases of linear, exponential and inverse exponential disorder with boron concentration is shown in Fig. Figure We study some cases of the mean field phase diagram to compare with the experimental phase diagrams. The temperature dependence of the mean pairing amplitude is shown for different cases of both on-site and structural disorder in Fig. considerably smaller in the case of structural disorder. To illustrate the fundamental difference between the nature of on-site and structural disorder, we show the DOS at different temperatures from T = 0 to T = t considering structural disorder only (Fig. the case of on-site disorder only, there is an intermediate flat region in the case of structural disorder, which eventually transitions to a deep V with the pseudo-gap persisting to higher temperatures in the case of structural disorder. The relative uniformity of the kinetic energy specifically in the superconducting regions illustrates the robustness of the local kinetic energy to on-site disorder. However considering only structural disorder with a disorder parameter of 0.5 (Fig. energy scale is very different to the case of on-site disorder at all sites. This reflects the more drastic changes in the kinetic energy which accompany changes in the hopping parameter and the concurrent overall increase in the kinetic energy with increasing structural disorder. Figure The variation of the structural disorder parameter with boron concentration was motivated by examining Raman studies of BNCD which show a change in the D and G peaks as the boron concentration is changed The significance of structural disorder can be determined by comparing the distribution of local pairing amplitudes for the different cases of on-site potential disorder and structural disorder. In the case of on-site disorder, there is a decrease in the number of sites with pairing amplitude around 1.6t while the number of sites with a local pairing amplitude of zero increases only slightly. Conversely, in the case of structural disorder the number of sites with local pairing amplitude close to 1.6t decreases rapidly while the number of sites with non-zero pairing amplitude increases dramatically, with the number of sites with zero pairing amplitude decreasing. This complete difference in behaviour highlights the different natures of structural and on-site disorder. On-site disorder results in shifts of the eigenenergies at boron sites resulting in little spread of the pairing amplitude while structural disorder can promote connectivity between regions with non-zero pairing amplitude due to the distribution of eigenenergies it creates. Opposite trends in the behaviour of the average kinetic energy have been noted for structural and on-site disorder On-site potential disorder results in enhanced localization of Cooper pairs. On the other hand, structural disorder results in a change in the coupling between different sites, resulting in a greater number of sites with non-zero pairing amplitude due to enhanced connectivity. While the mean pairing amplitude increases with increasing disorder in the case of structural disorder as well as considering on-site disorder at all sites (Figs. It is significant that in the case of on-site potential disorder the spectral gap in the density of states does not close (this has been found in other studies as well Considering the temperature dependence, experimental scanning transmission spectrosocpy studies of BNCD have shown different temperature dependences of the local energy gap for BCS-like and non-BCS like regions The initial decrease followed by an increase in the superfluid density with structural disorder is counterintuitive although it can be understood as follows. Initially, the increase in structural disorder rapidly decreases the number of lattice sites with relatively high local pairing amplitudes so the mean superfluid density rapidly decreases. With further increase in the structural disorder, the number of sites with non-zero pairing continues to increase with the random variation of the pairing amplitudes resulting in increased isotropy as local superconducting islands begin to spread out. This is borne out by the increase in the range of the pairing amplitude correlation function when considering high structural disorder (inset in Fig. The contrasting nature of on-site random potential disorder and structural disorder in the form of non-uniform random tight-binding hopping parameters has been illustrated and the results have been applied to understanding the superconductor-insulator transition in BDD and BNCD. While on-site potential disorder at the boron sites alone decreases the mean pairing amplitude and spectral gap, structural disorder can increase the mean pairing amplitude although the spectral gap still decreases as the disorder parameter increases. This significant difference in behaviour stems from the introduction of states within the gap region in the case of structural disorder, resulting in a wide distribution of mean pairing amplitudes. The calculated temperature dependence also highlights the different natures of structural and on-site disorder as structurally disordered systems show a marked deviation from the temperature dependence expected for a conventional BCS superconductor. This work is of particular interest when applied to BNCD due to the high level of structural disorder inherent in this unconventional superconductor. Through the combination of structural disorder, random on-site potential fluctuations and the Coulomb interaction in the narrow acceptor band, the experimentally found saturation of the T C in BDD as a function of the boron concentration can be understood. This study illustrates a minimal Hamiltonian which captures some of the features found in experimental studies of BDD and BNCD and lays a foundation for further work where grain boundaries in BNCD (which act as weak links) can be built into the theory through Joseph-son junctions to more closely reflect BNCD and be more directly comparable to transport and measurements.