A traveling wave parametric amplifier (TWPA) composed of a transmission line made up of a chain of coupled asymmetric superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) is proposed. The unique nature of this transmission line is that its nonlinearity can be tuned with an external magnetic flux and can even change sign. This feature of the transmission line can be used to perform phase matching in a degenerate four-wave mixing process which can be utilized for parametric amplification of a weak signal in the presence of a strong pump. Numerical simulations of the TWPA design have shown that with tuning, phase matching can be achieved and an exponential gain as a function of the transmission line length can be realized. The flexibility of the proposed design can realize: compact TWPAs with less than 211 unit cells, signal gains greater than 20 dB, 3 dB bandwidth greater than 5.4 GHz, and saturation powers up to -98 dBm. This amplifier design is well suited for multiplexed readout of quantum circuits or astronomical detectors in a compact configuration which can foster on-chip implementations. Over the past decade Josephson parametric amplifiers have proven essential in experiments studying quantum jumps 1 , tracking quantum trajectories The proposed TWPA utilizes the tunable nonlinearity of a one dimensional chain of asymmetric SQUIDs with nearest neighbor coupling through mutually shared Josephson junctions as a transmission line to overcome phase matching limitations. A magnetic flux Φ threads each SQUID to allow for tunability of the linear and nonlinear properties of the transmission line. A weak signal to be amplified and a strong pump tone will be incident on the input port to the transmission line. Due to the nonlinearity of the transmission line the weak signal will undergo parametric amplification through a degenerate four-wave mixing (FWM) process The design of the proposed TWPA is shown in Figure The defined unit cell of the transmission line is composed of two large and two small junctions (Figure where Φ 0 = h/2e is the flux quantum, h is Planck's constant, e is the electron charge, and r = I jl0 /I js0 . For Φ/Φ 0 = 0.5 there exists a critical r 0 = 4 where the linear term in I(φ) goes to zero and the cubic term dominates. At this point the inductance L ∝ dI(φ)/dφ -1 of the unit cell is the largest. This is the unique feature of the superinductor Using equation (1) a nonlinear wave equation was derived to describe the node flux φ n shown in Fig. where L = φ 0 /I js0 and φ 0 = Φ 0 /(2π). The first three terms of the wave equation represents the linear contributions to the dispersion on the transmission line due to the distributed inductances and capacitances and how they can be tuned with r and Φ. The fourth term describes the nonlinearity and how the nonlinear coupling coefficient, γ = a 4 /(φ 2 0 L) (r/48) + (1/3) cos 2πΦ/Φ 0 can be tuned with Φ. The solution to equation ( where a s and a i are the complex signal and idler amplitudes, k m is the wave vectors of the pump, signal, and idler (m = {p, s, i}) (see Appendix A), ∆k = k s +k i -2k p is the phase mismatch due to the linear dispersion in the transmission line, the total phase mismatch including self and cross phase modulation is κ = -∆k + 2α p -α s -α i , and |A p0 | is the undepleted pump amplitude. The terms α m ∝ γ|A p0 | 2 , are the self and cross phase modulation of the wave vectors per unit length. Equations ( At nearly phase matching conditions κ ≈ 0, g is positive and real and the signal gain has an exponential dependence on the length of the transmission line G s = |e gz /2| 2 . For small pump amplitudes |A p0 | ∼ = |A s0 | and ω s ∼ = ω p phase matching is not a concern. For larger pump amplitudes the parametric amplification process losses phase matching through self-phase modulation of the pump, when this happens g becomes small and κ is large, the gain scales quadratically as a function of TWPA length. The phase mismatch due to the large pump amplitude can be compensated with the linear dispersion along the transmission line if α p and ∆k are of opposite sign, III. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS From this point on numerical results are presented for a realizable set of parameters for the proposed TWPA. For each unit cell r = 6, C gnd = 50 fF, C js = 50 fF, C jl = rC js , I js0 = 1 μA, and I jl0 = rI js0 . In choosing C gnd and the inductance of the large junctions L jl = Φ 0 /(rI js0 ) which ultimately sets the characteristic impedance of the transmission line special attention was made to achieve an impedance near 50 Ω over the tunable range of the TWPA in order to maintain compatibility with commercial electronics. A realizable unit cell size based on our fabrication process is a = 8 μm Shown in Figure The saturation power of the TWPA is limited by pump depletion effects, which generally occurs when the signal amplitude becomes comparable to the pump. At such amplitudes the pump is depleted and the gain of the TWPA decreases. In order to evaluate these effects As Φ/Φ0 varies from 0.35 to 0.5 the pump power was varied from -68 dBm to -76 dBm to maintain phase matching conditions between a signal and pump tone at angular frequencies ωs/(2π) = 6 GHz and ωp/(2π) = 9 GHz respectively. The inset shows the signal gain as a function of signal power for Φ/Φ0 = 0.37 and device length 341a, the 1 dB compression point occurs at -98 dBm. the coupled mode equations (see Appendix B) without the un-depleted pump approximation and taking into account self-and cross-phase modulation are solved to determine the real amplitude and phase mismatch as a function of z along the length of the transmission line. Figure In conclusion a TWPA design based on a chain of coupled asymmetric SQUIDs has been presented. The proposed design allows for great flexibility where a magnetic flux can be used to tune the nonlinearity of the transmission line to achieve phase matching conditions in a four-wave mixing process. Numerical simulations have shown that the proposed amplifier can achieve gains of 23 dB with a 3 dB bandwidth of greater than 5.4 GHz at a center frequency of 6.5 GHz. Under different tuning conditions gains of greater than 20 dB can be achieved with a minimum transmission line length of 211 unit cells and a saturation power of up to -98 dBm with 341 unit cells. The proposed amplifier is ideally suited for multiplexed readout of quantum bits or kinetic inductance based astronomical detectors. We would like to thank M. Gershenson for helpful discussions. This work was supported in part by Solid State Scientific Corporation (US Army Small Business Technology Transfer Program). In this section we derive an analytical solution to the coupled nonlinear wave equations used to describe the interaction between the signal and pump traveling waves propagating along the transmission line composed of a chain of coupled asymmetric SQUIDs. The energy phase relation of a unit cell Figure Expanding ∂E J (φ)/∂φ| φ=0 gives the approximate current phase relation describing the current I n (φ) flowing through the backbone of unit cell n Eq. ( and neglecting the effects of dissipation and assuming a sufficiently long wavelength λ ≫ a of the signal and pump the following wave equation is derived for a position z along the transmission line where L = φ 0 /I js , φ 0 = Φ 0 /2π, r = I jl0 /I js0 , and γ = a 4 /(φ 2 0 L) (r/48) + (1/3) cos 2πΦ/Φ 0 . The solution to Eq.( where c.c. denotes complex conjugate, A m is the complex amplitudes, k m is the wave vectors, and ω m is the angular frequencies of the pump, signal, and idler (m = {p, s, i}). A degenerate four-wave mixing process is considered under the following frequency matching condition ω s + ω i = 2ω p . Eq.( and a uniform transmission line where C gnd , C js and k m are constant, a set of coupled mode equations which describes the propagation of the pump, signal, and idler waves along the transmission line is determined: where a large pump amplitude relative to the signal and idler amplitudes was assumed, decoupling the pump, and the quadratic terms in A s,i were neglected, ∆k = k s + k i -2k p the phase mismatch due to linear dispersion, and α m is the self-phase modulation per unit length a: where |A p0 | is the initial pump amplitude. The linear dispersion relation for this transmission line is Assuming an un-depleted pump amplitude and the following substitutions A p (z) = A p0 e iαpz solution to Eq. (A4), A s (z) = a s (z)e iαsz , and A i (z) = a i (z)e iαiz into (A5) and (A6) to obtain: where κ = -∆k + 2α p -α s -α i is the total phase mismatch. Equations (A9) and (A10) are similar to well established fiber parametric amplifier theory and have the following solution to describe the amplitude of the signal along the length of the transmission line assuming zero initial idler amplitude: A similar solution to (A11) exists for the idler amplitude. The exponential gain factor is The signal power gain can be determined from Eq. A11 For the proposed chain of asymmetric SQUIDs the phase mismatch due to linear dispersion is always real and nonnegative for r > r 0 . Using the frequency matching condition and Eq. A8 we show that where and where ∆ω ≡ ω s -ω p = ω p -ω i from the frequency matching condition. We also show that the sign of the first term in Eq.( Appendix B: Numerical Analysis Below the solutions to the coupled mode equations which govern the degenerate four wave mixing process between the signal, idler, and pump tones and pump depletion effects are presented. Plugging Eq. A3 into Eq. A2 and making the slowly varying envelope approximation the following coupled mode equations are derived: The coupled complex differential equations are solved by converting the complex amplitudes to A m = B m (z)e iθm(z) and finding the solutions for the real amplitudes B p (z), B s (z), B i (z), and the total phase mismatch θ s (z)+θ i (z)-2θ p (z)+∆k using the Runge-Kutta method. In this section we determine how variations in Josephson junction parameters and tuning magnetic flux gradients effect the operation of the proposed TWPA. Both types of variations manifest themselves as a position dependent alteration to both the linear and nonlinear dispersion from unit cell to unit cell which ultimately effects the phase matching and the signal gain in the TWPA. Since the transmission line of the TWPA is made up of coupled asymmetric SQUIDs variations in one unit cell through mutual coupling, effects the superconducting phase distribution in neighboring unit cells. We model the variations in Josephson junction parameters as a normal distribution with mean critical currents I js0 and I jl0 for small and large Josephson junctions respectively, and a relative standard deviation σ JJ which applies to both small and large junctions. The proposed TWPA was modeled by minimizing the total Josephson energy of a 200 unit cell chain by adjusting the phases on all the large junctions. A gauge was chosen such that the external magnetic flux would induce phases 2πΦ/Φ 0 on the small junctions. The constraint of the minimization procedure was that the sum of the phase drops on all of the large junctions would be equal to the total phase across the chain. From the minimization a position dependent ∆k m and ∆γ from unit cell to unit cell was determined, vectorized, and introduced into the numerical analysis of the coupled mode equations. to σ JJ = 1%, where the signal gain drops by 1 dB. FIG. A1(b) shows for r = 6 and Φ/Φ 0 = 0.5, the tolerance increases to σ JJ = 3% which can be realized with present day fabrication technology where the on-chip variation in junction parameters follows a normal distribution and σ = 2.4 -3.5% Numerical simulations of the signal gain as a function of magnetic flux gradient per unit cell across the TWPA is shown in FIG. 