The Onsager rule determines the frequencies of quantum oscillations in magnetic fields. We show that this rule remains intact to an excellent approximation in the mixed-vortex state of the underdoped cuprates even though the Landau level index n may be fairly low, n ∼ 10. The models we consider are fairly general, consisting of a variety of density wave states combined with d-wave superconductivity within a mean field theory. Vortices are introduced as quenched disorder and averaged over many realizations, which can be considered as snapshots of a vortex liquid state. We also show that the oscillations ride on top of a field independent density of states, ρ(B), for higher fields. This feature appears to be consistent with recent specific heat measurements [C. Marcenat, et al. Nature Comm. 6, 7927 (2015)]. At lower fields we model the system as an ordered vortex lattice, and show that its density of states follows a dependence ρ(B) ∝ √ B in agreement with the semiclassical results [G. E. Volovik, JETP Lett. 58, 469 (1993)]. order reduces to the familiar two-fold DDW order. In that case | sin Q•(r+r ) 2 | = 1 and the order parameter magnitude is a constant. The last term in Eq. ( B. The off-diagonal component ∆ij A breakthrough in the area of cuprate superconductivity is the observation of quantum oscillations in cuprates It has been argued from a theoretical analysis that the Onsager rule could be violated by as much as 30% To put our paper in the context, note that in conventional s-wave superconductors, previous work has shown that for higher Landau level indices, and within coherent potential approximation, vortices mainly damp the oscillation amplitude, but the shift in the oscillation frequency We consider the vortices explicitly in the Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, as in Ref. In Section II we define the model Hamiltonian that includes d-wave superconducting order parameter as well as a variety of density wave states. Our numerical method, the recursive Green function method adapted for the present problem is discussed in Sec. III. The results are discussed in Sec. IV and Sec. V contains discussion. There are three appendices. arXiv:1509.00494v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 27 Jan 2016 The starting point is the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian defined on a square lattice. Here μ is the chemical potential. H is the Hamiltonian that describes the normal state electrons; while the off-diagonal pairing term ∆ ij defines the superconducting order parameter. For simplicity, we ignore self consistency, as we believe that it cannot change the major striking conclusions. A. The diagonal component H Besides the hopping parameters, the normal state Hamiltonian H contains a variety of mean field order parameters defined below. Although many different orders are suggested to explain the normal state of the high-T c superconductivity, for our purposes it is sufficient to consider three different types: a period-2 d-density wave (DDW) Recently a bi-directional CDW has been observed ubiquitously in the underdoped cuprates where t,t , and t are the 1st, 2nd and the 3rd nearest neighbor hopping parameters respectively. where δ = x, ŷ denote the two nearest neighbors. η δ = 1 for δ = x while η δ = -1 for δ = ŷ indicates the DDW order has a local d-wave symmetry. 2. Bi-directional CDW order Again η δ = ±1 is the local d-wave symmetry factor of the CDW order. 3. Period-8 DDW order where the iG k term is the period-8 DDW order Here , and the ordering wavevector is Q = ( 3π 4a , π a ). The V c term in Eq. ( Fourier transformed to the real space, the Hamiltonian H d.w. becomes In the above, W 0 controls the overall magnitude of the period-8 DDW order parameter, i sin indicates that the order is a current, sin shows that the magnitude of this order is modulated with a wavevector Q, and the last factor in the curly bracket {...} explicitly exhibits its local d-wave symmetry. If Q = (π/a, π/a), then the The off-diagonal pairing term ∆ ij in the BdG Hamiltonian is defined on each bond connecting two nearest neighboring sites i and j. The pairing amplitude is taken to be where ∆ is the pairing amplitude far away from any vortex center. ξ is the vortex core size. In our calculation ξ = 5a is adopted, where a is the lattice spacing. In the presence of a single vortex, r eff in the above is simply the distance from the center of our bond ri+rj 2 to the center of that vortex. While in the presence of multiple vortices, following the ansatz used in Ref. In this ansatz, r eff is a monotonic increasing function of the parameter q for a given vortex configuration. Therefore if q is large, the calculated r eff as well as |∆ ij | is also larger, which means the vortex scattering is stronger. However our conclusions do not depend on the different choices of q (for more details see the appendix section C). Therefore in this paper, if not specified otherwise, q = 2 will be chosen. The bond phase variable θ ij contains the information of our quenched random vortex configuration, but for the purpose of our calculation we need the site phase variables. We use the ansatz for θ ij given in Refs. where φ i is the pairing order parameter phase field defined on a site. In the above, without the "sgn[...]" factor θ ij is simply the arithmetic mean of φ i and φ j . However using is not enough because whenever the bond ij crosses a vortex branch cut, the phase factor e iθij will be incorrect and different from the correct one by a minus sign. This can be corrected by the additional "sgn[...]" factor(see the appendix section A). Then φ i can be further computed from the superfluid velocity field v s (r i ) by with m * = 2m and e * = -2e are the mass and the charge of the Cooper pairs respectively. The path for this integral is chosen such as to avoid the branch cuts of all the vortices so that the phase field φ i is single valued on every site, as illustrated in Fig. Illustrations of the vortices (circle) on the lattice (dashed lines). The arrows show the path of the integral we have chosen in defining our phase field φ(r). To make this phase definite, the branch cuts of all the vortices are chosen to extend from the vortex center to the positive infinity (x = ∞), represented by the magenta horizontal lines. We still need to compute the superfluid velocity v s (r). This can be done by following Ref. For our square lattice calculation we discretize the above k integral and choose 2π/ξ as its upper cutoff, since the vortex is only well defined over a length scale larger than the vortex core size ξ. Therefore in the limit λ ξ > a, v s (r) can be rewritten as follows In this summation ξ . The prime superscript in the summation means the point (k x , k y ) = (0, 0) is excluded to be consistent with our approximation λ = ∞. Given the BdG Hamiltonian H defined above, we use the recursive Green's function method where the angular brackets denote average over independent vortex realizations. In the Green's function we have already set the energy to the chemical potential E = 0. For all the numerical results presented in the following, an infinitesimal energy broadening δ = 0.005t will be chosen, if not specified otherwise, and the periodic boundary condition is imposed in the y-direction. A. The Onsager rule for quantum oscillation frequencies With the parameters: t = 1, t = 0.30 t, t = t /9.0, μ = -0.8807 t, W 0 = 0.26 t, V c = 0, the hole doping level is p ≈ 11%. Without vortices we can diagonalize the Hamilontian H in the momentum space and obtain the normal state Fermi surface. This Fermi surface consists of two closed orbits, see the inset of Fig. from the Onsager relation, where Φ s = hc/2e is the fundamental flux quanta and the two lattice spacings a 2 = 3.82 Å × 3.89 Å are chosen for YBCO. At the antinodal point (0, π) there is an electron pocket with an area Ae (2π/a) 2 ≈ 1.9%, corresponding to a frequency F e = 525T (electron). We should notice that the fast oscillation F h (hole) is not observed in the experiments in cuprates. This problem can be resolved if we consider a period-8 DDW model We compute the ρ(B) as a function of the inverse of the magnetic field 1/B in the presence of various ∆. In these calculations, the number of vortices are chosen such that the total magnetic flux is equal to Φ = BLM a 2 . From the oscillatory part of ρ(B) we perform Fast Fourier Transform(FFT) to get the spectrum. The result is shown in Fig. We choose the following parameters: t = 1, t = 0.2t, t = t /8, V c = 0.12t, μ = -0.73t so that we can produce the right oscillation frequencies that are observed in experiments. The hole doping level is p ≈ 11%. The Fermi surface of the normal state is plotted in the inset of Fig. The oscillation spectrum of the ρ(B) is shown in Fig. ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ (e) FFT spectrum for the bi-directional CDW ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ In this subsection we present our quantum oscillation results for the period-8 DDW model. In this model the period-8 stripe DDW order is considered as the major driving force behind the Fermi surface reconstructions; while a much weaker unidirectional period-4 CDW is included as a subsidiary order. We choose the parameter set t = 0.3t, t = t /2.0, W 0 = 0.70t, V c = 0.05t, μ = -0.70t and estimate the hole doping level to be p ≈ 11.2%. We also obtain a Fermi surface similar to the one we had in Ref. The corresponding oscillation spectrum is presented in Fig. The observations here, combined with the other two cases, strongly suggest that the Onsager's relation being intact in the presence of vortex scattering is generic and independent of the order parameters that reconstruct the Fermi surface. In the above we have examined the effects of random vortex scattering on the quantum oscillations. Now we give an overview of the B dependence of the DOS for fields B 10T, at a representative value of ∆ = 0.1t. At lower fields, the vortex liquid model is not valid any more, since vortices should order into a solid instead. Therefore we should use a vortex lattice to model such a state. In the following we focus on the high field regime first and defer our vortex lattice discussions for the low field regime to the later section IV C. In Fig. A noticeable feature of this plot is that when the field becomes large, the oscillation of ρ(B) in 1/B gradually develops on top of a constant background. This constant background value of ρ(B) is suppressed from the normal state DOS ρ n (0). The size of this suppression depends on the vortex scattering strength. For the parameters used in Fig. The constant background of the DOS oscillation is not restricted to the two-fold DDW order case. As we can see in Fig. We also confirm this constant ρ(B) background feature in the oscillation regime for the period-8 DDW order case in Fig. Therefore we can conclude that the high field ρ(B) oscillation background being a constant is generic. Now we move on to the low field regime. In this regime when the field is low enough, the vortices order into a lattice. Whether the lattice is square or triangular requires a self-consistent computation of the system's free energy, which is far beyond the scope of this paper. Instead we simply take a square lattice for illustration. But none of the following qualitative features should depend on the vortex lattice type. To put the square vortex lattice onto our original CuO lattice so that each vortex sits at the CuO lattice plaquette center and the periodic boundary condition is still preserved along the transverse direction, we require the vortex lattice to be commensurate with our original CuO lattice, as schematically shown in Fig. However, we should calculate the DOS of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles instead of the electrons, because the system is far from being in a normal state in such a low field regime. Therefore now ρ(B) is computed from the following formula instead The major differences here from the one we used in our quantum oscillation calculations are: (1) the summation of the Green's function's diagonal matrix elements includes both the electron part and the hole part: j runs from j = 1 to j = 4M instead of j = 2M ; (2) there is no averaging over different vortices configurations because the vortex lattice is ordered; (3) an additional prefactor of 1/2 is added to avoid double counting of degrees of freedoms. For such a vortex lattice calculation, the summation over different vortex positions in the superfluid velocity calculation in Eq. ( where G n1,n2 = ( 2n1π lxa , 2n2π lya ) is a reciprocal Bragg vector of the square vortex lattice, with n 1 , n 2 ∈ Z. Then the Eq. ( The summations of (n 1 , n 2 ) are restricted to those values that satisfy 0 ≤ 2n1π lxa < 2π a , 0 ≤ 2n2π lya < 2π a . Again the prime superscript in the summation means the point (n 1 , n 2 ) = (0, 0) is excluded. According to Volovik where Φs 2πξ 2 ≈ 90T, if ξ = 5a and a ≈ 3.83 Å are used. 1. First we consider a square vortex lattice without any other additional density wave order. We choose the band structure parameters to be t /t = 0.3, t = t /9.0, μ = -1.01t so that the estimated normal state hole doping level p ≈ 15% is at the optimal doping. The computed DOS is shown in Fig. The normal state specific heat can be estimated as Here the additional prefactor of 4 comes from the spin degeneracy and the fact that one unit cell of YBCO123 contains two CuO planes. If we take t = 0.15eV, then γ n ≈ 15.7mJ/mol • K 2 and γ(B) = A √ B with the coefficient A ≈ 4.7 mJ/mol • K 2 • T 1/2 . Compared with the experimental value of A ≈ 0.9 mJ/mol • K 2 • T 1/2 from Ref. The above two values of κ are consistent with the fact that in Volovik's formula κ is of order unity. Of course its precise value depends on the vortex lattice structure, on the slope of the gap near the gap node (in the current case both the parameters ∆ and q), and also on the normal state band structure. From the above two scenarios we can conclude that irrespective of the existence of an additional density wave order, the DOS of a clean vortex lattice always scales as ρ(B) ∝ √ B in the low field limit. In summary we have shown that in the quenched vortex liquid state the quantum oscillations in cuprates can survive at large magnetic fields. Although the oscillation amplitude can be heavily damped if the vortex scattering is strong, the oscillation frequency is given by the Onsager rule to an excellent approximation. Of course, when the field is small the quantum oscillations are destroyed by the vortices and ρ(B) gets heavily suppressed due to the formation of Bogoliubov quasiparticles. When the field is small enough, a vortex solid state forms instead and it can be modeled by an ordered vortex lattice. We show the field dependence of the vortex lattice's den-sity of states follows ρ(B) ∝ √ B in the asymptotically low field limit, in agreement with Volovik's semiclassical predictions. However in contrast to the previous suggestion our results show that this small field limit does not extend to the high field oscillatory regime of the vortex liquid state. Instead when the oscillations can be resolved, the non-oscillatory background of ρ(B) flattens out, and becomes field independent consistent with the more recent specific heat measurements bond ij on the closed path. Therefore an appropriate θ ij should be equal to some value of the phase field on this segment. When the bond ij does not cross any branch cut, is indeed on the blue segment and can be a good definition of θ ij , as illustrated in Fig. -π instead can be a good definition, since it falls onto the blue arc segment, as indicated by the blue arrow in Fig. FIG. Based on these two scenarios, a good definition of θ ij will be This definition of θ ij guarantees that whenever the phase field φ i along a closed path crosses a branch cut once, the defined θ ij crosses the same branch cut once as well. When there are multiple vortices enclosed, we only need to linearly superpose the contributions from each vortex together to the field φ i and θ ij respectively. It is not difficult to see that the above definition of θ ij is still good in these cases. For our numerical calculation convenience, we rewrite the above definition of θ ij in a slightly different way Appendix B: Recursive Green's function method The recursive Green's function method studies a quasione-dimensional system, which is a square lattice with a very long axis of length La along the x-direction and a shorter axis of width M a along the y-direction in our 7. Schematic diagram of the recursive Green's function calculation. The sites enclosed by the blue dashed rectangle define the ith principal layer. The exact Green's function Gi has two self-energy contributions from both the left semi-infinite stripe and and the right one. The left stripe is characterized by its surface Green's function G L i-1 with the (i -1)th layer its surface; while the right one is characterized by another surface Green's function G R i+1 with the (i + 1)th layer its surface. problem. The system can be built up recursively in the x-direction by connecting many one-dimensional stripes together. Each stripe has a direct coupling only to its nearest neighboring ones. This property is essential for the recursion. In our Hamiltonian H the third nearest neighbor hopping t provides the farthest direct coupling along the x-direction. It connects two sites 2a apart. Therefore each stripe necessarily contains two columns of the square lattice sites so that the direct coupling exists only between two adjacent stripes. The blue dashed rectangle in Fig. Our goal is to compute the diagonal matrix elements of the exact Green's function G in order to get the DOS. For this purpose we first calculate G i ≡< i|G|i > for each layer i. The ket |i > represents a state where the Bogoliubov quasiparticles are found in the ith principal layer. It has 4M components, of which the first 2M ones give the electron part wavefunction, while the rest 2M ones define the hole part. Therefore G i = G i (j, j ) is a 4M × 4M matrix with j, j = 1, 2, ..., 4M . For brevity we will suppress the matrix element indices hereafter, if there is no confusion. The exact Green's function G i can be computed by (for derivations see Ref. B1) as schematically shown in Fig. The central task is then to compute G L i-1 and G R i+1 . This can be done recursively. Take G L i-1 as an example. We start with the leftmost layer i = 1. There our central system is connected to a semi-infinite lead, which contains infinite number of layers of the same width M , numbered by i = ..., -2, -1, 0. We denote this left lead's surface Green's function as G L s , whose computation will be presented in the following appendix subsection B 1. Then we add the i = 1st layer of our central system, but not other layers, to this lead so that we get a new semi-infinite stripe. This new stripe has a new surface Green's function denoted as G L 1 , which can be computed from G L s by where H 1,0 connects sites in the surface layer i = 0 of the left lead to the i = 1st layer of our central system. Similarly we can repeat this process by adding one more layer of our central system to the semi-infinite stripe each time, and build up the whole system. In general at an intermediate stage, we may have a semi-infinite stripe, whose surface is, say, the (i -2)th layer with a surface Green's function G L i-2 . Then the (i -1)th layer is connected to that stripe to form a new semi-infinite system, which has a new surface Green's function G L i-1 . And G L i-1 can be calculated from G L i-2 by the following recursive relation This is schematically illustrated in Fig. FIG. This recursive relation starts with G R L/2 at the rightmost layer i = L/2 of our central system, where it is connected to another semi-infinite stripe lead extended to x = ∞. Note that the central system has only L/2 principal layers because each layer contains two columns of the sites, and there are only L columns in total. The layers in this right lead are numbered by i = L/2 + 1, L/2 + 2, .... We denote the right lead's surface Green's function as where H L/2,L/2+1 connects our central system to the right lead and contains t, t , t only. To be compatible with our central system Hamiltonian, which contains superconductivity, our lead Hamiltonian should have both an electron part and a hole part so that the full Hamiltonian H lead is Correspondingly the surface Green's function takes a block diagonal form where for brevity we have introduced E + = E + iδ. We will denote the two diagonal terms as Apparently G hh can be obtained from G ee by simple substitutions: {t, t , t , μ} ⇒ {-t, -t , -t , -μ}. Therefore we only need to discuss how to compute G ee . Because of the periodic boundary condition along the y-direction, we can decompose G ee (E + ) into different momentum k y channels And g(k y , E + ) is the corresponding surface Green's function of this one dimensional chain. To compute g(k y , E + ) we group every two adjacent cites (c † i-1 , c † i ) of the one dimensional chain together into a cell, indexed by the cell number n, so that H eff (k y ) can be rewritten in a form such that direct couplings exist only between two nearest neighboring cells Since g(k y , E + ) is a surface Green's function, it should satisfy the same recursive relation given in Eq. (B3), which is rewritten here as The only difference from there is now all the matrix ele-ments are defined between different cells instead of layers. For clarity we have suppressed the k y and E + dependence of all the quantities in this equation. G 0 0 is the bare Green's function of the isolated single cell n = 0. Because each cell contains two sites, G 0 0 is a 2 × 2matrix, given by Similarly the effective hopping matrices between the cell n = 0 and cell n = -1 can be read off directly from Eq. (B11) By definition G L -1 in Eq. (B12) is the surface Green's function of the same chain but with the cell n = 0 deleted. However, since the chain is semi-infinite, deleting the surface cell only gives another identical semi-infinite chain. Therefore G L -1 should be the same as g. Then Eq. (B12) becomes a self-consistent equation of g as With this 2×2 matrix equation, for each k y , we solve for g numerically by iterations until the results converge. Then the computed g(k y , E) is substituted back into Eq. (B9) of G ee (E + ) to get G L s . Similar derivations can be carried out for the right lead Green's function G R s . It turns out G R s = (G L s ) T , where T is the transpose operation. This result is a manifestation of the fact that the two semi-infinite leads can be connected to each other by a reflection symmetry operation along the x-direction. Appendix C: The ansatz ( ξ r eff ) q = n ( ξ rn ) q The pairing amplitude on the bond, that connects two nearest neighboring sites r i and r j , is calculated by the following ansatz: to the nth vortex center R n , q is some positive number, and N v is the total number of vortices. If we consider a special case that there is only one vortex, for instance the nth vortex, then Eq. (C2) is reduced to r eff = r n , and In other words, we can define the pairing amplitude |∆ n | for the case when only the nth vortex is present as follows When more than the nth vortex is present, |∆ ij | should become smaller than |∆ n |. This requires r eff < r n because |∆ ij | is an increasing function of r eff , as seen in Eq. (C1). We sum the contributions from each vortex to |∆ ij | simply by adding the qth inverse moment(q > 0) of all r n together to define an effective distance r eff as in Eq. (C2). Using the qth inverse moment, instead of the qth moment guarantees that r eff < r n when there is more than one vortex. Furthermore it ensures that the terms ( ξ rn ) q with small r n on the right hand side of Eq. (C2) contribute more significantly than those with larger r n . This is consistent with the physical intuition that vortices nearby are more important in determining r eff , and therefore |∆ ij |, than those that are far away. Also when there are more vortices present, N v becomes larger and the resultant |∆ ij | from Eq. (C2) becomes smaller. This again agrees with our expectation. The |∆ ij | defined above increases monotonically with the parameter q for a given vortices configuration. To see this we only need to show r eff increases with q. For that purpose we can rewrite Eq. (C2) as follows log r min r eff where r min = min{r n } is the distance between the closest vortex and the bond, and the prime sign in the summation means this closest vortex is excluded. The right hand side of Eq. (C5) is a monotonic decreasing function of q because in the summation each rmin rn < 1. Therefore r eff increases monotonically with q, so does |∆ ij |. ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲ FIG. 9. Oscillation spectrum of the DOS for the two fold DDW order model with different q values but a fixed ∆. Note that the vertical axis scale for q = 1 is different from those for other q values. The two vertical dashed lines mark the two frequencies Fe = 525T, F h = 966T. An appropriate value of q can not be determined without solving the whole problem self-consistently, therefore we performed simulations for different q to see if our conclusions depend on q or not. One example data of the oscillation spectrum for the two-fold DDW order case is shown in Fig. Although the oscillation amplitudes can depend significantly on q, the oscillation frequencies remain unaffected by varying the q values, therefore the conclusion of Onsager's relation being robust against the vortex scattering does not depend on the value of q. the same. For both these two cases, the normal state, without magnetic field, can be described by the following Hamiltonian In this Hamiltonian the third term is a two-fold DDW order(or the staggered flux state order), and η ij = ±1 is again the local d-wave symmetry factor. 1. First consider the Fig. 2. Then consider the Fig. ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ 