As experimental quantum information processing (QIP) rapidly advances, an emerging challenge is to design a scalable architecture that combines various quantum elements into a complex device without compromising their performance. In particular, superconducting quantum circuits have successfully demonstrated many of the requirements for quantum computing, including coherence levels that approach the thresholds for scaling. However, it remains challenging to couple a large number of circuit components through controllable channels while suppressing any other interactions. We propose a hardware platform intended to address these challenges, which combines the advantages of integrated circuit fabrication and long coherence times achievable in three-dimensional circuit quantum electrodynamics (3D cQED). This multilayer microwave integrated quantum circuit (MMIQC) platform provides a path toward the realization of increasingly complex superconducting devices in pursuit of a scalable quantum computer. Experimental quantum information processing is rapidly developing in several physical implementations, and superconducting quantum circuits are a particularly promising candidate for building a practical quantum computer. Superconducting quantum circuits are presented with crucial challenges that prevent a scaling strategy similar to that of classical integrated circuits. The strong electromagnetic interactions of the qubits allow for efficient entanglement and control, but make them also especially susceptible to undesired couplings that degrade quantum information. This "crosstalk" results in either undesirable mixing of quantum states or decoherence. High isolation to prevent these effects is especially important as high-Q qubits (Q ≈ 10 6 -10 9 ) must also be coupled to high-speed, low-Q (Q ≈ 10 3 ) elements for readout, control, and feedback. Various strategies are employed in large scale detector arrays and complex cQED circuits to mitigate crosstalk. Therefore, the outstanding task is to design a hardware platform that allows large number of quantum components to couple through intended and controllable channels, while suppressing any other interactions. In addition, crucial properties of the quantum circuit, such as qubit and resonator frequencies, anharmonicities, and mutual interaction strengths must be more predictable and reproducible than what has been necessary to date. It is possible to construct a scalable quantum computer that overcomes these challenges by incorporating other technologies into the cQED architecture. This can be achieved by dividing the quantum circuit into subsystems and shielding each one with a three-dimensional superconducting enclosure, as sketched in Figure As an approach for implementing this concept, we introduce the multilayer microwave integrated quantum circuit (MMIQC), which combines the advantages of integrated circuit fabrication with the long coherence times attainable in 3D cQED (Figure The MMIQC hardware platform is suited for integrating a wide variety of cQED components and utilizes a number of existing technologies. ings to achieve the higher Q required for storing quantum states. Other existing quantum circuit elements of various geometries can be readily incorporated into the MMIQC. These include planar devices such as qubits and Josephson-junction based quantum amplifiers, which can be situated inside shielding enclosures on non-metalized surfaces. As shown in Figure The architecture presented here has several other advantages for meeting demands that future, large-scale QIP devices will face. First, it allows for high-density connectivity to external measurement and control circuitry through methods commonly used in integrated circuits, such as ball grid arrays and flip-chip bonding. While many features and components of the MMIQC make use of existing technologies, there are certain aspects of the design that will require the development of novel techniques. These include the fabrication of micromachined superconducting enclosures (both for use as cavity resonators and as shielding), and engineering coupling between 3D modes and embedded planar circuitry throughout the multilayer device. In particular, enclosures with high quality RF isolation will require a low-loss bond between two wafers that are etched and coated with a suitable superconductor. We have begun to investigate the feasibility of such devices by fabricating and testing 3D superconducting cavity resonators. As described in Ref. In summary, we believe that practical implementation of complex quantum circuits will require innovative approaches to scaling up. In the platform of cQED, the goal is to create integrated QIP circuits with multiple interconnected cavities, qubits, and embedded control wiring while also obeying the principles for minimizing materials losses, and providing the high isolation and shielding that quantum states require. We emphasize that the most pressing need in achieving this goal is not the miniaturization of circuits, but the maintenance of high coherence. We conclude that the solution is likely to heavily employ superconducting 3D enclosures. We have proposed a lithographic approach for fabricating complex quantum circuits that incorporate super-conducting enclosures. In a proof-of-principle experiment described in Ref. 