We study the effects of a phase difference on Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states in a spinful Coulombblockaded quantum dot contacted by a superconducting loop. In the limit where charging energy is larger than the superconducting gap, we determine the subgap excitation spectrum, the corresponding supercurrent, and the differential conductance as measured by a normal-metal tunnel probe. In absence of a phase difference only one linear combination of the superconductor lead electrons couples to the spin, which gives a single YSR state. With finite phase difference, however, it is effectively a two-channel scattering problem and therefore an additional state emerges from the gap edge. The energy of the phase-dependent YSR states depend on the gate voltage and one state can cross zero energy twice inside the valley with odd occupancy. These crossings are shifted by the phase difference towards the charge degeneracy points, corresponding to larger exchange couplings. Moreover, the zero-energy crossings give rise to resonant peaks in the differential conductance with magnitude 4e 2 /h. Finally, we demonstrate that the quantum fluctuations of the dot spin do not alter qualitatively any of the results. Yu-Shiba-Rusinov Recently, sharp subgap states have been observed with a weakly coupled normal (N) metal lead probing an S-QD-S junction as illustrated in Fig. states. It is this phase dependence of the spin-induced YSR states, which is addressed in the present paper. Earlier measurements of supercurrent through phasebiased Coulomb-blockaded quantum dots, The nature of subgap states depends on the ratio of the charging energy E C and the superconducting gap ∆. For E C > ∆ and E C Γ, where Γ denotes the elastic broadening of the dot states due to their coupling to the leads, the natural starting point for the spinful dot is the Kondo model In the opposite limit, E C < ∆, the natural starting point for understanding the subgap states is a model where the superconducting electrons are integrated out, giving rise to a local pairing on the dot with strength Γ, which was studied by Meng et al. For a multi-level quantum dot, the finite level spacing, δE, will also affect the simple evolution of ground states when δE ∼ T K , ∆. In this paper we thus restrict our attention to small dots, for which the level spacing is the largest energy scale, and Γ, ∆ E C ∼ δE, complementary to the ∆ E C regime studied by Meng et al. (Color online) Schematics of the two situations, EC > ∆ and EC < ∆. In both cases there is a subgap state in the odd diamond. For large ∆ it appears because of hybridization of the N = 0 and N = 2 charge states by the superconductor, while for large EC it appears because of hybridization between the dot electron and quasiparticles in the leads, forming a bound state, which is the YSR state. In both cases the average occupation on the dot is equal to one and the subgap states have similar dependences on gate voltage. In this paper, we focus on the situation (a) with EC > ∆. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II an effective Kondo model for an odd-occupied quantum dot coupled to superconducting leads is introduced. In Section III, we derive the subgap states within the polarizedspin approximation. The corresponding nonlinear tunneling conductance to an auxiliary normal lead is discussed in Section III B, with a few technical details relegated to Appendix A, and finally the supercurrent through the phase-biased S-QD-S junction is addressed in Section III C. In Section IV, we briefly compare the results from the polarized-spin approximation with the perturbative (in dot-lead coupling) results including the full quantum dynamics of the dot spin, which we derive in Appendix B. We consider a quantum dot tunnel-coupled to two superconducting leads, capacitively coupled to a gate electrode, and subjected to an applied magnetic field. The coupling to the normal metal electrode is also included for the purpose of doing transport spectroscopy. The quantum dot connected to these three leads is modelled by a single orbital Anderson-type model: The superconducting leads are described by the effective Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) mean-field Hamiltonian where ξ kσ = ξ k + σg ce B/2 and ξ k = ε αk -μ α are the conduction electron dispersions. Here α = L/R labels the two superconducting leads and k and σ are lead orbital and spin quantum numbers, respectively. The leads are assumed to have bandwidth 2D with The Landé g-factor in the superconductors is denoted by g ce , the magnetic field by B, and the complex superconducting order parameters by ∆ α = ∆e iφα . Here we for simplicity take the two order parameters to be of equal magnitude. The normal-lead Hamiltonian is with a bias voltage applied to this lead μ N -μ α = V . Assuming the level spacing in the quantum dot to be large, we model it by a single orbital: where d † σ creates an electron in the orbital with spin σ, U is the charging energy on the quantum dot, ε d is the level position, which is controlled by the gate voltage, and g d is the g-factor in the dot (which can be different from g ce ). The coupling between the leads and the dot is described by the tunneling Hamiltonian where t α denote the lead-dot tunneling amplitudes and the lead index α is extended to run through L, R, and N . We focus on the odd-occupied spinful cotunneling regime well inside the corresponding Coulomb diamond, where with ν F denoting the density of states at the Fermi level. A standard Schrieffer-Wolff transformation where the Zeeman term for the quantum dot spin reads with S i denoting the spin operator on the dot.The transformation is valid for ∆/U 1 and |g ce -g d |B/U 1. The exchange cotunneling term reads where τ i denotes the Pauli matrices, and the potential scattering term is Here the exchange, and potential scattering amplitudes are given by where x parameterizes the dimensionless gate voltage as Note that the Anderson model always gives antiferromagnetic exchange J > |W | ≥ 0 inside the odd occupied diamond x ∈ [-1, 1] and that W breaks particle-hole symmetry and therefore vanishes at the particle-hole symmetric point, x = 0, defining the middle of the Coulomb diamond. We also define the following dimensionless coupling constants: to be used extensively below. We start by considering the case where the spin operator in Eq. ( where with coupling asymmetry parameterized by an angle θ defined by Notice that θ = π/4 corresponds to symmetric coupling t L = t R . By means of a gauge transformation, the phases of the individual pairing potentials in the contacts, ∆ α , can be combined to a phase difference, φ = φ L -φ R , appearing only in the scattering terms via the matrix Θ: This matrix has eigenvalues 0 and 1 with corresponding eigenvectors: and a unitary transformation that diagonalizes J αα and W αα is therefore achieved with leading to the following transformed cotunneling terms: where the new operators c0k and c1k are defined as From expression (20) it is evident that the channel corresponding to eigenvalue 0 does not couple to the cotunneling terms. However, with finite phase the two channels are not independent and therefore the problem remains effectively a two-channel problem. In order to see this, we write lead Hamiltonians in Nambu space with Nambu 4-spinors defined as Notice that since H 0 is diagonal in lead space, a unit matrix in lead space is implied on each of the four matrix elements in (22). After the rotation (21), which in Nambu space reads the lead Hamiltonian becomes where P = U † U * , which evaluates to From the expression for P , we now see that for φ = 0 the two channels are not independent, and the problem therefore remains a genuine two-channel scattering problem. We are interested in understanding the structure of the subgap states and therefore we study the T -matrix for spin-σ given by with the diagonalized exchange, and potential scattering terms extended to Nambu space as whereby The local Green's function corresponding to (25) is found as where the k-integration was performed assuming a constant density of states ν F and assuming that |ω| < ∆ D. The lead asymmetry and the phase-difference are encoded in the dimensionless coefficients a = cos 2 θ + e iφ sin 2 θ, (31) c = sin(2θ) sin(φ/2). ( The condition for poles in and after some algebra one finds two roots for each spin, corresponding to YSR states at energies , (34) with the following shorthand notation Here we have assumed g > 0; the corresponding solutions for g < 0 simply have opposite spins, and hence are given by E ±,-σ . In the rest of this section we examine the dependence of the subgap states on the coupling strengths and the phase difference. For zero phase difference, φ = 0, and antiferromagnetic coupling, g > 0, Eq. ( This is the result obtained by Yu, Shiba and Rusinov. where τ denotes the normal state transmission of the junction. The energies of the four bound states are plotted as dashed curves against gate voltage and phase difference for different cases in Fig. For (a), where g = 0.5 at x = 0, the upper YSR state moves down and crosses zero as x approaches the charge degeneracy points at which g diverges. In contrast, in (b) where g = 1.5 at x = 0, the YSR state has already crossed zero at x = 0 due to stronger coupling. Interestingly, the zero energy crossings correspond to a change of parity of the ground state, cf. the discussion in Ref. 8. Adding now a finite phase difference, panels (c) and (d) reveal the 2-channel nature of the problem, with two bound states above and below the zero energy. In panels (e)-(h), we plot the dispersion of the boundstate with phase difference. In general, a finite phase difference is seen to to shift the value of the coupling at which the energy levels cross zero to higher values. In the plots, θ = π/4 corresponds to symmetric coupling, t L = t R , see Eq. ( It is interesting to compare the above features with the experimental results by Chang et al. The YSR subgap states derived above can be observed by means of tunneling spectroscopy from a normal metal lead, as illustrated in Fig. -1 0 1 0 0.5 1. -1 0 1 0 0.5 1. 1.5 (Color online) Differential conductance dI/dV in units of 2e 2 /h between the normal electrode and the superconducting leads, see Fig. adatoms on a Pb(111) surface. where S ee and S he are the scattering amplitudes at energy eV for an incident electron to be reflected as an electron or a hole, respectively. The amplitudes S ee and S he can be obtained from the retarded T -matrix in Eq. ( where τ i and σ i are Pauli matrices representing particlehole and spin space, respectively, and J and W are 3×3 coupling matrices in lead space, with elements J αα and W αα for α, α = L, R, N . The unperturbed momentum-summed Green's function is a diagonal matrix in lead space, where for the superconducting leads α = L, R it is where η is a positive infinitesimal. For the normal lead, the Green's function simplifies to G R 0,N N (ω) = -iν F π, assuming the normal-lead density of states ν F to be the same as for the two superconductors, since any difference can be absorbed into the tunneling matrix elements. The S-matrix is now expressed through the T -matrix as and the amplitudes S ee and S he are found as submatrices of S with α = α = N and component (2,1) in electronhole space for S he and (1,1) for S ee . The calculation can be carried out analytically, but is quite lengthy. In Appendix A, we provide an analytical expression for dI/dV when the coupling to the superconducting leads is symmetric, θ = π/4, see Eq. (A1). In Fig. , with E σ from (36), implying very sharp peaks close to the gap-edges, and an overall scale set by the width g N N ∆ of a deep YSR state. When the voltage is resonant with subgap states the differential conductance is close to 2e 2 /h, except when the two subgap states are degenerate at zero energy, in which case they add up to exactly 4e 2 /h (cf. Fig. At zero temperature, the supercurrent can be found as the derivative of the ground-state energy, E GS , with respect to the phase difference between the two superconducting leads: 53 If the ground-state energy has a single minimum either at φ = 0 or at φ = π, the junction is classified respectively as a 0-junction or a π-junction. In the former (0) case, the supercurrent is a continuous function of φ with positive slope at φ = 0 and negative slope at φ = π. In the latter (π) case, the supercurrent has negative slope at 0 and a positive slope at π. In cases with minima both at φ = 0 and at φ = π, a 0 -or a π -junction refers to the global minimum being respectively at 0 or π, and the supercurrent is now a discontinuous function (with one discontinuity in the interval φ ∈ [0, π] and one in the interval φ ∈ [π, 2π]) with positive slopes both at φ = 0 and at φ = π. Phase diagram with couplings parameterized by Eq. ( The resulting phase diagram as a function of the dimensionless gate voltage x, and the lead-dot tunneling rate, Γ = πν F (t 2 L + t 2 R ), is depicted in Fig. In some cases the supercurrent is discontinuous, which is directly related to the subgap states crossing zero energy and changing their spin (as is evident from Eq. ( This functional dependence on the dimensionless gate voltage, x, was derived in the atomic limit (∆ → ∞) in Ref. 30. However, in the experiment ∆ ∼ T K , and γ and h were therefore used as free fitting parameters. Moreover, the data was also shown to match the result of a quantum Monte Carlo calculation for the corresponding Anderson model. We note here that the same functional behavior follows directly from Eqs. ( , h = g sin(2θ), (46) which allows extracting the coupling asymmetry and the dimensionless exchange coupling. Here we discuss the results for the fully quantum mechanical description, where unlike for the polarized-spin approximation an exact solution is not possible. Therefore we resort to perturbation in the cotunneling couplings g and w, which is valid when the Kondo temperature is much smaller than the superconducting gap T K ∆ and the ground state is a doublet. Details of the calculations can be found in Appendix B, and here we simply summarize the main findings and contrast them to the results for the polarized spin found above. In Appendix B 1, we diagonalize an effective lowenergy single-quasiparticle Hamiltonian. As in the spinpolarized case, we find two subgap excitation energies when the two superconductors have a phase difference. The transition energy from the ground-state doublet to the excited subgap singlet perturbatively matches the second order expansion (in g αα ) of the excitation energy obtained from the polarized-spin approximation for B = 0 and S = 1 2 , when replacing g αα → 3g αα in (34). In Appendix B 2, we show how the subgap excitation energies at weak coupling, g 1, are shifted in energy by an external magnetic field. Assuming that the field is screened in the superconducting leads, g ce ≈ 0, the transition energy from the ground-state doublet to the excited-state singlet is found to approach the polarizedspin result in the limit of high magnetic field, B g 2 |∆| (see Fig. Appendix B 3 goes beyond the low-energy singlequasiparticle Hamiltonian and provides a calculation of the leading order (g 2 αα ) correction to the ground-state energy. With reference to the three-quasiparticle Yosida wavefunction ansatz analyzed in Ref. 38, we argue why this shift of ground-state energy does not modify the excitation energy found in Appendix B 1. Finally, this second order shift in ground-state energy is used in Appendix B 4 to calculate the supercurrent in the presence of a finite magentic field via formula (42). In the perturbative regime, the functional dependence of the supercurrent on both φ and θ is similar with, and without the polarized-spin approximation, but again, only in the large-field limit do they match exactly. Summarizing theses findings, we find qualitative agreement between the results found within the polarized-spin approximation and the perturbative results for the full quantum mechanical treatment. A non-perturbative calculation of the YSR spectrum and the supercurrent beyond the polarized-spin approximation could be found by means of a numerical renormalization group calculation of the T -matrix, whereas the non-linear Andreev conductance would require an average of the current operator. In summary, we have determined the phase-dispersion of the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states induced by a spinful Coulomb blockaded quantum dot coupled to two phasebiased superconducting leads. At finite phase difference, two channels are involved in the screening of the dot spin. Consequently, the phase-biased system exhibits two, instead of one, YSR states, one of which merges with the continuum at the gap edge for zero phase difference. We have shown how the corresponding subgap excitation spectrum is modified by coupling asymmetry and potential scattering, and established that the phase difference generally shifts the parity transition, and the accompanying sign change in the supercurrent, to larger values of the exchange coupling. We have solved the problem exactly in the spinpolarized approximation, and perturbatively in the fluctuating quantum case (cf. Appendix B), and obtained a closed analytical expression for the subgap excitation energy [Eq. (34)], which extends Rusinov's result 3 to a situation with two superconductors at a finite phase difference and arbitrary tunnel couplings. The YSR bound states can for example be observed by a normal metal tunnel probe connected to the dot, which would also give information about their spectral weight. We have therefore calculated the differential conductance in such a setup. These results should provide a valuable basis for a more detailed analysis of future experiments like Refs. 12 and 13. Matsuura and Nagaoka, 32 using Yosida's wave-function ansatz. First, the BCS leads are diagonalized by the Bogoliubov transformation where (B2) In terms of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle operators γ αkσ , the lead Hamiltonian (2) reads with eigenenergies 1. Effective single-quasiparticle model Next, we express the exchange Hamiltonian H J in terms of the Bogoliubov operators. In accordance with the leading order term in Yosida's ansatz, we neglect all pairing-like terms, γ † a ↑ γ † a↓ and γ a ↑ γ a↓ in the exchange Hamiltonian and obtain the following low-energy effective model: where we have set u k ≈ v k ≈ 1 2 since their energy dependence only matters for higher order corrections to the subgap excitation energies. The last line in (B5) is expressed in terms of the conduction electron 4-spinor and the matrix in which M s operates in spin, and M l in lead space. The Hamiltonian (B5) is written in the excitation basis with γ αkσ annihilating the BCS vacuum, γ αkσ |0 = 0, and it can be diagonalized exactly. After diagonalizing the lead space matrix M l we obtain two decoupled channels δ = 1, 2 γ 1kσ = aγ Lkσ + be +iφ/2 γ Rkσ , γ 2kσ = aγ Rkσ -be -iφ/2 γ Lkσ , (B8a) where The corresponding eigenvalues for two channels are The eigenstates of the spin matrix are the singlet and triplet states Here λ S/T denotes the corresponding eigenvalues and We note that the states (B10) and (B11) span only the Hilbert sub-space of single particle excitations with respect to the ground-state doublet |D s = |0 |s . Expressed in the singlet/triplet basis (B10), the Hamiltonian now takes the following simple form (B12) To find a singlet subgap state from the above Hamiltonian (B12) we form the linear superposition and solve the stationary Schrödinger equation Projecting Eq. (B14) to S δq | we obtain the equation which is integrated over q to yield where g δ = πν F J δ /2 and the necessary integral, I E , for subgap states with |E| < ∆ and large bandwidth D ∆ is given by We note that the subgap triplet solutions can exist for ferromagnetic coupling, g δ < 0. we finally obtain the perturbative solution valid to lowest (second) order in g δ This result matches the second order expansion (in g αα ) of the excitation energy obtained from the polarized-spin approximation for w = 0, B = 0, and S = 1 2 , when the replacement g αα → 3g αα is made in (34). This could be anticipated already by comparing the expectation value of H J for the state |↑ δk , ↓ corresponding to a polarized spin and for the state |S δk : If the potential scattering term, H W , is included, the perturbative result and the polarized-spin approximation still match (see Ref. 38). In the singlet/triplet basis, the Zeeman term takes the following form where the last term represents the Zeeman splitting of the ground-state doublet |D s = |0 |s . In terms of the two potentially different g-factors, we have introduced the difference and average B-fields as For g d = g ce , we have B = 0 and the singlet and the triplet are mixed to form a new eigenstate Projecting the stationary Schrödinger equation to the sub-space spanned by |S δq and |T 0 δq and integrating over q yields the secular equation We start by examining Eq. (B25) in the low magnetic field limit where | B| |g 2 δ ∆|. Parameterizing the energy as before, we first expand Eq. (B25) to lowest order in to obtain the equation Expanding now to lowest order in B/(η 2 ∆), this yields which has the following leading order perturbative solution This shows that the energy of the subgap state decreases quadratically with B for small magnetic fields. In the high field limit where | B| |g 2 δ ∆|, we find from Eq. (B25) to lowest order in g δ that which corresponds to neglecting off-diagonal terms in the spin matrix (B9). For intermediate magnetic field strengths, the perturbative (in g δ ) solution is obtained by numerically solving Eq. (B28). Finally, we examine the subgap excitation spectrum in the case where the magnetic field in the superconducting leads is screened, i.e., for g ce ≈ 0 and B = B = g d B/2. Note that we assume the magnetic field to be much weaker than the critical field and hence neglect its influence on the gap. For positive magnetic field, B > 0, the ground state is the lower energy component of the doublet with E ↓ = -B and the resulting subgap excitation energy, E ex = E δ -E ↓ , for a particular channel δ is depicted in Fig. So far we have examined the excitation spectrum when only a single quasiparticle is included and the system is It is assumed that the magnetic field in the superconductor is screened gce ≈ 0. For antiferromagnetic coupling, g δ = 0.05, the excited state is singlet like, which for high magnetic fields becomes polarized-spin like |↑ δ , ↓ . effectively described by the Hamiltonian (B5). We now return to the original Hamiltonian and investigate the effects of the terms γ † a ↑ γ † a↓ which were neglected to arrive at (B5). With these terms included, second order perturbation theory yields the following shift of the groundstate energy from which the supercurrent can be deduced This second order shift in ground-state energy would appear to influence the observable excitation energies, but when analyzed in terms of a three quasiparticle Yosida wavefunction ansatz (see Ref. 38), the eigenen-ergies of the subgap states are found to be shifted in exactly the same way, and overall the shift (B32) drops out and the previously obtained second order result for the excitation energies, Eq. (B19), remains valid. In this manner, the Yosida wave-function ansatz generates a well defined perturbative expansion for the energy differences in the dimensionless couplings, g and w. Going beyond the polarized-spin approximation, we calculate the supercurrent perturbatively from Eqs. (42) and (B32). For B > 0 the ground state is |D ↓ and one finds I S = 2∆ sin 2 (2θ) w 2 -g 2 F (0) -2g 2 F ( B) sin φ, (B33) to leading order in w and g and with whereby F (0) ≈ 1/4 for D ∆. For zero magnetic field, the supercurrent simplifies to which always corresponds to a π-junction since g > w. For small magnetic fields with | B| ∆, we have From Eq. (B33), it then follows that a positive B decreases, and a negative B increases the magnitude of the supercurrent, |I S |. Notice that B can become negative for positive B when g ce > g d . For large magnetic fields with | B| ∆, one finds instead and as F ( B) vanishes with increasing field, the spin is polarized, and the supercurrent (44), obtained within the polarized-spin approximation, is recovered.