We investigate the H3S phase of sulphur hydride under high pressure 200 GPa by means of ab-initio calculations within the framework of the density-functional theory (DFT) with the PBE0 hybrid exchange-correlation (Exc) approximation. The choice of Exc has the largest effect on the calculated electron-phonon coupling (EPC) matrix elements; the high pressure equation of state and phonon frequencies are only slightly modified. Mode-dependent EPC correction factors are determined from PBE0 using a frozen-phonon supercell approach, while standard density-functional perturbation theory is used to determine the EPC with PBE generalized-gradient approximation Exc. Our principle finding is that the calculated PBE0 Tc is enhanced by 25% compared to PBE. This is similar in magnitude, but in opposite direction, to the proposed suppression of Tc by anharmonic effects [Errea et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 157004 (2015)]. Our calculations demonstrate the importance of considering exchange-correlation approximations for calculations of superconducting properties for this class of materials. The quest for the holy grail of high-pressure physics, metallic hydrogen, has continued to attract the interest of experimentalists and theorists since Ashcroft proposed that the new phase should exhibit superconductivity with T c ∼ 270 K. The previous theoretical investigations The mode-dependent EPC strengths λ qν are given by arXiv:1509.01297v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 27 Nov 2015 where the phonon frequencies ω qν and eigenvectors U I qν are obtained by diagonalizing the phonon dynamical matrix; ε k,i , ψ k,i are the single-electron energies and eigenfunctions, N (ε F ) is the density of states at the Fermi energy ε F , and M I is the mass of the Ith atom. The EPC matrix element ψ k,i | dV {R} dR I •U I qν |ψ k+q,j depends on the change of the self-consistent Kohn-Sham potential with respect to the phonon displacement. All of the quantities in Eq. ( qν The change ∆ε of a single-electron energy is approximated as: The difference ∆ε describes band splitting due to the lifted degeneracy in the presence of the phonon. For the application of the approximation (2) for the calculation of λ qν only the splittings nearest to the Fermi level are relevant. An example is presented in Fig. where the correction factor f qν is given by: This procedure could be repeated, in principle, to determine λ HDFT qν for each phonon mode throughout the Brillouin zone (BZ), using appropriate q-commensurate supercells. We note, however, that the Allen-Dynes equation for the superconducting transition temperature 10 depends on the total electron-phonon coupling coefficient λ, which is given by an integral over the BZ and sum over phonon branches: λ = (1/Ω BZ ) ν λ qν d 3 q, where Ω BZ is the volume of the BZ; μ * and ω log are discussed below. Therefore we determine the center of gravity q * ν in the irreducible wedge of the Brillouin zone (IBZ) with respect to the λ DFT qν for each DFT phonon branch ν: For each branch we calculate the correction factor (4) f q * ν and use this single value for all q-points within a given branch ν: The calculations were carried out by applying the Quantum Espresso 26 code. The DFT exchangecorrelation potential was PBE, whereas for HDFT we used PBE0. The effect of HDFT is larger for phonon frequencies near 200 GPa, as shown in Fig. primitive cell or 1 × 1 × 2-supercell calculations, respectively. A suitable indicator for the overall influence of the exchange-correlation effects on the electronphonon coupling is the Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω) ∝ ν (1/Ω BZ )λ qν ω qν δ(ω -ω qν )d 3 q which is plotted in Fig. The context for our results is the theory of conventional electron-phonon superconductivity as described by DFT. In H 3 S and related sulfides, the normal-state Fermi liquid quasiparticles have been described by DFT band structures and wave functions, using PBE E xc . The DFT approximation is often quite good and is widely used, although there are no guarantees regarding the accuracy of the related one-particle Kohn-Sham eigenstates. Phonon excitations are commonly described in the harmonic approximation, using DFPT or DFT supercell calculations. These are ground state properties, within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, so DFT is well justified. Using DFT for the non-adiabatic EPC is also justified within Migdal's theorem, In summary, we examined the influence of exchangecorrelation effects on the electron-phonon coupling in cubic Im 3m H 3 S under high pressure. We introduced the electron-phonon coupling center-of-gravity point q * , modifying the approach used in Ref. 19. We calculated a 25% enhancement of T c for HDFT compared to PBE predictions. This is similar in magnitude, but in opposite direction, to the proposed suppression of T c by anharmonic effects in Ref. 6. Our results demonstrate the importance of considering exchange-correlation approximations for calculations of superconducting properties for this class of materials.