The highly anisotropic and qualitatively different nature of the in-and out-of-plane charge dynamics in high-T c cuprates cannot be accommodated within the conventional Boltzmann transport theory. The variation of in-plane and out-of-plane resistivities with temperature and hole content are anomalous and cannot be explained by Fermi-liquid theory. In this study, we have proposed a simple phenomenological model for the dc resistivity of cuprates by incorporating two firmly established generic features of all hole doped cuprate superconductors -(i) the pseudogap in the quasiparticle energy spectrum and (ii) the Tlinear resistivity at high temperatures. This T-linear behavior over an extended temperature range can be attributed to a quantum criticality, affecting the electronic phase diagram of cuprates. Experimental inplane and out-of-plane resistivities (ρ p (T) and ρ c (T), respectively) of double-layer Y(Ca)123 have been analyzed using the proposed model. This phenomenological model describes the temperature and the hole content dependent resistivity over a wide range of temperature and hole content, p. The characteristic PG energy scale, ε g (p), extracted from the analysis of the resistivity data was found to agree quite well with those found in variety of other experiments. Various other extracted parameters from the analysis of ρ p (T) and ρ c (T) data showed systematic trends with changing hole concentration. We have discussed important features of the analysis in detail in this paper. Superconductivity in hole doped cuprates poses an outstanding problem for the scientific community. After almost three decades of its discovery a number of unsolved puzzles exist and a proper understanding of the normal and superconducting (SC) ground states of these strongly correlated electronic systems remains elusive till date Experimental studies reveal that the generic features of the temperature and hole content dependences of resistivity are qualitatively identical in all the families of hole doped cuprates, even though structural and electronic anisotropies vary over a large range. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the dominant electronic correlations present in all hole doped curates, irrespective of the structural or other finer electronic details (e.g., strength of spin-charge stripe correlations Various physical properties including the resistive features of cuprates are dominated by the PG, especially in the UD regime A number of theoretical study have been carried out to model the in-and out-of-plane dc charge transport of hole doped cuprates In a previous study Our proposed model also yields mutually consistent set of values for the characteristic energy scales for the PG from the analysis of in-and out-of-plane resistivity data, The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe the outline of the proposed model. Next, in section 3, experimental ρ p (T) and ρ c (T) data of double-layer Y(Ca)123 single crystals have been analyzed. Discussion on the important findings constitutes section 4 and finally, conclusions are drawn in section 5. As mentioned in the previous section, T-linear resistivity and the ubiquitous effect of PG in the quasiparticle on the charge transport are the two generic features present in all hole doped cuprates. Strange T-linear resistivity calls for an unconventional approach and quantum criticality seems to be the most plausible answer, especially when its potential to induce Cooper pairing at high temperature in systems with strong electronic correlations is considered Ordinary phase transitions are driven by thermal fluctuations and involve a change between an ordered and a disordered state. At absolute zero, where there are no thermal fluctuations, a fundamentally new type of phase transition can occur -a quantum phase transition. Quantum phase transitions are triggered by quantum fluctuations associated with the uncertainty principle. This type of phase transition involves no change in entropy and can be accessed only by varying a non-thermal parameter such as the doped holes as in case of cuprate superconductors. The point that separates the two distinct quantum phases at zero temperature is called a quantum critical point (QCP). The detailed description of how such a QCP affects the temperature dependent charge transport is still lacking. But a T-linear resistivity may originate from quantum criticality quite naturally. The basic physics is outlined below. From critical scaling, it follows that the thermal equilibrium time, Γ qcp , at a QCP is given by where h is the Planck's constant, k B is the Boltzmann's constant and C is a dimensionless universal parameter depending on dimensionality of the system. The most intriguing feature of Eqn. 1 is that this characteristic time depends only on temperature; no other characteristic energy scale (e.g., Fermi energy, exchange energy etc.) relevant to the Fermi-liquid description of the system appears in this expression. The transport properties are drastically affected by the presence of quantum criticality. Because the values of various transport coefficients depend on the same process that establish local thermal equilibrium inside the system under consideration. At high-T above the QCP, thermal timescale is much shorter than the quantum timescale, the physical properties at finite temperatures are, therefore, seriously influenced by the presence of the QCP at a particular value of the non-thermal parameter (say, g = g c , where g c is the critical value of the nonthermal parameter). The system in this regime cannot be simply described by the ground state wave function at g. In this quantum critical regime, the temperature dependence of the physical quantities often exhibits a striking deviation from conventional Fermi-liquid behavior. As temperature becomes the only relevant energy scale; the scattering rate is given by the inverse of Eqn. 1, and the resistivity becomes completely linear in this region of the T-p phase diagram. This T-linearity should affect both in-and outof plane normal state resistivities of cuprates in the same qualitative way. In general the dc electrical resistivity of a metal is expressed via the Drude formula given by = * (2 where m* is the carrier effective mass, n is the carrier concentration, e being the charge of the carrier and τ is the relaxation time. For ordinary Fermi-liquids the temperature dependence of ρ arises from the temperature dependent scattering rate, 1/τ. PG effects the in-plane resistivity by reducing the carrier scattering rate where N( ) is the EDOS of the Fermi level and H ′ is the scattering Hamiltonian, i and f denote the initial and final states of the scattered charge carrier. At finite temperatures the scattering rate will, in fact, be determined by the thermally averaged EDOS at the Fermi-level, < ( ) > . To explain a number of diverse physical properties of different families of high-T c cuprates, < ( ) > has been modeled quite successfully using the following expression where N0 is the flat EDOS outside the PG region and ε g is the characteristic PG energy scale expressed in temperature. Thus, considering the effects of QCP and PG, the in-plane resistivity of hole doped cuprates is dominated by two terms, the first one, due to quantum criticality, has the form and the second one proportional to the depleted EDOS due to PG is where α p is a constant, depending on hole content, measuring the strength of hole scattering and β p is an weight factor taking into account of the effect of the overall momentum dependence of < ( ) > and the scattering matrix elements on in-plane resistivity. Thus the total in-plane resistivity can be expressed as which on rearrangement becomes As mentioned before, the out-of-plane resistivity has been modeled within the same phenomenology before . Here t c is the c-axis tunneling matrix element and N 0 is the flat EDOS at high energies outside the PG region. These two parameters are expected to be p-dependent, whereas A is a constant independent of doping High-quality Y123 single crystals were synthesized using the self-flux method in ultra-pure BaZrO 3 crucibles. Whereas the 6% Ca doped Y 0.94 Ca 0.06 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals were grown using commercial YSZ crucibles with high-purity chemicals. Details of sample preparation, characterization, and measurements of in-and out-of-plane dc resistivities can be found elsewhere The p-values quoted in this paper, are accurate within  0.004. The crystals are detwinned and in-plane resistivity infers to the resistivity along the crystallographic a-direction, not affected by the CuO 1-δ chains running along b. We show the in-plane dc resistivities of the single crystals in Figs. 1. The out-of-plane resistivities along with the fits to Eqn. 9 are shown in Figs. 2. The in-plane resistivities with respective fits to Eqn. 8 are shown in Figs. The lower temperature limit has been selected such that the resistivity data are not affected by significant SC fluctuations (in other words, significant paraconductive contributions) In the previous section, we have demonstrated that the simple phenomenological model developed in this study accounts for the p and T dependent normal state in-and out-of-plane plane resistivity data remarkably well for double layer pure and Ca substituted Y123 single crystals. The extracted values of the characteristic PG energy scale agree very well with other studies Fig. Tables We have confined our analysis for samples with hole content lying within the range from p = 0.120 -0.185 for specific reasons. For deeply UD compounds, the in-plane resistivity develops an upturn at low-T The extrapolated value of extracted ε g (p) goes to zero at p ~ 0.195 (Fig. Within the proposed scenario, the resistivity anisotropy arises primarily due to the different functional dependence of ρ c (T) and ρ p (T) on the thermally averaged EDOS. At high enough temperatures where the EDOS becomes flat (almost constant) the anisotropy ratio, ρ c /ρ p becomes temperature independent. Higher the characteristic PG energy scale, higher the onset of the T-dependent anisotropy ratio -in complete agreement with experimental observations. The existence of PG, though poorly understood, is firmly established on experimental grounds. The same cannot be said about the QCP. One of the key point is that there is no clear thermodynamic sign of a QCP related phase transition, as one crosses the ε g (p) (or T * (p)) line. Nevertheless, certain versions of orbital current order scenario admit the presence of a QCP without any observable singularity in the specific heat In conclusion, we have proposed a minimalistic phenomenological model to describe the doping and temperature evolution of the in-and out-of-plane resistivity for hole doped superconducting cuprates. This simple model provides with a unified scheme to explain the apparently different behavior of ρ p (T) and ρ c (T) over a wide range of sample compositions. The proposed model fits the experimental data quite well and the extracted PG energy scale is in very good agreement with earlier findings. c (p), β c (p), and  g (p) from the fits to ρ c (T) data