We studied two BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 (Ni-doped Ba-122) single crystals at two different doping levels (underdoped and optimally doped) using an optical spectroscopic technique. The underdoped sample shows a magnetic phase transition around 80 K. We analyze the data with a Drude-Lorentz model with two Drude components (D1 and D2). It is known that the narrow D1 component originates from electron carriers in the electron-pockets and the broad D2 mode is from hole carriers in the hole-pockets. While the plasma frequencies of both Drude components and the static scattering rate of the broad D2 component show negligible temperature dependencies, the static scattering rate of the D1 mode shows strong temperature dependence for the both samples. We observed a hidden quasi-linear temperature dependence in the scattering rate of the D1 mode above and below the magnetic transition temperature while in the optimally doped sample the scattering rate shows a more quadratic temperature dependence. The hidden non-Fermi liquid behavior in the underdoped sample seems to be related to the magnetic phase of the material. The FeAs high temperature superconductors have been attracted much attention and have been studied intensively since their first discovery in 2006 and 2008 1,2 . These compounds are of several different types. Those types are a "1111" type (LaFePO, SmFeAsO, PrFeAsO, LaFeAsO etc.), a "122" type (BaFe 2 As 2 , SrFe 2 As 2 , CaFe 2 As 2 etc.), a "111" type (LiFeAs, NaFeAs, LiFeP etc.), a "11" type (Fe(Te,Se)), and so on. Each type except "11" has a different layered structure consisting of an alternating a charge transport layer and a charge reservoir layer; "11" type consists of only charge transfer layers. Each type shows a similar phase diagram as that of cuprates 3 even though the details are quite different; undoped parent compounds are antiferromagnetic metals while cuprates are antiferromagnetic Mott insulators. The superconducting mechanism in this material has not yet been figured out. Researchers in this field believe that its mechanism may have a common origin with that of the cuprates. Density functional theory calculation shows the electronic structure of FeAs compounds is multiband with three hole-like bands at the Γ point and two electron-like bands at the Brillouin zone corners 4 . The FeAs-compounds also show multigap superconductivity 5 compared with the cuprates which have a single d-wave superconducting gap. Since this material has the multiband channels an analysis of the optical data may need to include two different types of free-carrier contributions 6 . This material also shows quite strong correlations among charge carriers; electronic many-body effects seem to be important Recent optical study on Ba 0.6 K 0.4 Fe 2 As 2 with two Drude modes shows interesting hidden temperature-dependent properties of the two Drude modes 8 . It is observed that the two Drude modes show significantly different temperature-dependent trends; only one of the Drude modes shows a strong temperature dependence. The approach used is a similar to the so-called two-component analysis introduced in an earlier paper on Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ cuprates In this paper we investigate Ni-doped Ba-122 type Fe-pnictide samples (BaNi x Fe 2-x As 2 ) at two different doping levels: an underdoped x = 0.05 with the superconducting transition temperature, T c = 10 K and an optimally doped x = 0.10 with T c = 17 K. The underdoped compound shows magnetic and structure transitions near 80 K. We applied the two-component analysis to understand our optical data of BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 (x = 0.05 and 0.10). For the analysis we use a model with two Drude components for the two electronand hole-pockets on the Fermi surface. We found that one of the two Drude modes is quite narrow compared to the other as in a reported paper 8 . We denote the narrow as D1 and the broad D2. Other studies show that D1 (D2) come from the contribution of the electronpocket (hole-pocket) 8, We found that in the underdoped sample the magnetic transition affects transport properties of electron carriers. We observed that the underdoped and optimally doped samples show different temperature dependent hidden transport properties; the optimally doped sample shows a Fermi-liquid behavior while the underdoped one shows a non-Fermi liquid behavior. The measured reflectance spectra of our two Ni-doped Ba-122 crystal samples (see Methods section) at various temperatures are shown in Fig. In Fig. We display two representative real parts of the optical conductivity data of our two samples at 150 K and their Drude-Lorentz fits (see Methods section) in Fig. For the fitting we used two Drude modes (D1: one narrow and D2: the other broad) and two Lorentz modes (L1: one is strong at high and L2: the other weak at low frequency). While the narrow Drude component (D1) is known as contribution from electron carriers in the electron-pocket, the broad one (D2) from hole carriers 8, In Fig. In Fig. where H is the background dielectric function, which comes from contribution of the high frequency absorption. D1 (D2) stands for a narrow Drude component (a broad Drude component), Ω Di,p is the Drude plasma frequency, τ -1 Di is the (average) elastic scattering rate among free charge carriers. Ω j,p , ω j , and γ j are the plasma frequency, the center frequency, and the width of the jth Lorentz component, respectively. The optical conductivity can be related to the dielectric function as σ(ω) ≡ σ ) Qazilbash, M. M. et al. Electronic correlations in the iron pnictides. Nat. Phys. 5, 647 (2009). Dai, Y. M. et al. Hidden T -linear scattering rate in Ba 0.6 K 0.4 Fe 2 As 2 revealed by optical spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 117001 (2013). ]