We analyze the dynamics of a magnetic flux quantum (current vortex) trapped in a current-biased long planar elliptic annular Josephson tunnel junction. The system is modeled by a perturbed sine-Gordon equation that determines the spatial and temporal behavior of the phase difference across the tunnel barrier separating the two superconducting electrodes. In the absence of an external magnetic field the fluxon dynamics in an elliptic annulus does not differ from that of a circular annulus where the stationary fluxon speed merely is determined by the system losses. The interaction between the vortex magnetic moment and a spatially homogeneous inplane magnetic field gives rise to a tunable periodic non-sinusoidal potential which is strongly dependent on the annulus aspect ratio. We study the escape of the vortex from a well in the tilted potential when the bias current exceeds the depinning current. The smallest depinning current as well as the lowest sensitivity of the annulus to the external field is achieved when the eccentricity is equal to -1. The presented extensive numerical results are in good agreement with the findings of the perturbative approach. We also probe the rectifying properties of an asymmetric potential implemented with an egg-shaped annulus formed by two semi-elliptic arcs. A planar Josephson tunnel junction (JTJ) is certainly the best solid-state device for the study of non-linear phenomena and, in particular, for the investigation of soliton dynamics. In this context, a soliton is a current vortex, also called a Josephson vortex or a fluxon carrying one magnetic flux quantum. A fundamental model describing the fluxon dynamics is based on the perturbed sine-Gordon equation with additional terms which account for dissipation and driving fields. It has been recognized a long time ago 1 that the fluxon(s) motion is smoother in ring-shaped junctions since the collision of the fluxon with the boundaries are absent. Another unique property of not simply-connected junctions is due to the fluxoid quantization in the superconducting loop formed by either the top or the bottom electrodes of the tunnel junction. One or more fluxons may be trapped in the junction during the normal-superconducting transition. Once trapped the fluxons can never disappear and only fluxonantifluxon pairs can be nucleated. Later on, many researchers found the circular geometry ideal for experimental tests of the perturbation models developed to take into account the dissipative effects in the sine-Gordon analysis An additional motivation to study EAJTJs is to cast in one unique class the many apparently different JTJ configurations, including the linear geometry commonly studied in the context of JTJs. Furthermore, by constructing the junction from two halves of different ellipses it is possible to form an asymmetric oval or egg-shaped annulus with just one axis of symmetry. In this article we focus on the dynamic properties of the phase in long EAJTJs; their static properties in the presence of an externally applied field were the subject of a recent work Let us consider a planar tunnel junction shaped as an elliptic annulus that, as shown in Figure We will assume the annulus width to be constant and much smaller than the ellipse semiaxes. The internal and external boundaries of such an annulus can be implemented by drawing two closed curves parallel to a master ellipse, with constant but opposite offsets; strictly speaking, such curves are not ellipses, but more complex curves 11 . The master ellipse is described by the parametric equations x = a sin τ and y = b cos τ , where the parameter τ is measured clockwise from the positive Y -axis such that τ ≡ ArcTan ρx/y, not to be confused with the polar angle θ ≡ ArcTan x/y; for a circle, ρ = 1 (no eccentricity), so τ and θ coincide, while for ρ = 1, τ = θ only for θ = mπ/2. The length of an elementary elliptic arc is ds = dx 2 + dy 2 = √ a 2 cos 2 τ + b 2 sin 2 τ dτ , therefore we introduce the non-linear curvilinear coordinate along the ellipse s(τ ) = a τ 0 I(τ )dτ = aE(τ, e 2 ), where I(τ ) ≡ 1 -e 2 sin 2 τ = cos 2 τ + ρ 2 sin 2 τ is the integrand of the incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind, E(τ, e 2 ). s(τ ) increases by one perimeter, P = 4aE(e 2 ), as τ changes by 2π; for a thin circular ring with mean radius r, it would be s(τ ) = s(θ) = rθ. E(e 2 ) ≡ E(π/2, e 2 ) is the complete elliptic integrals of the second kind of real argument e 2 ≤ 1; typically, E(e 2 ) is reported with the argument in the [0, 1] interval; however, when ρ > 1, E(1-ρ 2 ) = ρ -1 E(1-ρ -2 ). Following Refs. In Eq.( H ν is the component of the applied magnetic field normal to the junction perimeter and ∆ is the coupling between the external field and the field in the junction Because of its local form, it is quite general and holds for long one-dimensional junctions of any geometrical shape. It states that the magnetic field enters directly into the PSGE, in contrast to the case of linear junctions for which it appears only in the boundary conditions. For small fields a long linear JTJ behaves as a perfect diamagnet by establishing circulating screening currents which maintain the interior field at zero. This "Meissner" effect does not occur in long curved junctions where even a small magnetic field does penetrate the barrier; nevertheless, still the critical current decreases linearly with the applied field In the absence of the right-hand side, the solitonic solution of Eq.( The PSGE for an EAJTJ in the presence of a spatially homogeneous magnetic field, H, applied in the junction plane perpendicular to the a-semi-axis, has recently been derived where h = H/J c a; Eq.( where n is an integer number, called the winding number, corresponding to the algebraic sum of Josephson vortices (or fluxons) trapped in the junction due to flux quantization in one of the superconducting electrodes. For ρ = I 2 (ρ, τ ) = 1, Eq.( In this section we will consider the dynamic properties of a single Josephson vortex trapped in a current-biased EAJTJ. We first consider the case when no magnetic field is applied; later on we study the consequences of a periodic non-sinusoidal potential while varying the annulus eccentricity. When cooling an annular junction below its critical temperature one or more Josephson vortices (fluxons) may be spontaneously trapped in the junction on a statistical basis. The corresponding flux quanta must be trapped in the superconducting loop formed by either the bottom or top electrode. The trapping probability is known to increase with the speed of the normal-to-superconducting transition A relativistic formula for the fluxon motion was derived 1 for an infinitely long junction using a perturbative approach. It predicts a smooth current-voltage profile of the ZFS branch in annular junctions where, as on an infinite line, the fluxon moves only subjected to cyclic boundary conditions: The dots in Figure The profile of the ZFS smoothly goes to zero as the bias current goes to zero and is point- symmetric for negative biases (not shown), meaning that the fluxon rotates counterclockwise. The ZFS profile is insensitive to the annulus eccentricity as far as we keep its perimeter constant; more specifically, numerical simulations showed that the fluxon travels at the same stationary power-balance speed regardless of the annulus aspect ratio, i.e., the revolution period only depends on the bias current. The solid line in Figure In the presence of a magnetic field the fluxon is trapped in a potential well until the Lorentz force associated with the bias current is strong enough to start its motion. The potential shape drastically depends on the annulus eccntricity and so does the depinning current, γ d . Considering that H = (0, H), the normal field along the annulus perimeter is 10 H ν (τ ) = HI -1 (τ ) cos τ . By assuming that the annulus is long enough so that the left and right tails of the fluxon do not interact, it turns out that the magnetic potential for an EAJTJ is U h (τ ) = -∆h ν (τ ) = -∆hI -1 (τ ) cos τ and is plotted in Figure ( F d (ρ)/h∆ is shown by the line in Figure Once the fluxon has been unpinned its speed is periodically modulated by the magnetic potential. However, due to the symmetry of the potential and the ohmic losses included in the sine-Gordon modeling, its average value does not changes. The more realistic viscous losses proportional to φ 2 t rather than φ t would yield a different results Asymmetric field profiles in long JTJs were recently investigated At variance with the other geometries previously used to study the effect of non symmetric Since the magnetic potential is averaged over the vortex size (∝ λ j ), the smooth changes in the oval curvature allows us to apply perturbation theory. The magnetic potential and the forcing term generated by an uniform in-plane magnetic field applied perpendicular to the symmetry axis are shown in Figure has been used to express U h and F h as a function of the normalized distance ŝ = s/λ j . We see that on the average the accelerating force in the right side is about twice larger than the mean decelerating one in the left; in addition, the positive force acts over a longer distance. A. Deterministic ratchet potential In this paper we investigated the dynamic properties of a not simply connected planar Josephson tunnel junction shaped as an elliptic annulus of constant width (which does not imply that the barrier area is delimited by two confocal ellipses). This system can be analyzed in the contest of the theory developed for curved one-dimensional long Josephson tunnel junctions Elliptic annular junctions inherently have specular symmetry with respect to their principal axes: quite obviously an in-plane magnetic field breaks the system symmetry along its direction. If the field is applied along one semi-axis the induced periodic potential is symmetric and non-sinusoidal. We studied the trapping properties of the potential as a function of the ellipse aspect ratio and found that smallest effect is achieved when ρ = √ 2. We also suggested an egg-shaped geometry with only one axis of symmetry; here the magnetic field coupled to the annulus lacks reflection symmetry, so accomplishing a rectifying potential in R.Monaco et al. which a soliton is preferentially accelerated in one half of the junction perimeter and accelerated in the opposite part. In passing, we note that an asymmetric potential can simply be implemented by applying the uniform in-plane field at a generic angle θ = kπ/2 measured from the b semi-axis of an EAJTJ, H = (H sin θ, H cos θ); in this case the normal field along the annulus perimeter would be H ν (θ, τ )/H = (a cos θ cos τ + b sin θ sin τ )/ √ a 2 cos 2 τ + b 2 sin 2 τ . However, in such a case the ratchet effect would be much less pronounced than for the asymmetric oval case. The inset of Fig. (A-1) This empirical finding provides an overall accuracy better than 0.5% for ρ = 0.5 and 2; the where K(e 2 ) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind. Abramowitz, Milton; Stegun, Irene A., eds. (1972), Handbook of Mathematical Func-