Based on first principle calculations we have investigated the evolution of magnetism in freestanding monolayer FeSe with respect to lattice constant and magnetism in bulk FeSe. The computational results show that the magnetic order in free-standing monolayer FeSe will change from anti-ferromagnetic pair-checkboard order to stripe collinear order along with enlarging lattice constant. The magnetic order in bulk FeSe will change from stripe collinear order to anti-ferromagnetic pair-checkboard order only if structure reconstruction is allowed. We use J1-J2-K1 model to fit the calculated total energies of different magnetic orders to study magnetic interaction strengths in FeSe. The fitting results of J1-J2-K1 indicate that magnetic interactions in FeSe are quite strong and highly frustrated, and increase slowly with enlarging lattice parameter. In recent years up to 20meV superconducting gap has been observed in monolayer FeSe grown on SrTiO 3 (STO) substrate by scanning tunneling spectroscopy(STS) Moreover, Jian-Feng Ge et al. In this paper, we have studied the evolution of magnetism in free-standing monolayer FeSe with respect to lattice constant and magnetism in bulk FeSe Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package(VASP) 500eV for plane wave energy cut-off, and Gaussian Smearing with broadening width of 0.01eV to capture converged results in meV scale. Over 15 Å vacuum layer was added to decouple interlayer couplings. We chose √ 2 × √ 2 × 1 supercell in the calculations of nonmagnetic(NM) state, Néel anti-ferromagnetic(NAFM) state, collinear anti-ferromagnetic(CAFM) state, spiral magnetic(SM) state, and tetrahedron magnetic(TM) state. 2 × 1 × 1 supercell and 2 √ 2 × √ 2 × 1 supercell were chosen in the calculations of bi-collinear antiferromagnetic(BAFM) state and anti-ferromagnetic paircheckboard(PAFM) state respectively. All the calculated magnetic states are schematically shown in the Figure where M i (M j ) labels the magnetic moment of atom on site i (j). i, j , i, j denote all the summations over nearest, next-nearest neighbor respectively. g labels the Landé g-factor. μ B represents Bohr magneton. In the calculations we used crystal structure after only relaxing ionic positions under CAFM order. Since the energy difference in bulk FeSe is quite small(1.5 meV per Fe atom under CAFM order) between ferromagnetic stacking and anti-ferromagnetic stacking in the c axis direction, we just considered ferromagnetic stacking in the c axis direction for simplicity during the calculations. All the calculated total energies and moments of freestanding monolayer FeSe with different lattice constants and bulk FeSe are illustrated in the Table Although no long range magnetic order has been observed in bulk FeSe, it does not mean that the magnetic interaction can been ignored. Previous studies in ironbased superconductors used local spin model to describe the magnetic interactions What's more, the fitting ratio of J 2 /J 1 in both monolayer FeSe and bulk FeSe is close to 0.5. It is known in J 1 -J 2 heisenberg model of square lattice that the system becomes highly frustrated as the ratio of J 2 /J 1 close to 0.5. Magnetic frustration has been proposed as the explanation for the absence of magnetic long range order in bulk FeSe To test the validity and accuracy of our approach to fitting exchange parameters, we calculated spin wave dispersions in bulk FeSe based on linear spin wave theory, which can be experimentally measured by inelastic neutron scattering. Since no structure reconstruction in bulk FeSe has been observed by experiments, we then chose CAFM order as magnetic ground state during the spin wave calculations. The magnon dispersions within J 1 -J 2 -K 1 model can be written as, where bulk FeSe For comparison we also calculated spin wave dispersions of tetragonal BaFe 2 As 2 We noticed that our fitting results for monolayer FeSe are different from previous calculations In conclusion, the computational results show that the magnetic order in monolayer FeSe will change from PAFM order to CAFM order with enlarging lattice constant, and that the magnetic order in bulk FeSe will change from CAFM order to PAFM order only if structure reconstruction is allowed. The fitted exchange parameters within J 1 -J 2 -K 1 model suggest strong frustration in monolayer FeSe and bulk FeSe, which may provide hint to understand why long range magnetic order has not been observed in FeSe. According to the results, the bandwidth of spin wave dispersions in bulk FeSe would be slightly larger than that in BaFe 2 As 2 , which can be verified in inelastic neutron scattering experiments. SM E(eV) -49.505 -49.366 -49.143 -49.458 M(μB) 1.