We investigate the properties of the coexistence phase of itinerant antiferromagnetism and nodal d-wave superconductivity (Q-phase) discovered in heavy fermion CeCoIn5 under applied magnetic field. We solve the minimal model that includes d-wave superconductivity and underlying magnetic correlations in real space to elucidate the structure of the Q-phase in the presence of an externally applied magnetic field. We further focus on the role of magnetic impurities, and show that they nucleate the Q-phase at lower magnetic fields. Our most crucial finding is that, even at zero applied field, dilute magnetic impurities cooperate via RKKY-like exchange interactions to generate a longrange ordered coexistence state identical to the Q-phase. This result is in agreement with recent neutron scattering measurements [S. Identifying new pathways towards realization of unusual ordered states is one of the main tasks of modern condensed matter physics Layered heavy fermion CeCoIn 5 is one of those surprising materials. The nodal d-wave superconducting state, with the highest transition temperature, T c = 2.3K, among this class of compounds at ambient pressure, is formed before the coherence of the heavy electron state is reached, and the residual magnetic fluctuations have a strong effect on its properties Our work is stimulated by a recent measurement that found a precise analog of the Q-phase in 5% Nd-doped CeCoIn 5 already in the absence of the applied field inside the superconducting phase. One of our main findings is that a low concentration of magnetic impurities in nodal superconductors close to the AFM instability produces static itinerant magnetic order in the electron system. The key aspect of our calculation is accounting for the RKKY exchange interaction arXiv:1510.00274v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 1 Oct 2015 among the impurity spins by allowing their relaxation to a configuration that minimizes the free energy. We find that the induced magnetic order occurs at precisely the wave vector connecting the nodal points at the Fermi surface, in direct analogy with the Q-phase under applied field. To verify this we also show that, under the assumption of Pauli-limiting, dilute magnetic impurities extend the range in the T -H plane where the Q-phase is stable. We emphasize, however, that our impurity calculation in the absence of the applied magnetic field does not rely on Pauli-limiting, and therefore our results are widely applicable to quasi-two-dimensional superconductors at the edge of magnetism, including organic compounds and other systems. CeCoIn 5 is a nodal superconductor with d x 2 -y 2 -wave gap symmetry. In the presence of an external Zeeman magnetic field we describe it by the mean-field BCS Hamiltonian The first two terms describe the kinetic energy with nearest neighbor tight-binding hopping integral t = 1, and the superconductivity with d-wave order parameter ∆ iδ = V c i↑ c i+δ↓ , respectively. Here δ spans the vectors connecting nearest neighbors, and V is the pairing potential. The third term includes the chemical potential and the Zeeman splitting, h = gμ B H, associated with an in-plane (in the following defined as the y -z-plane) applied magnetic field H (chosen along the in-plane z axis). The orbital part of the magnetic field is not included in the Hamiltonian due to the Pauli-limited nature of the system. Finite values of h result in small pockets of contours of constant quasi-particle energy located near the nodal regions in the superconducting state as shown in the inset of Fig. which favors antiferromagnetic (AF) order perpendicular to the plane when J x > J z , J y and the exchange coupling exceeds a critical interaction strength J c in zero field. The AF order parameter is m l (r i ) = s l i , where l ∈ {x, y, z} with s l i denoting the average spin density of the conduction electrons at site i. Finally, the system size N × N is chosen with N being a multiple of 9 in order to accommodate an integer number of periodic modulations corresponding to m(r i ) = n=± m n e iQn•ri . By introducing a unitary Bogoliubov transformation U , the Hamiltonian H = H sc + H ex may be brought to diagonal form, and we solve the resulting eigenvalue problem with the following self-consistency conditions Here f (E) is the Fermi function, and α in , β in , ω in , ν in denote the {0, 1, 2, 3} • N 2 < i ≤ {1, 2, 3, 4} • N 2 interval of components of the 4N 2 × 4N 2 transformation matrix U in , respectively. In this section we discuss the results obtained by solving the total Hamiltonian H = H sc + H ex under Zeeman field. We compare the results for the clean case with that for a single impurity, and show that the realm of the Q-phase is extended by magnetic disorder. In all of the following, we fix the d-wave pairing potential to V = 3.0. The superconducting phase (in zero field) becomes unstable towards magnetic order at J c = 3.6, and we consider a system close to this instability by fixing J x = 3.5, and further include a strong anisotropy of the form J z = J y = J x /14. The exact values of J z and J y are not important for the main conclusions of this paper. The obtained phase diagram for the homogeneous phase is shown in Fig. The results are shown in Figs. Having discussed the clean Q-phase we now turn to the inclusion of a single magnetic impurity placed at site i * . We investigate two distinct cases; 1) the impurity fully aligned with the field along the z-axis (Z-impurity), and 2) the impurity sharing the same easy axis as the conduction electrons of the Q-phase, which is defined as the out-of-plane x-axis shown in Fig. where S l represents the local impurity spin interacting with the spin of the conduction electrons s l , and l = x, z for an X-and Z-impurity, respectively. Of course, the physical situation may also arise that an x-aligned impurity rotates (aligns) with the applied field, leading to a mixture of X-and Z-terms. This situation can also be understood from the results presented below. In this paper, we follow the standard approach by Shiba A single Z-impurity in a magnetic field below the onset of the Q-phase (h < h * = 0.5, T = 0), can form a local pocket of perpendicular m x magnetization if the coupling to the conduction electrons is large enough (j z S z i * > 1.7). We show in Figs. For completeness we show also in Fig. We note that the properties of impurity-induced magnetization in d-wave superconductors have been discussed quite extensively in the context of the high-T c cuprates. The single impurity ordering discussed in the previous section leads to the hypothesis that the experimental results obtained for Nd-doped CeCoIn 5 by Ref. 42 at zero field (H = 0) may be explained by a cooperative impurity scenario. In the following we study two distinct cases 1) a concentration of magnetic Z-impurities cooperating to induce a long-range ordered m x component (in analogy with the homogeneous case with a field along the z-axis), or 2) a concentration of X-impurities each of which nucleate local m x order which couple and thereby generate a long-range ordered state with sharp peaks at Q. Naturally, the orientation of the impurity moments may also lead to a combination of 1) and 2). To investigate these possibilities we study systems doped with 5% magnetic impurities with moments aligned along either the x-or the z-axis at zero magnetic field (H = 0). The impurities are randomly positioned within the lattice, subject only to the criterion that they not be near-or next-nearest neighbors. The moment of each (Ising) impurity is initially assigned a random direction along the anisotropy axis, but the system is subsequently allowed to "relax" by minimization of the total free energy F = U -T S, where the internal energy U and the entropy S are given by More specifically, we impose impurity spin flips and thereby allow the system to optimize its magnetization configuration in order to minimize F in a standard Monte Carlo-like fashion. Discussing first scenario 1), we show in Fig. Turning next to the second scenario, 2), we show in Fig. In summary, we studied a d-wave superconductor that is close to the AFM state by solving the self-consistent Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations in real space. For the impurity-free case in the presence of an in-plane (Zeeman) magnetic field, we find a region of coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity at low temperatures and high fields, in full agreement with previous studies of this, so called Q-phase. In the bulk of the paper we investigated the influence of dilute magnetic impurities coupled to conduction electrons by an anisotropic exchange interaction in such superconductors. We showed how isolated magnetic impurities locally nucleate magnetic order consistent with the Q-phase even at fields below the onset of the global AFM-SC coexistence. Local magnetic probes, such as NMR, should be able to identify the signatures of such local Q-order. Finally, we showed that even at zero magnetic field for a finite concentration of magnetic impurities, the induced RKKY-like interaction tends to align the impurity moments and generate a ordered magnetic Qphase. This result is in agreement with recent experimental findings on Nd-doped CeCoIn 5 . We considered a purely magnetic impurity potential. Inclusion of the potential scattering may further suppress the transition temperature and smear the signatures of the Q-phase, but we leave a detailed study of this problem for future work.