We report the first experimental observation of the quenching of the superconducting state in current-voltage characteristics of an iron-based superconductor, namely, in FeSeTe thin films. Based on available theoretical models, our analysis suggests the presence of an intrinsic flux-flow electronic instability along with non-negligible extrinsic thermal effects. The coexistence and competition of these two mechanisms classify the observed instability as halfway between those of low-temperature and of high-temperature superconductors, where thermal effects are respectively largely negligible or predominant. Flux-flow instabilities are abrupt transitions from the flux-flow regime of type-II superconductors to the normal state, 1 observed in the current-voltage (I-V ) characteristic at bias currents larger than the critical current I c and below the critical temperature T c . These instabilities have been extensively studied in low-temperature superconductors (LTSCs) Whereas in LTSCs instabilities are generally driven by an intrinsic electronic mechanism, In type-II superconductors, the quenching of the superconducting state occurs with a voltage jump in the I-V characteristic at the instability current I * , as a consequence either of an intrinsic mechanism related to the vortex dynamics 1 or of extrinsic phenomena due to selfheating effects. In general, the relative importance of thermal effects can be characterized by the value of the Stekly parameter 10 α, defined as the ratio of the heat generation in the normal state ρ N J 2 c and the heat transfer 2(T c -T )h/D, being ρ N , J c , h, and D respectively the normal state resistivity, critical current density, heat transfer coefficient, and film thickness. The FeSeTe thin films have been grown on CaF 2 substrates by pulsed laser deposition from a FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 target. Figure where T c = 18.5 K at B = 5 T. As an example, Fig. As the bias current increases, the experimental I-V curve departs from the isothermal curve at a threshold value I d , as shown in Fig. The intrinsic nature of the instability is moreover consistent with the magnetic-field dependence of the vortex velocity v * = V * /(BL). As reported before, an intrinsic instability induces a characteristic field-dependence of the critical vortex velocity v * ∝ B -1/2 , in a wide range of temperatures T < T c . Figure , where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. Figure We reported the observation of the quenching from the flux-flow regime to the normal state in I-V characteristics of FeSeTe microbridges. We find evidence of an intrinsic electronic instability which coexists with a non-negligible contribution of extrinsic thermal effects. In particular, our theoretical analysis of the Joule selfheating suggests a temperature increase ∆T < 0.4 K, whose current-dependence is consistent with a steadystate heat balance regime. We thus infer a value of the Stekly parameter α ≈ 0.4, which classifies FeSeTe as halfway between LTSCs and HTSCs, where thermal effects are respectively largely negligible or predominant. Moreover, the value obtained for the quasiparticle scattering time τ is comparable with that of YBCO. On top of that, the observed magnetic-field dependence of the critical vortex velocity and of the corresponding Joule power are consistent with an intrinsic nature of the instability.