We have discovered an oscillatory magnetoresistance phenomenon in a wide range of superconducting systems, with a periodicity that is essentially independent of temperature, transport current, magnetic field, and even material parameters. The nearly universal period points to a possible fundamental mechanism deeper than superconductivity itself, and may result from intrinsic pair-breaking mechanisms at sub-atomic length scales. The formation of the superconducting state involves a delicate congruence between the parameters of the electronic structure and the interactions between the charge carriers and excitations in the solid. Minute alterations in any of these conditions can sensitively alter the superconducting state as reflected by its transition temperature T c and its resistance R in the dissipative regime. R decreases when the order parameter strengthens and provides a sensitive probe of small changes in the underlying electronic structure. Arising from flux vortex motion, fluctuations, and percolation between resistive and zeroresistance regions, R is typically a monotonically rising function of T , magnetic field B, and transport electric current I. In particular, the magnetoresistance (MR) is usually positive. We discovered oscillations in MR of a type that has not been seen before, and with a universality across materials that suggests a possible novel electronic phenomenon at sub-atomic length scales. The effect was seen when R(B) was measured with very fine steps in B under low-noise, low-excitation, and low-temperaturevariation conditions. While initially observed in films of the electron-doped infinite-layer Sr 1-x La x CuO 2 superconductor, we have since also observed these oscillations in another electron-doped cuprate Ne 2-x Ce x CuO 4 , in a hole doped cuprate Y 1 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7 , and even in the interface between a topological insulator (Bi 2 Te 3 ) and a chalcogenide (FeTe). Despite the large range of material parameters, sample dimensions, B orientations, and a temperature range covering 4-74 K, the period remains essentially the same (0.11-0.15 T). Not all samples tested show the effect, and some samples have a very weak oscillation amplitude. We suggest a possible connection between the observed phenomenon and mutual cancellation of subatomic-level pair breaking mechanisms. The main measurements in this study are on c-axisoriented epitaxial thin films of Sr 0.88 La 0.12 CuO 2 (SLCO) deposited on heated KTaO 3 substrates by rf magnetron sputtering followed by an oxygen reduction step. SLCO sample A had the parameters: thickness d=31 nm, width w=13.6 μm, length l=512 μm, midpoint transition temperature T c = 23.3, and a transition width (10-90% of normal resistance) of ∆T c ≈ 2.5 K. Sample B had: t = 61 nm, w = 4 μm, l = 100 μm, T c = 26.5 K, and ∆T c ≈ 2.5 K. The other sample included in this study is a c-axis-oriented epitaxial thin film of Y 1 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7 (YBCO) deposited on a SrTiO 3 substrate by the pulsedlaser-deposition process, with t = 50 nm, w = 4 μm, l = 70 μm, T c =78.6 K and ∆T c ≈ 9 K. All samples were four-probe bridges patterned by projection photolithography and argon-ion milling. All samples were characterized by broad transitions. The cryostat was a Cryomech PT405 pulsed-tube closed-cycle cryocooler, fitted with a 1.2 Tesla GMW 3475-50 water-cooled copper electromagnet. Regenerator materials used in a cryocooler can have a slightly B dependent heat capacity, which can cause the cooling power, and potentially T , to vary with B (although never in an oscillatory manner). In our system, the cold head is far removed from the magnet; a 22 cm long copper rod protrudes from the second-stage heat station into the magnet poles. The sample, along with calibrated cernox and diode thermometers, are mounted in close proximity at the end of this copper rod (a diode sensor on the second-stage heat station serves as a tertiary indicator). A hall sensor measured B and the current supplied to the electromagnet serves as a secondary indicator of B. The standard active temperature controller (which may produce T oscillations and add electrical noise) was disconnected. Instead T was set with a constant stable heater voltage; long-term temperature drifts were addressed by infrequently applying small precalculated corrections to this heater voltage, when T drifted by more than 5 mK. A cryocooler's cooling power oscillates with the compressor cycle. To overcome this, all measurements were conducted synchronously at a fixed phase point of the compressor cycle. This was achieved by housing the compressor in an acoustically isolated enclosure with a microphone inside to detect the repetitive sound. This signal (after preamplification, active rectification, and pulseshaping) triggered a pulse generator (with adjustable height and delay), which in turn triggered all other instruments (voltmeters, oscilloscopes, other pulse generators, etc.). The reliability of this system's measurement of R, and stability of T over time and against changes in B was extensively checked with resistors as "test samples" and through the continuous monitoring of all three thermometers. All R(B) data represent four-probe current-directionreversed resistance measurements at a constant dc I = 12.8μA. All data are completely reversible with respect to changes in I, T , and B. All data also lie in the Ohmic response regime (except for the one set of variable-I curves). To minimize electrical noise, the dc current source consisted simply of an alkaline battery and a large series resistor, serving as a ballast to hold the current constant. (A Hewlett Packard 5532A dc power supply, feeding through an RC low-pass filter, replaced the battery for the one set of variable-I curves.) Except where noted, the sample voltage was measured with a Keithley model 2182A nanovoltmeter and other voltages measured with Keithley model 2000 multimeters, with each quantity averaged over ∼30 readings (individual readings had integration times of 17 ms). The single confirmatory R(B) curve measured with pulsed signals utilized a Wavetek model 801 pulse generator, in-house built electronics, and a LeCroy LT 322 digital storage oscilloscope. Fig. Fig. Presence of weak links and microwave radiation can lead to Shapiro steps in the I-V response 2 . Fig. A final test, shown in Fig. We therefore turn to a fundamental B dependent energy scale that occurs universally on a subatomic level: the paramagnetic energy splitting ∆E p = ±μ B ∆B X ≃ 9 μeV (for our observed ∆B X = 0.15T) between opposite spins; where μ B = e /2m is the Bohr magneton. Cooper pairs ideally represent combinations of degenerate timereversed states. Energy differences between these pair states tend to weaken the superconducting order parameter and increase R (the familiar pair breaking concept). If the above mentioned paramagnetic shift were to cancel any preexisting energy differences between pair states with opposite spins, it would realign the pair energies and lead to a minimum in R. A candidate for such a spindependent energy splitting of comparable magnitude is the Lamb shift δE L . The singular point like electron of the Dirac theory vibrates and appears spatially smeared (with a root mean squared displacement u 2 ∼ 10 -13 m) because of its interactions with the zero-point electromagnetic oscillations of the vacuum. As a result its attraction is reduced for a singular potential well, such as the coulomb attraction of an atomic nucleus, and its energy is elevated. Low angular momentum states, especially L=0, that have a larger probability density at the potential's center undergo a larger shift and the magnitude of the shift depends on the depth of the potential well (for example the Lamb shift for a given n and L is higher in high-Z atoms). Thus different levels and different potential traps will undergo different shifts, leading to a sequence of minima, and we might expect the most elementary Lamb shift δE L = mc 2 (e 2 / c) 5 ≃ 11 μeV (between the L=0 2S 1/2 and L=1 2P 1/2 doublet in a hydrogen atom) as an order of estimate of the basic energy scale, which is indeed comparable to ∆E p . A possible candidate for the potential wells that nucleate the Lamb shift are the anomalous states 10 recently introduced to explain delayed x-ray laser bursts in metals The above scenario of material-independent pair breakers is only suggested as one avenue for an explanation. We hope that our reported exerimental observations will stimulate the development of a more conclusive and rigorous theory. Given the striking nature of the oscillations, it may seem surprising that they have not been reported before. However, the effect is only observed in broad resistive transitions (most studies tend to focus on "high quality" samples with sharp transitions), and the effect is sensitive to the level of excitation current and noise, and to fluctuations in T (in our apparatus, special measures were taken to minimize these problems). If the ∆E p ∼ δE L idea is on the right track, then this oscillatory effect could possibly be developed into a tool for investigating the anomalous states or other electronic level structure responsible for the phenomenon. Our preliminary investigations in magnetic superconductors show phase shifts and small reductions in ∆B X , possibly because of their internal magnetic fields. Thus our effect can potentially be used as a tool for measuring internal magnetic fields and permeabilities. The authors would like to thank the following for providing samples, useful discussions, and other assistance: L. Fruchter, Z. Z. Li, M. Liang, J. M. Knight, N. S. Moghaddam, S. Varner, R. A. Webb, K. Stephenson, and N. Lu. This work was supported by the U. S. Department of Energy through grant number DE-FG02-99ER45763.