We study photon assisted tunneling in Nb/AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions. A quantitative calibration of the microwave field in the junction allowed direct verification of the quantum efficiency of microwave photon detection by the junctions. We observe that voltages of photon assisted tunneling steps vary both with the microwave power and the tunneling current. However, this variation is not monotonous, but staircase-like. The phenomenon is caused by mutual locking of positive and negative step series. A similar locking is observed with Shapiro steps. As a result the superconducting gap assumes quantized values equal to multiples of the quarter of the photon energy. The quantization is a manifestation of nonequilibrium tuning (suppression or enhancement) of superconductivity by the microwave field. Superconducting Josephson junctions are used as sensitive detectors of microwave (MW) and terahertz signals where J n are Bessel functions of integer order n, V M W is the MW voltage amplitude in the junction and I 0 (V ) is a dc-current without MW. Positive/negative n terms in this expression describe contributions from PAT with absorbtion/emission of n photons. However, such a textbook description works only for weak MW signals that do not affect superconducting properties of junction electrodes. Strong electromagnetic fields may disturb a thermal equilibrium state. This may either suppress In this work we study photon assisted tunneling steps in Nb/AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions. Using an absolute calibration of the MW field inside the junction we demonstrate quantum efficiency of microwave photon detection by our junctions. We observe that contrary to expectations PAT voltages are not constant, but vary both with the MW power P M W and the current through the junction. However, this variation is not monotonous, but staircase-like. The phenomenon is caused by mutual locking of positive eV = 2∆ -nhf and negative eV = -2∆ + mhf PAT series at large MW amplitudes eV M W ∆. A similar locking is observed between Shapiro and PAT steps. The locking is a manifestation of nonequilibrium adjustment of the superconducting gap. As a result, ∆ assumes quantized values equal to multiples of the quarter of the photon energy. We study micron-size Nb/AlO x /Nb junctions made by a standard technology. Several junctions with different sizes on the same chip are studied. Detailed characterization of our junctions can be found in Ref. Figure Comparison of theory with experiment reveals a qualitative agreement, but also certain differences. First, in theory PAT steps oscillate quasi-periodically with V M W , while in experiment with P M W 2∆/e, which yields Here an additional factor 1/2 is due to rectifying action of the junction due to which at positive dc-bias the MW current is flowing only during positive half-periods of oscillations and P M W is the normalized MW power to the overlap point value. Thus, quantum-limited n-photon current is For the case of Fig. Another difference between experiment and theory, which is in focus of this work, occurs at high MW powers P M W > 1 when positive and negative PAT steps overlap. In theory, Fig. Figure In Fig. A condition for locking of positive and negative photon absorption steps is 2∆ -nhf = mhf -2∆. Therefore, upon such locking the gap assumes quantized values, ∆ = (n + m)hf /4. (2) Fig. Finally we want to discuss the mechanism of the observed gap quantization. Fig. To conclude, quantitative calibration of the microwave field in Josephson junction allowed direct verification of the quantum efficiency of microwave photon detection by the junctions. Our main result is observation of a quantization of the superconducting gap in intense microwave fields. The phenomenon is caused by mutual locking of photon assisted tunneling steps due to nonequilibrium enhancement and suppression of superconductivity by the microwave field. 