Molybdenum rhenium alloy thin films can exhibit superconductivity up to critical temperatures of T c = 15 K. At the same time, the films are highly stable in the high-temperature methane / hydrogen atmosphere typically required to grow single wall carbon nanotubes. We characterize molybdenum rhenium alloy films deposited via simultaneous sputtering from two sources, with respect to their composition as function of sputter parameters and their electronic dc as well as GHz properties at low temperature. Specific emphasis is placed on the effect of the carbon nanotube growth conditions on the film. Superconducting coplanar waveguide resonators are defined lithographically; we demonstrate that the resonators remain functional when undergoing nanotube growth conditions, and characterize their properties as function of temperature. This paves the way for ultra-clean nanotube devices grown in situ onto superconducting coplanar waveguide circuit elements. The discovery of single-walled carbon nanotubes One way to ensure that the carbon nanotubes remain clean and defect-free is to grow them directly on pre-fabricated contact electrodes, such that subsequently no further lithography and / or wet chemistry takes place. This technique has led to a multitude of striking measurement results, from single quantum dot spectroscopy Alloys of rhenium and molybdenum have been shown to exhibit superconducting transition temperatures up to 15 K In the following, we characterize molybdenum rhenium alloy films deposited via simultaneous sputtering from two sources, i.e., cosputtering, with respect to their composition as function of sputter parameters and their dc as well as GHz properties at low temperature. Specific emphasis is placed on the effect of the carbon nanotube growth conditions on the film. Coplanar waveguide λ/4 resonators are defined lithographically and characterized at dilution refrigerator temperatures; even after undergoing the growth conditions internal quality factors of up to Q i ≃ 5000 can be found. The temperature dependence of the resonance frequency and the internal quality factor is evaluated and found consistent with theoretical models. The sample holder is placed approximately 13.5 cm above and in the middle of both targets which are mounted at a distance of circa 15 cm to each other. Argon gas is injected via a mass flow controller close to the molybdenum target, and a plasma is ignited using a radiofrequency drive at a chamber pressure of 10 -1 mbar. Subsequently the chamber pressure is reduced to 7 ⋅ 10 -3 mbar and the argon plasma at the rhenium electrode is ignited using a dc power supply; at the same time the rf-output is adjusted such that the plasma close to the molybdenum electrode and target remains stable. As soon as both targets are sputtered, the shutters are opened and the deposition of the MoRe alloy starts. By keeping the chamber pressure constant over the whole process time, the deposition rate of both materials is kept approximately constant. In the following the alloy composition of the films is varied only by tuning one parameter, namely the output power P Mo of the rf-generator at the molybdenum target. In order to obtain the alloy composition, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is performed on the cosputtered films Characteristic XPS data of a cosputtered film are plotted in Fig. Adsorbates and the film itself can be etched by in situ Ar-sputtering for obtaining spectra from lower layers. An etching step lasts several minutes at a chamber pressure of less than 3 ⋅ 10 -8 mbar in which the base pressure is of 5 ⋅ 10 -10 mbar. Etching steps are repeated until the oxygen 1s-peak only negligibly contributes to the whole spectrum (at most about 10%). The red (gray) line in Fig. All rhenium peaks of the film are shifted by 1.3 eV to higher E B -values, compared to the literature values of pure rhenium. Similar values have been identified in Ref. Using the method of area sensitivity factors and evaluating the Mo 3d-, Re 4f-, C 1s-, and O 1s-peaks, the atomic concentrations of the sample have been estimated Subsequently the molybdenum-rhenium alloy ratio is obtained by normalizing to the sum of both sputtered metals. As can be clearly seen in Fig. Simulating the carbon nanotube chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth process typically used to locally grow few clean single-wall carbon nanotubes • C for several minutes and subsequently cooled down under argon and hydrogen flow. The XPS of a molybdenum rhenium alloy sputtered with P Mo = 75 W after exposure to the CVD environment is shown in Fig. Having in mind that molybdenum oxides exhibit drastically lower melting points of 795 • C for MoO 3 , and 1100 • C for MoO 2 • C • C, see Spectroscopy on a second sample using twice the gas flow of methane results in a composition of 12% molybdenum, 23% rhenium, and even 58% carbon in the bulk. From this we conclude that the penetration of carbon into the alloy also increases. However, the resulting sputtered metal ratio of Mo 34 Re 66 still remains close to the previous sample. To characterize the electronic properties of the cosputtered films at room temperature as well as at cryogenic temperatures, the fabricated thin films on top of SiO 5 A/mm 2 over a wide temperature range up to ca. 5 K before the transition to a normal conductor takes place above 8 K. This very high value for j c is well in accordance with the results of Coplanar waveguide λ/4 resonators were fabricated to investigate the high frequency behavior of the alloy material and its suitability for cavity quantum electrodynamics and optomechanics experiments. After sputtering of 150 nm Mo 20 Re 80 on SiO 2 or Al 2 O 3 substrates, the structures were patterned using optical lithography and reactive ion etching with SF 6 /Ar. A micrograph of a device coupling three λ/4 resonators to a common feed line is shown in Fig. Near its fundamental resonance frequency, given by the length of the resonator l and an effective permittivity each of the three resonators behaves like a parallel lumped-element RLC circuit, coupling energy out of the feed line and leading to a distinct resonant drop in feed-line transmission S 21 . In the vicinity of the resonance, the transmitted signal can be expressed by where Here, Q i is the material and temperature dependent internal quality factor of the λ/4 structure, and Q c the geometry dependent coupling quality factor. Q e is a complex-valued parameter closely related to the coupling quality factor Q c , whose finite phase Θ can give rise to a line shape asymmetry due to non-ideal circuit elements, e.g. a complex loading of the resonator or impedance mismatches. Its real part fulfils the condition Re[Q 2 for one exemplary resonance of a pristine film at T = 100 mK. It includes a fitted curve following Eq. 2; an intrinsic quality factor of Q i ≃ 23600 and a coupling quality factor of Q c ≃ 10800 are obtained. Fig. Fig. As can be seen in the figure, the resonance frequency f r clearly decreases at high temperatures (T ≳ 0.8 K for device 1, T ≳ 0.4 K for device 2). This can be attributed to a decrease in superfluid density of the superconducting thin film. A related rise in the quasiparticle density leads to a higher damping of the resonator and therefore to a reduction of the internal quality factor. Following Mattis and Bardeen with δf r (T ) = f r (T )f 0 the deviation of the resonance frequency with finite temperature and f 0 = f r (T = 0) the approximated resonance frequency at T = 0. In the limit hf ≪ ∆(T = 0) and k B T ≪ ∆(T = 0) the imaginary part σ 2 of the complex conductivity σ of the device can be approximated using the temperature-dependent BCS energy gap ∆ and the normal state conductivity σ n as ) where I 0 (x) is a modified Bessel function of the first kind. The parameter α 0 in Eq. 3 is the kinetic inductance fraction in zero-temperature limit of the coplanar waveguide. The solid red lines in Figs. In Figs. with the real part of the complex conductivity Here K 0 (x) is a modified Bessel function of the second kind. Using the parameters extracted in Figs. For T ≪ T c , the theory by Mattis and Bardeen predicts no change in the resonance frequency with temperature. However, in our devices for T ≲ 0.5 K a slight decrease in f r is observed, leading to an overall nonmonotonic behaviour of f r (T ), see the insets of Figs. Here, Ψ is the digamma function, 0 < F < 1 the filling factor, giving the ratio of the electric energy stored in the TLS hosting material to the total electric energy stored in the resonator, and θ the loss tangent of the substrate. The insets of Figs. In the case of device 1, Fig. This results in a quality factor Q i,TLS ≈ 24500, comparable to the value for device 1 and apparently insensitive to the degradation of the device due to the CVD process. Similar to f 0 , also the low-temperature behavior of the quality factor Q i is governed by interactions with substrate TLS. This can be modeled by Here, θ eff is an effective, reduced loss tangent which takes into account that at strong driving the two-level systems are partially saturated and thereby unable to absorb energy. Q other describes dissipative processes unrelated to TLS. The fit for device 1 again agrees well with the measured data (inset of Fig. As can be seen in Fig. The x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy characterization demonstrates that our co-sputtering process from two independent targets can generate MoRe thin films of controlled alloy composition. We observe traces of molybdenum oxides at the film surface after ambient air exposure. Exposing the thin films to the carbon nanotube CVD growth environment, a significant amount of carbon is incorporated into the film. No clear indications for the formation of molybdenum carbide can be found; the surface oxide is absent after CVD, pointing towards its reduction in the 850 • C H 2 atmosphere. In electrical characterization, we observe a higher resilience to the CVD process for Mo 20 Re 80 films; the critical temperature only drops below T c = 8 K for growth times > 20 min. For shorter growth times, data indicates that the CVD process may have effects similar to the annealing discussed in λ/4 coplanar waveguide resonators were defined by thin film deposition and subsequent reactive ion etching. After structuring, we observe internal quality factors up to Q i = 23700 in pristine devices and up to Q i = 5000 after undergoing the CVD process. The temperature evolution of the resonance frequency f r and the internal quality factor Q i of the devices can be understood for low temperatures T ≲ 0.4 K via interaction with substrate two-level systems, at higher temperatures T ≳ 0.8 K via the decreasing superfluid density. Mo 20 Re 80 clearly excels in terms of stability during the CVD process, critical temperature and field as well as critical current. However, the achieved quality factors are clearly lower than those reported in literature for similar materials 