We discuss the appearance of odd-frequency Cooper pairs in two-band superconductors by solving the Gor'kov equation analytically. We introduce the equal-time s-wave pair potentials as realized in MgB2 and iron pnictides. Although the order parameter symmetry is conventional, the band degree of freedom enriches the symmetry variety of pairing correlations. The hybridization and the asymmetry between the two conduction bands induce odd-frequency pairs as a subdominant pairing correlation in the uniform ground state. To study the magnetic response of odd-frequency Cooper pairs, we analyze the Meissner kernel represented by the Gor'kov Green function. In contrast to the even-frequency pairs linked to the pair potential, the induced odd-frequency Cooper pairs indicate a paramagnetic property. We also discuss the relation between the amplitude of the odd-frequency pairing correlation and the stability of superconducting states in terms of the self-consistent equation for the pair potential. The electronic structure at the Fermi level governs such characteristics of superconductivity as effective dimensionality, anisotropy in electromagnetic properties and the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. Many of the superconductors discovered so far have multibands at the Fermi level. These indicate unique characteristics such as a high-critical transition temperature in iron pnictides At the superconducting transition temperature T c , a superconductor chooses three discrete symmetry options for Cooper pairing: frequency symmetry, spin configuration, and momentum parity. In each case, there are two possibilities: pairing can be either symmetric or antisymmetric with respect to the interchange of the corresponding arguments, namely the times, spins, or coordinates of the two electrons forming a Cooper pair. Black-Schaffer and Balatsky Although diamagnetism is the most fundamental property of all superconductors, a number of theoretical studies have suggested that odd-frequency Cooper pairs have a paramagnetic property In this paper, we will show the existence of oddfrequency pairs in a two-band superconductor with the spin-orbit interactions or the band asymmetry. Within the theoretical model that we consider in this paper, odd-frequency Cooper pairs always exhibit a paramagnetic property irrespective of their generation mechanism. Since odd-frequency pairs appear as a subdominant pairing correlation in a uniform ground state, their paramagnetic instability suppresses the transition temperature. We also find that the band hybridization generates even-frequency Cooper pairs whose symmetry is different from that of the order parameter. We conclude that the rich symmetry variety of the induced pairing correlations in the bulk state is a key feature of multiband superconductors. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present a theoretical model describing two-band superconductors. The anomalous Green function of the Gor'kov equation are calculated and the magnetic property of odd-frequency pairs is discussed for the intra-and interband pairing order parameter in Sec. III and Sec. IV, respectively. The conclusion is provided in Sec. V. The Hamiltonian of two-band electronic states is, where ξ λ (r) = -∇ 2 2m λμ λ , σj for j = 1 -3 are the Pauli matrices in spin space, ψ † λ,α (r) (ψ λ,α (r)) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron in band λ (1 or 2) with spin α (↑ or ↓) and at a location r. The hybridization potential expressed by V 0 is independent of electron spin. We also consider the hybridization caused by the spin-orbit interaction represented by L. Throughout this paper, we assume the equaltime s-wave pair potential, (i.e., even-frequency evenmomentum-parity class) described by where g λ,ν = g ν,λ represents the attractive interaction and • • • represents the quantum and thermal average. The last equation is derived from the Fermi-Dirac statistics of electrons. In this paper, we confine ourselves to the pair potentials consisting of two electrons with opposite spin. We define the spin-singlet intraband pair potential by which belongs to the ESEE class in Table where s spin is 1 for spin-triplet symmetry belonging to the ETEO class and -1 for spin-singlet symmetry belonging to the ESEE class. The BCS Hamiltonian in momentum space is represented by, where We note that V j (k) for j = 1 -3 are odd-momentum-parity functions satisfying V j (k) = -V j (-k). In this paper, we assume that the hybridization potentials are much smaller than the Fermi energy in the two conduction bands. The basic property of the superconducting states are determined by the band structures and the effective attractive interaction in the absence of hybridization. We will discuss the effects of weak hybridizations on superconducting states. In what follow, we calculate the Green functions by solving the Gor'kov equation for Eq. (6). To obtain the analytical expression of the Green function, we reduce the 8 × 8 particle-hole space in Eq. ( For practical calculations, we often consider a simple two-band model described by with δμ ≪ μ F . We first consider a two-band superconductor with equal-time spin-singlet s-wave intraband pair potentials (ESEE). In Eq. ( When spin-flip hybridization is absent (i.e.,V 1 = V 2 = 0), Eq. ( In N 1 , the spin of an electron is ↑ and that of a hole is ↓. While in the other particle-hole space N 2 , the spin of an electron (a hole) is ↓ (↑). We set the sign factor s as The Green function is defined by At V 3 = 0, the anomalous Green function is calculated as where we have defined Here ρj for j = 1 -3 are Pauli matrices in the two-band space. The normal Green function is shown in Eq. (B1) in Appendix B. The relation holds due to the symmetry of the Gor'kov equation for reduced Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The intraband components are represented as These components are linked to the pair potential belonging to the ESEE class. The hybridization generates two types of interband pairing correlations. The interband components result in We find that the component belongs to the ESEE class and has the odd-frequency spin-singlet odd-band parity symmetry (OSEO). The symmetry classification results are summarized in Table is eliminated by choosing ψ 1α → ψ 1α e iφ/2 and ψ 2α → ψ 2α e -iφ/2 . The phase φ does not affect the physics in the normal state. When we consider more than one superconducting order parameter, however, such a gauge transformation affects the relative phase difference between the order parameters. This is why we keep the phase degree of freedom of the hybridization potential. Actually, the phase plays also an important role in the gap equations as discussed later. The magnetic property of Cooper pairs can be discussed using the relationship between the electric current and the vector potential j = -nee 2 mc QA. Within the linear response regime for the simple two-band model in Eq. (7), where G N is the Green function in the normal state and Tr means the summation over band degree of freedom. When we decompose the anomalous Green functions into the contribution of the ν th component of the anomalous Green function to the pair density becomes The component of As shown in Eq. ( The total magnetic response of all the components must be diamagnetic to realize stable superconducting states, (i.e., Q > 0). Generally speaking, the pair density Q has more complicated expression than Eq. ( The self-consistent equations for the intraband pair potentials are represented by where g λ is the pairing interaction at the λ th band. When we assume g 1 > g 2 in the simple model in Eq. ( Next we consider a situation where V 0 = 0 and V 3 (k) = 0. The spin-orbit interaction hybridizes the two conduction bands. The Hamiltonian is represented by Eq. ( We find that belongs to the ETOE class and belongs to the OTOO class because V 3 is an oddmomentum-parity function. The hybridization caused by the spin-orbit interaction generates two types of spintriplet Cooper pairs as summarized in the bottom two columns of Table C. Hybridization due to spin-orbit interaction with spin flipping In the end of this section, we consider a situation where The spin-orbit interaction hybridizes the two conduction bands with opposite spin. The reduced Hamiltonian is represented by In the first particle-hole space (N 1 ), the spin of an electron (a hole) in band '1' is ↑ (↓) and the spin of an electron (a hole) in band '2' is ↓ (↑). In the second particlehole space (N 2 ), the spin of a quasiparticle is opposite to those in N 1 . The sign factor s is 1 and -1 in N 1 and N 2 , respectively. The phase of hybridization potential does not affect the physics because it can be eliminated by a gauge transformation for each spin degree of freedom. In Eq. ( with where K and D ± are defined in Eq. ( The normal Green function is presented in Eq. (B3) in Appendix B. The first term of the f 1 component and that of the f 2 component in Eq. ( , we can confirm that the odd-frequency pairing correlations are paramagnetic. In the simple model in Eq. ( The correlations in Eqs. ( These coupled equations allow us to understand the role of the odd-frequency pairing correlation. When the two conduction band are identical to each other (i.e., ξ -= 0 and g 1 = g 2 ), ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 is expected in the self-consistent equations. As a result, the odd-frequency pairing correlation vanishes because ∆ -= 0 as shown in Eq. ( where N 0 is the density of states at the Fermi level in each band per spin, N c0 = ω c /(2πT c0 ) and ω c is the cutoff energy. The equation is identical to the equation for determining the transition temperature in a single-band superconductor. Therefore the hybridization does not affect transition temperature when ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 is expected in superconducting states. On the other hand for g 1 ≫ g 2 , ∆ 1 ≫ ∆ 2 is expected in superconducting states. By neglecting ∆ 2 in Eq. ( determines the transition temperature T c with N c = ω c /(2πT c ). Because of the second term in Eq. ( The condition is identical to T c < T c0 . In this way, we conclude that the hybridization reduces the transition temperature when ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 is expected in superconducting states. In such states, the induced odd-frequency pairs are unstable because of their paramagnetic instability. The expression of the pair density in Eq. ( If we could control the fraction of odd-frequency pairs in real materials, it would be possible to detect them from the variation of T c . In this section, we consider the superconducting order parameter that derived from the attractive interaction between two electrons in different conduction bands. The total Hamiltonian is given by Eq. ( We first consider the situation where the hybridization preserves spin by setting V 1 = V 2 = 0. The hamiltonian is described by for the spin-singlet pair potential, (i.e., s spin = -1 in Eq. ( The spin direction is opposite in N 2 . At V 3 = 0, the anomalous Green functions is calculated as with Z 3 = X 2 3 -Y 3 and The normal part is given in Eq. (B5) in Appendix B. The phase of the hybridization potential does not play any role in this case. Actually, Z 3 depends only on |V 0 | as shown in Eqs. ( in N 1 and N 2 , respectively. The intraband pairing correlations become They are generated by the hybridization and belong to the ESEE class. The band asymmetry generates the interband pairing correlation which belongs to the OSEO class. The odd-frequency pairing correlation is paramagnetic because The pair potential is linked to the pairing correlation The self-consistent equation becomes When we consider spin-orbit hybridization V 3 at V 0 = 0, the Green functions are given by Eqs. (B5) and ( The hybridization V 3 generates pairing correlations that belong to the ETOE class. The results of the symmetry classification are summarized in Table . III. Next we consider effects of spin-flip hybridization on the pairing correlations. At V 0 = V 3 = 0, the Hamiltonian can be reduced to In the first particle-hole space (N 1 ), the spin of a quasiparticle in band '1' is ↑ and that in band '2' is ↓ for both an electron and a hole. In the second particle-hole space (N 2 ), the spins of a quasiparticle are opposite to those in N 1 . The Green function is calculated as follows with The normal part is shown in Eq. (B7) in Appendix B. The elements of the anomalous Green function in Eq. ( in N 1 and N 2 , respectively. It is easy to confirm that the hybridizations V 1 and V 2 generate the equal-spin intraband pairing correlations They belong to the ETOE class. The band asymmetry generates the pairing correlation which belongs to the OSEO class. Since F 4 (k, iω n ) = -F * 4 (-k, iω n ), the odd-frequency pairing correlation is paramagnetic. The results of the symmetry classification are shown in Table .III. The self-consistent equation is described by Eq. (66) with X 3 → X 4 and Z 3 → Z 4 . Finally we consider the spin-triplet odd-band-parity pair potential. When the hybridization preserves spin (i.e., V 1 = V 2 = 0), the reduced Hamiltonian is given by with with Z 5 = X 2 5 -Y 5 and The elements of the anomalous Green function in Eq. ( The band asymmetry induces All of them belong to the OTEE class. Since F 5 (k, iω n ) = -F * 5 (k, iω n ), all of the odd-frequency pairing correlations are paramagnetic. The Green function for V 0 = 0 and V 3 = 0 are presented in Eq. ( They belong to the OSOE class. Finally we discuss the effects of spin-flip hybridization V 1 and V 2 on the pairing correlations. The Hamiltonian is given by Eq. ( which belongs to the OTEE class and has a paramagnetic property because of F 4 (k, iω n ) = -F * 4 (-k, iω n ). The symmetry classification results for the spin-triplet order parameter are summarized in Table . IV. The spinorbit hybridization generates the equal-spin pairing correlation. We have studied the magnetic response of the oddfrequency pairing correlations appearing in two-band superconductors by using analytical expressions of the anomalous Green function for the Gor'kov equation. We confine ourselves to the equal-time s-wave pair potential and introduce two types of hybridization potentials between the two conduction bands. One is a spin-independent hybridization potential. The other is a spin-dependent hybridization potential derived from the spin-orbit interaction. The hybridization potentials and the asymmetry in the two conduction bands generate the odd-frequency pairing correlations. We conclude that odd-frequency pairs always exhibit a paramagnetic response to external magnetic fields irrespective of their generation process. By analyzing the self-consistent equation for the order parameter, we found that the oddfrequency pairing correlations reduce the superconducting transition temperature because of their paramagnetic instability. The hybridization potential also generates even-frequency Cooper pairs, which belong to a different symmetry class from that of the pair potential. The appearance of the subdominant pairing correlation can be understood as a deformation of the ground state by the hybridization and/or the band asymmetry where λ L = (4πn s e 2 /mc 2 ) -2 is the London penetration length. Eq. (A4) indicates the exponential decay of a magnetic field into a superconductor. Thus all superconductors are diamagnetic. The negative sign on the right-hand-side of Eq. ( In a microscopic theory, the electric current is connected with the vector potential by a response function K as shown in Appendix C. The Cooper pairs are described by the anomalous Green function instead of the many-body wave function in Eq. (A1). In an inhomogeneous superconductor, odd-frequency Cooper pairs are generated by the spatial gradient of pair potential. For instance, odd-frequency pairs appear at a surface of spinsinglet d-wave or spin-triplet p-wave superconductor as a subdominant pairing correlation. Ref. 33 demonstrated a paramagnetic response of odd-frequency pairs to an external magnetic field at surfaces of such unconventional superconductors. At the London equation in Eq. (A3), the paramagnetic property is represented by negative pair density n s < 0, which immediately results in the penetration of magnetic field into a superconductor in Eq. (A4). The paramagnetic Cooper pairs attract a magnetic field and break the phase coherence. As a consequence, the existence of odd-frequency pairs increases the free energy as demonstrated in Ref. 34. Therefore odd-frequency pairs are thermodynamically unstable. In single-band superconductors, the odd-frequency pairs always appear locally due to their instability. To our knowledge, the odd-frequency pairing correlations derived from the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian are always paramagnetic and thermodynamically unstable. Thus the presence of uniform odd-frequency pairs in two-band superconductors is a surprising conclusion. To realize stable and diamagnetic two-band superconducting states, the total pair density (corresponding to Q in the text) must be positive. Finally a relation to Majorana physics where d is the dimensionality of a superconductor. When we decompose the Green function into in two-band space, we obtain where we omit spin indices α and α ′ . The kernel becomes Eq. (C8) can be applied to highly asymmetric two-band superconductors. For a simple model in Eq. ( where Q corresponds to the dimensionless pair density. In the simple model (7), we obtain Q = 1 at the zero temperature. 11,↓↑ F 12,↓↑ F 21,↓↑ F 22,↓↑ ,