We generalize the Chebyshev-Bogoliubov-deGennes method to treat multi-band systems to address the temperature dependence of the superconducting (SC) gaps of iron based superconductors. Four SC gaps associated with different electron and hole pockets of optimally doped Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2 were clearly identified by angle resolved photo-emission spectroscopy. The few approaches that reproduces with success this gap structure are based on strong-coupling theories and required many adjustable parameters. We show that an approach with a redistribution of electron population between the hole and electron pockets ν with evolving temperature reproduces the different coupling ratios 2∆ ν (0)/kBTc in these materials. We define the values that fit the four zero temperature gaps ∆ ν (0) and after that all ∆ ν (T ) is obtained without any additional parameter. Iron based high-T c superconductors (FeSCs) have been intensely studied, but there are still many fundamental open question concerning their mechanism of pairing. The main difficulty stems from their multi-band structure with indications of hybridisation among them. In this complex context, the strength of the electronelectron correlation is an issue of debate and this is one of the main points addressed here. The temperature dependence of the SC gap often indicates the coupling regime of Cooper pairs. Conventional BCS superconductors are characterized by a weak-coupling strength ratio of 2∆(0)/k B T c ≈ 3.52, whereas strongly correlated superconductors display much higher values. In the case of Ba 0.6 K 0.4 Fe 2 As 2 a ratio of ≈ 7.5 is observed in the α, γ and δ pockets, while a ratio of ≈ 3.7 is seen in the β pocket at the Fermi surface Despite the clear distinction of four different SC bandgaps To deal with this problem we develop a generalization of the Chebyshev-Bogoliubov-deGennes (CBdG) method While in the cuprates the low-energy physical properties are captured by a single band, it is generally believed that a minimal model for the FeSCs must include all five 3d orbitals of iron Here we address only these four bands because our main goal is to reproduce their SC gap temperature dependence and, in doing so, obtain some insights on the paring mechanism. To set the CBdG method for the with describes the intra-band dynamics, where the band index ν runs over the α, β, γ and δ band. The t ν ij are intra-band hoppings between lattice sites i and j up to second nearest neighbors as derived by ARPES band dispersion tight-binding fit Single particle inter-sheet scattering is usually described by where V μν ij is a non-local (nearest-neighbor) scattering potential among the bands and causes the multi-gaps to vanish at a common critical temperature T c = 37 K As it is common to BdG method, we determine self consistently the gap-functions ∆ ν i and ∆ ν ij , the local density of states (LDOS) ρ i , and the local density n i (the sum of all sheet populations). To do so, we generalize the Chebyshev-BdG (CBdG) method We write the double-time Green's function for band ν as where T is the time-ordering operator and . . . are thermal-averages. One can rewrite equation ( where and η is a positive infinitesimal. For an L× L square lattice and b bands, the matrix representation of H has dimension 2bL 2 . Here we use b=4 and L=30. In our calculations no significant changes were observed for L > 30. The diagonal (κ = 1) and off-diagonal (κ = 2) components of equation ( where the expansion moments are given by In this paper only these two components are necessary. We calculate the moments up to expansion order n = 3000. The expansion ( Using equation ( ii ( Ẽ). where the integral is performed in the Chebyshev interval [-1, 1] and f ( Ẽ) is the rescaled Fermi distribution. Such integrals can be efficiently calculated using Chebyshev-Gauss techniques The off-diagonal moments (9) determine the temperature dependence of the real part of the superconducting gaps For a homogeneous system, we need the list {μ ν,11 ii (n)} with ν = α, β, γ, δ to calculate the density of states (DOS) from We examine the case of constant local s-wave superconductivity in equation perimental values of the superconducting critical temperature and energy gaps, because they yield coupling rations 2∆/k B T c ≈ 3.52. A BCS-like temperature dependence of the energy gap has constant chemical potential ∆ ν (T ) ≡ ∆ ν (μ = const, T ). This is certainly the case in single-band systems such as the cuprates, where band filling remains constant. However, the FeSCs are intrinsically multi-band systems -the total electron population n = ν n ν is fixed, but band electron population n ν (T ) may vary, and hence μ ν (T ). This opens the possibility that ∆ ν (T ) may be a geodesic over the surface of ∆ ν (μ ν , T ), in which the chemical potential μ is allowed to vary monotonically in a specific band in contrast to the BCS-like constant μ geodesic over ∆ ν (μ, T ), see figure 2c. To show how the energy gap varies with electron population, we plot ∆ ν (μ, 1) in figure Our main calculation is explained in figure In figure We also investigated the unconventional gap structure with U ν i = 0 and non-zero second-nearset neigbors U ν ij , which emulates cos k x cos k y gap symmetry in k-space; see figure We generalized the CBdG method to treat multi-band superconductors. This allowed us to evaluate 7200×7200 (2bL 2 × 2bL 2 ) matrices, which would be unfeasible with the exact diagonalization BdG technique. We used the CBdG method's efficiency to address four bands simultaneously, instead of studying inhomogeneous superconductivity. We demonstrated that a multi-band BdG theory can reproduce at a single calculation the high and low coupling ratios 2∆/k B T c observed in high-T c multi-band FeSCs. The central point of our theory is the SC calculations at the maxima of ∆ ν (μ, T ) with slightly variation of μ(T ) with the temperature (of the order of 10 -20 meV). This represents a small exchange of particle between the overlaping bands α -β and γ -δ. The calculated ∆ ν (μ, T ) curves were in completely agreement with the empirical estimates of the experimental results. Surely these cannot be used for single-band superconductors such as the cuprates. A multi-band context is indispensable, where band electron populations can redistribute.