In this paper we determine the phase diagrams (for T = 0 as well as T > 0) of the Penson-Kolb-Hubbard model for two dimensional square lattice within Hartree-Fock mean-field theory focusing on investigation of superconducting phases and possibility of the occurrence of the phase separation. We obtain that the phase separation, which is a state of coexistence of two different superconducting phases (with s-wave and η-wave symmetries), occurs in define range of the electron concentration. In addition, increasing temperature can change the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter (from η-wave into s-wave). The system considered exhibits also an interesting multicritical behaviour including bicritical points. There has been much interest in high-temperature (unconventional) superconductivity (SC) over more than last two decades. Moreover, the phase separations phenomenon involving superconducting states (SS) is a very current topic after it has been evidenced in a broad range of intensely investigated materials including iron pnictides, cuprates and organic conductors (discussed below, also see for examples in Refs. The Penson-Kolb-Hubbard (PKH) model is one of the conceptually simplest phenomenological models for studying correlations and for description of superconductivity in narrow-band systems with short-range, almost unretarded pairing In this paper we determine the phase diagrams (for T = 0 as well as T > 0) of the PKH model for two dimensional (2D) square lattice within Hartree-Fock meanfield (HF-MF) theory focusing on a behavior of superconducting phases with changing model parameters and on a possibility of the occurrence of the state with phase separation. We obtain that the phase separation state, in which two different superconducting phases (s-wave and η-wave) can coexists, occurs in a definite range of electron concentration. In addition, increasing temperature can change the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter (from η-wave into s-wave). The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we present the derivation of HF-MF grand canonical potential and introduce some basic concept of phase separation. Next, Section III is devoted for presentation of the results of numerical computations for the ground state (T = 0, Section III A) and finite temperatures (T > 0, Section III B). Section IV reports the important conclusions and provides supplementary discussion. arXiv:1510.06887v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 27 Oct 2015 The purpose of the present work is the analysis of phase diagrams, in particular including phase separation, of the extended Hubbard model with pair hopping interaction, i.e. the so-called PKH model, which Hamiltonian in the real space has the following form where c † iσ (c iσ ) denotes the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron with spin σ at site i. t is the single electron hopping integral between nearest-neigbors (NN), μ is the chemical potential, U is the on-site density-density interaction, and J is the intersite charge-exchange (pair hopping) interaction between NN, respectively. The electron hopping amplitude (t) will be taken as a scale of energy in the system. The pair-hopping term (J) was first proposed in Refs. In order to analyze superconducting phases we perform the mean-field factorization of interaction Hamiltonian (3): where we define local superconducting order parameter (SOP) as ∆ i = c i↓ c i↑ . In general case, the local SOP is given as , where ∆ 0 is the amplitude of SOP, Q = (0, 0) for s-wave SS and Q = (π, π) for ηwave SS. The mean-field Hamiltonian H HF = H 0 + H HF int in the momentum space takes the form where E kσ = -tγ k -μ is a dispersion relation of free electrons (independent of spin σ in the absence of external magnetic field, with lattice constants a = 1 and b = 1), is a effective pairing interaction in the momentum space, and N = N x × N y is number of sites in the lattice. Notice that HF-MF Hamiltonians ( In the Nambu notation Hamiltonian (5) takes the following form: with where Eigenvalues of matrix H k are given by: where plus (minus) sign corresponds to the particle (hole) excitations. Next, we assume that FIG. Matrix H k can be diagonalized using unitary transformation U k , which has the form: where Then , and the grand canonical potential takes the form: where β = 1/k B T and T is absolute temperature. The electron concentration n in the system is determined from the condition: where f (ω) = 1/(1 + exp(βω)) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. Denotations as in Fig. In this subsection we would like to introduce the concept of phase separation and introduce the basics of its theory (also cf. e.g. Refs. where n is fixed. The minimization of ( (chemical equilibrium) and the following equation (socalled Maxwell's construction): which is equivalent with equality of grand potentials per site in domains: It implies that the transitions with a discontinuous change of n from n - to n + in the system considered for fixed μ can lead to occurrence of the regions of phase separation in the concentration range n -< n < n + on the diagrams obtained as a function of n. In these regions the homogeneous phases can be metastable as well as unstable, depending on the n-dependence of μ. In the PS states the chemical potential μ = μ + (n + ) = μ -(n -) is independent of the electron concentration, i.e. ∂μ/∂n = 0. On the other hand, there is another more intuitive approach. In such an approach the grand canonical potential ω = f -μn is used and chemical potential is independent variable instead of n for free energy f , as it was in previous case. In both separating phases chemi-cal potential has the same value. As a consequence we obtain the following simplified procedure: at first step we solve the equations for homogeneous phases and next we determined the transition point between both phases (for the condition: ω + (μ) = ω -(μ)). Usually, the electron concentrations in these both phases are different (n + > n -). In such a case, for electron densities between n -< n < n + the PS separation state can occur, in which considered phases coexist. The PS instability is specific to the short-range nature of the interactions in the model. In the presence of (unscreened) long-range Coulomb interactions, only a frustrated PS can occur (mesoscale, nanoscale) with the formation of various possible textures and the large-scale (macroscopic) PS can be prevented All calculations have been performed on graphic processor units using NVIDIA CUDA parallel computing technology, in momentum space on a square lattice grid N x × N y = 1000 × 1000, using the algorithm described in Ref. All phase transition boundaries, necessary to construct the complete phase diagram for fixed μ, have been obtained numerically by comparing the grand potential A. The ground state (T = 0) In this section we discuss the phase diagrams for model (1) at the ground state (T = 0). For T = 0 on the phase diagrams as a function of the chemical potential μ the following three homogeneous phases occurs: s-wave SS, η-wave SS and normal (non-ordered, NO) phase. The diagrams (Figs. , where Q = (0, 0) for the s-wave SS phase and Q = (π, π) for the η-wave SS phase (∆ (0,0) = ∆ 0 or ∆ (π,π) = ∆ 0 in the s-or η-wave SS phase, respectively). The transitions between the SS phases (s-wave or η-wave, ∆ 0 = 0) and the NO phase (∆ 0 = 0) are continuous ones. The diagram for the half-filling (n = 1, μ = 0) is shown in Fig. In the limit U/t → -∞ the discontinuous boundary FIG. between both SS phases is located at J/t = 0 (independently of μ). In such a limit there is a full symmetry between s-wave SS and η-wave SS phases In Fig. In Fig. As an example, the finite temperature phase diagrams for U/t = -5.0 and J/t = 0.4 are shown in Fig. In addition, the phase diagrams for fixed U/t and half- filling (n = 1, μ = 0) are presented in Fig. Let us stress that it is possible (for fixed μ as well for fixed n) to change the type of superconductivity occurring in the system with increasing temperature (the homogeneous η-wave SS phase can exist in higher temperatures that the homogeneous s-wave SS phase, but not contrariwise). In this paper we studied the superconducting states of the PKH model focusing on the states with phase separation states between two different superconducting phases. We derived phase diagrams of the model and found that two superconducting phases with different symmetry of order parameter can coexist in a state with phase separation. Moreover, the results predict the change of a symmetry of superconducting order (from η-wave to swave) with increasing temperature (for fixed μ as well as fixed n). Notice that one of the results of this paper that the temperature can change the symmetry of superconductivity pairing is consistent with other works One should also notice that it was also derived that increasing magnetic field can change symmetry of SOP from s-wave (or d-wave) into η-wave Let us stress that it has been reported that superconductivity can coexist with charge-ordered and magnetically ordered phases in states with phase separations Although the existence of η-wave SS has not been confirmed experimentally, the recent theoretical results (e.g. Ref. 