In monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), electrons in opposite K valleys are subject to opposite effective Zeeman fields, which are referred to as Ising spin-orbit coupling (SOC) fields. The Ising SOC, originated from in-plane mirror symmetry breaking, pins the electron spins to the out-of-plane directions, and results in the newly discovered Ising superconducting states with strongly enhanced upper critical fields. In this work, we show that the Ising SOC generates equalspin triplet Cooper pairs with spin polarized in the in-plane directions. Importantly, the spin-triplet Cooper pairs can induce superconducting pairings in a half-metal wire placed on top of the TMD and result in a topological superconductor with Majorana end states. Direct ways to detect equal-spin triplet Cooper pairs and the differences between Ising superconductors and Rashba superconductors are discussed. Monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are two-dimensional materials composed of a layer of triangularly arranged transition metal atoms sandwiched between two layers of triangularly arranged chalcogenide atoms, forming a 2D honeycomb lattice similar to graphene but with broken sublattice symmetry Even though the normal states of monolayer TMDs have been studied extensively in recent years As explained in Refs. In gated MoS 2 , the experimental data are well explained by solving the self-consistent gap equation which includes the Ising SOC fields of about 100T ( ≈ 6 meV in Zeeman energy) However, there are still important remaining questions: 1) Besides the in-plane H c2 measurements, are there other ways to detect Ising superconductivity? 2) Are there any novel experimental consequences of Ising superconductivity? This work is devoted to answering these two questions. In the following sections, we show that the Ising SOC induces spin-triplet pairing correlations in an s-wave superconductor. Moreover, the spin-triplet Cooper pairs are formed by electrons with equal spins pointing to inplane directions. As a result, half-metal leads with spin h polarized to the in-plane directions can freely tunnel Cooper pairs into the superconductor. The Andreev reflection tunneling amplitude decreases as h deviates from the in-plane directions. This would give an experimental signature of Ising superconductivity as depicted in Fig. To be specific, we study the properties of Ising superconductivity in monolayer MoS 2 but the conclusion obtained is very general and can be applied to many other superconducting TMD materials with Ising SOC. In the recent experiments, electrons of MoS 2 thin films are mostly trapped in the top layer due to heavy liquid gating. The samples exhibit superconductivity when the conduction bands near the K valleys are filled and the T c is about 10K at optimal gating where K = (4π/3, 0) is the momentum of the K point, p denotes the momentum deviated from K or -K points and = ± is the valley index. The out-of-plane direction is chosen as the z-axis. The β so term originates from the coupling between the Mo atoms and the S atoms. As a result, this term breaks the in-plane mirror symmetry. It pins the electron spins to the out-of-plane directions and is referred to as Ising SOC here to distinguish it from the Rashba SOC terms which arise due to mirror symmetry breaking in the out-of-plane direction and pin electron spins to in-plane directions. The superconducting MoS 2 with spin-singlet s-wave pairing potential ∆ 0 can be described by the following mean field Hamiltonian in the Nambu basis (c k↑ , c k↓ , c † -k↑ , c † -k↓ ): As demonstrated in the seminal works in Refs. Using H BdG and expressing the pairing correlations in the matrix form, we have: where ψ s parametrizes the spin-singlet pairing correlation and the d-vector parametrizes the spin-triplet pairing. The d-vector is parallel to the z-direction in the Ising superconductor case with d = (0, 0, d z ). Near the K valleys, where so and E + = E + i0 + . It is possible to generalize the pairing matrix of the Hamiltonian in Eq.( It is important to note that for small β so the triplet pairing correlation d z is linearly proportional to β so . As expected, the Ising SOC generates the mixing of spinsinglet and spin-triplet pairings Half-metal lead Ising Superconductor a) When the spin quantization axis is along the x-direction with θ = π/2, all the triplet Cooper pairs are formed by equal-spin electron pairs with spins pointing to inplane directions. In the following sections, we show that the property of possessing equal-spin triplet Cooper pairs has important experimental consequences in the detection of Ising superconductivity and the creation of Majorana fermions. As shown in Eq.( The tunneling charge conductance of the halfmetal/Ising superconductor junction is shown in Fig. If a CrO2 film, which has magnetic easy axis pointing to the out-of-plane directions, is used as the half-metal lead, the spin polarization of CrO2 can be continuously tuned to the in-plane directions by a small in-plane magnetic field The realization of topological superconductors which support zero energy Majorana bound states has been one of the most important topics in condensed matter physics in recent years In this section, we point out that superconducting monolayer TMDs provide an alternative route to realize Majorana fermions. This is due to the fact that in-plane equal-spin triplet pairing correlations are induced by the Ising SOC. When a half-metal wire is placed on top of the TMD, electrons with the same spin can form pairs, as long as the spin polarization of the electrons is not perpendicular to the plane. The induced pairing gap is largest when the spin polarization in the half-metal wire is aligned to in-plane directions. To demonstrate the induced equal-spin pairing effect on the half-metal wire which is in proximity to the TMD, we consider a system as depicted in Fig. where c R,s and f R,s are electron annihilation operators of the TMD and the wire respectively. The three lattice vectors of the TMD are denoted as r j = (cos 2jπ 3 , sin 2jπ 3 ) (j = 0, 1, 2). The hopping and chemical potential of the wire are denoted as t w and μ w respectively, h denotes the polarization field in the wire, and t c is the coupling between the wire and TMD. In order to make the wire a half-metal, we set |μ w + 2t w | 2|h| and the wire is parallel to the zig-zag edge direction of the TMD which is defined as the x-direction. The wire can also be placed along any other directions except the armchair direction where the induced triplet pairing is zero. Due to the translation symmetry along the wire, we can integrate out the superconducting TMD and plot the spectral function A(k x , ω) of the half-metal wire where Here, G R/A (k x , ω) are the retarded/advanced Green's function of the wire including the self-energy contribution from the superconducting TMD. As shown in Fig. (10) Here, the basis is (a kx , a † -kx ) and a kx is the annihilation operator of a spin polarized electron in the half-metal wire, t eff , μ eff are effective hopping and effective chemical potential respectively, and ∆ eff represents the equal-spin pairing induced on the wire by the background TMD. It has the form ∆ eff ∝ Z∆ 0 β so sin θ. This indicates that the Ising SOC term is essential in inducing the pairing on the half-metal wire and h should have in-plane components as shown Fig. It is important to note that superconducting TMD provides a very practical way to create Majorana fermions. One may place a half-metal wire such as CrO 2 on top of a superconducting TMD as depicted in Fig. We can now compare Ising superconductors with Rashba superconductors. In 2D Rashba superconductors with Rashba vector g where g is pointing to in-plane directions, the induced equal-spin Cooper pairs in Rashba superconductors have spins aligned in the out-of-plane directions Moreover, Ising SOC in TMD materials is very strong and can cause band splitting of over 100meV. We believe that, monolayer or few layers of NbSe 2 and NbS 2 , being intrinsic superconductors with strong Ising SOC in the hole bands In this work, we show that Ising SOC induces equalspin triplet pairs with electron spins pointing to the inplane directions. The equal-spin Cooper pairs can be detected in tunneling experiments. Majorana fermions can be created when a half-metal wire or a semiconductor wire is placed on top of a superconducting TMD. KTL thanks Patrick Lee for illuminating discussions. The authors thank the support of HKRGC and Croucher Foundation through HKUST3/CRF/13G, 602813, 605512, 16303014 and Croucher Innovation Grant. In our calculations for the charge/spin currents in Fig. where H F represents the Hamiltonian of the half-metal lead and H T M D is defined in the same way for the Ising superconductor as in Eq.( To study the transport properties, we calculate the scattering matrix at the half-metal lead/Ising superconductor interface at energy bias E using the recursive Green's function method in Refs. where α, β ∈ {e, h} label the electron or hole, σ 0 is the identity matrix in the spin space, and I is the identity matrix in the rest of the Hilbert space. G R (E) = (E + iη -H tot ) -1 is the retarded Green's function obtained from the tight-binding Hamiltonian in Eq.(B-1). Γ e/h is the electron/hole part of the broadening function. With the scattering matrix, the charge conductance and the spin conductance in the n direction at energy E can be readily obtained as: and the total spin conductance is defined as In Fig. Appendix C: Comparison between Ising superconductors and Rashba superconductors with s-wave pairing In this section, we compare Ising superconductors with 2D Rashba superconductors. As studied in Refs. with ξ k = k -μ referring to the kinetic term measured from the chemical potential μ and the SOC vector g k = (k y , -k x , 0) . Thus, the Rashba SOC pins the spins of electrons to the in-plane directions, in contrast with the Ising SOC which pins electron spins to the out-of-plane directions. As shown in Refs. As shown in Eq.(C-2), for Rashba superconductors, the induced equal-spin Cooper pairs have spins pointing to the out-of-plane z-direction, with From the pairing correlations, one can note that the Rashba superconductor can induce pairings on a halfmetal thin film if the spin polarization of the half-metal is pointing to the out-of-plane directions. This will result in a 2D topological superconductor. To show a specific example of the differences between Ising superconductors and Rashba superconductors, we demonstrate the proximity effect of Rashba superconductors on a half-metal wire as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. * phlaw@ust.hk