In this work, we show that a giant spin current can be injected into a nodal topological superconductor, using a normal paramagnetic lead, through a large number of zero energy Majorana fermions at the superconductor edge. The giant spin current is caused by the selective equal spin Andreev reflections (SESAR) induced by Majorana fermions. In each SESAR event, a pair of electrons with certain spin polarization are injected into the nodal topological superconductor, even though the pairing in the bulk of the nodal superconductor is spin-singlet s-wave. We further explain the origin of the spin current by showing that the pairing correlation at the edge of a nodal topological superconductor is predominantly equal spin-triplet at zero energy. The experimental consequences of SESAR in nodal topological superconductors are discussed. The search for Majorana fermions in condensed matter systems has been an important topic in recent years In particular, it was pointed out that a single Majorana end state of a topological superconducting wire can induce the so-called selective equal spin Andreev reflection (SESAR) at the normal lead/topological superconductor (N/TS) interface In this work, instead of studying isolated Majorana modes, we study the spin transport properties of the 2D nodal topological superconductor with a large number of spatially overlapping zero energy Majorana modes at the sample edge Specifically, we consider a 2D semiconductor quantum well (QW) grown in the (110) direction with Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and in proximity to s-wave superconductors In the following sections, we first review the SESAR processes. Secondly, using superconducting (110) Dresselhaus QW as an example, we show that giant spin currents can be injected into nodal topological superconductors using paramagnetic leads. Thirdly, to further explain the origin of the spin current, we show that the pairing correlation at the edge of the Dresselhaus QW is dominantly equal-spin triplet pairing even though superconductivity of the QW is induced by an s-wave superconductor. Finally, we discuss the experimental signatures of the equal-spin triplet Cooper pairs in nodal topological superconductors. SESAR and Quantized Spin Conductance -A arXiv:1510.03137v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 22 Oct 2015 Majorana fermion γ is a self-Hermitian particle with the property γ = γ † It is clear from Eq.1 that r he below the Fermi energy. Consequently, a pair of equal spin electrons are injected into the superconductor at each tunnelling event, which results in equal spin Andreev reflections. On the other hand, electrons with orthogonal spinor (b * , -a * ) are totally reflected as electrons. This type of Andreev reflection processes is referred to as SESAR Using Eq.1, we have G c = 2 e 2 h and G s,j = 2 e 2 h j • n, where n = (a * , b * )σ(a, b) T is the spin polarization direction of the electrons undergoing SESAR. In other words, SESAR induces quantized spin conductance in the n direction at zero bias. As long as the coupling ω is weakly energy dependent, the current at finite voltage bias is also spin polarized MFB in Dresselhaus QW-In this section, we consider a zinc-blende (110) quantum well in proximity to s-wave superconductors as depicted in Fig. The Hamiltonian of the system, in the Nambu basis of (c k↑ , c k↓ , c † -k↑ , c † -k↓ ), can be written as Here t denotes the hopping amplitude, μ is the chemical potential, α D is the Dresselhaus SOC strength, B = (B x , B y , 0) is the in-plane magnetic field, and ∆ denotes the induced superconducting pairing amplitude. σ i and τ i are Pauli matrices operating on the spin and particlehole basis respectively. In this section, the magnetic field is chosen to be in the y direction and |B| = B. Unlike 2D QWs with Rashba SOC k x σ y -k y σ x , where the electron spins are coupled to both k x and k y , the electron spins in the Dresselhaus QW couple to k x only. As a result, for fixed k y , H(k x , k y ) = H ky (k x ) is equivalent to the model describing a quantum wire with Rashba SOC strength α D , Zeeman energy B, s-wave pairing ∆ and effective chemical potential μ = μ + 2t(1 + cos k y ). Therefore, H ky (k x ) supports Majorana end states when the topological condition B 2 > μ 2 + ∆ 2 is satisfied The energy spectrum as a function of k y for a 2D quantum well with open boundary conditions in the xdirection and periodic boundary conditions in the ydirection is depicted in Fig. where R denotes the lattice sites, a = x, y denotes the primitive vectors along x and y directions, s =↑, ↓ denotes spin. The bulk gap closes at k y values where B 2 = μ 2 + ∆ 2 is satisfied and the nodal points are connected by the MFB as shown in Fig. Giant Spin Currents induced by MFB-Since each single Majorana fermion can induce spin currents, we expect that the large number of Majorana modes at the edge of a nodal topological superconductor may induce giant spin currents in leads coupled to the Majorana modes due to resonant Andreev reflections To proceed, we note that at fixed k y , H(k x , k y ) in Eq.4 is in symmetry class BDI and describes a 1D Rashba wire with s-wave pairing where U 1 and U 2 are k y -dependent unitary matrices. When the coupling between the lead and the superconductor is weak, U 1 = U 2 and the form obtained by effective Hamiltonian approach in Eq.1 is recovered. To obtain U 1 and U 2 for general coupling strengths, the scattering matrix at the N/TS interface at fixed k y can be calculated as where α, β ∈ {e, h} label the electron or hole, and i, j, m, n label the spin degrees of freedom. G αβ mn is the retarded Green's function obtained from both H T B in Eq.5 and the Hamiltonian of the lead by assuming periodic boundary conditions in the y direction at fixed k y . Γ e/h is the electron/hole part of the broadening function at fixed k y due to the lead. In the topological regime with a fixed k y , the channel with spinor Ψ 1 (k y ) = U 2 (k y )(0, 1) T which undergoes electron reflection can be found by the condition r he ky Ψ 1 (k y ) = 0. On the other hand, the channel with spinor Ψ 2 (k y ) = U 2 (k y )(1, 0) T undergoes resonant Andreev reflections at zero bias. In the weak coupling limit, the spin polarization of the SESAR process is n(k y ) = Ψ † 2 (k y )σΨ 2 (k y ). To understand the parameter dependence of the spin polarization direction, n(k y = 0) as a function of Dresselhaus SOC strength α D is shown in Fig. At finite voltage bias V , the total spin current in an arbitrary j direction can be worked out by summing up all the k y components : Pairing Correlation-In the above sections, it is shown using scattering matrices that the normal lead injects pairs of electrons with certain spin polarization into the superconductor to form Copper pairs. On the other hand, the parent superconductor which induces superconductivity in the Dresselhaus QW has s-wave pairing and it is rather surprising that the induced superconductivity on the edge of the Dresselhaus QW is predominantly spin-triplet. To further understand the system, we calculate the real space retarded Green's function of the system: The anomalous part of the retarded Green's function is the Fourier transform of retarded response function: (10) It provides information about the pairing symmetry of the superconductor Here, ψ s =tr[-iG eh σ y ]/2 gives the spin-singlet pairing correlation ψ † ↑ ψ † ↓ -ψ † ↓ ψ † ↑ and the d-vector characterizes the spin-triplet pairing correlation. For example, The retarded Green's function is calculated based on the tight-binding model in Eq.5 by recursive approach Moreover, since the Majorana modes are protected from disorder by a chiral symmetry Interestingly, from the d-vector, the spin polarization direction of the Cooper pair is found to be s = i(d × d * )/|d| 2 Since the Cooper pairs are spin-polarized in the s direction, a half-metal lead (such as CrO 2 Conclusion-In this work, we show that giant spin current can be injected into nodal topological superconductors using paramagnetic leads due to SESAR. SESAR is related to the spin-triplet correlations at the edge of the topological superconductors which can be detected by tunnelling experiments.