Many important questions for high-T c cuprates are closely related to the insulating nature of parent compounds. While there has been intensive discussion on this issue, all arguments rely strongly on, or are closely related to, the correlation strength of the materials. Clear understanding has been seriously hampered by the absence of a direct measure of this interaction, traditionally denoted by U . Here, we report a first-principles estimation of U for several different types of cuprates. The U values clearly increase as a function of the inverse bond distance between apical oxygen and copper. Our results show that the electron-doped cuprates are less correlated than their hole-doped counterparts, which supports the Slater picture rather than the Mott picture. Further, the U values significantly vary even among the hole-doped families. The correlation strengths of the Hg-cuprates are noticeably weaker than that of La 2 CuO 4 . Our results suggest that the strong correlation enough to induce Mott gap may not be a prerequisite for the high-T c superconductivity. Due to extensive efforts over the last 30 years The 'dome'-shaped region of superconductivity, which only appears after the long-range magnetic order is suppressed (see Figure The superconducting dome has been considered to be particularly important in the framework of some outstanding theoretical models or 'pictures' that assume or predict its existence In spite of its crucial importance, however, this issue is quite challenging because of the difficulty in quantifying the 'Mott-ness' or in estimating the correlation strengths. Here, we also note that while Comanac et al. concluded that all the cuprates are Slater insulators Here, we try to provide a clear answer to this long standing question by performing the direct estimation of U for several different types of cuprates. Our first-principles calculations show that both of the previous conclusions are not quite correct. On one hand, our result provides the first direct confirmation that the correlation strength of electron-doped materials is weaker than that of hole-doped counterparts. On the other, we significantly revise the previous conclusion: Not all of the hole-doped cuprates have stronger correlation compared to the electron doped ones. In fact, one representative hole-doped family, namely Hg-cuprates (and presumably many other multi-layered cuprates), has weaker electron correlation strength comparable to the electron-doped materials. Our result has a profound implication for the pairing principle: The correlation effects, strong enough to produce the Mott insulating state, may not be a prerequisite for high T c superconductivity. The results are summarized in Figure The calculated U/t for La 2 CuO 4 is ∼7 which compares reasonably well with the widely used values for the model Hamiltonian studies The 4f electrons in RE 2 CuO 4 located around the Fermi level must be considered carefully. Because there is no well-established method to treat these states, first-principles calculations of rare-earth compounds has been challenging. One widely-used method is to treat the 4f electrons as part of the core electrons, as was done in Ref. For the estimation of correlation strength the previous theoretical approaches analyzed either the mass renormalization factor or the optical conductivity In the present study, we directly calculated U from first-principles without any adjustable parameter (see Methods and Supplementary Information). Therefore, our results, which show a smaller U value in electron-doped materials, can be regarded as direct evidence that materials with the T -type lattice structure are less correlated. A characteristic feature that determines the material dependence of the correlation strength can be represented by a single parameter. Figure It is noteworthy that the hole-doped family can also have copper-oxygen layers with no apical oxygen. For example, the inner-layer of HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 8 has the same local structure as RE 2 CuO 4 (i.e., no apical oxygens; CuO 4 ). Figures It is instructive to see how these features are related to the charge transfer energy, ∆ dp = E d (Cu-3d energy level)-E p (O-2p energy level), which is another key parameter in many of the transition-metal oxides The overall behavior of U and ∆ dp is not quite different nor entirely similar. the same when plotted as a function of 1/h O . The similarity is likely due to that a large ∆ dp results in a smaller d-p hybridization, making Wannier orbital more localized. At the same time, the details of the band structure play some role in determining the correlation strength. Importantly, the results of both U and ∆ dp indicate that Hg-compounds are significantly less correlated than La 2 CuO 4 , and their correlation strengths are comparable to those of electron-doped materials. Therefore, a simple classification of the parent compounds in terms of the carrier types is not pertinent, and the previous studies that regarded La 2 CuO 4 as a prototype hole-doped cuprate should be re-interpreted. It may be more desirable to classify some of the hole-doped materials as Slater-type insulators. Comparison of our result with experiments is not at all straightforward and any direct quantitative argument may not be possible. The determination of U based on any experimental data is eventually to fit onto a certain type of model. Within such an obvious limitation, it may be instructive to see the optical conductivity data as a possible consistency check. The previous experiments on the hole-doped materials, for example, seem basically consistent with our results: Charge transfer gap of La 2 CuO 4 is larger than that of Nd 2 CuO 4 , and the integrated Drude weight of (doped) T'-materials is larger than La 2 CuO 4 . The trend of other materials is also compatible with our calculations while the data from the undoped parent compounds is not always available Our results can provide natural explanations for recent experiments The Hg-cuprates are of interest in this regard. Being a hole-doped family, their correlation strength is significantly weaker than that of La 2 CuO 4 and close to the electron-doped cuprates, especially in the triple-layer compound. Nevertheless, the dome-like doping dependence of T c has been observed in both single-layer Therefore, the dome-shaped T c may not necessarily be a consequence of strong electron correlation. In fact, a mechanism that can induce the dome-shaped T c without Mott-ness has recently been proposed We performed the first direct calculation of the material dependent correlation strengths in cuprates. A clear increasing trend of U is found as a function of 1/h O . Our result strongly supports the Slater picture for electron-doped cuprates. It is the first direct evidence of weaker correlations in electron-doped materials, and can be regarded as a (theoretical) confirmation. On the other hand, we significantly revise the current understanding of this issue. Contrary to the previous conclusion, some of the hole-doped cuprates (e.g., the Hg-compounds) have considerably weaker correlations which are comparable to those in electron-doped materials. Our results indicate that the electron correlation strong enough to induce the Mott gap may not be a prerequisite for high T c superconductivity. We used so-called 'constrained random phase approximation (cRPA)' method to estimate the correlation strength. This recently-established technique In order to avoid the ambiguity related to the 4f electrons in RE 2 CuO 4 , we used three different methods. Method 1 treats the RE-4f orbitals as the core as in the previous studies around the Fermi energy and can cause some deviation in the U estimation. Method 2 replaces RE ions with La while maintaining the experimental lattice parameters. The resulting effect is expected to be similar to Method 1. We emphasize, however, that the whole procedure is determined in a self-consistent way, and the position and the width of the Cu-3d band is adjusted accordingly. Therefore, the naive guess for the final U value might not be correct. Method 3 keeps the RE-4f states around the Fermi energy as described by LDA. Within LDA, these less-renormalized and uncorrelated 4f -bands are located closer to the Fermi level and contribute to the screening. In spite of the complexity of the LDA band structure, the Cu-e g bands are well identified by the standard Wannier fitting, and therefore, Method 3 works as well as the other two approaches (see the Supplementary Information). The average of these three values is presented as the main data while the error bars represent the largest and smallest values obtained by Methods 1-3 (Figure indicates the Cu to apical oxygen bond distance and the distance can be defined to be ∞ when there is no apical oxygen. For the case with no apical oxygen (CuO This work Ref. [1] Ref. Ref. We implemented a recent cRPA formalism refined by S ̧aşıoglu et al. We paid special attention to the low frequency oscillation of U (ω) (Fig. We have performed the Wannier fit by considering both the d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals explicitly as the internal space The calculation results for t, t , U , U /t, ∆ dp , and J are summarized in Table FIG. 2: Calculated U and U /t for cuprate parent compounds. The left (orange) and the right (green) vertical axis correspond to U and U /t, respectively. A total of seven different materials have been calculated: La 2 CuO 4 (single layered, hole doped), HgBa 2 CuO 4 (single layered, hole doped), HgBa 2 CaCu 2 O 6 (double layered, hole doped), HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 8 (triple layered, hole doped), Pr 2 CuO 4 (single layered, electron doped), Nd 2 CuO 4 (single layered, electron doped), and Sm 2