The discovery of high temperature superconductivity in FeSe films on SrTiO3 substrate has inspired great experimental and theoretical interests. First-principles density functional theory calculations, which have played an important role in the study of bulk iron-based superconductors, also participate in the investigation of interfacial superconductivity. In this article, we review the calculation results on the electronic and magnetic structures of FeSe epitaxial films, emphasizing on the interplay between different degrees of freedom, such as charge, spin, and lattice vibrations. Furthermore, the comparison between FeSe monolayer and bilayer films on SrTiO3 is discussed. Iron-based superconductors Epitaxial film growth provides a new route to tune T c for Fe-based superconductors. The monolayer FeSe on the SrTiO 3 substrate shows a strong charge effect. The as-grown FeSe film is generally non-superconducting. It becomes superconducting after annealing, which induces doping of electrons by introducing oxygen vacancies in the substrate. As revealed by the ARPES measurements, the superconducting monolayer FeSe film contains two electron-like Fermi surfaces around the corners of the Brillouin zone, Soon after the discovery of superconductivity in the FeSe epitaxial films, The pairing mechanism in the single-layer FeSe film is still unknown. But it is generally believed that the conducting electrons in the FeSe films couple strongly with phonon modes in the SrTiO 3 substrate. Based on a theoretical investigation on the screening effect of ferroelectric phonons of SrTiO 3 on the pairing interaction in the FeSe layer, Xiang et al. suggested that the superconducting transition driven by spin fluctuations can be strongly enhanced by the electron-phonon coupling, which in turn can increase significantly the su-perconducting transition temperature and even alter the pairing symmetry. The interplay between superconductivity and magnetic order is important to the understanding of pairing mechanism in iron-based superconductors. In bulk FeSe, the long-range magnetic order was not observed at ambient pressure down to low temperature, but the antiferromagnetic fluctuation, as revealed by the nuclear magnetic resonance experiment, is strong. For the bulk FeSe the transition temperature can arise from 8.3 K at ambient pressure to 37 K under high pressure, Using the first-principles electronic structure calculations by including the van der Waals correction, we determined the lattice structures of bulk FeSe under pressure as well as FeSe films on SrTiO 3 under different electron doping. We found that both the lattice constants and the phonon frequencies for bulk FeSe at ambient pressure agree well with the experimental values. For FeSe epitaxial films on SrTiO 3 , the induced variation of magnetic moment by the zero-point atomic displacement of the phonon mode is less than 0.2 μ B , From the STM spectra of FeSe/SrTiO 3 , it is known that the monolayer FeSe film behaves differently from the double-layer FeSe film. The monolayer FeSe upon electron doping shows a superconducting gap while the bilayer FeSe does not. We have briefly reviewed the first-principles density functional theory calculations on the electronic and magnetic structures of FeSe/SrTiO 3 films and compared with the corresponding results for the bulk FeSe. Without doping, the ground state of FeSe epitaxial films was found to be antiferromagnetically ordered. However, the energy difference between different antiferromagnetically ordered states is very small. This may indicate that the magnetic states in these materials are highly frustrated, which may eventually melt the antiferromagnetic order, leading to a quantum spin liquid state, as observed by experiments. Upon doping, the electronic band structure is changed and the density of states at the Fermi level is increased. Furthermore, the electron-phonon coupling is enhanced at the interfacial layer of FeSe films, especially after doping electrons. To unravel the underlying mechanism of interface-induced high temperature superconductivity, more theoretical studies are needed to elucidate the characteristics of spin fluctuations and their collaboration with electron-phonon coupling in this epitaxial system.