We review the progress of nonmagnetic impurity doping study on the Fe-based superconductors. On the theoretical side, two highly potential candidates for the pairing symmetry order parameter, i.e. the multi-gap s++ and s± wave models, have been proposed but continuously debated. The debate arises because of the complex gap structure, exceptive magnetic and metallic behaviors of Fe-based superconductors which may make the influences of nonmagnetic defects varied in chemical potential, impurity disorder, inter-and intra-band scattering strength, and electron localization, and hence difficulty in directly obtaining the most important information for understanding the symmetry order parameter. Experimentally, the nonmagnetic impurity substitution study has been widely carried out, which has provided very useful insights. We review herein the various nonmagnetic impurity doping experiments, including the controlled defects within the superconducting Fe2X2 planes through samples quality improvement, a single impurity effects on the electronic state and local moment, the magnetic response of the Fe2X2 planes both on macroscopic scale as antiferromagnetic state and local scale of moment, as well as the significant effect in modifying the transport properties. The experiments enable us to qualitatively analyze the nonmagnetic impurities effects on the superconducting state for many Fe-based superconductors. We also propose herein some strategies for the nonmagnetic impurity doping study. As an important model for explaining the nonmagnetic impurities doping effects, the pair-breaking model is compared with various theoretical approaches via analyzing the pair-breaking rates of various Fe-superconductors. In 2006, Kamihara et al. discovered superconductivity with a critical temperature (Tc) of 5 K in LaFePO1-xFx which has a layered ZrCuSiAs-type (1111-type) tetragonal structure To date, one of the remained key issues is to elucidate the pair-symmetry of the FBS, for which several possible models were proposed just after the discovery The SC Fe2X2 (X=As, P or Se) plane, which is similar as the SC CuO2 layer in cuprate superconductors, is a common feature shared by the various iron-pnicitide superconductors. The substitution of point defects for the Fe-site has been proposed for understanding the physical properties, which has been demonstrated as an effective way and has been intensively undertaken in cuprate superconductors. According to Anderson's theorem In this article we review both theoretical and experimental studies of the NMI effects on the superconductivity of FBS. We start with the introduction of the potential gap symmetries of FBS and recent theoretical studies on the defect impurities in Section 2, and then overview the NMI substitution methods in Section 3, including both chemical doping and irradiation inducing defects. The effects of NMI on the various properties of the host superconductors are reviewed by introducing the various experiments in Section 4: (i) The sample quality will be discussed for the controlled impurities within the SC Fe2X2 planes in Section 4.1. (ii) In Section 4.2, a single impurity effects on the electronic state and local moment are introduced. (iii) Magnetic response of the Fe2X2 planes to NMI on both macroscopic scale as antiferromagnetic state and local scale of moment will be reviewed in Section 4.3. (iv) Significant modifications of the transport properties of the superconductors are discussed in details in Section 4.4. (iv) Some potential experiments for introduction of NMI are also proposed in Section 4.5. (v) Finally, as the most prominent qualitative feature from the impurities doping, the effects on SC state are discussed in Section 4.5, which covers many systems of superconductors. As a summary, the pair-breaking rates in different systems will be reviewed in Section 5 by comparing with various theoretical approaches. Theorists have proposed four models as candidates for the SC energy gap symmetry of FBS as shown in Figure 1 For FBS, the conventionally simple s-wave model has already been eliminated by various studies and the multi-gapped s-wave models, i.e., the s± Various experiments have been performed to investigate the OP symmetry of FBS, including angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, quantum oscillation, London penetration depth, and Josephson tunneling effect, and so on. However, the issue remains inclusive because of the rather contrary results derived from these experiments. Here, we will review the NMI doping study on this issue. In this section, we focus on theoretical studies on the effect of impurity atoms or the atomic defects. The pair-breaking effect by magnetic and NMI will be introduced. As we mentioned above, magnetic impurity suppresses SC independently of the gap symmetry while the NMI effect depends strongly on it. The NMI, for instance Zn, will suppress Tc according to the Abrikosov-Gor'kov (AG) formula where φ(x) is the digamma function. In mathematics, the digamma function is defined as the logarithmic derivative of the gamma function The μ in Eq. ( where τ is the relaxation time of NMI scattering. Ω in Eq.( For an isotropic SC gap, for instance the isotropic s-wave, Ω=0, while Ω is 1 for an anisotropic gap like d-wave and anisotropic s-wave. As we can see from Eq. (1), the introduction of NMI does not break paired electrons for an isotropic SC gap but for an anisotropic gap where V is the electron-phone interaction strength. If the introduction of NMI affects D(Ef) (due to the carrier doping) or ωD, Tc will consequently vary even in the isotropic s-wave superconductors. Except for (?) the effect on D(Ef) and ωD, NMI can also break the Cooper pairs in anisotropic superconductors due to Ω≠0, as given by the following equation derived from Eq. (1) It is clear from Eq.( where 1/τc, which is defined as the critical scattering rate where SC is completely suppressed, can be expressed as . We will strengthen the discussions on this critical parameter in Section 3 and 4. To study the pair-breaking effect from magnetic and NMI on FBS, one of the most direct ways is to quantify the relation between Tc suppression and the doping level nimp. Onari and Kontani Figure The impurity disorder can also affect the SC due to that the SC mostly origins from doping. Efremov et al. Here, η is the parameter as the ratio of intra-and inter-band scattering as are the generalized cross-section normal state scattering rate parameters given as follow: In the weak scattering (Born) limit, one can get 0 ~  , while in the unitary limit (strong scattering) . On the other hand, for the strong scattering case, 0 ~  ab , hence Tc is independent of NMI. Figure where N = Na+Nb. The results indicate that a universal behavior of Tc suppression controlled by a single parameter λ . As a result, the s± wave SC can be suppressed by NMI for 0 λ  , but also demonstrates robust against impurities once 0 λ  . Typically, the critical value of the scattering rate crit  defined by Tc( crit  ) = 0 is given by within the Abrikosov-Gor'kov (AG) theory. In addition, as the increase of such disorder, the s± wave may change to a fully-gaped symmetry, s++ wave, which was suggested to be manifested by thermodynamic and transport properties. (3,-0.2,-0.1,0.5), for λ = 0 as (2,-2,-1,1), and for λ < 0 as (1,-2,-1,1), from Efremov et al. On the other hand, Wang et al. where Δ0 is angle-independent part of the gap function, r is the anisotropic factor, and φ corresponds to the angle around the electron pocket. For a fully isotropic s-wave gap, r = 0, hence the Tc is independent of NMI doping. In respect that a gap which has nodes on the electron pockets, for instance set r = 1.3, the results exhibit a wide variety of initial slopes of Tc-ρ0, which strongly depends on the scattering character of the impurity, but not just the doping lever itself. Namely, the Tc may be suppressed weakly or sharply by the change of ρ0, for instance, the pair-breaking residual resistivity c 0   can be up to 1000 μΩ cm once the α is less to 0.2, and even without any suppression for α = 0. Previous calculation results also showed α-dependent suppression rate Besides the pair-breaking and the scattering character of the impurity, one has to consider the separation of the exploration of impurity effects on different length scales, from lattice spacing to the coherence length to sample size, as suggested by Anderson theorem Furthermore, considering the NMI in the isotropic s++ wave state, the SC suppression may be caused by the following mechanisms: (i) suppression of the orbital fluctuations, which is a possible origin of the s++ wave state, because of the violation of the orbital degeneracy near the impurity atom, and (ii) the strong localization effect in which the mean-free-path is comparable to the lattice spacing. To well probe pair-breaking behavior, the fabrication of high quality nonmagnetic Zn-doped compound, especially for single crystals, is the most important issue. In the next section, we will show the recent progresses on the fabrication of impurity-substituted FBS. Substitution of impurity is considered as the simplest defect to "tune" the nature (magnetic and/or electronic properties) of the perturbation potential. Generally, the substitution was obtained by either chemical doping during the synthesis process or irradiating defects into a host crystal. Here, the substituted chemicals work as external impurities, while the irradiating defects as intrinsic impurities. In this section, we will discuss the fabrication of chemicals doped FBS crystals using ambient and high-pressure methods, and also impurities introduced by irradiation technique. Compared with the host atoms, the impurities may vary in the atomic size, bond valance, electron structure, magnetic state, and so on. The experimental design for chemical substitution should choose at least the similar atomic size and bond valance of the impurity as the host atoms, and the atomic substitution site should be confirmed as well before and after the synthesis. Taking the well-studied cuprate superconductors as an example Therefore, we have to consider the structure of the FBS before doping. Up to now, seven series have been discovered in the Fe-based family as given in Figure 5 Similar to the cuprates, each Fe-based compound has the distinct layered structure with the key layer of FeX (X =As, P, Te, or Se) (see Figure are the choice. Generally, the FBS was synthesized through the solid-state reaction in an inert atmosphere or vacuum. Besides, the solid-state reaction can also be implemented under high-pressure as few tens of thousands atmosphere pressure. To distinguish these two methods, we name them as ambient-pressure and high-pressure techniques. It is worth noting that the growth of impurity-doped epitaxial thin film by pulsed-laser deposition is also a promising way, but there is no any report yet. Up to now, most of our present FBS were synthesized under ambient-pressure which can be divided into several steps In a high-pressure process the as-prepared pellets were sealed in BN crucibles For the heavy impurities doping level, the chemical substitutions may lead to inhomogeneity in the lattice sites, resulting in change of local electronic density and even the Fermi-surface topology, which may mask the intrinsic impurity effects on the superconductivity. Despite that Zn is similar as that of Cu in the cuprate superconductor system YBa2Cu3O8, previous experiments demonstrated that Zn impurities cannot be substituted beyond 5% per Cu The particles should be light elements as electron, proton, neutron, and low power α-particle. However, most particle irradiation introduce correlated disorder and external defects as columnar and/or clusters, especially for the heavy particles like proton. Although the MeV-range electron irradiation can produce vacancy-interstitial (Frenkel) pairs as scattering centers The profiles of the irradiation induced defects strongly depend on the irradiation particles and power. To create uniformly distributed point defects over the entire crystal, it is essential to apply long attenuation length and the small recoil energy, such as electron irradiation with the small mass of electron particles. Nevertheless, the relatively large recoil energy may induce complex defects such as clusters and cascades, and even bulk defects as columnar tracks. Besides, the sample itself is also crucial for the irradiation experiments, for which the crystal structure, composition, and even the sample geometry can influence the irradiation results. Therefore, the particle irradiation can hardly replace the chemical doping completely. Up to now, most of the previous impurity-doping studies have been carried out on the polycrystalline samples synthesized under ambient-pressure. Figure On the other hand, although one can select ZnAs alloy instead of Zn metal Tan et al. Under the ambient-pressure conditions, it is generally necessary to synthesize the single crystals for long time, for instance, 92 hours for K0.8Fe2-y-xZnxSe2 Single NMI dot Zn 2+ has a filled d-shell, and hence works as quasiparticle interference scattering and provides information of the gap structure of the superconductors Zhu and co-workers Recently, Yang and co-workers In the FBS, a most recent work demonstrates the local destruction of superconductivity by nonmagnetic Zn impurities in Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 by exploring phase-slip phenomena in a mesoscopic structure with 119×102 nm 2 cross-section Since the SC mechanism for the FBS was widely considered as a spin fluctuation origin, magnetic properties are of great importance to understand the NMI effects on the SC In the SDW state, the ordered magnetic moment is about 0.3 μB and the ordering vector is Q ≈ (π, 0). SC was induced by suppression of TN via carrier doping, the AF phase however generally exists within the underdoped regime. It was expected from the single-defect calculation Li and co-workers studied the Zn-doping effect on the polyscrystalline LaFeAsO parent compound The impurity ions of Zn 2+ work as spinless centers, which may induce moments of s = 2 on the Fe-sites. However, there is still an open question for the Zn-induced local moment behavior and no direct experimental evidences can support it. For instance It should be noted that the study on Zn suppression effects on TN should be focused on the under-doped or undoped regimes where the AF state is still exist. A few candidates can be used to explore the Zn-induced local moment, such as STM, muon spin rotation, neutron scattering, specific heat, magnetic susceptibility, and so on. Among these methods STM measurement is the best and most direct method as we introduced in detail in Section 3. However, the STM analysis was plagued by materials problems as in Sec 4.2, as well as the muon spin rotation and neutron scattering measurements. Apart from the specific heat experiment as we will introduce in Section 4.5, magnetic susceptibility measurement is a promising and simple method. Theoretically, once substitution of Zn provides the local spin moment, it will enhance a Curie-like behavior in the uniform magnetic susceptibility, despite that the host material represents the metallic conduction of carriers. Curie-like behavior for the characteristics of temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility χ(T) is given by , where χ0(T) corresponds to the χ(T) without Curie-Weiss background which depends on the carrier density of the impurity-free sample, N is the number of magnetic ions, Θ is the Curie-Weiss temperature, and Peff is the effective moment in the units of the Bohr magnet (μB) and relates to the Zn doping. Therefore, by fitting the temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility χ(T) for different doping level of Zn, one can systematically obtain the Peff. Although an initial susceptibility data on Zn-substituted Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 polycrystals did suggest yielding of moments from 0.482μB/Fe to 0.362μB/(Fe+Zn) In addition, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) can probe nuclei coupled to the SC Fe2X2 planes which is capable of yielding insights into the local magnetic structure. Using a variety of nuclei, NMR can develop a fairly clear picture of how a nominally NMI provides a cloud of local staggered polarization on nearby Fe-site, and can characterize the response as a function of doping and temperature, for different materials. Kitagawa and co-workers Transport properties measurements can probe the impurities or defects effects on various SC properties, including the carrier, coupling between charges, spin degrees of freedom, and so on All of these parameters are correlated with the induced suppression of Tc, and more importantly with the pair-breaking from impurities. In this section, we will firstly discuss the in-plane transport properties in both high-temperature and low-temperature (around Tc) regions. Although transport properties of the 2-D FBS show slightly anisotropic along c-axis and ab-plane, we will focus on the in-plane properties where the impurities scattering occurs within the SC Fe2X2 planes. Studying on the normal state in-plane resistivity is the most common way to explore the impurities influence. Apart from few systems like hole-doped (e.g. Ba1-xKxFe2As2 and K1-δFe2-ySe2 where ρ0 is the residual resistivity which will be discussed in detail in the Section 4.4.2. According to the Mathiessen's rule The FBS are semimetallic at the normal state, and the resistivity is generally in unit of μΩ cm. Thus, it is rather challenged to measure the transport properties for a bulk crystal with a millimeter-size. In the traditional four-probe measurement technique, a high current bias is often necessary to enhance the measurement resolution, especially for the Hall signal, owing to the large geometry and strongly metallic behavior of the crystals. In this case, the heat effects can be a serious problem, especially at the interface between silver paste and crystal. To improve the experimental accuracy, micro-and nano-patterning techniques are promising ways to enhance the resistance and Hall signal. Recently, we developed a micro-patterning technique to fabricate the microbridges on the 122-type FBS Note that the whole sample was etched in step (iv), except the parts under the silver paste. Figure Let us come back to Eq. To estimate the ρ0 owing to the impurities scattering, one can extrapolate the ρab(T) to 0 K, or by measuring the parallel shift of the ρab(T) curves at high-T as what was done on the cuprate system where ρ0 is the residual resistivity at 0 K. Surprisingly, all powers are considerably less than that of a normal Fermi liquid (n = 2) which is dominated by strong electron-electron interactions, probably suggesting the effect from critical antiferromagnetic fluctuations. However, it is impossible to conclude the quantum critical profile from the extrapolation of normal state ρ(T) to low-T since all fittings were based on the normal state results, unless the superconductivity can be suppressed by high magnetic field. Particularly, the ρ0's of both impurity-free and impurity-doped crystals are dramatically less than previous measurements on the bulk crystals. Again, the relatively low ρ0 indicates the improvement of measurement setup. On the other hand, the strongly low-T upturn in ρab(T) makes it difficulty in estimation of the Δρ0 using linear or nonlinear fitting as shown in Figure The residual resistivity can hardly provide accurate determinations of the scattering rate directly; instead, it is a promising method to seek information from the depression of Tc induced by the scattering centers. The decrease of Tc (ΔTc) can be related with Δρ0 as Here, τ -1 is the scattering rate, which is given by the ρ0 as where m* is the effective mass with the value between 2me and 4me, and it should be temperature-independent regardless of carriers. Figure Considering the linear condition of Eq. ( However, it is a big challenge to access the critical Δρ for an exact evaluation of the slop, due to the weak power of the irradiation. We emphasize that the recent measurements on the Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 microbridges (BaK-Zn-2) demonstrate much smaller slope of Tc-Δρ than the bulk crystals (BaK-Zn), although using the same materials. The pronounced reduction of Δρ can be attributed to the improved characteristic method which can provide accurate evaluation for the pairing-breaking effect (see Figure BaK-irr (Ba1-xKxFe2As2 under electron irradiation) BaK-Zn-2 (Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2, x=0 and 0.05) is measured from microbridges as shown in Figure 20 The residual resistance may vary from crystals, and some intrinsic defects as grain boundary or magnetic domain may contribute additional scattering as well, thus one can hardly obtain accurate determinations of scattering rate directly from the resistivity results. Instead, further seeking the residual resistance per plane (Δρ□) is a promising approach. In a 2D system, the Δρ□ can provide crucial information for the scattering rate of conduction electrons by the impurity potential. Δρ□ can be described as Δρ□= Δρ0/t, where t corresponds to the distance between the nearest neighboring SC layers. Once Δρ□ reaches to the limit of metallic conductivity Rq = h/4e 2 = 6.45 kΩ, the metallic nature of the material will be depressed, as a result of the electron localization. Such method was successfully applied to analyze the cuprate system, for instance, YBa2Cu6O7-δ For instance, in the electron-type superconductors, the electron-provider, e.g. Co, contributes to the scattering as well. Therefore, the scattering factor can be revised as Δρ□n, for which the Hall coefficient measurements are essential. x = 0 and 0.005) [84], NdF-irr (NdFeAsO0.7F0.3 under different dose of α-particle irradiation) Different from the normal metal, the Hall coefficient of FBS displays a temperature dependent behavior, which is one of the important signatures of the normal state as those of the cuprate systems. In the cuprate superconductors, Anderson Up to now, apart from few reports on Hall effect measurements on the Zn-doped polycrystals, there are only studies on in-plane Hall effect on the 122-type single crystals, namely, the n-type BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2 and p-type Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 (M = Fe, Mn, Ru, Co, Ni, Cu and Zn) as shown in Figure 23 Regarding the normal state, no significant change of Hall coefficient is induced by the Zn substitution in the under-, optimal-, and over-doped regimes of Co in the n-type BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2, indicating that the substitution is truly isovalent which negligibly change the carrier density. The weak carrier density change in the p-type Ba0.5K0.5Fe2-2xZn2xAs2 Was likely caused by transferring of carrier type from hole to electron since it is anomalous that the Zn impurities resulted in a negative RH. Here, it should be noted that the present system has the multi-band nature with both electron and hole carriers. The results for the Zn doped samples may suggest that the electron carrier become dominant with existence of the substitution. However, such Hall experiments were implemented on a bulk crystal, while the Hall resistance was generally rather small owing to the bulk size and in-plane metallic behavior, thus we can hardly understand the nature of Zn impurities effect on the in-plane scattering. To enhance the Hall signal we recently developed a method to measure the transport properties on single crystalline microbridges as shown in Figure As substituting of nonmagnetic Zn ions into the BK, the RH is increased to about twice of the original magnitude, and the field dependent behavior is modified as well, i.e., the RH is independent of field in the whole temperatures region and the negative RH disappears, indicating H-independent carriers at all temperatures. For the magnetic impurity Co substituted BK, the RH becomes more complicated: (i) the RH demonstrates a pronounced increase; (ii) RH reveals intense H-dependent behavior at high temperature, and the TH (~ 240 K) is slightly smaller than that of BK; and (iii) the negative RH regime exists at almost the whole H-dependent region, and the saturated high field is essential to suppress the negative RH. These data suggest that the carriers are electron-type at almost all fields above the TH (240 K). However, the carriers of both BKZn and BKCo are similar with those of BK below the TH, which seems like that the impurities induce modification only on electron-pocket but not on the hole-pocket. To confirm the possible effect of Co 2+ and Zn 2+ on the electronic state, it is necessary to study the Hall angle for both impurity-free and impurity-doped samples. To explore the impurity effects on the electronic state, Anderson proposed a picture for describing the Hall angle (cotθH) within the framework of the Luttinger-liquid theory which can be expressed as where ρxx and ρxy are the longitudinal and transversal resistivity, respectively, and α is a parameter dependeding on the energy-scale of the spinon-spinon scattering in which τM is the impurity contribution. Therefore, the cotθH depends only on the transverse scattering lifetime (τH), which is determined mainly by spinon-spinon interactions and characterized by a T 2 dependence. Among the appealing features of the theory few parameters are required to describe the normal-state transport, and the understanding of the general features of the normal-state properties does not involve details of the electronic structure. In the cuprate superconductors, for instance YBCO, the quantity C behaves a linear function of Zn-doping level (x) while α is a constant It is essential to understand whether a NMI can induce a local moment on its vicinity, especially in the low enough temperature regions. The transport properties measurements can hardly be carried out below Tc, unless using extremely high fields, large current density, or heavy level impurity doping. Technically, the upper critical fields Hc2 for FBS are quite high, for instance, the Hc2 for Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 was found as around 55 T A recent study on optimal Fe1+yTe1-xSex (x≈0.4) showed that the Co or Cu substitution for Fe mainly serves as scatters rather than charge carrier doping The transport properties, for instance the Hall effect, is measured for the whole compound, but some compounds, like BaFe2-2x-2yZn2xCo2yAs2, have already doped with other elements that will strongly influence the Hall effect. Therefore, two scattering rates occur unless for an "ideal" pure single crystal. However, it is even harder to perform quantitative comparisons between samples than for the residual resistivity. Thus, the data can hardly provide the determination of the physical origin for the actual difference between the two scattering rates alone, for which some additional experiments such as electronic thermoelectric power on the Zn-substituted single crystals will be greatly helpful. In this case we can systematically study the electronic thermoelectric power in SC states of various Zn-doped compounds, and explore if Zn has contributed to the normal-state electronic or SC states, as what were comprehensively studied in cuprates The 11-system is featured by without the separating blocking-layer among the FBS family. The substitution of impurity is indeed onto the Fe-site rather than other sites within the blocking-layer as that occurs in other systems. Zhang and co-workers showed that among the 3d x, from Guo et al. Figure Cheng et al. studied the Zn and Mn substitution effects on SC of the p-type polyscrystalline Ba0.5K0.5Fe2As2 synthesized under ambient-pressure (see Figure Transport properties measurement revealed that the Mn doping enhanced the ρ0 significantly, and induced strong local magnetic moments (~2.58 μB) for distinct pair-breaking. Such results were well consistent with those of Mn-doping in other systems Among these impurities, the nonmagnetic Zn works as a unitary scattering center due to the quite strong potential comparable to the bandwidth. Consequently, it is expected to have strong pair-breaking effect on the SC with the anisotropic SC gap. The observed robustness of SC against Zn seems to contradict the s± wave model. As discussed in Section 2.2.2, the reduction in Tc due to the impurity is 25 K/at.%. It has also been mentioned that Tc will be weakly suppressed by the impurities in the s++ wave state in contrast to s± wave state. Among these impurities, Mn has the strongest suppression effect, even though it is much weaker than what is expected for the s± wave model (25 K/at.%). The negligible suppression effect by Ru is consistent with the results for the 1111-system In addition, substation of Mn introduces drastic charge localization and hence results in MIT in the low-T region of ρ-T curves, which was actually absent in this experiment. The authors attributed this anomalous phenomenon to the decrease of SC volume fraction owing to the nonSC islands around the Mn dopants. If so, the crystal may consist of two phases including a SC K0.8Fe2-ySe2 and a nonSC Mn-rich phase, hence, the present results may not be considered as intrinsic substitution effect. As discussed in Section 2.2, it is yet far from understanding the nature of NMI scattering based on an individual analysis of doping level dependent Tc. Instead, one should study various properties, among which the pair-breaking rate is the most important issue. The pair-breaking rate from NMI can be calculated as where γ is the electron scattering rate, Tc0 is the Tc of the Zn-free compound. Based on the five-orbital model for the 122-system, theoretical study proposed a relation between γ and Δρ0 as Here Δρ0 is the difference of the residual resistivity between the Zn-doped and Zn-free crystals. For the s± wave state, SC should vanish in the range of α > α ± c= 0.22 and using z = 0.33 or 0.50,, where the effective mass for calculation of z are from the ARPES experiments The results may indicate that measurements of Tc suppression with respect to the amount of chemical potential or disorder can hardly determine the gap structure in multiband systems. Region II: The pair-breaking rates from irradiation data are quite similar for proton irradiated BaFe1.85Co0.15As2 (α=3.50) Region III: Under the light electron particle irradiation the 122-type crystals are induced similar critical pair-breaking rates as 1.32, 1.26 and 1.21 for BaFeAs2-xPx, Ba1-xKxFe2As2, and BaFe1.76Ru0.24As2, respectively. Particularly, the pair-breaking rate of chemical doping (data from the In this review, we overviewed the theoretical and experimental progress in the nonmagnetic impurity substitution study on the Fe-based superconductors. Theoretically, scientists proposed two highly potential order parameter symmetries, i. e. the multi-gap s++ and s± wave. Because of the complex gap structure, exceptive magnetic and metallic behaviors of Fe-based superconductors, influences of nonmagnetic defects may vary in chemical potential, impurity disorder, inter-and intra-band scattering features, and electron localization, and of course the most important information for the understanding of symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. Experimentally, the first concern on the defects is naturally focused on its sample quality. Zn impurities have been successfully substituted into the single-crystalline 122-type superconductors, providing significant results by various measurements. Considering the effects of Zn impurities, the largest one is found in its immediate neighborhood within a ball region, which have not yet been investigated by using local probes such as NMR, NQR, μSR, or STM, while proofed by superconducting order-parameter phase-slip phenomenon in the Zn-doped nanowires, in which the radius of the correlation length of order around the non-superconducting regions around Zn was observed as a few lattice spacings. A single impurity also influences the electronic state and local moment, magnetic response of the Fe2X2 planes both on macroscopic scale as antiferromagnetic state and local scale of moment. Most of experiments on the effects of nonmagnetic impurities are from the transport properties. The Zn ions provided direct modifications of the superconductivity, including the suppression of critical temperature and the enhancement of residual resistivity. Particularly, the superconductivity disappears when the residual resistance per plane accesses to the quantum resistance limit (6.45 kΩ). The Hall measurements demonstrated that Zn impurities contributed weakly modification of the carrier densities. However, the Zn seems unlikely to change the slope of T 2 dependent Hall angle, suggesting the inducing in-plane impurity scattering rate with substitution of Zn. On the other hand, Zn ions can also influence the heat capacity, the London penetration depth, the electronic thermoelectric power, and so on. On basis of these experiments we emphasize the qualitative feature of impurities effects on superconducting state for many FBS systems. Considering an overall nice agreement between many different experiments on different materials systems, we can safely conclude that the nonmagnetic impurity can suppress the superconductivity with major concerns about sample quality variations. As a summarization, the pair-breaking rates of nonmagnetic defects on various superconductors are collected to compare with various theoretical approaches. The pair-breaking rates of the electron-irradiated 122-type crystals and the Zn-doped microbridges are consistent with the theoretical calculated value for s± wave (α ± c = 0.22), which provide strongly evidence for s± wave as the nature of pairing symmetry in the Fe-based superconductors, but not an isotropic gap symmetry. However, we can hardly exclude a much more complex symmetry, s+id wave, which behaves as strongly anisotropic gap symmetry as well. Further experimental and theoretical investigations are still required. 5K0.5Fe2-2xM2xAs2 single crystals were synthesized by high-pressure technique as introduced in Section 4.1.