Iron selenide (FeSe) is one of the iron-based superconductors (T C ~ 8 K) In contrast to the in-situ bottom-up MBE technique, a classical electrochemical etching Temperature dependence of the channel sheet resistance (R s -T curve) and its superconducting properties were measured using a standard d. c. four-terminal method. In the initial thick films on SrTiO ). The forth is that the high-T C superconductivity emerges under a relatively thicker condition about 10-unit-cells, followed by the small thickness dependence. At present, it is not clear whether whole thick film region contributes high-T C superconductivity or not. We will discuss it later. To further investigate the superconducting properties of the ultrathin FeSe film, we performed R s -T measurements under perpendicular magnetic fields B for sample N on MgO. As shown in Fig. indicating the two dimensional nature of the FeSe film. Figure (1 -/ (0)) with φ 0 and ξ(0) being the flux quantum and the GL coherent length at zero temperature, respectively, we obtained ξ(0) = 2.0 nm, which is around two times shorter than the bulk value Getting back to the thickness dependence of T c on in Figs. For sample B expectedly in the one/two-unit-cell condition, the initial insulating behavior was not recovered by removing V G from 5 V to 3 and 0 V as shown in Fig. This result is a good evidence for the thickness reached close to one/two-unit-cell, because the high-T C superconductivity under V G = 0 V is consistent with the result of previous reports on FeSe/SrTiO 3 with charge transfer solely from the SrTiO 3 substrate 8 . Interestingly, the increase of T c on from 43.5 K to 46.3 K as a result of reduced V G implicates the over-doping effect by electrostatic doping. In contrast, in sample C under the thicker 9.4 nm condition, the superconductivity vanishes and the R s -T curve is back to the insulating behavior when V G is removed (blue line in middle panel of Fig. The reappearance of insulating behavior indicates the uniform etching without local ultrathin region providing a high-T C superconducting current pass. Then, application of V G = 5 V recovers the superconductivity again (blue line in bottom panel of Fig. Finally, we discuss possible mechanisms for the high-T C superconductivity in FeSe EDL transistor from the view point of the thickness dependence. The comparable values of T c on as shown in Fig. Naively, it is likely that the positive V G depletes holes in the valence band at the Γ point and accumulates electrons in the conduction band at the M point through the IL/FeSe interface, while the interface between IL and thick FeSe layer does not work as the high-T C superconducting channel (see Fig. By employing EDL transistor configuration, the high-T C superconductivity in ultrathin FeSe films has been investigated from the several aspects such as thickness and substrate material dependence. The application of electric-field effect inducing modification of electronic band structure would make a major contribution for T c on of 40 K below 10-unit-cells regardless of substrate material. Our demonstration of the etching well controlled by the temperature of IL under applying V G shed light to the new aspect of the EDL transistor that is a useful approach to ultrathin films studies, expanding an opportunities to exemplify ex-situ the superconductivity of ultrathin FeSe grown on various insulating substrates 