A recent experiment has shown a macroscopic quantum coherent condensate at 203 K, about 19 degrees above the coldest temperature recorded on the Earth, 184 K (-89.2 C, -128.6 F ) in pressurized sulfur hydride. This discovery is relevant not only in material science and condensed matter but also in other fields ranging from quantum computing to quantum physics of living matter. It has given the start to a gold rush looking for other macroscopic quantum coherent condensates in hydrides at the temperature range of living matter 200 < Tc < 400K. We present here a review of the experimental results and the theoretical works and we discuss the Fermiology of H3S focusing on Lifshitz transitions as a function of pressure. We discuss the possible role of the shape resonance near a neck disrupting Lifshitz transition, in the Bianconi-Perali Valletta (BPV) theory, for rising the critical temperature in a multigap superconductor, as the Feshbach resonance rises the critical temperature in Fermionic ultracold gases In March 2014 Mikhail Eremets and his collaborators recorded in their logbook the first evidence of high temperature superconductivity in the high pressure metallic phase of H 2 S The record of superconductivity at 190 K in pressurized H 2 S was reported in December 2014 by evidence of zero resistivity 2015 High temperature superconductivity in pressurized H 3 S has been recently confirmed and the crystal structure has been measured In the past decades the search for new high temperature superconductors has provided evidence for a large variety of different materials with high T c . A binary intermetallic N b 3 Ge, with A15 crystalline structure, has hold the record of T c =23K for many years of CuO 2 atomic layers intercalated by a large variety of spacer layers. The record of T c =160 K critical temperature in cuprates was achieved by optimization of mainly three physical parameters: a) the misfit strain Eremets et al. followed for many years the research direction for high temperature superconductivity at high pressure SbH 4 Many years before high temperature superconductivity in pressurized hydrides and hydrogen was proposed by Aschroft The isotope effect in H 3 S [1] provided a direct evidence for the conventional phonon mediated pairing. Therefore theories of unconventional pairing based on exchange of magnetic interactions have been ruled out. From the results in ref. The superconducting temperature in sulfur hydride was interpreted by a series of theoretical papers using the standard BCS approximations. First, the dirty limit approximation reducing multiple bands, crossing the chemical potential, to a simplified metal with a single effective band. Second, the M igdal approximation considering the chemical potential very far from band edges so that the electronic and ionic degrees of freedom can be rigorously separated in agreement with the Born-Oppenheimer approximation. The superconducting temperature was predicted by employing the Allen-Dynes modified McMillan formula Starting from the evidence of Lifshitz transitions the Bianconi, Perali, Valletta (BPV) theory The BPV theory is based on the general theory of superconductivity The large Fermi surface(FS) No.2 coexists with the cubic-like FS No.1, and three small closed FS at Γ point No.3,4,5. The band dispersion shown in Fig. The L2 Lif shitz transition for neck disrupting (see Fig. The Migdal approximation breakdown for electrons at the Lifshitz transitions and they enter in the BEC or BCS-BEC crossover. While Eliashberg theory breakdown, the BPV theory describes the system by solving both the gap and the density equation and by including the chemical potential shifts in the superconducting phase. The shape resonance emerges between few pairs in BEC or BCS-BEC crossover and all other pairs in BCS regime. The hydrogen zero point motion gives In conclusion superconducting H 3 S has a complex crystal structure at the borderline with quasicrystals. The hydrogen bond plays a key role with large H atomic fluctuations. The system shows intrinsic inhomogeneity with segregation of sulfur moreover it shows lattice instabil-ity been sensitive to thermal annealing processes Fig. 