We report a reinvestigation of superconducting Sn1-xInxTe at both low and high In doping levels. Analysis of the superconductivity reveals a fundamental change as a function of x : the system evolves from a weakly coupled to a strongly coupled superconductor with increasing indium content. Hall Effect measurements further show that the carrier density does not vary linearly with Indium content; indeed at high Indium content, the samples are overall n-type, which is contrary to expectations of the standard picture of In 1+ replacing Sn 2+ in this material. Density functional theory calculations probing the electronic state of In in SnTe show that it does not act as a trivial hole dopant, but instead forms a distinct, partly filled In 5s -Te 5p hybridized state centered around EF , very different from what is seen for other nominal hole dopants such as Na, Ag, and vacant Sn sites. We conclude that superconducting In-doped SnTe therefore cannot be considered as a simple hole doped semiconductor. SnTe and other II-VI materials with the rock-salt structure type have long attracted attention as models of small band gap semiconductors, and have been of renewed recent interest due to the discovery of topological crystalline insulators. To test these two questions, we have revisited Indiumdoped SnTe. Our experimental investigations have revealed unanticipated new details of the electronic behavior of the system, leading us to suggest that Indium is not a trivial dopant in SnTe. Motivated by the experiments, analysis of our electronic band structure calculations indicates that unlike the case for other monovalent dopants, the In(s) states in Sn 1-x In x Te are prevalent at the Fermi level, supporting a resonant-level-type model in which Indium has a mixed oxidation state in the system, i.e. that it has partially filled 5s states and thus is neither In 1+ nor In 3+ . Indium as a resonant level dopant has previously been proposed in SnTe Polycrystalline samples of Sn 1-x In x Te were prepared by a single step solid state reaction method, starting with ultra-high purity (5N, 99.999%) elemental Sn, In and Te. The starting materials were placed in quartz glass tubes and sealed under vacuum. The tubes were heated (180 0 C per hour) to 1100 0 C and held at that temperature for about 5 hrs. They were then rapidly cooled to 850 0 C, and held there about 10 hrs after which they were again rapidly cooled to room temperature. The purity and cell parameters of the samples were evaluated by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) at room temperature on a Bruker D8 FOCUS diffractometer (Cu K α ) and unit cell parameters were determined by least squares fitting of the peak positions with the MAUD program. EDS studies on the In-doped samples indicated that the nominal and actual In-doping concentrations are closely matched. Therefore, the nominal concentrations are used throughout this manuscript. Single crystal X-ray diffraction measurements on a single crystal of Sn 0.6 In 0.4 Te extracted from the characterized polycrystalline sample were carried out at 100 K on a Bruker Apex II diffractometer with Mo radiation. Details of the data collection and analysis are found in the supplementary information file. The electrical resistivities were measured using a standard four-probe method with an excitation current of 10 mA; small diameter Pt wires were attached to the samples using a conductive epoxy (Epotek H20E). Data were collected from 300 -0.4 K in magnetic fields up to 5 T using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) equipped with a 3 He cryostat. Hall Effect measurements were similarly made with a 4-wire configuration geometry, in an applied field of ± 1 T to subtract off the possible longitudinal resistive contribution. Specific heats were measured between 0.4 and 50 K in the PPMS, using a time-relaxation method, at 0 and 5 Tesla applied magnetic fields. The magnetic susceptibilities were measured in a DC field of 10 Oe; the samples were cooled down to 1.8 K in zero-field, the magnetic field was then applied, and the sample magnetization was followed on heating to 6 K [zero-field-cooled (ZFC)], and then on cooling to 1.8 K [field-cooled (FC)] in the PPMS. The electronic structure calculations were performed by density functional theory (DFT) using the WIEN2K code with a full-potential linearized augmented planewave and local orbitals [FP-LAPW + lo] basis Fig. Due to the extremely high In content that can be substituted for Sn in SnTe, and the changes in the cell parameter vs. composition behavior described above, we considered the possibility that the crystal structure of Sn 1-x In x Te for high x might not be a simple NaCl type. To maintain the charge neutrality expected for semiconductors, for example, a highly defective material of composition Sn 1-x In x Te 1-(0.5x) could conceivably be formed at high x. Alternatively, even if the material is essentially stoichiometric at Sn 1-x In x Te, at very high x values some or all of the In could be found in tetrahedral interstitial positions in the rocksalt framework, rather than substituting on the octahedral site occupied by Sn, in other words the structural formula could be [Sn(octahedral) 1-x In(tetrahedral) x ]Te for high x. To test these possibilities, a very careful single crystal structure determination was performed on a single crystal of formula Sn 0.6 In 0.4 Te at 100 K. The crystal was found, to high precision, to have the perfect, stoichiometric rocksalt structure with all ideal atomic sites fully occupied and In simply substituting for Sn. Further, there were no displacements of the atomic positions from the high symmetry ideal rocksalt structure positions. Thus Sn 1-x In x Te is structurally and chemically exactly as it has been assumed to be in previous studies: its crystal structure can confidently be assigned to a simple, stoichiometric NaCl-type. The details of the data collection, structural analysis procedure, and results can be found in the supplementary information. The upper right inset of Fig. The main panel of Fig. The lower critical field can be extracted as H c1 (0) = 21 Oe. Continuing the characterization of the superconductivity for the highly doped material, the main panel of field, μ 0 H c2 (0), from the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) expression μ 0 H c2 (0) = -0.693 T c dHc2 dT | T =Tc . This expression is widely used to calculate the upper critical field of a variety of superconductors including intermetallic, heavy metal and oxide based materials. The upper critical field value μ 0 H c2 (0) can be used to estimate the coherence length ξ(0) = Φ 0 /2πH c2 (0) = 150 Å, where Φ 0 = hc 2e is the magnetic flux quantum. The ratio ∆C γTc can be used to measure the strength of the electron-phonon coupling. In a simple Debye model for the phonon contribution to the specific heat, the β 1 coefficient is related to the Debye temperature Θ D through β = nN A 12 5 π 4 RΘ -3 D , where R = 8.314 J mol K , n is the number of atoms per formula unit and N A is Avogadro's number. The calculated Debye temperatures are thus 204 K and 162 K for 5% and 40% Indium doped samples. These values of the Debye temperatures are similar to the previously reported values on chemically doped SnTe, PbTe and related systems. . The McMillan model contains the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling constant λ ep , which, in the Eliashberg theory, is related to the phonon spectrum and the density of states. The value of γ extracted from the measured specific heat data corresponds to a normalized electronic density of states at the Fermi energy N(E F ). The following values for the density of states, 0.44 and 1.17 states/(eV f.u.) (f.u. stands for formula unit) for 5% and 40% Indium doped samples are thus estimated from the relation The value of N(E F ) for the 5% In-doped samples is consistent with previous reports for low In doping levels but N(E F ) for the 40% doped sample is much higher, consistent with the fact that that higher In content samples show much higher superconducting T c 's than the lower In content samples. Fig. Future experimental investigation of the higher In content materials will be of interest, but here we look in more detail at the apparent complexity of the electronic system by performing electronic band structure studies on model materials that simulate the effects of doping in SnTe. In order to theoretically investigate the electronic structure of doped SnTe, DFT calculations were performed on supercells containing different levels of In, Ag, Na and Sn-vacancies; the latter dopants are considered for comparison to the In case. Fig. This effect is even more pronounced at higher doping levels. Fig. Finally, we note that In has been used as dopant to achieve very high resisitivities in Pb 1-x Sn x Te. This is consistent with the picture of Indium forming an in-gap state. At very low concentrations, this state would be relatively localized, and would pin the Fermi energy to the gap, acting as a carrier concentration buffer, much like Sn does in Sn:Bi 2 Te 2 Se. We have shown, through experimental observations and DFT calculations, that Indium doped SnTe cannot be thought of as a simple hole doped semiconductor. The nature of the superconductivity and the carrier type change as a function of Indium doping, going from overall p-type to overall n-type and from a weakly coupled to a strongly coupled superconductor. Furthermore, the In 5s states are shown by theory to be present at the Fermi level and therefore affect the electronic properties. Given that Indium doped SnTe has been studied as a superconducting doped topological crystalline insulator, this work indicates that the nature and influence of the In 5s states must be taken into account. This may also suggest that aside from allowing for insulating behavior or improving thermoelectric performance, resonant level dopants can affect superconducting properties. Future studies could elucidate further the nature of resonant level doping in SnTe. It is interesting that a very simple structure type can show both weakly and strongly coupled superconductors. Therefore we also argue that the high In-doped, strongly coupled superconductor in this system is worthy of further investigation. 