We report a combined theoretical and experimental investigation of the superconducting state in the quasi-two-dimensional organic superconductor κ-(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br. Applying spinfluctuation theory to a low-energy material-specific Hamiltonian derived from ab initio density functional theory we calculate the quasiparticle density of states in the superconducting state. We find a distinct three-peak structure that results from a strongly anisotropic mixed-symmetry superconducting gap with eight nodes and twofold rotational symmetry. This theoretical prediction is supported by low-temperature scanning tunneling spectroscopy on in situ cleaved single crystals of κ-(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br with the tunneling direction parallel to the layered structure. Introduction.-It has been widely accepted that κ-(ET) 2 X organic charge-transfer salts [where ET denotes bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene and X a monovalent anion] share essential features with cuprates regarding their superconducting state A direct determination of the pairing mechanism is extremely difficult, if not impossible, and therefore most efforts have been directed towards the determination of the symmetry of the superconducting energy gap function. For the cuprates, thanks to the availability of phasesensitive probes, compelling evidence was provided early on that the gap has predominantly d x 2 -y 2 symmetry In the above-mentioned studies the gap function could be determined only indirectly from the temperature dependence of the quantity investigated. In contrast, a direct examination of the energy gap and its angular dependence is possible, in principle, through scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS). Such STS studies have been performed by tunneling either into as grown surfaces for κ-NCS In this Letter we report evidence for an anisotropic superconducting gap structure for κ-Br based on a combined theoretical and STS investigation. By first constructing a two-dimensional Hubbard model of the ET layer from ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations and subsequently applying spin-fluctuation theory to this model, we predict the presence of a strongly anisotropic superconducting gap. As a consequence of the orthorhombicity of the crystal structure and the resulting details of the electronic structure the order parameter does not have pure d-wave symmetry. Instead, an eight node twofold rotationally symmetric state is realized, which we identify as (extended) s + d x 2 -y 2 . This pairing symmetry results in a quasiparticle density of states (DOS) with a distinct three-peak structure. STS measurements performed on well-defined surfaces obtained from a recently developed in situ cleaving technique Theory.-We performed ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations for κ-Br within an all-electron full-potential local orbital (FPLO) Previous theoretical approaches In the following we take the rigorous viewpoint that superconductivity in κ-Br is solely driven by electronelectron interactions, see e.g. From the RPA calculation we find that the superconducting order parameter has eight nodes [see Fig. The main difference between our formulation (Eq. 1) and conventional approaches Experiment.-Single crystals of κ-Br were grown in an electrochemical crystallization process By this procedure, the cooling rate of the sample, relevant at the glass-like ethylene-endgroup ordering transition T g , is estimated to be about -1 K/min at T g ≈ 75-80 K (see Fig. Next, we measured the differential conductance dI/dV of the ET layer and the anion layer in the temperature range from 5 K to 13 K [see Fig. The differential conductance is non-zero at E = E F for the spectrum measured parallel to the ET layer [Fig. An important piece of information is obtained from the second derivative of dI/dV w.r.t. the voltage as presented in Fig. The conductance spectrum related to the superconducting phase is given by S(V ) = [B(V )T (V )] -1 dI/dV . In Fig. Using the expression for ∆( k) given above, we reevaluate Eqs. 1 and 2 with parameter sets {∆ 0 , c s1 , c d1 , c s2 , x, Γ} until optimal agreement with the experimental spectra in the interval [-12, +12] meV is reached. The corresponding calculated spectra are shown in Fig. The nodal positions we find in our study are particularly appealing because of the ongoing controversy about the realization of either d xy and d x 2 -y 2 pairing in quasi-2D organic superconductors. In previous works, a fourfold rotational symmetry constraint was introduced based on single-band Hubbard-type models proposed for these systems with a dimer of molecules per site on an anisotropic triangular lattice The nodes β correspond to the usually discussed d x 2 -y 2 solution, while the nodes α lie close to the k xdirection. In contrast to the d xy -gap found in Ref. We note that from a study of the suppression of T c with increasing disorder in κ-NCS, a mixed order parameter has been suggested as an important constraint on models of the superconductivity Summary.-We have studied the organic superconductor κ-(ET) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Br in RPA spin-fluctuation theory based on ab initio density functional theory calculations, as well as low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy with the tunneling direction parallel to the layered structure. In both theory and experiment we find evidence for three coherence peaks in the spectra of the superconducting state. Our results indicate that the symmetry of the superconducting pairing in κ-(ET) 2 X organics might be neither of the d xy and d x 2 -y 2 states discussed in previous studies, but of a mixed extended s + d x 2 -y 2 type with four nodes located close to the Brillouin zone diagonals and four nodes located on the quasi-1D sheets. The height profile measured across the insulating and conducting layers shown in the STM image (Fig. In STS, the spectra have to be corrected for the different work functions of tip and sample which leads to a voltage-dependent asymmetric tunneling transmission function T (V ) 1 . For this reason all spectra shown here are normalized to T (V ) which was obtained from spectra taken at 13 K, i.e., in the normal state of κ-Br. We furthermore assume a constant DOS for the tip material in the relevant energy range so that the dI/dV /T (V ) curves reflect the thermally smeared DOS D(V ) of the sample with eV = E -E F (E F denotes the Fermi energy). Then we analyze this data in the framework of the Anderson-Hubbard (AH) model discussed by Shinaoka and Imada 2 for disordered itinerant electron systems with short-range interactions 3 . In their numerical treatment of the AH model a scaling law is introduced for the DOS in the presence of shortrange Coulomb interactions and a multi-valley energy landscape where d denotes the spatial dimension (d = 2 for the present case) and α = 0.288 is a non-universal constant. In the immediate vicinity of E F the AH model is not applicable 2 . A very good description of this energy region is obtained by assuming a hard energy gap of small size accounted for by a phenomenological DOS function of the following form: , where c is a constant and ε T measures the effective barrier height. For finite temperatures T > 0, B(V ) rapidly becomes non-zero near E F because a thermally activated crossing of the small barrier ε T leads to a nearly temperatureindependent prefactor and the voltage-dependence is described by the cosh term. With the requirement of continuous differentiability at the inflection point V 0 , c and ε T terms are fixed for any given temperature and do not represent adjustable parameters. The conductance spectrum of the superconducting state is given by S(V ) = dI/dV /T (V )/B(V ). In Fig. The second derivative of the tunneling conductance was calculated after smoothing the data using the Savitzky-Golay method 4 , which is a widely used technique to increase the signal-to-noise ratio without significantly distorting the signal data. The averaging interval is 2.3 meV in the interval [-2.09:2.09] meV and 6 meV outside of this interval. Different smoothing intervals are justified because the noise increases with increasing absolute tunneling current. Thus the noise is considerably lower in the close vicinity of E -E F = 0. A method for calculating the specific heat of an unconventional superconductor from first principles has not been developed yet. Therefore, we have performed calculations of the specific heat of κ-Br in the framework of the multi-band alpha model for d-wave superconductors in order to check for compatibility of the gap parameters, as derived from our STS data, with specific heat results from the literature 5 . The alpha model for swave superconductors, introduced by Padamsee et al. 6 , extends BCS theory in a purely phenomenological way to materials with arbitrary (positive) values of the ratio α = ∆(0)/k B T c . As low temperature specific heat data for κ-Br indicate nodes in the gap function 5 (d-wave) as do our STS results (extended s + d x 2 -y 2 ), we extend the alpha model to the d-wave case. This can be done once the density of quasiparticle excitations Z d (E) and the gap function ∆ d (k, T ) are known for this case. These two quantities have been calculated using BCS theory with a cylindrical Fermi surface and a gap function of the type ∆ d = ∆ 0 (T ) cos(2φ). As the electronic system of κ-Br shows a strongly two-dimensional character, these approximations can be considered as an appropriate simplification for estimating the specific heat. The results for Z d (E) and ∆ 0 (T ) are shown in Fig. The multi-band alpha model, where each of the gaps occurs in a different band, deviates from the one-band scenario (described in the subsequent theoretical parts) which is used for fitting the STS data. However, as the specific heat depends essentially only on the quasiparticle density of states Z(E), we attempt to fit this quantity (known from the theoretical considerations and the fitting of the STS data) by a sum of d-wave quasiparticle densities of states, each with its own maximum gap value ∆ 0,i (T ), i.e., with a multi-band alpha model. As an approximation to the density of states derived by the microscopic theory (blue line in Fig. with z d (E/∆ 0,i (T )) and ∆ 0,i (T )/∆ 0,i (0) being the dwave functions shown in Fig. with γ i = g i γ. The result of this calculation for the specific heat is shown in Fig. The basic idea of BCS theory is the Cooper problem, which states that an attractive interaction between two electrons with opposite spin and momentum leads to a bound state, no matter how small it is. The corresponding Hamiltonian for Cooper pairs having a net momentum of zero can be written as The interaction can be treated in mean field theory (δ(c , where terms quadratic in δ are neglected. The resulting Hamiltonian can be diagonalized using the Bogoliubov-Valatin transformation, which introduces quasiparticle creation and annihilation operators γ † kσ and γ kσ . The quasiparticle excitation energies are given as The excitation spectrum of the quasiparticles E k is gapped and defined only for positive energies. The density of states of quasiparticles in an isotropic s-wave superconductor (∆ k = ∆ 0 ) can be calculated via As the quasiparticles are superpositions of particles and holes, this is not the density of states that can be measured in, for instance, scanning tunneling spectroscopy. To determine the electron DOS, we have to start from another commonly used expression of the density of states in terms of Greens functions, ρ(E) = -1 π kσ Im(-c † kσ c kσ 0 ). We assume a non spin-polarized energy dispersion and again insert the Bogoliubov-Valatin transformation As the Hamiltonian is diagonal in the quasiparticle operators, we can insert the expression for the bare Greens function and get where k is a combined momentum and band index. |u k | 2 and |v k | 2 are the probabilities for the excitations being hole-or electron-like respectively. Only positive energies are taken into account 8 . Next we calculate the DOS explicitly for the ab initio derived bandstructure and the superconducting gap calculated microscopically. The delta functions in the DOS are replaced by gaussians with a standard deviation of 1.2 meV to simulate the broadening observed in experiment. For comparison we also calculated the DOS with a tetrahedron method 9 that does not employ any broadening. For the calculation of the DOS using gaussians we included 4000 × 4000 k-points in the xy-plane. In the tetrahedron method we used 4000 × 4000 × 2 k-points. A comparison of the broadened and unbroadened electron DOS and the quasiparticle DOS is shown in Fig. k (where k =k ) contribute and the BV coefficients should average to approximately √ 0.5. The small deviations are causing the asymmetric behavior, which merges to the normal density of states far away from the gap. In the case of an anisotropic gap, the normal state density of states can not be identified easily, because the gap ∆ then also depends on momentum k and the Fermi surface is not a concentric circle. However, in the commonly used ansatz the electrons are considered to be free (Fermi surface is a concentric circle) and the gap is only determined by the angle θ For all further calculations we will use this expression for the quasiparticle DOS. In a scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) experiment the current from the tip to the sample should obey (see Fig. where e is the positive elementary charge and a positive voltage V corresponds to net charge carrier transport into the sample. The current is proportional to the tunneling probability |M ts (E)| 2 , which depends on tip and sample geometry. Furthermore, the tunneling probability is proportional to the number of occupied states in the tip ρ tip (E -eV )f (E -eV ) and the number of unoccupied states in the sample at lower energies After shifting the integration variable E → E + eV , we arrive at the literature form of the expression for the tunneling current. In order to obtain the net current, we have to calculate the difference between the currents from tip to sample and sample to tip. We obtain The tunneling matrix element |M ts (E)| 2 is experimentally not accessible and therefore the tunneling current is divided by the voltage dependent tunneling transmission function T (V ), which can be determined from the experimental setup. The density of states of the tip is considered to be independent of energy in the region of interest. We obtain the differential conductance (shifting once again the integration variable E → E -eV ) by taking the derivative with respect to the voltage V , In the preceding expression we already included thermal broadening via the Fermi function. Additionally we have to take into account the finite quasiparticle lifetime. This can be done (following Dynes et al. 10 ) by replacing the energies E by E + iΓ in the density of states. If we now consider only proportionalities, we can also insert the angle dependent expression for the sample density of states Note that this formula can not be used to fit data with large finite values of the differential conductance at zero bias voltage, since the superconducting DOS goes to zero for zero bias voltage, independent of the choice of Γ. Sometimes a slightly different expression is used for the Dynes broadening: |Re[(E + iΓ)/ (E + iΓ) 2 -∆(θ) 2 ]| Although only taking the real part and calculating the absolute value were exchanged here, this formula yields a finite value for the superconducting DOS at zero bias voltage, which is proportional to Γ. Therefore, one can use it to fit data for the differential conductance, which include a constant background. Unfortunately, exchanging the order of the real part and absolute value operations is inconsistent with the expression for the BCS density of states. We fix this problem by introducing the shift of the background explicitly. On top of the broadening effects, it was found that the measured density of states is suppressed by the formation of a soft Hubbard gap caused by short-range interactions and disorder 2 . This correction can be taken into account by scaling the density of states by B(V ) as described before. Including this correction the differencial conductance reads For anisotropic gaps on Fermi surfaces, which are not concentric circles, this equation is still an approximation. To improve our calculations, we execute the integration over the angle as a summation over points on the discretized two-dimensional ab initio Fermi surface. We find from our microscopic calculations that the symmetry of the superconducting gap can be described by a superposition of two s± and the , where the normalized prefactors c i ( i |c i | = 1) can be a) fitted to the experiment (see Fig. The gap on the Fermi surface is shown in Fig. While Fig. While the symmetry of the superconducting gap obtained from theory is identical to the one found by fitting the experiment, the size of the superconducting gap around φ ≈ 45 • is clearly overestimated in our calculation. Quantitative differences are however to be expected, as our RPA approach does not take into account the electronic self-energy and lacks a selfconsistency condition. Note that there is currently no state-of-the-art method that can quantitatively predict the momentum-resolved gap structure or superconducting transition temperature of two-dimensional correlated electron systems. Finally, we investigate whether a nodeless anisotropic s-wave symmetry could be present in the system. We combine a plain s-wave gap with the d-wave expressions given in our manuscript and determine the prefactors for the contributions that lead to optimal agreement with the experimental spectrum measured at 5 K (see Fig. To estimate values for the critical temperature and the maximum gap size at zero temperature, we fitted our temperature dependent gap values to the interpolation formula ∆(T ) = ∆ 0 tanh(1.74 Tc T -1) for the solution of the s-wave BCS self consistency equation (see Fig. Solving the BCS self-consistency equation for unconventional pairing mechanisms is difficult due to the momentum dependence of the pairing interaction. Therefore, we decided to use the s-wave solution as a rough approximation. Our predicted values for the critical temperatures T c = 10.3 ± 1.2 K for fitted prefactors and T c = 11.2 ± 0.2 K for fixed prefactors are in good agreement with the experimental observation of T c ≈ 11.5 K (see f.i. Ref. 11). The maximal gap size is found to be ∆ 0 = 12.9 ± 2.0 meV (fitted prefactors) and ∆ 0 = 12.1 ± 0.7 meV (fixed prefactors). We use the experimental crystal structure 12 , but relax the ethylene endgroups of the BEDT-TTF molecules in eclipsed configuration 13 . For the exchange correlation functional we use the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) 14 . The DFT calculation was converged using 6 × 6 × 6 k-point grids. In κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X materials there is strong evidence for antiferromagnetic spin-fluctuations 15 . There-fore, we investigate the superconducting state of these materials based on a random phase approximation (RPA) spin-fluctuation approach 16 . We have generalized our implementation from single-site multi-orbital models 17,18 to multi-site single-orbital models relevant for the materials discussed here. The low-energy Hamiltonian is given by the kinetic part H 0 , derived with the Wannier function method described in the main text, and the intra-orbital Hubbard interaction H int . Here, σ represents the spin and n iσ = c † iσ c iσ . The sum over i runs over all BEDT-TTF sites in the unit cell. The hopping integrals t ij taken into account are not restricted to nearest or next-nearest neighbor hoppings. We rather determine the optimal distance cutoff during the wannierization procedure. The interaction strength U is treated as a parameter. We calculate the non-interacting static susceptibility χ 0 , where matrix elements a l μ ( k) resulting from the diagonalization of the initial Hamiltonian H 0 connect orbital and band-space denoted by indices l and μ respectively. The E μ are the eigenvalues of H 0 and f (E) is the Fermi function. a s μ ( k)a p * μ ( k)a q ν ( k + q)a t * ν ( k + q) × f (Eν ( k+ q))-f (Eμ( k)) Eν ( k+ q)-Eμ( k) In our calculation both q and k run over uniform grids spanning the reciprocal unit cell. Temperature enters the calculation through the Fermi functions. The static spin-and orbital-susceptibilities (χ s,RPA and χ c,RPA ) are constructed in an RPA framework. Since the interaction term in the Hamiltonian is local and our models are single-orbital in nature, we can restrict the calculation to the diagonal elements of the susceptibility and use scalar equations for the RPA-enhanced susceptibilities. , χ c,RPA L ( q) = χ 0 L ( q) 1 + U χ 0 L ( q) Here, χ L with L = {llll} denotes the diagonal element of the susceptibility tensor associated with an BEDT-TTF site indexed by l. The total spin susceptibility is given by the sum over all site-resolved contributions χ s ( q) = 1 2 L χ s,RPA L ( q). The pairing vertex in orbital space for the singlet channel can be calculated using the fluctuation exchange approximation 19,20 . Momenta k and k are restricted to the Fermi surface. As vectors k ± k do not necessarily lie on the grid used in the calculation of the susceptibility χ 0 ( q), we use linear interpolation of the grid data. The pairing vertex in orbital space is transformed into band space using the matrix elements a l μ ( k). ×a s ν ( k )a q ν (-k ) Finally, we solve the linearized gap equation by performing an eigendecomposition on the kernel and obtain the dimensionless pairing strength λ i and the symmetry function g i ( k). shows the gaps extracted from the fit using prefactors ci fixed to the values determined from the microscopic calculation, while (b) shows the gaps extracted from a fit to the STS experiment, where also the ci were used as parameters. In the gap equation we use the singlet symmetrized vertex Γ μν ( k, k ) = 1 2 [ Γμν ( k, k )+ Γμν ( k,k )]. The integration runs over the discretized Fermi surface and v F ( k) is the magnitude of the Fermi velocity. For the intra-molecular Coulomb interaction we use a value of U = 0.75 eV. The non-interacting susceptibility is calculated on a 50 × 50 k-point grid at an inverse temperature of β = 40 eV -1 . For the solution of the gap equation we used 548 points on the two-dimensional Fermi surface. S. Diehl, T. Methfessel, U. Tutsch, J. Müller, M. Lang, M. Huth, M. Jourdan, and H.-J. Elmers, Disorder-induced gap in the normal density of states of the organic superconductor κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 27, 265601 (2015 ). 4 A. Savitzky and M. J. E. Golay, Smoothing and Differentiation of Data by Simplified Least Squares Procedures, Anal. Chem. 36, 1627 ( 1964).