We propose an efficient protocol for digital quantum simulation of quantum chemistry problems and enhanced digital-analog quantum simulation of transport phenomena in biomolecules with superconducting circuits. Along these lines, we optimally digitize fermionic models of molecular structure with single-qubit and two-qubit gates, by means of Trotter-Suzuki decomposition and Jordan-Wigner transformation. Furthermore, we address the modelling of system-environment interactions of biomolecules involving bosonic degrees of freedom with a digital-analog approach. Finally, we consider gate-truncated quantum algorithms to allow the study of environmental effects. The field of quantum chemistry arises from the application of quantum mechanics in physical models to explain the properties of chemical and biological systems. Circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) is a cutting-edge technology in terms of design versatility, coherent control, and scalability. In this manuscript, we combine efficient digital quantum simulation techniques for electronic Hamiltonians with existing algorithms in quantum chemistry, and we analyze the scalability and feasibility according to the state-of-the-art cQED. The electronic structure is a quantum chemistry many-body problem that is usually difficult to solve due to the exponential growth of the Hilbert space with the size of the system. Typically, the aim is to compute ground-state energies and their associated eigenvectors of these interacting electron systems in a fixed nuclear potential. ) and Ỹ = exp(i π 4 σ y j ), and with XX = exp(-iθ i j tσ x i σ x j ). (d) After a complete decomposition into two-qubit gates of the Mølmer-Sørensen gates involved in the simulation of a multiqubit interaction, a simplification of two-qubit gates (red) cancelling each other is shown. Among the variety of methods for simulating fermionic models with quantum technologies, one of the most studied approaches considers quantum algorithms using the second quantized formalism of electronic systems. where the operators c † i and c i stand for the electrons and obey the fermionic anticommutation relations. Coefficients h i j come from the single-electron integrals of the electron kinetic terms and electron-nuclei interactions, and h i jkl correspond to the two-electron integrals associated with the electron-electron Coulomb interaction. That is, it is expressed in atomic units as where R k are nuclear coordinates, r electronic coordinates, and Z the atomic number representing the nuclear charge. Here, {φ i (r)} defines a set of spin orbitals, and r = (r, σ ) denotes the pair of spatial and spin parameters. Optimal strategies of computation for quantum chemistry merge quantum simulation and classical numerical techniques. These methods, that we name as algorithmic quantum simulation, After this mapping, the Hamiltonian of equation ( where In general, an analog quantum simulation of an arbitrary Hamiltonian evolution is a difficult problem, for large l, where the dominating error component is ∑ i> j [H i , H j ]t 2 /2l, which depends on the value of the commutators and scales with t 2 /l. In our case, we consider the evolution operators associated with the different summands of the Hamiltonian in equation ( Symmetric Trotter expansions provide the improvement of the digital error at the expense of more gate execution. The Hamiltonian of equation ( This protocol requires the implementation of the interactions of H 1 one more time than in the regular digital protocol, thereby reducing the digital error. We introduce a fixed error for any two-qubit gate between nearest-neighbour qubits, without restricting ourselves to a specific setup or experimental source of error. Single-qubit gate errors are neglected due to their high fidelity with current technology. If the dominating error is the experimental one, then the aim is to reduce the number of gates and, consequently, the regular protocol gets better fidelities. In Fig. In this section, we propose a quantum simulation in superconducting circuits of generic system-environment interactions, which have long been recognised as fundamental in the description of electron transport in biomolecules. Biological systems are not isolated, and one can consider minimal models for characterising the quantum baths and decoherence, In particular, we study a Hamiltonian describing the charge transfer in DNA wires, A generic effective charge-bath model that describes an electronic system coupled to a fluctuating environment, in this case a bosonic bath, is captured by the Hamiltonian 44 with f j ( f † j ), fermionic annihilation (creation) operators for electrons on different sites with energies ε j . V j, j+1 characterises the electron hopping between nearest-neighbour sites. The bath is represented by the bosonic annihilation (creation) operators b i (b † i ), and the coefficients λ i j indicate how the system and bath are coupled. A minimal and particular case is the two-site model with j = A, B, which comprises a donor (D) and an acceptor (A) site. As previously shown, in order to simulate fermionic operators in superconducting circuits, we replace them by Pauli matrices via the Jordan-Wigner transformation, leading to where the first two terms correspond to the purely electronic subsystem, the third term is the free energy of the bosons in the bath, and the last term represents the interaction of the electrons with the environment. The Hamiltonian is now suitable for a digital quantum simulation in superconducting circuits, in which the qubits are described by Pauli operators, and 3D cavities, multimode coplanar waveguides, or low-Q cavities play the role of bosonic baths. A first step in this direction, considering an open transmission line coupled to qubits in order to simulate fermionic systems interacting with a continuum of bosons was introduced in the context of quantum field theory. By coupling three tunable superconducting qubits with b i (b † i ) the ith mode annihilation (creation) operator related with the cavity frequency ω i , couplings g j (ω i ) = g 0 √ i + 1, and g 0 the coupling strength to the fundamental cavity mode ω 0 . We profit from the tunability of the coupling between qubits and transmission lines via external magnetic fluxes φ j ext and φ j ext 35, 63, 64 to address a wider range of regimes and models, since the set of couplings β (φ j ext , φ j ext )g j (ω i ) mimic the coefficients λ i j that characterise the interaction with the environment in equation (10). Moreover, it has been shown experimentally how to engineer different shapes for the bath spectral function with a transmission line and partial reflectors. Let us discuss how the Hamiltonian in equation ( With this proposal, we have provided not only a way of extracting results illustrating different charge transport regimes in biomolecules, but also a way of testing different minimal models for describing molecules embedded in a bosonic environment. Superconducting circuits are a controllable quantum platform in which we can tune couplings between spins and bosons, and manipulate external conditions to engineer different baths. We analyse models of biological systems with a certain complexity and translate them to a controllable superconducting device that enjoys a similar complexity.