We numerically investigate the generation of solitons in current-biased long Josephson junctions in relation to the superconducting lifetime and the voltage drop across the device. The dynamics of the junction is modelled with a sine-Gordon equation driven by an oscillating field and subject to an external non-Gaussian noise. A wide range of α-stable Lévy distributions is considered as noise source, with varying stability index α and asymmetry parameter β. In junctions longer than a critical length, the mean switching time (MST) from superconductive to the resistive state assumes a values independent of the device length. Here, we demonstrate that such a value is directly related to the mean density of solitons which move into or from the washboard potential minimum corresponding to the initial superconductive state. Moreover, we observe: (i) a connection between the total mean soliton density and the mean potential difference across the junction; (ii) an inverse behavior of the mean voltage in comparison with the MST, with varying the junction length; (iii) evidences of non-monotonic behaviors, such as stochastic resonant activation and noise enhanced stability, of MST versus the driving frequency and noise intensity for different values of α and β; (iv) finally, these non-monotonic behaviors are found to be related to the mean density of solitons formed along the junction. The problem of detecting a sinusoidal signal corrupted by a Gaussian noise source has been already, at least in principle, completely solved On account of their peculiar properties, Josephson Junctions (JJ) stand out among other nonlinear elements as well suited candidates for signal detection Experimentally, many systems exibit non-Gaussian noise signals In this paper, we study the escape time from a metastable state of a long JJ driven by an external oscillating force and subject to a noise signal. The main quantity of interest is the mean switching time (MST), i.e. the average time the junction needs to switch from the superconducting state to the resistive regime, calculated on a sufficiently large number of numerical realizations. The analysis is performed varying the junction length, the frequency of the driving current, and the amplitude of the noise signal. The noise is modeled by an α-stable Lévy distribution. These statistics aims at describing real situations Lévy-type statistics was observed in various research fields, characterized by the presence of scale-invariance The dynamics of phase difference across a long JJ is well described by the sine-Gordon equation, which admits very peculiar wave packet solutions, called solitons The paper is organized as follows. In the next section the sine-Gordon model is presented. In Sec. III the statistical properties of the Lévy noise are briefly reviewed, showing some peculiarities of different α-stable distributions. Section IV gives computational details. In Sec. V theoretical results as a function of the junction length, the driving frequency, and the noise intensity are shown and analyzed. Finally, in Sec. VII conclusions are drawn. The behavior of a long overlap JJ is described by a nonlinear partial differential equation for the order parameter φ, the sine-Gordon (SG) equation Here φ is the phase difference between the wave functions describing the superconducting condensate in the two electrodes. Hereafter, small (capitol) letters are used to indicate normalized (non-normalized) coordinates and current terms (with respect to the critical value I c ). In our JJ model, the junction is extended along only one direction, defined as x, and can be considered "short" along the other directions, so that a magnetic field through the junction points orthogonally to the x direction. In Eq. (1) j c is the critical current density, is the Planck constant, e is the value of the electron charge, c is the speed of light, R N and C are the effective normal resistance and capacitance of the junction, respectively. The magnetic penetration d = λ L + λ R + t i is the sum of the London depths in the left and right superconductors λ L and λ R , respectively, and the interlayer thickness t i . The current I includes both the bias and the fluctuating current. The SG equation can be recast Here a simplified notation has been used, with the subscript of φ indicating the partial derivative in that variable. This notation will be used throughout all paper. In Eq. ( The coefficient is the Stewart-McCumber parameter. The junctions with β c 1 have small capacitance and/or small resistance, and are highly damped (overdamped JJ). In contrast, the junctions with β c 1 have large capacitance and/or large resistance, and are weakly damped (underdamped JJ). The terms i b (x, t) and sin(φ) of Eq. ( where Γ is the normalized external magnetic field. Hereinafter we impose Γ = 0. The two-dimensional time-dependent tilted potential, named washboard potential, is given by and shown in panel a of Fig. where i ac and ω are amplitude and frequency (normalized to ω J ) of the dimensionless driving current. The term i 0 is a dimensionless current that, in the phase string picture, represents the initial slope of the potential profile. Increasing the slope of the washboard the height of the right potential barrier reduces. Specifically the expression for the right potential barrier height ∆U is The unperturbed SG equation, in the absence of damping, bias, and noise, is given by φ xx (x, t) -φ tt (x, t) = sin(φ(x, t)). This equation admits solutions in the traveling wave form f = φ(x -ut) where u is the propagation velocity normalized to the Swihart velocity c. The Swihart velocity is the characteristic speed of propagation of electromagnetic waves along the junction and is usually more than one order of magnitude smaller than the velocity of light in vacuum. Eq. ( The signs + and -in Eq. ( φ gives a normalized measure of the magnetic flux through the junction, so that Eq. ( where δ is the Dirac delta function and It is worth noting that the noise intensity γ T can be also expressed as the ratio between the thermal energy and the Josephson coupling energy E J (see Eq. ( Here, I T h is the equivalent thermal noise current. Inserting the numerical values, we see that I T h 0.15μA at liquid helium temperature (T =4.2 K). To analyze in more detail the effect of the non-Gaussian noise on the phase dynamics, we will fix the white thermal noise current at a very low intensity. Specifically, the non-Gaussian noise current i nG (x, t) is described by α-stable Lévy distributions. Here we briefly review the concept of α-stable Lévy distributions where the X j terms are independent copies of X. Moreover X is strictly stable if and only if b n = 0 ∀n. The well known Gaussian distribution stays in this class. This definition does not provide a parametric handling form of the stable distributions. The characteristic function, however, allows to deals with them. The general definition of characteristic function for a random variable X with an associated distribution function Following this statement, a random variable X is said stable if and only if where Z is a random variable with characteristic function represents the sign function. These distributions are symmetric around zero when β = 0 and μ = 0. In Eq. ( Fig. Fig. We note that in Eq. ( The heavy tails cause the occurrence of events with large values of x, whose probability densities are not negligible. The use of heavy-tailed statistics allows to consider rare events, corresponding to large values of x, because of the fat tails of these distributions. These events correspond to the Lévy flights previously discussed. The algorithm used in this work to simulate Lévy noise sources is that proposed by Weron We study the phase dynamics of a long JJ within the SG overdamped regime, setting β c = 0.01. The time and spatial steps are ∆t = ∆x = 0.05. Due to the stochastic nature of the dynamics of the system, we calculate the mean values of the variables analyzed performing a suitable number N = (5 • 10 3 -10 5 ) of numerical realizations (experiments). Throughout the whole paper we use the words string, referring to the entire junction, and cell to indicate each of the elements with dimension ∆x forming the junction. The string at rest within the washboard potential valley labeled with n = 0 (see Eq. ( ], in the i -th realization for the j -th cell, is Summing P ij (t) over the total number N c = L/∆x (L is the junction length) of cells and over the number N of realizations, the average probability that the entire string is in the superconducting state at time t can be computed as The MST τ is therefore calculated as The whole procedure is repeated varying the value of α and β, and obtaining the behaviors of the MST τ in the presence of different sources of Lévy noise. In this section, we investigate the dependence of the MST τ , the mean potential difference (MPD) ζ, and the mean soliton densities, n and n tot , on the junction length L, the driving frequency ω, and the noise amplitude γ as the Lévy parameters α and β are varied. The mean soliton density n is obtained considering only solitons partially lying in the potential well chosen as initial condition (see Fig. The noise intensity γ refers to the non-Gaussian component of the noisy current, while hereinafter the intensity of the thermal contribution is set to γ T = 10 -4 . The amplitude of the oscillating component of the driving current is set to i ac = 0.7, to allow, within a driving period, values of i b (t) greater than 1, corresponding to the absence of metastable states. In this section we study the behavior of a long junction varying its length L. The analysis can be split in two parts: i ) a comparison between the MST τ and the mean soliton density n; ii ) the study of the mean potential difference (MPD) ζ across the junction related to the total mean soliton density n tot . The MPD is in unit of Φ 0 and is normalized to the junction length L. The MSTs as a function of the length L, varying the stability index α ∈ (0, 2], are shown in panel a of Fig. For values of L < L c , soliton formation is hampered by the strength of interaction between neighbouring cells. Strings shorter than the nucleation length are indeed too small/too stiff to form ripples ample enough to overcome the potential barriers. As a consequence, below this threshold, the cells forming a string can only cross a barrier altogether, thereby suppressing chances of soliton formation. For L < L c , curves in Fig. Conversely, long strings move from a potential well by formation of kinks, antikinks and/or kink-antikink pairs. For L > L c a saturation effect is evident Depending on the junction parameters, the experimentalists can choose what to measure, either the voltage or the MST. For example, measurements of mean "noiseinduced" voltage may be performed easily for strong to moderate damping (β c < 1). In fact, with increasing β c (underdamped regime) the maximal value of current I max < I c , above which the switching to the running state occurs, decreases, and the measured voltages become also smaller (see Fig. According to the a.c. Josephson relation The potential difference across the JJ (normalized to Φ 0 ), in the i -th realization at the time t, is Therefore, the mean voltage for the i -th realization is Averaging over the total number of experiments N and dividing for the JJ length L, we obtain the MPD The curves of the MPD ζ as a function of L, varying α ∈ , where ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 are, respectively, the distances between the initial minimum and the two successive maxima on the right (see panel b of Fig. The constant value of ζ for L > L c is related to the saturation effect in the values of the mean soliton density. This is calculated by ensamble average of the number of kinks and anti-kinks formed along the string, without focusing only on the initial metastable state. We call this quantity the total mean soliton density n tot . The values of n tot as a function of L, varying α ∈ The curves in panel b of Fig. Here ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 are, respectively, the distances along the potential profile between the initial minimum and the two successive maxima on the right (see panel b of Fig. and D α,γ = (2γ) 1/α is the Lévy noise amplitude In this section we analyze the behavior of the MSTs as a function of the driving frequency ω. The results for different values of α ∈ (0, 2] are shown in panel a of Fig. All curves of Fig. The RA phenomenon is robust enough to be observed also in the presence of Lévy noise sources Considering the curves in Fig. The MSTs versus ω for different values of β ∈ [-1, 1] are shown in panel a of Fig. We note that a general lowering of τ occurs with increasing β. This behavior is related to the asymmetric fluctuations that these noise sources induce for β = 0. For β < 0, the Lévy jumps push the string in the negative φ direction, that is in the opposite direction with respect to the tilting imposed by the positive bias current. Therefore, the confinement of the string within the initial metastable state is the longest for β = -1. Conversely, a positive value of β gives fluctuations supporting the slipping of the string along the potential, resulting in very low values of τ . Panel b of Fig. In this section we analyze the MST versus the non-Gaussian noise amplitude γ ∈ [10 -4 , 5 • 10 2 ], for different values of α. The results for α ∈ (0, 2], β = 0.0, L = 10, ω = 0.9, and i 0 = 0.9 are shown in panel a of Fig. Regardless the value of α, for γ → 0 all the curves converge to the same value, i.e. the deterministic lifetime in the superconducting state, which strongly depends on the bias current. Increasing the intensity of noise, the MST curves exhibit an effect of noise enhanced stability (NES) We observe that in the curve for α = 2 two maxima are present in γ 0.1 and γ 100. Reducing the value of α the higher maximum shifts towards smaller γ maintaining its height, up to merge with the first maximum. In particular, the position γ(τ max ) of the second NES peak grows exponentially towards higher noise intensities as the value of α increases (see inset of Fig. The double maxima NES for short and long JJs in the presence of a Gaussian noise source, i.e. α = 2 and β = 0.0, was previously observed by Valenti et al. This oscillating behavior of P (t) tends to disappear as the noise intensity increases. In correspondence of the second NES peak for higher noise intensities no oscillations in P (t) are present. The JJ dynamics is totally driven by the noise, and the NES effect is due to the possibility that the phase string comes back into the first valley after a first escape event, as indicated by the fat tail of P (t) (cf. Fig. Reducing α, the probability to obtain intense noise fluctuations grows, so that temporary confinements within the initial metastable state after a first escape can still occur but in correspondence of lower intensities of noise. The second NES maximum is therefore present also for α < 2, as shown in Fig. Panel b of Fig. Both panels of Fig. From Fig. Moreover, we calculate the total mean soliton density for the zero bias force, that is i 0 = i ac = 0. In this condition, the solitons are exclusively generated by noise induced fluctuations along the string. The observation time is increased to t max = 10 3 and the junction length is L = 40. The results are presented in Fig. The total soliton density (kinks and antikinks) in a string is twice the kink density given in Eq. ( When the noise intensity is greater than the mean potential barrier height ∆U i 0 =0.0 = 2, i.e. 1/γ 0.5, the curves in Fig. We studied how both stochastic non-Gaussian fluctuations and an oscillating driving contribute to the generation of solitons in a long Josephson junction (also called string), which is a system governed by the sine-Gordon model. The non-Gaussian noise sources are modeled by using α-stable Lévy statistics. In detail, we analyzed the behavior of the superconducting lifetime and the voltage drop across the junction as the values of the characteristic Lévy parameters α and β change. The superconducting lifetime of the junction is calculated as the mean switching time (MST) from the initial metastable state, i.e. a minimum of the tilted washboard potential. Studying the MST as a function of the junction length L, two different behaviors are observed, in correspondence of regimes of length below and above a critical value L c . One, occurring for short junctions, is characterized by the movement of the phase string as a whole. The other one, occurring for junctions whose size exceeds L c , in which the solitons creation is allowed. We found a connection between the behavior of the MST for L > L c and the mean density n of solitons partially laying in the initial metastable state. Moreover, we observed that, for a fixed length of the junction, n varies non-monotonically as a function of α, showing a clear maximum. A similar non-monotonic behavior characterizes the probability P α,γ of a direct "noise-induced" jump from the initial washboard minimum to the next one. We investigated also the mean potential difference (MPD) as a function of the junction length. For L > L c the MPD behaves just like the mean density n tot of solitons formed along the string. Studying the behavior of the MST as a function of the driving frequency ω, we observed the presence of stochastic resonance activation, that is a noise induced phenomenon whose signature is the appearance of a minimum in the curve of MST versus ω. For frequencies nearby the RA minima, the behavior of the MST as a function of α is characterized by the presence of a maximum. We understood this result studying the jump probability P α,γ , which shows the same nonmonotonic behavior as a function of α. We found evidence of a nonmonotonic behavior also studying the MSTs as a function of the noise intensity γ, observing the phenomenon of noise enhanced stability, whose characteristics strongly depend on the values of the Lévy parameters α and β. Our findings are important to understand the role of non Gaussian noise sources on the transient dynamics of out of equilibrium long JJ devices. This is important not only in the general context of the nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, but also to improve the performance of this device. Moreover, the statistics of the escape times from the superconductive metastable state of a JJ carries information on the non-Gaussian background noise 