Within the BaFe 2 As 2 crystal lattice, we partially substitute thallium for barium and report the effects of interlayer coupling in Ba 1-x Tl x Fe 2 As 2 crystals. We demonstrate the unusual effects of magneto-elastic coupling and charge doping in this iron-arsenide material, whereby Néel temperature rises with small x, and then falls with additional x. Specifically, we find that Néel and structural transitions in BaFe 2 As 2 (T N =T s = 133 K) increase for x=0.05 (T N = 138 K, T s = 140 K) from magnetization, heat capacity, resistivity, and neutron diffraction measurements. Evidence from single crystal X-ray diffraction and first principles calculations attributes the stronger magnetism in x=0.05 to magneto-elastic coupling related to the shorter intraplanar Fe-Fe bond distance. With further thallium substitution, the transition temperatures decrease for x = 0.09 (T N = T s = 131 K), and this is due to charge doping. We illustrate that small changes related to 3d transition-metal state can have profound effects on magnetism. While the reasons for high-temperature superconductivity (HTS) remain unsolved, its manifestation in a particular antiferromagnetic material ('parent') In this work we demonstrate and discuss, based on experimental work and first principles calculations, a situation in which magneto-elastic coupling is sufficiently strong to reverse the well-documented reduction of Néel temperature with chemical substitutions. We find that with Tl doping of BaFe 2 As 2 (Ba 1-x Tl x Fe 2 As 2 ; Tl-122) with x=0.05, the Néel temperature increases from T N = 132 K to 138 K, and that further doping of x=0.09 reduces T N to 131 K. This is contradictory to the conventional wisdom regarding the iron arsenides, in which the T N decreases with doping of the parent. In order to understand this behavior, we compare our Tl-122 system to the known behavior of the isoelectronic hole-doped system Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 (K-122) Ba 1-x Tl x Fe 2 As 2 crystals had sheet/block morphologies and dimensions of ~ 5 × 4 × 0.1 mm 3 or smaller in a, b, and c crystallographic directions, respectively. Similar to BaFe 2 As 2 , the crystals formed with the [001] direction perpendicular to the plates. See Fig. The list of refined structural data from single-crystal X-ray diffraction is listed in Table Structural refinement parameters for BaFe 2 As 2 and two randomly chosen pieces from each of Ba 1-x Tl x Fe 2 As 2 with x nominal =0.15 and 0.30 batches. Single-crystal X-ray diffraction data were collected and refined x nominal =0. Single-crystal X-ray diffraction data are collected on an ~100 m size crystal; hence, we believe that EDS x averaging (described above) gives the best representative 'x' relevant to describing bulk physical behavior. The magnetic susceptibility (χ) behaviors of Ba 1-x Tl x Fe 2 As 2 crystals are anisotropic (Fig. We should note that there are varying experimental reports on the values of T N in BaFe 2 As 2 parent, presumably caused by off-stoichiometry, unintentional doping, chemical order, variable levels of strain, or even different inferred T N methods. For the parent, we find T N = 132(1) K (FeAs flux-grown crystals) [here, and for example 32, 36-39], although there are reports of T N = 137-139 K The resistivity of Tl-122 is not high, due to high densities of states at the Fermi level. The resistivity of Tl-doped samples is slightly less than the parent (ρ 300 K < 1 m.cm), probably due to increase in carriers by hole doping. All samples display similar metallic behavior with ρ decreasing upon cooling (Fig. For BaFe 2 As 2 , heat capacity increases below 134 K peaking at 132 K (Fig. We performed theoretical calculations in order to understand the highly unusual behavior of doping with thallium for which T N first increases in 5% chemical substitution, then decreases with 9% in BaFe 2 As 2 . This behavior is opposite to that expected and found for Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 The experimental structural details used for LDA calculations for Tl-122, and that of K-122 reported in ref. x Tl x Fe 2 As 2 increasing and splitting for the x= 0.05 doped crystal at T N = 138 K and T s = 140 K. Further Tl-substituted x= 0.09 crystal gives reduced the value of T N = 131 K, with an overlap with T s . Evidence from single crystal x-ray diffraction attributes the stronger magnetism for x= 0.05 to shorter intraplanar Fe-Fe bond distance. This is the first report of thallium-doping of BaFe 2 As 2 , and the first clear demonstration of the disparities between magneto-elastic coupling and charge-doping. Theoretical LDA calculations indicate the great sensitivity of the T N behavior to the crystal structural details. Synthesis and preparation. Single crystals of Ba 1-x Tl x Fe 2 As 2 were grown out of self-flux using the conventional high-temperature solution(flux)-growth technique Elemental and structure analyses. The chemical composition of the crystals was measured with a Hitachi S3400 scanning electron microscope operating at 20 kV, and use of energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Phase purity, crystallinity, and the atomic occupancy of crystals were checked by collecting data on a Bruker SMART APEX CCD-based single-crystal X-ray diffractometer, with fine-focus Mo K α radiation. One piece of each crystal from x nominal = 0, 0.15, and 0.30 batch (all sides less than 0.1 mm) was covered in Paratone N oil and kept under a stream of liquid nitrogen, at 173(2) K, above their potential structural or magnetic transition values. We used the initial atomic coordinates from the known BaFe 2 As 2 structure, and then refined against the X-ray data using full matrix least-squares methods of SHELXTL software; absorption correction was applied using SADABS Physical property measurements. Magnetization of the samples was performed in Quantum Design (QD) Magnetic Property Measurement System with the field in the ab-plane and along the c-crystallographic axes. Each sample was cooled to 2 K in a zero-field, then the data were collected by warming to ~ 370 K in magnetic field of 1 Tesla. The electrical transport was performed in the Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). Four electrical leads were attached to the samples using Dupont 4929 silver paste, with resistance measured in the ab plane. The temperature dependence of the heat capacity was also obtained using the QD PPMS, via relaxation method. Neutron diffraction. Single crystal neutron diffraction was performed using the four-circle diffractometer HB-3A at the High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, to distinguish between the structural and magnetic transitions in x=0, 0.05, and 0.09 Tl-122. The selected crystals were initially used for EDS and property measurements. The neutron wavelength of 1.542 Å was used from a bent perfect Si-220 monochromator Theory. Charge doping was simulated using the virtual crystal approximation (VCA), under the assumption that both the Tl and K substitute on the Ba-site and are monovalent. All calculations were performed using the all-electron planewave first principles density functional theory code WIEN2K We have checked convergence of the energy differences with respect to both RK max (by increasing RK max to 9.0) and the number of k-points (by using approximately 5000 k-points); the differences in energy between the stripe and checkerboard structures changed by less than 0.1 percent in all cases. Our present calculations, similar to those reported, found an antiferromagnetic interaction along the c-axis for K-122, so that the ground-state magnetic ordering vector is (101).