novel composite pairing scenario [O Superfluid density or London penetration depth measurement is a fundamental experimental tool to detect low-temperature superconducting quasi-particle excitation in highly entangled unconventional pairing groundstate. More recently, London penetration depth measurement of Yb-doped CeCoIn 5 , i.e. Ce 1-x Yb x CoIn 5 , has been performed and unexpectedly the power-law behavior is gradually replaced by a fully gapped exponential behavior upon Yb-doping. As a crucial application of the derived superfluid response formula, we revisit the undoped CeCoIn 5 and Ybdoped Ce 1-x Yb x CoIn 5 . For the former one, the agreement between theory and experiment is rather good, thus confirms the present theoretical formalism and underlies the dominating heavy fermion excitations. Furthermore, when applied to the Yb-doped latter one, we successfully explains the doping evolution of pairing symmetry in Ce 1-x Yb x CoIn 5 as a simple doping effect by inspecting its pairing strength. The calculated temperaturedependent superfluid density in both nodal-d wave and nodeless-s wave states is well consistent with available measurement, The definition of Kondo-Heisenberg model is standard, which reads, For simplicity, the system is located on a regular square lattice and the resulting conduction electron band is (Extension to other lattices like triangular or honeycomb lattice is straightforward. with τ being the standard Pauli matrices. Moreover, to exclude nonphysical charge fluctuation of auxiliary fermion f σ , it is crucial to enforce the local constraint σ f † iσ f iσ = 1 at each site. Physically, this model describes two competing tendencies: The first is the Kondo screening, which leads to the formation of collective spin-singlet state among local moments and conduction electrons. The second is the short-ranged antiferromagnetic fluctuation introduced by Heisenberg interaction between local moments. It is believed that the observed complicated phenomena in diverse heavy electron systems can be captured by these two active factors. Usually, to get qualitatively correct information in the paramagnetic heavy fermion liquid state, the fermionic large-N or slave-boson mean-field theory is widely utilized. After performing the standard large-N mean-field approximation, Here, Kondo screening effect is encoded by an effective hybridization between conduction electron and local spins via V =σ c † iσ f iσ . Meanwhile, local spins acquire dissipation χ k = J H χη k +λ with η k = cos k x +cos k y due to the formation of nearest-neighbor valence-bond order χ = σ f † iσ f jσ . Intuitively, such valence-bond order reflects the quantum dynamics of disordered local spins, which competes with magnetic long-ranged order. In addition, Lagrangian multiplier λ is introduced to impose the local constraint on average and a constant energy shift with the number of lattice sites N s is added. Using the following quasi-particle transformation relation with and , the original Hamiltonian Eq. ( with the quasi-particle energy ) for quasi-particle A kσ and B kσ , respectively. Because we are mainly interested in the superfluid response in corresponding superconducting pairing phase, a proper superconducting model is required to perform any realistic and sensible calculation. For the present Kondo-Heisenberg model, it has long been proposed that the introduced Heisenberg interaction is able to mediate spin-singlet pairing between conduction electrons via the preformed pairing of auxiliary fermions. Here, the spin density operator denotes the spin degree of freedom of local f-electron , which should result from the existing RKKY interaction. Furthermore, if only nearestneighbor coupling is involved, this term naturally evolves into the Heisenberg term in Kondo-Heisenberg model. That is to say that the Kondo-Heisenberg model itself has already included the basic element of superconducting pairing. Now, we can write Heisenberg interaction term into its momentum-space version as 37 where J q = 2J H (cos q x + cos q y ) for square lattice. Then, using the auxiliary fermionic representation of spin operator, the Heisenberg term is rewritten as Usually, it is well-known that in heavy fermion system the dominated magnetic correlation has antiferromagnetic feature, thus the spin-triplet pairing channel is not favored and we will only consider the spin-singlet channel in our remaining parts. Therefore, the effective interaction in spin-singlet pairing channel is On physical ground, such term describes that a pair of fermions with opposite spins feels a pairing interaction as V q = -3 4 J q . Then, let q → k -k ′ and symmetrize with momentum, we have the following pairing interaction 37 which leads to an effective BCS pairing Hamiltonian as Considering the C 4 rotation symmetry of square lattice, In other words, Heisenberg-like local antiferromagnetic exchange interaction may mediate extended-s and d x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing on square lattice. For each pairing symmetry, we obtain its pairing Hamiltonian as Then, follow the spirit of classic BCS mean-field theory, 2 we introduce pairing order parameter and the corresponding mean-field Hamiltonian reads Note that such pairing Hamiltonian is identical to ones in Refs. 30, 31, and 46, where the RVB-like approach is utilized, Obviously, although our method is more like the conventional antiferromagnetic spin-fluctuation-exchange theory, it is equivalent to the RVB-pairing theory at least in the present mean-field level, which emphasizes the core role of local magnetic interaction. k for quasi-particle A σ and B σ , respectively. Note that such gap function is modified by the normal-state coherent factor, whose momentumdependence deviates from the pure pairing function γ k but the qualitative physics is unchanged by such modulation. Now, we see that the advantage of such simplification is to decouple each heavy fermion quasi-particle band, which leads to two independent BCS-like meanfield Hamiltonian. Therefore, after introducing Bogoliubov transformation for each quasi-particle band as with where the energy spectrum of superconducting quasiparticle has the following form The corresponding free energy and mean-field selfconsistent equations are given in Appendix B. Now, the mean-field superconducting Hamiltonian for Kondo-Heisenberg model is obtained. When the temperature is above critical temperature T c , there still exists the normal state described by Eq. 3, where heavy fermion quasi-particle moves freely in the renormalized heavy Fermi liquid. If we cools the system below T c , the normal heavy Fermi liquid transits into the heavy fermion superconducting state with pairing of heavy quasi-particle. To avoid the instability to quantum spin liquid or fractionalized Fermi liquid states, In this section, we will study the superfluid response function in heavy fermion superconductors. The main point of this section is for superfluid response in heavy fermion superconductors, which one is practically coupled to external electromagnetic field A, conduction electron, auxiliary fermion or heavy fermion quasi-particle? As shown in the detailed discussion in this section, it is found that only the heavy fermion quasi-particle is most likely to couple with A strongly, which is also depicted in Fig. For Kondo-Heisenberg model, by definition, the external electromagnetic potential A is exerted on conduction electron by substitution t ij → t ij e ieAij , where t ij is the hopping energy in real-space. Thus, the Hamiltonian is invariant under local U(1) charge gauge transformation via while the auxiliary fermion f σ does not directly response to A because it originates from the fermionic representation of spin and has no electric charge. To discuss the superfluid response function, we consider conduction electron is coupled to electromagnetic field A q via the following Hamiltonian 37 Here, we have defined conduction electron velocity v k = ∂ε k ∂ki and the Nambu spinor ψ † k = (c † k↑ , c -k↓ ). Note that the bare vertex is simply ie v k , which leads to paramagnetic current-current correlation function as where G is 2 × 2-matrix Nambu Green's function for conduction electron and its detail formalism is given in Appendix A. Inserting the explicit expression of Green's function and setting zero-energy limit iΩ n = 0 and zeromomentum limit q = 0, we get the contribution of paramagnetic current is On the other hand, the diamagnetic current is coupled to A through The effective mass tensor for conduction electron is defined as Here, the interacting vertex is -( e 2 2m ) ij τz and its corresponding zero-frequency diamagnetic current-current correlation is Combining the contribution from paramagnetic and diamagnetic part, we obtain Finally, by using of the definition of superfluid density ρij e 2 m = ReΠ(q = 0) ij , one gets the desirable superfluid density formula ρ s ≡ ρ ii , Unfortunately, as what can be seen in Fig. A careful reader may note that in the normal-state mean-field Hamiltonian Eq. 1, conduction electron is hybridized with auxiliary fermion via the formation of Kondo screening (V = 0 and is real), thus repeating the argument of U(1) charge gauge transformation discussed in the beginning of this subsection, the auxiliary fermion has to transform like which means that the auxiliary fermion f σ now effectively acquires electric charge due to the well-developed Kondo hybridization in heavy fermion liquid state. As a matter of fact, this statement is more general and beyond the present mean-field level. In this section, we assume that beside the conduction electron, the auxiliary fermion also electromagnetically couples to A, thus the total paramagnetic current is Here, v i c = ∂ε k /∂k i and v i f = ∂χ k /∂k i are the effective velocity of conduction electron and auxiliary fermion, respectively. Therefore, the paramagnetic response function is ). Note that there exist four terms, among which Π cc ij and Π f f ij denote the contribution of conduction electron and auxiliary fermion, respectively. The left terms Π cc ij and Π f f ij are the cross-term, which implies the quantum interference effect between different currents. In last subsection, we have calculated Π cc ij , After a long but straightforward calculation, we obtain Since ReΠ(q = 0) cf ii = ReΠ(q = 0) f c ii , the remaining work is to calculate Π(q = 0) cf ii , whose expression is After inserting the explicit form of G 13 and G 14 , the final result reads So, the paramagnetic current response is found to be and the diamagnetic current response is easy to obtain as Therefore, our wanted superfluid density formula is In Fig. After all, we indeed confront a serious problem on the calculation of superfluid density. In last section, we have seen that the standard process of calculating superfluid response in fact breaks down. However, there exists a hint to resolve this question by noting that when collective Kondo screening develops, the quasi-particle of the system is the heavy fermion quasi-particle A kσ and B kσ . If all interesting physics occurs at energy-scale smaller than the width of quasiparticle band E + k and E - k , the heavy fermion quasiparticle can be seen as the only fundamental or true particles in our problem, thus we may expect the low-energy thermodynamics and transport are dominated by those heavy quasi-particle alone. For heavy fermion superconductivity, it is commonly believed that the pairing results from heavy quasi-particle but not directly involving with original conduction electron. where the effective velocity for heavy fermion quasiparticle A σ and B σ are defined by , respectively. At the same time, the diamagnetic current is found to be Then, with the same treatment in last subsection, one can use these two heavy quasi-particle currents to derive Eq. 11. (11) which is a useful and physically correct superfluid density formula and is the most important finding of the present paper. As shown in Fig. When comparing to the experimental data of undoped CeCoIn 5 in Ref. 7, (See also Fig. A. Superfluid response in heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn5 In this section, we proceed to study the superfluid response in a kind of typical heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 . To meet with the realistic experimental measurement, we fix model parameters as t = -1, t ′ = 0.3, J K = 2, J H = 0.6, V = -0.2965, χ = 0.2222 and n c = 0.9, 36 thus the resulting normal state Fermi surface is shown in Fig. Next, it is interesting to understand the possible pairing symmetry transition in Yb-doped CeCoIn 5 , which is suggested by recent superfluid density measurement and inspires an exotic local electron pairing scenario. Here, the dimensionless λ * measures the overlap of pairing function γ k on normal-state Fermi surface. Obviously, less (more) overlap between nodal point/line (maximized gap zone) and Fermi surface is helpful to lower ground-state energy and the corresponding pairing strength is larger. In other words, pairing symmetry with larger λ * will ultimately become the true superconducting pairing instability. For the Fermi surface shown in Fig. When considering the doping case, we plot the pairing strength λ * and effective mass ratio m * /m in Fig. Before ending this section, it is interesting to note that for the heavy fermion superconductor CeRhIn 5 , For realistic materials, the nonmagnetic impurity scattering is unavoidable and is ubiquitous. Particularly, it plays a key role in the low temperature regime where linear-T dependence of nodal d-wave is replaced by the T 2 law. The main point of nonmagnetic impurity scattering is that it introduces effective damping rate Γ A and Γ B for each heavy quasi-particle. Then, the corresponding retarded heavy quasi-particle Green's function in superconducting state reads where and the case for G R BB (k, ω) is similar. Next, follow the same treatment in the main text, we obtain the expression of superfluid density as with . By using the above equations, one can inspect the explicit behavior of superfluid density in all temperature regime. Here, we investigate the low temperature behavior by expanding Z α=A,B k as 2 (W α k is approximated as a constant in this case) where the first term basically denotes a correction to zero-temperature superfluid density and the second term introduces the impurity-dominated T 2 dependence since this term vanishes with Γ α → 0. Then, for nodal superconductors like d x 2 -y 2 -wave in undoped CeCoIn 5 , it is found that the low-temperature superfluid density behaves as which is in contrast to the linear-T behavior of the pure sample. Here, ρ α (0) and ∆ α are the zero-temperature superfluid density and effective gap for each quasi-particle band. We should emphasize that both the pure nodald wave and the one with impurity are at least qualitative consistent with the observed power-law behaviors in CeCoIn 5 . For La and Nd substituted CeCoIn 5 , 13 this impurity induced T 2 dirty d-wave behavior has also been observed by using a tunnel-diode resonator technique. Furthermore, for the possible nodeless pairing state in Yb-doped Ce 1-x Yb x CoIn 5 , no qualitative behaviors are changed by nonmagnetic impurity scattering since all low-energy excitations are fully gapped. For nodal pairing states like the studied d x 2 -y 2 -wave, when approaching gap nodal points, its coherent length ξ ∼ v F /∆ is larger than its London penetration depth λ, thus the so-called non-local effects are important, where the momentum-dependent superfluid response function At low temperature (T < T * ∼ ξ/λ(0)∆), for nodal superconducting states, the above equation gives △λ(T ) ≡ λ(T ) -λ(0) ∼ T 2 , which is similar to the effect of nonmagnetic impurity and modifies the linear-T behavior. We note authors in Ref.9 argued that the penetration depth of CeCoIn 5 is governed by this nonlocal electrodynamics effect but rather than the nonmagnetic impurity effect. In this work, we have systematically studied superfluid density response formula in pure sample and with nonmagnetic impurity. These formulas have been successfully applied to undoped heavy fermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 and its Yb-doped counterpart Ce 1-x Yb x CoIn 5 . The agreement between theory and experiment in those typical heavy fermion superconductors is rather good, which confirms our basic formalism and emphasizes the core role of heavy fermion quasi-particle. The present work may provide useful formalism to understand and explain existing and future superfluid density experiments in heavy fermion superconductivity. In the main text, we have noted that the measurement of thermal conductivity suggests there is no pairing symmetry transition in Ce 1-x Yb x CoIn 5 , which is in contrast to the result of London penetration depth experiment. Frankly, it is still unable to judge which experiment gives true physical behavior, but if we use the model in Ref. 24 with our superfluid density formula, we find only nodal-d wave is possible in this case. It is intriguing to note the possibility that if the critical quasi-particle picture is still valid in heavy fermion superconducting states with proximity to quantum critical point, In the superconducting state, the single particle imaginary time Green's function is defined as follows With the superconducting mean-field Hamiltonian, the matrix element in momentum-energy representation reads Then, minimizing the free energy function versus mean-field parameters V , χ, λ, μ and ∆, we obtain the following five self-consistent equations: Appendix C: Charged auxiliary fermion In this section, we follow the argument of Ref.37 to explain the fact that auxiliary fermion has acquired electric charge via Kondo screening in heavy fermion liquid state. In literature, the finite temperature or imaginary-time path integral formalism is often used and the corresponding formula is Here q = 1/N and N = 2 for the physical spin case and all mean-field order parameters are now dynamic fields. Evidently, the dynamic Lagrangian parameter λ enforces the constraint if we integrate it out. Meanwhile, integrating out valence-bond order χ ij will recover the original Heisenberg interaction term. Thus, the above path integral formalism is an exact description of original Kondo-Heisenberg model. As emphasized in Ref. 37, when Kondo screening develops, the internal gauge symmetry is lost in the above action due to the Anderson-Higgs mechanism, which states that the the absorb of gapless phase into gauge field leads to the mass of gauge field itself. In other words, f -fermion appears a physical object and is free of internal gauge structure. Furthermore, we can define a new λ i to absorb ∂ τ φ i , Here, we should note the integral measurement of λ i is changed from {-∞, ∞} to complex plane, thus the number of degree of freedom is unchanged. Now, under the electrodynamic gauge transformation, c iα → c iα e iθi , we have to use f iα → f iα e iθi since V i is real and charge-less. This clearly endorse the physical charge into composite f -fermion and it can response to the external electromagnetic field as true physical electron excitation. where both conduction electron and auxiliary fermion are coupled to external electromagnetic field.