We report the detailed transport, magnetic, thermodynamic properties and theoretical calculation of KBi2 single crystals in superconducting and normal states. KBi2 shows metallic behavior at normal state and enters superconducting state below Tc = 3.573 K. Moreover, KBi2 exhibits low critical fields in all of measurements, field-induced crossover from second to first-order phase transition in specific heat measurement, typical magnetization isotherms of type-I superconductors, and small Ginzburg-Landau parameter κGL = 0.611. These results clearly indicate that KBi2 is a type-I superconductor with thermodynamic critical field Hc = 234.3(3) Oe. Superconductivity is one of most attractive topics in condensed matter physics area not only because of the great application potential of those superconductors (SCs) with high transition temperature and critical field but also due to the importance of understanding the mechanism of Cooper pairing, especially for the unconventional superconductivity beyond Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) mechanism. According to the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory, the value of GL parameter κ GL which is the ratio of penetration depth to coherence length classifies SCs into two categories: type-I SCs when κ GL < 1/ √ 2 and type-II SCs when κ GL > 1/ √ 2. 1 For most of superconducting compounds, they belong to the type-II SCs and have been studied extensively. In contrast, type-I SCs are thought empirically to occur mainly in elementary metals and metalloids and type-I superconducting compounds are very rare. For the binary bismuth compounds, some of them show superconductivity, such as KBi 2 (3.6 K), Single crystals of KBi 2 were grown by the flux method with K : Bi = 1 : 9 molar ratio. K pieces (99.9 %) and Bi shot (99.9 %) were mixed and put into an alumina crucible, covered with quartz wool and then sealed into the quartz tube with partial pressure of Argon. The quartz tube was heated to 580 • C for 12 h and then slowly cooled to 280 • C where crystals were decanted with a centrifuge. Single crystals with typical size 1.8×1.8×1 mm 3 were obtained and exhibit metallic luster. X-ray diffraction (XRD) of powdered small crystals and a single crystal were performed using a Bruker D8 X-ray machine with Cu K α radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm) at room temperature. Rietveld refinement of the XRD patterns was performed using the code TOPAS4. As shown in Fig. Fig. The transition temperature is consistent with previous magnetic susceptibility measurement (T c = 3.5 K). Specific heats of KBi 2 single crystal at various fields are shown in Fig. The fitted γ and β is 1.3(4) mJ mol -1 K -2 and 3.10(4) mJ mol -1 K -4 , respectively. The latter one gives the Debye temperature Θ D = 123.4(5) K using the formula Θ D = (12π 4 N R/5β) 1/3 . The electron-phonon coupling λ e-ph can be estimated with the values of Θ D and T c using McMillan's theory, 24 where μ * is the repulsive screened Coulomb potential and is usually between 0.1 and 0.15. Setting μ * = 0.13, the calculated λ e-ph is 0.774, implying that KBi 2 is an intermediately or strongly coupled BCS SC. Fig. where ∆F (T ), ∆U (T ), and ∆S(T ) are the differences of free energy, internal energy, and entropy between zero-field superconducting and normal states. The relationship between the T c and critical fields determined from the magnetization, resistivity, specific heat measurements and free energy analysis is summarized in the H -T phase diagram (Fig. Fig. where k B is Boltzmann constant and m e is the free electron mass. With derived m * and n, the London penetration depth is calculated as λ L (0) = (m * /μ 0 ne 2 ) 1/2 = 11.8 nm. In summary, the single crystal of KBi 2 has been grown from Bi flux successfully. Resistivity, magnetization and specific heat measurements indicate that KBi 2 shows a bulk superconductivity with T c = 3.573 K. Further analysis of experimental results indicate that KBi 2 is type-I BCS SC in the dirty limit with an intermediate or strong coupling strength. The thermodynamic critical field is 234.3(3) Oe and the calculated GL parameter κ GL = 0.611. This study not only deepens our understanding on type-I superconductivity but will also stimulate further work on discovering other type-I SCs in binary or ternary compounds.