We propose a scheme to realize controllable quantum state transfer and entanglement generation among transmon qubits in the typical circuit QED setup based on adiabatic passage. Through designing the time-dependent driven pulses applied on the transmon qubits, we find that fast quantum sate transfer can be achieved between arbitrary two qubits and quantum entanglement among the qubits also can also be engineered. Furthermore, we numerically analyzed the influence of the decoherence on our scheme with the current experimental accessible systematical parameters. The result shows that our scheme is very robust against both the cavity decay and qubit relaxation, the fidelities of the state transfer and entanglement preparation process could be very high. In addition, our scheme is also shown to be insensitive to the inhomogeneous of qubit-resonator coupling strengths. In the past two decades, many advances in quantum computation have been achieved on various kinds of quantum systems. One of the crucial perquisites for realizing quantum information processing is quantum entanglement. Due to its non-locality and non-classical correlations, quantum entanglement has been exploited in many applications The recent rapid developments in circuit QED has enabled this system as one of the leading platforms for studying quantum computation and quantum simulation In this paper, we propose a scheme based on adiabatic passage to realize QST and quantum entanglement generation among three transmon qubits fabricated in a transmission line resonator. This method could also be simply generalized to many qubits case to achieve long-distant QST and multipartitie quantum entanglement. In our scheme, QST can be performed between arbitrary two qubits through applying approximate driven pulses. Moreover, based on tuning the time delay of the driven pulses, the transferred quantum state can be stabilized in a long time range, which is very helpful for further quantum information extraction with quantum non-demolition measurement. Furthermore, the degree of the final generated entanglement among the three transmon qubits can be tuned by changing the parameters of the driven pulse. In particular, we show the case for generating three qubit W state, which has many applications in quantum information processing. Finally, we numerically analyze the influence of the decoherence on our scheme, including the cavity decay and qubit relaxation. The result shows that our scheme is robust to their influence and the QST and entanglement generation could be achieved with very high fidelity. Moreover, our method is also shown to be insensitive to the inhomogeneous qubit-resonator coupling strength. The Building block. We consider three identical transmon qubits placed in a transmission line resonator, and the resonator has single relevant mode with the frequency w c involving the qubit-photon interaction, as shown in Fig. , where w c = 1/ √ L c C c denotes the resonator frequency, and a (a + ) represents the annihilation (creation) operator of the transmission line resonator. Under the rotating-wave approximation, the effective interaction Hamiltonian of the whole system can be written as where we have assumed that = 1, g l is the coupling constant between the cavity and the transmon, Ω l (t) is the Rabi frequency for the transition |e l ↔ |1 l of the qubit l. Without loss of generality, we assume that the transmon qubit is driven by a time-dependent microwave pulse with Gaussian envelopes where Ω 0l , τ l and T l are pulse amplitude, time delay and operation duration. In the following, the parameters and the shape of the driven Gaussian pulses will be engineered for achieving certain target quantum information processing, which is within the current state of the art circuit QED technology. Recently, based on similar engineering on the external driven Gaussian microwave pulses, non-adiabatic Quantum state transfer. We now show how to engineer the driven pulses based on adiabatic passage Assume the initial state of the system is |0 c |1 1 |0 2 |0 3 , where the transmon qubit 1 is prepared in the state |1 , transmon qubits 2 and 3 are in the state |0 , and the cavity field is in the vacuum state. In this situation, the system evolves within this subspace is spanned by seven basis where |φ 4 ∼ |φ 7 are the intermediate states. It is easy to verify that the following two states are the eigenstates of the effective Hamiltonian with zero eigenvalue where N 3 is the normalization factor. The states |D(0) 3 and |D(t) 3 are dark states since they have no dynamics under the Hamiltonian, and thus the excited level |e l (l = 1, 2, 3) is unpopulated. When the system is in the state |0 c |0 1 |0 2 |0 3 , the dynamical evolution of the system will be frozen. From the above dark state formalism, it is easy to find that, if one can simultaneously engineer the three driven Gaussian pulses so that initially {Ω 3 (t), Ω 2 (t)} ≫ Ω 1 (t) and finally {Ω 3 (t), Ω 1 (t)} ≫ Ω 2 (t), then the population transfer could be achieved from |φ 1 to |φ 2 . The detailed evolution path and the driven pulses needed in the above transfer can be described as the following. First, Then, the photon is further absorbed by the second qubit, the system will further evolve according to Similarly, one can realize the QST from transmon qubit 2 to 3. In this case, based on observing the dark state formalism, when the three driven Gaussian pulses are engineered simultaneously so that initially {Ω 3 (t), Ω 1 (t)} ≫ Ω 2 (t) and finally {Ω 1 (t), Ω 2 (t)} ≫ Ω 3 (t), the population from the initial state |φ 2 would be transferred to the target state |φ 3 . The detailed evolution process can be written as first and then the photon is further absorbed by the third qubit which is the coherent QST between the qubit 2 and 3. In the whole process, one can find that the cavity state and the qubit state |e are the intermediate states. It is worth to point out that, our method is also can be generalized to realize QST between arbitrary two qubits, including one particular qubit to the one that is far away from this qubit, which is of great significance to the large scale quantum computation in the future. In the following, we will show the method to design the driven Gaussian pulse sequence with their parameters satisfying the above requirements. For this purpose, we firstly assume the forms of the time-dependent driven Gaussian pulses are chosen as Ω 3 (t) = Ω 31 e -(t-τ5) 2 /T 2 5 + Ω 32 e -(t-τ6) 2 /T 2 6 . Through substituting the above forms into the systemic Hamiltonian, we numerically calculate the systemic evolution and go to find the optimal parameters where the fidelity of our scheme is maximal. In Fig. In Fig. , where ρ(t) and ρ f are the density matrixes of the evolved state at the end of the pulse operation and the ideal final state respectively. One can find that the fidelity can almost approach one. Actually, the fidelity for QST from qubits 1 to 3 is much higher. Note that the influence of the inhomogeneous qubit-resonator coupling strengths on our scheme caused by the imperfection in the practical fabrication is a very important issue needed to be addressed. With a typical choice on the inhomogeneous qubit-resonator coupling strengths, we numerically calculate the corresponding fidelity and analyze the performance in this case in Fig. In Fig. Entangled state generation. We next consider using driven pulses to robustly generate quantum entanglement among the three transmon qubits placed in the transmission line resonator. There have been some entanglement generation schemes in similar circuit QED setups. Firstly, Tsomokos However, due to the fact that the coupling between every two qubits is required and each qubit is operated at its degeneracy point, it needs more time to achieve the entanglement and more fragile under the decoherence than our scheme. Secondly, Galiautdinov and Martinis Firstly, the driven pulse with Rabi frequency Ω 1 (t) drives the system from |φ 1 into the state |φ 5 , then evolves into the state |φ 4 through the coupling between transmon qubit 1 and the resonator. Note that the state |φ 4 is just onephoton state. So, from now on, all the couplings between the three qubits and the resonator will dominant over the evolution, make |φ 4 evolve into |φ 5,6,7 with equal weights. After that, three driven pulses with Rabi frequencies Ω 1,2,3 (t) would bring |φ 5,6,7 into |φ 1,2,3 with equal weights, leaving the cavity in the vacuum state. Then we get the entangled state of the three transmon qubits as which is a W state and can be employed to complete various quantum information processing tasks. The detailed performance of the above quantum entanglement generation is further analyzed through numerically designing the driven pulses. For this purpose, the form of three optimal time-dependent driven Rabi frequencies are chosen as In Fig. We verify that the following two states are eigenstates of the Hamiltonian with zero eigenvalue. Here, N n is a normalization factor. The states |D(0) N and |D(t) N are dark states since the excited level |D(0) l is unpopulated. Through optimizing the time-dependent driven pulses applied on the transmon qubits, we can achieve the fast quantum state transfer and quantum entanglement among different qubits. Actually, one also can find that the degree of the above entanglement also can be engineered to a particular value through designed approximate driven pulses. Moreover, different from the previous methods, the Bell state and W state could be prepared between arbitrary two and three qubits with such method. Such feature is very helpful for achieving large scale quantum computation in a quantum network. Discussion. At this stage, we take into account the cavity decay and qubit relaxation and analyze their influences on the quantum state transfer and quantum entanglement generation. For this purpose, the master equation is employed to described the above decoherence process, which can be written as ) where κ is the decay rate of the cavity, Γ l,1 (Γ l,e ) is the dephasing rate of the qubit l with the level |1 (|e ), γ l,1e and γ l,e0 are the energy relaxation rates for the qubit l with the decay path |1 → |e and |e → |0 , respectively; L[A] = 2AρA + -A + Aρ -ρA + A, σ - l,ij = |j l i| σ + l,ij = |i l j|, and σ l,k = |k l k| (k = 1, e). For simplicity, we assume Γ 1 = γ/2, Γ e = γ/4, γ 1e = γ and γ e0 = γ/2 In summary, based on engineering external driven microwave pulses and adiabatical passage, we have proposed a controllable method to realize high-fidelity QST and quantum entanglement among three superconducting qubits embedded in a transmission line resonator, which can be achieved with fast speed and high fidelity even in the presence of decoherence. Moreover, we also demonstrate that our scheme is also very robust to the inhomogeneousness of qubit-resonator coupling strength. In addition, our method can be readily scaled up to realize long-distance QST and multipartite quantum entangled generation. Finally, our proposal can also be applied to other types of superconducting qubits. Therefore, it is expected that our scheme could add a robust means for circuit QED to realize large-scale quantum computation and quantum simulation.