A three-terminal Josephson junction biased at opposite voltages can sustain a phase-sensitive dccurrent carrying three-body static phase coherence, known as the "quartet current". We calculate the zero-frequency current noise cross-correlations and answer the question of whether this current is noisy (like a normal current in response to a voltage drop) or noiseless (like an equilibrium supercurrent in response to a phase drop). A quantum dot with a level at energy 0 is connected to three superconductors Sa, S b and Sc with gap ∆, biased at Va = V , V b = -V and Vc = 0, and with intermediate contact transparencies. At zero temperature, nonlocal quartets (in the sense of four-fermion correlations) are noiseless at subgap voltage in the nonresonant dot regime 0/∆ 1, which is demonstrated with a semi-analytical perturbative expansion of the cross-correlations. Noise reveals the absence of granularity of the superflow splitting from Sc towards (Sa, S b ) in the nonresonant dot regime, in spite of finite voltage. In the resonant dot regime 0/∆ < ∼ 1, crosscorrelations measured in the (Va, V b ) plane should reveal an "anomaly" in the vicinity of the quartet line Va + V b = 0, related to an additional contribution to the noise, manifesting the phase sensitivity of cross-correlations under the appearance of a three-body phase variable. Phase-dependent effective Fano factors Fφ are introduced, defined as the ratio between the amplitudes of phase modulations of the noise and the currents. At low bias, the Fano factors Fφ are of order unity in the resonant dot regime 0/∆ < ∼ 1, and they are vanishingly small in the nonresonant dot regime 0/∆ 1. The Josephson effect and multiple Andreev reflections (MARs) appear to be well established at present time in two-terminal set-ups 1-4 , especially with respect to the clearcut break-junction experiments p,q sin [p (φ a (t) -φ c (t)) + q (φ b (t) -φ c (t))] = I c p,q sin [p (φ a (0) -φ c (0)) + q (φ b (0) -φ c (0))] ,(1) where the last identity is valid only at a (p, q) resonance p(V a -V c ) + q(V b -V c ) = 0 at which the nonlocal Josephson effect becomes time-independent, and the critical current I c p,q can be calculated at equilibrium. It turns out that the microscopic process of four-fermion exchange produces a π-shifted current-phase relation for the quartets It is shown here that noise experiments in threeterminal Josephson junctions should provide complementary characterization of those phase-coherent processes, similarly to Cooper pair splitting in three-terminal normal metal-superconductor-normal metal set-ups However, this physical picture for partition noise does not apply to equilibrium superflows of Cooper pairs in response to different phases on different leads (in the absence of applied voltage), because a superflow is collective and nongranular. The calculations presented in the main body of our article are based on a previous article by Cuevas et al. Let us come back to three-terminals superconducting junctions, which contain both ingredients of applied voltages and dc-supercurrent of pairs 8 . Three-body static phase coherence is present in both the pair current (quartets or multipairs) and the quasiparticle current (multiple Andreev reflections, MARs). One expects that noise cross-correlations may help to separate the underlying microscopic processes. A natural question arises in view of the discussion above on the noise of a normal or superconducting flow: Is the phase-sensitive current noiseless or noisy? This question is the subject of the present article. The notion of "quartets" is now discussed from a different perspective. Focusing on the case V a -V c = -(V b -V c ), the appearance of a Josephson-like dc-current between, on the one hand, S c , and on the other hand the pair (S a , S b ), signals the existence of static phase coherence between the three superconductors, despite the presence of nonzero voltages, in the absence of static phase coherence between two conductors only. The three-body coherence manifests itself in the relevant "quartet" threebody phase variable φ Q = φ a +φ b -2φ c , that is in principle controllable with superconducting loops. In general, the dc-current is a periodic function of the variable φ Q . The latter form suggests that instead of exchanging single Cooper pairs as in a SN S or SIS junction (I is an insulating barrier), the exchange "currency" to establish static phase coherence between S c and (S a , S b ) is an electronic quartet. This macroscopic point of view is valid irrespective of the nature of the junction and of the parameter regime, close or far from equilibrium. Two distinct pictures for the notion of "quartets" are then envisioned. Notion A corresponds to the restrictive sense of four-fermion correlations, as those appearing in the adiabatic regime Further technical introductory material is presented in Sec. II. It will be shown in Sec. III on the basis of semianalytical calculations that the nonresonant-dot quartet current looks like an equilibrium dc-Josephson current in the sense that it is noiseless. Sec. IV demonstrates by numerical calculations that finite noise and noise crosscorrelations are produced in the resonant dot regime, depending on the three-body phase variable φ Q mentioned above. It will be concluded in Sec. V that an anomaly in the noise or in the noise cross-correlations may be observed in future experiments with resonant quantum dots. Moreover, the anomaly in the noise is predicted to disappear as the quantum dot energy level is made nonresonant by applying a gate voltage, because of a crossover towards a collective nongranular flow of Cooper pairs in the presence of finite voltages. Three superconducting leads S a , S b and S c biased at V a = V , V b = -V and V c = 0 are connected to a common region (insulating or nonresonant quantum dot). The method used here is taken from the papers by Cuevas et al. The kernel of current-current correlations between terminals a k and a l (a k , a l ∈ {S a , S b , S c }) is given by where δI a k (τ ) is the current fluctuation of terminal a k at time τ . Because of the explicit time-dependence of the Hamiltonian, the current-current correlations S a k ,a l (τ, τ ) depend on both times τ and τ , not only on τ -τ . The noise correlations are given by 4 The kernel given by Eq. ( Insulator-like (g =0) c sin φQ, with φQ = φa + φ b -2φc. On this figure, the central region is equivalent to an insulator-like region, used to address the nonresonant dot regime in Sec. III. However, the numerical calculations in the forthcoming Sec. IV deal with a set-up containing an embedded quantum dot (see Fig. where the trace "Tr" is a summation over the Nambu labels. Latin labels a, b, c are used for the tight-binding sites in the superconducting leads, and Greek labels α, β and γ are used for the insulating region. The label x will be used in Sec. IV for a zero-dimensional quantum dot (see also the Appendix). Notations like Σa,α or Σα,a have the meaning of the hopping amplitude for crossing the interface S a I in the direction a → α or α → a respectively. The Keldysh Green's functions in Eqs. ( The gauge is such that the tunnel terms (purely diagonal in Nambu) are time-dependent: with The expression for the noise kernel is conveniently Fourier transformed. Of particular interest is to show that the noise vanishes in the adiabatic limit. The adiabatic limit corresponds to very small applied voltage, whatever interface transparencies. Then, the phases evolve slowly in time and the Keldysh Green's functions are approximated as being parameterized by the quasi-static phase variables φ a,b,c . Fourier transforming from the time difference τ -τ to frequency ω leads to the following expression for the Keldysh Green's functions: (14) where n F (ω) is the equilibrium Fermi distribution function at zero temperature, and at energy ω. Those expressions are easily deduced from the corresponding Dyson equations for the Keldysh Green's function, which, in a compact notation, take the following form: Going from Eq. ( The next step, considered in the following Sec. III, is to show that the quartet contribution to the noise crosscorrelations is vanishingly small in the nonresonant dot limit, for subgap voltages. The nonresonant dot limit corresponds to very low interface transparencies, whatever the applied voltages. It is supposed in this section on perturbative calculations in transparency that three superconducting leads S a , S b and S c are connected to a (small) common insulating region (see Fig. Σ1,1/0,0 c2,γ2 ĝA/1,1/0,0 γ2,β , and similar expressions are obtained for all of the 28 terms contributing to the current-current crosscorrelations [see Eqs. ( It is first shown that our expansion in the tunnel amplitude Σ is compatible with the vanishingly small value of the noise in the adiabatic limit (see Sec. II). For this purpose, we collected the only four terms at order Σ 8 containing only advanced or only retarded Green's functions, but no products between the former and the latter. It is indeed those terms that encode the adiabatic limit, because the current in this limit is expressed as the sum or difference of terms that contain only advanced or only retarded Green's functions [see the form of the Keldysh Green's function in Eq. ( where p is an integer. The contribution of those "adiabatic" terms to the noise is thus vanishingly small, in agreement with the discussion of the adiabatic limit in Sec. II B. Now, numerical results are presented for the perturbative calculation in transparency, in which the 28 lowestorder terms in the quartet contribution to the zerofrequency cross-correlations S Q,ab (0) are evaluated numerically at zero phase. The voltage dependence of S Q,ab (0) is shown (in log scale) in Fig. A few results are known for the current-current cross correlations in a three-terminal all-superconducting structure with arbitrary interface transparencies. Phaseinsensitive positive cross-correlations were discovered by Duhot, Lefloch and Houzet 10 in the incoherent regime. The phase-sensitive thermal noise and noise cross-correlations of a superconducting structure at equi-librium was calculated by Freyn et al. It is first recalled that a quantum dot is connected to three superconducting leads S a , S b and S c biased at opposite voltages V a = -V b ≡ V , and V c = 0 respectively. The normal-state transparency of the contacts is controlled by Γ = t 2 /W , where t is the hopping amplitude between the dot and the superconductors in their normal state, and W is the hopping term in the bulk of the superconductors (a fraction of the bandwidth). It is supposed now that a single energy level is within the superconducting gap window, and, in addition, this energy level 0 (controllable by a gate voltage) is varied systematically, thus allowing to cross-over from nonresonantdot quartets (for 0 /∆ 1) to resonant-dot quartets for 0 /∆ < ∼ 1, with different behavior of the noise in both regimes. It was established by Jonckheere et al. The current-current cross-correlations S a,b are shown by a color-plot in Fig. The color-plots in Fig. A strongly anharmonic behavior is clearly obtained for 0 /∆ < ∼ 1 and eV /∆ 1, with a quasi-period doubling as eV /∆ is reduced from eV /∆ = 0.6 to eV /∆ = 0.1 if 0 /∆ = 0 (Fig. 0 /∆ = 5, which become negligibly small as the voltage is reduced below eV /∆ < ∼ 0.3 (see Fig. It is relevant both experimentally and theoretically to compare the values of the cross-correlations to the values of the currents. It was found previously (see Fig. the meaning of an amplitude phase variations.] The second Fano factor is defined as the amplitude of the oscillations of the cross-correlations normalized to that of the phase-MAR processes: F φ,2 = δS a,b /δ[I a -I b ]. The voltage dependence of log(F φ,1 ) and log(F φ,2 ) are shown in Figs. The results presented in Fig. The crossover between the resonant and nonresonant dot regimes is better visualized in Fig. To conclude, it is a relevant question to ask whether splitting a supercurrent by quartets at resonant voltages produces positive cross-correlations at zero temperature. Splitting a supercurrent at equilibrium or in the adiabatic limit does not produce noise, and our numerical calculations are consistent with this limit of low bias voltage. It was shown by a semi-analytical perturbative calculation in interface transparency that the quartets are noiseless also in the nonresonant dot regime in the limit of small interface transparencies, for arbitrary voltage below the gap. Those perturbative calculations in interface transparency took the full Keldysh structure into account. However, phase-sensitive positive current-current crosscorrelations are obtained numerically in the resonant dot case. A quantum dot was connected to three supercon-ductors with an intermediate coupling Γ/∆ = 0.5. The resonant dot regime was obtained if the quantum dot energy level 0 is such that 0 /∆ 1 and the nonresonant dot regime corresponds to 0 /∆ 1. These phasesensitive current cross-correlations correlate in a qualitative manner with the signal of phase-sensitive MARs, which suggests a strong contribution from the latter. Those phase-sensitive MARs correspond to the transmission of a quasiparticle assisted by quartets or by multipairs. In this respect, a nonzero value for the phasesensitive component of current cross-correlations in noise experiments would imply that quartets or multipairs are present together with quasiparticles. One can conclude that a cross-correlation experiment should detect a gatetunable anomaly at the quartet resonance V a + V b = 0. A strong phase-sensitivity of the cross-correlations is predicted in the resonant dot regime 0 /∆ < ∼ 1, and an absence of noise cross-correlations is obtained in the nonresonant dot regime 0 /∆ 1. In an experiment, the width in voltage (V a , V b ) parameter plane of the anomaly obtained for 0 /∆ < ∼ 1 in the cross-correlations is expected to correlate to the Josephson anomaly in the average current, because both anomalies originate from the appearance of the three-body phase variable φ Q = φ a +φ b -2φ c . It is noted finally that phase-sensitive noise was already calculated and measured in Andreev interferometers Kn,n+2 Kn,n+2 D. Averin and A. Bardas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1831 (1995). D. Averin and H. T. Imam, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,