The current-voltage characteristics of superconductors are commonly determined by means of a standard 4-probe DC measurement technique. In coated conductors, however, one often encounters problems due to weak or no stabilization and in such case, when the risk of burning the tape is high, the 4-probe approach can fail. In other cases such as in HTS cable structures, besides vulnerability and high risk of damage, it may also be difficult to achieve a high critical current level with a power supply that is normally used to characterize single strands. We therefore investigated an alternative method to determine the DC I-V curve, based on measuring the AC transport loss as a function of frequency in overcritical current range. In the AC regime, both the hysteretic loss component and the joule dissipation are present for applied transport currents exceeding the critical current I c . In this work, AC loss measurements at different frequencies are related to different electric fields in DC and a curve similar to the DC I-V is obtained. From this curve, the power index N and I c values are estimated. AC regime operation can be more beneficial for two reasons: firstly, because very high currents can be achieved easily by using a transformer; secondly, because the effective joule heat dissipation with overcritical AC currents is much lower than that with DC of the same amplitudes. In the experiment, we used a 4 mm wide YBCO reference tape with 20 μm of Cu-stabilization. For the comparison with AC transport loss, the sample was measured with the standard 4-probe technique and remained stable even in overload condition. To support our study, numerical simulations, reproducing both transient and stationary operation conditions, were performed. A similar relation between the AC current transport loss and the I-V curves was also observed in the simulations. IGH TC COATED CONDUCTORS (CCs) for AC applications can be modelled based on the static characterization in DC regime. In DC regime, the heat dissipated in the superconductor fed with current below I c is negligible. When the amplitude of the current exceeds the critical value then the losses increase very quickly and the thermal heating becomes considerable. This heating furthermore tends to reduce the current carrying capacity. The reason for this is the very steep power low dependence of the electric field on the applied Manuscript received September 8, 2015. This work was partially supported by the Helmholtz-University Young Investigator Group Grant VH-NG-617. E. Demenčík, A. Godfrin, V. Zermeño and F. Grilli are with Institute for Technical Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76344 Germany. Corresponding author's: phone: +49721608-28067; fax: +49721608-22849; e-mail: eduard.demencik@kit.edu. current E~J N . Thermal and electrical stability of the CC tapes is therefore an issue for further use in AC applications such as cables and magnets, where excessive heating can be present while AC operation or ramping of the magnets. It has been shown in previous works For the experiments a 4 mm YBCO sample with 20 μm of copper stabilization manufactured by SuperPower, Inc., was used. The CC sample was characterized by a standard 4-probe method and the critical current was determined for the electric field criterion of E c = 10 -4 V.m -1 . The measured CC sample was supplied with the harmonic AC current with frequencies covering nearly two orders of magnitude from 2 Hz up to 144 Hz. In this range, the transport AC loss was measured as a function of frequency. The resistive part of the measured AC loss curves was compared with the DC current-voltage curve obtained by measurement in the self-field condition. To do this correctly, the current in the resistive part of the AC loss curve was recalculated with the newly introduced effective values. The AC loss experimental data was supported by the analytical Norris formula for a thin strip. The 60 mm long piece of sample was characterized and the DC current-voltage characteristic was obtained by using a 4-probe technique, see In Fig. A CC 4 mm wide and 0.3 m long piece of sample was supplied with a harmonic alternating current with amplitudes exceeding the critical current value. The AC transport loss was measured with the integration technique and the power dissipation per unit length, as a function of frequency of the AC current, is shown in Fig. In Fig. It is well known that in normal metals the transport AC current creates joule dissipation and an effective value of the AC current (RMS) exists. By definition, at this current level, the same amount of heat energy as in the DC condition is dissipated, see In Fig. After calculation of the effective values of the current data points, represented on x-axis on Fig. Based on the discussion carried out above, it is possible to distinguish two regions in which different AC loss mechanisms prevail. The subtle division line between them is defined by the saturation of the current in superconductor. This is the case when the current amplitude, higher than a certain threshold value, is applied. On the power plot, this line can be obtained using two asymptotic lines, as shown in Fig. where the loss per cycle of a thin strip is given by . AC-loss -definition of the "saturation line" with the help of assymptotic lines from lower and higher range for each frequency curve (black lines correspond to f = 2 Hz). The dashed lines show loss evaluated with Norris strip formula, scaled with frequency. The I c parameter in the Norris formula was scaled for each frequency so that it matches the diamond symbols in the plot. For comparison, in red circles, the DC power line is shown. The I c parameter in the equation is scaled such that the model AC loss curve fits well the measured data. This is done separately for each frequency. The power line is determined as the series of the I c values found for each frequency. These values define the current saturation threshold level for each frequency. These values are listed in tab. 1 (represented by blue diamonds in Fig. We investigated AC transport loss of a 4 mm wide CC sample with 20 μm of copper stabilization. The sample was characterized by a standard 4 probe method and DC I-V curve was measured. The critical current was determined by the electric field criterion of 10 -4 V.m -1 . The AC loss in overload conditions, as a function of frequency was measured by the integration technique. These measured AC loss curves were compared with the curve derived from the DC measured I-V characteristics, referred to as the "power line", which represents the heat dissipation of the tape in the DC regime. The AC and the DC data are then directly compared. The discrepancy in the resistive part of the AC dissipation curves, compared to the DC power line, is observed. In contrast to the other approaches, we suggested to leave the power dissipation, measured as a physical quantity, intact and rather recalculate the amplitude of the current. The reasons for this are: first, the separation of the resistive and the magnetic loss component from the measured power is not so straightforward. Second, the approach does not allow for the direct comparison of the DC and the AC measurements. Thus, the advantage of the suggested new procedure is the direct comparison of the dissipation of the CC tape in DC with the AC. In which case, the DC I-V curve can be extracted from the AC loss measurement. In order to do so correctly, we introduce the effective current, calculated for the amplitudes of the current in the over-load condition. The effective values of the current replace the amplitude values in the range where magnetic loss is saturated. As we have shown a fair comparison of the AC and the DC power dissipation is possible in the resistive part (overload conditions) of the AC loss curve. As a consequence of these presented results, it is hence possible to reconstruct the I-V curve from the AC transport loss measurements.