Using high-pressure magnetotransport techniques we have discovered superconductivity in Bi2Te, a member of the infinitely adaptive (Bi2)m(Bi2Te3)n series, whose end members, Bi and Bi2Te3, can be tuned to display topological surface states or superconductivity. Bi2Te has a maximum Tc= 8.6 K at P= 14.5 GPa and goes through multiple high pressure phase transitions, ultimately collapsing into a bcc structure that suggests a universal behavior across the series. High-pressure magnetoresistance and Hall measurements suggest a semi-metal to metal transition near 5.4 GPa, which accompanies the hexagonal to intermediate phase transition seen via x-ray diffraction measurements. In addition, the linearity of Hc2(T) exceeds the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg limit, even in the extreme spinorbit scattering limit, yet is consistent with other strong spin-orbit materials. Considering these results in combination with similar reports on strong spin-orbit scattering materials seen in the literature, we suggest the need for a new theory that can address the unconventional nature of their superconducting states. The last several years have seen a large volume of research dedicated to materials whose properties are driven by the topology of their quantum states One of the key properties necessary for making a TI is strong spin-orbit coupling, first discovered in HgTe quantum wells, and later found in several bismuth-based chalcogenides In our search for functional materials that possess these exotic properties we synthesized and studied Bi2Te, a member of the (Bi2)m(Bi2Te3)n series, with m=2 and n=1. Containing a Bi fraction of 0.67, Bi2Te is on the Bi rich side of this series, which spans the spectrum from pure Bi (m=3:n=0) to Bi2Te3 (m=0:n=3). Similar to other members of this series Single crystals of Bi2Te were grown using the self-flux method. Stoichiometric amounts of elemental Bi and Te (99.999%, ESPI Metals) were combined in an alumina crucible and sealed under 500 mbar of high purity argon gas in a quartz tube and melted at 420 o C for 2 days. The solution was then cooled to 318 o C over a period 4 days, at which point the quartz tube was removed from the oven and centrifuged to remove excess flux. Large platelets were removed and ground into a coarse powder using a mortar and pestle. The coarse powder was then placed on a glass slide and chopped with a razor blade into a fine powder for powder x-ray diffraction characterization, which confirmed that they were single phase Bi2Te. For structural studies under pressure we used a conventional, membrane-driven diamond anvil cell (DAC) with 300μm diamond culets. The powdered Bi2Te, 3-5μm particle size, was loaded into a 130-μm diameter sample chamber that was drilled out of a rhenium gasket preindented to 25 GPa, corresponding to an initial thickness of 23 μm. The chamber was also loaded with, fine copper powder (3-6μm, Alfa Aesar) as the pressure calibrant and neon precompressed to 30,000 psi as the pressure-transmitting medium. Room-temperature, angle-dispersive x-ray diffraction experiments were performed at HPCAT (beamline 16 BM-D) at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. The sample was illuminated with a 29.2 keV monochromatic x-ray beam and angular dispersive diffraction patterns were collected with a Perkin Elmer detector using an exposure time of 10-20 s. The two dimensional diffraction images were integrated using Fit2D, Temperature was measured using a calibrated Cernox thermometer affixed to the outside of the DAC. Electrical transport measurements were made as a function of temperature and magnetic field using the AC Transport option in the Quantum Design PPMS. High pressure x ray diffraction studies were performed on Bi2Te powder in order to explore the universality of the collapse into the high pressure bodycentered-cubic (bcc) phase that occurs within the (Bi2)m(Bi2Te3)n series. At ambient pressure and temperature the Bi2Te starts out in the hexagonal phase with the P-3m crystal structure, denoted as Bi2Te-I, which persists up to 7 GPa. Upon compression near 5 GPa an intermediate phase begins to appear, denoted as Bi2Te-II. Diffraction peaks belonging to this Bi2Te-II phase are present in the diffraction patterns up to 17 GPa. However, at 9 GPa a second phase transition begins into the Bi2Te-III that completes at 17 GPa. Integrated diffraction patterns for the three phases are shown in figure We also note that concomitant with the phase transformation from phase I to phase III, there is a volume collapse of approximately 9%. The fact that Bi2Te also collapses into the bcc phase strongly suggests that, despite having disparate ground state phases, the entire (Bi2)m(Bi2Te3)n series converges into the bcc phase at high pressures. These structural transformations are ubiquitous across this series, which suggests that there should also be concurrent transformations occurring in the electronic structure as well. High-pressure magnetotransport measurements were performed to investigate the effects of the high-pressure structural phase transformations on the electronic structure of Bi2Te. Hall resistance at 25K as a function of applied magnetic field is shown in Figure Low-temperature, high-pressure transport data (Fig. Once the pressure is increased to P= 14.5 GPa there is a single, sharp superconducting transition, which gives the maximum Tc= 8.6 K with a transition width of only 0.57 K. Although from the x-ray diffraction data we know that Bi2Te is still in the mixed phase at P= 14.5 GPa, the superconducting transition seems dominated by the Bi2Te-III (bcc) phase, and has a Tc similar to the maximum Tc of Bi The universality of the superconducting state of the (Bi2)m(Bi2Te3)n series in the high-pressure bcc phase can be seen more clearly by plotting the reduced critical temperature, Tc/Tc,max versus P/Pc,max, where Pc,max is the pressure where T=Tc,max, as is shown in figure To investigate the pair-breaking mechanism in greater detail we applied magnetic fields to study how the superconducting state is suppressed as a function of pressure and magnetic field. This is shown for a single pressure of P= 14.5 GPa for applied fields up to 30 kOe (Fig. Considering that all of these materials contain bismuth, these results suggest that strong spin-orbit scattering is the dominant pair breaking mechanism in these materials. Within the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) model To compare our results within the WHH theory for spin-singlet superconductors we plot the normalized critical field h*(t)=(Hc2/Tc)/|dHc2/dT|t=1 as a function of the normalized temperature t=T/Tc for selected pressures up to 32 GPa (figure In conclusion, we have found that Bi2Te provides further evidence of a universal behavior of the series to collapse into the bcc structure at high-pressure. Although Bi2Te enters a high-pressure mixed phase region between roughly 5-17 GPa, we were able to observe a semimetal-metal transition near 5.4 GPa in both linear and Hall resistance measurements. We were able to establish that there is a dominant carrier type below 5.4 GPa via magnetic field and temperature dependence measurements, though it was difficult to unambiguously determine carrier type and concentration in the mixed phase. We also made the first discovery of pressure induced superconductivity in Bi2Te, with a maximum Tc=8.66K at P= 14. 