The study of superconductivity arising from doping a Mott insulator has become a central issue in the area of superconductivity. Within the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven superconducting mechanism, we discuss the thermodynamic properties in triangular-lattice superconductors. It is shown that a sharp peak in the specific-heat appears at the superconducting transition temperature Tc, and then the specific-heat varies exponentially as a function of temperature for the temperatures T < Tc due to the absence of the d-wave gap nodes at the charge-carrier Fermi surface. In particular, the upper critical field follows qualitatively the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer type temperature dependence, and has the same dome-shaped doping dependence as Tc. The parent compounds of cuprate superconductors are identified as Mott insulators The heat-capacity measurement of the specific-heat can probe the bulk properties of a superconductor, which has been proven as a powerful tool to investigate the low-energy quasiparticle excitations, and therefore gives information about the charge-carrier pairing symmetry, specifically, the existence of gap nodes at the Fermi Surface In this case, a challenging issue for theory is to explain the thermodynamic properties of the triangular-lattice cobaltate superconductors. In our recent study The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We present the basic formalism in section II, and then the quantitative characteristics of the thermodynamic prop-erties in the triangular-lattice cobaltate superconductors are discussed in section III, where we show that although the pairing mechanism is driven by the kinetic energy by the exchange of spin excitations In the triangular-lattice cobaltate superconductors, the characteristic feature is the presence of the twodimensional CoO 2 plane Based on the t-J model in the fermion-spin representation, the kinetic-energy-driven SC mechanism has been developed for the square-lattice cuprate superconductors in the doped regime without an AF long-range order (AFLRO) where the charge-carrier quasiparticle coherent weight Z aF , the charge-carrier quasiparticle coherence factors 2U 2 ak = 1 + ξk /E ak and 2V 2 ak = 1 -ξk /E ak , the charge-carrier quasiparticle energy spectrum , and the charge-carrier excitation spectrum ξk . In the early days of superconductivity in the triangular-lattice cobaltate superconductors, some NMR and NQR data are consistent with the case of the existence of a pair gap over the Fermi surface Since the spin part in the t-J model in the fermion-spin representation is anisotropic away from half-filling where the function B k and spin excitation spectrum ω k in the spin Green's function (2a) have been given in Ref. where )]/3, the parameters A 1 , λ, , the decoupling parameter α, and the spin correlation function χ have been also given in Ref. where J eff = (1 -δ) 2 J with the doping concentration δ, while the spin correlation function χ z has been given in Ref. We are now ready to discuss the thermodynamic properties in the triangular-lattice cobaltate superconductors. The charge-carrier pair gap parameter ∆(a) is one of the characteristic parameters in the triangular-lattice cobaltate superconductors, which incorporates both the pairing force and charge-carrier pair order parameter, and therefore measures the strength of the binding of two charge carriers into a charge-carrier pair. In particular, the charge-carrier pair order parameter and the chargecarrier pair macroscopic wave functions in the triangularlattice cobaltate superconductors are the same within the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven SC mechanism One of the characteristics quantites in the thermodynamic properties is the specific-heat, which can be obtained by evaluating the temperature-derivative of the internal energy as, 1.0 in the SC-state and normal-state, respectively, where γ s (T ) and γ n (T ) are the temperature dependence of the specific-heat coefficients in the SC-state and normalstate, respectively. In Fig. v (solid line) as a function of temperature at δ = 0.20 for t/J = -2.5 and J = 50meV. For comparison, the corresponding experimental result 18 of Na x CoO 2 •yH 2 O is also shown in Fig. 7 for the discontinuity in the specific-heat at T c , which is roughly consistent with the experimental data For a better understanding of the physical properties of the specific-heat in the triangular-lattice superconductors, we have fitted our present theoretical result of the specific-heat for the temperatures T < T c , and the fitted result is also plotted in Fig. varies exponentially as a function of temperature (C with A ∼ 10.69 and B ∼ 270.65), which is an expected result in the case without the d-wave gap nodes at the charge-carrier Fermi surface, and is in qualitative agreement with experimental data where the related entropy of the system is evaluated from the specific-heat coefficient in Eq. ( where a = s, n referring to the SC-state and normalstate, respectively. We have made a calculation for the condensation energy (7), and the result of E cond (T ) as a function of temperature at δ = 0.20 for t/J = -2.5 and J = 50meV is plotted in Fig. C. Upper critical field A quantity which is directly related to the condensation energy E cond (T ) in Eq. ( This upper critical field B c (T ) is a fundamental parameter whose variation as a function of doping and temperature provides important information crucial to understanding the details of the SC-state. In Fig. FIG. The coherence length ζ(T ) also is one of the basic SC parameters of the triangular-lattice cobaltate superconductors, and is directly associated with the upper critical field as ζ 2 (T ) = Φ 0 /[2πB c (T )], where Φ 0 = hc/(2e) is the magnetic flux quantum. In Fig. Within the framework of the kinetic-energy-driven SC mechanism, we have discussed the doping dependence of the thermodynamic properties in the triangular-lattice cobaltate superconductors. We show that the specificheat anomaly (a jump) appears at T c , and then the specific-heat varies exponentially as a function of temperature for the temperatures T < T c due to the absence of the d-wave gap nodes at the charge-carrier Fermi surface, which is much different from that in the squarelattice cuprate superconductors 