The in-plane resistivity anisotropy is studied in strain-detwinned single crystals of FeSe. In contrast to other iron-based superconductors, FeSe does not develop long-range magnetic order below the nematic/structural transition at Ts ≈90 K. This allows for the disentanglement of the contributions to the resistivity anisotropy due to nematic and magnetic orders. Comparing direct transport and elastoresistivity measurements, we extract the intrinsic resistivity anisotropy of strainfree samples. The anisotropy peaks slightly below Ts and decreases to nearly zero on cooling down to the superconducting transition. This behavior is consistent with a scenario in which the in-plane resistivity anisotropy in FeSe is dominated by inelastic scattering by anisotropic spin fluctuations. Electronic nematicity has emerged as a key concept in iron-based superconductors since the observation of inplane resistivity anisotropy in stress-detwinned crystals of Co-doped BaFe 2 As 2 Electronic contributions involved in the in-plane resistivity anisotropy In this context, the stoichiometric FeSe In this Letter we report the resistivity anisotropy measured in strain-detwinned single crystals of FeSe. Upon cooling, the anisotropy ∆ρ(T ) ≡ ρ a -ρ b (ρ a and ρ b are the resistivities along the orthorhombic a-and bdirections) initially increases, reaching a maximum at about 20 K below T s , and then nearly vanishes upon further cooling towards the superconducting transition T c ≈8.5 K. This pronounced non-monotonic behavior is consistent with the scenario in which the main contributor to the resistivity anisotropy is inelastic scattering by magnetic fluctuations rather than the anisotropy of the elastic scattering or of the Fermi surface. To support this conclusion, we performed model calculations of resistivity anisotropy for the scattering of electrons by anisotropic magnetic fluctuations. We find that the anisotropy is well described by the product of two temperature-dependent functions, ∆ρ(T ) = Υ(T )φ(T ). The standard nematic order parameter, φ(T ), increases upon cooling and the scattering function, Υ(T ), decreases and vanishes as the temperature approaches zero. Single crystals of FeSe (∼1 mm 2 surface area and 20 to 150 μm thick) were grown using a modified chemical vapor transport as in Ref. T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) Their difference ∆ρ(ε1)-∆ρ(ε2) is proportional to the strainderivative d∆ρ/dεa (dashed orange line). The latter was used to extract the intrinsic (strain-free) in-plane anisotropy of the resistivity ∆ρ(εa = 0) ≈ ∆ρ(ε2) -d∆ρ dεa ε2 in the orthorhombic phase (red line). eter, defined as φ image (T ) ≡ ω(T )/ω(T → 0), is shown in Fig. Samples for mechanical detwinning were cut along the tetragonal [110] direction, which becomes the orthorhombic a or b axis on cooling, as shown schematically by the green lines in Fig. The application of strain not only promotes the formation of orthorhombic domains of only one orientation below T s , but it also induces resistivity anisotropy above and below T s due to the elastoresistivity of the material. Figure above T s . The scaling yields ε 2 = 7.7 × 10 -4 (∼ 40% of the distortion in the orthorhombic phase) for the external strain applied through the horseshoe device. Below T s , samples in the elastoresistivity setup are not fully detwinned, so that the domains dominate the measured m 66 , which prohibits such a comparison. To determine the effect of strain on the resistivity below T s , we return to the two resistivity curves at constant strain ρ a (ε 1 ) and ρ a (ε 2 ) in Fig. . The derivative is used to extract the intrinsic resistivity anisotropy between the a and b directions of a single-domain sample in the absence of external strain, ∆ρ(ε = 0) ≈ ∆ρ(ε 2 ) -∆ρ(ε2)-∆ρ(ε1) ε2-ε1 ε 2 . The constant value of ε2 ε2-ε1 ≈ 3.7 is fixed by enforcing ∆ρ(ε = 0) = 0 in the tetragonal state. The resulting ∆ρ(ε = 0) (red line in Fig. The previous comparison between m 66 and ∆ρ reveals that, above T s , the resistivity anisotropy is proportional to the strain, and therefore to the nematic order parameter φ. A similar behavior was experimentally observed in the iron pnictides In order to develop a microscopic scenario for this behavior, we consider the three-band model of Ref. where Υ 0 is a constant that depends on the geometry of the Fermi surface and on the residual resistivity. This leads to Υ(T → 0) ∼ T 2 , and therefore, the different temperature dependencies of φ(T ) and Υ(T ) gives rise to a maximum in ∆ρ below T s . This behavior is illustrated in Fig. In conclusion, the comparison of direct transport and elastoresistivity measurements in FeSe was used to extract the intrinsic in-plane resistivity anisotropy of strainfree samples. Strong non-monotonic temperature dependence, displaying a maximum below T s and becoming very small as T → 0 limit was observed. This behavior is explained by anisotropic inelastic scattering as a main contribution to ∆ρ, shedding new light on the origin of nematicity in iron-based superconductors. The experimental work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering. The experimental research was performed at Ames Laboratory, which is operated for the U.S. DOE by Iowa State University under Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11358. M. S. acknowledges the support from the Humboldt Foundation. R. M. F. is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under Award No. de-sc0012336. G. D. was funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundations EPiQS Initiative through Grant GBMF4411.