We propose a novel possibility of dynamically changing the pairing of superconductors from s wave to η pairing (where the pairs condense at the Brillouin-zone corner momenta) by driving the system with ac fields. We consider a periodically-driven attractive Hubbard model in the strong-coupling regime, and show that the pair-hopping and pair-repulsion terms in the effective Hamiltonian in the Floquet formalism are drastically renormalized in different manners between the two terms, which can change the ground states from an s-wave superconductivity to an η-pairing superconductivity or a charge-ordered phase. While in isolated systems such as cold atoms a simple quench scheme would not realize the dynamical phase transition into η pairing, we show that there are pathways that realize the dynamical transition, where the field amplitude is varied via a charge-ordered phase as an intermediate state. Fascination with periodically-driven systems in condensedmatter and cold-atom physics is increasing as the become an important branch in nonequilibrium physics. Time-periodic external fields have turned out to make dramatic changes in physical properties as captured by the Floquet formalism Here we consider the strong-coupling regime of the attrac-tive Hubbard model, where fermions, in equilibrium, form pairs (doublons) in real space and behave as an s-wave fermionic superfluid, as depicted in the left panel of Fig. The possible candidates in real materials we have in mind When we perform the strong-coupling expansion of the Hubbard model, we have an effective Hamiltonian for doublons, which comprises pair-hopping and pair-repulsion terms. In ordinary situations the pair-hopping amplitude J is positive, for which the s-wave superconductivity is described as a condensation of doublons at the bottom of a bosonic band at k = 0. If one can invert the sign of the pair hopping, this would flip the band structure to give a new bottom at k = Q, where the η-pairing superconductivity is expected, as schematically depicted in Fig. However, we have to be careful when discussing dynamical phase transitions because the driven system should, in general, have a nonequilibrium energy distribution (such as a population inversion) and may not necessarily relax to the ground state. This is important if we have cold atoms in an optical trap, where the system is isolated, so that a sudden flipping of the band structure will induce an inverted population that is stable in the absence of dissipations. To overcome this, we propose to invoke a "broken η-SU(2) symmetry," which will turn out to be a property peculiar to the attractive model (as opposed to the repulsive half-filled one). While the repulsive Hubbard model is mathematically equivalent to the attractive one at half filling in equilibrium, the equivalence is crucially broken once the driving field is turned on, which results in a breaking of the η-SU(2) sym- 1. (color online) Schematic change of the ground state from swave pairing for a positive pair-hopping amplitude J > 0 to η pairing for a negative J < 0 with the band bottom for doublons inverted. The solid line represents the band dispersion, with the colored peak symbolizing the occupation of states, here illustrated in one dimension but conceivable in general dimensions. metry. This brings about richer physics in the attractive case, where the pair hopping J and pair repulsion V are modified in different manners due to the phase in the hopping amplitude, which contrasts with the spin-SU(2)-invariant repulsive case Thanks to this, the dynamical instability arises, as we shall show in Sec. III: We derive a Gross-Pitaevskii-type equation of motion to obtain time evolutions and elementary excitations, which demonstrates that the superfluid phase is unstable in the regime where the pair repulsion is dominant, while the charge order becomes unstable when the pair hopping dominates. These instabilities enable us to manipulate the order parameters, and we actually propose two protocols, a two-step quench and an adiabatic ramping, to realize the η-pairing superfluid, as prescribed in Sec. IV. A. Attractive Hubbard model and underlying η-SU(2) symmetry We start from the attractive Hubbard model on a cubic lattice, Ĥ = - in standard notations, where we set the hopping t i j = 1 hereafter. For large enough attraction U > 0, the ground state tends to maximize the double occupancy, and fermions behave as doublons at any filling. The low-energy Hamiltonian for doublons ĤD is described by the virtual processes in terms of the strong-coupling expansion (perturbation from t i j = 0), where J 0 = 2/U is the pair-hopping amplitude, while V 0 = 2/U is the nearest-neighbor pair repulsion, with ni /2 being the number of doublons on the ith site. Let us first recall the underlying η-SU(2) symmetry in the Hubbard model: The attractive Hubbard model is known to be equivalent to the repulsive one since the Shiba transformation keeps the form of Eq. ( where is the pseudospin (Lie-algebra) operator that is transformed to the spin operator, η j ↔ Ŝ j , under the Shiba transformation. Namely, the Hubbard model has, on top of the spin-SU(2) symmetry for Ŝ = j Ŝ j , another η-SU(2) symmetry for η = j η j , both in the attractive and repulsive cases. However, we have to note that the constraint for fixing the particle number breaks the equivalence between attractive and repulsive cases except exactly at half filling since the chemical potential can be rewritten as a pseudo-Zeeman field ∝ ηz along the z axis. More importantly, in the present context, an ac driving introduces a specific type of η-SU(2) breaking even in half-filled systems, as we shall reveal below. Let us now turn to a periodic driving of the system. For lattice systems, the Peierls substitution describes the coupling of fermions to ac laser fields as where R ji = R j -R i , with R i being the position of the ith site, and A(t) = A cos ωt is the vector potential of a linearly polarized laser. On the right-hand side we have performed a Fourier transform, where J m is the mth Bessel function. For cold-atom systems we shake optical lattices, where the vector potential is emulated by A(t) = ∂ t L(t), with L(t) being the periodic motion of the lattice. If we now apply the transformation (3) to the present case with Eq. ( that is, the resultant Hamiltonian acquires a spin-dependent hopping as This degrades the equivalence between the repulsive and attractive cases and implies that the external field breaks the η-SU(2) symmetry. The breaking of η-SU(2) becomes significant, especially in the strong-coupling limit, since the η spin becomes the relevant degree of freedom, in terms of which the low-energy Hamiltonian (4) is expressed. However, under a time-dependent drive, the energy is not conserved, so that the usual perturbation scheme to derive Eq. ( A key observation then is that we still have a discrete temporal translational symmetry since the ac laser field with a driving frequency ω is time periodic with a period T = 2π/ω. Namely, we can employ Floquet's theorem The eigenvalue of F is called the quasienergy , which is the temporal analog of the crystal momentum in Bloch's theorem and is defined over (-ω/2, ω/2]. Then the quasienergy eigenstate is expressed as By expanding Ĥ(t) and φ(t) in a Fourier series, we can convert the time-dependent Schrödinger equation into a timeindependent one, in the Floquet formalism for an extended Hilbert space, where Ĥm and φ m are the mth Fourier components of Ĥ(t) and φ(t), respectively. Eigenvalues of this matrix are equivalent to those of F modulo ω. To explore the property of the Floquet equation ( in the time average. Here we take A = A(1, 1, 1). We can immediately notice that J eff and V eff are modified in different manners, which is the very manifestation of the broken η-SU(2) symmetry due to the external field. The difference comes from the interference of phase factors: As depicted in Fig. Let us first examine the analytic behavior of the pairhopping and pair-repulsion terms [Eq. except in the vicinity of zeros of J 1 (A). If we now look at a numerical result for J eff and V eff against A in Figs. When we decrease ω even further, drastic changes in the behavior of the parameters occur in a large A region when we are close to ω = U/m, which is due to the diverging contribution from J m (A) 2 /(Umω). For smaller values of A, we have J eff ∼ (2/U)J 0 (2A) and V eff ∼ 2/U for ω/U 1 in an ω/U expansion, which is justified for contributions satisfying mω/U 1, but other contributions can be neglected due to J m (A)∼A m /(2 m m!) as far as the small-A region is concerned. This corresponds to the bosonic picture: When ω is small enough, doublons always behave as bosons, where the effective Hamiltonian looks like that of the shaken Bose-Hubbard model [with the hopping renormalized by J 0 (2A)]. This is shown in Fig. We have revealed that the parameters in the effective Floquet Hamiltonian can be controlled, where we can even invert the sign of J eff . This urges us to consider an intriguing possibility of the exotic η-pairing superfluid As stressed in the Introduction, we have to take into account the nonequilibrium distributions in discussing dynamical phase transitions, which can make final states totally different from the equilibrium ones, especially for isolated systems as in trapped cold atoms. Thus we investigate in this section the stability of the s-wave superfluid under the effective Floquet Hamiltonian. We shall see that the s-wave superfluid does not simply evolve to the η-pairing state even for the Hamiltonian with negative J eff . However, we shall then see that one can induce a collapse of the original superfluid when V eff is dominant, which turns out to be a key for finally realizing the η-pairing state in Sec. IV. In order to keep track of the fate of an s-wave superfluid, here we consider its coarse-grained time evolution by the effective time-evolution operator e -i Ft with the effective Floquet Hamiltonian, While the continuous-time evolution with this Hamiltonian differs from the actual one, they are identical at t = nT since e -i FT represents the actual time translation by definition. Then we can discuss the time evolution in the mean-field approximation. Here we describe the superfluid state by a time-dependent ansatz, , and take a variation δ dt S(t) = 0, where S(t) = Ψ|( F -i∂ t )|Ψ / Ψ|Ψ . This leads to an equation of motion, which is analogous to the time-dependent Gross-Pitaevskii equation. We can easily confirm that the s-wave superfluid is a stationary solution of Eq. ( The stability of the s-wave superfluid is examined by adding a small perturbation δΨ to see how it grows. By denoting Eq. ( where The diagonalization of Eq. ( when μ k + 2σ k > 0 If J eff is changed to negative where the η-pairing ground state is expected, the excitation energy ω(k) becomes negative. This will induce a Landau instability when the system is coupled to a heat bath. In isolated systems, on the other hand, the s-wave superfluid will be retained under the evolution with the effective Hamiltonian. Now we can note that μ k + 2σ k is not necessarily positive: Indeed, it becomes negative for, e.g., k = Q when V eff /J eff > 1 at half filling. When μ k + 2σ k < 0, the solution becomes The imaginary eigenvalue signals a dynamical instability; that is, a small deviation from an s-wave superfluid grows exponentially. These instabilities, the Landau and dynamical ones, are analogous to those in Bose-Einstein condensates in an optical lattice To grasp the physical origin and the fate of the dynamical instability, we can consider a special case where the initial state is uniform on each of A and B sublattices in a bipartite lattice. Then Eq. ( The superconducting amplitude on each site | ĉ j↓ ĉ j↑ | is expressed as {1-[ρ Q +(-1) j (n-1)] 2 } 1/2 /2. With these variables, Eq. ( where Namely, the system obeys a Hamiltonian mechanics with ρ Q and θ acting as canonical variables for a "classical" Hamiltonian H. Since Eq. ( On the contour maps, the s-wave superfluid is represented by the origin, (ρ Q , θ) = (0, 0) [and (0, π)]. The η-pairing superfluid corresponds to the points (ρ Q , θ) = (0, ±π/2), while the charge-ordered phases are delineated by ρ Q = ±1, as displayed in Fig. In the absence of the external field [Fig. Namely, the dynamical instability of s-wave superfluid results in the collapse of the superfluid into an exponential growth of the charge-density wave (CDW) ρ Q . Because of the integrability of Eq. ( Incidentally, if one increases A further, the trajectory whirls into (J eff , V eff ) = (0, 0), as shown in Fig. We have seen that, while a parameter region for the ηpairing ground state exists, the s-wave superfluid does not The phase diagram of the present system at half filling with phase boundaries depicted with solid black lines. Annotation above the name of a phase such as "(CDW→)" indicates that the dynamical instability into the phase occurs from a CDW phase. The CDW phase comprises two regions (displayed with different colors) according to the dynamical instability they have. A red curve represents a locus of (J eff (A), V eff (A)) when A is adiabatically varied for ω = 0.8U. The dashed darkred arrow indicates the path in a quench protocol used in Fig. This opens a way, by a judicious choice of the temporal variation of the field amplitude, to induce the evolution ending up with η pairing via other phases. The simplest way is to consider a two-step quench of the field amplitude, with the first quench inducing a dynamical instability into a CDW state, followed by another instability from CDW to η pairing. We describe this scheme in Sec. IV A. Alternatively, we can consider adiabatic ramping (as op-posed to quench) of the field amplitude. This approach gives a deeper insight in terms of the classical Hamiltonian mechanics introduced in the previous section because one can apply the adiabatic theorem for classical mechanics Hereafter we concentrate on the half-filled case, but we have confirmed that deviations from half filling do not significantly affect the qualitative behavior. Let us also comment on the time-dependent formalism with a nonperiodic modulation, which we adopt below. Qualitatively, a temporal variation of the field amplitude A(t) can be described by a temporal variation of the effective parameters J eff (A(t)), V eff (A(t)). On the other hand, when the Hamiltonian is nonperiodic in time, the Floquet theorem is no longer applicable, and the effective Hamiltonian cannot be interpreted as a generator of a discrete time translation. Still, we can take an approach with an effective Hamiltonian by considering the general timedependent version of the strong-coupling expansion for an arbitrary vector potential. As we show in the Appendix, the system evolves with time-dependent parameters J i j (t), V i j (t) [Eqs. (A.5), (A.6)] in place of J eff (A(t)), V eff (A(t)). In the following we adopt this formalism for numerical calculations. A. Two-step quench in the field amplitude Now let us devise a two-step quench protocol to obtain the η-pairing superfluid. We keep track of the evolution of the candidate order parameters, We set U = 10 and take an initial state with a tiny inhomogeneity as Ψ i (0) = 1 + 0.001 cos(q • R i ), with q = (π/6, π/6, π/6). As the first quench, we turn on the ac field at t = 0 with A(t) = A(t)(1, 1, 1) sin ωt with A = 0 → 0.3 and ω = 8 = 0.8U as in Fig. For comparison we also show the time evolution with the effective static Hamiltonian [Eq. Then we perform the second quench (second part of the dashed arrow in Fig. We can see that dominant order parameters evolve as (i) initially, |∆ 0 | 1, then (ii) |ρ Q | → 0.8 in the first quench, and (iii) |∆ Q | → 0.7 in the second quench. The reason why |ρ Q | and |∆ Q | do not reach unity is a heating effect, which increases for a larger change in |V eff /J eff |, so that the ratio should be kept closer to unity in the quench protocol if we want to obtain larger ∆ Q . Another way we propose for avoiding heating is an adiabatic ramping of A as described in the next section. Let us alternatively consider an adiabatic change (as opposed to quench) of the amplitude. We again consider a situation where the initial state is uniform on each sublattice, where the dynamics is described by the Hamiltonian [Eq. which is conserved in adiabatic changes of parameters according to the adiabatic theorem We should remember that the conservation of the adiabatic invariant is broken not only for a rapid change of the amplitude but even for slow changes when the contour has a saddle point, at which the period of the motion diverges and the change of the amplitude is no longer adiabatic. Now we consider a protocol in which we perform a ramping up of the amplitude slowly, toward the region where the effective Hamiltonian has an η-pairing ground state (-J eff > V eff > 0). Here we take ω = 0.8U. As the amplitude is varied, we walk along a trajectory in the phase diagram displayed by the red curve in Fig. The situation is then drastically changed due to the charge order collapsing due to the dynamical instability. We can here interpret this in terms of the adiabatic invariant. The emergence of the dynamical instability is signaled as a jump in I: As we increase the amplitude, the maximum value of I against H (at H = +0) starts to decrease from 2π, as shown in Figs. On the other hand, there is another side-sharing rectangular contour enclosing the η-pairing point, (ρ Q , θ) = (0, π/2), which belongs to H = -0. An increase in the amplitude makes the rectangle for H = +0 narrower and that for H = -0 wider as the shared side (the horizontal thick line) moves away from θ = π/2, as seen in Figs. This observation clearly explains the behavior of the system after passing through the phase boundary. The system is at first in a charge-ordered state with a large I. As we increase the amplitude, the maximum of I decreases until it finally hits the conserved value. Then the system starts to evolve along the rectangular contour with H = +0. If the amplitude is increased further when the system evolves along the horizontal contour [the thick line in Fig. Let us now turn to the result of a numerical simulation for the actual time evolution in Fig. In this paper we have examined dynamical phase transitions in the periodically-driven large U attractive Hubbard model to look for exotic phases. The effective theory is described by the pair hopping and pair repulsion, which are found to be widely tuned in, both magnitude and sign. Thanks to a broken η-SU(2) symmetry induced by the external field, rich possibilities do emerge, in sharp contrast to the repulsive half-filled case. We have revealed the emergence of the dynamical instabilities between superfluid phases and charge-ordered phase, which induce a dynamical phase transition even in isolated systems. Most importantly, we have invoked dynamical tran- sition as a key process to realize the η-pairing superfluid, for which we have proposed and confirmed numerically two protocols, a two-step quench and an adiabatic ramping of the field intensity. In this study we have employed several approximations. One is to consider the leading-order terms in the strongcoupling expansion, which can be improved by going over to higher orders or by employing the nonequilibrium dynamical mean-field theory Let us finally comment on the experimental feasibility, where most promising candidates are cold-atom systems. We can manipulate the strength of attractive interaction with the Feshbach resonance, while the shaken optical lattice has become an established method, as in an experimental realization of the Floquet topological insulator Evidence for the η pairing proposed in the present paper should be detected in the time-of-flight image of doublons for the cold-atom systems: The image directly reflects the distribution of total momenta of the Cooper pairs, n D (p) = ∆ † p ∆p , with ∆p = N -1 i ĉi↓ ĉi↑ e -ip•R i . The quantity can be measured in cold-atom experiments, as has been utilized in detecting fermionic superfluids Figure For any boundary condition, the first term in Eq. (A.3) results in a contribution like (1/2) Pi Ŝ (0) T (t)e iUt P, which vanishes in the time average [otherwise, the expansion is not justified, as seen in, e.g., the divergence of Eqs. Forms of external fields to which the present formalism is applicable should be restricted from the condition for the expansion to be justified. For fast components of Ŝ (t), the Fourier transform of Eq. (A.2) gives i Ŝ (ν)∼ -T (ν)/ν with a frequency ν, which should justify the truncation of higher orders in Eq. (A.1). For slow components, on the other hand, negligible ∂ t Ŝ (t) reduces Eq. (A.2) to that for static problems, which is justified for strong couplings. The expansion can break down when the second and third terms in Eq. (A.2) nearly cancel out each other, unless T (ν) is small enough. This occurs when ν is close to U, although even in such cases T (ν) is vanishingly small in the small-A region for periodic modulations.