Laboratoire de Physique Théorique et des Hautes Energies, CNRS UMR 7589, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Sorbonne Universités, 4 Place Jussieu, 75252 Paris Cedex 05 (Dated: August 13, 2018) In a transparent three-terminal Josephson junction, modeling nonequilibrium transport is numerically challenging, owing to the interplay between multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) thresholds and multipair resonances in the pair current. An approximate method, coined as "partially resummed perturbation theory in the number of nonlocal Green's functions", is presented that can be operational on a standard computer and demonstrates compatibility with results existing in the literature. In a linear structure made of two neighboring interfaces (with intermediate transparency) connected by a central superconductor, tunneling through each of the interfaces separately is taken into account to all orders. On the contrary, nonlocal processes connecting the two interfaces are accounted for at the lowest relevant order. This yields logarithmically divergent contributions at the gap edges, which are sufficient as a semi-quantitative description. The method is able to describe the current in the full two-dimensional voltage range, including commensurate as well as incommensurate values. The results found for the multipair (for instance quartet) current-phase characteristics as well as the MAR thresholds are compatible with previous results. At intermediate transparency, the multipair critical current is much larger than the background MAR current, which supports an experimental observation of the quartet and multipair resonances. The paper provides a proof of principle for addressing in the future the interplay between quasiparticles and multipairs in four-terminal structures. Multiterminal Josephson junctions have recently focused interest, as a generalization of standard twoterminal junctions. In particular, all-superconducting structures with three BCS superconductors S a , S b and S 0 subject to voltages V a , V b and V 0 (set to V 0 = 0 by convention) respectively (see Fig. The starting point was the discovery of what was called "self-induced Shapiro steps" by Cuevas and Pothier 1 . This work was based on Usadel equations for a diffusive normal metal region connected to three superconductors, one of them involving a tunnel contact. DC resonances in the current were obtained at commensurate voltages. The analogy with Shapiro steps implies a zero-frequency mode-locking of the Josephson AC oscillations induced at the two transparent contacts. This reminds of the phenomenon studied in the 80s in well-separated junctions coupled by a non-mesoscopic environment Two additional classes of threshold resonances have been unveiled by Houzet and Samuelsson 5 at the level of the quasiparticle conductance of incoherent MARs. Those threshold resonances are interpreted in terms of higher-order MAR channels involving all three terminals, which open upon reducing bias voltages. In this case, the ratio V a /V b between the bias voltages can be commensurate or incommensurate. Already at equilibrium, multiterminal superconducting structures possess striking properties, like Andreev states robustly crossing the zero-energy level In contrast with all these predictions, very few experiments are presently available. In a pioneering transport experiment 10 on a three-terminal long diffusive junction, clear Josephson-like anomalies have been observed at voltages corresponding to quartets emitted by one terminal towards the two others. More recent Shapiro step experiments on the same set-up 11 confirm the coherent character of these resonances. In such an experiment, the currents (and the conductance matrix) are obtained by fixing the voltages V a , V b . Other experiments are expected in clean systems such as carbon nanotubes or nanowires Because of the presence of three terminals, the voltage (V ) and the phase (φ Q ) can be taken as two independant variables, and experiments are highly desirable in order to test the dependence of the quartet and MAR current with V and φ Q . Yet, modeling such multichannel systems poses a formidable difficulty. The related work by Cuevas and Pothier 1 is numerically exact, but one contact being a tunnel one. However, how about a situation in which all contacts have similar and intermediate transparency, as in the recent experiment by Pfeffer et al. It is a general trend in the field of quantum electronics that experiments are controlled by robust effects that, up to now, have never required supercomputers for being uncovered theoretically at the semi-quantitative level. It is however true that the challenge of the exact solution may provide surprises in connection with nonlinear physics, but experimental relevance of those effects in the context of multiterminal Josephson junctions has not been proven at present time. Here, the line of thought is to ignore the effects appearing solely in the exact solution (e.g. not captured by the approximation used here), which does not prevent us from exploring the exact solution in the future, on the basis of large-scale numerical calculations. The present paper proposes a kind of "unified" but approximate numerical framework for multiterminal Josephson junctions, which can be used for any ratio V a /V b between the voltages (e.g. commensurate or incommensurate), as a substitute to the unavailable exact solution. The calculations are based on the socalled Hamiltonian approach [which was developed by Cuevas, Martín-Rodero and Levy Yeyati 14 for multiple Andreev reflections in a single-channel superconducting weak link], and intermediate transparencies are used. The method is developed for a three-terminal Josephson junction with two interfaces having the same intermediate transparency (see Fig. Within this approximation, all resonances at rational V a /V b can be captured in a semi-quantitative way, and the MAR threshold resonances 5 are also obtained for irrational V a /V b . The method can eventually be generalized to four-terminal structures. Agreement with respect to results established previously The article is organized as follows. Introductory material on the method is presented in Sec. II, all analytical calculations being relegated to Appendices. The numerical results are presented and interpreted in Sec. III, in connection to previous results Set-ups containing three interfaces are considered in some theoretical approaches, such as the Usadel equations used by Cuevas and Pothier 1 , circuit theory treated by Padurariu et al. (work in progress). Other approaches consider two superconductors S a and S b at voltages V a and V b connected to the grounded S 0 (see Fig. In what follows, the interfaces S a S 0 and S b S 0 are extended (multichannel), and S a and S b are thus separately connected to S 0 , forming a three-terminal Josephson junction with only two interfaces 3 (see Fig. The current I a,α connecting two points a (in S a ) and α (in S 0 ) is calculated (see Appendix A and Fig. The tight-binding hopping amplitude in the bulk of S a , S b and S 0 is denoted by W . The interface transparency is characterized by the dimensionless transmission coefficient (in between 0 and 1) and is equal to We start by investigating the symmetries of the current, in order to demonstrate compatibility of the Hamiltonian approach with expectations based on general symmetry arguments A breakdown of perturbation theory in interface transparency for the current already appears at the level of the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk 17 (BTK) wavefunction calculation of the Andreev reflection current in a normal metal-insulator-superconductor (N IS) junction. It is underlined that the following argument is for a single N IS interface, with a time-independent Hamiltonian. A onedimensional model of N IS junction is considered now, with a dimensionless interfacial scattering potential Z, according to the standard BTK notation 1. An expansion in 1/Z 1 of the transmission coefficient is carried out now (namely, a small-transparency expansion) and, in a second step, the integral over energy of each term of this expansion will be evaluated from 0 to eV . This procedure is problematic if eV becomes larger than the superconducting gap ∆, in which case the gap edge singularity is within the interval of integration over energy E. [In the discussion of the BTK calculation, the energy is denoted by E as in usual BTK calculations. The symbol E has the same meaning as ω used in the Green's function calculations.] The BTK amplitudes where u 0 and v 0 denote the BCS coherence factors for electrons and holes. Specializing to E ∆ leads to where α is a constant of order unity. Divergences are produced in the energy dependence of the spectral current, leading to an expression of the current integrated over energy as the sum of an infinite number of infinite terms, which, eventually, takes the finite value obtained by BTK A similar artifact is present in the forthcoming partially resummed perturbation theory for a three-terminal junction. In this case, the exact nonperturbative values of the currents are unreachable, because of far too long times for their computation. It is emphasized that, because of multichannel effect, even at a multipair resonance (such as the quartet resonance), where only one frequency remains in the calculation, it is not an easy task to obtain the fully nonperturbative value of the current. On the other hand, the lowest order term turns out to diverge only logarithmically. This lowest-order term will be shown to behave correctly with respect to physical expectations and to the results established over the last few years for the quartet, multipair The approach relies on the same principle as a previous work by Mélin and Feinberg In a more technical language, each microscopic process contributing to the DC current at order-2n corresponds to a closed diagram having 2n nonlocal bare Green's functions crossing the central superconductor S 0 . With this convention, the lowest order in partially resummed perturbation theory is order-two in the number of nonlocal Green's functions. The next-order terms is order-four, ... The Dyson equations provide a perturbation series in the hopping amplitude Σ 0 . This series in power of Σ 0 will be reordered as a series in the number of nonlocal bare Green's functions, taking into account to all orders dressing by "local" processes [e.g. each of those processes involves only one of the two S 0 S a or S 0 S b interfaces, without coupling to the other]. Said differently in a more physical picture, at lowest order, an electron-like quasiparticle coming from S a couples to MARs to all orders at the S a IS 0 interface. Next, it can experience electronhole conversion while crossing S 0 only once, and finally, the resulting hole-like quasiparticle is subject to MARs at the S 0 IS b interface before being transmitted into S b . Combining with a similar processes from S b to S a leads to physical picture for the history of the n = 1 processes contributing to the lowest order-two approximation for the phase-sensitive current at a multipair resonance. Fig. As a first point of comparison for partially resummed perturbation theory, the set of MAR threshold resonances discovered by Houzet and Samuelsson 5 was recovered for incommensurate voltages (however, in the phase-coherent case as far as the present calculations are concerned). Those threshold resonances correspond to two families associated to the opening of the channels of MARs: with p, q and p , q four integers. The question arises of whether all values of (p, q) are accessible within lowest order-two in the number of nonlocal Green's functions. The answer is that a (p, q) diagram for multipairs can be transformed into a (p, q) diagram for phase-sensitive MARs by adding one extra line. One easily checks that some multipairs diagrams can be constructed by using only two nonlocal lines. Yet, they involve only two split pairs from S 0 , and for higher order processes (sextets, octets..) e.g. if p > 1 or q > 1, the other pairs participating to the multipair correlation are not split but originate from direct Andreev reflection at the N a or N b interface. The above considerations show that at lowest order in the nonlocal processes, all values of (p, q) are expected to be accounted for, however approximately. At higher order (not treated hereafter), two, three or higher numbers of Cooper pairs may split, also accompanied by a (p, q) multipair at both interfaces. Fig. The contact transparencies are also intermediate in the recent experiment by Pfeffer et al. on three-terminal metallic structures Interestingly, positive nonlocal conductance ∂I a /∂V b is obtained in Fig. The MAR threshold resonances are better visualized on Fig. The same data are shown on Fig. It is clear from Fig. , and there is no π-shift in this case. Here, I Q and I dEC generalize the usual critical current found at equilibrium. Again, partially resummed perturbation theory is compatible with physical expectations: the original inversion of the sign of the current-phase relation for the quartets is related to the electron exchange between two Cooper pairs in the quartet process One also notices that the nonharmonic behavior in the current-phase relation is enhanced as the normal-state transmission increases from T N = 0.04 to T N = 0.33 (see Fig. Broadening of the multipair resonances was introduced "by hand" in Fig. An efficient approximate analytical and numerical framework was provided for a three-terminal Josephson junction. This framework is based on semi-analytical calculations suitable for providing a kind of "unified" picture for the various phenomena taking place in a threeterminal superconducting junction. The principle of the method was presented, and it was demonstrated that this method reproduces the behavior of the various resonances and threshold resonances discovered over the last few years To conclude, it is suggested now that partially resummed perturbation theory is scalable to four terminal, and that this planned extension is promising for addressing a possible interplay between the recently proposed peculiar features of multiple Andreev reflections at incommensurate voltages and multipair resonances at commen-surate voltages for nonideal voltage sources. More precisely, we have started to consider the device in Fig. Appendix A: Notations used for Green's functions The three superconducting electrodes S a l (a l ∈ {a, b, 0}) are described by the BCS Hamiltonian: where i, j is a pair of nearest neighbors on a cubic lattice. The interfaces are coupled by an intermediate hop-ping amplitude: The labels a n and b m in the Green's functions correspond to the tight-binding sites at the interfaces of S a and S b respectively (see Fig. where a l ∈ {a, b} labels each of the superconductors S a and S b , and a l ∈ {α, β} are tight-binding sites belong to S 0 , on opposite interfaces. The three superconductors have the same gap ∆. The phases at t = 0 in S a , S b and S 0 are denoted by φ a , φ b and φ 0 . The parameter η can be viewed as a phenomenological linewidth broadening, introduced as an imaginary to the energy ω. The parameter η ∆ takes a finite value in the numerical calculations where it plays the role of regularizing infinities in the partially resummed perturbative expansions. The nonlocal Green's function crossing S 0 takes the form The retarded Green's functions are obtained from the advanced Green's functions by changing η into -η. The current per channel between sites a and α is the sum of four terms: I 1,1 α,a (t) = Σα,a (t) Ĝ+,a,α (t, t) where G +,-is the Keldysh Green's function and Σa,α (t) and Σα,a (t) are the hopping amplitudes for transferring at time t electrons or holes (according to the selected component of the 2 × 2 matrix in Nambu) from a to α or from α to a respectively. The total current for the extended interface is the sum over all channels: I(t) = n I an,αn (t). Appendix B: Symmetries of the current 1. Symmetry S1: checking that the current is a real number The demonstration is illustrated on an example simpler than the full Keldysh Green's function. Only one term contributing to the full Ĝ+,α,a is selected as an example: Ĝ+,- , where the following identity deduced from Eq. (A5) were used: Inserting the frequency variables leads to: Now, making a change of variable in the integral over ω leads to The notation Σ a stands for the "11" component of the Nambu tunnel amplitude connecting S a and S c . The components I 1,1 α,a and I 1,1 a,α are given by where the superscript refers to the overall propagation in the fully dressed Green's function, and the subscript a or b refers to processes taking place "locally" within each S a S 0 or S b S 0 interface. Similar expressions are obtained for Ĝβ,α and Ĝα,α . Appendix C 1 above deals with the expansion of the advanced and retarded Green's functions. Now, the same expansion is carried out for the Keldysh Green's function. The first step is to obtain the specific expression of the Keldysh Green's function for the three-terminal structure under consideration. The exact fully dressed Keldysh Green's function is obtained as the sum of 12 terms: Σα,a Ĝ+,- where the matrices X, Ŷ and Ẑ do not couple the two interfaces. In the next step, all of the fully dressed advanced and retarded Green's functions in Fn (n = 1...9) are expanded in perturbation in the number of nonlocal bare Green's function. The final expression of the Keldysh Green's functions first involves the matrix elements of some products between the matrices X, Ŷ and Ẑ, and the matrices Â, B, Ĉ and D. Each of the bare nonlocal bare Green's functions is evaluated from Fourier transform over times t and t : Coming back to the expansion of the Keldysh function at the lowest order-two, an example is the following: F2 X | Ŷ = X Â(α,α),R Ŷ Â(α,α),A + X Â(α,α),R Ŷ B(α,α),A ĝA + O (g α,β ) The variables κ n (with n = 1, 2, 3) label both Nambu and the harmonics of the Josephson frequency. The average over the Friedel oscillations in Eq. (C21) may appear as a standard procedure within the theory of nonlocal transport in three-terminal N SN structures where the function F (r) has rapid Friedel oscillations at the scale of the Fermi wavelength λ F = 2π/k F (to be averaged out because of multichannel averaging), but its envelope decays smoothly on the much longer scale of the coherence length ξ. The Nambu elements of the non-local Green's function ĝ 1 α,β (R) can be written as where 1 = ± labels advanced or retarded. The exponent in its power-law decay is dimension-dependent, and ξ(ω) is the energy-dependent coherence length. The parameter η is a small linewidth broadening. The function f (R) is a prefactor that does not oscillate at the scale of the Fermi wave-length. It will be taken as a constant in our numerical calculations, because the contacts are at distance large compared to their size. Using cos 2 (k F R) = sin 2 (k F R) = 1/2 and cos(k F R) sin(k F R) = 0 leads to The expansion in the number of nonlocal bare Green's functions sketched in the previous Appendices was combined to an algorithm for evaluating the local Green's functions dressed by processes taking place "locally" at each S a S 0 or S b S 0 interface. All components of the Green's functions connecting any harmonics to any other are required to be evaluated in order to obtain the fully dressed Keldysh Green's function of the three-terminal S a S 0 S b structure, approximated as above . However, inversions of matrices connecting both interfaces are never required to be performed, which explains the reduced computation times. Direct matrix inversion of matrices defined locally at a single interface and thus not coupling the two interfaces is numerically efficient if the cut-off in the number of harmonics of the Josephson frequency is not larger than ∼ 10, which is the case in what follows because the calculations are restricted to voltage eV > ∼ ∆/10. Otherwise, if needed, a possible future version of the code will evaluate the fully dressed local Green's functions from one-dimensional recursive Green's functions in energy if all information about nonlocal processes would be kept in a frontal approach. Programming the problem in this way was attempted, but running codes with increasing values of N max upon reducing voltage becomes undoable with standard computer resources, even if the voltages are not necessarily small compared to the gap. In addition, the prohibitive computation time given by Eq. (D1) has to be multiplied by a factor N k F R , in order to calculate the integral over the Friedel oscillations with microscopic phase factor k F R suitable for a multichannel contact (see Eq. C26). Alternatively, the spatial aspect of this problem may be treated with recursive Green's functions in real space, extended to include the harmonics of half the Josephson frequency (below a given voltagesensitive cut-off), but this numerical implementation appears to be even more computationally demanding than an average over k F R for a collection of independent channels. A scaling factor in the computation time, of typical value N ω = O(10 3 ), is also required for the evaluation of the integral over energy of the spectral current (containing sharp resonances) with an adaptative algorithm. The size of the matrices to be inverted with partially resummed perturbation theory used here is only [2(2N max + 1)] × [2(2N max + 1)], (D2) not larger than for a single interface. In addition, the average over the Friedel oscillations is built-in in the case of the expansion in the number of nonlocal bare Green's functions, and there is thus a gain of computation time by the factor N k F R , because, at the lowest order-two in the partially resummed perturbation theory, the multichannel junction maps onto a single-channel problem. Again, N ω = O(10 3 ) calls to the spectral current routine are required in order to integrate it over energy with an adaptative algorithm. Then, the numerical calculations become approximate, but, above all, they become doable without running them on a supercomputer.