We use the Landauer-Büttiker scattering theory for electronic transport to calculate the current cross-correlations in a voltage-biased three-terminal junction with all superconducting leads. At low bias voltage, when charge transport is due to coherent multiple Andreev reflections, we find large cross-correlations compared with their normal-state value. Furthermore, depending on the parameters that characterize the properties of the scattering region between the leads, the cross-correlations can reverse their sign with respect to the case of non-interacting fermionic systems. Contribution for the special issue of Physica E in memory of Markus Büttiker. Multiple Andreev reflections are the processes that explain how a dissipative charge transport can take place in a junction between superconducting leads at subgap voltages, eV < 2∆, where ∆ is the superconducting gap, and low temperatures Further insight in the multiple Andreev reflection processes may be acquired through current cross-correlations in a multi-terminal geometry. As Markus Büttiker demonstrated in his seminal paper on shot noise, the cross-correlations in non-interacting fermionic systems are always negative due to the Pauli principle Motivated by these results, one of us studied the cross-correlations of multiple Andreev reflections in a normal chaotic dot attached to three superconducting leads The present work addresses the complementary coherent regime, where both an a.c. Josephson effect and dissipative quasiparticle transport take place. Phase-dependent multiple Andreev reflections in the I(V)-characteristics were investigated experimentally in a diffusive conductor We consider a junction consisting of a normal scattering region connected to three superconducting leads, see Fig. For simplicity, we assume that there is one channel per terminal, that the normal scattering region does not break time-reversal symmetry, and that there is no spin-orbit coupling in the system. Then the normal region can be characterized by a 3 × 3 scattering matrix, Ŝ (ε) = {S αγ (ε)} α,γ=1,2,3 . If it is shorter than the superconducting coherence length, the energy-dependence of Ŝ (ε) can be neglected. Assuming that leads 1 and 2 are symmetrically coupled to lead 3, the scattering matrix can be parametrized as up to irrelevant phases. Here The scattering matrix is thus parametrized by two real parameters: the transparency D between leads 1 and 2 and the transparency 2D 2 between lead 3 and the other leads, with the constraints D ≤ 1 and . When φ = 0, the junction is equivalent to a two-terminal junction with transparency 2D 2 . However, the symmetry between leads 1 and 2 is broken at finite φ. This can be related to the formation of a doubly-degenerate Andreev bound state with energy when the junction is in equilibrium For D 2 ≪ 1 and finite voltage, a quasi-bound state with energy E qb (φ) = ∆ 1 -D sin 2 (φ 2) between leads 1 and 2 remains and affects the current as well as the noise and cross-correlations. The phase dependence of I 3 , where I α is the current going to contact α = 1, 2, 3, was studied in Ref. To calculate the transport properties of the junction, we make use of the Landauer-Büttiker theory, extended to describe hybrid junctions with superconducting leads Using their Fourier transform in energy space, ψin out eβE (t) = ∫ dε (2π) ψin out eβE (ε)e -iεt , we can relate the incoming and outgoing components of the electron part of the wave function through the scattering matrix Ŝ e for electrons. Namely, where S e αγ = e i(φα-φγ) 2 S αγ , and V α is the voltage at terminal α. As specified above, V 1 = V 2 = 0 and V 3 = V. Note that we use units where ̵ h = 1. Similarly, we can relate the incoming and outgoing components of the hole part of the wave function, where Ŝ h = ( Ŝ e ) * is the scattering matrix for holes. Furthermore, the electron and hole components of the wavefunction at terminal α are related via Andreev reflections, Here the Andreev reflection amplitude is given as The source term, J(E) = 1a(E) 2 , on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( Similarly, the incoming and outgoing wavefunctions, ψin out hβE (t), associated with an incoming hole-like state from lead β at energy E solve the same Equations ( T , where ν = {p, β, E} for an incident particle of type p = e h, from lead β, and with energy E, one readily checks the particle/hole symmetry relation T , where ν = {p, β, -E} with ē = h and h = e. Using a Floquet decomposition, a solution of Eqs. ( This reflects the periodic time-dependence of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations that describe the junction. Using the decomposition of Eq. ( with a n (E) = a(E + neV), and Eqs. ( To obtain the current, noise, and cross-correlations, we need the operator for the current flowing to lead α, Here v F is the Fermi velocity, and C α is a Nambu spinor in particle-hole and in/out space, where c † in out,ασ is a creation operator for an incoming/outgoing electron in lead α with spin σ =↑, ↓. Using a Bogoliubov transformation, C α can be expressed in terms of the wavefunctions introduced above and the annihilation and creation operators γ ν,σ , γ † ν,σ for a Bogoliubov quasiparticle ν with spin σ, Defining we may write Eq. ( Note that γ ν obeys fermionic anticommutation relations, {γ ν , γ μ } = 0 and {γ ν , γ † μ } = δ νμ . Assuming an equilibrium occupation of the scattering states, ⟨γ † ν γ ν ⟩ = f (E), where f (E) is the Fermi distribution function, we can compute the expectation value of the current, ⟨I α (t)⟩. In particular, the d.c. current reads where is the current flowing through the structure in the normal state. In particular, one finds The current noise is given as where δI α (t) = I α (t) -⟨I α (t)⟩. Using Eq. ( where E ν is the energy of state ν and f ν = f (E ν ). By performing the time integrations in Eq. ( Note that, in the normal case and at zero temperature, one obtains the noise in accordance with the result for a two-terminal junction with transmission 2D 2 , and negative cross-correlations In the following sections, we compute the d.c. current Let us first discuss the current I 3 to the voltage biased lead 3. Panels (a) in Figs. In addition, in the tunneling regime at D 2 ≪ 1 shown in Fig. In Figs. , where Note that phases φ close to π are special. Namely, at φ = π, one finds E - A (π) = E + A (π), and the adiabatic current between leads 1 and 2 is zero. Thus, for phases φ sufficiently close to π, one still finds a quasi-bound state at energy Ẽqb ≈ √ The values E ± A for the transmissions D and D 2 and phases φ chosen in Figs. Next we turn to the current (I 1 -I 2 ) 2, shown in panels (b) of Figs. As voltage is increased, two different features are observed. These features are linked with the resonances in the current I 3 discussed above. At eV Rabi = E qb (φ), one finds a suppression of the current, corresponding to an average occupation of the doubly-degenerate quasi-bound state with one quasiparticle. At eV > eV DoS = ∆ + E qb (φ), the injection of quasiparticles from lead 3 leads to a reversal of the current, corresponding to a double occupation of the quasi-bound state. Due to the phase dependence of E qb (φ), the reversal appears first around the phase π and then spreads over the entire phase interval as voltage is further increased. In summary, there are several different voltage regimes: voltages eV > 2∆, the current is reversed for all phases. As can be seen in Fig. As discussed above, the above features get washed out for most values of the phases φ when D 2 increases. The adiabatic current in that case is given as Īad where ĒA (φ) = ∫ 2π 0 dφ 3 E A (φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 ) (2π). The current outside of the tunneling regime is shown in Fig. In Figs. We now turn to the noise and cross-correlations. The noise is shown in Figs. As shown in Fig. In addition to this main result, we notice that the noise and cross-correlations display additional features that are related with the features discussed above for the current. Namely, the multiple Andreev reflection features at voltages eV n = 2∆ n are visible in the noise and cross-correlations as well. While their position is independent of φ, their visibility varies. In particular, they become more and more pronounced as φ increases from 0 to π. In the tunneling regime, additional features due to the presence of a quasi-bound state are present, see Fig. Three-terminal Josephson junctions realize positive cross-correlations at low voltages. These correlations are strongly enhanced compared to the case where only one of the leads is superconducting due to the process of multiple Andreev reflections. Here we studied the coherent regime where supercurrents and dissipative quasiparticle currents lead to an interesting interplay that manifests itself in the current as well as in the noise and cross-correlations. As a next step, it would be interesting to address the crossover between coherent and incoherent multiple Andreev reflection regimes in multichannel hybrid junctions. The methods introduced in our work could also be helpful to test recent predictions related with topological aspects of the Andreev subgap spectrum in multiterminal Josephson junctions We dedicate this article to the memory of Markus Büttiker. His groundbreaking contributions to mesoscopic physics have shaped the field and remain an inspiration for our research. This work was supported by ANR, through grants ANR-11-JS04-003-01 and ANR-12-BS04-0016-03, and by the Nanosciences Foundation in Grenoble, in the frame of its Chair of Excellence program.