The properties of Josephson tunneling between a single band s-wave superconductor and a two band s± superconductor are studied, in relation to recent experiments involving iron-based superconductors. We study both a single junction and a loop consisting of two junctions. In both cases, the relative phase between the order parameters of the two superconductors is tuned and the energy of the system is calculated. In a single junction, we find four types of behaviors characterized by the location of minima in the energy/phase relations. These phases include a newly found double minimum junction which appears only when the order parameters are treated self-consistently. We analyze the loop geometry setup in light of our results for a single junction, where the phase difference in the junctions is controlled by a threaded flux. We find four types of energy/flux relations. These include states for which the energy is minimized when the threaded flux is an integer or half integer number of flux quanta, a time reversal broken state and a meta-stable state. The experimental determination of the pairing symmetry of an unconventional superconductor is an important tool for narrowing down the microscopic theories which suggest different origins for superconductivity in the system. Shortly after the discovery of the iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) One important tool for detecting the order parameter structure is the Josephson effect, due to its sensitivity to the order parameter (OP) phase difference across the junction. The Josephson effect played a key role in determining the d-wave nature of the order parameter of the high T c cuprate superconductors In iron based superconductors (FeSCs), some evidence in favor of s ± OP was provided by a loop-flux experiment by Chen et al. The problem of a junction between an s-wave superconductor and an s ± -superconductor was considered by several authors previously The literature points at two possible types of contacts: (i) the s-wave superconductor couples predominantly to either the electron or hole pockets or (ii) the couplings between the s-wave and the electron and hole pockets are comparable leading to Josephson frustration. One type of proposals to experimentally determine the s ± symmetry rely on the ability to produce different types of contacts in which the s-wave predominantly couples to one type of pocket or another It has been argued In the current paper we work with a microscopic model on a lattice in an s ± -s-wave junction setup. While our model is similar to that investigated by previous authors In the next section, we present our model and method for a single s ± -s-wave junction (section II A). The results are presented in section II B and discussed in section II C. Section III discusses the combination of two s ± -s junctions into a loop and its possible states. We study the Josephson junction depicted in Fig. s± Superconductor For the s ± superconductor, we use a minimal two orbital model 40 in which the two orbitals correspond to the 3d xz and 3d yz iron orbitals illustrated by red/blue lobes in Fig. x,k,σ and d † y,k,σ which create an electron in the d xz , d yz orbital with momentum k and spin σ. Using these operators we write the Hamiltonian H s± in the form x where μ is the chemical potential, ∆ x,y is the pairing amplitude and i are the Fourier transforms of the hoping amplitudes. Close to the junction we expect the order parameter of both superconductors to become dependent on position. A mean-field Hamiltonian cannot account for the effects of this order parameter modification, therefore it is necessary to write down interaction terms which lead to superconductivity in our system. The position dependence of the order parameter is then determined self-consistently. We consider the s ± order parameter to arise from a J 1 -J 2 nearest neighbors and next nearest neighbors anti-ferrromagnetic Heisenberg interaction. The meanfield decoupling of this interaction leads to four possible pairing symmetries. The dominant pairing symmetry for this model is s ± in the relevant region of parameters where and α = x, y here and throughout the paper. This interaction is decoupled as: with the structure factor and In a system with translation invariance, the ground state corresponds to zero momentum pairing, i.e. ∆ α (q) = ∆ α δ q,0 resulting in the mean field Hamiltonian, Eq. ( The s-wave superconductor is modeled using one orbital per site, nearest neighbors hopping t 0 , and momentum independent pairing ∆ 0 . The operator c † σk creates an electron with momentum k and spin σ on the s-wave superconductor side. The system is described by 0 (k) = -2t 0 (cos (k x ) + cos (k y )), μ 0 is the chemical potential, and ∆ 0 the pairing amplitude. To account for superconductivity in the s-wave side of the system, we use an attractive Hubbard-U term: with U > 0. In a translation-invariant system, the meanfield decoupling of this interaction leads to the Hamiltonian H s mentioned above and the self-consistency equation: The model of the s ± -s junction considered in this work consists of the two superconductors previously described connected through a tunneling contact along the (1 0) direction. We consider N 1 lattice sites in the x-direction in the s ± superconductor and N 2 in the s-wave superconductor. The contact breaks the translation symmetry along the x-direction, but since the y-direction is still periodic, the momentum k y is well defined. The natural description of the system is in terms of the operator d † α,ky,σ (n) which create an electron whose momentum component in the y-direction is k y , on a site with x-coordinate index n, with spin σ in the α orbital, and c † ky,σ (n) which creates an electron whose momentum component in the y-direction is k y , on a site with x-coordinate n, with spin σ in the s-wave superconductor. In order to write the Hamiltonian, we define the vectors ... d † α,ky,σ (N 1 ) , and which contain all the possible creation operators for a given k y , spin and orbital. Combining them into Nambu vectors allows us to write the Hamiltonian in the following compact form: where C is defined below and The matrices H s± (k y ) and H s (k y ) are given by the following BCS form: For the s-wave part of the Hamiltonian H s (k y ), K s (k y ) and ∆ s (k y ), are N 2 × N 2 matrices given by: For the s ± part of the Hamiltonian the matrices K s± (k y ) and ∆ s±(s) (k y ) can be further decomposed as: and where the above sub-blocks are the following The matrix T describes the tunneling contact between the two superconductors. As shown in Figure here T x and T y are N 1 × N 2 matrices. Finally C in Eq. ( Since superconductivity arises from the spin interaction terms given in Eqs. 3-4,9, the following self-consistency equations should be satisfied: with We study how the energy of the system and the current depend on the phase difference between the two superconductors. In an infinite system, this can be modeled by fixing the order parameter at ±∞ and imposing a phase difference between the two ends. The selfconsistency equations of our lattice model are complicated and must be solved numerically, on a finite lattice. Therefore, we model the composite system by dividing each superconductor into a bulk part and a junction. In the bulk of the s ± superconductor, we set , where ∆ ± is real, positive and equal to the pairing amplitude that is obtained self-consistently in a translation invariant system, ignoring the contact. In the bulk part of the s-wave superconductor, ∆ 0 (n) = |∆ 0 |e iφ , with |∆ 0 | self-consistently determined in the absence of the interface. φ is the phase difference between the s-wave order parameter away from the contact and the s ± order parameter away from the contact on the other side. In the part near the junction, ∆ x (n, n + 1), ∆ y (n, n + 1) and ∆ 0 (n) are determined by the self-consistency equations, Eq. ( We have performed junction simulations on a 20 by 20 lattice for each of the s-wave and the s ± superconductors, allowing the order parameters of the system to be determined self-consistently on up to 5 lattice sites from the contact. In order to elucidate the effects of the selfconsistent determination of the order parameter, we also perform non-self-consistent energy and current calculations in which the order parameters are fixed. All of the energy relations found in our model are 2π periodic and inversion symmetric (E(φ) = E(-φ)). We therefore present the energy-phase relation in the [0, π] interval. For the studied parameter space, we find four types of junctions: a) 0-junctions where the energy is minimized when the phase difference between the order parameter of the s-wave superconductor and the hole pockets is 0 (corresponding to a phase difference of π between the s-wave and the electron pockets), b) π-junctions, where the energy is minimized for phase difference π, c) φ-junctions, see Fig. Our model contains parameters that characterize the properties of both superconductors and the contact between them. In order to study some representative phase diagrams we fix the bulk properties of the s ± superconductor, and focus on varying the properties of the contact and the s-wave superconductor. Following Ref. [40] we set: For this choice of parameters, half filling corresponds to μ = 1.54|t 1 |. Since doping is a common way to tune the superconducting phase in FeSCs, we choose to work away from half-filling and set μ = 1.805|t 1 |. This value of μ corresponds to a doping of 0.18 electrons per Fe site. Following the measurements from Refs. [42,43] and the estimates for |t 1 | found in Ref. [44], we set the bulk pairing amplitudes ∆ x (n, n + 1) = ∆ y (n, n + 1) = 0.08|t 1 |. In the subsequent text we work in units such that |t 1 | = 1. On the s-wave superconductor, we fix t 0 = |t 1 | to get a similar band width on the two sides of the junction. The other parameters of the s-wave superconductor, i.e. the chemical potential μ 0 and the bulk pairing amplitude ∆ 0 , as well as the contact parameters are varied. Sample phase diagrams are shown in Fig. Fig. Observing the energy/phase relations, E(φ) we see that the location of the global minimum changes continuously as the model parameters are varied. If we start in a phase where the minimum is at φ = 0 and change the parameters the minimum changes continuously until it reaches π. Hence, the φ-junction is always between the 0-junction and the π-junction. When the tunneling parameters of the contact w x , w y are small, the transition between the 0-and π-junction is very sharp and the φ-junction phase occupies only a narrow sliver in parameter space. As the tunneling amplitudes are increased, the φ-junction takes up a larger portion of parameter space. The parameter μ 0 , the chemical potential of the s-wave superconductor has a dramatic effect on the phase diagram. We can relate this to the overlap between the hole and electron pockets with the Fermi surface underlying the s-wave superconductor. This relation is further demonstrated in Fig. We can also observe in Fig. The final insight that can be gained from Fig. The role of the tunneling parameters w x and w y is further explored in Fig. Since the s ± order parameter is defined on the lattice links we define an on-site order parameter in the s ± superconductor for the purpose of visualization: In Fig. In the different panels of Fig. In order to further explore the relation between the self-consistent determination of the order parameter and the double minimum phase, it is necessary to quantify the dependence of ∆ x and ∆ y on the phase difference φ. To do this, we define the following functions: The behavior of g x and g y for two different cuts of parameters around the double minimum phase is shown in Fig. The problem of Josephson tunneling between an s ± superconductor and a single band s-wave superconductor has been considered previously using different approaches. These previous studies point at two possible scenarios: (i) the s-wave superconductor couples predominantly to either the electron or hole pockets or (ii) the couplings between the s-wave and the electron and hole pockets are comparable leading to Josephson frustration. The momentum space structure of the order parameter in our model is ∆ α cos(k x ) cos(k y ), hence in the hole pockets the order parameter phase is the same phase as ∆ α while in the electron pockets the order parameter phase is shifted by π. Hence, we can interpret the 0-junction as a scenario in which the s-wave is interacting primarily with the hole pockets, the π-junction as one where the s-wave is interacting primarily with the electron pockets, and the other two cases (φ-junction and a double minimum junction) as resulting from competing interaction of the s-wave with electron an hole pockets. In the current study, we find that the global minimum is at a phase difference of π, i.e. when the phase of the s-wave order parameter is equal to that of the electronlike pairs, for a large portion of the parameter space. This is consistent with the fact that we are working with an electron doped s ± sample. Hence, the s ± superconductor has more pairs that come from electron pocket states rather than from hole pocket states. Upon tuning of model parameters, the preferred phase difference may shift to 0. In both these cases the system minimizes its energy by matching the OP phase of the s-wave superconductor with either the hole or electron pockets. This tendency is strongly dependent on the overlap between Fermi surface states on both sides of the Junction. Figure Our phase diagrams suggest that a transition between a 0-junction and a π-junction does not occur directly. Instead, an intermediate φ-junction or double minimum phase appears (see Fig. In this work, we developed a model that considers both higher order Josephson terms and a self-consistently determined order parameter. Our results suggest that the higher order Josephson harmonics play a more important role in the realization of the φ state. This can be demonstrated by comparing the results of a self-consistent order parameter determination with the non-self consistent solutions. In the non-self-consistent case, the hole and electron pocket order parameters are given by the form of Eq. 2. Unlike in the self-consistent treatment, their amplitudes are related and their phase difference is always π. Comparing the two cases we see that the main difference is the appearance of the double minimum phase (Fig. To make this point clearer, let us look into the first two terms in the Josephson coupling. It has been pointed out in Ref. [24] that if the coupling between the hole-like pairs and the s-wave superconductor is similar to the coupling between the electron-like pairs and the s-wave superconductor, the first order terms on the Josephson energy tend to cancel each other, increasing the importance of the next order terms. This can be shown by writing the Josephson energy of the junction as E = E h + E e , where E h(e) is the Josephson energy associated to the coupling between the s-wave and the hole(electron) pockets. Then we have: h(e) cos 2φ h(e) + ..., (25) where φ h(e) is the phase difference between the s-wave and the hole(electron) pairs. Since φ e = φ h + π, the energy of the contact is then Hence, when E (1) e , the first Josephson harmonic cancels , and the second order term cannot be neglected. Several theoretical models of an s ± -s junction can exhibit 0-junction, π-junction, or φ-junction behavior It is interesting to note the differences and similarities between this work and the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau treatment of Ref. [19]. While the two models describe an interface between a single order parameter superconductor and a double order parameter superconductor the details are quite different. Most importantly, in the Ginzburg-Landau model the order parameters are defined on each band and are only coupled through their amplitudes (in a way that ensures their opposite sign is favored in the bulk). In our microscopic model, the order parameter is defined on the orbitals and due to interorbital hopping, the two bands are gapped. As a result, in the current work we can not easily control the gap magnitude on each band, nor can we directly control the effective coupling between the order parameters on the two bands. We should also note that while the Ginzburg-Landau model does not explicitly contain terms of higher harmonic Josephson tunneling, our model does. These differences make the comparison between the models difficult. However, we can speculate that the differences mentioned above are responsible for the different states found in the two models. Overall, we find that for competing coupling between the electron and hole pockets and the s-wave it is important to consider higher order processes, such as higher order Josephson harmonics and the effect of the contact on the order parameters of the system. At low tunneling strength, the contact phase diagram is dominated by the 0 -junction and π-junction phases. When the tunneling strength is increased higher order processes cause the TRB phase to widen and the double minimum phase appears. We now proceed to use the formalism developed for studying an s ± -s junction to treat the experimentally relevant problem of a flux threaded s ± -s loop. The system we study consists of bending the s ± -s junction along the x-direction and adding another planar contact to form a loop. Each of the contacts forming the loop is characterized by two tunneling parameters: w , which describe the amplitude of tunneling an electron from the α orbital in the s ± superconductor to an adjacent site in the s-wave superconductor across contact 1 (2). After the addition of the second contact, the Hamiltonian for the s ± -s junction can still be described by Eq. ( where the sites in the s ± side of the loop are enumerated 1..N 1 and the sites on the s-wave side are enumerated 1..N 2 . The self-consistency equations remain those given in Eq. (22). Next, we proceed by threading the loop with a magnetic flux Φ. As shown in the Appendix, the flux dependence can be transferred to the contact by performing a gauge transformation. With the addition of magnetic flux the tunneling matrices become: Here, where Φ 0 = hc 2e is the superconducting flux quantum. For long loops, N 1 , N 2 1 the two junctions essentially decouple. The OPs behavior near one contact is uninfluenced by the presence of the other contact and the energy cost of the two contacts is a simple sum. Moreover, by making an additional gauge transformation, the phase acquired by hopping between the two superconductors, 2 , can be translated into a phase difference φ 1(2) between the two superconductor OPs. Hence, the ground state energy of the loop is given by: where ) is the energy of a single s ± -s junction where the phase difference between the superconductors is φ 1(2) with contact parameters w . This allows us to deduce the energy of the flux threaded loop as a function of the flux. We find four types of behavior of the energy vs. flux curve, shown in Fig. The energy of the loop is minimized for half-integer flux quantum values when the energy/phase relation one of the contacts has a minimum at 0 and the other has a minimum at π. Our analysis shows that it is possible to find this behavior without changing the bulk parameters of the superconductors if the tunneling parameters across each of the two contacts are different. If the energy of one of the contacts is minimized for a phase difference 0 < φ < π, then the energy of the loop will be minimized for values of magnetic flux which are neither integer flux quantum nor half integer flux quantum. This causes supercurrent to flow in the loop and therefore the phase is named 'time reversal breaking'. The energy-flux relation shown in Fig. . An example of this type of energy vs flux relation is shown in Fig. An energy/flux relation with minima of different depth such that one is a global minimum and the other is a (meta-stable) local minimum can occur when the loop is formed by two contacts that have a double minimum. As can be seen in Figure The local minima in the meta-stable relations found in this work are shallow (see Fig. where for simplicity we have considered an equal inductance in both arms of the loop. In , where I 0,1 and I 0,2 are the critical currents of the two junctions. As can be seen in Fig. We studied the Josephson tunneling between an s ± superconductor and a single band s-wave superconductor within a microscopic formalism in which the order parameters of both superconductor are determined using self-consistent Bogoliubov-deGennes equations. We find four possible junction behaviors, characterized by their We find that allowing the order parameter to change its amplitude and phase self-consistently close to the junction has some important effects on the resultant phase diagram. Most notable -it is essential for the appearance of a new state, namely the double minimum junction. We also use our results to study the energy of a flux threaded s ± -s loop. We find that the loop can have different types of unconventional energy/flux behavior such as, 1/2-flux-loop, TRB and metastable. equation. The values of U obtained for Figures 2. Self-consistent solution of the BdG equationscalculating the order parameter magnitude close to the junction The self-consistency equations 22 were solved in the vicinity of the interface, using the bulk values of the order parameters, i.e ∆ x (n, n + 1) = ∆ y (n, n + 1) = 0.081 and ∆ 0 (n) = |∆ 0 |e iφ , as a starting point of the iteration loop. The iteration loop is stopped when the difference in the order parameters obtained in two consecutive iterations is less than 1 × 10 -6 . We consider periodic boundary conditions on the y-direction and a 20 × 20 lattice for each superconductor. When changing the momentum resolution in the direction along the junction cross section (k y ) we find some sensitivity of our results to the resolution. However, the main findings are not altered. In the phase diagram the nature of the different phases is not sensitive to the k y resolution but the phase boundaries may shift slightly. The energy/flux relation for the array in Sec. III can be easily found from the energy/phase profile of the two interfaces following Eqn. 30. The energy/ phase relation is found by solving the order parameter self-consistently and the energy using exact diagonalization for 41 evenly spaced values of the phase difference between 0 and 2π. Afterwards, we can define the energy/phase relations E 1(2) (φ) for any value of φ using cubic Hermite spline interpolation. Finally, the energy vs flux curve is given by: Since the value of φ is bounded and the minima of E 1 φ + 2πΦ Φ0 + E 2 (φ) are very sharp for the metastable cases, the most practical way to do the minimization is by brute force, i.e. by directly evaluating the function for a grid of points in the [0, 2π] interval. The curves is Fig. 