We analyze Cooper pairing instabilities in strongly driven electron-phonon systems. The light-induced nonequilibrium state of phonons results in a simultaneous increase of the superconducting coupling constant and the electron scattering. We demonstrate that the competition between these effects leads to an enhanced superconducting transition temperature in a broad range of parameters. Our results may explain the observed transient enhancement of superconductivity in several classes of materials upon irradiation with high intensity pulses of terahertz light, and may pave new ways for engineering high-temperature light-induced superconducting states. The application of a strong electromagnetic drive has emerged as a powerful new way to manipulate material properties We propose a general mechanism for making a normal conducting metal unstable toward Cooper-pair formation by irradiation with light. The key ingredient is the nonlinear coupling between optically active infrared phonons and the Raman phonons that mediate electron-electron attraction, responsible for superconductivity (Fig. × phonons into squeezed quantum states, which can have significantly enhanced coupling to electrons, and, finally, the periodic modulation of system parameters leading to Floquet states. Of these effects, we find that phonon squeezing universally leads to an enhancement of T c , by potentially a large factor Furthermore, the proposed mechanism can be readily applied to many other types of long-range order such as chargedensity and spin-density waves, by performing the instability analysis in the appropriate channels. We now describe the consequences of different types of optically-accessible phonon nonlinearities. The pump pulse directly couples to infrared-active phonon modes, which have a finite dipole moment. Since the photon momentum is negligible compared to the reciprocal lattice vector, the drive creates a coherent phonon state at zero momentum, Q IR q=0 (t) = E cos Ωt, where Ω is the drive frequency and E is proportional to the drive amplitude. In the presence of phonon nonlinearities, the driven infrared-active phonon mode couples to Raman modes Q R q of the crystal There are three leading types of phonon nonlinearities which can have static and dynamic effects (Tab. I). A static renormalization of the Hamiltonian parameters arises from phonon nonlinearities that involve even powers of Q IR 0 , since these terms have finite time averages. For phonon nonlinearities of type I (Tab. I), this leads to a static displacement of the zero-momentum Raman phonon while for nonlinearities of type II the frequency of the Raman phonons is modified, cf. App. A. Both affect the superconducting instability, causing either enhancement or suppression; the analysis can be done with a standard equilibrium Migdal-Eliashberg formalism We illustrate the aforementioned effects by using a model with Fröhlich-type electron-phonon interactions that couple with strength g k to the displacement of the Raman phonons Q R k (P R k is the conjugate momentum) to the local electron density n iσ : We consider dispersive optical phonons ω k with mean frequency ω and spread ∆ω. Here, J 0 is the bare electron hopping matrix element and V the volume of the system. Further, we assume a quartic nonlinearitiy of type II. The phonon drive term, introduced for t > 0, reads where k and E is the amplitude of the driven infrared-active phonon. The effect of the drive is twofold. First, there is a static contribution, which renormalizes Raman phonon frequencies. For negative nonlinearities, Λ k < 0, phonons are softened by ω 2 k (1 -A k ). The mode softening suppresses the electron tunneling, increases the density of states and thus the overall pairing strength. Second, the time dependent part of the drive (2) realizes a parametrically driven oscillator which dynamically generates phonon squeezing correlations and can strongly suppress the electron tunneling matrix element Effective Hamiltonian.-We will now derive an effective electronic Hamiltonian by integrating out phonons. This is analogous to the standard derivation of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) Hamiltonian starting from the Fröhlich model, however, with the phonons being driven strongly out of equilibrium. As a consequence, the Hamiltonian will be explicitly time-dependent. In addition, it will contain residual electron-phonon scattering that contribute to the electron scattering rate. We first perform the Lang-Firsov transformation (App. B), which eliminates the electron-phonon interaction term in Eq. ( Solving the full problem numerically we find that J(t) oscillates with 2Ω around its mean value which is suppressed by mode softening and phonon squeezing, as parametrized by ζ. Near parametric resonance the squeezing correlations increase in time leading to a decrease in J(t) and an increase in the amplitude of its oscillations. Since we are studying transient phenomena, we compute the average over the first ten driving cycles to extract the effective electron tunneling. We take the electron-phonon coupling g k such that g 2 k /ω k = const., which leads to a local Hubbard-type electron-electron interaction U . This assumption is reasonable for phonons with wavevectors above the Thomas-Fermi screening length where Ĥel-ph scatt. represent electron-phonon scattering terms that vanish upon tracing out the phonons in the rotating frame. The drive, Eq. ( To carry out the BCS Floquet analysis of the pairing instability, we use the equations of motion technique , where E is the energy which has to be determined self-consistently from the Floquet BCS gap equation (App. C) The instability of the system manifests in the appearance of an eigenmode with negative imaginary part of E which we obtain by searching for the zeros of the determinant of ( are the Floquet harmonics of the gap, ρ is the electron density of a single spin-component, μ the chemical potential, n k the Fermi-Dirac distribution of the electrons determined by the temperature of the undriven system, and k the electron dispersion. The assumed thermal state of the electrons is justified in the weak-coupling regime and since we are only interested in transient effects that follow the drive The high and low frequency limits of the Floquet BCS gap equations ( In the low frequency limit Ω → 0, the core of the gap equations We verify these perturbative predictions by numerically solving the Floquet BCS gap equations ( The reduction of the superconducting transition temperature due to the finite electron lifetime is of the Abrikosov-Gorkov form T c = T c,0 -1/τ , where T c is the dynamical transition temperature including pair-breaking and T c,0 the one without pair-breaking. We find an enhancement of the dynamical T c compared to equilibrium, Fig. Even though we are not studying a specific material from first principles, let us estimate the typical order of magnitude of the discussed effects for a recent experiment in which transient non-equilibrium superconductivity has been explored in K 3 C 60 fullerides Our calculations suggest that the increase of T c is related to a dynamical enhancement of the effective electron mass, Eq. (3). Such a dynamical renormalization of the electronic dispersion can, for instance, be determined experimentally by time-resolved ARPES measurements, see e.g. We studied the competition between the increased Cooper pair formation and Cooper pair breaking in strongly-driven electron-phonon systems and found that the latter need not to inhibit the dynamic enhancement of T c . Even though we focused on superconducting instabilities, the proposed mechanism for achieving a larger coupling constant is generic and can be directly applied to other forms of long-range order such as spin or charge density waves. The present analysis addresses the transient dynamics of the system. At long times, the inelastic scattering of electrons from excited phonons will increase their temperature and will tend to destroy superconducting order, as seen in the experiments. At intermediate times, heating of the electrons can give rise to nonequilibrium distribution functions which potentially enhances superconducting coherence as experimentally seen by microwave irradiation of superconducting samples The infrared phonon is coherently driven Q IR 0 = E cos Ωt. Neglecting the feedback of the electrons on the phonons, we find for the phonon equation of motion This equation can be solved analytically with . The phonon displacement thus oscillates with twice the pump frequency 2Ω around a mean value Q. Plugging this into the SSH Hamiltonian, we find The finite displacement of the lattice along the coordinates of the Raman mode renormalizes the electron tunneling by a term ∝ gΛE 2 . The effective electronic bandwidth is reduced when gΛ < 0; a condition that is material specific. Reducing the bandwidth results in a higher density of states and hence an enhanced superconducting transition temperature T c . For gΛ > 0 contrary is the case. These general considerations may account for the physical origin of the enhancement of the transition temperature which has been seen in ab initio calculations for specific materials In this case, the coherently driven infrared phonon excites Raman phonons in pairs and with opposite finite momenta, leading to quantum correlations between k and -k modes. These states are referred to as squeezed states in quantum optics with A k = -Λ k E 2 /2ω 2 k , which describes a parametric oscillator with resonance condition Ω = ω k √ 1 -A k . The drive can be again separated into a static and an oscillatory contribution with the implications of the static displacement being crucially dependent on the sign of the nonlinearity Λ k . For Λ k < 0 the frequencies of the Raman modes ω k are softened and hence the effective electron-electron interaction, which is typically of the form g 2 k /ω k , is increased, while for Λ k > 0 the opposite is the case. By contrast, we find that irrespective of the sign of the couplings, the oscillatory term squeezes the Raman modes which results in a polaronic suppression of the electron tunneling matrix element compared to equilibrium and hence in an enhanced density of states, Fig. Type III: Cubic nonlinearities.-In non-centrosymmetric crystals, the lowest order phonon nonlinearity is of the cubic form III, , as the zero-momentum infrared active phonon mode can linearly couple to the displacement of the Raman modes. Coupling to pairs of Raman modes at opposite momentum gives rise to phonon squeezing that leads to an enhanced T c . Hence, phonon squeezing is largely insensitive to the microscopic details of the phonon nonlinearities and can occur in a variety of nonlinear couplings. The effective phonon Hamiltonian arising from such a nonlinearity is with A k = Λ k E, which also describes a parametric oscillator but with resonance condition Ω = 2ω k . In the case of cubic interactions, direct mode softening cannot occur because the the time average of Q IR 0 vanishes. Nonetheless, the dynamic generation of squeezing near the parametric resonance is universally present also for cubic nonlinearities and qualitatively similar enhancement diagrams can be also obtained in that case, cf. Fig. For studying phonon nonlinearities which generate squeezed states, we consider the Holstein model with Fröhlich electronphonon interactions where the phonon displacement couples to the charge density We expect our results to be insensitive to the fine details of the model and expect for example similar results for the SSH model. We pursue the following strategy: 1. Using a Lang-Firsov transformation we remove the electron-phonon interaction. 2. We determine the unitary transformation W that transforms the system into a rotating frame in which the phonon driving is absent. This leads to a driven Floquet BCS problem. 3. We estimate the dynamic Cooper pair breaking rate due to the non-equilibrium scattering of phonons and due to oscillations in the microscopic interaction parameter using Floquet Fermi's Golden rule. The Cooper pair-breaking rate is self-consistently taken into account by adding an imaginary self-energy correction to the Floquet BCS equations. 4. Solving the driven Floquet BCS problem, we determine the enhancement of T c relatively to the undriven one. Considering the Holstein model (B3), we introduce operators bk and b † -k which diagonalize the static phonon Hamiltonian The electron-phonon interaction in Eq. (B3) can be removed by a Lang-Firsov transformation Applying it to the Hamiltonian and switching on the drive we obtain with dressed tunneling matrix element and attractive electron-electron inter- We construct a unitary transformation to remove the phonon driving following Ref. Applying the unitary transformation, we find Multiplying this equation from left by W and from right by W † and identifying H 0 = H 0,ph and H 1 = H ph,0 + H drv , we obtain Our goal is to construct a mapping of the quantum problem onto a classical Mathieu equation which determines the transformation W where The time dependent factors in Eq. (B10) are chosen such that b q e iωqt = bq (t) are invariants of the undriven problem H 0 , which are defined by requiring that they commute with the corresponding action, i.e., [ bq (t), i∂ t -H 0 ] = 0. For a given invariant bq (t), bq (t) |ψ remains an eigenstate of H 0 provided |ψ is an eigenstate, since 0 = [ bq (t), i∂ t -H 0 ] |ψ = (i∂ t -H 0 ) bq (t) |ψ . We furthermore introduce the invariants of the driven problem as which will be generated by the unitary transformation âq (t) = W b q (t)W † . By differentiation and subsequent integration we obtain for the invariants We do not explicitly write the q dependence in χ and λ, as these functions are symmetric in q, i.e., χ q = χ -q . Next, we compute the invariants i∂ t âq (t) = [H, âq (t)], (B12), using relations (B13) We transform α = χ -λ * , β = χ + λ * which yields the Mathieu equation From the initial conditions that require χ(0) = 1, λ(0) = 0, we find Using the definition of χ, λ we find the relations between ξ(t), φ(t) from the unitary transformation Eq. (B10) and the parameters of the Mathieu equation Plugging in the driving from Eq. (B5), we find Ω 2 t = (1 -A q -A q cos 2Ωt). Even though the Mathieu equation can not be solved analytically, for this form of the driving its solution is well understood, as it realizes the parametric oscillator, which displays a parametric resonance when Ω = ω √ 1 -A. On resonance the phonon squeezing |ξ| increases linearly in time while off resonance it oscillates around a mean value, Fig. Assuming, that the drive is adiabatically switched on, the system remains in phonon vacuum in the rotating frame from which we find q (2-2 cos q(ri-rj )) where α q = (cosh |ξ| -ξ * e 2iωq t |ξ| sinh |ξ|)e iφ . Upon time averaging this equation yields equation It is convenient to transform the time evolution from the kinetic energy to the interaction energy. Once, we evaluated the phonon dynamics, Eq. (B19), we obtain the effective electron Hamiltonian of the form where we used ĤT and ĤU as short hand notation for the kinetic energy and the interaction energy, respectively, and J(t) is the time dependent hopping matrix element. We introduce J(t) = J eq e -ζ j(t) where j(t) is an oscillating function with mean value one. In order to move the time dependence from the kinetic energy to the interaction energy, we consider where Relative strength of the oscillations in the microscopic parameters. We show the time dependence of U/J(t) relatively to the undriven system for ω = U = W/8, ∆ω = 0.2ω, A = 0.1, (a) off resonance Ω/ω = 0.1 and (b) near the parametric resonance Ω/ω = 0.9 (blue solid line). Initially oscillations at multiple frequencies appear, however, all oscillations except for the driving frequency are washed out in time because for a dispersive the only common frequency of all modes is the driving frequency. Oscillations with Ω are indicated by the red dashed line which we choose to approximate the dynamics of the microscopic parameters. The time average of U/J(t), black dashed line, is enhanced near resonance and with increasing driving strength. The inverse of this equation cannot be calculated analytically, however, for an oscillating function with amplitude small compared to the mean of j(t) follows that t ∼ t which holds because we chose j(t) to oscillate around one. Thus we can directly transform the time dependent part from J(t) to the interaction and arrive at ĤT -U j(t) ĤU . (B24) As we show in the next section, the oscillations in the interaction can be well described by a single harmonic. For a dispersive phonon with spread ∆ω the time evolution of U/J(t) typically oscillates at driving frequency Ω which is a common oscillation frequency for the phonon modes at all wave vectors. We approximate the oscillations of U/J(t) with a single harmonic of frequency Ω and strength A, see Fig. Fluctuations around the initial phonon state and the temporal modulation of the interactions reduce the quasiparticle lifetime which in turn decrease the superconducting transition temperature. Below, we compute the quasiparticle scattering rate from the phonon fluctuations 1/τ ph and the modulated interactions 1/τ int by Floquet Fermi's Golden Rule. Due to the time dependence of the coupling constants, energy required to create particle-hole excitations can be borrowed from the drive. This enhances the scattering rate compared to equilibrium. The total dynamic Cooper pair breaking rate 1/τ = 1/τ ph + 1/τ int is shown in Fig. where . Taking the phonon vacuum expectation value of Eq. (B25), we obtain the first two terms of equation ( ijσ (e jσ which as discussed vanishes upon taking the phonon vacuum expectation value. Using a Floquet Fermi's Golden Rule analysis we estimate the Cooper pair-breaking rate which originates from both (i) phonon fluctuations in the kinetic energy and (ii) modulation of the effective electron-electron interactions. a. Phonon Fluctuations. Fluctuations around the phonon vacuum require energy. This energy can be borrowed from the time dependence of the drive. Expanding the exponentials of the electron phonon scattering term Ĥel-ph scatt. to first order, we obtain Ĥel-ph scatt. ∼ -J eq e -ζ 1 √ with Higher order terms in the series expansion of the exponentials correspond to multi-phonon processes which are energetically suppressed. The finite lifetime of quasiparticles at the Fermi energy can be calculated from the imaginary part of the retarded phononfluctuation self energy To leading order the corresponding greater and lesser components are Here, G ≷ k (t 1 , t 2 ) is the bare electron and D ≷ q (t 1 , t 2 ) the bare phonon propagators, which are functions of the time difference as the unperturbed Hamiltonian is static. Thus, in Fourier space they are given by , where we considered the phonons to be in the vacuum state and thus neglected their distribution functions in D > and D < . The self-energy contains the drive α q (t) and therefore is a fully non-equilibrium object which is a function of two times, Eq. (B29). We rewrite the self-energy using the average time T = 1 2 (t 1 + t 2 ) and the time difference t = t 1 -t 2 Σ ph,≷ (t, T ) = i V q |F kq | 2 α q (T + t/2)α * q (T -t/2)G ≷ k-q (t)D ≷ q (t). (B30) In order to estimate a quasi-particle lifetime, we integrate over the "slow" timescale T which yields for the effective coupling |ᾱ q (t)| 2 = Ω π π Ω 0 dT α q (T + t/2)α * q (T -t/2). The effective coupling |ᾱ q (t)| 2 , distinguished from the bare coupling by the bar, is only a function of the time difference t. From a Fourier transform we obtain its Floquet components |ᾱ qn | 2 , where n ranges from -∞ to ∞. We calculate the retarded self-energy Σ + ph,k using where ω is the conjugate variable to the time difference t, and find for the lifetime at the Fermi surface In order to obtain a semi-analytical estimate for the pair breaking rate, we neglect the weak wavevector dependence of g q /ω q (1-A q ) 3/4 and replace them by their mean. We replace wavevector summations by integrals over energies with a constant density of states, yielding where W = 4J eq e -ζ is half of the electronic bandwidth. b. Modulated interactions. The temporal modulation of the effective electron-electron interaction leads to another source for decreasing the quasiparticle lifetime. Similarly as in the case of phonon fluctuations, we estimate the interaction decay rate by computing the imaginary part of the leading order self-energy contribution Performing a Floquet Fermi's Golden Rule analysis, we first integrate over the "slow" timescale T to obtain an effective coupling as a function of the time difference t and then compute the Floquet components of the coupling. Plugging this into the expression for the retarded self-energy and taking the imaginary part, we obtain the decay rate We evaluate both quasiparticle decay rates numerically, cf. Fig. we obtain Dividing by E + 2nΩ -2( k + i/τ -μ -U ρ), and summing over k, we find the Floquet BCS gap equation: Defining the gap ∆ n = U V k a * kn , we obtain the simple system of equations The fact that we used a single harmonic to describe the time evolution of U (t) reflects in the gap equation having only a single side band. More complicated functions would lead to further side bands which would give quantitative differences but our conclusions will not be altered on the qualitative level. The BCS Floquet equations have a nontrivial solution, when the determinant is zero, which we determine by scanning E in the complex plane. The Cooper pair formation rate is characterized by the imaginary part of E.