The kagome Heisenberg antiferromagnet is a leading candidate in the search for a spin system with a quantum spin liquid ground state. The nature of its ground state remains a matter of great debate. We conducted 17 O single crystal NMR measurements of the spin S = 1 / 2 kagome lattice in herbertsmithite ZnCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 , which is known to exhibit a spinon continuum in the spin excitation spectrum. We demonstrate that the intrinsic local spin susceptibility χ kagome deduced from the 17 O NMR frequency shift asymptotes to zero below temperature T ~0.03J , where 200 J K is the Cu-Cu super-exchange interaction. Combined with the magnetic field dependence of χ kagome we observed at low temperatures, these results imply that the kagome Heisenberg antiferromagnet has a spin liquid ground state with a finite gap. The realization and characterization of a kagome Heisenberg antiferromagnet (KHA) with a corner-shared triangle structure (Fig. Moreover, inelastic neutron scattering measurements A major advantage of using a single crystal for NMR is that we can achieve high resolution by applying an external magnetic field B ext along specific crystallographic directions. In Fig. It is straightforward to assign these 17 O signals to the nearest neighbor (NN) of the Cu 2+ defects, the next-NN (NNN) of the Cu 2+ defects, and the intrinsic Main sites located far from defects, respectively, for the following reasons. First, we recall that the Cu 2+ defects occupying the Zn 2+ sites with ~15% probability The NMR properties at the NNN and main sites are very similar, and we could clearly distinguish them only near 295 K where the NMR lines are narrow. Their similarity suggests that the spin polarization induced by the Cu 2+ defects decays very quickly within the kagome plane, unlike the long-range nature of the Kondo oscillations in metals In the field geometry of B ext || c, accidental superposition of the NN peaks prevented us from resolving the central part of the Main peak below ~70 K (Fig. Normally, the partitioning of the 17 O NMR lines into Main1 and Main2 would merely complicate the overall spectrum. Here, thanks to the small value of ν Q (a*) ~ 8 kHz, all five of the I z = m to m +1 transitions of Main1 are bundled into a large peak that we could resolve down to 1.8 K (~0.01J). Moreover, we were able to selectively measure the Main1 lineshape ( nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 are also consistent with diminishing intrinsic spin excitations toward T = 0 (Fig. To estimate the magnitude of the gap Δ, we fitted 17 K (a*) below 4.2 K to an exponential function with a pre-factor T, 17 K (a*) ~T ⋅ exp(-Δ / T ) , as shown in Fig. We grew the single crystal sample of ZnCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 based on the same method as described in detail in We were unable to resolve the central transition of the main2 peak in Fig. (A) Solid lines represent an alternate fit of 17 K (a*) based on an exponential function, 17 K (a*) ~ exp(-Δ/T), without the linear pre-factor T used for Fig. Temperature (K) B The site-selective anomalous X-ray scattering experiments reported in In contrast, an earlier report based on powder Rietveld refinement and powder 17 O NMR measurements concluded that as many as ~5% of the Cu 2+ sites within the kagome layer are replaced by non-magnetic Zn 2+ anti-site defects Due to the inherently low resolutions of the NMR lines in powder experiments, the authors of (23) were able to detect only one set of defect-induced split-off 17 O NMR signals dubbed as "Dsites," and assigned them to the non-existing 17 O sites adjacent to the anti-site defects. Unlike our single crystal NMR measurements conducted with higher resolutions, they were unable to clearly separate the peak of the "D-sites" at low temperatures, either, and hence concluded that the NMR Knight shift K (D) at the "D-sites" levels off at a positive value. Such alleged leveling of K (D) was attributed to the formation of singlet spins at two kagome Cu 2+ sites adjacent to the anti-site defects. Comparison of the powder 17 O NMR results of the "D-sites" with our single crystal data reveals, however, that the authors of ( 