Within the framework of the fermion-spin theory, the charge transport in the doped Mott insulators on a honeycomb lattice is studied by taking into account the pseudogap effect. It is shown that the conductivity spectrum in the low-doped regime is separated by the pseudogap into a low-energy non-Drude peak followed by a broad midinfrared band. However, the decrease of the pseudogap with the increase of doping leads to a shift of the position of the midinfrared band towards to the low-energy non-Drude peak, and then the low-energy Drude behavior recovers in the high-doped regime. The combined results of both the doped honeycomb-lattice and square-lattice Mott insulators indicate that the two-component conductivity induced by the pseudogap is a universal feature in the doped Mott insulators. In a Mott insulator, the spin configuration arrangement attempts to minimize the energy by aligning the spins on the lattice sites. However, in some cases, the spin configuration arrangement makes it impossible to minimize the energy on all spins on the lattice sties at the same time -a situation known as the geometrical spin frustration. The parent compounds of cuprate superconductors are a Mott insulator on a square lattice In the doped square-lattice Mott insulator, the physical quantity which most evidently displays the signature for the pseudogap is the charge transport, which is manifested by the optical conductivity and resistivity, where the characteristic features are that the conductivity is divided into two-components by the pseudogap with a non-Drude-like narrow band centered around energy ω ∼ 0 followed by a broadband centered in the midinfrared region, while the resistivity grows nearly linearly with temperature The paper is organized as follows. The basic formalism is presented in Sec. II, where we generalize the theory of the charge transport from the previous case in the doped square-lattice Mott insulators to the present case in the doped honeycomb-lattice Mott insulators, and then evaluate explicitly the conductivity. Within this theoretical framework, the quantitative characteristics of the conductivity in the doped honeycomb-lattice Mott insulators are discussed in Sec. III. Finally, we give a summary in Sec. IV. The t-J model, or equivalently the large U Hubbard model, are prototypes to study the strong correlation effects in solids, especially in connection with the doped Mott insulators where the lattice constant has been set as a = 1. Since each unit cell contains two sites, belonging to different sublattices A and B, the corresponding reciprocal lattice vectors in momentum-space are given by, In this case, the t-J model on a honeycomb lattice can be expressed as, supplemented by a local constraint σ C † υlσ C υlσ ≤ 1 to remove double electron occupancy, where the summation is over all sites l, and for each l, over its NN sites η, υ = A, B is the sublattice index, C † υlσ (C υlσ ) is the electron creation (annihilation) operator, S υl = (S x υl , S y υl , S z υl ) are spin operators, t is the NN hopping integral, J is the NN spin-spin antiferromagnetic (AF) exchange coupling constant, and μ is the chemical potential. It has been shown that the local constraint of no double electron occupancy in the t-J model (3) can be treated properly within the fermion-spin theory respectively, with the fermion operator h υlσ = e -iΦ lσ h υl that keeps track of the charge degree of freedom together with some effects of spin configuration rearrangements due to the presence of the doped charge carrier itself, while the spin operator S υl represents the spin degree of freedom, and then the local constraint of no double electron occupancy is always satisfied in actual calculations. In this fermion-spin representation (4), the original t-J model ( with Within the framework of the fermion-spin theory (4), the charge transport in the doped square-lattice Mott insulators has been discussed where ν = 1, 2, and the mean-field (MF) charge-carrier excitation spectrum ξ with the corresponding intra-sublattice and intersublattice parts of the self-energy, Σ intra (k, ω) and Σ (h) inter (k, ω), repectively, that are evaluated explicitly in the Appendix A. In a doped Mott insulator, the strong correlation effect and the related charge-carrier quasiparticle coherence are closely related to the chargecarrier self-energy Σ (h) (ν) (k, ω), and then the behavior of the charge-carrier quasiparticle is most fully described in terms of the charge-carrier Green's function (6). Now we turn to calculate the conductivity of the doped honeycomb-lattice Mott insulators in terms of the full charge-carrier Green's functions (6). The conductivity in the system is expressed as with the electron current-current correlation function, where j is the electron current operator. The external magnetic field can be coupled to the electrons, which are now represented by C υl↑ = h † υl↑ S - υl and C υl↓ = h † υl↓ S + υl in the fermion-spin representation (4). For the calculation of the electron current density, we need to obtain the electron polarization operator, which is a summation over all the particles and their positions, and can be evaluated in the fermion-spin representation as The electron current operator on the other hand is obtained by evaluating the time-derivative of the polarization operator j = ∂P/∂t = (i/ )[H, P] as In the fermion-spin approach, this electron current operator (10) can be decoupled as, where φ = h † Blσ h Alσ = h † Alσ h Blσ is the charge-carrier's particle-hole parameter. The second term in the right-hand side of Eq. ( where the intra-sublattice and inter-sublattice current vertices are given by, and the intra-sublattice charge-carrier bubble Π intra (k, ω) is obtained from the corresponding intra-sublattice part of the charge-carrier Green's function (6a) as, and is closely related to the quasiparticle scattering within the same sublattice, while the inter-sublattice charge-carrier bubble Π inter (k, ω) is obtained from the corresponding inter-sublattice part of the charge-carrier Green's function (6b) as, and therefore is directly associated with the quasiparticle scattering between the sublattices A and B. Substituting the electron current-current correlation function (12) and the intra-sublattice and inter-sublattice charge-carrier bubbles ( respectively, where the intra-sublattice and inter-sublattice components of the charge-carrier spectral functions are given by A , respectively, while n F (ω) is the fermion distribution function. In Fig. In Eq. ( where ε pg (k) is the pseudogap, and is therefore identified as being a region of the self-energy effect in which the pseudogap suppresses the spectral weight. This pseudogap ∆(ν) pg (k) and the corresponding energy spectrum ε (ν) k can be obtained explicitly in terms of the self-energy Σ k). In Fig. Within the framework of the fermion-spin theory, we have studied the charge transport of the doped Mott insulators on a honeycomb lattice by taking into account the pseudogap effect. Our result shows that the conductivity spectrum in the low-doped regime is separated into a non-Drude peak centered around energy ω ∼ 0 followed by a broad midinfrared band. However, the decrease of the pseudogaps with increasing doping leads to a shift of the position of the midinfrared band towards to the lowenergy non-Drude peak, and then the low-energy Drude type behavior of the conductivity recovers in the highdoped regime. Incorporating the present result with that obtained in the doped square-lattice Mott insulators i.e., Σ (h) (k, ω) = Σ o (k, ω). In the static limit, although Z hF (k) still is a function of momentum, however, the wave vector k in Z hF (k) can be chosen as k 0 = [2π/3, 0], and then the corresponding intra-sublattice and inter-sublattice parts of the quasiparticle coherent weight can be obtained as,