As one of the simplest systems for realizing Majorana fermions, topological superconductor plays an important role in both condensed matter physics and quantum computations. Based on ab initio calculations and the analysis of an effective 8-band model with the superconducting pairing, we demonstrate that the three dimensional extended s-wave Fe-based superconductors such as Fe1+ySe0.5Te0.5 have a metallic topologically nontrivial band structure, and exhibit a normaltopological-normal superconductivity phase transition on the (001) surface by tuning the bulk carrier doping level. In the topological superconductivity (TSC) phase, a Majorana zero mode is trapped at the end of a magnetic vortex line. We further show that, the surface TSC phase only exists up to a certain bulk pairing gap, and there is a normal-topological phase transition driven by the temperature, which has not been discussed before. These results pave an effective way to realize the TSC and Majorana fermions in a large class of superconductors. TSC is known for its ability of hosting Majorana fermions and implementing topological quantum computations Recently, it is found by the density functional theory (DFT) calculations and confirmed by ARPES observations that superconducting (SC) FeSe 0.5 Te 0.5 (FST) and LiFeAs possess topologically nontrivial band structures due to a band inversion in the Γ -Z direction Experimentally, FST is synthesized within the inversion symmetric space group P 4/nmm As shown in Fig. The effective model at the Γ point or Z point has the full point group symmetry D 4h of the crystal. The full Hamiltonian with spin-orbit coupling (SOC) under the spinful bases (|1 , |2 , |3 , |4 ) ⊗ (| ↑ , | ↓ ) takes the form: where H 0 is a 4-band spinless Hamiltonian, and H soc is an 8×8 matrix describing the SOC interaction. When the superconductivity is considered, the electronic states on the FST (001) surface may fall into either a two dimensional (2D) normal superconductivity (NSC) phase or a TSC phase. It is usually believed that the surface is a TSC when the Fermi level crosses the surface Dirac cone, where the surface electrons occupy a single band and are thus forced to form a topologically nontrivial pairing under the bulk proximity effect An equivalent understanding of the mechanism of the surface Majorana mode is to view the vortex line as a Majorana chain where H(k) is the effective 8-band Hamiltonian as shown explicitly in the Supplemental Materials Our results show that one needs to dope some electrons into FST to realize a surface TSC. Fortunately, FST is such a material that it is usually self-doped by the excess Fe atoms when synthesized in experiments, as is denoted by the chemical formula Fe 1+y Se x Te 1-x . In particular, the superconductivity of FST is robust in a wide range -0.1 < y < 0.1 To investigate the dependence of the TSC regime on the bulk pairing gap ∆ = (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 ), we vary ∆ in the range up to 3.5∆ exp , then calculate and plot the phase boundaries of the TSC as shown in Fig. In the real materials, the pairing gap ∆ decreases as the temperature T increases. Roughly, the BCS theory gives ∆(T ) ∼ ∆ 0 1 -T /T c , where ∆ 0 is the zero temperature pairing gap. This enables one to see a phase transition from TSC to NSC by tuning the temperature T of the system at a fixed chemical potentials. For instance, at μ = 35 meV of our results as shown in Fig. Lastly, we note that such topologically nontrivial band structures are quite common in the Fe-based superconductors. Similar band inversion has been found in the other superconducting systems including LiFeAs (T c =18 K) 