The single crystal growth and superconducting properties of PbTaSe2 with noncentrosymmetric crystal structure is reported. Using the chemical vapor transport (CVT) technique, PbTaSe2 crystallizes in a layered structure and the crystal symmetry has been shown belonging to a non-centrosymmetric space group P m2 confirmed by the consistent band picture near the Fermi level between the angle-resolved photoemission spectrum (ARPES) and theoretical calculations. Superconductivity with Tc =3.83±0.02 K has been characterized fully with electrical resistivity (T), magnetic susceptibility (T), and specific heat C(T) measurements using single crystal samples. The superconducting anisotropy, electron-phonon coupling λep, superconducting energy gap 0, and the specific heat jump ΔC/γTc at Tc confirms that PbTaSe2 can be categorized as a weakly coupled type-II superconductor. The discovery of superconductivity in the non-centrosymmetric (NCS) materials, such as heavy fermion CePt3Si and half-Heusler YPtBi compounds, has initiated widespread research activities in the field of unconventional superconductors. Clear Pb-5d, Ta-4f and Se-3d core level peaks were observed in the photoemission spectrum, which confirms the correct chemical composition in our PbTaSe2 single crystal samples and in consistent to the EPMA chemical analysis. While the XRD lacks the resolution to distinguish whether the PbTaSe2 has a better fitting to the space group of either P6/mmm or P m2, the crystal surface profile has been examined with scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) in detail. PbTaSe2 crystals were prepared for STM measurements by in vacuo cleavage at room temperature, in a preparation chamber with a base pressure lower than 1x10 -10 mbar, before transfering to an STM chamber at a pressure lower than 5x10 -11 mbar. STM measurements were performed at a temperature of 4.6 K, using an Omicron LT-STM and an electrochemically etched tungsten tip. The STM image was obtain with a bias voltage of -0.5 V and tunneling current 0.7 nA. Figure The first-principle calculations were carried out using the QUANTUM ESPRESSO code. The in-plane residual resistivity before entering the superconducting state is ~ 0.28 μΩ-cm and with a residual resistivity ratio RRR = ρ(300 K) /ρ(5 K) ~ 115, as shown in Figure The ρx(T) (5 K ≤ T≤ 300 K) data fit well with the BG model, as shown by the solid red curve in Figure Tesla are displayed in Figure All of the extracted parameters shown above, including the superconducting anisotropy, the value of the specific heat jump ΔCp/Tc at Tc, the superconducting energy gap 0/kB, and the electron-phonon coupling λep support that PbTaSe2 can be categorized as a weakly coupled type-II superconductor. A high-quality single crystal of hexagonal PbTaSe2 (space group P m2) was synthesized for the first time using a chemical vapor trasport technique. Although XRD cannot distinguish the space group has centrosymmetry or not conclusively, STM surface profile scan suggests that the highly ordered atomic plane is consistent to a crystal symmetry of noncentrosymmetric spacegroup (P m2). The bulk superconductivity below 3.83±0.02 K is confirmed with electrical resistivity (T), magnetic susceptibility (T), and specific heat measurements. The parameters of electron-phonon coupling λep, energy gap 0/kB, and the specific heat jump ΔC /γTc at Tc imply that PbTaSe2 can be ascribed to a weakly coupled type-II superconductor. Electronic band structure calculations show a complex Fermi surface and a moderately high DOS at the Fermi level. Chemical vapor transport method was employed with PbCl2 as the transport agent for the PbTaSe2 crystal growth, which allows an effective and faster vapor transport to produce the necessary super saturation of the expected final product. A three-zone muffle furnace was fabricated for this purpose, having a typical temperature profile as shown in Figure Stoichiometric amount of Pb:Ta:Se (6N purity for Pb and Ta and 5N for Se) was loaded into a quartz ampoule, evacuated, sealed and fed into a furnace (850°C) for 5 days. About 10g of the pre-reacted PbTaSe2 powder was placed together with a variable amount of PbCl2 (purity 5N) (50 to 75mg) at one end of the silica ampoule (length 30-35 cm with inner diameter of 2.0 cm and outer diameter of 2.5 mm). All treatments were carried out in a glove box, with continuous purification of the Argon gas of oxygen and water level kept below 1 ppm. The loaded ampoule was evacuated, sealed and fed into a furnace for the growth next. The end of the ampoule containing the pre reacted material was held at 850°C, while the crystals grew at the other end of the ampoule was maintained at a temperature of 800°C (i.e., a temperature gradient near 2.5 K/cm) for about one week. Shiny single crystals of sizes up to 7 × 5 x 2 mm 3 were obtained. The growth habit of the crystals was characterized by the dominance of (00l) faces, as confirmed by the Laue picture and XRD with preferred, as shown in the inset of 