We study the system of double Rashba wires brought into the proximity to an s-wave superconductor. The time reversal invariant topological superconductivity is realized if the interwire pairing corresponding to crossed Andreev reflection dominates over the standard intrawire pairing. We derive the topological criterion and show that the system hosts zero energy Andreev bound states such as a Kramers pair of Majorana fermions. We classify symmetry of the Cooper pairs focusing on the four degrees of freedom, i.e., frequency, spin, spatial parity inside wires, and spatial parity between wires. The magnitude of the odd-frequency pairing is strongly enhanced in the topological state. We also explore properties of junctions occurring in such double wire systems. If one section of the junction is in the topological state and the other is in the trivial state, the energy dispersion of Andreev bound states is proportional to ∼ ± sin φ, where φ denotes the macroscopic phase difference between two sections. This behavior can be intuitively explained by the couplings of a Kramers pair of Majorana fermions and spin-singlet s-wave Cooper pair and can also be understood by analyzing an effective continuum model of the s + p/s-wave superconductor hybrid system. The concept of topology Alternatively, there are also time reversal invariant topological superconductors belonging to the topological DIII class The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we introduce a tight-binding model of the double quantum wire (DQW) model with Rashba spin-orbit interaction and proximity induced superconductivity where both interwire and intrawire pairing potentials are taken into account. The topological criterion for the system is analyzed beyond the linearization approximation applied in Ref. [64]. We confirm that the interwire pairing potential must be larger than that of intrawire one and that the inversion symmetry should be broken. In Sec. III, we study symmetries of Cooper pair of the DQW model and find various types of pair amplitudes due to the translational and inversion symmetry breaking. We show that, in topological regime, the odd-frequency pairing is strongly enhanced at the ends of the system. We prove that the ↑↓ component of the spin-triplet pairing is absent both for even and odd-frequency pairings due to the time reversal symmetry. In Sec. IV, we focus on ABSs in the DQW/normal metal/DQW and DQW/normal metal/spin-singlet s-wave superconductor Josephson junction system. Especially for the latter case, we see an anomalous energy dispersion of ABSs proportional to ∼ ± sin φ with φ being the superconducting phase difference between two sections. We provide a qualitative argument to explain this relation by considering tunneling Hamiltonian between Kramers MFs and spin-singlet s-wave pairing. We also reproduce this dispersion relation in the framework of the effective model which can be interpreted as an s + p/s-wave superconducting junction. In Sec. V, we summarize our results. We consider the setup consisting of two quantum wires with Rashba SOI proximity coupled to an s-wave superconductor (Fig. Here, we introduce index i (η = 1, 1) to label lattice sites (QWs). We define c † iση (c iση ) as the creation (annihilation) operator acting on the electron at the site i of the η QW with the spin σ (σ =↑ (≡ 1), ↓ (≡ 1)). The first term represents hopping with amplitude t between two adjacent sites i, j . The second term describes chemical potential μ η at each site. The third term corresponds to the Rashba SOI of the amplitude α η . The last two terms represent the intrawire and interwire pair potential with amplitude ∆ η and ∆ c , respectively. To simplify analytical calculations, we focus on the case of ∆ 1 = ∆1 throughout this paper. Using translational invariance along x-direction, we introduce the number of unit cells N x and momentum in x-direction k x , and Fourier transform the operators as c iση = 1 Nx kx e ikxax c kxση . The Hamiltonian can be rewritten in the momentum representation in the basis composed of Here, s x,y,z , τ x,y,z , and η x,y,z are Pauli matrices acting on the degree of freedom of spin, particle-hole, and chain, respectively. We define ξ kxη as ξ kxη = -2t cos(k x a x )-μ η . By linearizing the energy spectrum, Here, we study this setup by tight-binding analysis to find whether time reversal invariant topological superconductor is obtained beyond the linearized approximation of the energy dispersion for arbitrary chemical potential. Below, we calculate winding number to judge whether the system is topologically non-trivial. With an appropriate choice of the unitary transformation V , the Hamiltonian H can be decomposed into two segments that are "time reversal partners" which are distinguished by index l = 1, 2. Then each sector is brought into off-diagonal form: with the appropriate 8 × 8 and 4 × 4 matrices V and W (see Appendix A for more explicit forms). Below, we focus on h 1 (k x ), however, we note that the topological condition remains the same if we consider h 2 (k x ). The topological properties can be studied by evaluating the trajectory of determinant of h 1 (k x ) The system is topologically non-trivial when the trajectory of det[h 1 (k x )] wraps around the origin in complex space, that is, the non-zero winding number indicates a non-trivial topological state. To simplify calculations, it is useful to introduce symmetric and antisymmetric parameters, The real and imaginary parts of det[h 1 (k x )] are rewritten as Here, we assume 4t 2 + 4α 2 s < |μ s | such that ε(k x ) becomes zero at certain values of k x . Based on the spirit of "weak pairing limit", ) around the origin in complex space as k x changes from k x a x = -π to k x a x = π. We scale λ(k x ) to λ(k x ) → aλ(k x ) by introducing a parameter a, and continuously change a from a = 1 to a small non-zero value. Importantly, upon this change, the winding number remains the same. In the case of ε(k x ) = 0, (d 1 , d 2 ) is approximated as (0, sgn ε(k x )) ≡ (0, ±1) for a sufficiently small a and stays constant. However, in the vicinity of Fermi momenta k F,j , which we define as two solutions of ε(k F,j ) = 0 such that k F,1 < k F,2 , the (d 1 , d 2 ) vector could wind around the origin. Close to these momenta, ε(k x ) can be expanded as At around the momentum k F,j , the vector (d 1 , d 2 ) reads Now we consider the trajectory spanned the the vector (d 1 , d 2 ) as the momentum changes from k x a x = -π to k x a x = π, see also Fig. where for ν = 1(0) the system is non-trivial (trivial) topological state. First, we note from Eq. ( To get the explicit phase diagram for the system, we consider a simplified case by setting α s = 0. In this case, the Fermi points k F,1 and k F,2 are defined via The intensity plot of LDOS of zero energy on the edge of DQW model found by recursive Green's function technique as function of as function of αa and μa (μs and μa) with ∆c/t = 0.4, ∆1/t = 0.1, and μs/t = -1 (∆c/t = 0.4, ∆1/t = 0.1, and αa/t = 0.5 ). We set length of the system long enough (4000 sites) so that overlapping between zero energy states on the both edges is negligible. and are given by with μ 0 ≡ 1 -(μ s /2t) 2 for |μ s | < 2t. According to Eq. ( has to result in ν = -1 to realize the topological phase. For α a μ a > 0, Eq. ( have to be satisfied in order to get non-trivial state. In To summarize this section, two conditions, ∆ c > ∆ 1 and α a = 0, are necessarily but not sufficient to generate time reversal invariant topological superconductivity. As we show in the next section, the presence of zero energy state also changes the dominant symmetries of Cooper pairs at the end of the system. In this section, we study symmetries of Cooper pair in the model of double Rashba QW system coupled to an s-wave superconductor. In addition to the standard symmetries of Cooper pair, where frequency, spin, and parity are taken into account, we should include one more spatial degree of freedom connecting to two QWs. We call the pair amplitude to be wire-odd (wire-even) if it picks up negative sign (remains the same) by the exchange of the wire index. Due to this additional degree of freedom, there are now eight classes of Cooper pair with different symmetries that are consistent with Fermi-Dirac statistics as summarized in Table The odd-frequency pairings combined with even-wire symmetry cases, v) and vii), have been studied in previous work dedicated to ferromagnet junctions, unconventional superconductor junctions, and non-uniform superconducting sytems. First, we discuss how to evaluate pairing amplitudes. Using Eq. ( with Matsubara frequency which is set to be ω n /t = 0.01 throughout the paper without loss of generality. Introducing matrices G(ω n , j, j ′ , σ, σ ′ , η, η ′ ) and F (ω n , j, j ′ , σ, σ ′ , η, η ′ ), we rewrite Eq. ( where G M is divided into four sectors in the particle-hole space. We focus on F (ω n , j, j ′ , σ, σ ′ , η, η ′ ) to analyze symmetries of Cooper pairs. First, we focus on the frequency dependence. Introducing J ≡ (j, j ′ , σ, σ ′ , η, η ′ ), we define F O (J) and F E (J) as follows Here, we define A =E, O with the convention that sgn[E/O] = ±1. Then, using Eq. ( with B =E, O. Further, by denoting L as L ≡ (σ, σ ′ ), we can address the spacial symmetry between QWs defined by F ABO (j; L), F ABE (j; L) as with C =E, O. Finally, by addressing also the spin degree of freedom, we get eight classes of pair amplitude which are given by where the indices A, B, and C take the values either E or O. The combination of A, B, and C has to satisfy for spin-triplet (spin-singlet) pairing. As for ↑↑ and ↓↓ spin-triplet components, the corresponding pair amplitudes are We emphasize that due to the time reversal symmetry present in the system, the ↑↓ components of spin-triplet are absent. Indeed, using the definition of anomalous Green function with imaginary time τ and inverse temperature β = 1/k B T , as well as the fact that under time reversal operation T, we obtain for the time-reversal invariant system. Using the fact that Green's function in Eq. ( Next, we consider systems, in which the translation invariance is also broken, for example, if some parameters are non-uniform or the system is finite. Thus, the parity mixing can occur by reversing the parity corresponding to frequency 9,37,39 to be consistent with Fermi-Dirac statistics. We first consider the case of μ s = 0 and α s = 0. In case (4), the breakdown of the parity inside a wire induces the OSOE pairing. This result is consistent with preexisting results in non-uniform superconducting systems. We calculate the spatial profile of pairing amplitudes numerically for parameters chosen such that the system is in the topological regime, see Figs. FIG. tion to the ESEE pairing, which is the primary symmetry of the parent system [see Fig. To emphasize the correspondence between zero energy states and odd-frequency pairings explicitly, we calculated numerically the LDOS at the edge of the DQW system and the pairing amplitudes of OSEO and OTEE (see Fig. In this section, we address Andreev bound states (ABSs) in DQW/DQW junctions. The ABSs localized between two superconductors are extensively studied in the literature. The energy of the ABS E b localized between two topologically trivial s-wave superconductors is given by E b = ± 1 -σ N sin 2 (φ/2)∆ 0 , where ∆ 0 , φ, and σ N is the magnitude of the superconducting pairing potential, the phase difference between superconductors and the transparency of the junctions, respectively. 109 On the other hand, the energy of ABS E b between two one-dimensional topological p x -wave superconductors is given by Making use of the recursive Green's function technique, we can calculate the spectrum and the energy of the ABSs. First, we focus on the case when both sides of the DQWs are in the non-trivial topological regime. The result is shown in Fig. Next, we check the most interesting regime in which we set the one side of the junction to be in the topological regime and another to be in the trivial regime [see, Fig. The tunneling Hamiltonian can be written as where T k is the tunneling amplitude, b kσ is the annihilation operator acting on the electron on the ride side of the junction with the spin σ and the momentum k. The Majorana operator γ σ acts on the left side of the junction with the index σ used to distinguish between to two MFs building a Kramers pair. We introduce the Bogoliubov transformation as follows where u k and v k are given by and φ is the macroscopic phase difference between right and left superconductors. Here, ξ k is the energy spectrum of the right superconductor in the normal state and is the quasi-particle energy spectrum, where ∆ k is the pair potential in the right side superconductor. Without loss of generality, u k can be set to be a real number and v k to be a complex number. As a result, the tunneling Hamiltonian is rewritten as At the next step, we construct the effective Hamiltonian describing the coupling between two MFs in the second order perturbation theory, where H 0 represents BdG Hamiltonian without tunnel-ing (32), H 0 ≡ kσ E k α † kσ α kσ , and |0 is set to be the ground-state of the quasi-particles. From Eq. ( 0| Here, we used the fact that . and also set E = 0. First, we ignore the first two terms in Eq. ( with the energies given by k ∆0 sin φ, which coincides with the dispersion relation obtained for the ABSs in Fig. The characteristic features of the energy dispersion of the ABSs shown in Fig. where m is the effective mass given by m = 2 /2ta 2 x . As seen from Eq. ( If we set ∆ p > ∆ s / 2m(2t + μ s ), time reversal topological superconductivity is realized. In this paper, we have studied the double quantum wire system brought into proximity to an s-wave super-conductor. As was shown before, the system is in the topological phase if the induced interwire (crossed Andreev) pairing dominates. We have generalized this topological criterion to account for the detuning of the chemical potential by calculating the winding number. We have also classified symmetry of the superconducting order parameter by focusing on four degrees of freedom, i.e., frequency, spin, the spatial parity inside the QWs, and the spatial parity between the QWs. The magnitude of the odd-frequency pairing is hugely enhanced if the topological superconductivity is realized. We have also considered the ABSs in the DQW/DQW junctions. For topological/non-topological junctions, the energy dispersion of the ABSs is proportional to ∼ ± sin φ, where φ denotes the phase difference between two section of the DQW system. We have explained this behavior in terms of the couplings of Kramers pair of Majorana fermions and spin-singlet s-wave Cooper pair. We have confirmed that this φ dependence can be reproduced using the effective continuum model corresponding to the s + p/s-wave superconductor junction system. The oddfrequency pairing and the ABSs in the topological regime can be detected by tunneling spectroscopy. the determinant wraps around the origin in the complex plane as a function of the momentum is nothing but the winding number. The model Hamiltonian given by Eq. (2) can be rewritten in the basis composed of c Here, A(k x ) and B(k x ) are 4 × 4 matrices given by In this basis, the time reversal operator is represented as . Next, we transform the basis by unitary matrix V to satisfy where V can be written as As a result, the Hamiltonian is given in the new basis by and is decomposed into two independent sectors. In what follows, we focus on only one of two sectors, H 1 (k x ) given by The H 1 (k x ) possess the chiral symmetry, CH 1 (k x )C = -H 1 (k x ), where strength H δ . Taking into account the Andreev approximation, we can write down the eigenmodes of the Hamiltonians H s and H s+p . In the s-wave superconductor dominated section (x < 0), we find ψ s,e ↑,± (x) = e iφ/2 , 0, 0, γ 0 e -iφ/2 T e ±ikF x , (B5a) ψ s,e ↓,± (x) = 0, e iφ/2 , -γ 0 e -iφ/2 , 0 ψ s,h ↑,± (x) = γ 0 e iφ/2 , 0, 0, e -iφ/2 T e ∓ikF x , (B5c) ψ s,h ↓,± (x) = 0, γ 0 e iφ/2 , -e -iφ/2 , 0 where we have defined k F = √ 2mμ and γ 0 = ∆ 0 (E + E 2 -∆ 2 0 ) -1 . The quasiparticle energy E is measured from the chemical potential and the subscript "+" ("-") stands for the right-going (left-going) solutions. For the s+p-wave superconductor dominated section (x > 0), we only consider the right-going solutions of H s+p given by (B10) The discrete ABSs can be determined by the condition det M = 0, where the matrix M is defined as where we used the notation Z = 2mH δ /k F . At the next step, we calculate the Josephson current using Furusaki-Tsukada's formula 122 by considering the incoming electrons from the left side, All the coefficients can be found from the same boundary conditions given by Eq. (B10). The Josephson current is given by 122 where r eh σσ (iω n ) and r he σσ (iω n ) are obtained by the analytical continuation E → iω n of r eh σσ (E) and r he σσ (E). The Matsubara frequency ω n is defined as ω n = πk B T (2n + 1) for n = 0, ±1, ±2 • ••, and Ω n = ω 2 n + ∆ 2 0 . Here, we work in the low temperature limit and neglect the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap.