The design of artificial vortex pinning landscapes is a major goal towards large scale applications of cuprate superconductors. While disordered nanometric inclusions have shown to modify their vortex phase diagram and to produce enhancements of the critical current 1,2 , the effect of ordered oxide nanostructures remains essentially unexplored. This is due to the very small nanostructure size imposed by the short coherence length, and to the technological difficulties in the nanofabrication process. Yet, the novel phenomena occurring at oxide interfaces open a wide spectrum of technological opportunities to interplay with the superconductivity in cuprates. Here we show that the unusual long range suppression of the superconductivity occurring at the interface between manganites and cuprates affects vortex nucleation and provides a novel vortex pinning mechanism. In particular, we show evidence of commensurate pinning in YBCO films with ordered arrays of LCMO ferromagnetic nanodots. Vortex pinning results from the proximity induced reduction of the condensation energy at the vicinity of the magnetic nanodots, and yields an enhanced friction between the nanodot array and the moving vortex lattice in the liquid phase. This result shows that all-oxide ordered nanostructures constitute a powerful, new route for the artificial manipulation of vortex matter in cuprates. The discovery of the metallic state at the interface between LAO and STO While the induced spin polarization in the cuprate is probably at the origin of the exotic proximity phenomena observed at these interfaces In this paper, we examine the use of the long range suppression of superconductivity occurring at the interface between cuprates and manganites to design artificial pinning landscapes. In particular we show periodic pinning by an array of manganite magnetic nanodots in YBCO layers of nanometric thickness. Periodic pinning by (sub)micrometric antidots (holes) was shown in YBCO An array of circular shaped (100 nm diameter) magnetic dots was defined in 25 nm thick manganite (LCMO and LSMO) layers by electron beam lithography (Figure The Tc of the YBCO films on the nanodot arrays (measured from the resistive transition) was not significantly depressed as compared with the single layer one (Figure From the inspection of that Figure, it is clear that the matching effects are relatively more pronounced the lower the temperature and the lower the current density, which indicates that the periodic pinning effects are maximized in the vortex liquid phase. Notice also that the matching effects are stronger the smaller vortex velocity, and that for a given vortex velocity range, the velocity decrease at matching is similar regardless of the temperature and applied current (Lorentz force). It is clear, then, that the periodic pinning effect can be viewed as a friction of the vortex lattice with the underlying dot array, which is maximized at the matching condition. We can rule out Ca diffusion and other forms of intermixing as the origin of the observed pinning phenomenon since scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) with atomic column resolution have shown that the interfaces are both structurally and chemically abrupt at atomic scale. As a result there is a distribution of vortex lengths (short vortices on the dots and long vortices out of the dots). Since vortex energy scales with vortex length, this could have an effect on pinning as previously proposed by Daldini and collaborators To learn about the magnetism state of the ferromagnetic manganite nanodots, magnetic force microscopy experiments were conducted on a patterned dot array (prior to the YBCO growth). Figure We propose that the long range suppression of the superconducting order parameter reported at these ferromagnet superconductor interfaces is at the origin of the observed pinning phenomenon To get further insight into the pinning mechanism we prepared samples with the same dots array and with oxygen depleted YBCO. The effect of oxygen outtake from YCBO is increasing the vortex anisotropy. This reduces the intensity of the native pinning strength and, more importantly, it provides a measure of the homogeneity of the pinning mechanism along the vortex line. The loss of correlation along the vortex line upon increasing anisotropy causes a vortex dimensional crossover, from 3D for fully oxygenated samples to quasi 2D for x=6.55 (when vortex correlation length is smaller than sample thickness) to pure 2D for x=6.35, close to the superconductor to insulator transition To quantitatively compare the intensity of the matching effects in the different samples, it is useful to plot the vortex velocity as a function of the current density (Lorentz force). This is done in Figure In summary, we have shown commensurate pinning in YBCO by an ordered array of manganite dots. By comparing the effect of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic dot arrays, we have shown that the pinning phenomenon has magnetic origin. The geometric corrugation effect caused by the thickness modulation of the superconductor as it grows on the manganite nanostructures has also a pinning effect although it is comparatively less intense than the magnetic contribution. The small remanence of the dots shown by the MFM observations rules out the dipolar coupling of the vortex current field to the stray fields of the vortices as the dominant pinning contribution. We conclude that pinning originates at the proximity suppression of the superconducting order parameter at the interface with the manganite, which as it is wellknown is due to the build-up of a spin polarization caused by the Mn-O-Cu superexchange interaction. Samples were grown on (001) SrTiO 3 single crystals by a high pressure (3.4 mbar) pure oxygen sputtering technique at high temperatures (900 oC) from stoichiometric target which produces good epitaxial growth of cuprates and highly ordered manganite cuprate interfaces Oxygen content of the YBCO was adjusted following a stability line of the pressure-temperature phase diagram Prior to MFM measurements, the tips were magnetized with an external field (500 Oe) in their axial direction. Magnetoresistance measurements were performed in a closed cycle cryostat equipped with a 4000 Oe electromagnet and in a Quantum Design 9T PPMS system equipped with a horizontal rotator. 