The Josephson effect in ballistic point contacts between single-band and multi-band superconductors was investigated. It was found that in the case of Josephson junctions formed by a single-band and an s ± -wave two-band superconductor as well as by a single-band and a three-band superconductor the junctions become frustrated, demonstrating the φ-contact properties. Depending on the ground state of a three-band superconductor with broken time-reversal symmetry (BTRS), the Josephson junction can have from one to three energy minima, some of which can be locally stable. We also study the behavior of a dc SQUID based on the Josephson junctions between singleband and multi-band superconductors. Some features on the dependences of the critical current and the total magnetic flux on the applied flux of a dc SQUID based on the Josephson point contacts between a single-band superconductor and an s ± -wave superconductor, three-band superconductor with BTRS and three-band superconductor without BTRS as compared to the conventional dc SQUIDs based on single-band superconductors were found. The results can be used as an experimental tool to detect the existence of multi-band structure and BTRS. One of the most efficient ways of obtaining information about the symmetry of the order parameter in unconventional superconductors is phase-sensitive techniques based on the Josephson effect in such superconducting systems. Armed with the hypothesis about a possible form of the Cooper pair wave function, we can theoretically predict specific aspects of the behavior of various Josephson systems based on unusual superconductors. These features form the basis for the technique known as Josephson interferometry. This technique involves the study of the magnetic response of a Josephson junction, current-phase relation for the Josephson junctions formed at grain boundaries and SQUID interferometry. Among the variety of the Josephson interferometry techniques, the latter is often the most useful. From a technical point of view, it is based on the study of the characteristics of a one-contact interferometer (a Josephson junction in a superconducting ring) or a dc SQUID (a SQUID ring with two Josephson junctions). In this geometry, one of the superconductors forming the junction has an isotropic swave symmetry of the order parameter, while the second one is an unusual superconductor with the symmetry of the order parameter to be revealed The recent discovery of a new class of high-T c iron-based superconductors The theory of stationary Josephson effect in ballistic point contacts (S-c-S contacts) formed by swave single-band superconductors has been developed in Ref. In this case the total current through the Josephson contact at any temperature T is given by the expression: Here χ is the phase difference between the first order parameter of the multi-band superconductor and the single-band superconductor, denotes the phase difference between i-th and the first order parameter of the bulk n-band superconductor, 0 ∆ is the energy gap of the single-band superconductor, i ∆ are values of the energy gaps of the n-band superconductor, ω is Matsubara frequency and Ni R are partial contributions of each band to the total resistance of the contact in the normal state. The temperature dependence of energy gaps in the n-band superconductor can be found by the numerical solution of the self-consistency equation ( ) where ij λ are the constants of electron interactions of the n-band superconductor, I is the imaginary unit. Let us make few comments regarding the phase differences i φ , which determine ground states of a n-band superconductor. For a bulk clean two-band (n = 2) superconductor the ground state is non-degenerate with 2 0 , respectively, depending on the character of the interband interaction (attraction or repulsion). As it was shown in Refs. 31 and 32 in the case of a three-band superconductor degree of the degeneracy of the ground state is determined by the values of the interband interaction coefficients and modules of order parameters. Within the microscopic description it was found that the phase differences of the order parameters 2 φ φ = and 3 , i N are density of states at the Fermi level for each of the bands. The selection of stable solutions corresponding to the frustrated or non-frustrated state is determined by the second variation of the energy of the three-band superconductor with the difference of the phases φ and θ . In order to simplify the analysis of the problem we make a few assumptions. Let the temperature T be equal to zero and assume that superconducting energy gaps 0 i ∆ =∆ =∆ are equal. These assumptions will help us to understand qualitatively the main features of the behavior of the Josephson system without the complex numerical solution of Eqs. ( And after integration over χ we find the energy of the Josephson junction ( ) As follows from Eqs. ( Ni I eR and the energy of Josephson junction The current-phase relation of this contact and the dependence of the Josephson energy on the phase difference χ is shown in Fig. 1 2 sin sgn cos cos sgn sin 2 2 2 2 and energy of the Josephson junction according to Eq. ( Several conclusions follow from Eqs. ( Secondly, the frustrated ground state corresponds to a non-zero phase difference (conventional contact, see. Fig. The behavior of the Josephson junction, which is formed by a single-band and a three-band superconductor, is much more complicated. First of all, this is due to the presence in the threeband superconductor of BTRS phenomenon, which leads to the frustration, namely the emergence of two ground states in the bulk three-band superconductor 2 φ φ = and 3 φ θ = . The values of the phase differences are determined by Eqs. ( and the Josephson energy is, according to Eq. ( To investigate the properties and characteristics of the Josephson junction, the phase differences φ and θ can be chosen arbitrarily, since it is always the possible to select such values of the coupling constants ij λ , that satisfy Eqs. ( Moreover, the dependence ( ) E χ clearly indicates that the Josephson system with a three-band superconductor in the frustrated ground state with 0.6 = behaves like a φ-contact. We also found that such contact with the ballistic conductivity formed by a single-band and a three-band superconductor with BTRS has two local minima on the dependence ( ) E χ in addition to the global minimum (Fig. As can be seen, the phase diagram is divided into sectors according to the number of energy minima of the Josephson junction. Depending on the values φ and θ the number of minima changes from one to three. For each of eleven sectors (I-XI) the position of the minima is given by the expressions in Appendix A. However, the most notable feature of the Josephson contact with the ballistic conductivity formed by a single-band and a three-band superconductor is much wider variety of the states in comparison with a similar system in the dirty limit (Fig. It is well-known that if one or more of Josephson junctions are included in a superconducting ring, there arise a number of remarkable features related to macroscopic quantum interference phenomenon. In this section we consider these effects in a dc SQUID -a system of two Josephson point contacts that are closed to an s-wave-band and a multi-band superconductor (fig. where Φ is the total magnetic flux through the system and 0 Φ is the magnetic flux quantum. Recall that i φ denotes the phase difference between the i-th and the first order parameter of the n-band superconductor and defines its ground states. Quantization condition ( 1 2 where 1 I и 2 I are currents flowing through the contacts, e Φ is the external magnetic field, 1 L and 2 L are the inductance of each branch of the dc SQUID. These inductances can be , where L is the total dc SQUID ring inductance ( ) ( ) where the currents i , 1 i and 2 i are expressed now in units of the first-band critical current (1) 1 c I of the multi-band superconductor without taking into account of the interband interactions for the first point contact (fig. where ( ) j Ni R are partial contributions of each band of the multi-band superconductor to the normal resistance of the j -th contact. Eqs. ( , J E χ χ is an expression for the total energy of the Josephson point contacts of the dc SQUID ( ) ( ) Let us begin the investigation of the dc SQUID behavior by considering its energy as a function of the phase difference 1 χ and 2 χ , which depends on the applied magnetic flux. Unless otherwise stated, for the sake of simplicity in the following we will consider symmetric a dc SQUID with identical point contacts Fig. The most interesting features emerge for a dc SQUID based on a BTRS three-band superconductor. At zero magnetic flux there is only a shift of the position of the global minimum of energy of the dc SQUID from the zero point 1 2 0 χ χ = = (Fig. In this case the problem of finding the function is equivalent to the problem of determining the maximum of the function ( ) ( ) ( ) taking into account the quantization condition i χ and ( ) i χ are the dimensionless current-phase relations defined by Eq. ( qualitatively agrees with the similar characteristic for a SQUID based on singleband superconductors (see Fig. is the same for both ground states of a bulk three-band superconductor (Fig. (Fig. The incorporation of asymmetry of the critical currents of the Josephson point contacts naturally leads to an asymmetry of dependencies (fig. 1 Let us now consider the S-states of a dc SQUID, i.e. the dependencies of the total magnetic flux through the loop on the external magnetic flux for zero bias current 0 i = . Assuming the critical currents of the Josephson point contacts equal, the dc SQUID can be replaced with the equivalent rf SQUID with a phase difference rf χ at the contact. This phase difference is related to the phase differences 1 χ and 2 χ of the dc SQUID through the relations where χ ∆ is a certain parameter, which can be found by summing Eqs. ( and Eqs. ( The value of the parameter χ ∆ depends on what superconductors are in contact in the dc SQUID. If the dc SQUID is formed by Josephson junctions between single-band superconductors, then in the interval For a system of Josephson junctions between a single-band and a two-band superconductor with s ± -wave symmetry of the order parameter For a three-band superconductor the parameter χ ∆ depends on φ and θ which define the ground states of a bulk three-band superconductor. In this case parameter χ ∆ can be found only by numerical solution of Eqs. ( This equation is transcendental, thus its solutions, namely the functions ( ) rf e χ χ can be found numerically only. Solving Eq. ( A similar situation occurs for a dc SQUID based on a BTRS three-band superconductor. Figure Therefore, the presence of the S states in a dc SQUID can be regarded as a kind of necessary condition for the possible existence of multi-band superconductivity and the realization of BTRS phenomena in such multi-band superconductors. In summary, we have studied the properties of Josephson systems based on point contacts with ballistic conductivity formed between a single-band and a multiband (two-and three-band) superconductor at zero temperature. The ballistic Josephson point contact between a single-band and an s ± -wave superconductor is frustrated, has two ground states, and thus demonstrates the properties of a φ-contact. If the Josephson junction is formed by a single-band and a three-band superconductor with BTRS, such a contact may have two different current-phase relations, also demonstrating the φ-contact properties. Furthermore, depending on the ground state of the threeband superconductor with BTRS, the Josephson junction can have from one to three energy minima. These minima can be either all stable in the global sense (three-fold degeneracy of the ground state) or only one of them can be globally stable. For a three-band superconductor, which is characterized by the absence of BTRS, the Josephson junction has qualitatively the same properties as the contact with an s ± -wave two-band superconductors, it is a frustrated (two-fold degenerate) φ-contact. It was found that in comparison with the Josephson junction with a diffusive conductivity, the ballistic junction between a single-band and a three-band superconductor can demonstrate a significantly wider variety of states with additional local or global energy minima. We also considered the behavior of a dc SQUID based on the Josephson junctions formed by a single-band and a multi-band superconductor. We found the differences in the characteristics of dc SQUIDs (the dependences of the critical current and the S-state) constructed of an s±-wave superconductor, a three-band superconductor with BTRS and a three-band superconductor without BTRS as compared with conventional dc SQUID based on single-band superconductors. The above features can be used to detect the presence of a multi-band structure in superconductors. Moreover, in the case of a three-band superconductor these results can help to detect BTRS. This work was supported by a grant from the DKNII (M/231-2013) and a grant from the BMBF (UKR-2012-028). One of the authors (Y.Y.) was supported by a grant from the RSF No. The phase diagram in Figure 