Nonlinear electrical effects in superconducting S -c -S contacts, including the spectroscopy of electron-phonon interactions (EPI) in these systems, and the recovery of the EPI function from experimental data are discussed. The effect of a magnetic field on the current-voltage characteristics (I-V curves) and their derivatives for ErN i2B2C point contacts (PC) with d ≥ ξ (where d is the diameter of the PC and ξ is the coherence length) is studied. It is found that in zero magnetic fields and in near-critical fields, when the size of the superconducting gap can be neglected, the position of the peaks in dV /dI coincides with the peaks in the Yanson EPI spectra. In low fields the peaks are shifted toward lower energies and in intermediate fields, the peaks split. For PC with diameters greater than or on the order of the coherence length, the relative size of the negative phonon contribution to the excess current is considerably greater than in ballistic contacts. This leads to substantial suppression of the high-frequency peaks in the spectra for the superconducting state. In order to recover the EPI function from these spectra it is necessary to correct their intensities at high energies. For dirty N bSe2 and N b point-contacts with d ≥ ξ, which have no phonon features in the second derivative of the I-V curve in the normal state, the EPI can be reconstructed from the superconducting state. In ballistic point contacts, an electron passing through the short joining the metallic electrodes acquires an energy eV from the applied voltage. At any point in its trajectory it can lose excess energy and emit a nonequilibrium phonon. If this occurs in the immediate vicinity of the short, then there is a fairly high probability that the electron will return to the electrode from which it emerged. In this case, the resistance of the pointcontact (PC) is supplemented by an additional nonlinear contribution. Although only a small fraction of the electrons are scattered on nonequilibrium phonons in the neighborhood of the short and only some of these scattered electrons turn back, the deviation from Ohm's law owing to the high current density (∼ 1 • 10 8 A/cm 2 ) in the constriction can be very substantial and can approach ten percent. The main task of Yanson PC spectroscopy is the study of this nonlinearity, since the second derivative of the I-V curve of a PC in the normal state is proportional to the electron-phonon interaction (EPI) function G pc (ω) The distance over which most of these electrons lose excess energy is referred to as the energy relaxation length and depends strongly on the applied voltage. The minimum energy relaxation length is attained when the energy of an electron is comparable to or exceeds the maximum possible energy of a phonon at the edge of the spectrum. If one or both of the electrodes forming a pointcontact is superconducting, then an additional transport channel owing to the presence of excess current shows up in the PC conductivity through the constriction. When the voltage on the contact is considerably higher than the superconducting gap, and when all the nonlinearities in the I(V ) curve are taken into account, the current can be written in the form Here δI N ph (V ) is the nonlinearity owing to the EPI in a normal PC and is the basis of Yanson spectroscopy (see Eq. ( and, finally, δI S ph (V ) is the negative contribution to the excess current owing to collisions of nonequilibrium phonons with Andreev electrons (i.e., quasi-electrons, during the process of electron-hole conversion). Because of these collisions, the number of Andreev electrons is reduced, and this leads to a drop in the excess current. For the excess current of an S -c -S contact we have Here v is the velocity of the electrons averaged over the Fermi surface. On comparing this with Eq. ( i.e., it is small compared to the bias-independent excess current. The relative smallness of this contribution is caused by the ballistic character of the PC, since the probability of inelastic scattering of nonequilibrium phonons on Andreev electrons depends on their mutual concentration. The maximum concentration coincides with the region of maximum current density and falls off rapidly with distances from the constriction. Thus, in ballistic contacts the volume for generation of the phonons that form the PC spectrum in the normal state is close to the volume within which the spectrum owing to the suppression of the excess current is formed. Because of this, the EPI functions recovered from the characteristics of these contacts in the normal state are extremely close to the EPI functions obtained from the excess current (see Figs. 2, 5 and 6 in Ref. If the condition that the contact diameter should be small compared to the coherence length is not strict, i.e., d ≤ ξ 0 , then the EPI spectrum recovered from the excess current for a PC with an amorphous core will have a shape close to the spectrum for a ballistic contact in the normal state. Condition The influence of antiferromagnetic ordering on the superconducting gap in the nickel borocarbide superconductor ErN i 2 B 2 C has been examined in detail elsewhere is d=17 nm, where it is assumed that ρl ∼ = 10 11 Ω • cm 2 (Ref. Figure Figure Recall that for S-c-N point-contacts the peaks in the first derivative of the excess current are shifted relative to the EPI function by an amount somewhat less than ∆ (see Figs. 1 and 2 of Ref. In a magnetic field, the type-II superconductor is penetrated by vortices, i.e., normal (the core of a vortex) and superconducting regions coexist in the neighborhood of the contact. This problem has not been examined theoretically, and experimental data are shown here for the first time. Figure Further increases in the field to H = 1.04 and 1.69 T cause splitting of the peaks, which begin to gravitate toward the position characteristic of zero field. The nature of this behavior of the spectrum is not understood, but it does suggest that it would be extremely difficult to recover the EPI function for S -c -S point-contacts in a magnetic field. We have observed the strong effect of a magnetic field on the EPI spectra of Ta ballistic pointcontacts in the superconducting state before We now examine the spectrum in a field of H = 2.6 T , near the complete suppression of superconductivity, in more detail. The initial segment (the dotted line) up to about 13 meV is the second derivative of the I-V curve without changes. The next part is recovered from the second derivative of the I-V curve after subtracting the background and integrating (Fig. We have published data on EPI in N bSe 2 previously Here the coherence length is ξ 0 = 7.7 nm, or less than half the contact diameter. As a comparison, the diameter of the R N 0 = 1000 Ω point-contact examined in Ref. FIG. the normal and superconducting states. It can be seen that the second derivative in the normal state contains no peaks near the characteristic phonon energies; only some small bends show up. This behavior is typical of an amorphous material with disrupted long-range order. It can be assumed that in the region of the constriction the momentum mean free path is extremely short. Taking the ratio ρ 300K /ρ res ∼ 2 at the center of the contact and given that ρl = 3, 1 ÷ 3, 75 • 10 -12 Ω • cm 2 (Refs. Experiments with, for example, tin (Figs. 2, 3, 4 of Ref. At the same time, any scattering process for nonequilibrium phonons on Andreev electrons is efficient, since it leads to a drop in the excess current. Thus, the spectrum in the normal state will the formed directly at the boundary, in the region where the scatterer concentration is highest, while the superconducting contribution to the spectrum is formed in a larger, cleaner region of the superconductor. To summarize, we have the following: 1. If the PC spectrum in the normal state and the EPI function recovered from the superconducting contribution to the current are fundamentally different in shape, then they originate in geometrically different volumes of the point-contact. 2. Since the conversion length for Andreev electrons into Cooper pairs is the coherence length, for pointcontacts with d ≥ ξ 0 the superconducting contribution to the spectrum is formed in a volume smaller than the contact diameter. When items 1 and 2 are satisfied simultaneously, we are dealing with a nonuniform point-contact in which impurities and lattice distortions are concentrated near the boundary between the electrodes. The spectrum in the normal state is formed right at this boundary, while the spectrum in the superconducting state develops in a volume extending from the boundary by the coherence length, within which the crystal lattice is not distorted so much. When d ≥ ξ 0 , recovery of the EPI function from the superconducting contribution requires that the reduction in the relative intensity of the high-energy part of the phonon spectrum be taken into account and a correction for the decrease in the excess current must be included. 1. It has been found that for point-contacts with diameters larger than or on the order of the coherence length, the relative magnitude of the negative phonon contribution to the excess current is considerably greater than that for ballistic contacts. This leads to substantial suppression of the highfrequency peaks in the spectra for the superconducting state. In order to recover the EPI function from these spectra it is necessary to correct their intensities at high energies. For dirty N bSe 2 and N b point-contacts with d ≥ ξ 0 , which have no EPI spectrum in the normal state, the EPI functions have been recovered from the superconducting spectra. 2. The effect of a magnetic field on the current-voltage characteristics and their derivatives for S -c -S point-contacts of ErN i 2 B 2 C with d ≥ ξ 0 has been studied. It was found that in zero magnetic field and in fields close to those which suppress superconductivity, when the size of the superconducting gap can be neglected, the position of the peaks in the differential resistance in the first derivatives of the I-V curve coincides with the peaks of the Yanson EPI spectra. In low fields the peaks are shifted toward lower energies and in intermediate fields the peaks are split. This work was supported by the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine as part of project FTs 3-19. The author thanks A. V. Khotkevich for valuable consultations and comments.