The emergence of iron-selenide high-temperature (high-T c ) superconductors including A x Fe 2-y Se 2 (A = alkali metal) The spin-fluctuation, which is believed to be important to the superconducting pairing in iron-pnictides, comes from the Fermi-surface nesting between electron and hole pockets Previous first-principles calculations provided the exchange parameters Here, we formulate a new model, including the anisotropic biquadratic term which is found to be crucial. We show that by including biquadratic terms between the nearest neighbors, the experimentally observed magnetic properties can be accurately reproduced in different phases of A x Fe 2-y Se 2 , without the next-next-nearest-neighbor exchange constant J 3 . To obtain reliable effective exchange parameters, instead of the conventional energy mapping method, we propose a new convenient method based on non-collinear first-principle calculations. The new model gives the magnetic excitations, in the framework of density functional theory, which are in good agreement with the results observed by neutron scattering experiments. The present studies suggest that the highly anisotropic magnetic coupling originates from the non-negligible biquadratic term. Our results indicate that the localized model spin Hamiltonian with a biquadratic term well-describes the magnetic excitations in A x Fe 2-y Se 2 . The success of the Heisenberg spin Hamiltonian including the biquadratic term reveals that magnetic interactions in A x Fe 2-y Se 2 are dominated by the localized spin moments. We have established a direct relationship between the microscopic electronic structure and the observed spin excitations from the neutron experiments, which sheds light on the future study of the high-T c iron-based superconductors considering the biquadratic magnetic interaction within the local moment pictures. The effective exchange parameters in the model Hamiltonian could be obtained through energy mapping. In principle, the fitted J should be independent on the details of the fitting process. However, for the conventional energy mapping method, a different choice of the high energy magnetic states in the mapping process would probably lead to different exchange parameters in some cases. This is due to the inclusion of meta-stable high energy states which might lead to different effective exchange parameters. With the four-state energy mapping method To obtain reliable exchange parameters from our present method, we avoid using other high-energy magnetic states. Here we develop an efficient method based on non-collinear first-principles calculations. Our method computes the magnetic interaction only using states near the ground magnetic state, without including any other high energy states. It unambiguously addresses the effective exchange parameters and predicts the properties of the spin excitations accurately. It can deal with the contribution from both the Heisenberg term and the non-Heisenberg biquadratic term, based on efficient first-principles calculations. Without loss of generality, we compute the magnetic exchange parameters based on a low-energy collinear spin state. Without loss of generality, we assume that the spins are along either the z or -z directions. Let us focus on a spin-pair between spin 1 and spin 2. The effective spin Hamiltonian is written as where 11 and other E is the magnetic interaction between the spins without spin 1 and spin 2. It should be noted that 12 , QQ and other E are independent of the directions of spin 1 and 2 since the magnetic order is a collinear spin state. This is also the case for 3 Q and 4 Q . Then we considered four spin configurations of spin 1 and 2 (neglecting the spin-orbital coupling): (I) 1 0 If the angle  used in the calculation is small, then we can use the approximations 2 cos 1 2    and sin  . We then extract the contribution from the Heisenberg exchange coupling J 12 and the biquadratic term K. 2 If spin 1 is aligned antiferromagnetically with spin 2 in the collinear spin state, we obtain The total energies of the different spin configurations are obtained directly from first-principles calculations, while the magnetic moment of the spin with a bias angle  was stabilized with the help of an additional energy-penalty function. The method described above is a reasonable extension of the previous four-state energy-mapping analysis To fit the J 1a,1b and K 1a,1b in AFe 1.5 Se 2 , we used the two magnetic states, the ground magnetic state A-collinear AFM order, and another metastable magnetic state P-collinear AFM order (see the Supplementary Materials). By fitting J and K in these two magnetic orders, we solved for J 1a,1b and K 1a,1b exactly from first-principles calculations. We employed the plane-wave basis and the projected augmented wave method We used a plane-wave cutoff energy of 500 eV and a Monkhorst-Pack mesh First, we can accurately predict the experiment-fitted exchange parameters in KFe 1.5 Se 2 with the collinear-AFM (CAFM) order with an effective model (Fig. where J 1a,1b are the in-plane nearest-neighbor (NN) Heisenberg exchange coupling parameters, K 1a,1b are the anisotropic NN non-Heisenberg biquadratic coupling parameters, and J 2 is the next-nearest-neighbor (NNN) Heisenberg exchange coupling parameter. The summation in In order to compare with available results from experimental and theoretical studies, we use the relation J 1a' = J 1a + 2K 1a S 2 , J 1b' = J 1b -2K 1b S 2 The effective spin Hamiltonian and the obtained magnetic exchange parameters, allow us to give detailed descriptions of the spin wave and spin fluctuations. Due to the large effective magnetic moment in KFe 1.5 Se 2 (around 2.8 B  ), we assume S= 3/2 for each spin, and use the linearized Holstein-Primakoff (HP) transformation Our model also reproduces the spin dynamic structure factor (SDSF). It is another important physical parameter measured in the neutron-scattering experiments The spin dynamic spectral function along the high symmetry lines is shown in Fig. Finding the origin of the strong magnetic anisotropy is of great interest. The anisotropy of exchange parameters in KFe 1.5 Se 2 is so strong that the signs of NN exchange parameters J 1a ' and J 1b ' are reversed. The sign-change NN exchange parameters are regarded as a common feature of the CAFM order in both iron-pnictides and iron-selenides AFe 1.6 Se 2 with 55  iron-vacancy is another major component in the phase-separated A x Fe 2-y Se 2 sample, which is also proposed to be the parent compound of the superconductivity. Several neutron-scattering experiments have been conducted to study the magnetic properties of AFe 1.6 Se 2 , but the unexpected block-AFM order and the complex magnetic interactions make it difficult and time-consuming to experimentally address the unambiguous magnetic excitation and exchange parameters of AFe 1.6 Se 2 In conclusion, we have proposed a new method based on the non-collinear first-principles calculation to study the magnetic interaction and spin dynamics in iron-based superconductors A x Fe 2-y Se 2 , where the prominent non-Heisenberg biquadratic interaction is exactly included in our model. Our method obtains the Heisenberg interaction and non-Heisenberg biquadratic interaction by performing convenient calculations on a magnetic order, without using any other meta-stable magnetic orders. We find that after taking the biquadratic term into account in the effective Hamiltonian, the experimentally observed strong anisotropy in KFe 1.5 Se 2 is well described. By adopting our method, we can also accurately describe the spin wave and spin dynamic structure, which paves the way for the future experimental study of magnetic excitations in A x Fe 2-y Se 2 systems. Our present method based on the density functional theory, for the first time quantitatively captures the magnetic interaction and spin excitations in A x Fe 2-y Se 2 iron-based superconductors. It successfully builds the bridge between the theoretical Hamiltonian and the experimental observation of the magnetic interaction and the spin dynamics in iron-based superconductors, thus establishes unambiguously the local moment picture in A x Fe 2-y Se 2 systems. We believe that this method could be widely used in understanding magnetic interactions and spin dynamics of the iron-based superconductors like iron-selenide derived materials. ( ) x SS   , 2 cos( ) z SS   . Here, we assume that spin 1 aligns ferromagnetically with spin 2 in