We study theoretically the two Kitaev chains put in parallel, i.e., Kitaev ladder, coupled by Josephson junction. The π-junction between the Majorana bound states at the ends of the chains competes with the usual Josephson coupling along the chain, and this frustration leads to the modulation of the phase difference of the superconducting order parameter between the two chains. We show that this modulation gives the double degeneracy of the ground states, which can be manipulated by external electric and magnetic fields. Introduction.-The Kitaev chain Majorana states exhibit non-Abelian statistics In this paper, we theoretically study two parallel Kitaev chains, i.e., Kitaev ladder shown in Fig. Majorana bound states.-Figure where t is the nearest neighbor hopping strength, μ is the chemical potential, ∆ α = |∆|e iθα is the p-wave superconducting order parameter with the phase θ α , and λ is the coupling between these two chains. We put parentheses for the indices indicating chains to avoid confusions. The electron operators c α j can be decomposed into Majorana operators γ α i in the following way First, let us consider decoupled chains by setting λ = 0, and for simplicity, we choose particular set of parameters, |∆| = t > 0 and μ = 0, where the system is in a topological phase. The Hamiltonian is written by using Majorana operators as In the ground state, γ α 2j γ α 2j+1 form dimmers depicted by the gray bonds in Fig. Here, we considered the interchain tunneling process only between the parallel sites. We will treat it as a perturbation. In the dimer limit (Eq. ( (1) m with n, m = 1, 2N , i.e., the Majorana fermions participating in the dimer formation. For this coupling, there is a finite gap in the unperturbed Hamiltonian, and hence the second order perturbation theory can be applied. A straightforward calculation gives the perturbation energy -(λ 2 /16t) cos(θ 1 -θ 2 ) except a constant energy shift. This dependence on the phase difference is expected for the ordinary Josephson coupling in superconducting junctions. For γ (1,2) n with n = 1, 2N , there is no unperturbed Hamiltonian, and hence the degenerate perturbation theory must be applied. Picking up terms which includes only these Majorana fermions in Eq. ( (2) where we have introduced (complex) fermion operators as a = (γ 2N + iγ Of crucial importance is the dependence on the phase difference, which is the sinusoidal form. This should be contrasted to the anomalous Josephson coupling of Majorana states discussed in, for example, Refs. 1 . One can understand this form by looking at the last term in Eq. ( GL theory of the superconducting phases.-We consider the GL theory of the phases of the superconducting order parameter based on the above result. In a system with an infinite length, the Hamiltonian is written as where J = λ 2 /16t and ρ s is the superfluidity density, i.e., the stiffness of the phase. We introduce the center of mass phase θ and the phase difference φ as θ 1 = θ + φ/2 and θ 2 = θφ/2. The solutions can be obtained by the ordinary stationary equation for both fields θ and φ. Since it is obvious that θ takes a constant value, we set it to be 0. As for the phase difference φ, we obtain the sine-Gordon equation The boundary term in Eq. ( with the assumption that φ(x → -∞) = 0, φ(x → ∞) = ±2π, and (d/dx)φ(x → ±∞) = 0. This solution has a kink at x = x 0 which is fixed by the competition between the bulk term and boundary term in Eq. ( arising from the last term in Eq. ( is satisfied. Eventually, the solutions to Eq. ( where the ones with the plus sign in the curly bracket have the same sign at the two ends (see the left panel in Fig. where The distribution of the current is schematically depicted in the second row in Fig. Low energy physics.-Finally, we construct an effective theory describing the low energy physics in our model based on the above discussion. We introduce the following set of Pauli matrices; σ z i corresponding to the occupancies of a and b fermions and τ z i the sign of the phase difference φ at the left and right ends. The Majorana Josephson coupling is represented by where we set m = λ sin (|φ(0)|/2) (see Eq. ( where r is a positive value since the kink-antikink configuration is energetically favored as discussed (note that such a configuration corresponds to the matrix element with the same eigenvalues of τ z i ). r scales as exp (-L/ξ φ ). Another possible term comes from the overlap of the Majorana bound states at two ends of each chain. It is described by using complex-fermion operators a and b H w = w(iγ where w ∝ exp (-L/ξ M ). Equation ( We also consider an additional non-trivial term expressing the macroscopic quantum tunneling with the matrix element Γ as It describes quantum tunneling process connecting kinkand antikink-configurations. The total effective Hamiltonian H eff = H m + H r + H w + H MQT is in the form of 16 × 16 matrix and the energy eigenvalues can be obtained by the diagonalization. Here m is considered to dominate other parameters since both r and w decay exponentially in the length of the system. Figure The shaded area shown in the bottom of the graph shows the set of parameters r and Γ with which the doubly degenerate eigenvalues (shown in the yellow curve) have the lowest values, i.e., the ground state is degenerate. Note that r and w have different length scales ξ φ and ξ M , then, we expect that in a system with ξ φ > ξ M the magnitude of r exceeds that of w and the ground state is degenerate. For example, in the experiment found in Ref. Conclusion and outlook.-We investigate the role of modulation in the superconducting order parameter in two Kitaev chains put in parallel. When those are in the topological phase, single electron tunneling between Majorana states sitting at the ends is allowed and gives anomalous Josephson coupling, which results in spatially modulated superconducting phase. Due to this modulation, the ground state are doubly degenerate even though we take into account the overlap of Majorana wavefunctions. This double degeneracy can act as a qubit, and its manipulation is an important issue. As discussed above, the kink-antikink solutions don't have the net magnetic field, and hence cannot be biased by the uniform external magnetic field. However the local magnetic field applied only on one end of the system lifts the degeneracy. The other means to control the state is to put the potential difference V 12 (t) between the two chains, which modulates the phase of the tunneling matrix element Γ in Eq. ( 