We present a systematic investigation of the electrical, structural, and antiferromagnetic properties for the series of Ba(Fe1-x-yCoxRhy)2As2 compounds with fixed x ≈ 0.027 and 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.035. We compare our results for the Co-Rh doped Ba(Fe1-x-yCoxRhy)2As2 compounds with the Co doped Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 compounds. We demonstrate that the electrical, structural, antiferromangetic, and superconducting properties of the Co-Rh doped compounds are similar to the properties of the Co doped compounds. We find that the overall behaviors of Ba(Fe1-x-yCoxRhy)2As2 and Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 compounds are very similar when the total number of extra electrons per Fe/T M (T M = transition metal) site is considered, which is consistent with the rigid band model. Despite the similarity, we find that the details of the transitions, for example, the temperature difference between the structural and antiferromagnetic transition temperatures and the incommensurability of the antiferromangetic peaks, are different between Ba(Fe1-x-yCoxRhy)2As2 and Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 compounds. The high-temperature superconductivity in the FeAsbased compounds is closely related to the underlying structural and magnetic properties. The parent BaFe 2 As 2 compound exhibits structural and antiferromagnetic (AFM) phase transitions. Since the structural, magnetic, and superconducting properties are similar in compounds in which the rigid band approximation is valid, one can imagine that the doping effect plays a major role in the properties of the FeAs-based compounds while it has been argued that the aspects of the crystal structure, such as the pnictogen-Fe-pnictogen angle or the pnictogen height, may directly affect superconducting properties. Here, we present a systematic study of the electrical properties, lattice parameters, and structural and antiferromagnetic properties as a function of total doping level, x + y in Ba(Fe 1-x-y Co x Rh y ) 2 As 2 . We find that the details of the crystal structures, observed by the lattice parameters a and c, are different in Co122, Rh122, and CoRh122 but the superconducting transition temperatures are similar in all these compounds. We show that the structural/AFM transitions, the AFM ordering, and their phase diagrams are quite similar in Ba(Fe 1-x-y Co x Rh y ) 2 As 2 , Co122, and Rh122, indicating that the rigid band picture is applicable in explaining the properties of Co and Rh doubly doped Ba(Fe 1-x-y Co x Rh y ) 2 As 2 compounds. Single crystals of Ba(Fe 1-x-y Co x Rh y ) 2 As 2 with x ≈ 0.027 were grown out of a Fe/Co/Rh-As flux using conventional high-temperature flux growth. We fixed the content of the Co doping to be x ≈ 0.027 and varied the Rh content, y. First, we prepared Fe/Co/Rh-As precursors with a ratio of Fe:Co:Rh:As = (1 -xy) : x : y : 1, which were sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. The prepared precursor powders were heated following the temperature steps described in Ref. For neutron diffraction measurements, single pieces of crystals with a typical mass of approximately 200 mg were selected from each growth batch. We performed the diffraction measurements at the TRIAX triple-axis spectrometer at the University of Missouri Research Reactor. The beam collimators before the monochromator, between the monochromator and sample, between the sample and analyzer, and between the analyzer and detector were 60 ′ -40 ′ -sample -40 ′ -80 ′ collimation. We used fixed E i = E f = 14.7 meV and two pyrolytic graphite filters, one before the analyzer and one before the monochromator to eliminate higher harmonics in the incident beam. Measurements were performed in a closed-cycle refrigerator between room temperature and the base temperature, T ≈ 5 -7 K of the refrigerator. We define Q = (H, K, L) = 2π a Hî + 2π b K  + 2π c L k where the orthorhombic lattice constants are a ≥ b ≈ 5.6 Å and c ≈ 13 Å. Samples were studied in the vicinity of Q AFM = (1, 0, 3) in the (ζ, K, 3ζ) plane, allowing a search for incommensurability along the b axis ([0, K, 0], transverse direction) as found for Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 We present normalized electrical resistance data between T = 2 K and 300 K for selected Ba(Fe 1-x-y Co x Rh y ) 2 As 2 compounds in Fig. A closer inspection of Fig. Figure In order to study the temperature dependence of the AFM ordering, we plot transverse scans at three different temperature regimes and the corresponding order parameters in Fig. We summarize our results in the phase diagram of Ba(Fe 1-x-y Co x Rh y ) 2 As 2 compounds in Fig. Taken together, we have shown that the changes in the structural and antiferromagnetic phase transitions, suppression of their order parameters below T c , and the emergence of superconductivity in Ba(Fe 1-x-y Co x Rh y ) 2 As 2 compounds are very similar to those in Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 compounds whereas the fine details of those properties are slightly different between both materials. This clearly indicates that a simple rigid band picture works well in explaining the overall properties of electron doped superconducting BaFe 2 As 2 compounds including Ba(Fe 1-x-y Co x Rh y ) 2 As 2 compounds.