In theory of superconducting junctions, Green's function has an important role to obtain Andreev bound states, local density of states and Josephson current in a systematic way. In this article, we show how to construct Green's function on the surface of topological insulator following McMillan's formalism where the energy spectrum of electrons obeys a linear dispersion. For a model of superconductor (S)/ferromagnet (F)/normal metal (N) junction, we show that the generation of Majorana Fermion gives rise to the enhanced local density of states and pair amplitude of odd-frequency pairing. We also derive an extended Furusaki-Tsukada's formula of d.c. Josephson current in S/F/S junctions. The obtained Josephson current depends on the direction and magnitude of the magnetization. About 50 years before, McMillan has developed a theory of Green's function Although there exist other approaches to solve Green's function such as recursive technique, McMillan's formalism has its advantages and can make simplifications in certain problems, such as Josephson effect. It is also known that the surface Green's function can also be found by McMillan's method Before we start discussion, let us survey a history of this theory and its applications to superconducting junctions. The original work by McMillan The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, we will give an intuitive introduction of the approach of McMillan's theory. In section III, we present an example of constructing Green's function in an s-wave superconductor (S)/ferromagnet (F)/normal metal junction on TI surface. In Section IV, we will study the S/F/S Josephson junction on TI surface. A concluding remark is given in Section V. We start by reviewing some general aspects of McMillan's formalism. The retarded and advanced Green's functions are defined by They follow equations (2.4) The operator L = E -Ĥ acts on the Green's function from the left side in Eq.(2.3), while it does from the right side in Eq. (2.5) where the index m (n) is the quantum number and cn and dm are coefficients which will be determined in the framework of McMillan's theory. We can take the transpose on both sides of Eq.(2.7) To find the proper form of L x ′ T , we should use the fact kT x ′ ,y ′ ,z ′ = -kx ′ ,y ′ ,z ′ , where kx,y,z is a real space operator kx ′ ,y ′ ,z ′ = -i∂ x ′ ,y ′ ,z ′ . For example, if we have 2 by 2 Hamiltonian where σi=0,1,2,3 is Pauli matrix, ĤT x ′ is then expressed by For convenience, we define a "new" operator H as As seen from the 2 by 2 example of Eq.(2.10), one can find the general relation that the wave function Φ of H (x) and the wave function Ψ of ĤT (x) have the one-to-one correspondence or where kx, ky, kz are quantum numbers. And we know that the Hilbert spaces spanned by the eigenfunctions of H and Ĥ have one-to-one correspondence. Then, we have The Green's function of Eq.(2.14) corresponds to the elementary process Eq.(2.6) and the Green's function of Eq.(2.15) corresponds to the conjugate process Eq.(2.8). If the system has a translational invariance along yand z-directions, G R x, x ′ , E = G R ky ,kz x, x ′ , E e iky(y-y ′ )+ikz(z-z ′ ) is satisfied. Therefore, we must choose the solutions of Eq.(2.6) with quantum number (ky, kz) and those of Eq.(2.8) with (-ky, -kz). The specific components of Ψ (x) ΦT x ′ are determined by the type of Green's function we seek. If we consider the retarded Green's function, we need outgoing waves. In this case, Eq.(2.14) means that the impulse at x ′ will propagate and affect the field at x. On the other hand, Eq.(2.15) means that the impulse at x will propagate and affect the field at x ′ . If we consider the advanced Green's function, we need incoming waves. In this section, we show an example to construct McMillan's Green's function. Let us consider an planer s-wave superconductor (S)/ferromagnet (F)/normal metal (N) junction on the surface of TI. The Dirac-type Hamiltonian is given by where h(kx, ky) = v f (ky σx -kx σy) -μ. σi=x,y,z is the Pauli matrix in the spin space and μ is the chemical potential. The pair potential ∆ is given by ∆ 0 Θ(-x) and the Hamiltonian has a translational invariance in the y-direction. Throughout this paper, we set = 1. The exchange field in F region is M = i=x,y,z m i σi Θ (x) Θ (L -x). For an elementary process, we solve four eigenvectors Â1 e ik + x+ikyy , Â2 e -ik -x+iky y , Â3 e -ik + x+iky y and Â4 e ik -x+iky y with ) where and For the conjugate process, we have with h(kx, ky) , B3 e -ik + x ′ -ikyy ′ , and B4 e ik -x ′ -ikyy ′ , with The wave functions ψ 1 (x), ψ 2 (x) ψ 3 (x), and ψ 4 (x) exhibit the processes in Figs.1(a), (b), (c) and (d), respectively and are given by ) ) .17) Substitute ψ i=1∼4 (x) and ψi=1∼4 x ′ into Eqs.(3.9) and (3.10), we can obtain and where we denote The Green's function must satisfy the boundary conditions obtained by integrating Eq.(2.14) at Since the right side of Eq.(3.28) is independent of space, we can immediately obtain By solving Eqs.(3.29) and (3.30), we can find Hence, the boundary condition becomes After solving this matrix equation, one can find The condition that III x=x ′ +0 =III' x=x ′ -0 is guaranteed by the following detailed balanced relations, ) Thus, we have solved the retarded Green's function and The advanced Green's function is analytic in the lower complex-plane G A x, x ′ , E -iδ . We can use incoming waves to construct it. The corresponding processes are shown in Figs. In the above, φ 1 (x), φ 2 (x), φ 3 (x), and φ 4 (x) are given by and φ1 (x), φ2 (x), φ3 (x), and φ4 (x) are given by Substitute φ i=1∼4 (x) and φi=1∼4 x ′ into Green's function, we have ) with and with The boundary conditions of Green's function becomes, Following the same procedure as in the case of calculating retarded Green's function, we can find The detailed balanced relations are given by Then, the advanced Green's function is obtained by and We first focus on the local density of states (LDOS) ρ on the edge of superconductor x = 0. Here, ρ is given by The obtained results are shown in Fig. Then, we write down the Matsubara Green's function explicitly The pair amplitudes at x = x ′ < 0 are given by We calculate the spatial dependence of the odd-frequency pair amplitude F odd ↑↑ . It is known that odd-frequency pairing is generated by spin-rotational symmetry breaking or translational symmetry breaking In this section, we derive a Josephson current. We treat S/F/S junction where the left S side is chosen as the same as that in the previous section. The phase difference between the left and right S side is φ so that the pair potential in the right S is given by ∆e -iφ . The derivation of the Josephson current is performed in the left S side. We start from the continuity equation [30] with and Then, we make the wick rotation so that the time becomes imaginary t → iτ . The operators can be expressed by Matsubara Green's function as For the positive frequency ωn > 0, we can obtain the Matsubara Green's function by analytical continuation E + iδ → iωn from the retarded Green's function We can find It is noted that ) we have the relations and e -iθ+ + e iθ-= 1 4 e iθ+ + e -iθ-= 1 4 Hence, quasiparticle current becomes The current which arises from the source term is given by Finally, we can obtain the total Josephson current J = Ĵx + Js In the same way, we obtain the Josephson current for the negative frequency region from the analytical continuation from advanced Green's function We sum Matsubara frequencies and wave vector ky. Then, we obtain the Josephson current The above equation is an extended version of Furusaki-Tsukada's formula for Josephson current on TI surface. The physical picture is that the Josephson current is carried via Andreev reflection which transfers (annihilates) Cooper pair. In the quasiclassical limit, with E, ∆ ≪ μ, we have Then, the resulting Josephson current becomes We can derive that the contribution from negative frequencies are the same as that from positive frequencies in the above equation. Then we have In Fig. In this article, we have shown how to construct Green's function in superconducting hybrid systems on the surface of topological insulator following McMillan's formalism where the energy spectrum of electrons obeys linear dispersion. We have obtained not only retarded Green's function but also advanced one. We have applied this theory for a model of superconductor/ferromagnet/normal metal (S/F/N) junction. When the magnetization is along x-axis, the local density of states is highly asymmetric around zero energy. On the other hand, when the magnetization is along z-axis, we have obtained a prominent zero-energy peak due to the generation of Majorana fermion. At the same time, pair amplitude of odd frequency pairing is also enhanced. We have also derived an extended Furusaki-Tsukada's formula of d.c. Josephson current in S/F/S junctions. It is remarkable that a compact formula of Josephson current is obtained. When the magnetization is along x-axis, Ic has the Ambegaokar-Baratoff type temperature dependence for low transmissivity junction. On the other hand, when the magnetization is along the z-axis, we can obtain Kulik-Omelyanchuk type behavior of Ic due to the presence of prominent zero-energy states by Majorana fermion. Before closing this article, we mention about the relation between the present theory and the quasiclassical Green's function theory. It is an efficient way to study proximity effect based on quasiclassical Green's function theory as far as we are focusing on the low energy excitation. Although there have been many good review articles of quasiclassical Green's function theory 