We investigate the thermoelectric properties of a quantum dot coupled to ferromagnetic and superconducting electrodes. The combination of spin polarized tunneling at the ferromagnetic-quantum dot interface and the application of an external magnetic field that Zeeman splits the dot energy level leads to large values of the thermopower (Seebeck coefficient). Importantly, the thermopower can be tuned with an external gate voltage connected to the dot. We compute the figure of merit that measures the efficiency of thermoelectric conversion and find that it attains high values. We discuss the different contributions from Andreev reflection processes and quasiparticle tunneling into and out of the superconducting contact. Furthermore, we obtain dramatic variations of both the magnetothermopower and the spin Seebeck effect, which suggest that in our device spin currents can be controlled with temperature gradients only. The quest for energy harvesting devices that efficiently convert waste heat into electricity has been intense in the last decades. It has been argued that low dimensional systems offer better performances due to interfacial boundary scattering of phonons On the other hand, even if the Seebeck coefficient is large a heat current inevitably accompanies a temperature gradient. The efficiency of the thermoelectric process is then determined by the dimensionless figure of merit ZT , which accounts for the relation between the thermoelectric power factor and the heat or thermal conductance Recent proposals suggest that electron-hole symmetry can be broken if the superconductor is put in proximity of ferromagnetic contacts #" $" FIG. faces Here, we propose to insert a quantum dot between the ferromagnetic source electrode and the superconducting drain contact as in Fig. The hybrid system considered here is also interesting for fundamental reasons. It is well known that at low bias voltages the dominant transport mechanism at the interface between a metal and a superconductor is an electron-hole conversion known as Andreev reflection Yet, we We also explore spin caloritronic effects that arise when a spin polarized current is generated under the influence of a temperature bias The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we explain the theoretical model. The magnetization in the ferromagnetic contact leads to spin-dependent tunneling rates for the ferromagnetic-quantum dot coupling. We discuss both the electric current and the heat flux driven by voltage or temperature biases and separate the contributions from Andreev processes and quasiparticle tunneling. In Sec. III we give the transport coefficients (electric, thermoelectric, electrothermal and thermal conductances) that characterize the linear transport regime. We show that the cross responses obey the Kelvin-Onsager relation. We also derive appropriate expressions for the charge thermopower, the figure of merit and the spin Seebeck coefficient. Section IV contains our main results. We discuss the dependence of the thermoelectric effects for both charge and spin on the spin polarization, the applied magnetic field and the external gate voltage. Finally, we summarize our findings in Sec. V. The F-D-S device is comprised of the left ferromagnet (F) with a polarization p (|p| ≤ 1), a single-level quantum dot (D), and the right superconductor (S) as depicted in Fig. where describes the charge carrier with momentum k, spin σ with a magnetization M σ along the given axis (say z) in the left ferromagnet and describes the right superconductor with an order parameter given by the energy gap ∆. We neglect the phase of ∆ and treat it as a real constant. This is valid with a suitable gauge transformation when we consider an equilibrium superconductor. In what follows, we set ∆ = 1 as an energy unit. In the dot Hamiltonian the spin-degenerate energy level can be split when the magnetic field is on, i.e., ε dσ = ε d + σ∆ Z with Zeeman splitting ∆ Z . Scattering at the ferromagnet creates spin-dependent scattering phases that to first order induce an additional effective Zeeman splitting and can be included into ∆ Z We ignore spin-flip scattering (see, however, Ref. where the last term corresponds to the Joule heating. Applying the nonequilibrium Keldysh-Green formalism where is the Fermi-Dirac distribution with the applied voltage V = V F -V S and the electrode temperature T α = T + θ α (T : background temperature, θ α : thermal bias). For definiteness, we drive only the F lead assuming that the right superconductor is at equilibrium (V S = θ S = 0) and take the Fermi level as the energy reference (E F = 0). Similarly, the heat current is given by In Eq. ( In other words, we have Importantly, this property causes the Andreev heat current to vanish in the linear response regime when we apply a small voltage bias (i.e., no Peltier effect). Note that the factor 2 in Eq. ( The key quantities to determine the transmission probabilities T σ A and T σ Q are the dot retarded Green's functions G r ij (ε) where 2 × 2 submatrices in the first block (i, j = 1, 2) and the second block (i, j = 3, 4) correspond to the electron spin-up and spin-down spaces respectively, with subscripts 1, 3 denoting electron sectors and 2, 4 referring to hole parts. The whole matrix in Eq. ( with The remaining Green's functions follow from Eqs. ( 11 (-ε). We have used the wide band approximation, i.e., energy-independent tunnel couplings, being the spin-averaged coupling constant to each lead α = F, S. The spin dependence in Γ F σ arises from the nonzero magnetization in the ferromagnet, where is the ferromagnet density of states. We wish to point out that for p = ∆ Z = 0 the spin dependence of the system disappears as we would end up with a normal-quantum dot-superconducting setup One can write the spin-resolved Andreev transmission in terms of Green's functions, viz. with which the Andreev charge A currents can be defined via Eq. ( with the aid of Eqs. ( where If either p = 0 or ∆ Z = 0, the spin symmetry is generally broken, i.e., , leading to a spin-polarized net current. Nevertheless, focusing on Andreev transport only, the inherent particle-hole symmetry strictly satisfies T ↑ A (ε) = T ↓ A (-ε) even in nonequilibrium conditions. Then, it follows from Eqs. ( with the property f F (-ε ± eV ) = 1 -f F (ε ∓ eV ) (recall that we take E F = 0). Therefore, in our model the subgap Andreev process always prohibits the generation of spinpolarized currents. Spin dependence of the crossed Andreev transport can be observed in the strong coupling regime with a multiterminal device In stark contrast, I s Q and J s Q are generally nonzero with a finite p or ∆ Z [see Eqs. ( and for the heat As can be seen in Eq. ( with the corresponding transport coefficients given by where ∂ ε f denotes the energy derivative of Fermi function at equilibrium (V α = θ α = 0). Equation ( due to microreversibility. This also implies X σ (p, ∆ Z ) = X σ(-p, -∆ Z ) for all the kinetic coefficients X = G, L, R, K. Furthermore, we obtain R σ Q = T L σ Q as one can easily verify from Eqs. ( Employing Eqs. ( and the spin-polarized counterparts as where we have used the symmetry relation The linear responses found above completely determine the thermoelectric properties of our device. Let us first focus on the charge transport. The Seebeck coefficient or thermopower is defined as the generated voltage from thermal gradients in open circuit conditions I c = 0. This can be easily evaluated from Eq. ( The efficiency of the thermoelectric conversion can be quantified by the figure of merit ZT . We first calculate the thermal conductance with the help of Eqs. ( Then, we find where we have used Eq. ( From these expressions one can determine the spin Seebeck coefficient which measures the generated spin voltage from the application of a temperature difference θ when both the charge and the spin currents vanish. These conditions give a constraint for the applied voltage. Alternative definitions of S s are also possible Another important aspect of spin transport is the dependence of the thermopower on the magnetization or the applied magnetic field The above formulas are general and can be applied to a variety of situations. In this section, we consider the case where the dot is more strongly coupled to the superconducting lead (Γ F = 0.1∆ and Γ S = 0.5∆). This amplifies the effects discussed below but qualitatively the physics remains the same if the opposite situation (ferromagnetic dominant case) is considered. Our results rely on the breaking of particle-hole symmetry. This can be done in three different ways. First, the gating of the quantum dot energy level ε d away from the Fermi energy breaks the symmetry and thus creates a finite thermoelectric signal. Second, the Zeeman field splitting ∆ Z can enhance the effect of gate potential if one of the spin split levels is shifted out of the gap region. Third, the spin polarization p of ferromagnetic lead causes an asymmetry in the electron and hole transport in case of spin-split dot levels. Figure The case of nonzero magnetization is illustrated in Fig. The thermoelectric figure of merit calculated from Eq. ( The spin Seebeck coefficient S s is calculated from Eq. ( We have investigated the thermoelectric properties of a ferromagnetic-quantum dot-superconducting device in the presence of an external magnetic field applied to the dot. We have shown that the device develops high values of the thermopower from the combined effect of spin polarized tunneling, Zeeman splitting and tuning of the dot level. Importantly, the thermoelectric conversion is efficient since the dimensionless figure of merit reaches values as high as 6. Moreover, the spin Seebeck effect exhibits relevant changes as a function of the gate potential and the magneto-Seebeck coefficient becomes sensitive with reversals of the magnetization direction or the applied magnetic field. Our predictions can be tested with today's experimental techniques. The quantum dot can be formed inside a carbon nanotube attached to ferromagnetic and superconducting contacts. Another possibility is to use a nanowire deposited onto the ferromagnet and the superconductor Our work raises two important questions. First, what is the role of electron-electron interactions? Our theory assumes a single-level dot large enough that Coulomb repulsion is negligible. The results would also hold for strongly coupled quantum dots since in this case the charging energy U is smaller than the tunneling broadening and electronic interactions can be safely disregarded. However, small dots usually have large U and Coulomb blockade effects become dominant. It would be even possible to explore strongly correlated phenomena such as the Kondo effect 