We report the superconductivity of the CaSn 3 single crystal with a AuCu 3 -type structure, namely cubic space group P m3 ̅ m . The superconducting transition temperature T C =4.2 K is determined by the magnetic susceptibility, electrical resistivity, and heat capacity measurements. The magnetization versus magnetic field (M-H) curve at low temperatures shows the typical-II superconducting behavior. The estimated lower and upper critical fields are about 125 Oe and 1.79 T, respectively. The penetration depth λ(0) and coherence length ξ(0) are calculated to be approximately 1147 nm and 136 nm by the Ginzburg-Landau equations. The estimated Sommerfeld coefficient of the normal state γ N is about 2.9 mJ/mol K 2 . ΔC/γ N T C =1.13 and λ ep =0.65 suggest that CaSn 3 single crystal is a weakly coupled superconductor. Electronic band structure calculations show a complex multi-sheet Fermi surface formed by three bands and a low density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, which is consistent with the experimental results. Based on the analysis of electron phonon coupling of AX 3 compounds (A=Ca, La, and Y; X=Sn and Pb), we theoretically proposed a way to increase T C in the system. LnM 3 (Ln=Y and rare-earth elements, M=Pb, Tl, In, Ga, and Sn) compounds crystallized in a cubic AuCu 3 -type structure have attracted much attention due to their interesting physical properties, such as superconductivity, heavy fermion behavior, quantum critical point and so on. Herein, we have successfully grown the bulk single crystals of CaSn 3 for the first time and discovered that it shows superconductivity with T C =4.2 K. We have performed electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and heat capacity measurements to determine the superconducting parameters of CaSn 3 single crystal. Furthermore, electronic band structure calculations suggest a complex, multi-sheet Fermi surface formed by three bands. The calculated low density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level is almost consistent with the value derived from the small electron specific coefficient measured. Finally, based on the analysis of electron phonon coupling (EPC) of AX 3 compounds (A=Ca, La, and Y; X=Sn and Pb), we theoretically proposed a way to increase T C in the system. Single crystalline specimens of CaSn 3 were prepared through Sn-self flux. Ca pieces (99.99 %, Alfa Aesar) and Sn powders (99.99 %, Alfa Aesar) with mole ratio 1:28 were weighted and loaded into a 2 mL alumina crucible, which was sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. All were done in an Ar-filled glove box. The sealed quartz tubes were slowly heated to 800 o C for 24 hours, and dwelled for 24 hours, then slowly cooled down to 270 o C with 2 o C/h. Finally, the quartz tubes were inverted and quickly spun into a centrifuge to remove the excess Sn flux. More detail can be found in the Supporting information. Rectangular single crystals with shining surface were observed. The size was about 1.5*1.5*1 mm 3 . The single crystals were air-sensitive and thus they were kept inside the glove box until characterization. Such handling was necessary to avoid decomposition. Powder Xray diffraction (XRD) patterns were taken with Cu K α1 radiation (λ=0.15406 nm) using a PANalytical X'pert diffractometer at room temperature. Heat capacity and electrical transport properties were measured using the Quantum Design physical properties measurement system (PPMS-9T) and magnetic properties were performed by the magnetic property measurement system (MPMS-XL5). The electrical transport measurements were performed by a four-probe method to eliminate the contact resistance. The measurement of specific heat was carried out by a heat-pulse relaxation method on PPMS-9T. Electronic structures were obtained from first-principles density functional theory in the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) according to the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof. CaSn 3 shows a cubic structure with space group P m3 ̅ m , as present in Fig. where ρ 0 is the residual resistivity and R is a constant. The second term represents contributions from the electron-phonon interaction and Θ R is the Debye temperature. shows the resistivity under different magnetic fields. T C at different magnetic field is determined at a 50 % decrease from the normal-state resistivity value, and transition width is taken as the temperature interval between 10% and 90 % of the transition. A nearly linear relationship is obtained in the measured temperature range, which leads to a μ 0 H c2 (0) value of 1.79 T. The value of μ 0 H c2 (0) is lower than the Pauli-limiting field Expected within the same weak-coupling BCS theory, it is about 7.6 T for T C =4.2 K. which is usually used to calculate the upper critical field for a variety of intermetallic and oxide superconductors. The value of μ 0 H C1 (0) is about 125 Oe. In addition, we may estimate the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) , where the thermodynamic critical field 15 T, and the magnetic penetration depth λ(0) is found to be 1147 Å from λ(0)=кξ(0). McMillan formula: The EPC constant λ ep is estimated to be 0.65, assuming the Coulomb pseudopotential μ * =0.1, which supports the weakly coupling scenario. The determined superconducting parameters of CaSn 3 single crystal are listed in Table The enhancement of γ should be attributed to EPC with the factor of , where λ ep is derived to be ~0.5, which is qualitatively in agreement with the weakly coupling scenario proposed above. In order to understand the superconductivity of CaSn 3 single crystal, herein, we compare CaSn 3 superconductor with other AuCu 3 type alloys. As we know, researchers usually want to find a general rule to guide the exploration of the superconductors with higher T C in the AuCu 3 type alloys. For example, the oscillation of T C with respect to numbers of valence electrons n was suggested. Figure We summarize the N(E F ), lattice parameter a, and T C of the reported ASn 3 and APb 3 (A=Ca, Y, La) superconductors in Fig. where the 〈I α 2 〉, M α , and 〈ω α 2 〉 are the mean square EPC matrix element averaged over Fermi surface, atomic mass, and averaged squared phonon frequency of the αth atom in the unit cell, respectively. where X=Sn and Pb. Therefore, though La has a much larger atomic mass, when X is fixed, the T C differences between YX 3 and LaX 3 are small (less than 1 K), since the N(E F ) of those two are close. Meanwhile, when X is fixed, YX 3 and LaX 3 have higher N(E F ) than that of CaX 3 , which leads to a higher T C of YX 3 and LaX 3 . On the other hand, when X is changed from Sn to Pb, the EPC was strongly suppressed by the large increase of mass in the denominator of Eq. ( However, the T C of CaPb 3 (T C ~ 1 K) is only one fourth of that of CaSn 3 . According to the above analysis we can choose the suitable doping elements to increase N(E F ) or decrease the mass of X atom to enhance the EPC and hence increase T C . Moreover, compared to other cubic superconductors, such as MgCNi 3 (T C ~ 7 K) with N(E F ) of ~5 states/eV with N(E F ) of ~4 states/eV In summary, we have investigated the physical properties of CaSn The used crystals were cubic or rectangle shape, we decanted the crystals is about 270 o C, which is higher than the melting point of element Sn (231 o C) and decanting speed is very fast and can reach 1800 round/second within 10 seconds. We did the polishing before doing the measurements, so just little element Sn may be left on the surface. Figures: 