We report an investigation of the superconducting order parameter of the noncentrosymmetric compound PbTaSe2, which is believed to have a topologically nontrivial band structure. Precise measurements of the London penetration depth ∆λ(T ) obtained using a tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) based method show an exponential temperature dependence at T ≪ Tc, suggesting a nodeless superconducting gap structure. A single band s-wave model well describes the corresponding normalized superfluid density ρs(T ), with a gap magnitude of ∆(0) = 1.85Tc. This is very close to the value of 1.76Tc for weak-coupling BCS superconductors, indicating conventional fully-gapped superconductivity in PbTaSe2. Noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCS), where the crystal structure does not have a center of inversion, display unique properties. In the presence of antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC), the pairing state is expected to be a mixture of spin singlet and triplet components, leading to unusual properties, even when the pairing has the conventional electron-phonon mechanism 1,2 . For instance, evidence for nodal superconductivity has been found in the weakly correlated NCS Li 2 Pt 3 B and Y 2 C 3 Single crystals of PbTaSe 2 were synthesized using a chemical vapor transport (CVT) process Single crystals of PbTaSe 2 were characterized using both resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measurements, as shown in Fig. Fig. In the inset of Fig. The temperature dependence of μ 0 H c1 is shown in the main panel of Fig. The change of the London penetration depth as a func- The main panel of Fig. where ∆(0) is the superconducting gap magnitude in units such that k B = 1 To further characterize the superconducting gap symmetry of PbTaSe 2 , we also analyzed the normalized superfluid density ρ s (T ), which was converted from ∆λ(T ) using ρ s = λ(0) 2 /λ(T ) 2 and is displayed for sample #1 in Fig. where f (E, T ) = [1 + exp(E/T )] -1 is the Fermi distribution function and . . . FS represents an average over the Fermi surface where ∆ 0 (0) represents the gap magnitude at zero temperature, which is the only adjustable parameter in the fitting The fitting results are also plotted in Fig. Our results indicate that the bulk superconductivity of PbTaSe 2 is consistent with fully gapped, single band s-wave superconductivity with a gap size close to the weakly coupled BCS value. The nodeless bulk superconductivity is consistent with recent measurements of the specific heat, which could also be fitted with exponential behavior at low temperatures The fact that these results are consistent with single band s-wave superconductivity would suggest that the pairing in noncentrosymmetric PbTaSe 2 is dominated by the spin singlet component. Indeed the lack of singlettriplet mixing in PbTaSe 2 is somewhat of a puzzle, given the strong effect of the ASOC To summarize, we have investigated the superconducting order parameter of the noncentrosymmertic superconductor PbTaSe 2 . The change in the London penetration depth ∆λ(T ) of single crystals was precisely measured down to 0.1T c , which clearly shows an exponential temperature dependence below T c /3, indicating fully gapped behavior. Both ∆λ(T ) and its deduced superfluid density ρ s (T ) can be described by a single band s-wave model, providing strong evidence for a nodeless superconducting gap structure in PbTaSe 2 . A gap magnitude of ∆(0) = 1.85T c is obtained from fitting the superfluid density, which slightly larger than the weak coupling BCS value of 1.76 and indicates the absence of strong electronphonon coupling.