We present temperature dependences of the large and the small superconducting gaps measured directly by SnS-Andreev spectroscopy in various Fe-based superconductors and MgB 2 . The experimental ∆ L,S (T ) are well-fitted with a two-gap model based on Moskalenko and Suhl system of equations (supplemented with a BCS-integral renormalization). From the the fitting procedure, we estimate the key attribute of superconducting state -relative electron-boson coupling constants and eigen BCS-ratios for both condensates. Our results evidence for a driving role of a strong intraband coupling in the bands with the large gap, whereas interband coupling is rather weak for all the superconductors under study. In spite of the intensive theoretical and experimental studies stimulated by the recent discovery of Fe-based superconductors in 2008 Among the iron-based superconductors, the 1111 family have the simplest band structure Fortunately, the 1111 oxypnictide superconductors are good candidates for probing by multiple Andreev reflections effect We used LiFeAs single crystals with critical temperature T bulk C ≈ 16-17 K (the synthesis is detailed in In our studies, superconducting gaps and ∆(T ) temperature dependences were probed by Andreev spectroscopy of superconductor -normal metal -superconductor (SnS) contacts The multiple Andreev reflections effect occurring in ballistic SnS interface manifests itself as a pronounced excess current at low bias voltages (so-called foot area), and a series of dynamic conductance dips at certain positions V n = 2∆/en, where n is a natural subharmonic order; these features are called subharmonic gap structure (SGS). The gap value may be directly determined from the SGS positions over all the temperature range from 0 to T C with no dI(V)/dV fitting Figure At T = 4.2 K, dynamic conductance peculiarities located at |V 1 | ≈ 10.8 mV and |V 2 | ≈ 5.4 mV (marked in Fig. A two-band BCS-like superconducting system is described by a matrix of four electron-boson coupling constants λ ij = V ij N j , i, j = L, S (L index corresponds to the bands with the large gap, S index -to the bands with the small gap), where V ij is the interaction matrix element between i th and j th bands, N j is the normalstate density of states at the Fermi level in j th band From the fitting procedure, we directly estimate some important parameters of the two-gap superconducting state in GdO 0.88 FeAs, Sm 1-x Th x OFeAs, LaO 1-x F x FeAs, and Mg 1-x Al x B 2 , summarized in Table The dependence of the relative intraband coupling constant (for the small gap) λ 22 /λ 11 on critical temperature for 1111, Mg 1-x Al x B 2 , and LiFeAs is shown in Fig. In conclusion, we directly measured temperature dependences of the large and the small gap for oxypnictide superconductors GdO 0.88 FeAs, Sm 1-x Th x OFeAs, and LaO 1-x F x FeAs, for Mg 1-x Al x B 2 , and LiFeAs. The ∆ L,S are well-fitted with a two-band Moskalenko and Suhl system of gap equations within the RBCS model. We estimated relative values of electron-boson coupling constants, and the eigen BCS-ratios for both bands. Our data prove a strong intraband and a weak interband coupling in the studied two-gap superconductors. 