Superconductivity originates from pairing of electrons. Pairing channel on Fermi surface and pairing glue are thus two pivotal issues for understanding a superconductor. Recently, high-temperature superconductivity over 40 K was found in electron-doped FeSe superconductors including K x Fe 2-y Se 2 , Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 OHFeSe, and 1 monolayer FeSe thin film. However, their pairing mechanism remains controversial. Here, we studied the systematic evolution of electronic structure in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. The doping level is controlled precisely by in situ evaporating potassium onto the sample surface. We found that the superconductivity emerges when the inter-pocket scattering between two electron pockets is turned on by a Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface. The nematic order suppresses remarkably at the same doping and strong nematic fluctuation remains in a wide doping range of the phase diagram. Our results suggest an underlying correlation among superconductivity, inter-pocket scattering, and nematic fluctuation in electron-doped FeSe superconductors. Most iron-pnictide superconductors share the same Fermi surface topology. The Fermi surface consists of both hole and electron pockets at the center and corner of the Brillouin zone (BZ) and the inter-pocket scattering between the hole and electron pockets is believed to be critical for the high-T c superconductivity 1-3 . However, in electron-doped FeSe superconductors, the heavy electron doping pushes the hole bands well below the Fermi energy (E F ) and the Fermi surface consists only of electron pockets at the BZ corner 4-7 . Surprisingly, high-T c superconductivity emerges on such a Fermi surface. The T c is over 30 K in K x Fe 2-y Se 2 and Li 0.8 Fe 0.2 OHFeSe 8, 9 , and possible superconductivity over 65 K was observed in 1 monolayer (ML) FeSe thin film One effective way to understand a superconductor is to characterize its phase diagram. However, the doping level is difficult to control in electron-doped FeSe superconductors. Discrete phases are found in K x Fe 2-y Se 2 due to its intrinsic phase separation Recently, potassium evaporation has been found to be an effective method that can dope electrons into a sample The pairing of electron occurs through inter-pocket scattering between two electron pockets and the nematic fluctuation plays an important role in mediating the superconducting pairing. Evolution of band structure with electron doping. The doping process is divided into 15 fine steps (D0-D14). The doping dependence of the second derivative photoemission spectra is shown in Fig. Hybridization gap opens at the band crossing between the β and γ bands. When doping electrons into the system, bands shift downwards to higher binding energy as expected (Fig. The invariant bands are thus attributed to the undoped bulk state. Figure We then turn to the bands around the (π, π) point. The energy splitting between the β 1 and β 2 bands reflects the strength of nematic order. As shown in Fig. The superconducting gap emerges at D5, then increases to its maximum around 8 meV at D11, and finally decreases to around 7 meV at D14. The T c is characterized by the onset temperature of gap opening and the suppression of spectral weight at E F as shown in Figs. Considering that most microscopic models of iron-based superconductors are constructed in one-iron BZ Figure The Δ nem /k B T nem is 6.22 as determined by the Δ nem and T nem in undoped FeSe single crystal. The doping dependence of Δ nem /k B T nem is ignored. Similarly, the T c is calculated from the superconducting gap magnitude (Δ sc ) and the 2Δ sc /k B T c is 7.74 as determined from the data in Fig. The T nem decreases remarkably at the second Lifshitz transition but does not reach zero (Fig The Lifshitz transition of Fermi surface, the emergence of superconductivity and the suppression of nematic order all occurs at the same doping level, which suggests an underlying correlation among them. The SC e-e phase emerges when the inter-pocket scattering between two electron pockets is turned on by the second Lifshitz transition. This suggests that the inter-pocket scattering is crucial for the superconducting pairing in the SC e-e phase. Such inter-pocket scattering can be mediated by spin fluctuation as proposed in both weakand strong-coupling theories Due to its distinctive Fermi surface topologies, the potassium-coated FeSe single crystal serves as a model system for further experimental and theoretical studies. The SC h-e dome ends at the first Lifshitz transition where the central hole pocket vanishes implying that the inter-pocket scattering between hole and electron pockets is critical for the SC h-e phase. Furthermore, the SC h-e phase coexists with the nematic order and its superconducting dome is well beneath the nematic transition. This suggests that, unlike the SC e-e phase, the nematic fluctuation is absent above T c for the SC h-e phase due to the formation of long-range nematic order. Therefore, our result suggests possible different pairing mechanisms for the SC e-e and SC h-e phases in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal. The two superconducting phases (SC e-e and SC h-e ) represent two distinct superconducting pairing channels in iron-based superconductors. It is intriguing to further study how they interplay in iron-pnictide superconductors when both hole-electron and electron-electron inter-pocket scatterings exist on the Fermi surface. High quality FeSe single crystal was synthesized using vapor transport method 