Recent discovery of superconductivity in iron pnictides had attracted immense attention of the scientific community. The parent compounds were spin density wave (SDW) metals unlike the high-TC superconductors which were Mott insulators. In this present study, we synthesized single crystal of a new compound YbFe2As2 by using high temperature solution growth technique without flux. The YbFe2As2 single crystals had been systematically characterized by energy dispersive Xray analysis (EDAX). The presence of oxygen was found by EDAX on the surfaces of grown YbFe2As2 single crystals which had been kept in air ambience for few months. The measurement of magnetization (M) versus temperature (T) using SQUID at constant magnetic field (H = 100 Oe) for YbFe2As2 had revealed an occurrence of sharp slope change around 140 K which was the known SDW transition temperature for the parent compound BaFe2As2. An additional slope change had been observed around 40 K. M vs T data at H= 10000 Oe had exhibited paramagnetic behavior. Result of M versus H measurements for YbFe2As2 at 2 K had shown that the saturation had not been achieved at H = 80000 Oe. We had carried out magnetization measurements for oxygen adsorbed YbFe2As2 (YbFe2As2 : O2 ) and BaFe2As2 (BaFe2As2 : O2) for comparative study also. There was considerable interest in the recently discovered iron-based superconductors because the superconducting transition temperature was as high as 56 K and superconductivity arose from antiferromagnetic or spin density wave (SDW) metallic parent compounds Furthermore, there were reports of the co-existence of superconductivity and magnetism particularly in the under doped region Herein, we reported the synthesis of YbFe2As2 single crystals by using high temperature solution growth technique without flux. The grown single crystals had been systematically characterized by energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The magnetic characteristics of YbFe2As2 single crystals were performed by using SQUID. For comparative analysis, we had performed magnetic characteristic of oxygen adsorbed in YbFe2As2 and BaFe2As2 single crystals and the results were reported in detail. YbFe2As2 were synthesized by high temperature solution growth technique without using flux The sealed ampoule was placed in a programmable furnace and heated to 1300 ο C. Then it was cooled at 3 ο C per hour up to 95 ο C and again cooled at 50 ο C per hour up to room temperature. BaFe2As2 had been grown by high temperature solution growth technique using FeAs as self-flux In order to understand the chemical composition present in the as-grown YbFe2As2 single crystals, we performed the EDAX measurement. Fig. Oxygen adsorption on crystal surfaces was accompanied by an increase in the work function. Oxygen adsorption might cause some surface reconstruction and it could penetrate beneath the surface layer The magnetic properties of as-prepared YbFe2As2 : O2 single crystals were analyzed by means of SQUID measurements. Here, we also measured the magnetic properties for BaFe2As2 : O2 single crystals for the comparative analysis. Figs. 