The single crystal of ThCr 2 Si 2 -type BaPd 2 As 2 was successfully prepared by a self-flux method, and the crystal structure was characterized by X-ray diffraction method with the lattice parameters a = 4.489(2) Å and c = 10.322(3) Å. Bulk superconductivity below a T c (critical temperature) of 3.85 K was revealed in this compound by the measurements of resistivity, magnetic susceptibility and specific heat, and this T c is much higher than those of other isostructural Pd-based superconductors. Transition metal compounds have been widely studied due to their intriguing physical properties which usually originate from the strongly correlated d-electrons, especially for the search of high-T c (T c is critical temperature) superconductors Among the new high-T c family of iron-pnictide superconductors, the ternary parent compounds AFe 2 As 2 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba, etc.) belong to a common ThCr 2 Si 2 -type crystal structure, and they are spin density wave (SDW) semimetals at low temperature. Superconductivity can be induced after suppressing the SDW order by chemical doping, external pressure or internal crystal defects, for instance the Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 superconducts at 38 K Recently, Anand et al. prepared single crystals of APd 2 As 2 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba) by PdAs flux The single crystal of BaPd 2 As 2 samples were grown by a self-flux method. The starting materials of high-purity elemental Ba pieces, Pd and As powders were mixed together by a molar ratio of 1:2:2 (as stoichiometric BaPd 2 As 2 ), then placed into alumina crucibles and sealed in evacuated quartz tubes. The sealed tubes were slowly heated up to 1100 °C at a rate of 50 °C/h and kept at this temperature for 20 hours, then slowly cooled down to 800 °C at a rate of 2 °C/h. The furnace was then cooled down to room temperature. Shiny millimeter-size plate-like crystals were easily separated. We note that the molar ratio of the starting elements is the most crucial factor for the successful growth of ThCr 2 Si 2 -type BaPd 2 As 2 single crystals. The crystal structure of all samples was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) method on a PAN-analytical x-ray diffractometer with Cu-K  radiation at room temperature. The resistivity and specific heat were measured by a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS), and the magnetic susceptibility was measured with both field cooling (FC) and zero field cooling (ZFC) methods under a magnetic field of 5 Oe by a Quantum Design magnetic property measurement system (MPMS). The XRD patterns for the powders of crushed single crystals and the surface of a piece of single crystal were collected and presented in Fig. In Fig. The low temperature specific heat C p was also measured to further confirm the bulk superconductivity in BaPd 2 As 2 crystal. The data for C p /T versus T 2 are plotted in Fig. The specific heat jump determined from the data at T c yields the C e /T c = 1.41, which is close to the BCS value of 1.43 in the weak coupling limit. In conclusion, we have successfully grown the high quality BaPd 2 As 2 single crystal with ThCr 2 Si 2 -type structure, which is a type-II bulk superconductor with a T c of 3.85 K. 