Superconductivity in disordered systems close to an incipient localization transition has been an area of investigation for many years. It has been noted that in such highly disordered superconductors, anomalous spectral weight develops in their conductivity near and below the superconducting gap energy. In this work we investigate the low frequency conductivity in disordered superconducting NbN thin films close to the localization transition with time-domain terahertz spectroscopy. In the normal state, strong deviations from the Drude form due to incipient localization are found. In the superconducting state we find substantial spectral weight at frequencies well below the superconducting gap scale derived from tunneling. We analyze this spectral weight in the context of a model of disorder induced broadening of the quasiparticle density of states and effective pair-breaking. We find that although aspects of the optical and tunneling data can be consistently modeled in terms of this effect of mesoscopic disorder, the optical conductivity returns to the normal state value much faster than any model predicts. This points to the non-trivial interplay of superconductivity and disorder close to localization. The manifestation of superconductivity in systems close to a disorder-driven localization transition has been an area of investigation for many years, yet many even central topics are not understood. The electrodynamic response of such systems is a fundamental probe of their low-energy physics but wide-open issues exist here as well. The optical conductivity corresponding to the mean-field Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity was worked out in the context of the celebrated Matthis-Bardeen (MB) theory In this work we studied the low-frequency conductivity of strongly disordered superconducting NbN thin films close to the localization transition. In the normal state, strong deviations from the Drude form are found, which are indicative of incipient localization in these films. For medium disorder, the optical conductivity of the superconducting state is well-described by the MB formula. However, for higher disorder samples, additional lowenergy spectral weight forms in a region below that predicted by the BCS theory. For these samples, this energy is well below the scale of the gap determined by tunneling. We investigated this feature in the context of prevailing models and conclude that its onset is reasonably described by a model of pair breaking from mesoscopic disorder. However, discrepancies exist with the predicted shape of the conductivity in that in the most disordered samples, the conductivity recovers more quickly to the normal state values than predicted. As the particular form of the MB conductivity functional derives from a particular form of the BCS coherence factors, this difference may presage a transition to an insulating state with localized Cooper pairs. The low-frequency conductivity was measured with time-domain terahertz spectroscopy (TDTS) (See supplementary materials (SI)). The NbN used in this study consist of 60 nm and 120 nm epitaxial thin films that were grown by using pulsed laser deposition on (100)oriented MgO single crystalline substrates. Disorder in the NbN system can be tuned by varying the number of Nb vacancies in the crystalline NbN lattice As disorder is increased T c decreases monotonically down to the limit where it is destroyed at k F l of order unity. In Fig. The real and imaginary parts of the optical conductivity at our lowest temperature of 1.5 K are shown in Figs. ( b ) F r e q u e n c y ( T H z ) F r e q u e n c y ( T H z ) ) F r e q u e n c y ( T H z ) 1/ω is set by the spectral weight in the zero frequency delta function, the coefficient of σ 2 decreases in accord with the delta function's dependence on both the gap and the normal state conductivity It is also interesting to note that for the highest level of disorder, the high frequency parts of σ 2 show a progressively larger negative contribution. This negative contribution is also apparent in the normal state and comes from the increasing relative effect of finite frequency excitations on the real part of the low-frequency dielectric function (e.g. the system polarizability) and departures from the Drude form due to the localizing tendencies of the normal electrons. In the conventional MB theory, the real part of the superconducting state conductivity is expressed as a ratio to the normal state conductivity to normalize out the transition matrix elements between the single electron states. However, in the usual theory it is expected that this normal state real conductivity is flat in frequency and its imaginary part is zero as is typical for a highly disordered metal with a large scattering rate. Due to the strong deviations from the expectation in the normal state conductivity we found that (except for the least F r e q u e n c y ( T H z ) disordered sample), it is completely impossible to simultaneously fit both complex components to the MB form when using a frequency independent σ n even when letting the gap be a free parameter. To eliminate the localizing features in the spectra, we normalized the real part of the superconducting state conductivity by the normal state real conductivity (1.1 T c ) (Fig. In Fig. A number of possibilities beyond MB theory exist to explain this anomalous absorption. In principle, both collective modes and quasiparticle excitations may contribute. It has been pointed out that, in systems with a spatial modulation of the superfluid density, one may find absorptions far below 2∆ Alternatively, it was recently claimed in the study of the optical response of disordered thin films that the in-gap optical conductivity exhibited a sharp threshold that was consistent with an excitation of the amplitude of the order parameter Irrespective of the above considerations, it is clear that, with substantial tunneling conductance below ∆, it is inadequate to model the optics with an MB functional that relies on a clean gap. Tunneling measurements are an important point of comparison to optical conductivity by virtue of the fact that they probe quasiparticle effects directly and only indirectly probe collective modes through their coupling to quasiparticles. We propose that the low threshold (as compared to T c ) of 2E g that we see in optics derives from the same sub-gap states seen below the coherence peak ∆ in tunneling. It is quite natural to expect a modification of the quasiparticle excitations of the system at high disorder. Larkin and Ovchinnikov showed that that disorder in the form of a spatially varying BCS coupling constant will give an effective pair breaking effect We can model both quasiparticle properties of the optical and tunneling data in a self-consistent fashion by the model of Larkin and Ovchinnikov (LO) To more precisely compare the LO model to the data we solved the Usadel equation iEsinθ + ∆cosθ -η∆sinθcosθ = 0 numerically with ∆ taken from tunneling and η is estimated above. Here, E is the energy relative to Fermi level, θ is the pairing angle and sinθ and cosθ are the disorder-averaged Green's functions where the generalized coherence factor is given by Here f (E) is Fermi-Dirac distribution function. In the limit where η = 0, one recovers the traditional MB form. We show the simulation of normalized conductivity in Fig. A home-built time-domain terahertz (THz) spectrometer was used for this work. GaAs Auston switches are used as emitters and receivers to generate and detect THz pulses. An ultrafast laser (800 nm) is split into two paths by a beamsplitter. One beam travels to the biased emitter and generates a THz pulse. This THz pulse passes through the sample or substrate and arrives at the receiver. The other laser beam propagates to the receiver and is used to gate the THz pulse coming from the emitter side. The beam path difference between these two laser beams is precisely controlled by a delay stage to map out the E field as a function of time of the THz pulse. By mapping out THz pulses after transmitting through substrates and samples separately, and taking a ratio of the Fourier transforms, we obtain transmission function in the frequency domain. The complex conductivity of thin films can be directly calculated in the thin-film limit with the expression Here T (ω) is the transmission as referenced to MgO substrate, σ is the complex optical conductivity, n is the refraction index of substrate, ∆L is the small thickness difference between samples and reference substrates, d is the thickness of the thin film and Z 0 is the vacuum impedance. Temperature dependent real and imaginary parts of the optical conductivity of all measured NbN thin films are shown in Figure ) ) V ( m V ) To obtain these fits, the equation u 1 + η Here η is a phenomenological de-pairing factor that depends on the degree of disorder and 0 , which can be shown to determine the centre of the impurity band, was taken equal to unity. η is a lower bound for the broadening parameter which arises from mesoscopic disorder. Other de-pairing factors not included in the theory could further increase its value. The numerical solution obtained was used to generate the density of states (DOS) as N (E) = N (0)Re u u 2 -1 . This resulted in a DOS with a hard gap renormalized to E g = (1 -η 2/3 ) 3/2 ∆. The inclusion of electron-electron interaction effects modifies this DOS further to create sub-gap states Figure As discussed in the main text, disorder smears the coherence peaks and transfers spectral weight into gap region. This feature can be captured by the model of Larkin and Ovchinnikov (LO). In Fig. 