Alkali-doped fullerides (A 3 C 60 with A = K, Rb, Cs) show a surprising phase diagram, in which a high transition-temperature (Tc) s-wave superconducting state emerges next to a Mott insulating phase as a function of the lattice spacing. This is in contrast with the common belief that Mott physics and phonon-driven s-wave superconductivity are incompatible, raising a fundamental question on the mechanism of the high-Tc superconductivity. This article reviews recent ab initio calculations, which have succeeded in reproducing comprehensively the experimental phase diagram with high accuracy and elucidated an unusual cooperation between the electron-phonon coupling and the electron-electron interactions leading to Mott localization to realize an unconventional s-wave superconductivity in the alkali-doped fullerides. A driving force behind the exotic physics is unusual intramolecular interactions, characterized by the coexistence of a strongly repulsive Coulomb interaction and a small effectively negative exchange interaction. This is realized by a subtle energy balance between the coupling with the Jahn-Teller phonons and Hund's coupling within the C 60 molecule. The unusual form of the interaction leads to a formation of pairs of up-and down-spin electrons on the molecules, which enables the s-wave pairing. The emergent superconductivity crucially relies on the presence of the Jahn-Teller phonons, but surprisingly benefits from the strong correlations because the correlations suppress the kinetic energy of the electrons and help the formation of the electron pairs, in agreement with previous model calculations. This confirms that the alkali-doped fullerides are a new type of unconventional superconductors, where the unusual synergy between the phonons and Coulomb interactions drives the high-Tc superconductivity. The alkali-doped fullerides with the composition of A 3 C 60 (A = K, Rb, Cs) show the highest transition temperature (∼ 40 K) among the molecular superconductors Figure Cs 3 C 60 can be synthesized into either an fcc or an A15 structure In the fcc structure, the buckyballs are located at the fcc positions and the alkali atoms are intercalated in between the C 60 molecules. In the A15 structure, the C 60 molecules are located on the body-centered-cubic (bcc) lattice, while a unit cell contains two C 60 molecules with different orientations. In both structures, the intercalated alkali atoms donate electrons to the fullerene bands turning the semiconducting undoped C 60 solid into a metal Figure Both phase diagrams show a superconducting phase with a high critical temperature, whose maximum reaches ∼ 35 K and ∼ 38 K for the fcc and A15 systems, respectively. Interestingly, the fcc and A15 phase diagrams share a similar shape of the T c dome as a function of V C 3- 60 despite the lack of magnetic ordering in the Mott state for the frustrated fcc lattice. The symmetry of the superconducting order parameter was found to be of s-wave by various different experimental techniques What makes the system more remarkable is the existence of the Mott insulating phase next to the s- wave superconducting phase In fullerides, this proximity is even more surprising because the s-wave superconductivity is believed to be fragile to the strong correlations, as opposed to the d-wave symmetry. In the Mott phase, at low temperature, the antiferromagnetism has been observed in both fcc and A15 systems In 1990's (well before the discovery of the Mott phase and magnetism in Cs 3 C 60 in 2008), the pairing mechanism had been often discussed based on the conventional phonon mechanism theory, it leads to the increase of T c On the other hand, the importance of the electron correlations has been argued since the early stage of the study. Auger spectroscopy measurements for the undoped C 60 solid lead to an estimate of ∼ 1.6 eV for the effective intramolecular Coulomb interaction The discovery of the Mott insulating phase in Cs 3 C 60 strikingly confirmed the strength and the relevance of the electron-electron correlations This discovery has triggered both the experimental and theoretical studies The metallic and superconducting states also show interesting behaviors near the metal-insulator transition. In the superconducting state, NMR measurements observed a deviation of the ratio between the gap(∆) and T c (2∆/k B T c ) from the BCS value of 3.53 to a larger value, while 2∆/k B T c ∼ 3.53 holds in the region of small V C 3- 60 The spin susceptibility in the normal phase also shows a larger value than that expected from the smooth extrapolation from the values in the small V C 3- 60 region The clear fingerprints of the electron-phonon coupling in the superconducting state and the very existence of the Mott insulating state suggest the importance of considering both electron correlations and phonons for the understanding of the surprising phase diagram. In particular, it is a great challenge to understand why the s-wave superconductivity is robust against (or even benefits from) the strong correlations. Another challenge is an ab initio calculation of T c of strongly-correlated unconventional superconductivity. A nonempirical calculation of T c is necessary for predicting/designing new high-temperature superconductors. Even for the conventional superconductors, the T c calculation usually relies on empirical parameters such as the Coulomb pseudopotential In this review, among the various studies on the C 60 superconductors, we mainly focus on the most recent ab initio studies By analyzing a realistic low-energy Hamiltonian with the above-mentioned unusual interactions, the theoretical phase diagram was derived without empirical parameters. Remarkably, it shows a good agreement with the experimental phase diagram at a quantitative level. In particular, the calculated T c 's agree with the experimental data within a difference of 10 K. It indicates that the scheme employed in Refs. The outline of this review is as follows. Throughout the review, we mainly focus on the fcc systems. In Sec. 2, we describe the methods, which were employed in Refs. In the case of the alkali-doped fullerides, an accurate description of the intramolecular correlations induced by the Coulomb interactions and the intramolecular vibrations is important for clarifying the underlying physics. The main playground of the intramolecular correlations and the intriguing low-energy phenomena is the partially-filled bands near the Fermi level. In the fullerides, the LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) bands, the t 1u bands, are partially filled (see Sec. 3) and they are energetically isolated from the other bands For this purpose, one of the most appropriate schemes would be a combination of the densityfunctional theory (DFT) and the dynamical meanfield theory (DMFT), so called DFT+DMFT In order to make a quantitative argument, we need a realistic low-energy Hamiltoinan for the fullerides to be used in the DMFT calculation. This can be done by the ab initio downfolding scheme In fact, in Refs. In the following, we clarify the basic electronic and phonon properties of the fullerides by looking at the realistic parameters in the low-energy Hamiltonian in Secs. 3 and 4 [the above-described steps (i) and (ii)]. Then, we move on to the analysis of the realistic Hamiltonian by the E-DMFT in Secs. 5, 6, and 7 [the step (iii)]. Here, we discuss the electronic structure of the fcc A 3 C 60 systems. Since A 3 C 60 is a molecular solid, the molecular limit is a good starting point for understanding its electronic structure Red curves in Fig. it. We obtain three t 1u Wannier orbitals (which can be visualized as p x , p y , and p z -like orbitals) per molecule. By calculating the transfer integral between the molecular orbitals where t ij is the hopping parameter with i, j being the composite index for the site and orbital. Here, each site corresponds to each molecule. ĉ † iσ (ĉ iσ ) is a creation (annihilation) operator for the electron characterized by the composite index i and the spin σ. Since the three orbitals are degenerate, the double counting correction needed in the DFT+DMFT scheme becomes a constant shift for all the orbitals, which can be absorbed in the chemical potential. The blue-dotted curves in Fig. Next, we turn to the effective interaction between the electrons, which is to be used in the E-DMFT calculation. This is a very important quantity because the intramolecular interaction dominates the local dynamics of the electrons. The effective interaction is given by the sum of the repulsive Coulomb and attractive phonon-mediated interactions (see Fig. The former and the latter are calculated by the constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) Interorbital (opposite spin) Interorbital (same spin) Pair hopping Spin flip Schematic picture for various types of the intramolecular interactions. Here, the phonon-mediated interactions are depicted as if they were instantaneous interactions. In reality, they are retarded interactions. that the fullerides are multi-orbital systems, which accommodate various types of interactions including density-density type interactions such as the Hubbard U , and the non-density type interactions such as the pair-hopping and spin-flip interactions (Fig. In the following, we will show that the fullerides are strongly correlated materials because the intramolecular Hubbard interaction (∼ 1 eV) is larger than the low-energy t 1u bandwidth (∼ 0.5 eV) Using the Wannier basis, we define the Coulomb Table in the low-energy Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Table The cRPA Coulomb interactions have a long-range tail proportional to 1/r with respect to the distance r between the centers of the Wannier orbitals The electron-phonon coupling Ĥel-ph and phonon one-body Ĥph terms in the low-energy Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with the displacement operator xν = b † ν + bν , and respectively. Here, b † ν ( bν ) is a creation (annihilation) operator of the phonon and ν is a composite index for the momentum and the branch. In solids, the electron-phonon coupling g ν ij and the phonon frequency ω ν are subject to renormalization by the electrons: The electron-phonon coupling is screened by the electronic polarization; the phonons are dressed by electrons, which results in phonon softening. As in the case of the Coulomb interaction parameters in Eq. ( In the action corresponding to the low-energy Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Therefore, we can analytically integrate out the phonon degrees of freedom without introducing any approximation, which leads to an effective action involving only the electronic degrees of freedom. In this effective action, the effective interaction between the electrons is given by the sum of the Coulomb interactions and the retarded phononmediated interactions (Fig. An important point here is that the phonon-mediated interaction is given by the sum over the phonon modes. We do not assume any particular type of the vibration modes a priori to study the superconductivity. We call the onsite (intramolecular) part of these interactions ), and ), respectively, with the orbital indices α and β. Among 189 (= 63 × 3) phonon branches, it has been argued that the intramolecular lattice vibrations mainly contribute to the total electronphonon coupling [157] for a more detailed discussion). The H g vibrations are the Jahn-Teller modes, which induce a split of the t 1u energy levels, while they do not change the center of the levels Here, we look at the partially-dressed phonon frequencies needed to calculate the phonon-mediated interaction in Eq. Copyright 2015 by American Physical Society. is excluded. These partially-dressed frequencies are defined in the low-energy Hamiltonian. Thus, they cannot be directly compared to the experimental data. To compare with experiments, we need to solve the low-energy Hamiltonian to obtain fully-dressed phonon frequencies. In Fig. The dispersion of both the partially and fully dressed frequencies is tiny, which reflects the intramolecular nature of the modes (almost perfectly described as the Einstein phonons). We see that the red curves agree with the blue-dotted curves for the majority of the bands, and that the main difference is in the bands around the frequency of 0.14 and 0.16 eV. These two correspond to the two H g modes out of the eight H g modes. Because of the cubic symmetry, the frequencies of the H g modes, which are fivefold degenerate in the molecular limit, are split into threefold-and twofold-degenerate frequencies. The A g modes are located at the energies beyond the range of Fig. The difference between the partially-and fullydressed phonon frequencies in Fig. Table Thus, this means that the Jahn-Teller phonons surpass the Coulomb exchange interactions and realize an effectively negative exchange interaction. However, the size of this negative exchange interaction (∼ -17 meV) is small. Figure Figure However, in the region where J eff (ω) becomes negative, U ′ eff (ω) becomes slightly larger than In the following sections, we discuss the surprising consequence of this unusual relationship between the interactions U ′ eff > U eff and J eff < 0. By solving the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Here we study superconductiviy by directly allowing the symmetry breaking in the E-DMFT calculation. Within the single-site E-DMFT calculation for the fcc lattice (non-bipartite lattice), we also allow for ferroorbital/magnetic order, while we do not consider a possibility of the antiferromagnetic order, which, in the actual fcc lattice, is observed only at very low temperature, significantly smaller than the lowest temperature (10 K) we used in our E-DMFT. As a result, we obtain three different phases: the paramagnetic metal, the paramagnetic Mott insulator, and the s-wave superconducting phase. The s-wave superconductivity is characterized by a nonzero superconducting order parameter ∆ = 3 α=1 c αs↓ c αs↑ , which describes intraorbital Cooper * In solving the Hamiltonian, we take into account the frequency dependence of the density-density-type interactions pairs for the t 1u electrons. Here, α and s are the orbital and site (=molecule) indices, respectively. We omitted a site (=molecule) index in ∆, because ∆ does not depend on a site (the solution is homogenous in space). In the Mott insulating phase, the self-energy diverges and hence the Mott gap opens in the spectral function (the blue-dotted curve in Fig. Comparing the theoretical phase diagram in Fig. This agreement is remarkable since our T c calculation does not rely on any empirical parameters: It starts from the DFT calculation using only the information of the crystal structure and all the parameters used in the E-DMFT analysis are calculated from first principles. Furthermore, the slope between the paramagnetic metal and insulator is consistent between the theory and experiment. As temperature increases, the insulating region expands, which indicates that the insulator has a larger entropy than the metal. The position of the metal-insulator boundary is also consistent. It is known that the DMFT often overestimates the stability of the metallic phase While we see a good agreement, there are minor discrepancies between the theory and experiment. For example, the metal-insulator boundary looks like a crossover in the experiment, while the theory shows a clear first order transition. While the reason of the discrepancy is not yet clear, one of the possible reasons is the disorder in the orientations of the buckyballs To gain insight into the superconducting mechanism, we first look at the property of the metal-insulator transition at 40 K. Figure Another interesting observation is that the double occupancy D = n α↑ n α↓ on each molecule increases toward the Mott transition. This is in contrast with the intuition and the behavior of the single-band Hubbard model and of multiorbital models with the standard exchange interaction, where D is suppressed by the repulsive Hubbard U . While the fullerides also have a strongly repulsive Hubbard U , the interorbital repulsion U ′ is effectively larger than the Hubbard U (Sec. 4.3). Therefore the electrons (3 electrons per molecule on average) prefer to sit in the same orbital despite they pay an energy cost of U We can gain more insight by looking at the histogram of the weight of the intramolecular electronic ♯ The experiment measured a monolayer system. However, the theoretical calculation assumes a bulk system. Therefore, we do not compare a band dispersion between the theory and the experiment, and restrict ourselves to the comparison of the angleintegrated quantities. configurations [Fig. In Fig. In the non-interacting limit at half filling, all the 64 intramolecular electronic configurations have equal weight. Then, the weights for the (210), In the metallic phase, however, there exist charge fluctuations because the non-half-filled (N = 3) configurations have a nonnegligible weight. The nonhalf-filled (N = 3) configurations gradually lose their weight toward the Mott transition. In the Mott insulating phase, we see that N = 3 weight becomes tiny. It indicates that the charge degrees of freedom are frozen and the filling on each molecule is nearly fixed at half filling, which is nothing but the Mott physics induced by the strongly repulsive U eff However, the orbital and spin degrees of freedom are active even when the charge degrees of freedom are frozen and the balance of the interaction favors lowspin configurations Finally, we discuss the superconducting mechanism A crucial point is that the formation of the electron pairs is not simply compatible with the strong local repulsion, but it is actually assisted and Table The pair-hopping interaction, whose amplitude is again given by J eff , is also important, as discussed in several previous works In principle, the enhancement of the superconductivity by the Suhl-Kondo mechanism occurs irrespective of the sign of the pair-hopping interactions. However, in the present three-orbital system, the negative pair-hopping enhances the superconductivity more efficiently than the positive one. This is because the former prefers the gap function with the same amplitude and sign for every orbital, while the latter favors the sign change in the gap function, generating a frustration. With the above considerations, we conclude that the crucial factors for the s-wave superconductivity in the alkali-doped fullerides are Since the unusual relations J eff < 0 and U ′ eff > U eff are a consequence of the coupling of the electrons with the Jahn-Teller phonons, we confirm that the phonons are necessary to drive the s-wave superconductivity in these materials. However, thanks to the unusual form of the multi-orbital interactions, the strong correlations surprisingly cooperate with the phonons by assisting and favoring the formation of the intraorbital electron pairs. This fact marks a sharp contrast with the conventional phonon mechanism, where the phonons and the Coulomb interactions compete with each other, especially when both interactions are local and for halffilled bands The picture emerging from our fully ab-initio theory is consistent with the previous model studies on the negative-J multiorbital Hubbard model Finally, we discuss the origin of the dome shaped T c in the experimental phase diagram, which is not seen in our theoretical result: The calculation gives an increase of the critical temperature as the transition to the Mott insulator is approached. As shown in the study on the negative-J multiorbital Hubbard model We have reviewed the properties of alkali-doped fulleride superconductivity, starting from the basic electronic structure of the fcc A 3 C 60 systems. The band structure of A 3 C 60 fullerides is well described by a picture in terms of molecular orbital levels connected by relatively small hoppings between them. The halffilled low-energy t 1u bands are the main playground for the superconductivity. We have elucidated that the effective intramolecular interactions between the t 1u electrons, which arise from the combination of the Coulomb repulsion and electron-phonon interactions, have an unusual structure characterized by a strongly repulsive Hubbard repulsion and a weakly negative exchange interaction, which leads to an inverted Hund's coupling. This unusual situation occurs since the fullerides are the degenerate multi-orbital systems having tiny Hund's coupling and strong coupling to Jahn-Teller modes. The realistic Hamiltonian with this form of the intramolecular interaction comprehensively reproduces the experimental phase diagram including the adjacency of the Mott insulator and the s-wave superconductivity. Remarkably, the agreement is not only qualitative but also quantitative; the theoretically calculated T c using only the information of the crystal structure, agrees with the experimental T c within a difference of 10 K. The derived Mott insulating phase is characterized by a low-spin (S = 1/2) state with orbital degeneracy, completely consistent with the experimental observations. The analysis on the superconducting mechanism reveals that the high-T c s-wave superconductivity is driven by an unusual cooperation between the strong correlations and the Jahn-Teller phonons. This confirms that the mechanism of the fulleride superconductivity is indeed unconventional and requires strong correlation effects, despite the crucial role of the electronphonon interaction and the s-wave symmetry of the order parameter. In this review, we have not discussed the A15 systems and have focused on the fcc systems. Through the calculations for the fcc systems, we have found that the dynamics of the electrons within the molecule with unusual form of the interactions is the most important factor to drive the s-wave superconductivity. The building block of the A15 systems is the same C 60 molecules as that in the fcc systems. Then, as far as an effectively negative exchange interaction is realized on each molecule, the intraorbital pair-formation and the Suhl-Kondo mechanism, which are related to intramolecular dynamics, will work irrespective of the lattice structure. This explains naturally why the superconducting properties are similar between the A15 and fcc systems in experiment. On the other hand, the antiferromagnetism will be strongly affected by the lattice structure: For example, the degree of frustration and the structure of the super-exchange interactions are crucial for the magnetism. It will be interesting to apply the present scheme also to the A15 systems and see whether it also comprehensively explains their experimental phase diagram. Light-induced superconducting-like state in K 3 C 60 Recently, superconducting-like signatures have been reported in the optical spectra of K 3 C 60 at temperatures higher than 100 K (much higher than the equilibrium critical temperature T c = 19 K) by means of impulsive excitation The E-DMFT takes into account the effect of the intermolecular Coulomb interactions as a dynamical reduction of the intramolecular interactions. We find that this dynamical screening is not an essential ingredient in the superconductivity, while it quantitatively improves the location of the Mott transition in Fig. We note that the self-energy is still momentum independent within the E-DMFT. ¶ There are several works which study the effect of the merohedral disorder