Can topological quantum entanglement between anyons in one topological medium "stray" into a different, topologically distinct medium? In other words, can quantum information encoded non-locally in the combined state of non-Abelian anyons be shared between two distinct topological media? We consider a setup with two p-wave superconductors of opposite chirality and demonstrate that such scenario is indeed possible. The information encoded in the fermionic parity of two Majorana zero modes, originally within the same superconducting domain, can be shared between the domains or moved entirely from one domain to another provided that vortices can tunnel between them in a controlled fashion. The emergence of quasiparticles known as anyons, i.e., particles whose quantum exchange statistics is neither bosonic nor fermionic One of the important questions from the computational point of view deals with the mechanisms for transferring quantum information between different circuit elements. Ideally, one would imagine that such a transfer happens on-chip between different qubits (or qudits) defined within the same topological medium where braiding and measurement operations are employed to manipulate quantum information. However, this may not always be feasible, particularly if the complexity of quantum devices were to be scaled up. One possible way of transferring quantum information would involve more "conventional", non-topological qubits as intermediate agents An interesting physical question, however, is whether it is possible to transfer quantum information between distinct topological media directly. An even more interesting question, at least from the physics point of view, is whether such information can be shared between two such distinct media. (a) An idealized setup involving moving a vortex across the domain wall between p x + ip y and p xip y superconductors. Red arrows indicate chiral Majorana edge states at the boundaries of the superconducting domains. γ 1 denotes a Majorana zero mode associated with the vortex being moved, while Γ 1 , Γ 2 and Γ 3 represent the stationary modes which, along with γ 1 encode a qubit. (b) The schematic setup of the model we used to "mimic" the move of a vortex across the domain wall. Majorana modes Γ 1 ,. . . Γ 3 are decoupled from the edge states, while γ 1 and γ 2 are coupled to chiral Majorana edge states with time-dependent coupling constants α 1 (t) and α 2 (t) at x = x 1 and x = x 2 along the edge, respectively. Here, we assume x 2 > x 1 . (c) A schematic setup considered in Ref. [9]: two Majorana modes γ 1 and γ 2 coupled to a single chiral Majorana edge with time-dependent coupling constants α 1 (t) and α 2 (t), respectively. Naïvely, this seems counterintuitive: topological quantum information is stored in the (superposition of) degenerate states pertaining to a given quantum system; sharing such information would require entanglement between two different quantum systems of macroscopic size. The goal of this paper is to address these questions. As we show, the answer is, surprisingly, affirmative! One potentially serious obstacle to this idea is that transferring an anyon between two distinct media is not only contin-gent on an anyon of this type being supported by both media, it also requires that such a transfer is accomplished solely by the means of electron tunneling: fractionalized excitations cannot exist outside of their host media and hence cannot tunnel between them. E.g., a fractionally charged Laughlin quasiparticle cannot tunnel between two separate quantum Hall droplets simply due to the fact that each droplet is made of an integral number of electrons. In order to avoid these issues, we focus on a particular example of non-Abelian anyons -Majorana zero modes bound to superconducting vortex cores in chiral p-wave superconductors An idealized setup considered in this paper is schematically shown in Fig. Intuitively, such a transfer should lead to decoherence of quantum information as the domain wall separating the two droplets hosts co-propagating gapless chiral edge states The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present the minimal model describing the low energy degrees of freedom of our Gedanken setup consisting of (i) a pair of coupled copropagating Majorana edge states at the domain wall and (ii) Majorana zero modes hosted inside the droplets and coupled to the edge modes with time-dependent coupling strengths. In Sec. III, we show how this setup allows the quantum information encoded by Majorana zero modes to be transferred across the domain wall. We present analytical results obtained within the Heisenberg picture. In Sec. IV, the amount of transferred quantum information is evaluated within a specific protocol governing the time dependence of the coupling strengths. In Sec. V, we discuss the relevant experimental parameters necessary to achieve high fidelity of such information transfer. Details of derivations are presented in two Appendices. The presence of a pair of co-propagating Majorana edge states at a domain wall between p x + ip y and p xip y superconductors, as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. where the coupling strengths α a (t) for a ∈ 1, 2 are timedependent; by optimizing this time dependence we can control the transfer of quantum information. As a special consequence of the fact that the 1D chiral modes are co-propagating, the coupling between them (whose strength is given by the coupling constant m(x) in Eq. (2.1)) will not induce a gap. Instead, the coupled edge fields can be diagonalized by a spatially dependent unitary transformation where mixing angle θ depends on the coupling between the two edges and is given by In terms of the "rotated fields", the edge Hamiltonian reads while the Hamiltonian describing the coupling of the Majorana zero modes to the edge states becomes Here, coupling constant λ i a (t) with i, a ∈ 1, 2 represents the coupling strength between transformed field η i (x a ) and Majorana zero mode γ a . The full set of λ i a 's is given by λ (2.7) When two coupled chiral edge states have different velocities, the low energy effective theory can still be described in terms of two independent chiral edge states The goal of this paper is to analyze the transfer of quantum entanglement between two Majorana zero modes, γ 1 and γ 2 , whose dynamics is governed by the Hamiltonian H = H e + H c with H e and H c given by Eqs. (2.5) and (2.6). In effect, this Hamiltonian describes two zero modes simultaneously coupled to two independent chiral edge states. Prior to delving into this problem, however, let us first study a simplified setup with both Majorana zero modes coupled to a single chiral Majorana edge state as shown in Fig. where we assume x 2 > x 1 . As shown in Fig. In what follows, we first study this simplified setup and establish the necessary formalism to investigate how the quantum information stored in the Majorana mode γ 1 can be transferred to the Majorana mode γ 2 . We will then apply this formalism to study the original setup described by Hamiltonian Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2) and discuss the relation of the original setup and the simplified setup. A straightforward way to understand the time evolution of quantum states is to employ the Heisenberg picture in quantum mechanics. From Eq. (2.8) together with the commutation relations, the Heisenberg equations of motion of operators are given by In terms of the initial operators, γa ≡ γ a (t 0 ) and η(x, t 0 ), the time evolved operators γ a (t) are given by Note that, Eq. (3.2a) contains η (0) (x, t) ≡ η(xv m (tt 0 ), t 0 ), an unperturbed chiral Majorana edge field. On the other hand, Eq. (3.2b) contains η and the weight function Several comments are in order. Firstly, γ a (t) as well as η(x, t) satisfy the proper equal-time anticommutation relations, as should be expected from unitarity. The first terms in Eqs. (3.2a) and (3.2b) represent the loss of memory of the initial conditions for both operators to the coupling of the corresponding zero modes to the edge. Most importantly, the second term in the Eq. (3.2b) describes how the second Majorana mode γ 2 (t) acquires the memory of the initial condition for γ 1 (0); the weight function W(t 0 , t, ∆x) given by Eq. (3.5) is exactly the quantum information transferred from the zero mode γ1 to γ 2 (t). Explicitly, let us consider the case where the operator iΓ 1 γ 1 (t 0 ) has eigenvalue ±1 for the initial quantum state. Using Eq. (3.2b), we have iΓ 1 γ 2 (t) = ±W(t 0 , t, ∆x), which represents the fidelity of the quantum information transfer. In the next section, we will show that owing to the chiral nature of the edge state, a high fidelity of transfer can be achieved by employing specific protocols for α a (t). As a side note, a non-zero expectation value of iγ 1 γ 2 (t) will also develop. Physically, this phenomenon comes from the edge-state coupling that correlates two Majorana zero modes and can be understood as contributions from the η (0,1) (x, t) terms in Eqs. (3.2). This polarization reaches its peak value of 2/π in the limit of ∆x → 0 with the timeindependent couplings of equal strength, α 1 = α 2 Having analyzed the case of single edge coupling, we are now ready to discuss the actual setup of interest shown in Fig. Here, the . . . represents contributions from η L,R (x, t 0 ). As those terms play no part in the quantities we are interested in, we will omit them for simplicity. Again, γa ≡ γ a (t 0 ) represent initial operators while the kernel function K a is defined in Eq. (3.4). The weight function, which describes the transfer of the quantum entanglement across the domain wall, can be related to that of the single Majorana edge state in Eq. (3.5) by W 2E (t 0 , t, ∆x) = W(t 0 , t, ∆x) sin ∆θ. (3.7) The phase factor ∆θ depends on the coupling strength m(x) between two chiral Majorana edge states and is given by The reduction of the fidelity for quantum information transfer due to this phase factor can be intuitively understood as follows. The coupling m(x) between two Majorana edge states spatially interchanges contents of the edge fields η L,R (x) in terms of the mixed edge fields η 1,2 (x). As a result, the quantum entanglement associated with the initial operator γ1 carried away by the edge field η L (x) from x = x 1 is partially transferred across the domain wall with the ratio sin ∆θ and is then picked up by the γ 2 coupled to the edge field η R (x) at x = x 2 . To mimic the process of moving a vortex across the domain wall, the time-dependent profiles for coupling strengths α a (t) are chosen to satisfy the following boundary conditions. At the initial time t → -∞, Majorana mode γ 1 is decoupled from the edge while Majorana mode γ 2 is strongly coupled to the edge. At the end of the process, t → ∞, the Majorana mode γ 1 is strongly coupled to the edge while the mode γ 2 becomes decoupled from the edge. We choose to parameterize the time dependence of the coupling strengths as which satisfy the aforementioned boundary conditions. Here, Λ determines the strength of the coupling between the Majorana modes in the bulk and the edge states, the inverse time constant β controls how fast the couplings are turned on and off, and ∆t is the time delay between the two processes. With these time-dependent coupling constants, the weight function W(t 0 , t, ∆x) in Eq. (3.5) is governed by two dimensionless parameters, Λ 2 /β 2 v m and β(∆x/v m -∆t). We evaluate the weight function with time t → ∞ and plot the weight strength as functions of these two dimensionless parameters in Fig. The fidelity of the information transfer across a chiral pwave domain wall, can be further reduced by the factor sin ∆θ -see Eq. (3.7)). However, as we discuss in the next section, this problem can be in principle alleviated, resulting in an optimal quantum information transfer. Let us now discuss the experimental parameters pertinent to our setup and their tunability for optimizing the transfer of quantum information across the domain wall separating two p-wave superconductors with opposite chiralities. To reach the optimal fidelity, the accumulated phase in Eq. (3.8) due to the coupling between chiral Majorana edge states has to be ∆θ = π/2 (mod π), while the weight function W(t 0 , t → ∞, ∆x) should be at its maximum. In order to satisfy the former condition, we observe that the coupling strength m(x) relates to the superconducting phase difference ∆φ(x) across the domain wall by m(x) = m 0 (x) cos(∆φ(x)/2). On the other hand, the weight strength W(t 0 , t → ∞, ∆) can be tuned by β, Λ, and ∆t. Assuming that the inverse time constant is in the range of β ∼ 10 6 -10 9 s -1 , it should be easy to achieve sufficiently small values of β(∆x/v m -∆t) when ∆x is in the order of 1-2 μm and edge velocity v m ∼ 10 5 m/s. With this condition, the weight function reaches its peak value with the ratio Λ 2 /(v m 2 β) ∼ 7, as seen in the inset of Fig. It is also worth mentioning that while we have studied a specific protocol given by Eq. (4.1), other protocols may lead to even more reliable transfer of quantum entanglement. We have described a process whereby quantum entanglement associated with Majorana zero modes in a chiral p-wave superconductor can stray from the original medium into another, topologically distinct medium. As a result, the topological quantum information initially encoded within one superconducting domain can now be shared between two domains of opposite chirality. In principle, this can be done very efficiently provided that the fermion tunneling between superconducting vortices and edge states can be judiciously controlled. From the physical point of view, this effect can be understood from the fact that the quantum information is encoded in the fermionic parity. Different domains, even though topologically distinct, need not be in the parity eigenstates individually; coupling their respective edge states through fermionic tunneling provides a mechanism for moving this parity across and creating entangled states between the domains. Utilizing this mechanism repeatedly, quantum information can be transferred from one medium to another directly, without any need for measuring it or employing intermediate quantum buses. The reliance of our proposed setup on fermionic tunneling does appear to be a limiting factor as far as potential generalizations of this scheme to other topological platforms are concerned. Unfortunately, it is not clear to us how this constraint can be physically avoided in the cases of more exotic non-Abelian anyons. While our idealized setup does not take into account some "real life" complications, such as a finite stretch of the edge state (rather than its single point) coupled to a vortex -which will somewhat degrade the fidelity of the information transfer -our main goal has been to provide a "proof of principle". Further optimization of the transfer protocols with an eye on those experimentally relevant effects should be a subject of future research. Now the order of integrations in each term can be rearranged with the following identity A t 0 dτ 0 g(τ 0 ) After summing infinite terms, one obtains We note that this solution of η To include the coupling at x 2 in Eq. (A7), we can use η Again, the solution of η(x, t) is expressed in terms of η(x, t 0 ). Finally, the contribution of initial operators η(x, t 0 ) to γ a (t), i.e. the second part (the integration part) of solutions in Eqs. (3.2), can be obtained by employing Eq. (A5) with solution in Eq. (A13). The goal of this Appendix is to describe the phenomenon of edge-induced polarization, namely the non-zero expectation value iγ 1 (t)γ 2 (t) for two Majorana modes coupled to a chiral Majorana single edge The qubit polarization is then formally expressed as where we have used Eq. (A12) with ∆x → 0 + for η (1) (x 2 , t ). We observe that the polarization are induced through two mechanisms: (I) polarization due to direct entanglement of Majorana modes and edge state, i.e., the first part of Eq. (B2), and (II) polarization due to transfer quantum information of Majorana mode γ 1 to mode γ 2 through the edge, i.e. the second part of Eq. (B2). Before we evaluate the magnitude of the induced polarization, we first observe that because α a is time independent. We will also need the following correlation function Let us first focus on the contribution from mechanism (I), Using Eqs. (B3) and (B4) together with changes of variables τ = tt and τ = tt , we have Here we have taken tt 0 → ∞. With a further change of variable T = (τ + τ )/2 and ∆τ = (τ -τ )/2, the double integral can be carried out and gives Now we turn to evaluate the contribution from mechanism (II), Exchanging the order of integral over t and τ 0 and using Eq. (A11) and explicitly integrate out t , we obtain By performing changes of variables τ = tt and τ = t -τ 0 and taking tt 0 → ∞, we then have This integral is similar to that in Eq. (B6). Hence, with similar procedure, we can show that By adding two part of contributions, the total polarization when two Majorana modes are coupled to the edge is give by This result is consistent with what found in Ref. 9 and has its peak value 2/π for α 1 /α 2 = 1. If the two edge states propagate with different velocities, the approach taken in the main text, Sec. II and III, is no longer valid. One can not reduce the problem to that of a single edge state. Instead, we can investigate directly the Green's function that enter the calculation of W 2E in Eq. (3.6). Starting with the Hamiltonian of the two edges, we have: This can be rewritten in terms of Pauli matrices: where we define δv The equations of motion for the Green function are Here, x and t are the source space and time. When m(x) has no spatial dependence, the Green's function is formally resolved in Fourier space as G(xx , tt ) = -i dk 2π dω 2π (vk -ω) -δvkσ z + (m/ )σ y (vk -ω) 2 -(δvk) 2 -(m/ ) 2 e ik(x-x )-iω(t-t ) . (C4) By integrating over the frequency domain and choosing the pole that gives the retarded Green's function, we obtain G(xx , tt ) = Θ(tt ) dk 2π e ik(x-x ) 2 e -iω + (t-t ) + e -iω -(t-t ) + δvkσ z √ m 2 + 2 k 2 δv 2 e -iω + (t-t )e -iω -(t-t ) + mσ y √ m 2 + 2 k 2 δv 2 e -iω -(t-t )e -iω + (t-t ) , (C5) with ω ± = vk ± (m/ ) 2 + k 2 δv 2 . In the limit δv → 0, the 2 × 2 Green's function becomes after taking the k integration. As an alternative way, this Green's function will lead to results obtained in Sec. III B. Because the term that mixes the two edges plays important role for constructing W 2E in Eq. (3.6), we shall focus on the off-diagonal σ y term, G y (xx , tt ). The role this function plays becomes clear when we consider how to modify the result for the all-important W function from Eq. (3.5). The way our answer is modified when the velocities are different is: Let us next approximate G y (∆x, t 2t 1 ). To allow information transferring between the two edges, we must have m∆x v ∼ 1 and hence kv m ∼ 1. In the limit δv v, we can confine ourselves to the case of kδv m. Thus we can expand the expression in Eq. (C5) to the second order in δv and obtain a Gaussian integral G y (∆x, t 2t 1 ) has a time width of about δt ∼ δv vm around (xx )v(tt ) = 0. Hence the higher mx v is, the more oscillatory the function will be as a function of time at the second Majorana site. Observing that Eq. (C8) reduces to the result in Eq. (C6) for δv m → 0. As a result, we expect that the effect of the velocity difference becomes negligible when δv m ∆x. In the limit of our consideration, this condition is in general satisfied. Indeed, carrying out the integral in Eq. (C8) approximately yields a simple suppression term of e (-δv/v) 2 relative to the results in Fig. 