Superconducting magnets enable precise control of nuclear and electron spins, and are used in experiments that explore biological and condensed matter systems, and fundamental atomic particles. In high-precision applications, a common view is that slow (< 1 Hz) drift of the homogeneous magnetic field limits control and measurement precision. We report on previously undocumented higher-frequency field noise (10 Hz to 200 Hz) that limits the coherence time of 9 Be + electron-spin qubits in the 4.46 T field of a superconducting magnet. We measure a spin-echo T2 coherence time of ∼ 6 ms for the 9 Be + electron-spin resonance at 124 GHz, limited by part-per-billion fractional fluctuations in the magnet's homogeneous field. Vibration isolation of the magnet improved T2 to ∼ 50 ms. In many spectroscopic applications the field stability of superconducing magnets is important. For example, in atomic physics superconducting magnets are used for high-precision mass spectroscopy A variety of techniques can improve long-term field stability to as low as 2 × 10 -11 /hr, enabling ion cyclotron mass spectroscopy at the ∼ 10 -10 level In the experiments described here, the homogeneous field of a superconducting magnet gives radial confinement of 9 Be + ions in a Penning trap, and defines the quantizing axis for the 9 Be + ions' valence-electron spin degree of freedom. Electron spin resonance (ESR) with these spins is sensitive to part-per-billion fractional field fluctuations at frequencies out to several hundred hertz (see Appendix). Our measurements show correlations between the T 2 coherence of the electronic spin states with measured mechanical vibration of the magnet dewar. We further demonstrate that spin coherence may be extended by acoustic and vibration isolation of the magnet system. Penning traps are routinely used in a wide range of studies including mass spectrometry of biological molecules (e.g., FTICR) We confine a laser-cooled crystal of N ∼ 300 9 Be + ions in a Penning trap with a B 0 = 4.46 T superconducting magnet. Our two-level system (qubit) is the 9 Be + valence electron spin states |↑ ≡ |m s = +1/2 and |↓ ≡ |m s = -1/2 , where m s is the spin's projection along the B 0 ẑ quantizing field. The spins' Larmor precession frequency Ω 0 is first-order field sensitive: Ω 0 g J μ B B 0 , where g J -2.002 is the electron g-factor and μ B is the Bohr magneton. Including a small hyperfine correction, Ω o = 2π × 124.05 GHz for B 0 = 4.46 T. Similar to other nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and electron spin resonance (ESR) experiments, arbitrary spin rotations are obtained with a resonant external microwave-frequency magnetic field B rf cos(Ω 0 t). The microwave field is approximately uniform across all the ions and drives a spin flip τ π = 68 μs. The superconducting magnet used in these experiments is a room-temperature bore (12.7 cm diameter) Nalorac Cryogenics Corporation[19] model 4.5/125 man- In 2010 we noticed a correlation between mechanical vibration of lab floor and the potential across our magnet's normal-current in-bore Z 0 shim coil V emf (t). For the ambient laboratory environment, Figures We measure the T 2 coherence of our spins using a spinecho sequence illustrated in Figure Our key observations were consistently observed over an interval of 5 years in two different laboratory environments using two Penning traps. In 2011 (Fig. The observed increase in T 2 can be causally related to V emf by noting that for a coil, a time-varying magnetic field B(t) = B sin(ωt) induces a potential V emf (t) = V cos(ωt) with relative amplitude V /B = ηω. Here, η is an unknown geometric factor with units of m 2 . We assume that η is frequency-invariant S B (ω) = S V (ω) ηω , where S B (ω) is the magnetic field spectral density in T/ √ s -1 . We use a filter function formalism to predict the spin coherence where Here, S β (ω) = S B (ω)gμ B / is the spectral density of frequency fluctuations in units of s -1 / √ s -1 and F 1 (ω, 2τ ) = 16(sin(ω2τ /4)) 4 is the spin-echo filter function in the limit of zero pi-pulse length. This model is in qualitative agreement with observed decay of coherence in Figure An independent calibration of η was obtained by coherent shaking of the magnet at ω using the EMO and observing V emf (ω) and B(ω) using a spectrum analyzer and the ion-spins respectively. The EMO-induced motion induces a magnetic field B(t) that gives rise to a potential V 0 cos(ωt) across the Z 0 shim coil, where B(t) = V 0 sin(ωt)/ωη. Synchronous with the EMO drive, we perform a pulse sequence with m -1 equally spaced π-pulses and m intervals of duration τ = 1 2 (ω/2π) -1 . This sequence (Fig The RMS variation in the spin-flip frequency δ RM S due to S B is (see Appendix). Integrating S 2 β for the conditions in Figure In summary, we observed part-per-billion fractional fluctuations in the homogeneous magnetic field of a 4.46 T superconducting magnet at frequencies up to 200 Hz. Using 9 Be + electron-spins as sensitive field detectors, an order of magnitude reduction in integrated magnetic field noise was obtained by isolating the magnet from environmental acoustic and mechanical noise. In so much as our superconducting magnet is representative, we anticipate that a variety of high-precision measurements may be limited by similar fluctuations and could benefit from improved isolation. Examples include ESR and electron-cyclotron resonance with frequencies ≥ 90 GHz (see Appendix) where q is the ion charge, M is the single-ion mass, β r = ω r ω -2 z (Ω c -ω r ) -1/2, Ω c is the single-ion cyclotron frequency and ω z is ions' harmonic center-of-mass motion along ẑ. For 9 Be + ions in our trap potentials, Ω c = B 0 q/M = 2π × 7.6 MHz and ω z ∼ 2π × 800 kHz. Ion rotation is precisely controlled with an external rotating quadrupole potential Quantum control experiments begin with Doppler laser cooling followed by optical pumping to the |↑ state using ∼ 313 nm laser light In the limit of large magnetic field, the 9 Be + nuclear spin is decoupled from the single valence electron. Optical pumping prepares the nuclear spin in the |m I = +3/2 state. In high-field magnetic fields the impact of small, fast magnetic field fluctuations is qualitatively different for ESR than for NMR and ion-cyclotron mass spectroscopy. Consider the case of a static magnetic field B 0 modulated at a single frequency ω m with amplitude B m , The instantaneous Larmor precession frequency is where δω ≡ γB 0 , where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. The value of γ is g n μ N for a nuclear spin and g e μ B for an electron spin, where g e (g n ) is the electron (nuclear) gfactor and μ B (μ N ) is the Bohr (nuclear) magneton. The frequency modulation of Eq. 6 produces phase modulation of depth β m ≡ δω m /ω m that results in sidebands at Ω 0 ± nω m of relative strength J n (β m ) and a depleted carrier of relative strength J 0 (β m ) where Since J 0 (β m ) ∼ 1 -1 4 β 2 m , the carrier is substantially depleted for β m ∼ 2. Broadband noise also causes carrier attenuation. The impact of Eq. 5 on ESR and NMR is strikingly different ( Table A complimentary analysis in the main text relates the power spectral density of frequency fluctuations S 2 β (ω) to the spin coherence (Eq. 2). The quadratic dependence of S 2 β (ω) on γ means decoherence is about a million times weaker for NMR than for ESR That is, field noise that fully depletes (dephases) the Larmor carrier in the context of ESR has negligible impact on NMR. We calculate the RMS variation in spin-flip frequency δ RM S due to S B as follows. Consider a Ramsey experiment with a free-evolution interval τ short enough that the spin-flip frequency remains constant over τ . Let δ be the instantaneous frequency deviation of the spin-flip frequency from its mean. The accumulated phase difference between the microwaves and the spins is then φ = δτ . In the limit δ RM S τ 1 and averaging over many experiment repetitions, the Bloch vector length is Applying the filter function formalism and expanding to first order, where F 0 (ω, τ ) = 4 sin 2 (ωτ /2) is the Ramsey filter function and we have used the small angle approximation. We then obtain Since microwave phase phase noise can also limit T 2 , we use a low-phase noise microwave synthesis chain. It starts with a low-noise quartz oscillator at 100 MHz which is subsequently multiplied up to 124 GHz. Due to multiplication, the phase noise at 100 MHz is at least 20 log 10 (1240) dB = 62 dB larger at 124 GHz. The ions are exposed to microwaves from outside the vacuum chamber by a ∼ 1 m long, open-ended WR-8 waveguide. Prior to 2011, we generated 124 GHz using a Gunn diode oscillator whose phase noise precluded T 2 measurements beyond ∼ 10 ms Ion movement through a magnetic field gradient can produce an apparent time-dependence to the magnetic field. Here we discuss the potential sensitivity of our T 2 measurements to magnetic field gradients. Field gradients in our superconducting solenoid were minimized by applying currents to superconducting (z, z 3 , x, y, xz, yz, xy, x 2 -y 2 ) and normal (z, z 2 ) shim coils. Shimming the superconducting coils was performed using a deuterium oxide (D 2 O) probe without the Penning trap inserted in the magnet bore. The field gradients in Table The gradients measured using the ions as field probe (Table Ion crystal axial extent along ẑ is sensitive to the z and z 2 terms. For four planes (∼ 60 μm), the axial gradients produce a spread in the electron spin-flip frequency of ∼ 50 Hz. Ion crystal rotation averages the radial gradients to zero, except for the x 2 + y 2 term which can produce a ∼ 170 Hz dispersion in the electron spin-flip frequency for a 250 μm radius. The spin-echo will cancel out the effect of these gradients as long as the ions do not move within the crystal. Although measurements of T 2 are performed with the cooling laser blocked, previous work showed that the period of time for a small crystal to melt is longer than 100 ms The x-and y-linear gradients in Table Permeable materials in the magnet bore give rise to additional magnetic fields and field gradients, and their mechanical motion and temperature variation causes time variation in the field sensed by the ions. The Penning trap itself is constructed from low permeability materi-als (type-2 titanium, Macor, aluminum, OFHC copper, Kapton and fused silica), and the approximately cylindrical arrangement of these materials should minimize gradients. Also in the magnet bore are relatively large structures that guide laser beams and support photon collection optics. The structures are not mechanically tied directly to the Penning trap. Images of the ions constrain the axial ẑ motion of the structures within the magnet bore to < 3 μm. The largest support structure is a 5 cm length aluminum cylinder (12.5 cm OD, 7.5 cm ID). The magnetization of a permeable material is given by M = χH = χB/μ 0 ; χ = 2.22 × 10 -5 for aluminum. The field produced by a uniform magnetization can be calculated by an equivalent current on the surface of the aluminum. The largest gradient is at the ends of the dewar where dBz dz = 630 × 10 -6 T/m in the 4.5 T field of the magnet. The fractional magnetic field variation due to a 3 μm displacement of the cylinder is 1 B dB dz dz = 4.2 × 10 -10 (52 Hz). Field fluctuations at the location of the ions are expected to be smaller than this estimate by 20 to 30%. The variation in the susceptibility of aluminum with temperature is not completely negligible. We estimate a dependence of the field sensed by the ions on the aluminum cylinder temperature to be 1 B dB dT = 3 × 10 -9 / • C. Temperature changes will occur on time scales slower than those considered in these experiments. We note that the V emf induced in the room temperature Z 0 shim coil was not significantly changed with the trap and supporting structures mounted in the magnet bore. The considerations in this section indicate that the permeable materials inserted into the magnet bore did not significantly contribute to the T 2 measurements with the magnet sitting on the floor. However, this effect may contribute to T 2 coherence times with the magnet vibrationally isolated.