We study the density of states (DOS) in diffusive superconductors with pointlike magnetic impurities of arbitrary strength described by the Poissonian statistics. The mean-field theory predicts a nontrivial structure of the DOS with the continuum of quasiparticle states and (possibly) the impurity band. In this approximation, all the spectral edges are hard, marking distinct boundaries between spectral regions of finite and zero DOS. Considering instantons in the replica sigma-model technique, we calculate the average DOS beyond the mean-field level and determine the smearing of the spectral edges due interplay of fluctuations of potential and nonpotential disorder. The latter, represented by inhomogeneity in the concentration of magnetic impurities, affects the subgap DOS in two ways: via fluctuations of the pair-breaking strength and via induced fluctuations of the order parameter. In limiting cases, we reproduce previously reported results for the subgap DOS in disordered superconductors with strong magnetic impurities. The influence of local inhomogeneities on the density of states (DOS) in superconductors depends on the nature of disorder. In s-wave superconductors, potential impurities do not change the BCS DOS The effect of magnetic impurities on the superconducting state becomes more fascinating beyond the Born limit. In this case, a single magnetic impurity produces a localized state inside the BCS gap The square-root vanishing of the DOS is not specific to superconductors with magnetic disorder. The same qualitative behavior is observed, e.g., in the mean-field treatment of proximity-coupled normal-superconducting (NS) structures Existence of the sharp spectral edge is an artefact of the mean-field approximation. The exact treatment reveals a tail of the subgap states formed in the classically gapped region. The physical origin of these states is related to fluctuations, when some rear disorder configurations, missed on the mean-field level, lead to local shifts of the spectral edges. Averaging over fluctuations then results in the spatially homogeneous nonzero subgap DOS. Fluctuation smearing of the gap edge was first considered by A different approach to the description of the subgap states in diffusive superconductors was elaborated in early 2000s by Simons and co-authors The apparent discrepancy between the results of Larkin and Ovchinnikov An important feature of disorder-induced gap smearing is its large degree of universality in the vicinity of E g , where any type of nonpotential disorder can be mapped onto an effective random order parameter (ROP) model The problem with infinitesimally weak magnetic impurities was reduced to the ROP model in Ref. Subgap states due to magnetic impurities in otherwise clean superconductors were considered in Refs. The purpose of the present paper is to extend the ap- proach of Ref. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we formulate the model and discuss the main results. In Sec. III, we formulate our field-theoretical approach, underlining the procedure of averaging over Poissonian statistics of magnetic impurities. Section IV is devoted to description of the replica-symmetry-breaking instanton solution, responsible for the subgap DOS. We also map our problem to the ROP model. In Sec. V, the developed approach is applied to several limiting cases. Possibility of experimental observation of the predicted DOS tails is discussed in Sec. VI. Finally, we present our conclusions in Sec. VII. Some technical details are presented in Appendices. Throughout the paper we employ the units with = k B = 1. We consider a dirty s-wave superconductor with both potential and magnetic disorder. Scattering on potential impurities preserving the electron spin is assumed to be the dominant mechanism of momentum relaxation. On time scales larger than the elastic mean free time τ , electron motion becomes diffusive with the diffusion constant D. A much weaker magnetic (spin-flip) scattering is described by the Hamiltonian We make the same assumptions about the magnetic disorder as in Refs. where the points r i have a Poisson distribution, and (b) spins of different magnetic impurities are statistically independent and the distribution over orientations is uniform, ). Magnetic impurities are characterized by the two dimensionless parameters: 0 < μ 1 and 0 < η. The parameter of "unitarity" μ, defined as (where ν is the DOS at the Fermi energy per one spin projection), controls the strength of a single impurity (μ → 0 is the Born limit, and μ ∼ 1 is the unitary limit) where n s is the average concentration of magnetic impurities. In their original treatment, AG ρ(E) in the (η, μ) plane. The AGSR DOS at E = 0 is zero (finite) below (above) the solid blue line. The impurity band is resolved (merged with the continuum) above (below) the dashed red line. Insets illustrate typical behavior of ρ(E) in each region The results of the mean-field calculation of the DOS by Abrikosov and Gor'kov Abrikosov and Gor'kov Later it was realized localized at the length scale Equation ( Adding more impurities leads to the overlap of the states localized on different impurities, and a well-defined impurity band between E g1 and E g2 is formed inside the superconducting gap. The width of the band grows with increasing the impurity concentration (i.e., increasing η). Shiba (a) no gap edges, gapless regime; 3. Position of the spectrum edges Egi (normalized to ∆) vs. (η, μ). Depending on the (η, μ) values, the number of the spectrum edges varies from zero to three (the corresponding three sheets on the plot are denoted by Eg1, Eg2, and Eg3). The bold yellow line (lying in the η = 0 plane) traces the position of the single-impurity localized state E0 [Eq. ( (b) AG regime with one spectrum edge E g1 (the impurity band merged with the continuum); (c) the impurity band touches zero, so the two spectrum edges are the upper edge of the impurity band (E g2 ) and the lower edge of the continuum (E g3 ); (d) the impurity band is detached both from zero and the continuum, so there are two edges of the impurity band (E g1 and E g2 ) and the lower edge of the continuum (E g3 ). Evolution of the gap edges, E gi (η, μ), demonstrating the transitions between the above regimes, is shown in Fig. where the energy-dependent spectral angle ψ must be obtained from the algebraic equation with Since real ψ leads to a vanishing DOS, the disappearance of a real solution of Eq. ( Hard mean-field gap edges are smeared by fluctuations, leading to the average DOS sketched in Fig. Though the original problem is three-dimensional, the effective dimensionality of the instanton, d = 0, 1, 2, or 3, is determined from comparison of the sample dimensions to the instanton (optimal fluctuation) size L E given by Eq. (69) below. In the present analysis, we restrict ourselves to the three-and zero-dimensional geometries. The cases d = 1 and d = 2 require special treatment due to the presence of multiple instanton solutions and will be reconsidered elsewhere According to the general consideration of Ref. Once the mapping to the ROP model is identified, one can apply the known results In the ROP model, a nonzero DOS in the gapped region originates from the interplay of potential disorder and disorder in ∆(r), which is taken care of by the parameter K. The instanton action S inst is proportional [see Eq. ( where the functions φ 1 (r) and φ 2 (r) should be obtained from the system of coupled differential equations The system ( which is controlled by the dimensionless distance from the gap edge (note that our definition of the dimensionless distance ǫ is different from ε in Ref. In general, Eqs. ( As we demonstrate in Sec. IV, the problem of Poissonian magnetic impurities also fits the phenomenology of the ROP model. In order to apply the results of Ref. Below we present the general expression for the subgap DOS, while the correlation function f (q) in the case of magnetic impurities is discussed in Sec. II C 3. In the formulas below, the effective dimensionality of the instanton may take the values d = 3 and d = 0. The instanton action is proportional to S 0 (K) given by Eq. ( Finally, the value of ǫ * entering the definition of K(ǫ) in Eq. ( Equations ( As ǫ grows, the role of mesoscopic fluctuations becomes increasingly important. In the regime of ǫ ≫ ǫ * the subgap states are solely due to optimal fluctuations of potential disorder, with another universal behavior The dimensionless functions α d (η, μ) and β d (η, μ) are defined in Eqs. ( Reducing the problem of magnetic impurities to the ROP model valid in the vicinity of the mean-field gap is the most delicate issue. The reason is that there exist several physically distinct mechanisms which contribute to the effective correlation function The terms in this equation refer to the following types of effective inhomogeneities: 1. f ns (q) -fluctuations due to inhomogeneity of the concentration of magnetic impurities; 2. f s (q) -fluctuations involving the triplet sector induced by a random spin orientation of magnetic impurities; 3. f ∆ MF (q) -mesoscopic fluctuations of the orderparameter field ∆(r) due to randomness in positions of potential impurities. The last two contributions, f s (q) and f ∆ MF (q), were analyzed in the case of infinitesimally weak magnetic impurities (μ → 0) in Ref. Here, we focus on the term f ns (q) which is proportional to 1/g ξ but contains an additional small factor of μ, vanishing in the Born limit (μ → 0). It gives the leading contribution to the correlation function which will be assumed thereafter. Under this condition, the effective ROP correlation function f (q) ≈ f ns (q) is determined by fluctuations of the concentration of magnetic impurities, n s (r) = n s + δn s (r). In the zeromomentum limit, it can be written as where the first term in the sum is due to fluctuations of the spin-flip scattering rate (at a constant ∆), whereas the second term is due to fluctuations of ∆(r) (at a constant η). They are combined additively in Eq. ( where ψ g is the spectral angle at the gap edge [see Eq. (A1) below]. The value of C(0) depends on the particular gap edge considered, it is positive for E g1 and negative for E g2 and E g3 . The implicit temperature dependence of C(0) originates from that of ψ g since the parameter η is expressed in terms of the temperature-dependent ∆(T ) [Eq. ( (27) Contrary to C(0) [Eq. ( The relative magnitude of the two contributions, C(0) and C ∆ (0), depends on η and μ, and on a particular gap edge considered. Each of them can dominate in a certain region of parameters as discussed in Sec. V. We emphasize here that our reduction to the effective ROP model [Eqs. ( In order to study the DOS in disordered superconductors with magnetic impurities, we employ the standard sigma-model approach in the replica representation The problem formulation is the same as in the paper by Marchetti and Simons We consider the situation when the spin-flip scattering rate is much smaller than the potential scattering rate, τ ≪ τ s ; however, the strength of an individual magnetic impurity (characterized by the parameter μ) is not necessarily weak. In this case, it is convenient to postpone averaging over magnetic disorder to the final step of the derivation. After averaging over potential disorder and integrating over fermions, the standard derivation written in terms of the imaginary-time action S: Here, λ is the Cooper-channel interaction constant, T is the temperature, n is the number of replicas, tr stands for the trace over E ⊗ R ⊗ N ⊗ S, while Tr acts also in the coordinate space. The inverse Green operator is given by where ε is the Matsubara energy, and τ i and σ i are the Pauli matrices in the Nambu and spin spaces, respectively. The matrix Q is subject to the standard nonlinear constraint Q 2 = 1, and obeys the symmetry where the transposition acts in the energy space as well. The average DOS can be extracted from Q εε analytically continued to real energies E, see Eq. ( The resulting sigma-model action can be written as where S D is the standard diffusive action (we choose ∆ to be real), and the magnetic part S mag originates from the last term in Eq. ( If the distance between the magnetic impurities, n -1/3 s , is much larger than the mean free path due to potential (nonmagnetic) disorder l [44], we can approximate Then the magnetic part of the action becomes separable in the individual magnetic impurities where the dimensionless parameter α is defined in Eq. (3). Replacing the full action S mag by Eq. ( In what follows, we will neglect the effects of induced spin magnetization and consider only the singlet sector of the theory, Q = Q 0 σ 0 [such an approximation is justified under the condition where we introduced the concentration of magnetic impurities [cf. Eq. ( Performing Poisson averaging over magnetic disorder with the help of the relation where n s is the average concentration of magnetic impurities, we find the magnetic contribution to the sigmamodel action: An important feature of this expression (where one can easily recognize the moment-generating function for the Poisson distribution) is its nonlinear dependence on tr ln[1 + α(Qτ 3 ) 2 ], which will be crucial for the analysis of subgap states. Equation ( In the problem of magnetic impurities, the field can be identified as a primary fluctuator responsible for the formation of the subgap states through the Larkin-Ovchinnikov mechanism Another point which distinguishes our treatment from the analysis of Ref. The action ( A routine approach would be to work with the magnetic part S av mag [Eq. ( Due to self-consistency, the order parameter adapts to fluctuations of the concentration of magnetic impurities. This can be described in terms of a (replica-symmetric) linear response of ∆ 1 (r) = ∆(r) -∆ to δn s (r), which in the momentum representation can be written as The temperature-dependent response kernel C ∆ (q) is calculated in Appendix B [Eq. (B10)] by summation over Matsubara energies. The kernel C ∆ (q) is positive, and the sign in Eq. ( where Having eliminated fluctuations of the order-parameter field, we arrive at the action S[Q] = S D + S mag + S OPF and are in a position to perform the final averaging over magnetic disorder. Both S mag and S OPF are linear in n s , representing two ways inhomogeneities in the distribution of magnetic impurities affect the system: through fluctuations of the overlap between the localized states (S mag ) and through the self-consistent modification of ∆ (S OPF ). Averaging S mag + S OPF over the Poissonian distribution of n s (r) is straightforward, leading to the following term in the action [which in the absence of the orderparameter fluctuations reduces to S av mag given by Eq. (43)]: Combined with the standard diffusive action S D [Eq. ( The nonlinear action S ns simplifies significantly in the vicinity of the spectrum edge, at E → E g , where the replica symmetry breaking (RSB) is weak, all traces in Eq. ( where and omitted terms contain higher powers of the trace. In Sec. IV B, we will see that the first two terms in the action (50) are sufficient to describe the subgap tail states in the vicinity of the spectrum edge (an analogous simplification has been recently carried out for the problem of vacancies in chiral metals) mag can be naturally interpreted as resulting from averaging of the action S mag + S OPF over Gaussian fluctuations of δn s specified by the correlation function The fact that the Poissonian distribution of magnetic impurities can be effectively described by Gaussian fluctuations should not be surprising. In the vicinity of a spectrum edge, E → E g , the characteristic spatial scale [L E , see Eq. ( Here, the first two terms are linear in the trace and lead to the AGSR theory at the replica-symmetric saddle point (Sec. IV A), whereas the last term is quadratic in the trace and is responsible for gap fluctuations due to fluctuations in n s (r). The simplified action (54) will be used in Sec. IV B for the universal description of subgap states near the gap edge. A. Replica-symmetric saddle point We start the analysis of the effective action (54) with the simplest replica-symmetric case. The stationary replica-diagonal spin-singlet saddle point can be parametrized in terms of the spectral angle θ a ε as Then only the linear-in-trace part of the action becomes important: with the Lagrangian (written up to a constant term vanishing in the replica limit) where the parameter μ is defined in Eq. (3). The average DOS is calculated as where Q EE is the expectation value of Q with the action S, analytically continued to real energies: ε → -iE. To simplify the analysis of the subgap states, it is convenient to switch to a variable ψ In terms of ψ a E , the Lagrangian L acquires the form Varying the action (2) mag as well as higher-order terms in Eq. ( Subgap states are known to be associated with the RSB instantons (A similar form of the RSB in the energy space was considered in the context of energy level statistics in random matrices In order to get the instanton equation for the fields ψ 1 (r) and ψ 2 (r), one has to substitute the ansatz (61) into the saddle-point equations for the action (49). The resulting system can be written as where the positive (negative) sign in front of the last term corresponds to a = 1 (2). The instanton equations (62) are quite cumbersome and in a general situation (arbitrary E) can be treated only numerically. Remarkably, the analysis simplifies considerably in the vicinity of the spectral gap, E → E g (the precise conditions will be formulated in Sec. IV D below), where one can use the simplified action (54) and map the system onto the ROP model with a proper correlator f (0). The key point in this mapping is that near the gap edge the RSB is weak, ψ 1 and ψ 2 are close to each other, and the action (54) can thus be expanded in ψ 1 -ψ 2 . In the replica limit (n → 0), the linear-in-trace part where the factor of 2 accounts for the doublet {ε 0 , -ε 0 } in Eq. ( The cubic term ought to be retained since the coefficient in front of the quadratic term, F ′ (ψ 0 ) ≈ F ′′ (ψ g )(ψ 0 -ψ g ), vanishes at E = E g : where ǫ is defined in Eq. ( To complete the mapping to the ROP model, consider the quadratic-in-trace part S (2) mag in the action where f (0) acquires the form of Eq. ( The form of the prefactor in Eq. ( To write the resulting action in the canonic form, we introduce the new fields φ 1,2 according to and switch to the dimensionless coordinate r = r/L E . Here, the length scale where F ′ (ψ 0 ) is given by Eq. ( The strength of replica mixing is controlled by the dimensionless parameter where the crossover scale ǫ * can be represented in the form Varying the action (70), we arrive at the universal system Below, we briefly overview the properties of the system (15) obtained in Refs. We start the analysis of the K-dependence of the instanton action with the simplest zero-dimensional case realized for superconducting grains smaller than the instanton size, L E . In this case, ρ(E) ∝ exp(-S inst ) gives the DOS averaged over an ensemble of grains where the signs are chosen in order to provide a positive action. Calculating the instanton action with the help of Eq. ( is depicted by the dashed lines in Fig. 2. Instanton in the limit K → 0 In the limit K → 0 (i.e., far enough from the gap edge, ǫ ≫ ǫ * ), Eqs. ( both for φ 1 (r) and φ 2 (r). This equation has a bounce solution φ (d) inst (r) vanishing for r → ∞ (in 1D, this solution is known explicitly, while for other dimensions it can be found numerically). The action ( Finally, with the help of Eq. ( 3. Instanton in the limit K → ∞ In the limit K → ∞ (i.e., close to the gap edge, ǫ ≪ ǫ * ), the RSB is weak: φ 1 -φ 2 → 0. Due to a remarkable dimensional reduction inst (r). The instanton action (14) in the limit K → ∞ then reads where c d is the dimensionality-dependent constant Substituting Eq. ( Here, we summarize conditions on ǫ which allow us to derive the universal description near the gap edge developed in Sec. IV B. This description is based on (i) an expansion of the linear-in-trace action, defined by Eqs. ( Considering approximation (i), we immediately see that the expansion in powers of (ψ i -ψ 0 ) requires with the characteristic value of ǫ 1 estimated from Eqs. (65) and (68). At the same time, one can check that approximation (65) itself requires Actually, it can be shown that conditions (81) and (82) also justify other approximations related to the linear-intrace action [neglecting the fourth-order (ψ i -ψ 0 ) 4 term in Eq. ( With parametrization ( With this notation, approximation (ii) requiring that the cubic (ψ 1 -ψ 2 ) 3 term can be neglected in Eq. (66), imposes an additional requirement Finally, approximation (iii) implying that S mag can be neglected, requires (86) Thus, the conditions (81), ( The results for the instanton action obtained above are valid for arbitrary μ (strength of individual magnetic impurities) and η (their concentration), and apply in the vicinity of any of the three possible spectrum edges. The general recipe for calculating the instanton action is outlined at the end of Sec. II C. In the Larkin-Ovchinnikov regime, at ǫ ≪ ǫ * , the subgap DOS is determined by optimal fluctuations of the concentration of magnetic impurities characterized by the parameter f (0) = n s [C(0) + C ∆ (0)] 2 . The two terms here correspond to fluctuations of the pairbreaking rate (η) and the order parameter (∆), both being induced by δn s (r). The ratio of these two contributions, C ∆ (0)/C(0), calculated numerically is presented in Fig. Different signs of C(0) and C ∆ (0) for different gap edges can be qualitatively understood by analyzing the mean-field expressions for E g available in the limiting cases: while E g is generally an increasing function of ∆, it decays with η for E g1 [Eqs. Further analytical progress is possible in certain limiting cases discussed below. Sufficiently far from the gap edge, at ǫ ≫ ǫ * (while still ǫ ≪ ǫ 1 , ǫ 2 , ǫ 3 , ǫ 4 so that our approximations are valid, see Sec. IV D), the average DOS is given by Eq. The effective instanton dimensionality below takes the values d = 3 and d = 0. A. Weak magnetic impurities (small μ) Consider now the gapped AG regime (magnetic impurities are weak, almost in the Born limit, so that there is only one spectrum edge, E g1 ): corresponding to the bottom of the region (b) in Fig. where the two terms in the brackets correspond to the contribution of C(0) and C ∆ (0), respectively. In the limit of weak pair-breaking (η ≪ 1), the value of f (0) is determined mainly by C(0), which describes fluctuations of the overlap of the states localized at different magnetic impurities due to fluctuation in their concentration (fluctuations of η). On the other hand, near the gap closing, at η ∼ 1, the order-parameter fluctuations induced by magnetic impurities give a comparable contribution [with a moderately large numerical factor C ∆ (0)/C(0) ≈ 3.6 as η → 1]. The ratio C ∆ (0)/C(0) for the spectrum edge E g1 is shown in Fig. The main asymptotics of the DOS tail at ǫ ≪ ǫ * is governed by the action with f (0) given by Eq. (88). In the case of weak spin-flip scattering, η ≪ 1, Eq. (90) simplifies to where ãd = 16 • 6 -d/4 c d . Equation ( The far asymptotics of the DOS tail at ǫ ≫ ǫ * is determined by the instanton action which exactly coincides with the result of Lamacraft and Simons Analyzing the upper-bound applicability conditions for ǫ, formulated in Sec. IV D, we find that the most restrictive one is ǫ ≪ ǫ 2 , while This means that our theory based on the universal description (see Sec. IV B) can trace both the main asymptotics of the tail due to magnetic disorder (at ǫ < ǫ * ) and its far asymptotics due to potential disorder (at ǫ > ǫ * ). The physical meaning of ǫ 2 becomes transparent in the case of weak spin-flip scattering, η ≪ 1. In this limit, ǫ 2 ∼ η 2/3 , which is of the same order as the mean-field smearing of the gap edge. B. Small concentration limit (small η) Here, we consider the limit of small impurity concentration, corresponding to the left border of the region (d) in the phase diagram of Fig. 1. Smearing of the impurity band (Eg1 and Eg2) In the limit (94), the values of the spectral angles determining the mean-field edges of the impurity band are given by The edges of the impurity band are then expressed as where E 0 is the energy of the single-impurity bound state, Eq. ( Smearing of the impurity band determined by the action ( independently of the value of η. For the crossover energy, we obtain Analyzing the upper-bound applicability conditions for ǫ, formulated in Sec. IV D, we find that it is sufficient to require ǫ ≪ ǫ 2 , while ǫ 2 ∼ ǫ * . This means that our results based on the universal description (see Sec. IV B) are valid only in the regime of the main asymptotics, ǫ < ǫ * . This asymptotics of the DOS [Eq. The instanton size L E [see Eq. ( It is instructive to evaluate the instanton action (100) at ǫ ∼ (E g2 -E g1 )/2∆, which corresponds to the halfwidth of the impurity band. Parametrically, this energy scale coincides with ǫ * , and the action can be estimated as This action should be large in order for the present theory to be applicable at such energies. If the sample is thicker than ξ 0 (three-dimensional case, d = 3), this condition is equivalent to the requirement that there should be many magnetic impurities within the localization volume, L 3 0 , of the single-impurity bound state [see Eq. ( Finally, we address fluctuation smearing of the edge of the continuum spectrum, E → E g3 -0. In the limit (94), the third, largest root of Eq. (A1) is given by e ψg3 ≈ 4μ/η, and the mean-field spectrum edge is (note that E g3 is slightly higher than ∆; this fact can be viewed as a result of level repulsion between the impurity band and the continuum). Then F ′′ (ψ g3 ) ≈ -η/2μ. In the zero-temperature limit, the effective ROP correlator ( where the two terms in the brackets correspond to the contribution of C(0) and C ∆ (0), respectively. At not too small μ, C ∆ (0) dominates, whereas C(0) becomes the leading contribution in a very narrow region μ 4/3 ≪ η 2/3 ≪ μ ≪ 1, see Fig. The crossover energy following from Eq. ( Equation ( The far asymptotics at ǫ ≫ ǫ * is governed by the action The outcome of the upper-bound applicability conditions for ǫ, formulated in Sec. IV D, depends on the relation between the two terms in the brackets of Eqs. ( In the regime μ 4/3 ≪ η 2/3 ≪ μ ≪ 1 [very narrow green strip in Fig. At the same time, the dimensionless energy scale η 2 /μ 2 not only determines the difference between E g3 and ∆, but also sets the width of the DOS "coherence peak" above E g3 . In the regime μ 4/3 ≪ η 2/3 ≪ μ ≪ 1, this scale coincides with ǫ * , and making a shift of this order from E g3 into the subgap region, we find . The requirement S inst ≫ 1 at such energies then implies that the number of magnetic impurities within the instanton volume is large. In the regime η 2/3 ≪ μ 4/3 , where the second term in the brackets of Eqs. ( This means that the universal description breaks down at ǫ ∼ ǫ 4 ≪ ǫ * , where the subgap states are still due to fluctuations of magnetic disorder. Finally, if η ∼ μ 2 so that the two terms in the brackets of Eqs. ( A number of experimental techniques can be used to probe peculiarities of the DOS in superconductors with magnetic impurities. The gap suppression, predicted by the AG theory The width Γ tail of the DOS tail that needs to be experimentally resolved, according to our predictions, depends on the particular spectral edge. In order to get a feeling of possible numbers, we consider the limit of weak magnetic impurities and weak spin-flip scattering, μ ≪ η 2/3 ≪ 1, with only one spectrum edge, E g1 (see Sec. V A). Rewriting the main asymptotics of the DOS tail given by Eq. (91) in the form we find the width of the tail, For a small superconducting grain (d = 0), with the parameters μ = 0.1, η = 0.2, g ξ = 10 as an example, we obtain Γ tail /∆ ≈ 0.2. We therefore expect that predicted tails of the DOS can be measured with the help of modern experimental techniques. In order to distinguish the edge smearing on top of the thermal broadening, the temperature should be lower than Γ tail . We have calculated the subgap DOS tails in diffusive superconductors with pointlike magnetic impurities of arbitrary strength described by the Poissonian statistics. Hard spectral gaps obtained in the mean-field approximation are smeared due to rare fluctuations producing localized quasiparticle states in the classically forbidden region. The central question then is to identify the fluctuator responsible for the formation of the subgap states. In the present problem, there are two types of such fluctuators: (i) random potential leading to mesoscopic fluctuations (potential disorder), and (ii) concentration of magnetic impurities (nonpotential disorder). In the framework of the replica sigma-model approach, the smearing of the hard mean-field gaps and the appearance of the tail states is described by instantons with the broken replica symmetry. In the vicinity of E gi , the general system of instanton equations (62) can be simplified, taking the universal form In deriving the effective ROP correlation function f (q), we obtain that fluctuating concentration of magnetic impurities (nonpotential disorder) affects the DOS in two ways: directly, via fluctuations of the pair-breaking parameter [see Eq. ( Our present analysis also unveils the limits of the universal description based on the ROP model. With the function F (ψ) [Eq. Our reduction to the effective ROP model was performed under assumption of an arbitrary function F (ψ). Therefore it may be used for the analysis of other problems when the hard gap in superconducting systems is smeared by disorder. However, each time the effective correlation function f (0) should be recalculated independently. Finally, we emphasize that our treatment is limited to the three-and zero-dimensional instanton geometries. Though our reduction to the effective ROP model is valid for any dimensionality d, formation of the subgap states in the ROP model in the one-and two-dimensional cases should be reconsidered due to the presence of multiple instanton solutions 2. ∆(r) suppression near a single magnetic impurity As a byproduct of our consideration, we can find the suppression of ∆ in the vicinity of a single magnetic impurity. For that, in Eq. (B10) we should take L(q) and Π ε (q) on the background of purely potential scattering (n s = 0, η = 0) with cos θ ε = ε/E(ε), sin θ ε = ∆/E(ε), and E(ε) = √ ε 2 + ∆ 2 [as found from Eq. (B6)]. A single magnetic impurity (at r = 0) is described by δn s (q) = 1, and we get simply ∆ 1 (q) = -C ∆ (q). (B11) In the real space, the order parameter is suppressed on a length scale of the order of ξ 0 near the magnetic impurity. The result (B11) derived in the diffusive limit can be easily extended to the case of an arbitrary mean free path l by using a more general expression in Eq. (B10) for the cooperon propagator In particular, in the ballistic limit at Matsubara energies and real q, where v F is the Fermi momentum, and we readily reproduce the result by Rusinov 3. Zero-temperature limit for C∆(0) The general expression for the kernel C ∆ (q) is given by Eq. (B10). The value of C ∆ (0) at zero momentum can be easily evaluated at T = 0 by switching from integration over ε to integration over θ ε with the help of the relation dε/dθ ε = -E(ε)/ sin θ ε , (B14) derived from Eqs. (B5) and (B6) (note also that the spectral angle θ ε is real in the Matsubara technique). Then, T ε (. . . ) in Eq. (B10) can be calculated as , η + μ > 1. (B17) Analogously, from Eq. (B9) we obtain an expression for the fluctuation propagator in the limit of T = 0, q = 0: With the help of Eq. ( 