We report conductance and supercurrent measurements for InAs single and parallel double quantum dot Josephson junctions contacted with Nb or NbTiN superconducting electrodes. Large superconducting gap energy, high critical field and large switching current are observed, all reflecting the features of Nb-based electrodes. For the parallel double dots we observe an enhanced supercurrent when both dots are on resonance, which may reflect split Cooper pair tunneling. structures. Being a refractory metal with high melting point it is unsuitable for electron beam deposition without significant efforts to reduce the risk of oxygen contamination (for example due to outgassing resist) which can drastically effect the superconducting properties for small structures. Indeed there have been no reports on fabrication of QDJJs with InAs SAQDs contacted by electrodes made from Nb or other large superconducting gap materials to date, whereas there are a number of reports on InAs or InSb nanowires coupled to such superconductors SQDJJs and DQDJJs were fabricated in the following way. InAs SAQDs are grown on the surface of a GaAs substrate by molecular beam epitaxy. The area density of the dots is 1.5-2×10 9 /cm 2 , and the typical dot diameter ranges from 50 to 200 nm. During growth, a Si-doped layer is included 300nm below the surface to be used as a global backgate. Since the InAs SAQDs are randomly distributed on the GaAs surface, precise alignment is required for placing the contacting electrodes in the right positions. For this purpose we preselect QDs using images taken with a low-damage SEM (JSM-7500FA) and obtain their coordinates in relations to previously fabricated nanoscale markers. We note that devices made using a conventional SEM were unable to achieve working devices despite accurate alignment and so the use of a gentle beam or low damage SEM system (or AFM observation in other studies) was critical to limit damage to the device. The typical misalignment of the deposited electrodes was 10 to 20 nm. We select nominal 150nm-diameter quantum dots to make SQDJJs (See Fig. We first focus on the characterization of the SQDJJs with Ti/Nb contacts. We measured the differential conductance of SQDJJs under voltage bias using a conventional lock-in technique with frequency of 37 Hz and ac excitation voltage of V ac =5 μV. The samples were immersed in a shows the differential conductance as a function of source-drain voltage V sd and backgate voltage V bg measured for an out-of-plane magnetic field B z = 0T. At around V sd =±1.1mV, conductance peaks due to direct quasi-particle tunneling are observed. Coulomb diamonds are not clearly visible due to the presence of these peaks, though from the data taken in high magnetic field of ~4T we obtained the charging energy U = 2-3 meV, and the level spacing ξ~1 meV 27 , which are comparable with those of previous measurements for InAs SAQDs of the same size. Typical critical temperature and critical field of the contact leads are evaluated as ~7.0K and ~4.5T. The critical temperature measured is smaller than that measured on separately fabricated thin films which show T c ~8.5K. Fig. Although we confirmed contact of Nb electrodes to InAs SAQDs, we could not detect supercurrent flow in any of the devices we fabricate. The combination of electron beam deposited Ti contact/adhesion layer and sputtered Nb maybe non-ideal as the sputtered layer can easily cover the edge of the Ti layer. As a result the leading edge of the contact to the dot maybe Nb rather than Ti/Nb affecting the junction transparency. To improve this issue we studied sputtered NbTiN contacts which did not require the deposition of additional contacting films. From here, all experiments were performed in a He 3 -He 4 dilution refrigerator with base temperature of 50 mK and fridge lines with homemade copper powder, 2 nd order RC and pi filters. The measured differential conductance dI/dV sd at B z =0 T is shown in Fig. The measured differential resistance dV sd /dI sd at B z = 0 T is shown in Fig. ,which is shown in Fig. Shown in Fig. Finally we will discuss DQDJJs with NbTiN electrodes, which were prepared in the same way as the SQDJJs but with two closely spaced InAs dots (see Fig. as a schematic illustration: both dots on resonance in red (D) and orange (B) and QD1 only on resonance in cyan (A), blue (C), and black (E), respectively. Here the resistance of 7.5 kΩ (extracted from an V-I trace with the minimum zero-bias resistance), which is attributed to imperfect transparency and thermal phase diffusion Fig. In conclusion, we have fabricated InAs SAQD Josephson junctions with Nb-based electrodes. The observed superconducting transport properties resemble those from previous studies, but physical quantities to characterize the superconductivity, such as critical current and critical field, are higher than those measured in QDJJs with InAs SAQDs contacted by Al electrodes. We have also fabricated double-dot Josephson junctions. From the zero-bias conductance measurement with the two side-gate voltages we confirm the stability diagram of the parallel double dot. In the current bias measurements we observe enhanced conductance near zero-current and its suppression at a finite current, suggesting a flow of supercurrent when one of the two dots is on resonance. In addition, we observe a tendency of increased current threshold when both dots are on resonance, providing strong evidence for the presence of split Cooper pair tunneling. These results are encouraging for future experiments in high magnetic fields to probe non-local spin-entanglement of split Cooper-pairs. We would also like to note that devices comprised of arrays of QDs coupled to a superconductor have been proposed for the study of Majorana fermions # of words : TEXT+CAPTIONS+FIGURES+EQUATION=2443+329+705+16=3493(words) 