Type-II superconductors owe their magnetic and transport properties to vortex pinning, the immobilization of flux quanta through material inhomogeneities or defects. Characterizing the potential energy landscape for vortices, the pinning landscape (or short, pinscape), is of great technological importance. Besides measurement of the critical current density jc and of creep rates S, the ac magnetic response provides valuable information on the pinscape which is different from that obtained through jc or S, with the Campbell penetration depth λC defining a characteristic quantity well accessible in an experiment. Here, we derive a microscopic expression for the Campbell penetration depth λC using strong pinning theory. Our results explain the dependence of λC on the state preparation of the vortex system and the appearance of hysteretic response. Analyzing different pinning models, metallic or insulating inclusions as well as δTc-and δ -pinning, we discuss the behavior of the Campbell length for different vortex state preparations within the phenomenological H-T phase diagram and compare our results with recent experiments. In a type-II superconductor, the magnetic field H penetrates the material in the form of vortices When measuring a material's ac response, a small magnetic field h ac is applied on top of a large dc field B 0 . In Campbell's original phenomenological approach A phenomenological approach as described above cannot relate the measured penetration depth λ C to the microscopic parameters of the pinscape. In particular, it is unclear how such a simple description can deal with the Bean critical state Vortex pinning, including j c , is usually described within either of two frameworks, weak collective pinning due to the joint action of many weak defects or strong pinning produced by a low density of strong impurities In the following, we first review the general approach to the ac response (Sec. II) and then introduce the strong pinning formalism in Sec. III. We derive a quantitative relation between the Campbell length and the microscopic pinning potential and discuss the generic dependence of λ C on the state preparation (e.g., FC vs. ZFC) as well as hysteretic effects. In Sec. IV, we analyze the pinning characteristics of four types of defects, namely insulating and metallic inclusions as well as δT c -and δ -pins. In Sec. V we compare our findings with recent measurements 20 on SrPd 2 Ge 2 and find good overall agreement using a pinscape with a scaling characteristic of insulating defects. A brief account of parts of this work can be found in Refs. [25] and [26]. We analyze the magnetic response of a bulk superconducting sample subject to a static field H and a parallel ac perturbation with a small amplitude h ac H. While the magnetic field H induces a vortex lattice with an average induction B 0 in the sample, the small ac-field induces motion of these vortices. We choose a geometry with a superconductor filling the half-space X > 0 with the sample surface, magnetic field, and Z-axis arranged in parallel. This corresponds, up to finite size effects, to a sample in a slab geometry arranged parallel to Z where demagnetization effects are absent. We will briefly discuss the geometry of a thin platelet-like sample (arranged in the XY -plane) at the end of the section. On the macroscopic level, the vortex lattice can be described as an elastic medium and its response to the ac perturbation is reflected in a macroscopic displacement field U (X, t) of the flux-lines. We use capital letters when describing macroscopic coordinates and displacements and denote their microscopic counterparts (below) by lower-case symbols. Starting from an initial field B 0 (X) and current j 0 (X) at time t = 0, the vector potential δA = U (X, t)B 0 (X) associated with the vortex lattice displacement U induces time-dependent corrections of the form The above expressions are valid in the linear-response regime where U is the smallest length and (∂ X B 0 )U B 0 (∂ X U ). Integrating Eq. ( The distribution of this flux within the sample generates an additional induction δB(X, t) on top of the dc field B 0 (X), see also Sec. III C. Having reduced the change in fields and currents to the macroscopic displacement field U (X, t) of vortices, we can find the dynamical response of B(X, t) through the equation of motion of the flux-line lattice, which balances the dissipative Bardeen-Stephen term with η = BH c2 /ρ n c 2 against the sum of Lorentz and pinning force densities, F L = (j 0 + δj)B 0 /c and F pin = F 0 + δF pin . The static initial state is characterized by a pinning force F 0 that exactly compensates the Lorentz force j 0 B 0 /c and the right-hand side vanishes identically (for a field-cooled sample both F 0 and j 0 vanish individually). Hence, the dynamic equation ( Making use of Eq. ( It remains to find an expression for the change in pinning force density δF pin (U ). Referring to Campbell's original work Using this Ansatz, the equation of motion (5) can readily be solved for the displacement field U (X, t), from which the field and current dynamics follow via Eqs. ( at low frequencies ω → 0. The Campbell length thus relates the ac penetration depth with the pinning properties of vortices through the curvature α of the effective pinning potential, a relation that has widely been used to characterize the pinning landscape. However, inferring the properties of the pinning landscape from the experimental measurements based on a simple phenomenological model is prone to misjudgments. We therefore proceed with a microscopic approach based on strong pinning theory Before doing so, we briefly touch upon geometric aspects of the problem. For the slab geometry chosen here (with magnetic fields along Z and currents along Y ), the contributions from shear and tilt deformations average to zero and only the bulk compression modulus c 11 (k = 0) = B 2 0 /4π enters in Eq. ( Within strong pinning theory as originally discussed by Labusch 1. Schematic view of the vortex distortion near a pinning center. The pinned vortex (red) with asymptotic position rμ = rp is deformed to rp +u(rp, z) by the presence of the pin (black dot). Nearby vortices with ν = μ (blue) are deformed as well with their deformation u(rν , z) transported by the elastic Green's function G(rν -rp, zν -z). The full pinning problem can be reduced to a self-consistency equation for the deformation u(rp) ≡ u(rp, 0) of the pinned vortex at the height z = 0 of the defect. where r μ + u(r μ , z) is the real position of the μ-th flux line with u(r μ , z) its microscopic displacement field away from the equilibrium position r μ . Variational minimization of the elastic deformation and pinning energies results Here, α and β index the in-plane components x and y, and ν is a vortex label and we assume summation over double indices. Inserting Eq. ( For a pinning potential with a trapping range smaller than the inter-vortex distance a 0 and pinning at most one vortex, only one term is relevant in the above summation and we arrive at with r p = r μ the equilibrium position of the vortex in the vicinity of the pinning site. Evaluating (12) for this vortex at r ν = r p and z ν = 0, we obtain the self-consistency condition for the displacement u α (r p ) ≡ u α (r p , 0) of the vortex pinned at the defect site. This expression can be further simplified by exploiting the isotropy of the local Green's function, G αβ (0, 0) = δ αβ / C, with the effective elasticity C defined through The integration of the reciprocal-space elastic Green's function over the vortex lattice Brillouin zone (BZ) involves the dispersive compression-[c 11 (k, k z )] and tilt-[c 44 (k, k z )] as well as the non-dispersive shear moduli (c 66 ), see also Ref. [30]. Here k = |k| is the norm of the in-plane momentum k = (k x , k y ). Performing the integration in Eq. ( The determination of the numerical factor ν requires an accurate evaluation of the linear response of a vortex to a local force. Simple estimates for ν can be obtained through the approximate evaluation of the integral in Eq. ( ], see Refs. [32] and [30], and assuming k 2 λ 2 k 2 z λ 2 and k 2 λ 2 1, we can extend the integral over k z to infinity and limit the planar integral to the circularized Brillouin zone k 2 < 4π/a 2 0 . Using these approximations, we arrive at a numerical ν = 4. The alternative estimate is based on a flux line with elasticity ε l = ε 0 trapped within a cage potential V cage = πε 0 (u/a 0 ) 2 set up by the neighboring vortices Making use of the effective elasticity C, Eq. ( where we have dropped the subscript in the vortex-pin distance, r p → r. It is the appearance of multiple solutions of this non-linear self-consistency equation which is at the origin of the strong pinning phenomenon. Inserting the solution u(r) of Eq. ( associated with the total energy (18): evaluating the total derivative ∇ r e pin (r), we can express the gradient -∇ r e p (r) through the bare pinning force, -∇ r e p (r) = f p (r), and making use of Eq. ( Hence, a multi-valued solution of Eq. ( For the geometry introduced in Sec. II and discussed below, we simplify the formalism further by assuming that all vortex trajectories with impact parameter 2|y| < t ⊥ experience maximal pinning, i.e., that of a vortex hitting the defect head-on with y = 0. For a small pinning center, the transverse length t ⊥ is of the order of the vortex core size ξ (the coherence length), while t ⊥ is determined by the pin size for a large defect. With this simplification, the problem reduces to one effective dimension with Eqs. ( The self-consistency equation ( diverges with increasing pinning force for the first time when the maximal force derivative f p matches the elasticity C. This onset of strong pinning then is defined by the Labusch criterion κ = 1, where κ ≡ max x [f p (x)/ C] denotes the Labusch parameter. At small values of κ < 1, i.e., when f p (x) < C for any x, the force profile f pin (x) is single valued and u (x) always has the same sign as Within the strong pinning framework, this weak pinning regime κ < 1 is associated with a vanishing average pinning force F pin = 0 and hence j c = 0. At the same time, the absence of force jumps is associated with a divergent Campbell length λ C = ∞, see below. These results are modified if collective phenomena are included in the model, a topic that goes beyond the present work. For κ > 1, the pinning force profile f pin (x) turns multivalued with inflection points at ±x -and ±x + (0 < x -< x + ) where Eq. ( Hence, the Labusch criterion 27 κ = f p (x m )/ C = 1, with max x [f p (x)] = f p (x m ) realized at x m , serves as a quantitative separation between the regimes of weak (κ < 1) and strong (κ > 1) pinning. As pinning vanishes alltogether at κ < 1, one often uses the distinction between weak, intermediate, and strong 'strong-pinning' regimes with different j c -scalings, j c ∝ (κ -1) 2 and j c ∝ κ 2 , at the two extremes. With the formalism of strong pinning at hand, we are now ready to discuss the physical implications of vortex pinning by a low density of pinning centers. For randomly (and homogeneously) distributed pinning sites with a small density n p (see below for a quantitative criterion), the macroscopic pinning force density F pin results from proper averaging of the microscopic forces (22), with ] referring to the occupied branches u o in the effective force profile f pin (x). In the zero-field-cooled (critical) state, the pinning landscape acts with the critical force density F pin = -F c against the Lorentz force density jB 0 /c, thus defining the critical current density j c = cF c /B 0 . This maximal pinning force density is achieved when the pinned branch u p (x) is occupied in a maximally asymmetric way between -x - to x + , see Fig. where ∆e pin denotes the sum of the jumps in e pin (x) between pinned and unpinned branches at the positions -x -and x + . More precisely, ∆e pin = (e up pine p pin ) -x-+ (e p pine up pin ) x+ , where the superscripts 'up' and 'p' denote unpinned and pinned branches. While Eq. ( with the depairing current j dp = cΦ 0 /(12 √ 3π 2 λ 2 ξ) and the small parameter n p a 0 ξ The Campbell penetration depth λ C is another measureable quantity characterizing the pinning landscape. In a microscopic derivation of λ C , we have to find the dynamical change in pinning force δF pin [U (X, t)]. The latter is determined by the change in branch occupation due to the macroscopic displacement U of the vortex lattice. As shown below, the macroscopic Campbell length relates to ∆f pin , the sum of the jumps in f pin (x) between occupied and unoccupied branches, and hence probes another quantity than j c , Eq. ( The Bean critical state, as described in Sec. III B, is characterized by the maximal or critical pinning force F pin = -F c with an asymmetric branch occupation. Hence, depending on the sign of U , the branch occupation will be affected differently. Specifically, for a macroscopic shift of all vortices in the direction of the Lorentz force, i.e., x → x + U with U > 0, most vortices adiabatically follow their branch, u(x) → u(x + U ). The few vortices on the unpinned (pinned) branch at distances less than U away from the branch edge at -x -(x + ) will be pushed beyond that boundary and irreversibly jump to the pinned (unpinned) solution, see inset of Fig. On the other hand, for a displacement x → x + U to the left with U < 0, i.e., against the critical slope, all vortices adiabatically follow their branches. The occupation of the pinned branch then is shifted to lie between -x -+ U and x + + U , see Fig. This drop in the critical force always appears when vortices start moving to the left and is associated with a reduction of U (X, t) with increasing time. In order to follow dynamically the appearance and disappearance of this term in the equation of motion, we introduce the max-field U 0 (X, t) = max t <t U (X, t). Whenever U (X, t) changes the direction of motion from right to left, U starts deviating from U 0 . The argument U in Eq. ( and satisfies both Eqs. ( similar to the mean force in Eq. ( The asymmetric response of the vortex system to an increasing versus decreasing field is associated with a peculiar transient initialization towards a periodic vortex motion, where on every ac cycle vortices are pumped (and diffusively penetrate) into the sample, asymptotically changing the dc field from B 0 to B 0 +h ac after many cycles. A detailed discussion of this process is presented in Ref. [26], where it is shown that the number of cycles needed to shift the critical state from B 0 to B 0 + h ac within the depth of the Bean profile L = cB 0 /4πj c is about N = (πL/2 D ) 2 , with D = (B 2 0 /2ωη) 1/2 the diffusion length per cycle period 2π/ω. After this rectification process, vortices move reversibly in their wells as U always remains below U 0 . The latter reaches the asymptotic form U 0 (X) = (h ac /B 0 )(L -X). For a sample of finite thickness d < 2L along X, d/2 replaces L is the expressions for N and U 0 . The reversible dynamics of vortices after the initialization can be solved by substituting the variable δU (X, t) ≡ U (X, t) -U 0 (X) into Eq. ( The ac response of the vortex lattice in the critical state δB(X, t) = h ac e -X/λC e -iωt + h ac [1e -X/λC ] ( is regular and involves the Campbell length λ C given by Eq. ( The field-cooled state is characterized by vanishing net currents and net pinning forces. In the strong pinning regime, the vanishing pinning force translates into a symmetric occupation of the branches, with jumps between the pinned and unpinned branch located at ±x jp ∈ [x -, x + ]. If this position is away from the branch edges x ± , the oscillation is always reversible. If x jp coincides with one of the branch edges x ± , a one-cycle initialization process reshuffles few vortices near the branch edges, after which the oscillation is reversible and the result in Eq. ( with ∆f pin now involving two identical jumps at ±x jp . In order to quantify the Campbell length in the fieldcooled state, the central remaining task is to determine the precise position of the jump x jp within the interval [x -, x + ] and find the corresponding jump ∆f pin upon changing the temperature T . For insulating or metallic inclusions, where pinning smoothly increases when crossing H c2 (T ) (see below), we can follow the branch occupation as a function of T as the system evolves from weak (κ < 1) to strong (κ > 1) pinning through the Labusch point κ(T L ) = f p (x m )/ C| TL = 1 defining the Labusch temperature T L (here, x m denotes the point of maximal slope f p ). Above the Labusch temperature, T > T L , the force profile is single valued, the critical current vanishes [see Eq. ( Depending on the temperature dependence of the elastic and pinning forces, we have identified three possible scenarios defining the (symmetric) jump positions ±x jp in the branch occupation, see Fig. In the simplest case (a), vortices at x < x 0L (x > x 0L ) follow adiabatically the evolution of the pinned (unpinned) branch and the occupation jumps at x jp = x 0L , such that ∆f pin = 2∆f pin | x0L enters the expression (28) for the Campbell length, with ∆f pin | x0L denoting the jump in f pin at x 0L . In case (b), the unpinned branch, initially existing for x > x 0L , becomes unstable in the interval [x 0L , x -]. As a result, vortices with x 0L < x < x - now occupy the pinned branch and the force jump appears at x jp = x -, with ∆f pin = 2∆f pin | x-entering λ C . Similarly, in case (b'), the vortices populate the unpinned branch in the interval [x + , x 0L ] where the pinned solution has stopped existing. The Campbell length then involves the jumps at ±x + . The repopulation of vortices from the unpinned to the pinned branch in case (b) [or vice-versa in case (b')] leads to a hysteretic response if the system is reheated after the cooling process. Consider a system in case (b) cooled to the minimal temperature T min and subsequently reheated. Upon cooling, vortices on the unpinned branch become locally unstable at x -(T ) and the jump in occupation follows x -(T ); the Campbell length Eq. ( In order to provide a quantitative insight into the evolution of x ± away from (but close to) x 0L , we expand the bare pinning force around x m , with f p (x m ) = 0 and γ ≡ -f p (x m )/2 > 0. These two conditions originate from the definition of x m as the location maximizing f p (x). Using the above expression in combination with Eqs. ( where x 0 (T ) = x mf p (x m )/ C| T is a generalization of x 0L = x 0 (T L ). Case (a) is realized when x 0 (T ) = x 0L to order (κ -1) 2 , i.e., the relevant jump is at x 0L . Solving the self-consistency equation ( x -(T min ) However, case (a) is a special situation since the term linear in (κ -1) in the expansion of x 0 , see Eq. ( Within the same approximation, the Campbell length in the Bean critical state involves one jump at -x -and one at x + ; since both jumps are equal, the result for the zero-field-cooled state coincides with that for the fieldcooled states of cases (b) and (b'). On the other hand, the non-generic case (a) features a smaller Campbell length since the associated jump centered between x -and x + is larger by a factor 2/ √ 3 ≈ 1.155. Away from the Labusch point, the degeneracy of the cases (b) and (b') is removed and all force jumps are different, with . Simple expressions can be provided in the limit κ 1, where the force jump at x jp assumes the approximate value ∆f pin | xjp Cx jp (note that the pinned branch is well described by f pin = -Cx away from the Labusch point). These jumps appear at x + = κξ for case (b') and x 0L ξ for case (a). The jump at x -(κ) for case (b) depends on the tail of the force profile f p (x) far from the pin. For a power-law decay f p (x) ∝ -(ξ/x) n , we find x -(κ) ξκ 1/(n+1) , while for an exponential tail f p (x) ∝exp(-x/ξ), we have x -(κ) ξ ln(κ). We then find with If one neglects the weak dependence of t ⊥ = 2x -on κ, the two last relations in (41) tell that the information on the pinning force f p disappears from the Campbell length in the field-cooled cases (a) and (b). More precisely, following the discussion above, the residual weak dependence of x -on κ provides information on the decay of f p (x) at large x > ξ. Applying the same estimates as in Sec. III B to the zero-field-cooled Campbell length in Eq. ( Similar to the critical current, see Sec. III B, the Campbell length involves the small parameter n p a 0 ξ 2 1 characteristic of the 3D strong pinning limit In the discussion above, we have analyzed the interaction of pinning centers with a single flux line. In high fields, where the vortex separation a 0 is comparable to the maximal pinning length x + ∼ κξ, this picture needs to be modified as the periodicity of the pinning potential has to be properly accounted for. In the vicinity of H c2 , the pinning potenial is dominanted by the lowest harmonic, e p (x) ∝ [1cos(2πx/a 0 )], and the corresponding force takes the form f p (x) ≈ -f 0 sin(2πx/a 0 ). Analyzing the characteristic lengths for the present situation, one finds that (i) the position x m of steepest slope in f p coincides with a 0 /2, (ii) x 0L = x mf p (x m )/ C = x m because f p (x m ) = 0, and (iii) x 0 (T ) = x 0L because of symmetry arguments. Furthermore, the branch edges ±x -have disappeared and those at ±x + overlap with the next period, i.e., |x + | > a 0 /2, see Fig. Again, simple closed-form expressions can be found at small values of κ 1. Near the Labusch point, the results Eqs. ( a factor κξ/a 0 larger than the low-field result (43). However, for such strong pinning the applicability of the elastic theory becomes questionable. Indeed, as suggested by numerical analysis For mid-range magnetic fields, neither the singlevortex nor the sinusoidal force profile is accurate. Starting from the limit of high fields, in addition to the basic sinusoidal force profile, further higher-order harmonics need to be taken into account. As the field is sufficiently lowered, the position x m of the maximal slope in the (bare) force profile detaches from a 0 /2, and a second (unpinned) branch develops. It is interesting to analyze the scaling behavior of the Campbell length as a function of the strong pinning parameter κ. Indeed, when expressing λ 2 C [Eq. (28)] in units of λ 2 /ν p , with ν p = n p a 0 ξ 2 the dimensionless small density parameter, we find where we have used that C ∼ ε 0 /a 0 , see Sec. III A. When pushing the system across the Labusch point κ = 1 into the strong pinning regime, we find a universal scaling [see Eqs. ( which is valid at all fields and for different vortex states (FC as well as ZFC), see Fig. 1 at small and large κ > 1, respectively) when the intervortex distance a 0 approaches ξ. These results can be used to characterize the pinscape by combining theoretical input on κ(T, H) for various pinning models (see below) with experimental data for λ C . Such information is of great value when simulating vortex dynamics within a numerical approach, e.g., using time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory In order to proceed further towards quantitative predictions of the Campbell response, we have to specify all relevant quantities entering the pinning problem. In particular, the temperature-and field-dependence of the vortex elasticity C and the pinscape energy e p have to be determined. This is the central topic of this Section and will allow us later to follow the evolution of the effective force f pin upon cooling and reheating the system in the field as typically done in an experiment. Here, we focus on the comparison between different pinning models and defer the comparison to experiments to Sec. V. The T -and H-dependence of the effective elasticity C and of the pinning energy e p is mainly determined by the Ginzburg-Landau parameters λ and ξ, with the superfluid density n s ∝ λ -2 scaling both with temperature and field, λ , while the coherence length scales with temperature only, ξ -2 (T ) = ξ -2 0 (1τ ). Here we have used the scaling of the upper critical field H c2 (T ) = Φ 0 /2πξ 2 (T ) Schematic view of the κ-dependence of the parameter νp(λC/λ) 2 , with νp = npa0ξ 2 1 the small dimensionless density parameter. Upon crossing the Labusch point κ = 1 and entering the strong pinning regime, all curves first decrease as 1/(κ -1) 1/2 . Subsequently, the cases FC (a) and FC (b) decay weakly ∝ ξ/t ⊥ and ∝ ξ 2 /t ⊥ x-, respectively. The cases ZFC and FC (b') decay more rapidly ∝ ξ/κt ⊥ . At large κ, the decrease slows down when x+ κξ and x-reach the scale a0; note that t ⊥ = 2x-within our analysis. The field-cooled cases (b) and (b') exhibit a hysteretic response upon reversing the direction of κ (see dashed line). The hysteresis loop shown for case FC (b) merges with the curve FC (b') when taking κ back to unity. Similarly, reversing κ on curve FC (b') one approaches the curve FC (b) (not shown). and have introduced the reduced temperature τ = T /T c and the reduced field b 0 = B 0 /H c2 (0). Note that the superfluid density vanishes on approaching H c2 (T ) where 1-τ -b 0 = 0. In this section, we shall not burden our expressions with the more complicated details of the H-and T -dependence in the superconducting phase but rather extrapolate the Ginzburg-Landau scaling valid near T c to the entire phase diagram. In Sec. V, where we confront our predictions with experimental data, a more accurate scaling will be chosen. The Labusch parameter is given through the ratio of pinning curvature and elasticity, κ = max x [-e p (x)]/ C. For small defects, we approximate the curvature -e p ≈ e 0 V pin /ξ 2 , with e 0 the typical gain in energy density and V pin the relevant pinning volume, hence In the following, we consider four different pinning models (metallic and insulating inclusions, as well as δT c -, or δ -pinning) and evaluate the behavior of κ within the H-T phase diagram. We first evaluate the effective elasticity C, a quantity that is independent of the chosen pinning model. Starting from its definition (14) and the subsequent discussion, the effective elasticity C = (νa 2 0 /λ)[c 66 c 44 (0, 0)] 1/2 involves the non-dispersive shear (c 66 ) and the bulk tilt [c 44 (0)] moduli as well as the London penetration depth λ. Inserting the standard expressions and using the scaling The factor (1τb 0 ) 3/2 describes the softening of the lattice near the H c2 -line. We consider a defect in the form of a small inclusion of radius ρ ξ. A vortex placed a distance x away from this pin will experience an energy decrease The shape of the vortex solution ψ 0 (x) can be obtained within Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory In the high field limit 1 -B 0 /H c2 1, we approximate the vortex solution and evaluating Eq. ( For an insulating inclusion, the typical energy that a vortex state gains by aligning a flux line with the defect is determined by the condensation energy density and the pin volume. The former derives from a minimization of the Ginzburg-Landau 39 (GL) functional f GL = α|ψ| 2 + β|ψ| 4 /2, providing an order parameter |Ψ 0 | 2 = |α|/β; inserting back to f GL , we obtain e 0 = -|α| 2 /2β. While in standard GL theory the temperature dependence derives from α(T ) = α 0 (T -T c ) = -α 0 T c (1-τ ), close to the H c2 (T )-line we can adopt a lowest Landau level approximation of the GL functional 43 by H/H c2 (0) replacing this temperature dependence with a temperature and field dependence α(T, B) = -α 0 T c (1τb 0 ) (the order parameter then assumes the role of the amplitude of the space-modulated solution). The combination with the expression for the (zero-temperature) thermodynamic critical field H 2 c0 /4π = α 2 0 T 2 c /β then produces an overall temperature and field scaling of the condensation energy of the form in agreement with the discussion in [44]. Combining this result with the effective elasticiy C in Eq. ( For insulating pins the strong pinning parameter reveals two important asymptotic regimes, see Fig. Similar happens in the case of a metallic defect which affects the superconductor via the proximity effect. For a metallic inclusion, the order parameter is substantially suppressed within a volume ∼ ξ 3 around the pin. This provides the possibility for the flux line lattice to gain the condensation energy density (54) over a larger volume V pin → V eff pin ≈ (4π/3)ξ 3 . In this case, the real size of the defect drops out of the final result and the strong pinning parameter shows a qualitatively similar behavior as the insulating pin in Eq. ( The combination with the expression (49) for the elasticity C provides the scaling for κ in the form As a result, κ is divergent both at low fields b 0 → 0 and near the H c2 (T )-line. On the other hand, the factor (1τ ) 3/2 suppresses κ near T c . This leads to a peculiar weak-pinning lobe extending from (T c , H = 0) into the phase diagram, see Fig. Finally, we address the pinning due to local changes of the mean free path, →δ . The dependence of the Ginzburg-Landau functional on the mean free path appears in the gradient term ( 2 /2m)|∇ψ| 2 . Indeed, a microscopic calculation with ξ 0 the T = 0 clean-limit coherence length. The (quenched) fluctuations in translate into fluctuations in the gradient term and entail a change in the energy density e 0 of the form We then arrive at a Labusch parameter in the form exhibiting a qualitative similar behavior as the one found for δT c -pinning but with a larger exponent 5/2 for the (1τ ) factor (3/2 for δT c -pinning), pushing the weakpinning lobe deeper into the phase diagram, see Fig. Equipped with a microscopic expression for the Campbell penetration depth, we discuss experimental signatures that provide strong support for our new results. Below, we focus on few original studies by We have identified four major experimental signatures that find a natural explanation within our analysis of ac magnetic response. a. Low versus high dc fields. In early work, e.g., by Campbell d. Universality of λ C | ZFC for different critical states. Within our microscopic analysis, the direction of the Lorentz force ±j c does not affect the asymptotic (i.e., large times t 2π/ω) oscillatory response of the vortex lattice in the critical state. Hence, the Campbell length is independent on whether the external field H is reached from below (ramping up) or from above (ramping down). This independence has been experimentally demonstrated Finally, we provide a semi-quantitative comparison of our microscopic analysis of the Campbell length λ C with measurements on a single-crystal germanide superconductor SrPd 2 Ge 2 with T c = 2.7 K and H c2 = 0.49 T. Vortex pinning in this ternary compound, parent to the iron-and nickel-pnictides, is likely to be strong. response has been investigated with a tunnel-diode technique in Ref. [20]. We focus on two traces of λ C recorded at different applied dc fields 0.02 T and 0.3 T and taken from Fig. The theoretical analysis of λ C , see right of Fig. and applying the normalization (neglected in Ref. [25]) e p (x) = e 0 V pin χ(x)χ(0) χ(a 0 /2)χ(0) . For a better comparison to experiment, we replace the simple Ginzburg-Landau scaling 1τ used in Sec. IV by the more accurate two-fluid-model scaling 1τ 2 ; the latter properly captures the saturation of the phenomenological parameters at low temperatures. In order to find the temperature and field dependence of λ C , we numerically evaluate the force profile f pin (x) and the relevant jumps ∆f pin for the zero-field-cooled and field-cooled situations. For the latter, we make use of a numerical routine that follows the branch evolution and the associated occupation upon lowering the system's temperature and its subsequent heating. The quantity (n p ξ 3 0 ) 1/2 λ C /λ 0 solely depends on the ratio ρ/ξ 0 , with ρ the radius of the insulating defect. This parameter governs the extent of the strong pinning region within the H-T diagram. It turns out, that choosing an insulating defect of radius ρ ≈ 1.82 ξ 0 (ρ ≈ 1.6 ξ 0 in Ref. [25]), see Eq. ( We have investigated the linear ac magnetic response of type-II superconductors in the Shubnikov phase as characterized through the Campbell length λ C , the penetration depth of the ac signal. Starting from the microscopic theory of strong pinning, we have shown that the Campbell length involves specific jumps in the (multivalued) pinning force profile corresponding to abrupt changes in the occupation of the force branches. With this new tool at hand, we have discussed the generic behavior of the Campbell length (i) near and away from the Labusch point describing the onset of strong pinning, (ii) at low and high magnetic fields, and (iii) for both field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) state preparations. Several new features have been observed: first, the FC and ZFC states probe different force jumps and hence result in (possibly even parametrically) different Campbell lengths. Second, in the critical state, a transient initialization changes the dc field by h ac after which the response follows a regular ac dynamics with a finite Campbell length. Third, for the field-cooled state, we predict a possible hysteretic response of the Campbell length upon thermal cycling. On the road towards quantitative predictions, we have studied the scaling behavior of four types of defects (insulating and metallic inclusions, δT c -and δ -pinning) and have constructed H-T scaling diagrams for the pinning strength κ. Finally, we have confronted our theory with experimental data and have found good qualitative and even semi-quantitative agreement. The framework presented here provides a quantitative relation between the macroscopic Campbell length λ C and the underlying microscopic pinning landscape. The power of this approach lies in the ability to distinguish between different vortex configurations, e.g., field-cooledand zero-field-cooled states or an arbitrary state 'inbetween', allowing for a spectroscopic analysis of the pinscape. While the measurement of λ C combined with theoretical insights provides access to bulk averaged parameters of the pinscape such as the defects' nature (insulating, metallic, δT c -or δ -type), its density n p , and shape e p (r), recent experiments using scanning STM and scanning SQUID techniques allow for space-resolved imaging of the pinscape 