Superconducting MgB2 shows an E2g zone center phonon, as measured by Raman spectroscopy, that is very broad in energy and temperature dependent. The Raman shift and lifetime show large differences with the values elsewhere in the Brillouin Zone measured by Inelastic X-ray Scattering (IXS), where its dispersion can be accounted for by standard harmonic phonon theory, adding only a moderate electron-phonon coupling. Here we show that the effects rapidly disappear when electronphonon coupling is switched off by Al substitution on the Mg sites. Moreover, using IXS with very high wave-vector resolution in MgB2, we can follow the dispersion connecting the Raman and the IXS signal, in agreement with a theory using only electron-phonon coupling but without strong anharmonic terms. The observation is important in order to understand the effects of electronphonon coupling on zone center phonons modes in MgB2, but also in all metals characterized by a small Fermi velocity in a particular direction, typical for layered compounds. MgB 2 is a superconductor 1 where the mechanism for pairing is conventional electron-phonon coupling. It shows an unexpectedly high transition temperature of 39 K, almost twice that of most conventional systems at ambient pressure MgB 2 shows an anomalously low isotopic effect, surprising for a conventional pairing mechanism In a previous work Although the above explanation is quite reasonable, there is no complete proof of it, as the calculations are only qualitative, and we lack a direct observation of the suggested steep, anomalous dispersion close to Γ. Here we show, using high Q resolution Inelastic X-ray Scattering, that a very steep phonon dispersion can be detected in Mg 1-x Al x B 2 at very small x substitution, and rapidly disappears at higher Al content. The result is important for the theory of superconductivity of MgB 2 , as an alternative interpretation of the Raman shift and broadening, in terms of anharmonicity, could explain the anomalous isotopic effect of MgB 2 For the crystal growth and characterization, see Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by APS] as well as Ref. 5 for the MgB 2 samples. Note that in the text we rounded the precise stoichiometry given in Sup-arXiv:1512.07065v5 [cond-mat.supr-con] 14 Apr 2016 plemental Material [URL will be inserted by APS] as follows for the Al content: 0.93 → 1 (note that there is no Mg in that sample); 0.71 → 0.7 and 0.37 → 0.4. Inelastic X-ray Scattering (IXS) experiments were performed on the ID28 beam line of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The Mg 1-x Al x B 2 samples (0.37 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) were mounted in a vacuum chamber at room temperature such that the 110 and 001 directions were contained in the scattering plane. This orientation allowed for measurements of transverse and longitudinal branches along the Γ-A and Γ-M direction. For these samples, the backscattering monochromator was set at the Si (8 8 8) reflection order IXS measurements in stoichiometric MgB 2 crystal were realized using higher energy resolution ( ∆E = 3 meV) at the Si (9 9 9) reflection order of the back-scattering monochromator, in a very similar instrumental configuration of a previous experiment 5 with the notable difference that we benefitted of 9 instead of five analyzers, allowing finer steps in the reciprocal space in particular for the in-plane direction Γ-M, and taking particular care of adjusting the slit opening in front of the analyzers to maximize the spectrometer brilliance while optimizing the Q resolution as detailed in Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by APS]. All measurements were guided by calculations of inelastic structure factors resulting from first principles calculations. The spectra were analyzed by a fitting program which automatically accounted for the experimental resolution taken from measurements or a model as described in Ref. Most of our data have been collected for the MgB 2 and Mg 0.6 Al 0.4 B 2 single crystals and the Γ-A direction which is of particular interest. In Fig. In Fig. The overall evolution of the phonon modes along Γ-A and Γ-M in function of x, going from x=0.0 to 0.4 qualitatively follows what it is expected according to Ref. 23 for Al substitution in the x=0.3-0.5 range: a large hardening for the E 2g mode (∼ +35 meV) and a reduction for the A 2u and longitudinal acoustic ones (few meV energy increase) with a concurrent moderate softening of the B 1g mode (few meV decrease), with the E 1u staying approximately at the same energy. A similar behavior is also experimentally observed for the E 2g mode in carbon doped Mg(B 1-x C x ) 2 by IXS As mentioned, this is not the case for x=0.0, for which there is a disagreement between the DFT calculations extrapolated to the zone center and the Raman data for the E 2g mode, as can be appreciated in Fig. However, the proof was only qualitative, lacking a direct numerical comparison with data. The above mentioned recovery of E 0 would also induce a very steep dispersion as q 0 should be small (in the order of 0.1 of the BZ or less) while the energy shift is as large as ∆ E = E-E 0 ∼35 meV as shown in Ref. 26. Previous attempts to complete the dispersion close to the zone center Γ were unsuccessful (see Fig. In order to see if our observations are compatible with crossing the Landau damping threshold, and the corresponding modifications of the dispersion, we compare with the calculations in Ref. 26. In that work a modified dispersion along Γ-M is shown, including non-adiabatic effects mentioned above (see Fig. and, although quite close to the E 2g dispersion calculated by DFT, not accurate enough for a direct comparison with data, being e.g. about 5 meV below the data for q ∼ 0.3 -0.4 × Γ-M, a shift about as large as the one we are looking for at Γ. This approximate dispersion was used because DFT can be performed neither exactly at the zone center, nor with enough q resolution to estimate the corrections of the self-energy for 0< q < q 0 . Conversely, the DFT calculated dispersion is much closer to the data, if we exclude the E 2g mode in the q region close to the zone center. In Fig. . This is a rather crude approximation in principle, but the corrections are rather small in absolute values, so a posteriori valid to first order. We apply the corrections to the DFT calculated dispersion (black line in Fig. The observation is important to understand the effects of electron-phonon coupling on zone center phonons modes in MgB 2 , and its relevance to its superconducting properties. Moreover, this is relevant in all metals characterized by a small Fermi velocity in a particular direction, and for which the temperature dependence of the Raman shift is often measured in order to detect electron-phonon coupling effects 