The authors report on the design and measurement of a reflective single-pole singlethrow microwave switch with no internal power dissipation, based on a superconducting circuit containing a single Josephson junction. The data demonstrate the switch operation with 2 GHz instantaneous bandwidth centered at 10 GHz, low insertion loss, and better than 20 dB on/off ratio. The switch's measured performance agrees well with simulations for input powers up to -100 dBm. An extension of the demonstrated circuit to implement a single-pole double-throw switch is shown in simulation. a) ofer.naaman@ngc.com Quantum integrated circuits based on solid state qubits with increasing complexity have been demonstrated recently Our implementation of a single-pole single-throw (SPST) switch, arguably the most basic device for integrated routing and modulation of microwave signals, is shown schematically in Figure Because the mutual inductance associated with the rf-SQUID coupler is tunable through zero, it is useful as a switch element in circuits that rely on this mutual inductance for signal transmission between the input and output ports. While it is tempting to connect the rf-SQUID in-line with a transmission line to implement a microwave switch We proceed by designing such a filter and embedding the SQUID coupler in place of one of the filter's admittance inverters The design of a band pass filter to embed the SQUID coupler follows the procedure outlined in Ref. 13. The filter's N poles are implemented as parallel LC shunt resonators whose resonant frequency coincides with the filter center frequency ω res = (L res C res ) -1/2 . We start with all resonators being identical, and their impedance Z res = L res /C res will be determined later. The resonators are coupled via admittance inverters (or J-inverters), whose admittance values {J i,j } are calculated from the set of filter coefficients {g i=0...N +1 } that can be found in design tables, to implement the desired filter characteristics: , where w is the desired fractional bandwidth of the filter, and Z 0 is the embedding impedance, usually We implement all but one of the admittance inverters as capacitive π-sections with C i,j = J i,j /ω res . The remaining inverter J k,k+1 is implemented with an inductive π-section and accommodates the SQUID coupler. This sets the Josephson inductance of the coupler junction L J0 = 1/ω res J k,k+1 . The negative shunt capacitances and inductances associated with the inverters in the interior sections of the filter are in parallel with, and can be absorbed by, those of the shunt resonators. The negative capacitances of the first and last inverters can be replaced by a series capacitor near the termination and a negative shunt capacitor in parallel with the first and last resonators, so that the first (last) series capacitance becomes C s = J/ω res 1 -(Z 0 J) 2 , and the associated (negative) shunt capacitance becomes C e = J 1 -(Z 0 J) 2 /ω res , where J is the admittance of the first (last) inverter The characteristic impedance of the shunt resonators is constrained by two conditions: first, that the SQUID coupler have β L < 1, favoring low impedance resonators. The second constraint, which favors high impedance resonators, follows from the requirement that the first and last series capacitances remain finite, i.e. Z 0 × max {J 0,1 , J N,N +1 } < 1. Both constraints can be satisfied simultaneously in most filter topologies. Our microwave switch design, shown in Figure We proceed to characterize the large-signal response of the device. Figure While a shift of the transmission null towards integer flux is not surprising and is consistent with an increase of the nonlinear junction inductance with drive amplitude 14 , we do not have at the time of this writing a quantitative model to understand the power dependence of Figure Figure In Figure To summarize, we have demonstrated a flux-controlled microwave switch based on a Josephson junction coupler embedded in a band-pass filter, with low insertion loss, over 2 instantaneous bandwidth, and over 20 dB on/off ratio. We observe good agreement with simulations in the device's linear regime for input powers up to approximately -100 dBm. We demonstrated by simulation an extension of the basic device to an SPDT switch configuration that enables flexible routing and integration into switch matrices. We presented a design outline that makes it possible to implement similar devices using different filter prototypes or different number of poles, with fractional bandwidths up to 40%. These devices represent a family of non-dissipative Josephson junction circuits for integrated routing and modulation of microwaves for qubit control and readout.