We show that the diagonal elements of the second-order reduced density matrix (RDM2) can be chosen as basic variables for describing the superconducting state, instead of the off-diagonal elements of the RDM2 that are usually adopted as basic variables in the density functional scheme. The diagonal elements of the RDM2 are called pair-density (PD), which is explicitly related to the fluctuation of the particle number of the system. In this paper, we argue that the fluctuation of the particle number can become an indication of the superconducting state, and that the density functional scheme in which the PD is chosen as a basic variable would be a promising first-principles theory for superconductors. The superconducting state of the fermion system is defined as the condensation of electrons into the same two-particle state, which is so-called the Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) of the fermion system Thus the previous DFT-based theories for superconductors focuses on the off-diagonal elements of the RDM2 The diagonal elements of the RDM2 are called the pair-density (PD), which is explicitly related to the fluctuation of the particle number (Sec. IV). In this paper we will show that the fluctuation of the particle number, i.e., diagonal elements of the RDM2, can become an indication of whether the superconducting state appears or not in the system. As a promising theory to predict the fluctuation of the particle number, we come up with the PD functional theory . This is because the fluctuation of the particle number is calculated rigorously with the use of the PD and electron density, which will also be shown in the subsequent sections. In addition to the above reason, there would be an advantageous reason of developing the PD functional theory from another point of view. That is, it can be expected to utilize the findings and knowledge obtained in developing zero-temperature PD functional theory for the normal state material . The zero-temperature PD functional theory has recently attracted much attention due to the reason that the PD contains full of the information on the static electron correlation Organization of this paper is as follows. The superconducting state is defined as the BEC of the fermion system. Using this definition, the OPSS is reviewed in Sec. II for the convenience of the subsequent discussions. In Sec. III, we show that the fluctuation of the particle number becomes O(N) when the OPSS appears in the system. This means that there exists another possible way to choose basic variables for describing the superconducting state. In order to develop the first-principles theory for reproducing the fluctuation of the particle number, in Sec. IV, we present the PD functional theory that is applicable to the superconductor. In Sec. V, some concluding remarks are presented together with the discussions on the signification of this PD functional theory. The superconducting state is defined with the aid of the concept of the BEC of the interacting fermion system In order to define the superconducting state, it is necessary to consider two-particle states which are included in the RDM2 of the many-electron system. The operator of the RDM2 is given by where ψ(r 1 ζ 1 ) and ψ † (r 1 ζ 1 ) are field operators of electrons, and r and ζ are spatial and spin coordinates, respectively. If the RDM2 of the system of state |Ψ is denoted as Using Eq. ( where, as |0 is the vacuum state, the ket vector |r 1 ζ 1 , r 2 ζ 2 is given by If the eigenfunction and eigenvalue for the operator D(2) Ψ are denoted as |ν Ψ and n ν Ψ , respectively, the eigenvalue equation for D The eigenfunctions |ν Ψ are two-particle states, which can be formally defined corresponding to the many-electron state |Ψ . They are sometimes called geminal in the field of the quantum chemistry Using these eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, the spectrum decomposition of the RDM2 is written as where intimately associated with whether the system contains the pairing state such as the Cooper pair of the superconducting state or not. The magnitude of n ν Ψ is also significant for judging whether the superconducting state appears or not, because n (2) ν Ψ corresponds to the occupation number of two-particle state ν Ψ (r ν Ψ is also shown to be not O(N 2 ) but O(N) (2) ν Ψ are key quantities for the definition of the superconducting state. Using the coordinate of center of gravity R and relative coordinate ρ, where R = Let us consider two types of geminals in terms of their spatial broadenings. The first type is (a) geminal which is spatially extended with respect to both R and ρ. In this case, the magnitude of the geminal can be estimated as where Ω is the volume of the system. The second type is (b) geminal which is extended with respect to R, but is localized with respect to ρ in some region ω (≪ Ω). In this case, the magnitude of the geminal can be estimated as In case (a), there would not exist an attractive force between electrons, and any kinds of electron pairings do not form in the system. That is to say, the system is not under the superconducting state but under the normal state. On the other hand, in case (b), electrons would attract each other via some attractive force that overcomes the Coulomb repulsive force, which yields the pairings of electrons. The BEC of the fermion system is defined by means of the spectrum decomposition of the RDM2 Here we shall give the definition of the superconducting state. When the BEC occurs with some geminal, and further when such a geminal is type (b), then we will say that the superconducting state appears in the system. This definition sounds reasonable, because the number of pairings is O(N) and they are occupied in the same two-particle state, which is analogous with the intuitive description of the BEC of the ideal bosons, and further because such two-particle state is spatially localized like the Cooper pair The striking point of the present definition is to define the spatial broadening of geminals which are condensed in the superconducting state. In this subsection, according to the definition of the superconducting state, we shall revisit the OPSS. As mentioned in Sec. II-B, the eigenvalue of some geminal becomes O(N) when the superconducting state appears in the system. First, let us take the following limit on both sides of Eq. ( This limit means that the distance between particles belonging to the same geminal gets close to each other and the distance between geminals spreads infinitely. It should be noted that the limit (11) includes the thermodynamical limit given by where N and Ω are particle number and volume of the system, respectively. In the superconducting state, the first term of the right-hand side of Eq. ( where Eqs. Since we merely intend to check whether the second term of Eq. ( For this aim, it seems to be appropriate to adopt the Slater determinant as an explicit form of In other words, the Hartree-Fock approximation may be used for the order estimation of the magnitude of ν Ψ (Rρ; ζ 1 ζ 2 ). A similar estimation using the Hartree-Fock approximation has been done by Yang in the paper where the BEC of the fermion system was first discussed where φ a (rζ) is the plane wave containing the spin function χ σa (ζ), which is given by Substituting Eq. ( Note that Eq. ( Using Eq. ( ) . We shall take the limit of Eq. ( Considering Eqs. ( Ψ can take a finite and nonzero value in the limit of Eq. (11) when the system |Ψ is in the superconducting state. This statement is written by the following formula: Eq.( Of course, the right-hand side of Eq. ( On the other hand, let us consider the case of taking the limit of Eq. ( Equation ( Eq.( Compared Eq. ( If Ψ|ψ(rζ)ψ(r ′ ζ ′ )|Ψ takes a nonzero value, then the system |Ψ is in the superconducting state. Further from Eq. ( Let us extend the above-mentioned discussions to the case of the finite temperature. The superconducting state should be treated on the basis of the grand canonical ensemble because the number of electrons that form the superconducting phase varies depending on the condition of the system. If the statistical density matrix of the grand canonical ensemble is denoted as ρH , the statistical average of the physical quantity Â is given by Tr ρH Â , which is hereafter denoted as Â . The statistical average of the RDM2 with respect to ρH is given by In a similar way to the case of zero-temperature (Eq. ( H with the use of the equation r H . H is formally written as where |ν H and n ν H are eigenfunctions and eigenvalues for D(2) H , respectively. Using Eq. ( H is given by in a similar way to Eq. ( The superconducting state can be defined in the same way as the case of zero-temperature (Sec. II-B). Specifically, the definition of the superconducting state is given by the following replacement in Eq. ( Also concerning the OPSS, we can obtain it by using Eq. ( Here we suppose that the cluster decomposition principle holds also at the finite temperature if the system is stable where Â(r) and B(r ′ ) are operators of arbitrary physical quantities. In a similar way to Eq. ( Thus, the extension to the finite temperature can be done by the replacement in addition to Eq. ( III. In this section, it is shown that diagonal elements of the RDM2 can be used as an indication quantity of the superconducting state instead of the conventionally-used OPSS, i.e., off-diagonal elements of the RDM2. Specifically, we shall show that the fluctuation of the particle number becomes O(N) when the OPSS appears in the system. A. Bloch-de Dominicis theorem for the RDM2 It is sufficient for the order estimation of the physical quantities to make a use of the Hartree-Fock approximation. In Sec.II-C, we have already adopted the Hartree-Fock approximation for estimating the order of the second term of Eq. ( The Hartree-Fock approximation of some physical quantity at the finite temperature corresponds to the statistical average of the quantity by means of the density matrix involving the mean-field Hamiltonian. In the superconducting state, the mean-field Hamiltonian is devised such that the gauge symmetry is explicitly broken, as can be seen in the BCS theory where γ i and γ † i are annihilation and creation operators of quasiparticles, and where u i (rζ) and v i (rζ) are elements of the unitary matrix which are determined by requiring that ĤM is diagonalized in terms of the quasiparticles where N is the operator of the particle number, and where μ is the chemical potential of the system. By using this ĤM , we consider the statistical average of the RDM2, i.e., the Hartree-Fock approximation of the RDM2: where the concrete forms of the statistical density matrix ρH M is given by with Ξ = Tr e -β( ĤM -μ N ) . Using Eqs. ( This equation means that the Bloch-de Dominicis theorem holds even when taking the statistical average of the RDM2 written by the field operators of electrons by means of the statistical density matrix of the noninteracting quasiparticle system. On the right-hand side of Eq. ( The operator of the RDM1 is given by If the RDM1 of the system of state |Ψ is denoted as D(1) (r Also if the statistical average of D(1) (r 1 ζ 1 , r 2 ζ 2 ) with the density matrix ρH M is denoted as , then it is written as When the trace on the right-hand side is taken by means of eigenfunctions of ĤM , Eq. ( is rewritten as where The RDM1 of the system of state |Φ m , i.e., D(1) (r , can be rewritten by using the spectrum decomposition such that Substituting Eq. ( This is the spectrum decomposition of the RDM1 at the finite temperature. In order to consider the idempotent of the RDM1, we calculate the following product of the RDM1's: On the other hand, using Eq. ( where the normalization of the natural spin orbital is used Suppose that the eigenvalues E m in Eq. ( Accordingly, the dominant contribution in Eq. ( where we use the orthonormality of the natural orbitals, and where the summation of the right-hand side is over the natural spin orbitals only for the ground state. Similarly, Eq. ( where the note on the summation is the same as that of Eq. ( Furthermore, since the eigenfunction |Φ m of Eq. ( μ Φm corresponds to the occupation number of the natural spin orbital in the single Slater determinant |Φ m μ Φm is necessarily equal to unity or zero. Thus, we have Subtracting Eq. ( Due to Eq. ( Thus, it is shown that the idempotent of the RDM1 approximately holds at low temperature even in the superconducting state. It should be noted that Eq. ( C. Fluctuation of the particle number for superconductors at low temperature In this section, it is shown that the fluctuation of the particle number is equal to O(N) when the OPSS takes nonzero value. Under the condition that r 1 , ζ 1 = r 4 , ζ 4 and r 2 , ζ 2 = r 3 , ζ 3 , the Bloch-de Dominicis theorem for the RDM2, i.e., Eq. ( Using the anti-commutation relation of the field operators of electrons in the left-hand side, Eq. ( Integrating both sides with respect to r 1 , r 2 and ζ 1 , ζ 2 , we obtain N2 where Eqs. ( Using Eqs. ( at low temperature. Substituting Eq. ( The physical quantity ψ † (r H M is exactly the OPSS which has been mentioned in Sec. II-D. When the system is in the superconducting state, H M is given by Eq. ( Using the normalization of ν max H M and applying Eqs. ( Thus, it is shown that the fluctuation of the particle number becomes O(N) when the system is at low temperature in the superconducting state. The fluctuation (a) necessarily appears when the system is treated on the basis of the grand canonical ensemble the magnitude of the fluctuation (a) is O(N). In the limit of zero temperature, the system is close to the pure state, which results in the disappearance of the statistical fluctuation of ground state Here we shall give a comment on the discussion in Sec. Using this fact, the critical temperature can be estimated quantitatively as the major changing point of the slope in the above-mentioned curve. That is to say, it is possible to estimate the critical temperature of the superconductivity by means of the fluctuation of the particle number. This is a strong merit of the PD functional theory which will be presented in the subsequent section. In the previous sections, it is shown that the fluctuation of the particle number may become an indication to judge whether the superconducting state appears or not. In Sec. IV-A, we shall show that the fluctuation of the particle number can be calculated directly by means of the PD and electron density. Considering this fact, the first thing we should do is to develop the first-principles theory where the PD and electron density are quantitatively reproduced. In Sec. IV-B, we present the theoretical framework of the PD functional theory for superconductors. A. Relation between the fluctuation of the particle number and PD In this subsection, it is shown that the fluctuation of the particle number can be calculated directly via the PD and electron density. The PD is defined as the diagonal elements of the RDM2. Using Eq. ( Using Eqs. ( where note that D(1) (r 1 ζ 1 , r 1 ζ 1 ) is identical with the operator of the electron density. Therefore, the fluctuation of the particle number for the system with the statistical density matrix The fluctuation of the particle number can be calculated rigorously by means of the PD and electron density through Eq. ( It should be noted that the electron density can be derived from the PD when the system is in the normal state In the superconducting state, we have to choose both the PD and electron density as the basic variables for describing the fluctuation of the particle number. In order to reproduce the fluctuation of the particle number, the PD functional theory seems to be most suitable because that for the normal state has been developed so far by many workers , and because the findings and knowledge obtained by them may be useful for developing the theory for superconductors. In a similar way to the zero-temperature PD functional theory Let us start with the Hamiltonian for superconductors. It includes the kinetic energy T , electron-electron repulsive potential energy Ŵ1 , external potential energy V , and electronelectron attractive potential energy Ŵ2 which is mediated by the quasiparticle such as a phonon. We have where ψ σ (r) is the field operator of the electron with spin σ, and where w(r, r ′ ) and v(r) are the attractive potential and external potential, respectively. We construct the PD functional theory in accordance with the way of the extended constrained-search theory and Here we define the universal energy functional that are independent of the external field: F γ (2) , n = Min ρ→(γ (2) ,n) where the right-hand side means that the minimum value of the statistical average of T + Ŵ1 + Ŵ2 plus entropy-related term is searched by varying statistical density matrices within the set of those that yield prescribed γ (2) and n. The last term in the curly bracket on the right-hand side is the entropy term, the operator of which is given by Ŝ = -k B ρ ln ρ. We shall discuss the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem for the present PD functional theory. With the use of Eq. ( where N is the operator of the particle number which is given by N = n(r, ζ)d 3 rdζ. Gibbs's variational principle says that the above functional Ω [ρ] takes the minimum value at the correct density matrix ρ0 and the corresponding value Ω [ρ 0 ] is equal to the correct grand potential, i.e., the grand potential of the equilibrium state Ω 0 . Namely we have where ρ0 is given by with Ξ = Tr e -β( Ĥ-μ N ) . Equation ( where Eqs. ( then Eq. ( Compared the first line of the right-hand side of Eq. ( The value of Ω v-μ γ (2) , n corresponds to the grand potential at the minimum point within the restricted set of density matrices that yield the prescribed γ (2) and n. Therefore, Eq. ( 0 and n 0 . Thus, Eq. ( with γ (2) Next we discuss the theorem for one-to-one correspondence between the correct density matrix and equilibrium densities. The universal energy functional at the equilibrium densities is given by F γ where the searched density matrix of the right-hand side is referred to as ρmin , and where note that ρmin yields γ 0 and n 0 . Considering Eq. ( Since both ρ0 and ρmin yield the correct densities γ The right-hand side is coincident with F γ (2) 0 , n 0 from Eq. ( Using Eqs. ( It follows that the correct density matrix ρ0 (= ρmin ) is uniquely determined by the correct densities γ (2) 0 and n 0 via Eq. ( (2) 0 , n 0 . The most crucial theorems of the PD functional theory have successfully been derived. These theorems enable us to develop the concrete scheme for calculating the PD and electron density of the equilibrium state. This would be the next issue to be tackled. As mentioned in Sec. III, the fluctuation of the particle number is a possible indication of the superconducting state, and accordingly the critical temperature of the superconductivity may be evaluated via the temperature dependence of such a fluctuation. This seems to be one of the strong merits of the PD functional theory presented in the previous section. In addition to the estimation of the critical temperature, the present theory has another merit about the description of the superconducting state. As shown below, it can predict the density of particles which form the geminal ν max H M . In other words, the spatial distribution of the OPSS can be obtained from the present PD functional theory. As shown in Sec. III-B, the idempotent of the RDM1 holds at low temperature. This idempotent can also be written in the other form: Integrating both sides of Eq. ( Substituting Eq. ( (2) The integral of the right-hand side represents the density of particles forming geminals in the superconducting state. Thus, the spatial distribution of the OPSS can be obtained by means of the PD and electron density at low temperature. This is also a useful information for understanding the superconducting state as well as the critical temperature. In this paper, we show that the fluctuation of the particle number is a possible indication of whether the superconducting state appears or not in the system. Specifically, the quantum fluctuation of the particle number becomes O(N) when the OPSS appears in the system. Using this result, the critical temperature of the superconductivity can be evaluated in principle as a bending point in the temperature-dependence curve of the fluctuation of the particle number. As the practical scheme for calculating the fluctuation of the particle number, we also present the theoretical framework of the finite-temperature PD functional theory. This PD functional theory can evaluate not only the fluctuation of the particle number but also the density of particles forming geminals of the BEC. The latter corresponds to the spatial distribution of the OPSS, which also characterizes the superconducting state of the system as well as the critical temperature. Let us discuss the meanings of the present PD functional theory from the viewpoint of the basic variables describing the superconducting state. In this paper, we present the theory where the fluctuation of the particle number, i.e., diagonal elements of the RDM2, are chosen as the basic variables, instead of choosing the off-diagonal elements of the RDM2 which have been used in the conventional theories for superconductors The next step is to construct the concrete scheme for calculating the PD and electron density on the basis of theorems of the present PD functional theory, and then to confirm the reproducibility of them through actual calculations. This will be done in near future.