The transition from insulator to superconductor was achieved in the non-superconducting FeSe ultrathin film via simple Mg coating technique in present work. It was found that in non-superconducting FeSe ultrathin film without Mg coating, insulating β-Fe 1-x Se phase with iron-vacancy disorders is the main phase and more likely to be the parent phase of FeSe superconducting system. Proper Mg coating on the surface of FeSe films can lead to Mg entering FeSe crystal lattice to fill up these Fe vacancies rather than replace Fe. Simultaneously, additional electron doping is introduced and the electron carrier concentration in this parent phase can be tuned, which is responsible for the SIT and evolution of superconductivity in this system. However, abnormal decrease of electron concentration was found in FeSe film with excessive Mg coating, which brings about the severe degradation in superconducting performance. Compared with bulk crystals, FeSe in the form of thin films has generated wide research interest as large enhancement in superconducting performance is obtained. In particular, the monolayer (ML) FeSe thin film on SrTiO 3 substrate exhibits unexpected high-T c superconductivity close to boiling temperature of liquid nitrogen (77K) According to our recent research interface effect In this point of view, it should be strong evidence to the speculation mentioned above if the transition from insulator to superconductor can be achieved in non-superconducting FeSe thin films with thickness below critical value by introducing external electron doping. Moreover, in contrast to the instability of FeSe multilayer in atmosphere, FeSe thin film can be stable in atmosphere and thus could act as a satisfying media for various characteristics or physical measurements to explore SIT phenomenon as well as understand the nature of electron doping in this unique FeSe superconducting system. In present work, the transition from insulator to superconductor was achieved in the FeSe ultrathin film via Mg coating technique. Proper Mg coating on the surface of FeSe films can introduce electron doping and induce the variation of electron carrier concentration, which is responsible for the SIT and evolution of superconductivity in this system. This is the first time to achieve transition from insulator to superconductor in non-superconducting FeSe ultrathin films with thickness below critical value via a simple metal coating process. FeSe films are grown on CaF 2 (100) substrate (lattice parameter a = 5.462 Å) by PLD technique (Nd: YAG, 355 nm, 10 Hz, 2 W output). Substrate temperature is chosen as 300 ̊C and the entire experiment is carried out in a close chamber with vacuum better than 5 × 10 -4 Pa. Home-made FeSe pellet which is prepared from commercial available Fe and Se powder serves as target for FeSe sputtering. In order to check the influence of Mg content on FeSe films, the thickness of FeSe films is strictly fixed at 40 nm which shows non-superconducting. Right after the deposition of FeSe film, Mg coating is introduced by directly switching to Mg target holder. By controlling the deposition time of Mg as 0min, 3 min, 10 min and 20 min, a batch of Mg-coated FeSe films are obtained and denoted as #FM0, #FM1, #FM2 and #FM3, respectively. Both of the electrical resistivity and Hall coefficient measurements are carried out in a 9 T physical property measurement system (PPMS). XRD θ-2θ scan is used to characterize the crystal structure of films. For checking the surface morphology and chemical composition, scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-6490LV) and high-accuracy energy dispersive X-ray spectrum (EDX) detector (Oxford Instruments X-MaxN 80) is employed. previous study As shown above, insulator-superconductor transition in FeSe thin films can be achieved by Mg coating, thus it is of great importance to understand its intrinsic mechanism. It is well known that charge carrier concentration is one of the most crucial parameters that influence the superconductivity in iron-based superconductors The transition from insulator to superconductor was achieved in the FeSe ultrathin film via simple Mg coating technique. It was found that in non-superconducting FeSe ultrathin film without Mg coating, insulating β-Fe 1-x Se phase with iron-vacancy disorders is the main phase and more likely to be the parent phase of FeSe superconducting system. Proper Mg coating on the surface of FeSe films can lead to Mg entering into the FeSe lattice structure instead of reacting with FeSe to form new phase. The Mg that enters the FeSe crystal lattice mainly fills up Fe vacancies rather than replace Fe. Simultaneously, additional electron carrier can be introduced and higher superconductivity will be obtained. However, abnormal decrease of electron concentration was found in FeSe film with excessive Mg coating, which brings about the severe degradation in superconducting performance. 