While it was known that High Temperature Superconductivity appears in cuprates showing complex multiscale phase separation due to inhomogeneous charge density wave (CDW) order, the spatial distribution of CDW domains remained an open question for a long time, because of the lack of experimental probes able to visualize their spatial distribution at mesoscale, between atomic and macroscopic scale. Recently scanning micro X-ray Diffraction (SμXRD) revealed CDW crystalline electronic puddles with a complex fat-tailed spatial distribution of their size. In this work we have determined and mapped the anisotropy of the Charge Density Waves (CDW) puddles in HgBa 2 CuO 4+y (Hg1201) single crystal. We discuss the emergence of high temperature superconductivity in the interstitial space with hyperbolic geometry, that opens a new paradigm for quantum coherence at high temperature where negative dielectric function and interference between different pathways can help to raise the critical temperature. Organization of local lattice fluctuations and charge inhomogeneity determines intrinsic physical properties in new functional materials. This heterogeneity varies from the scale of microns to the atomic level Nowadays, the improved X-ray optics and imaging techniques make possible to image the bulk structure at nanoscale and mesoscale that is the scale length between the atomic and macroscopic world. In particular, Scanning micro X ray diffraction (SμXRD) using focused beams on the micro-scale is able to probe the k-space order in different spatial locations of the material. This allows to unveil the complex maps showing the multiscale structure in materials. In this way, ultrastructure and phase separation have been visualized in complex and heterogeneous materials for applications in different field from biomedicine Here we determine the variation of CDW puddles size both along the in plane direction and along the out of plane direction, point by point by means of Scanning micro X-ray diffraction (SμXRD) measurements. The sample was kept at T=100K where the system shows the maximum CDW order where p(ξ) is the probability density function of the size, ξ. In Figure From the CDF(x) we can determine that the "average size" of CDW puddles amounts to 4.3 nm in good agreement with previous work probing only the" average size". On the other hand, our space resolved SμXRD measurements indicate a size distribution with fractal-like geometry with rare domains reaching a maximum domain size of 40 nm. At the same time, the probability distribution of the out of plane CDW size appears to be exponential, indicating a normal size distribution of out of plane CDW puddles. The average out of plane size of the CDW puddles has been found to be about 4 nm. A view of CDW puddles packing, is represented in Figure The free electrons can travel between two different points, taking different paths that cannot be topologically deformed one into the other. This complex space resulting from the measured power law distribution of the in plane puddle size can be mapped to a hyperbolic space The hyperbolic space has recently been found to play a key role in different fields looking for the emergence of order in complex systems ranging from network theory to quantum gravity Therefore further investigations are needed to investigate the substantial role of non Euclidean space in the mesoscale range in high temperature superconductors 