In this paper, we discuss the topological classification of time-reversal invariant topological superconductors. Based on the axion field theory developed in a previous work (Phys. Rev. B 87 134519 ( Topological states of matter have attracted enormous attention since the discovery of integer and fractional quantum Hall effects in 1980's Although the free fermion classification of topological states is stable against interaction in many examples such as integer quantum hall states, this does not hold in general. The first example of SPT with classification qualitatively modified by electron interaction was given by Ref. In this paper, we provide an alternative understanding of the Z 16 classification of interacting TSCs by studying anomalies in electromagnetic responses. More specifically, we studied the vortex crossing process in type-II topological superconductors. We show that an anomalous Berry's phase is obtained in the event of a crossing between "chiral vortex line" (which will be defined later in the text) and an ordinary superconducting vortex line. By relating the (3 + 1)-d TSC to a (4 + 1)-d TI, this anomaly can be understood as a charge pumping in the extra dimension. This Berry's phase vanishes for a ν = 16 topological superconductor, consistent with the previous prediction that the topological classification is Z 16 . Our result can be obtained by applying the axion field theory proposed in Ref. In this section we will review the axion field theory for (3 + 1)-d TSC developed in Ref. A. Derivation of the axion field theory in (3 + 1)d Let's first recap the strategy in the paper FIG. As is illustrated in Fig. The topological invariant c 2 of the (4 + 1)-d theory is related to that of the (3 + 1)-d topological superconductor. In a time-reversal invariant superconductor θ L , θ R = 0, π, and the topological invariant of TSC is given by Without losing generality, we will assume we are working with a TSC whose (θ The full action should also includes the Higgs term, Maxwell term and Josephson coupling between θ L and θ R . The long-wavelength behavior of electromagnetic field is dominated by the Higgs term, but the topological term (2) remains significant in non-perturbative processes of vortex crossing. The Josephson coupling between θ L and θ R is allowed by symmetry of the system, and leads to confinement of vortices of θ L with that of θ R in the bulk of the superconductor. The axion field theory only depends on three fields: θ L , θ R and electromagnetic field A μ , so the elementary excitation are three types of vortex strings: left hand chiral vortex string of θ L , right hand chiral vortex string of θ R and their combination, which we will call a non-chiral vortex string, see Table(I). Due to flux quantization of the electromagnetic gauge field, there is always even number of non-chiral vortex strings crossing any closed surface. In particular if we consider a system with the spatial geometry of 3 dimensional torus T 3 , and consider FIG. straight vortex lines in y and z directions as is shown in Fig. In the discussion above we have focused on topological properties of vortices. When we consider the energetics of vortices, it should be noticed that the chiral vortices with opposite chirality are actually confined in the bulk of the superconductor, because there is no separate U(1) symmetry of left-hand and right-hand order parameters θ L and θ R . In general the action of the theory contains a Josephson term which physically comes from the inevitable coupling of left-hand and right-hand fermions at high energy. This term leads to a linear confinement energy between vortices with opposite chirality. However, chiral vortex strings can still survive on the interface between TSC and a trivial superconductor, which correspond to a domain wall between two boundary conditions at the interface, as is shown in Fig. FIG. One important consequence of this confinement is that the vortex crossing process can not happen between two chiral strings, because two chiral strings always stay in the same plane. Hence, the "minimal" vortex crossing event is that between a chiral string on the surface and a non-chiral string perpendicular to the surface. and non-chiral(black) vortex strings. In the previous section, we recalled some results in Ref.20 that are relevant to the current work. In this section, we will obtain a new result, the Z 16 classification of TSC, by studying a single/primitive vortex crossing event, as is shown in Fig. with all other components zero, except those related to above by symmetry of indices. (Note that the non-chiral string is moving, so it induces an electric field along y direction F ty .) To understand the consequence of a single vortex crossing, it is most intuitive to use the relation of TSC to (4+1)-d topological insulator that was discussed in Fig. During the single vortex crossing event, a charge current is introduced in the bulk, described by the Chern-Simons term (we are considering c 2 = ν = 1): Since F is only non-vanishing in the boundary (3 + 1)d system, the only nonzero component of the current is in the direction perpendicular to the physical (3 + 1)dimensions, which we denote as w component. The net charge pumped from the left-hand superconductor to the right-hand one is obtained by integration over j w , which is during a single vortex crossing event. This fractional charge inflow is analogous to the charge accumulation in integer quantum hall effect induced by a flux threading In the previous subsection we have described the consequence of vortex crossing as a charge pumping in the (4 + 1)-d picture. To understand whether this argument applies to generic (3 + 1)-d TSC we would like to reformulate the argument in a way that is applicable without referring to the (4 + 1)-d theory. For this purpose, we investigate the consequence of chiral anomaly in TSC. A chiral U(1) rotation is defined by shifting the superconducting phase θ L without shifting θ R . Even at presence of the Josephson coupling term J cos (θ L -θ R ), the shift of θ L by 2π should still be a symmetry: Alternatively, one can also define the shift of θ R without shifting θ L . Since s L is expected to be a global symmetry for this system, no physical process should depend on this transformation. However, during the single vortex crossing event, even when the movement is infinitely slow, the system still obtains a nontrivial Berry's phase due to the topological term: Here U (∞, -∞) is the adiabatic time-evolution operator, and states |in and |out are the initial and final states before and after the vortex crossing event, respectively (see Fig. FIG. Compare the anomaly discussion with the (4+1)-d picture, the phase obtained by the system in transformation θ L → θ L + 2π is e iπQ L , which is measuring the charge of the left-hand fermion (mod 2). Therefore the fact that the phase changes by a factor of e iπν/8 is equivalent to the charge pumping from one surface of the (4 + 1)-d TI to the other surface that we discussed in the previous subsection. An obvious concern about equation ( with θ = θ L -θ R . The change of θ in an adiabatic change of θ L -θ R by 2π is gauge invariant modulo 2π, which defines a physical procedure of measuring ν modulo 16. From the discussion in this subsection, we see that the fractional charge pumping is equivalent to a Berry's phase effect obtained by tuning two parameters, vortex crossing and the value of θ L -θ R at the crossing point. This reformulation does not explicitly depend on the (4+1)-d picture, which thus confirms that our results on the Z 16 classification is applicable to generic (3 + 1)d TSC. Furthermore, the Berry's phase formulation also indicates that it is possible to provide an even more general classification of (3 + 1)-d TSC which does not even need to rely on the topological field theory description. This will be the task of next section. In the previous section, we offers an argument on why we need 16 copies of ν = 1 TSC to trivialize the physical consequence of vortex line crossing, which is based on the topological action. In this section, we would like to develop a more general approach to the Z 16 classification based on general geometrical arguments and general properties of superconductors, without explicitly using the topological action. We start by defining a two-dimensional parameter space for a superconductor with vortices (Fig. The ground state of the system |G(θ, λ) varies with these two parameters, which defines a Berry connection a s = -i G|∂ s |G , with s = θ, λ. The Berry curvature is When we consider the vortex crossing at a given background value of θ, the phase obtained is which is not gauge invariant. The winding of φ(θ) during change of θ by 2π is however gauge invariant, which is determined by the surface integration of gauge curvature: ∆φ is a physical property of a given parameterized family of superconductors. Without further contraints to it, it is not obvious how to use ∆φ to probe the discrete topological invariant in the TSC. In Eq.( To understand the quantization of ∆φ, the key is to construct a vortex-crossing process that is periodic. If we label the vortex configuration during a periodic process also by λ, the parameter space (θ, λ) is now a torus since it is periodic in both directions. Therefore the net flux T 2 dθdλF θλ ∈ 2πZ is quantized in unit of 2π, which leads to the quantization of ∆φ, see Fig (7). FIG. In Ref. As shown in Fig. FIG. More explicitly, the procedure in the Fig. (2) Drill the genus 2 handlebody(interior) out, and implement a Dehn twist on its surface; (3) Refill the handlebody with the Dehn twist, which leads to a closed 3 manifold. From Fig. Remarkably, although the Dehn twist we consider preserves the topological structure of the manifold, it in general will change the spin structure of the surface. Due to this consideration, we see that a single crossing between two 2π vortices may not be considered as a periodic process. However, it can be shown that carrying the same Dehn twist twice always preserves the spin structure of the surface (See Appendix(A) for technical details and proof). Consequently, we conclude that two crossings between a pair of 2π vortices is always a periodic process, which leads to the same vortex configuration in T 3 with the same spin structure. Note that the 2 crossings of 2π vortices are equivalent to 16 crossings of chiral vortices with non-chiral vortices, we conclude that the phase factor ∆φ obtained in 16 crossings must be quantized in the unit of 2π. Therefore ∆φ for each crossing satisfies In summary, by mapping a vortex crossing process to a surgery on T 3 with a Dehn twist involved, we learn that the topological invariant ν mod 16 is the first Chern number in the parameter space (θ, λ), where θ ∈ [0, 2π) describes the periodic interpolation between TSC and trivial superconductor, and λ describes a periodic vortex crossing process involving 16 vortex crossing points, which together are equivalent to a double Dehn twist. In this section, we will generalize the axion field theory approach to the topological classification of TSC to higher dimensions. More explicitly, we are going to study the DIII class TSC in space-time dimension d + 1 = 4n. We will follow the idea and strategy of the (3 + 1)d DIII class case, and relate the 4n-dimensional TSC to the 4n + 1-dimensional time-reversal invariant TI. In the same way how (3 + 1)-d time-reversal invariant TSC is related to the (4+1)-d time-reversal invariant TI, corresponding to the TRI TSC in 4n dimensions there is a 4n + 1-dimensional TRI TI which in the free fermion case is classified by an integer. The electromagnetic response of these TI's are described by Chern-Simons theories In 4n + 1 dimensions, Chern-Simons theories are timereversal invariant. Although all (4n + 1)-d TI's are classified by integer (for non-interacting fermions), there is a subtle difference between (8k + 5)-d and (8k + 1)-d (k ∈ Z), which occurs because of the different quantization of the coefficient c 2n . For free fermions, c 2n is the 2n-th Chern number of the Berry's gauge field: For generic insulators, c 2n can take any integer value. However, with the T 2 = -1 time-reversal symmetry, for even n the Chern number is always an even integer, while for odd n it can be any integer. This statement can be directly verified by computing c 2n for lattice Dirac models, i.e., Ĥ = k ψ(k) † d j (k)Γ j ψ(k), with Γ j , j = 1, 2, ..., 4n the Dirac Γ matrices satisfying Γ j , Γ k = 2δ jk I. This conclusion also agrees with the Twisted KR theory computation. It is also interesting to comment that the distinction between Z in 8k + 5 dimensions and 2Z in 8k + 1 dimensions actually have important physical implication on Z 2 topological insulators in adjacient dimensions Now we are ready to generalize the axion field theory in (3+1)-d to higher dimensions by a very similar dimensional reduction procedure. We consider a (4n + 1)-d TI defined on a spatial manifold M 4n-1 × I, with M 4n-1 a (4n -1)-d closed manifold. This system has two boundaries ∂(M 4n-1 × I) = M 4n-1 M 4n-1 as is shown in Fig. The bulk of the 4n + 1-d TI is described by the Chern-Simons theory (17). The topological effect of the superconducting phase on the surface can be understood by taking a gauge transformation Here we have labeled the extra-dimensional interval by x 4n+1 ∈ [0, 1], and label the gauge vector potential along that direction as A 4n+1 . By choosing φ ( After this gauge transformation, we can do the dimensional reduction by assuming all components A μ are independent from x 4n+1 , which leads to the axion action: with F 2n ≡ μ1ν1μ2ν2...μ2nν2n F μ1ν1 F μ2ν2 ...F μnνn as abbreviation. Parallel to (3 + 1)d case, in general 4n dimensions, we can consider the topological response induced by vortex crossing events. A superconducting vortex is always a co-dimension 2 surface, which means a 4n -2 dimensional membrane in 4n-dimensions. To have a topological nontrivial effect, we need to introduce 2n -1 superconducting vortices and one chiral vortex, which cross at a space-time point. For example, we can consider 2n -1 superconducting vortices with the field strength The intersection of these vortices is a two-dimensional plane along the directions x 4n-1 , x 4n , which can then cross with a moving chiral vortex that induces a flux F 4n-1,4n = π 2 δ(x 4n-1 )δ(x 4n ). Similar to the (3 + 1)-d case discussed in Sec.(III A), the topological response induced by such a crossing is best visualized as a charge pumping in the (4n + 1)-d TI along the extra direction x 4n+1 : The net charge pumped during a single vortex crossing event is Due to the Cooper pair condensation in the surface superconductors, the transfer of charge 2 is considered as trivial. Therefore, the fractional charge ∆Q mod 2 is a topological invariant that defines the topological classification of the TSC. In other words, the minimal value of c 2n that corresponds to a trivial superconductor is given by ∆Q = 2, i.e. c 2n = 2 2n+2 . Depending on the spacetime dimension, we have the following two cases: • For space-time dimension (d + 1) = 8k + 4, namely n = 2k + 1, c 2n ∈ Z, so that the TSC is classified by Z ν with ν = 2 2n+2 = 2 (d+5)/2 . • For space-time dimension (d + 1) = 8k, namely n = 2k, c 2n ∈ 2Z, so that the TSC is classified by The charge pumping can be reformulated to an anomaly of the partition function in the chiral rotation of θ L -θ R in exactly the same way as in the (3 + 1)-d case, which we will not repeat here. Using the axion field theory and vortex crossing, we have obtained a topological classification of DIII class TSC, which is Z ν with ν = 2 (d+5)/2 for d + 1 = 8k + 4, and ν = 2 (d+3)/2 for d+1 = 8k. We would like to compare this result with other classification schemes. One alternative approach is the non-linear σ model analysis 2527 . The surface theory of a 4n-dimensional TSC is a massless Majorana fermion theory in (4n -2) spatial dimensions, with the Hamiltonian Here ψ is a Majorana spinor, and Γ i are real symmetric Dirac matrices. Γ i and the time-reversal matrix T together form the representation of a real Clifford algebra. Since this Hamiltonian describes a topological surface state, by definition there are no quadratic TRI mass terms allowed. If we consider time-reversal breaking mass terms, it is possible to consider the following massive Hamiltonian: where γ a are purely imaginary anti-symmetric matrices satisfying γ a , γ b = 2I and γ a anti-commutes with all Γ j . (In other words, -iγ a are negative generators of a real Clifford algebra. ) The mass of the Hamiltonian is |m| = a m 2 a . The number of mass terms that can be added depends on the number of flavors of Majorana fermions, which is then determined by the topological invariant ν. For example, the minimal surface theory of (3 + 1)-d TSC is H = d 2 xψ T (-iσ x ∂ x -iσ z ∂ y ) ψ, with σ x , σ z two Pauli matrices. This Hamiltonian allows only one mass term σ y . If we have instead a ν = 2 TSC with the surface theory given by Γ x = σ x ⊗ I, Γ z = σ z ⊗ I, there can be two mass terms σ y ⊗ σ z , σ y ⊗ σ x . The key argument of the σ model analaysis is by considering a fluctuating mass m a . By integrating out the massive fermions, one obtains a non-linear σ model with the target space S N -1 . If the σ model is in its ordered phase, time-reversal symmetry is spontaneously broken. If the σ model is disordered, it is possible to realize a gapped phase with time reversal symmetry restored, which is possible if the bulk is topologically trivial. As was discussed above, the maximal number of mass terms N is determined by the topological invariant ν. If the target space has high enough dimension N -1 > 4n, the σ model cannot have any topological term, so that a trivial disordered phase should exist. Following this argument, one obtains a critical value ν for which the surface state can become trivial due to mass term fluctuation. Following the idea sketched above, a critical ν can be determined for all dimensions 4n using knowledge about representation theory of Clifford algebra. We will leave more details to Appendix(D), and only state the result that the non-linear σ model approach predicts exactly the same classification Z ν as our axion field theory result in the previous subsection. The agreement of these two distinct approaches indicate that the axion theory result is generic. In this paper, we revisit the axion field theory description for DIII class topological superconductors in (3+1)d. We show that a minimal vortex crossing event between a chiral vortex and a non-chiral vortex leads to a quantum anomaly. We provided two equivalent descriptions of this quantum anomaly. From a purely (3 + 1)-d point of view, the anomaly is a Berry's phase factor obtained during a chiral rotation of the axion phase θ L -θ R . From a (4 + 1)-d point of view, when the TSC is considered as a slab of (4 + 1)-d TI with surface superconductivity, the anomaly corresponds to a charge pumping induced by vortex crossing on the surface. The net charge pumped during a single vortex-crossing event is ν 8 . Since in a superconductor, pumping charge 2 is trivial, this anomaly only detects the topological invariant ν mod 16. Therefore our result indicates that the topological classification of (3 + 1)-d TSC is Z 16 . We also present a generic geometrical argument to show that the anomaly is robustly defined even without referring to the axion topological field theory. The quantum anomaly argument guarantees that the TSC phases with ν = 1, 2, ..., 15 are topologically nontrivial and distinct from each other. However, the absence of anomaly at ν = 16 does not necessarily mean ν = 16 is trivial. The fact that ν = 16 is trivial can be supported by other approaches such as the σ-model approach we discussed, and the surface topological order approach We further generalize the axion field theory description to arbitrary d + 1 = 4n dimensions to study the topological classification of DIII class TSC in these dimensions. In higher dimensions, the vortex crossing event happens between 2n vortices, one chiral and the rest non-chiral. The anomaly suggests that the topological classification is Z ν with the value of ν increasing exponentially with the spatial dimension. The critical value ν is ν = 2 (d+5)/2 for spatial dimension d = 8k + 3, and ν = 2 (d+3)/2 for d = 8k + 7. As a comparison, we study the topological classification with the non-linear σ model approach, which leads to the same conclusion. In a recent work An interesting question is whether our approach to topological classification can be generalized to TI's and TSC's in other dimensions and symmetry classes. It is possible to start from a "parent state" described by a Chern-Simons theory, and consider spontaneous symmetry breaking. Topological defects in a different symmetry-breaking state may have different codimensions as the superconducting vortices, so that a different kind of discrete quantum anomaly may be introduced. The investigation of such generalizations will be left for future works. To prove statement A, we will recall a useful tool in low dimensional topology called Heegaard diagram. (For reference see Ref. Three dimensional closed oriented manifold M can be Heegaard decomposed into two handlebodies H 1 and H 2 (Warning: the decomposition of T 3 in the main text is not a Heegaard decomposition, because the complement is not a handlebody.) s.t. M = H 1 ∪ f H 2 , where f is a 'gluing' map. We denote the 'cutting surface' by Σ g , which is a genus g Riemann surface. On the other hand, given two handlebodies with their boundaries, (H 1 , H 2 , Σ g ), we don't have to know every detail of the gluing map f to reconstruct the manifold. Instead, it is sufficient to use the Heegaard diagram: Definition A.1. Heegaard diagram is an ordered pair (H, {l 1 , . . . , l n }), where H is a handlebody, and {l i } is a collection of disjoint, embedded, simple, closed curves on ∂H, s.t., ∂H\{l i } is a collection of punched spheres. Definition A.2. Heegaard diagram for M : if {l i } are images in a map f : ∂H 1 → ∂H 2 of boundaries of a system of disks for H 1 , we say {l i } is a Heegaard diagram for f (or for M). System of disks for H: a collection of properly embedded, essential disks {D 1 , . . . , D n }, s.t. the complement of a regular neighborhood of ∪D i is a collection of balls. Essential: Disk D ⊂ H is essential, if its boundary ∂D doesn't bound a disk on the ∂H. The main theorem we will use is the following: If there is a homeomorphism φ : H 2 → H 2 taking each loop l i to l i then there is a homeomorphism ψ : M → M . An immediate corollary says two identical Heegaard diagram produce the same manifold, upto homeomorphism. Roughly speaking, this theorem indicates that a Heegaard diagram contains adequate information to reconstruct a 3-manifold. This is what we need for proving the statement (A). Before proceeding, it is useful to familiarize the tool by a classic example, see Fig. S 3 can be understood as Heegaard decomposition by arbitrary genus g surface. In particular, it could be decomposed by torus with handlebodies being solid torus. Similarly, S 2 ×S 1 can also be decomposed into two solid torus, but the gluing map is different from the S 3 case. The difference can be told from their different Heegaard diagrams, see Fig. For a 3 torus T 3 = S 1 × S 1 × S 1 , it is convenient to represent it by a cube with opposite face identified. A Heegaard decomposition can be visualized in such a cube, see Fig. The visualization provides a g = 3 Heegaard decomposition. To construct the Heegaard diagram, we first pick a system of disks on the faces of cubes(in total 3, with opposite face identified). Its boundary produces a collection of curves on ∂H 1 , as shown in Fig. We should mention that this specific decomposition of T 3 is different from the one in the main text, see Fig. However, we will show this extra handle is irrelevant for the arguments here, that is to say, if we can prove (A) with the extra handle, we can also prove it without the extra handle in parallel. It is not true in general, but is true for the special surgery we are considering here. The reason is the following: a Dehn twist along a curve c is a local operation on a tubular neighborhood A( will be define in A.3) on surface. This can be justified by providing a concrete definition of Dehn twist: Suppose c is a simple closed curve on a closed orientable surface S. Let A be a tubular neighborhood of c, i.e., an annulus homeomorphic to S 1 × I, I is unit inverval. Now provide A a coordinates (s, t), where s is of the form e iθ with θ ∈ [0, 2π], and t ∈ [0, 1]. Let f be the map from S to itself, inside A, we require: outside A, f is an identity map. Then we call f a Dehn twist about the curve c. According to the definition, as long as we can move the extra handle far away from the tubular neighborhood A (which is possible in our case) the existence or absence of the extra handle won't change the effect of Dehn twist on the topology of T 3 . Because the Dehn twist is an identity map outside A. By this argument, we relate the 'surgery' in the main text to the one in this section, therefore, we just need to prove in the current setup, that relevant surgery won't change the topology of T 3 . On the other hand, it is logically possible to use g = 3 handlebody to show that a crossing can be geometrically represented by a Dehn twist on Riemannian surface Σ 3 in the beginning, and prove the holding 3-d manifold T 3 is unchanged topologically. Also, the proof of (B) is for general Σ g , therefore, is still applicable to show such crossing is in general changing spin structure, but a double crossing keep spin structure invariant. Nevertheless we choose the current presentation because it is obscure to use a g = 3 surface in decomposition before knowing we need to prove some technical detail with a special tool: Heegaard decomposition. Now to continue the proof (A) in the g = 3 Heegaard decomposition, we need to identify the relevant 'Dehn twist' (relevant to physical crossing of strings) on the handlebody picture and see its action on the diagrams. With visualization shown in Fig. In this subsection we present a proof of the statement (B): a double Dehn twist doesn't change spin structure. We will first describe the definition of spin structure in a precise language, state a classification theorem, and then give a computational proof. Definition A.4. (Haefliger(1956) A spin structure on an orientable Riemannian n manifold (M, g) is an equivariant lift of frame bun-dle F SO (M ) → M , with respect to double covering Spin(n) → SO(n). I.e., a pair (P, F p ) is a spin structure on the principal bundle π: F SO → M , if: (a) π P : P → M is a principal spin bundle; (b) F p is a equivariant 2-fold covering map. Physically speaking, a spin structure is a consistent choice of periodic/anti-periodic boundary conditions for fermions, similar but different to a 'Z 2 gauge field'. (Different in the way that there is a special trivial configuration for gauge field, i.e., all holonomy are trivial. While for spin structure, generically, there is no pre-selected 'trivial' configuration.) Remarkably, there is a classification theorem of spin structure(e.g., see Ref. Theorem A.2. the set of spin structures on a closed surface Σ g of genus g can be identified with the set of quadratic forms on H 1 (Σ g ; Z 2 ) Now we will calculate the action of a double Dehn twist on the mod 2 homology H 1 (Σ g ; Z 2 ). A Dehn twist t a along a simple closed curve a ⊂ Σ g acts on mod 2 homology x ∈ H 1 (Σ g , Z 2 ) in the following way: where α are the homology class for a, a•x counts the mod 2 intersection points between a representative of class x and a. Therefore, a double of Dehn twist: acts trivially on mod 2 homology. An immediate corollary says it preserves the spin structure. In the main text, for simplicity, we model 2π flux tube by featureless lines. This might be unrealistic because the real physical flux tube always has a finite size ∼ λ p , the penetration depth. So in general, we should consider finer structure associated with those lines: the framing. Pictorially, it is sufficient to use a ribbon with one solid side and one dash side to represent the framing structure. We always imagine an arrow from the solid side to the dash side representing the framing. An important subtlety in ribbon case is the effect of a twist on two ribbons together, see Fig. FIG. Therefore, to represent a pure crossing for ribbons, we should undo the twist for each ribbon after a total twist for two ribbon together see Fig. Now we discuss the modification to the statement (B) with ribbon structure. Again, we can write down the For physical application, we restrict ourselves to real and complex numbers, i.e., K = R or C. Then Clifford algebra over C can be understood as complex extension of real one, and will be denoted as Cl c : Since C includes the square root of -1, there will be no difference between positive and negative generators: We are going to discuss the representations of Clifford algebra over R and C. As a starting point of our discussion, it is useful to notice the theorem by Wedderburn: Theorem B.1. Wedderburn theorem: Any simple algebra over R or C is isomorphic to certain matrix algebra over the corresponding division algebra. According to Frobenius theorem: Theorem B.2. Frobenius theorem: the only division algebras over R are real R, complex C and quaternion H; the only division algebra over C is C. These two theorems allow us to obtain a general classification about the Clifford algebra of our interest. We will discuss the details in the following subsections. Let's first do the easier case: complex Clifford algebra Cl c (n). As we have seen in the above discussion, the center of Cl c (n) depends on the parity of n: Cl c (2k) has trivial center, so it is isomorphic to complex matrix algebra C(2 k )(dimension is determined by counting 2 2k = (2 k ) 2 ): More explicitly, there are 2k gamma matrices with dimension 2 k , γ i as a representation of generators, e i , (i = 1, . . . , 2k). For the Cl c (2k + 1) case, the center is nontrivial, generated by 1 and e c , so the algebra Cl c (2k + 1) has to be a direct sum of two matrix algebra C(2 k ): this also agrees with the dimension counting: 2 2k+1 = (2 k ) 2 ×2. In terms of representation, the two parts can be understood as two different representations for the chiral element. For example, Cl(3) has two representations, Pauli matrices σ x , σ y , σ z and its complex conjugation, corresponding to e c = i and -i. More generally, for Cl(2k + 1), the square of chiral element e 2 c = (-1) k(2k+1) . The two representations correspond to e c = ±1 for k even, and e c = ±i for k odd. The more subtle case is the real Clifford algebra, because we have to pay attention to the difference between positive and negative generators. We will keep the original notation and denote Clifford algebra with signature {p(+), q(-)} as Cl(p, q). According to the general principle stated at beginning, the real Clifford algebra is isomorphic to matrix algebra over K = R, C or H. The matrix algebra has obvious properties: Among these three types, R(n) and H(n) are central algebra (i.e., have trivial center). While C(n) is not a central algebra, i = √ -1 is a nontrivial center. Remember that the center of Cl(p, q) is trivial when p+q is even, and nontrivial when p + q is odd, we conclude that To get a finer resolution, we square the chiral element in p + q = 2k + 1 case. Using the anti-commutation relations of the generators one obtains The above are some general structures which can be verified from the result that we are going to derive now. The following construction is following the strategy of Ref. There is a way to construct larger Clifford algebra by smaller one, following the rules: Cl(p, q) ⊗ Cl(2, 0) Cl(q + 2, p) (B15) Cl(p, q) ⊗ Cl(0, 2) Cl(q, p + 2) (B16) Cl(p, q) ⊗ Cl(1, 1) Cl(p + 1, q + 1) (B17) Proof. Here we provide a constructive proof, following which, we can construct right hand side(RHS) from the data of left hand side(LHS). Generators for the LHS: It is straightforward to verify the above constructions do satisfy the rules for the generators of RHS. The above rules provide a way to construct general Cl(p, q) from building blocks. The building blocks are in low dimensions, which is simple enough to be figured out case by case: In this section, we study the topological classification of DIII TSC in 4n-dimensions with the fermion σ model approach We consider a generic fermion model on spacetime dimension 4n -1 (the boundary of 4n-d TSC) with N mass terms: where we factor the pure imaginary number i out, and use Majorana representation By integrating out the fermion modes, we get an O(N ) σ model with the target space a sphere S N -1 . The critical dimension below which such a σ model doesn't have any topological term is space-time dimension N -2, where a Weiss-Zumino-Witten (WZW) term According to this argument, we obtain the minimal number of copies needed to trivialize the surface theory, by setting N = 4n + 2: Following the procedure described in section(B), we can compute ν explicitly: • For space-time dimension d + 1 = 4n with odd n: n = 2k + 1, ν = 2 4k+4 = 2 d+5 2 • For space-time dimension d + 1 = 4n with even n: n = 2k, ν = 2 4k+1 = 2 This result agrees with the axion field theory result in the main text. We would like to finish this section by a comment about the relation between the σ model approach and the axion field theory approach. In the σ model approach, it is relatively easy to understand why ν copies is sufficient to trivialize the surface, because there is nothing to forbid a disorder phase when we have enough (N > 4n+1) mass terms. On the other hand, it is generally hard to demonstrate whether TSC with less than ν copies of surface states is indeed topologically nontrivial. When the number of mass terms N ≤ 4n+1, there might be topological terms in the σ model, (e.g., WZW term when N = 4n+1) but to prove that a trivial disordered phase does not exist, one needs to consider the possibility of more complicated mass terms corresponding to target manifolds that are not spheres. In contrast, the axion field theory approach explicitly shows that any TSC with the topological invariant nonzero and less than ν is nontrivial, due to the anomaly, but it does not directly predict that TSC with topological invariant equal to ν is trivial. In this sense, combining the two arguments, we are able to completely pin down the classification for general 4n dimensional DIII class.