Ultranarrow superconductors are in the strong quantum confinement regime with formation of multiple coherent condensates associated with the many subbands of the electronic structure. Here we analyze the multiband BCS-BEC crossover induced by the chemical potential tuned close to a subband bottom, in correspondence of a superconducting shape resonance. The evolution of the condensate fraction and of the pair correlation length in the ground state as functions of the chemical potential demonstrates the tunability of the BCS-BEC crossover for the condensate component of the selected subband. The extension of the crossover regime increases when the pairing strength and/or the characteristic energy of the interaction get larger. Our results indicate the coexistence of large and small Cooper pairs in the crossover regime, leading to the optimal parameter configuration for high transition temperature superconductivity. Control and enhancement of superconductivity when the material geometry is reduced at the nano or atomic scale has been predicted long time ago. First systems considered have been ultrathin superconducting slabs of metals In another class of systems, ultracold cigar-shaped fermions, the quantum confinement induces the formation of a series of multiple subbands. In Ref. More recently, the discovery of the MgB 2 superconductor and of the different families of iron-based superconductors definitely opened a new field of investigation in condensed matter physics: the multicomponent (or multigap / multiband) superconductivity Here we report on a simple physical realization of the multiband BCS-BEC crossover induced by the quantum confinement in superconducting slabs at the atomic limit. To capture the relevant and essential physics, we limit our analysis to the first two subbands generated by the quantum confinement. We consider an effective s-wave attractive interaction with an energy cutoff, including the important subband dependence induced by the reconfiguration of the pairing at the atomic scale. By evaluating the superconducting ground state properties at a mean-field level of approximation, we obtain the selective BCS-BEC crossover when the chemical potential is tuned close to the second subband bottom. The characterization of this crossover is obtained by evaluating the zero temperature condensate fraction of the partial condensate of the second subband and the correlation length of Cooper pairs forming in the same subband. We consider a two dimensional two-band system of interacting fermions at T = 0. The equations and relative discussions for band dispersion, gap, density, condensate fraction and pair correlation length are the same as discussed in Ref. The electronic subbands have a parabolic dispersion of the form where m is the effective mass, which is taken equal in the two subbands, μ is the chemical potential and ε i are the energies of the subband bottoms. The index i=1, 2 labels the subbands: 1 stands for the lower subband while 2 for the upper. Here ε 1 is set to zero. The sketch of the subbands and of the corresponding Fermi surfaces can be seen in Fig. The effective pairing attraction is taken in a separable form and with an energy cutoff ω 0 . In contrast with Ref. The pairing potential can be then written as where V 0 is the (positive) strength of the attractive (swave) potential. The k-dependence of the gaps is given by The coupled mean-field equations for the gaps are being Ω the area occupied by the system. In this work the density is not fixed and it is given by where v i (k) is the BCS weight of the occupied states The condensate fraction α i and pair correlation length ξ i are given by where The sums over k are replaced by two-dimensional integrals over momenta and then by integrals over the energy variable, after introducing the 2D density of states N 2D = m/(2π). The integrals of Eqs. (4-6) and ( We present here the plots of superconducting gaps, condensate fractions and pair correlation lengths as functions of the ratio (μ -ε 2 )/ω 0 , which is the Lifshitz parameter measuring the distance from the Lifshitz transition in units of the energy cutoff of the pairing interactions ω 0 , for a given value of the cutoff energy ω 0 /ε 2 = 0.5 and for two couplings λ ≡ N 2D V 0 =0.2 and 0.3. Gaps are units of ω 0 as well as in units of the Fermi energies of the bands E Fi = 2π m n i where n i is calculated by Eq. ( Fig. subband ε 2 . The curves become flat when μ -ε 2 -ω 0 ≥ 0. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. Quantum confinement of superconductors at the atomic scale can generate a coherent overlap of partial superconducting condensates which are in different regimes of the BCS-BEC crossover. We found that the ratio between the energy gap in one of the subbands and the local Fermi energy is the relevant experimental parameter to locate the partial condensate in the BCS-BEC crossover. Considering the second subband, when the chemical potential approaches the subband bottom the ratio ∆ 2 /E F2 becomes of order 1 and the system enters the shape-resonant crossover regime when 0.3 < ∆ 2 /E F2 < 1.0, with a rapid onset of the BEC regime for negative chemical potential with respect to the subband bottom, corresponding to ∆ 2 /E F2 > 1.0.