In this paper we give a derivation of a system of equations to describe the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors. First, we consider a relativistically covariant theory in terms of gauge four-vector electromagnetic potential and scalar complex field. We use the first-order formalism to obtain the supplemented Maxwell equations for gauge invariant electric, magnetic, four-vector fields and the modulus of the superconducting order parameter. The new four-vector field appears in some of the equations as a gauge invariant super-current and in other ones, while gauge invariant, as a four-vector electromagnetic potential. This dual contribution of the new four-vector field is the basis of the electrodynamics of superconductors. We focus on the system of equations with time-independent fields. The qualitative analysis shows that the applied magnetic field suppresses the superconductivity, while the applied electric field impacts appositely, supporting it. Second we consider time-dependent non-relativistic Ginzburg-Landau theory. The earliest study of the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors is attributed to London brothers The unsuccessful experiments to detect an electric field in superconductors Our main goal is to show that a system of equations which describes the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors can be derived from time dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory. First, we consider a relativistically covariant theory in terms of gauge four-vector electromagnetic potentials and scalar complex field. The electrodynamics is a Lorentz covariant theory and one expects that the model under consideration will help to get deeper insight for the interplay between electric, magnetic fields and superconductivity. We want also to compare our results with the results in The system of equations, derived from a relativistically non-covariant theory, shows that the effect of the applied electric field depends on the direction of the field. The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we derive the system of equations to describe the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors from relativistically covariant theory of superconductivity. For the case when density of Cooper pairs is a constant the system of equations reduces to the London brothers equations. The system of equations derived in the present paper includes an equation for the density of Cooper pairs which shows the different impact on superconductivity of applied electric and magnetic fields. In Section III, we use the same technique of calculations to consider time-dependent relativistically non-covariant Ginzburg-Landau theory. The main results are reported and commented in Section IV. We begin with a well-known field-theory action written in terms of gauge four-vector electromagnetic potential "A" and complex scalar field "ψ", the superconducting order parameter. The parameter where T is the temperature and T c is the critical temperature, is positive when the system is superconductor. We use the standard, for the relativistically covariant systems, notations: , where μ is the magnetic permeability and ε is the electric permittivity of the superconductor. We assume that these parameters do not change their values when the system undergoes normal to superconductor transition. The action ( where φ(x) is a real function. We represent the order parameter ψ(x) in the form where ρ(x) = |ψ(x)| is a gauge invariant and the gauge transformation of θ(x) is The action It is convenient to use the action in the first-order formalism where gauge potential A λ , phase θ, gauge invariant antisymmetric field F λν = -F νλ , gauge invariant four-vector field Q λ and gauge invariant scalar field ρ are assumed to be independent degrees of freedom in the theory. To derive the system of Maxwell equations for s-wave superconductors we vary the action If we set in equations ( Alternatively, one eliminates the gauge fields A λ and θ from equations (8-12) to obtain the system of equations for the gauge invariant fields F λν , Q λ and ρ: Equation ( We construct the antisymmetric tensor F λν by means of the electric E and magnetic B fields in a standard way: In terms of E, B, Q and Q the system of equations which describes the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors is: It is important to stress that the gauge invariant vector Q and scalar Q fields take part in the equations ( To compare our result with the London equations With the London brothers postulates in mind we arrived at London equations Taking the curl of (31), using the equation ( where Taking the divergence of (34) and using the equation ( The equations ( A number of authors have discussed the non-relativistic time-dependent generalization of the Ginzburg-Landau theory where φ = υA 0 is the electric scalar potential, with gauge transformation (3) φ ′ = φ -∂ t φ, D is the normal-state diffusion constant We follow the same procedure to derive the system of equations which describe the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors. We represent the order parameter ψ by means of modulus and phase (4) and write the field-theory action, in the first-order formalism, in the form It is important to stress that Q k is a three component vector field and k = x, y, z. Using a variational principle we obtain the system of equations We supplement the system of equations (42-47) with equation which is a definition of the new gauge invariant field Q. In the same way, starting from the system of equations (42-48), we arrive at the Maxwell equations for superconductors in a non-relativistic theory. The system of equations for time-independent fields is: There are two important differences between equations in relativistic theory (26-30) and equations in non relativistic one (54-58). In contrast to equation (28), in equation ( The aim of the present paper was to present the mathematical basis for the exploration of the intricate interplay between superconductivity and applied magnetic and electric fields. We derived a system of equations to describe the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors. When the model is relativistically covariant, we obtained that the applied electric field supports the supperconductivity. It is very difficult to experimentally test the effects of applied electric field. Right below the superconductor The system of equations (A6-A8), rewritten in terms of the new functions, reads: In equations (A12) κ is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter For semi-infinite superconductors, with a surface of superconductor orthogonal to the z-axis, the boundary condi-