We analyze the possible interaction-induced superconducting instabilities in noncentrosymmetric systems based on symmetries of the normal state. It is proven that pure electron-phonon coupling will always lead to a fully gapped superconductor that does not break time-reversal symmetry and is topologically trivial. We show that topologically nontrivial behavior can be induced by magnetic doping without gapping out the resulting Kramers pair of Majorana edge modes. In case of superconductivity arising from the particle-hole fluctuations associated with a competing instability, the properties of the condensate crucially depend on the time-reversal behavior of the order parameter of the competing instability. When the order parameter preserves time-reversal symmetry, we obtain exactly the same properties as in case of phonons. If it is odd under time-reversal, the Cooper channel of the interaction will be fully repulsive leading to sign changes of the gap and making spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking possible. To discuss topological properties, we focus on fully gapped time-reversal symmetric superconductors and derive constraints on possible pairing states that yield necessary conditions for the emergence of topologically nontrivial superconductivity. These conditions might serve as a tool in the search for topological superconductors. We also discuss implications for oxides heterostructures and single-layer FeSe. In the past few years, topological phases of matter have attracted considerable interest in condensed matter physics Concerning the realization of these phases, one has to distinguish between "intrinsic" and "extrinsic" topological superconductors. In "extrinsic" systems, superconductivity is induced in a spin-orbit coupled normal conducting material via injection of Cooper pairs from a trivial superconductor and, potentially, additional external fields are applied (see, e.g., Ref. 6). In "intrinsic" topological superconductors, both superconductivity as well as the nontrivial topology arise spontaneously due to the internal interactions of the system. In particular in the search for the right material for the latter type of topological superconductors, guiding principles are required that go beyond model studies and depend only on very few and easily accessible details of the system, such as symmetries or Fermi surface topologies. A related, but more fundamental, question is whether there is a direct relation between the mechanism that leads to the superconducting instability and the topology of the resulting phase. E.g., in Ref. 7, it has been shown for a specific model of the two-dimensional (2D) electron fluid in oxide heterostructures that there is a one-to-one correspondence: For conventional, i.e., electron-phonon induced, superconductivity, the condensate is trivial, whereas in case of an unconventional mechanism, i.e., superconductivity resulting from electronic particle-hole fluctuations, topologically nontrivial behavior is found. This can be used to identify the microscopic origin of the pairing state by determining its topological properties. One promising class of materials for observing intrinsic topological behavior, are superconductors where inversion symmetry is already broken in the normal state In this paper, we address both issues of intrinsic topological superconductors outlined above: We derive simple guiding principles for the search for interaction-induced topological superconductivity and relate the mechanism driving the superconducting instability to the topology of the corresponding condensate. Our analysis indicates that magnetic fluctuations, either from the proximity to a magnetic instability or due to magnetic impurities, are essential for the formation of a time-reversal symmetric topological superconductor. To arrive at these conclusions, we focus on strongly noncentrosymmetric systems in the sense that the spin-orbit splitting E so exceeds the transition temperature T c of superconductivity, E so T c . Our results are based on exact relations following from symmetries of the system, most notable the time-reversal symmetry (TRS) of the high-temperature phase, and, thus, do not depend on further microscopic details. To describe unconventional pairing, we apply an effective low-energy approach More specifically, it is shown that, irrespective of whether superconductivity arises from phonons or fluctuations of a time-reversal symmetric order parameter in the particle-hole channel, the resulting condensate will be fully gapped, preserve all point symmetries of the hightemperature phase as well as TRS. The invariance under the reversal of the time direction both crucially affects the electromagnetic response of the system and determines the topological classification of the superconductor as well as the structure of the MBS emerging at edges of the system in case of a topologically nontrivial phase 1 . To deduce the associated topological invariant (class DIII We find for phonons or fluctuations of a particle-hole order parameter which is even under time-reversal, that the invariant is generically trivial. Naturally, significant residual Coulomb repulsion can lead to a topological phase. We show that also magnetic impurities can drive the system into a topologically nontrivial superconducting state that still preserves TRS. Although the disorder required to stabilize the topological structure of the bulk system locally breaks TRS, the MBS at the edge of the topological domain are shown to be protected if there is a residual reflection symmetry at the boundary. In case of fluctuations of an order parameter that is odd under time-reversal, the situation is completely different: The interaction is fully repulsive within and between all Fermi surfaces such that the resulting superconducting order parameter will have sign changes, can break any point symmetry as well as the TRS of the high-temperature phase. We consider the limit where the inversion-symmetry breaking terms induce a momentumspace splitting of the Fermi surfaces that is smaller than the scale on which the spin-orbit texture varies. This roughly corresponds to E so Λ t where Λ t denotes the bandwidth of the system. We derive an asymptotic symmetry and show that all possible superconducting order parameters can be grouped into two classes: The relative sign of the order parameter can only be either positive or negative at all "Rashba pairs" of Fermi surfaces. Here "Rashba pair" denotes a pair of Fermi surfaces that merge into one doubly degenerate Fermi surface upon hypothetically switching off the inversion-symmetry breaking terms in the Hamiltonian. To discuss the implications on the topological properties, we focus on fully gapped (sign changes only between the different Fermi surfaces) and time-reversal symmetric superconductors. The latter assumption is not very restrictive as many noncentrosymmetric point groups do not allow for spontaneous breaking of TRS by a single superconducting phase transition Our results imply that one should look for superconducting systems that are close to a particle-hole instability with an order parameter that is odd under timereversal (e.g., a spin-density wave instability) for realizing a noncentrosymmetric topological superconductor. This leads to strong magnetic fluctuations that can drive a superconducting instability. Even if the superconducting state is due to electron-phonon coupling, the proximity to a magnetic phase might lead to the spontaneous formation We believe that this work will serve as a guiding tool in the search for topologically nontrivial superconducting states and, in addition, help determining the pairing mechanism of noncentrosymmetric superconductors. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the notation used in this work and proof the absence of topological superconductivity in a clean electron-phonon superconductor. To describe unconventional pairing, the analysis will be extended to general bosonic fluctuations in Sec. III. In Sec. IV, we discuss the modifications when disorder is taken into account and show how magnetic impurities can render an electron-phonon superconductor topological. Finally, Sec. V is devoted to illustrating the consequences of our results for two specific materials. In this section, we will discuss conventional, i.e., electron-phonon induced, superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric systems. Assuming that the normal phase is time-reversal symmetric, we will proof on a very general level that the resulting superconducting state will be necessarily topologically trivial in the absence of disorder and additional residual electronic interactions. The inclusion of the latter two effects, which make topological superconductivity possible, is postponed to Sec. IV. Throughout this work, we consider fermions described by the general noninteracting Hamiltonian where the indices α, β = 1, 2, . . . 2N represent all relevant microscopic degrees of freedom, e.g., spin, orbitals and subbands. Here and in the following we use hats to denote operators acting in the many-body Fock space. The only symmetry we assume in this section is TRS. Time-reversal is represented by the antiunitary operators Θ and Θ in Fock and single-particle space, respectively, i.e. such that Θ Ĥ0 Θ † = Ĥ0 is equivalent to Here, Θ = T K with K denoting complex conjugation. Since we will focus on spin-1/2 fermions, it holds Θ 2 = -1 and, hence, T T = -T . The electron-phonon coupling giving rise to superconductivity is taken to be of the general form As mentioned above, further interaction channels are assumed to be irrelevant in this section. In Eq. ( To analyze the consequences of the latter, first note that since the deformation of the lattice Qq ∼ b † -q + bq and the conjugate momentum Pq ∼ i( b † q -b-q ) must be even, Θ Qq Θ † = Q-q , and odd, Θ Pq Θ † = -P-q , under timereversal, respectively. Using this in Eq. ( Finally, the Hamiltonian of the phonons reads where the phonon dispersion ω ql satisfies ω ql > 0 and ω ql = ω -ql due to stability of the crystal and TRS, respectively. Restating the system in the action description and integrating out the phonon degrees of freedom yields the effective electron-electron interaction Here cα and c α are the Grassmann analogues of the fermionic creation and annihilation operators ĉ † α and ĉα . We use k ≡ (iω n , k), q ≡ (iΩ n , q) with k comprising both momentum and Matsubara summation, where β denotes the inverse temperature. For describing superconducting instabilities, it is very convenient to work in the eigenbasis of the noninteracting part h k of the high-temperature Hamiltonian. We thus write where ψ ks denote the eigenstates of h k , i.e. h k ψ ks = ks ψ ks . If the summation over s includes all 2N values, Eq. ( Inserting the transformation (11) into Eq. ( where we have introduced The Hermiticity constraint (5) now becomes In this paper, we will focus on systems with singlydegenerate Fermi surfaces which requires a center of inversion to be absent. The combination of broken inversion symmetry, e.g., at an interface or in the bulk of a noncentrosymmetric crystal, and atomic spin-orbit coupling will generally lift the degeneracy of the Fermi surfaces. Together with TRS of the normal state Hamiltonian, Eq. ( with (k-dependent) phases φ s k ∈ R that are determined by how the phases of the eigenstates ψ ks are chosen (gauge symmetry). Eq. ( In this work we will not have to specify the phases φ s k explicitly, it will only be taken into account that as a consequence of Θ 2 = -1. Using Eqs. ( This is a central relation for our analysis as it can be used to rewrite the Cooper channel of the interaction (12), i.e., the scattering process of a Kramers pair {s, k; s K , -k} of quasiparticles into another Kramers pair {s , k ; s K , -k } as depicted in Fig. where The very same matrix elements also govern the forward scattering processes shown in Fig. Using the Hermiticity (5) of the electron-phonon interaction one finds F = V. Consequently, the combination of TRS and the fact that the Fermi surfaces are singly degenerate highly constraints the Cooper channel of the interaction. As stated in Eq. (19), it can be written as the product of the time-reversal phases defined in Eq. ( Before proceeding, a few remarks are in order: Naturally, the Cooper scattering amplitude ( We finally list three properties which are readily read off from Eq. (20) and will be taken into account in the following. The aim of Eliashberg theory 20,23 consists of calculating the Nambu Green's function in the superconducting phase. For our purposes, it will be convenient to perform the calculation in the eigenbasis of the normal state Hamiltonian h k . We thus introduce the Nambu Green's function as According to this ansatz, all Cooper pairs carry zero total momentum excluding the formation of translation-symmetry breaking superconductivity, e.g., Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov In addition, we assume that, for determining the superconducting properties, the Green's function can be approximated to be diagonal in Fermi-surface space, which will be referred to as weak-pairing approximation in the following. When the energetic separation E so of the Fermi surfaces is larger than the energy range 2Λ of the low-energy theory, Eq. ( Physically, the weak-pairing approximation means that the Cooper pairs are made from the same quantum numbers as the normal state. We emphasize that this is only a statement about the propagator G and does not restrict the interaction to be diagonal in Fermi-surface space. On the contrary, interband interactions are even essential to have a unique superconducting order parameter as, otherwise, the free energy would be independent of the relative phase of the order parameter at different Fermi surfaces. Before proceeding with the calculation of the Green's function, let us discuss its antiunitary symmetries (see Appendix A 2 for more details on the derivation of the following statements). To begin with charge-conjugation symmetry, it holds (24) which is just a consequence of the inherent redundancy of the Nambu Green's function in Eq. (22). Secondly, the TRS constraint, which is, in the microscopic basis, described by the operator Θ, reads when transformed into the eigenbasis according to Eq. (11). The phases φ s k enter because of the relation (16) between the wavefunctions of Kramers partners. Note that the expression for the time-reversal operator stated above yields Θ 2 ks = 1 which, at first sight, seems to disagree with G s being a Green's function of spin-1/2 fermions. This can be reconciled by noting that the full time-reversal operator Θ ks I that also includes the inversion I of momentum indeed satisfies ( Θ ks I) 2 = Θ ks Θ -ks K = -1 as a consequence of Eq. (17). Note that this subtlety usually does not play any role as the time-reversal operator in momentum space in many cases (e.g. in the microscopic basis as in Eq. ( In order to compare our Green's function approach with the mean-field picture, which will be particularly useful when discussing the topological properties below, let us consider the generic superconducting mean-field Hamiltonian Performing the transformation into the band basis analogously to Eq. ( with Nambu spinor Ψ † ks = f † ks f-ks K and Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian Here we have introduced the Fermi-surface-diagonal matrix elements ∆ s (k) = ψ ks |∆ k T † |ψ ks of the order parameter. Demanding that Eq. ( The relation (29) between the mean-field Green's function G and the weak-pairing representation of the general multiband mean-field Hamiltonian (26) will be relevant in Sec. II C when discussing topological properties of the superconducting phase beyond mean-field. Let us next calculate the Green's function G within Eliashberg approximation, i.e., by solving the Dyson equations for the electronic and anomalous Green's function represented diagrammatically in Fig. We parameterize the Green's function according to with quasiparticle weight Z s (k), s (k) = ks + δ s (k), where δ s (k) is the band renormalization, and anomalous self-energies Φ s (k) and Φ s (iω n , k) = Φ * s (-iω n , k). These quantities, which uniquely determine G, follow from the self-consistency equations where we have introduced for notational convenience. Here Eqs. (21a) and (21b) have been taken into account to write the expressions in more compact form. The additional factor of 2 on the right-hand sides of Eq. ( In this work, we will focus on the vicinity of the critical temperature of the superconducting transition and, hence, linearize the Eliashberg equations (31) in Φ. To proceed further, let us rewrite the momentum summation as an angular integration over the Fermi surfaces and an energy integration (momentum perpendicular to the Fermi surface) subject to an energetic cutoff Λ, which is a characteristic energy scale of the phonons (e.g., the Debye energy). More explicitly, we replace where ρ s (Ω) > 0 denotes the angle-resolved density of states that is taken to be independent of . The dimensionality of s dΩ is set by the dimensionality of the Fermi surface s. For the general purposes of this paper, we do not have to specify any parameterization, we will, as illustrated in Fig. In addition, we take the interaction V, δ and Φ as well as the quasiparticle residue Z to be only weakly dependent on the momentum perpendicular to the Fermi surface (valid for m/M 1) and set and similarly for δ and Φ. With these approximations, the Eliashberg equations ( i.e., there is no Fermi velocity correction. In Eq. ( has been introduced in order to render the kernel of the gap equation (35b) symmetric. Note that, as a consequence of linearizing in Φ, Eq. (35a) explicitly determines Z s (iω n , Ω), i.e., it follows without solving a self-consistency equation. We di- which is a consequence of its definition but can, alternatively, be explicitly seen in Eq. (35a) using Eq. (21b). Together with Z s (iω n , Ω) = Z * s (-iω n , Ω) following from Eq. (21c), we can summarize The properties of the superconducting order parameter follow from the second Eliashberg equation (35b). As opposed to mean-field theory, the temperature dependence of Eq. (35b) is more complicated and hidden in the kernel v defined in Eq. ( As v only has positive components, we conclude from the Perron-Frobenius theorem Since v ss (iω n , Ω; iω n , Ω ) is invariant under a simultaneous sign change of ω n and ω n , which follows from and Eqs. (21c) and ( Eqs. ( We will next discuss the consequences of Eqs. ( By design, the Nambu Green's function defined in Eq. ( Consequently, the resulting system is invariant both under charge conjugation Ξ with Ξ 2 = 1 as well as under time-reversal Θ ks I satisfying ( Θ ks I) 2 = -1 and, thus, belongs to class DIII where the "topological Hamiltonian" is given by For the calculation of the topological invariant, we have to go to zero temperature. In Eq. ( For this purpose, we assume that no additional topological phase transition occurs in the temperature range between the onset of superconductivity and T = 0. In more mathematical terms, it means that, upon lowing T to zero, the structure of the solution of the (nonlinear) Eliashberg equations does not change in a way that affects the topological invariant. Under this assumption, the topological properties of the superconducting phase can be inferred from the solution of the linear Eliashberg equations (35). Due to Φ s (0, Ω) > 0, the superconductor is fully gapped and the Green's function G s (iω, k) must be an analytic function of ω in a finite domain containing the imaginary axis. Consequently, iωZ s (iω, k)| iω=0 = 0 as iωZ s (iω, k) is an odd function of ω [cf. Eq. ( which is manifestly Hermitian. Furthermore, it is readily checked to be particle-hole and time-reversal symmetric with Ξ and Θ ks as given in Eqs. ( The resulting topological properties are most easily inferred by reading the approximation of the general meanfield Hamiltonian in Eq. ( In Ref. 29, it has been shown that the topological class-DIII invariant ν of a mean-field Hamiltonian of the form of Eq. ( where k s is an arbitrary point on and C 1s denotes the first Chern number of the Fermi surface s (for the definition of C 1s we refer to Eq. (E1)). Due to Eqs. ( i.e., a topologically trivial superconductor. In the second equality of Eq. ( Taken together, superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric systems that arises due to electron-phonon coupling alone can neither break TRS nor any point symmetry of the system and must necessarily be topologically trivial. This has been derived under very general assumptions: The inversion-symmetry breaking is assumed to be sufficiently strong for the weak-pairing approximation to be valid (E so T c ). The Eliashberg approach is controlled in the limit of adiabatic ionic motion (m/M 1), in principle, allowing for arbitrarily strong interactions V. Also the analysis of topological invariants is performed beyond the mean-field level. We emphasize that, despite looking deceptively like a meanfield description, the topological Hamiltonian approach we use is equivalent Note that these conclusions are not altered when electronic renormalization effects of the phononic dispersion are taken into account since ω ql in Eq. ( It is instructive to compare this result valid for noncentrosymmetric systems with the situation where inversion symmetry is preserved. In this case, all Fermi surfaces are doubly degenerate and the superconducting state can only be either singlet or triplet. As has been shown in Ref. 32 using mean-field theory, singlet and triplet states will be degenerate if the electron-phonon coupling satisfies certain symmetries such that already an infinitesimal amount of residual Coulomb repulsion favors the triplet state that breaks inversion symmetry and has nontrivial topological properties In the remainder of the paper, we will discuss several generalizations of the considerations presented above including coupling to generic collective bosonic modes (Sec. III), residual Coulomb interactions as well as disorder (Sec. IV) rendering topologically nontrivial properties possible in the weak-pairing limit. In this section, we will extend the analysis to unconventional superconductors, i.e., systems where superconductivity is not based on electron-phonon interaction but arises from a purely electronic mechanism. Eventually, it is the Coulomb interaction which, strongly renormalized depending on the microscopic details of the system, gives rise to the superconducting instability. Here we will fully neglect the electron-phonon interaction and treat the interacting electron problem in the following low-energy approach The proximity to, e.g., (real) charge-density or spindensity wave order correspond to time-reversal even (TRE), t = +1, or time-reversal odd (TRO), t = -1, fluctuations, respectively. Furthermore, we assume that the interaction processes at energies larger than Λ neither destroy the Fermi-liquid behavior of the fermions nor lead to TRS breaking. Consequently, the noninteracting part of the fermionic Hamiltonian is still of the form of Eq. ( and all other residual electron-electron interactions will be neglected since, by assumption, the channel described by the collective mode φqj is dominant. In Eq. ( resulting from φ being real and Eq. ( In case of a model with only a single orbital where α just refers to the spin of the electrons, one could have {λ (j) } = {σ 0 }, N B = 1, in case of t = + and {λ (j) } = {σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 }, N B = 3, for t = -. Here σ j , j = 0, 1, 2, 3, denote the Pauli matrices in spin space. For simplicity of the presentation of the results, the discussion of more complex fermion-boson couplings will be postponed to Sec. III C. The dynamics of the bosons will be described by the action where φ is the field variable corresponding to the operator φ and χ 0 (iΩ n , q) is the bare susceptibility with respect to the order parameter of the competing particle-hole instability the system is close to. The full susceptibility χ(iΩ n , q), renormalized by particle-hole fluctuations as shown in Fig. As shown in Appendix A 1, χ has to satisfy (the same holds for χ 0 ) the exact relations The first identity is just a consequence of χ being a correlator of twice the same operator φ evaluated at q and -q, whereas the second line is based on Hermiticity, φ † qj = φ-qj . Finally, the third relation follows from TRS of the system. Being Hermitian, χ(iΩ n , q) has real eigenvalues all of which have to be positive as required by stability: By assumption, the competing instability will not occur and, hence, the bosons have to have a finite mass. In the following, we will proceed in a manner very similar to Sec. II: Writing the entire model in the field integral representation and integrating out the bosons leads to an effective electron-electron interaction of the form of Eq. ( where we have introduced the N B -component vector of matrix elements in analogy to G in Eq. ( which constitutes the obvious generalization of Eq. ( We have seen in Sec. II B that, in the weak-pairing approximation, the superconducting properties are fully determined by the Cooper and the forward scattering channel shown in Fig. To show this, TRS (55) and Hermiticity, λ † = λ, have been taken advantage of. Recalling that stability forces χ(q) to be positive definite, we conclude that V s s < 0. We see that the forward scattering amplitude F is, exactly as in case of phonons, negative for all states on the Fermi surfaces, whereas the global sign of the Cooper channel is reversed in case of TRO fluctuations as compared to phonons (or TRE electronic fluctuations). Note that, in general, this only holds for the renormalized electron-electron interaction since only χ and not the bare χ 0 has to be positive definite. Let us next analyze the consequences for the possible superconducting phases. As before, we apply Eliashberg theory that is frequently used for studying superconductivity caused by collective bosonic modes other than phonons (see, e.g., Ref. 34 As in this case, m/M 1 will not hold in general, one expects this approach only to be applicable in the weakcoupling regime. However, in the limit of large numbers of fermion flavors, neglecting vertex corrections is also justified in the strong-coupling case Using Hermiticity of λ, Eqs. ( Repeating the arguments presented in Sec. II B, we directly conclude that Eq. ( To begin with TRE fluctuations, t = +, the kernel has, exactly as V in Eq. ( For TRO fluctuations, we have t = -such that δ now belongs to the eigenspace of v with the smallest eigenvalue. This has two crucial consequences. Firstly, we cannot generically exclude spontaneous TRS breaking since it is no longer guaranteed that this eigenspace is one-dimensional. Although all eigenvectors of the real matrix v can always be chosen to be real valued, the superconducting order parameter can be a complex superposition of the degenerate eigenvectors which makes TRS breaking possible. Note that, apart from accidental degeneracies which we will neglect here, these degeneracies can be enforced by symmetry if the point group of the system allows for multidmensional or complex irreducible representations To proceed, we will assume that the resulting superconducting state preserves TRS and, thus, belongs to class DIII. This is not very restrictive since it has been shown 14 that, for 2D systems, spontaneous TRS breaking can only occur in the weak-pairing limit if there is a threefold rotation symmetry perpendicular to the plane. Furthermore, as we want to discuss topological properties of superconductors, we will focus on fully gapped systems, where the sign changes take place between different Fermi surfaces. Being fully gapped, we can apply the weak-pairing expressions in Eqs. (45) and (47) for the DIII invariant to the topological Hamiltonian (43). To derive necessary conditions for the emergence of nontrivial topological invariants, we will next discuss an approximate symmetry that is expected to be applicable to many noncentrosymmetric systems. It will give rise to an asymptotic symmetry of the gap equation (35b) and, in turn, constrain the possible superconducting order parameters and associated topological properties. To deduce this approximate symmetry which relates the wavefunctions at different spin-orbit split Fermi surfaces and discuss the limit where it becomes exact, let us split the quadratic Hamiltonian (1) of the fermions according to with a term h S that is symmetric and a term h A that is antisymmetric under inversion. We first diagonalize the centrosymmetric part of the Hamiltonian. The corresponding eigenvalues S kj , j = 1, 2, ..., N , must be doubly degenerate due to the combination of inversion and TRS. Note that h S in general also includes spin-orbit coupling, which entangles the spin and orbital degrees of freedom of the electrons. Nonetheless, as is easily seen by construction, one can still introduce a k-space local pseudospin basis {|k, σ } which has the same transformation properties under TRS and inversion as the physical spin. Denoting the Pauli matrices in this basis by s i , i = 0, 1, 2, 3, we have where g k = -g -k and no term ∝ s 0 can be present as dictated by TRS and h A being odd under inversion. In Eq. ( Due to the decomposition of h k in Eq. ( k | can now be labeled by the composite index s = (j, ν). If g k varies slowly on the separation |g|/v F (v F denotes the Fermi velocity) of the Fermi surfaces s = (j, ν) and s R ≡ (j, -ν), we can approximate g (j) k g that becomes exact in the limit g (j) → 0. Here γ s Ω are phase factors that depend on the choice of the eigenstates. Note that this relation is structurally similar to that based on TRS in Eq. ( Physically, Eq. ( As a second step, this, together with Eq. ( already using the approximation and notation introduced in Eq. ( under two assumptions: Firstly, similar to g, the susceptibility χ(iΩ n , q) must be slowly varying in q on the scale |g|/v F . This is a very natural assumption as the description in terms of a collective mode will only be sensible if there are long-wavelength fluctuations. Secondly, and much more importantly, χ(iΩ n , q) must be an even function of momentum q. We see from Eq. ( In a 2D system this symmetry can be realized as a twofold rotation C z 2 perpendicular to the plane of the system. Since C z 2 commutes with all other symmetry operations, the irreducible representations of the point group must be either even or odd under this operation (see Appendix D) and the same holds for the order parameter of the competing particle-hole instability. This means that leading to the required relation as shown in Appendix A 1. One might expect that, even in the absence of a two-fold rotation symmetry or in 1D and 3D, Eq. (67) still constitutes a valid approximation for E so Λ t : Although the superconducting instability, arising from infrared singularities, is essentially influenced by the splitting |g| of the Fermi surfaces due to the broken inversion symmetry, the susceptibility χ might not. As the tendency of the system towards the competing instability mainly results from processes at energies comparable to Λ t [cf. Fig. Let us now deduce the implications of the resulting asymptotic property (64) of the interaction matrix. Due to ρ s ∼ ρ s R in the limit considered, we have Z s ∼ Z s R as can be seen directly from Eq. (35a). Therefore, the kernel v of the gap equation (35b) has the same symmetry as V in Eq. ( with either p = + or p = -for all s, ω n and Ω. This is a central result of this section. It highly constraints the possible order parameters and allows them to be grouped into two basic classes: The relative sign of the order parameter at Rashba partners can only be either positive (p = +) or negative (p = -) for all Rashba pairs. In the following, the corresponding pairing states will be denoted by "Rashba even" and "Rashba odd", respectively. This has also crucial consequences for the possible topological properties of the superconductor. To discuss this, we will, as already mentioned above, have to assume that the superconducting state is fully gapped and timereversal symmetric. Note that Eq. (68) will also hold if these two additional assumptions are not satisfied. Let us first focus on the 2D case where the topological invariant is determined by Eq. ( The same also holds in 1D, where m j = 1. Consequently, the total number of TRIM enclosed by Rashba pairs of Fermi surfaces must be necessarily odd for the interaction-induced superconductor to be topological. To continue with 3D, we first note that the Fermi surface Chern numbers of Rashba partners must be equal in magnitude but opposite in sign, C 1(j,+) = -C 1(j,-) ≡ C 1j , which readily follows from Eq. ( (70) Note that the right-hand side does not depend on Ω as the sign of the order parameter of a fully gapped superconductor cannot change on a given Fermi surface. Irrespective of the dimensionality of the system, we have seen that Rashba odd pairing is required to make In (a), we expect χ to be peaked at momenta connecting states within the two Rashba pairs leading to Rashba odd pairing. The resulting state will nonetheless be topologically trivial as the number of TRIM enclosed by Rashba pairs is even. In case of (b), a Rashba even state is expected. topologically nontrivial superconductivity possible. We expect this to be realized when the strongest nesting occurs between Rashba partners such that χ is dominated by momenta connecting the Rashba-split Fermi surfaces. An example for N = 2 is shown in Fig. More specifically, we can conclude that for just a single Rashba pair, N = 1, only Rashba odd pairing is possible. This simply follows from the fact that, in case of TRO fluctuations discussed here, the interaction is fully repulsive in the Cooper channel such that the superconducting state must have at least one sign change. Focusing on fully gapped superconductors, this sign change must occur between the two Fermi surfaces. Irrespective of the dimensionality of the system, the superconductor will be automatically topological if the number of TRIM enclosed by the Rashba pair is odd. In 1D and 2D, this is directly seen from Eq. (69), whereas, for the 3D case, the relation 29 (-1) C1j = (-1) mj implying C 1j = 0 for odd m j has to be taken into account in Eq. (70). Here we will generalize the previous analysis by considering more general forms of the fermion-boson coupling (49). To allow for the most general particle-hole order parameter we now investigate the coupling Hamiltonian (71) where φqj are N B -component complex bosons ( φ † qj = φ-qj ) and m (j) (k + q, k) are potentially momentumdependent, generally non-Hermitian matrices. The momentum dependence is essential, e.g., when discussing current fluctuations, where m(k + q, k) ∝ (k + q/2)σ 0 with σ j being Pauli matrices in spin space. The generalization to non-Hermitian order parameters is relevant, e.g., in case of imaginary spin-(m (j) = iσ j ) or chargedensity waves (m = iσ 0 ). By decomposing both φqj and the fermion bilinear into their Hermitian and Antihermitian parts, one can reduce Eq. ( where Let us for the moment again focus on either TRE or TRO fluctuations forcing T M * (-k, -k )T † = t M (k, k ). Below we will comment on the situation of having both components at the same time. Repeating the analysis presented above, one readily finds that Z must still satisfy all three properties in Eq. (39). In case of TRE fluctuations, spontaneous TRS breaking cannot occur with the resulting superconducting state being necessarily topologically trivial. To derive the property (68) which is central for our analysis of superconductivity induced by TRO fluctuations, Eq. ( Note that Eq. ( So far we have assumed that the fermion-boson interaction can be described by a Hamiltonian in the lowenergy theory. If this interaction obtains significant frequency-dependent renormalization corrections resulting from processes at energies between Λ t and Λ [see Fig. is required. Here Γ (j) is the generally momentum-and frequency-dependent vertex function. Similar to our treatment of χ, the vertex will not be explicitly specified in the following. We will only take into account the exact relations resulting from TRS and Hermiticity (see Appendix A 3). To begin with the former symmetry, it holds which reduces to Eq. ( To analyze the forward-scattering channel defined in Fig. ) which reduces to λ † = λ for the coupling (49). One can show that, despite the sign change of the frequencies on the right-hand side of Eq. ( To discuss the case of t = -, we have to take into account the implications for the vertex function resulting from the asymptotic symmetry introduced in Sec. III B. In Appendix A 3 it is shown that, as long as Eq. ( on the fully renormalized vertex function, which constitutes the obvious generalization of relation (62). Using the constraints resulting from the invariance of the system under Ŝ defined in Eqs. ( ) we recover the Rashba symmetry (64) of the Cooper channel. Similarly, one can show that Z s = Z s R still holds. Consequently, the possible superconducting states can again be classified into Rashba even and Rashba odd according to Eq. ( Finally, let us discuss the situation when the dominant fluctuations are neither fully TRE nor TRO, i.e., if the bosons coupling to the fermions according to Eq. ( with t j = + and t j = -for the TRE and TRO components of the fluctuations, respectively. From the analysis presented above, it is clear that the interaction cannot be generally repulsive or attractive in the Cooper channel. The constraint (52c) now assumes the generalized form such that χ(q) is not Hermitian anymore. However, as long as we assume that all components M (j) in the bare coupling (72) satisfy Eq. ( In Sec. II, we have shown that, in a clean system, electron-phonon coupling alone can never lead to topological superconductivity. Now let us ask how an electron-phonon interaction dominated superconductor can nonetheless be topologically nontrivial. Firstly, there might be some finite residual Coulomb interaction. Although typically small 38 due to renormalization group corrections at energies between the Fermi energy and the Debye frequency, it will induce sign changes between Fermi surfaces if the electron-phonon interaction has a favorable structure: Focusing for simplicity on a two-band model with Fermi surfaces, e.g., as shown in Fig. Secondly, one might ask whether disorder can induce a transition from an electron-phonon driven trivial superconductor to a topologically nontrivial state. From our discussion of particle-hole fluctuations in Sec. III, we expect TRA, usually referred to as "magnetic", disorder to be a promising driving force for unconventional pairing. Indeed, recalling former studies of magnetic disorder in multiband superconductors Let us first investigate the general multiband superconducting system described by the noninteracting Hamiltonian ( where f and f † are the operator analogues of the Grassmann variables f and f introduced in Eq. (11). Due to Eq. ( We introduce disorder as perturbations of the form with ĉ † (x) and ĉ(x) being the Fourier transform of the microscopic creation and annihilation operators ĉ † k and ĉk . Assuming that the system is self-averaging, we treat W as a Gaussian distributed real (W † = W ) random field. Restricting the analysis to spatially local configurations, x = x in Eq. ( where . . . dis represents the disorder average. Averaging over W produces an effective four-fermion interaction within replica theory with C being real and symmetric Although a generic disorder realization W will break all spatial symmetries, the symmetries of the clean system must be restored on average. This means that the correlator Γ must be fully invariant under all symmetry operations g of the point group of the system or, formally, that where R ψ (g) denotes the wavefunction representation of the operation g. Coming back to spatial symmetries below, let us first only focus on the TRS properties of the disorder configurations: TRS ("nonmagnetic") and TRA ("magnetic") disorder is mathematically equivalent to restricting the expansion (84) to matrices satisfying with t γ = + and t γ = -, respectively. To solve for the dominant superconducting state in the presence of disorder, the interaction (81) will be treated within mean-field approximation. We introduce the order parameter such that the resulting mean-field Hamiltonian is of form of Eq. ( Here, V -1 denotes the inverse of the interaction kernel V and the disorder averaged particle-particle bubble D Ωs,Ω s is represented diagrammatically in Fig. In analogy to the Eliashberg approach (cf. Fig. which is real valued due to Eq. ( In the second line, Eqs. ( As shown in Appendix F, summing up the diagrams in Fig. with the symmetrized scattering vertex and the diagonal matrix Note that the inverse in Eq. ( Ωs,Ω K s K . Using the symmetry constraint (86) on the disorder correlator, it is straightforward to show that where R v (g) denotes the representation of the symmetry operation g on the multi-index (Ωs). The symmetry of the spectrum implies that also the density of states ρ s (Ω) is invariant under all symmetry operations g of the point group. Consequently, C Ωs,Ω s satisfies the same constraint as S S in Eq. ( To show that disorder can drive an electron-phonon superconductor, that must be necessarily trivial in the clean limit, into a topological DIII state, let us focus for concreteness, e.g., on 2D systems with C 2v point group. From the arguments presented above it is already clear that the resulting superconducting state must be timereversal symmetric due to the absence of a threefold rotation symmetry. Assuming that there are no additional orbital degrees of freedom, the normal state Hamiltonian can be written as where σ j are Pauli matrices in spin space. The most general disorder correlator Γ in case of nonmagnetic (t γ = +) disorder reads in the microscopic basis as whereas, in case of magnetic (t γ = -) impurities, we have Here γ ++ m,c and T ++ c,0 are the critical scattering rate of the s ++ superconductor and its transition temperature in the absence of disorder, respectively. Part (b) shows the exact representation of the kernel of the quadratic Ginzburg-Landau expansion (89) in terms of the full Greens function (double line) and renormalized vertex (gray triangle). Focusing on the limit kF l 1, the former and the latter only contain the noncrossing diagrams shown in (c) and (d), respectively. Here the impurity line (dashed) only enters in the combinations defined in Eqs. ( The terms proportional to γ i.e., there is an intraband Cooper scattering (U ) that is the same for both bands and an interband Cooper interaction (J) both of which are constant on the two Fermi surfaces. By diagonalizing the resulting D in the free-energy expansion (89), one can deduce the transition temperatures and, hence, the dominant instability of the system as a function of the interaction parameters U , J as well as of the disorder strength parameterized by γ 0 and γ m for nonmagnetic and magnetic disorder, respectively. In case of nonmagnetic disorder, the critical temperature of the s ++ state which, due to the parameters used in the present calculation, has ∆ 1 (Ω) = ∆ 2 (Ω) = const., is not affected by disorder. This is just a manifestation of the well-known Anderson theorem The full phase diagram that shows the dependence on the ratio J/U of the interaction parameters for a fixed (negative) value of U can be found in Fig. As s ++ and s +-are degenerate for J = 0, the critical scattering rate ρ F γ * m for stabilizing a topological phase must go to zero as J → 0. For small J/U , it varies linearly with J according to [cf. green line in Fig. where T ++ c,0 is the critical temperature of the s ++ state in the clean limit. If J is sufficiently strong, the critical temperatures of both s ++ and s +-will go to zero as a function of the magnetic scattering strength γ m before a transition into the s +-phase can occur. This gives rise to a critical ratio (J/U ) c for the impurity-induced topological transition. One finds (for U < 0) showing that it scales linearly with U in the weakcoupling limit. Our mean-field approach predicts (J/U ) c to approach 1 in the strong-coupling limit ρ F |U | 1. At this point, two remarks are in order: Firstly, let us contrast our results with Ref. 47, where magnetic scattering induces nontrivial topology with respect to a symmetry class with broken TRS: For the model considered in Ref. 47, a Zeeman field is required Secondly, we note that the disorder-induced formation of a topological phase has not been obtained in Ref. 42 since the analysis of Ref. 42 has been performed in the limit J/U → ∞. One major consequence of the topologically nontrivial DIII bulk invariant is the existence of gapless counterpropagating Kramers partners of MBS at the interface of the superconductor to a topologically trivial phase such as the vacuum 1 . The presence of these gapless modes is guaranteed by TRS. However, the magnetic impurities required to stabilize the bulk topology break TRS and might hence gap out the boundary states making them unobservable in experiments. Let us first notice that, at least theoretically, there exists a parameter range where the disorder-induced gap in the surface spectrum is irrelevant. As can be seen in Eq. ( Secondly, unitary symmetries can protect the Kramers pair of MBS even if TRS is broken. E.g., in case of the 2D system with point group C 2v , the protection results from the residual reflection symmetry perpendicular to an interface along one of the crystallographic axes. To show this, let us assume that the system is located in the xy-plane with a boundary to a trivial phase at y = 0 as illustrated in Fig. with μ, μ = ±. From this, it already follows that the diagonal (μ = μ ) matrix elements of all spin operators S j must vanish. To restrict the off-diagonal components (μ = μ ), the mirror symmetry has be taken into account. Under σ yz , it holds k x → -k x and R σyz S j R -1 σyz = p j S j with p 1 = 1 and p 2 = p 3 = -1 where R σyz = exp(-iπS 1 ) is the representation of σ yz in Nambu space. It follows where we have used R σyz |+, k x = e iα kx |-, -k x , α kx ∈ R, in the limit k x → 0. The additional minus sign in Eq. ( To further illustrate the protection of the MBS resulting from the symmetries of the system, let us investigate the standard Rashba single-band model defined by k = -t(cos k x + cos k y ) -μ and g k = α(-sin k y , sin k x , 0) T in Eq. ( Consequently, if the impurities are, e.g., mainly polarized perpendicular to the plane of 2D system, γ To illustrate the general results obtained above let us now discuss the implications for two physical systems that have attracted recent attention. The first example is given by the LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 heterostructures. Although conducting behavior has been observed Let us first focus on the [001]-oriented interface, where superconductivity is associated Without taking into account further microscopic details, our results also allow for the following conclusions about the [110] interface. If the chemical potential is gate tuned The second system we will discuss is single-layer FeSe on [001] SrTiO 3 which shows a superconducting transition 12 at temperatures significantly above 50 K. Although the presence of the substrate manifestly breaks inversion symmetry, it is less obvious in this system whether the weak-pairing approximation can be applied due to the larger transition temperature. If it is appropriate for deducing the superconducting order parameter, we can conclude that, irrespective of the unknown pairing mechanism, the condensate will be topologically trivial. This follows from the experimental observation 60 that there are two Rashba pairs of Fermi surfaces around the M -point leading to j m j = 2 in Eq. (69). Note that this does not contradict the recent proposal 61 of topological superconductivity in this system since the analysis of Ref. 61 has been performed in the opposite limit where inversion-symmetry breaking can be fully neglected for describing superconductivity. To summarize, we have considered the relation between the mechanism driving the superconducting instability and the topological and time-reversal properties thereof in noncentrosymmetric systems. Our results are general in the sense that they only depend on very few properties of the system such as the time-reversal behavior of the bosonic fluctuations inducing superconductivity, the symmetries of the crystal and the topology of the Fermi surfaces with respect to the TRIM. Throughout the paper, we have been using the weak-pairing approximation, formally defined in Eq. ( Firstly, we have seen that spontaneous TRS break-ing is not possible for superconductivity resulting from electron-phonon coupling or from TRE particle-hole fluctuations, whereas it cannot be excluded when TRO particle-hole (e.g., spin-density wave) fluctuations are relevant. In the latter case, only the general necessary condition In case of TRO fluctuations, the superconducting order parameter naturally has sign changes making topologically nontrivial states possible. From the asymptotic symmetry (61) valid for E so Λ t , it follows that all resulting order parameters can be grouped into Rashba even (p = +) and Rashba odd (p = -) as defined in Eq. (68). Focusing on TRS-preserving states, we have shown that only the latter can be topologically nontrivial which leads to constraints on the corresponding topological invariants. E.g., it implies that 1D and 2D noncentrosymmetric superconductors can only be topological if the number of TRIM enclosed by Rashba pairs of Fermi surfaces is odd. This necessary condition for topological superconductivity is readily accessible experimentally as the structure of the Fermi surfaces can be directly measured in photoemission experiments. Note that one does not have to resolve the spin-orbit splitting as the criterion only refers to Rashba pairs of Fermi surfaces. E.g., for single-layer FeSe, photoemission data Finally, we have seen that magnetic disorder can induce a transition from a topologically trivial superconductor, e.g., resulting from pure electron-phonon coupling, into a topological TRS-preserving phase. Focusing on 2D systems, it has been demonstrated that the resulting Kramers pair of MBS is protected against magnetic out-of-plane impurities if the associated edge is oriented perpendicular to one of the mirror planes of the bulk point group. Our analysis shows that all noncentrosymmetric systems, such as the oxide heterostructures, that show a strong tendency towards magnetism Using the same steps as in Appendix A 1 and A 2, one can analyze the consequences of TRS in the spectral representation (A19) yielding Taking into account the properties of the fermionic and bosonic propagator in Eqs. (A11) and ( In the asymptotic limit discussed in detail in Sec. III B, the entire Hamiltonian commutes with R: The quadratic fermionic Hamiltonian is invariant since the Fermi velocities of Rashba partners are asymptotically identical. The bare fermion-boson interaction (72) commutes with R as long as Eq. ( In this appendix, we show that the leading superconducting instability, i.e., the first nontrivial (δ = 0) solution of Eq. (35b) when the temperature is decreased, is determined by the largest eigenvalue (the so-called Perron root) of the positive matrix v defined in Eq. (38). As a first step, let us formally diagonalize v, n s s dΩ v s,s (iω n , Ω; iω n , Ω )a j s (iω n , Ω ) = λ j (β)a j s (iω n , Ω). Due to v being symmetric and real, this is always possible, all eigenvalues λ j (β) ∈ R and the eigenvectors {a j } j form an orthonormal basis such that Eq. (35b) assumes the simple form λ j (β) = 1. The set of degenerate eigenvalues that, upon lowering the temperature, first become 1 determines the critical temperature and the order parameter δ must then be a superposition of the associated eigenvectors. So far, this is completely analogous to mean-field theory. However, due to the more indirect way the temperature enters in the Eliashberg equations, it is not clear whether the largest eigenvalue first becomes 1. E.g., a finite subset of the eigenvalues could be larger than 1 for all temperatures. In other words, we still have to show that all eigenvalues are smaller than 1 in the limit of high temperatures β → 0. Let us first focus on the effective electron-electron interaction resulting from electron-phonon coupling. In the high temperature limit, the interaction matrix elements (20) become Assuming a second order phase transition, the competing order parameter must transform under one of the irreducible representations of the point group and, hence, can only be either even or odd under C z 2 . Appendix E: Chern numbers of Rashba partners Here we proof that the symmetry (61) forces the Fermi surface Chern numbers defined by 29 to satisfy C 1s = -C 1s R . In Eq. (E1), dω jj are the surface element two forms of the Fermi surface s. Using the notation ψ ks ψ Ωs , we rewrite the integrand according to Here we have applied the symmetry (61) in the second line and used (∂ kj ψ † )ψ = -ψ † ∂ kj ψ in the last line to show that all contributions involving derivatives of the phases γ s Ω vanish due to the antisymmetrization in j and j . Inserting this back into the integral of Eq. (E1), we obtain the required property. . (F5) Using the diagonal matrix C = diag(c -1 ) as explicitly defined in Eq. (95), one can write the particle-particle bubble as an infinite series With the assumptions stated in the main text, ρ s (Ω) const. and Eq. (100), we have ∆ s (Ω) = ∆ s and the kernel D of the free energy expansion (89) effectively becomes a 2 × 2 matrix. Its eigenvalues λ ++ and λ +-corresponding to the s ++ ( ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 ) and s +-( ∆ 1 = -∆ 2 ) state, the zeros of which determine the associated transition temperatures, read for nonmagnetic (t γ = +1) disorder. Here ψ denotes the digamma function. We see that the transition temperature T ++ c of the s ++ state is unaffected by disorder as required by the Anderson theorem In this case, both T ++ c and T +- c are reduced by disorder. However, T ++ c is more strongly affected due to the additional factor of 2 in front of γ in Eq. (F9a). Physically, 2γ has to be seen as the sum of intra-and interband scattering strengths which happen to be identical in the example considered, whereas γ in Eq. ( Eqs. ( 