Starting with the generic Ginzburg-Landau expansion from a microscopic N -band model, we focus on the case of a 3-band model which was suggested to be relevant to describe some iron-based superconductors. This can lead to the so-called s+is superconducting state that breaks time-reversal symmetry due to the competition between different pairing channels. Of particular interest in that context, is the case of an interband dominated pairing with repulsion between different bands. For that case we consider in detail the relevant reduced two-component Ginzburg-Landau theory. We provide detailed analysis of the ground state, length scales and topological properties of that model. In many superconductors, the pairing of electrons is supposed to take place in several sheets of a Fermi surface which is formed by the overlapping electronic bands. To name a few, this is for example the case of MgB 2 Experimental data suggest that in the hole-doped 122 compounds Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 , the symmetry of superconducting state can change depending on the doping level x. A typical band structure of Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 consists of two hole pockets at the Γ point and two electron pockets at (0, π) and (π, 0). At moderate doping level x ∼ 0.4 various measurements, including ARPES The s + is state is isotropic and preserves crystal symmetries To this day, no experimental proof of s + is nor s + id BTRS states have been reported. Indeed this requires probing the relative phases between the components of the order parameter in different bands, which is a challenging task. For example the s + is state does not break the point group symmetries and is therefore not associated with an intrinsic angular momentum of Cooper pairs. Consequently it cannot produce a local magnetic field and thus is a priori invisible for conventional meth-ods like muon spin relaxation and polar Kerr effect measurements that were for example used to probe timereversal breaking p + ip superconducting state in e.g. Sr 2 RuO 4 compound The paper is organized as follows: in section II we start by deriving the GL expansion for a generic N -band model. Then we focus on the minimal three-band microscopic model suggested to describe hole-doped 122 compounds with three superconducting gaps. There we consistently derive the two-component Ginzburg-Landau equations that are relevant for interband dominated pairing. Next, section III is devoted to the analysis of the ground-state phases of the Ginzburg-Landau model. Then in section IV we introduce a reparametrization of the model that allows further investigation of the perturbative spectrum. This allows for example to derive the relevant length scales and the second critical field. Finally, section V is devoted to the analysis of the topological properties of the theory, together with the possible topological excitations. We consider superconducting coupling which can result on BTRS state. A typical band structure of iron pnictides consists of two hole pockets at the Γ point and two electron pockets at (0, π) and (π, 0). This structure is sketched on Fig. To derive a Ginzburg-Landau expansion that can be used for example in numerical simulations, we consider the microscopic model of clean superconductor with, in general, N overlapping bands at the Fermi level. Within the quasiclassical approximation, the band parameters that characterize the different cylindrical sheets of the Fermi surface are the Fermi velocities v (j) F and the partial densities of states (DOS) ν j , where the label j = 1, ..., N denotes the band index. The particular example of a three-band model believed to be relevant in 122 compounds and which is considered in details below, is schematically shown in Fig. where Π = ∇ -2πiA/Φ 0 , A is the vector potential, and Φ 0 the flux quantum. The quasiclassical Green's functions in each band obey the normalization condition g 2 j + f j f + j = 1. Finally, the self-consistency equation for the gaps and the electric current are Here g j = sign(ω n ) 1 -f j f + j and ν j is the density of states, the parameters p run over the corresponding Fermi surfaces and λ ij are the components of the coupling potential matrix. For simplicity we further consider isotropic pairing states so that λ ij (p, p ) = const, on each of the Fermi surfaces. However, in electron pockets we keep the anisotropy of Fermi velocities in Eqs. The derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau functional from the microscopic equations formally follows the standard scheme. That is by expressing the solutions of the Eilenberger equations in the form of the expansion by powers of the gap functions amplitudes ∆ j and their gradients. We stress that this multiband expansion relies on the existence of above-mentioned multiple small parameters. This is in contrast to the simplest single-band Ginzburg-Landau expansion that is justified by a single small parameter (1-T /T c ). For a multi-band GL expansion, using a single small parameter is in general incorrect or irrelevant due to the existence of multiple broken symmetries. Also, even in the case of a multiband system breaking a single symmetry, an expansion that is obtained relying on a single small parameter in certain cases has vanishingly small applicability range Then, the summation over Matsubara frequencies gives 2πT Substituting ( , where the average is taken over the j-th Fermi surface and a, b stand for the x, y coordinates. The current reads as The critical temperature is determined by the equation n ), where λ -1 n are the positive eigenvalues of the inverse coupling matrix Λ-1 . Provided that all the eigenvalues are positive, the number of components of the order parameter coincide with the number of bands N . In this case, the system of Ginzburg-Landau equations for the general N -component system can be written as follows where Various choices of microscopic coupling parameters can result in qualitatively different structures of the Ginzburg-Landau field theory. Our main interest here is the time-reversal symmetry breaking s + is states in three-band systems. Let us consider first the simplest case of an intraband dominated pairing which can be described by a three-component GL theory in the vicinity of T c . This regime is described by the following coupling matrix where η e , η h λ. The critical temperature is determined by the equation where Since we assume that η e,h > 0 and η e,h λ, the critical temperature is given by the smallest eigenvalue G 0 = 1/(λ + η h ) so that where The free energy functional whose variations give the three-component Ginzburg-Landau equations reads as where Here we assumed that bands are isotropic and put K 0 /2 and introduce the dimensional units normalizing lengths by ξ 0 = vF /T c (where vF is the average value of Fermi velocity), magnetic field by B 0 = T c 4πν/ρ, current density j 0 = cB 0 /(4πξ 0 ) and free energy density Here ν is the DOS which is assumed to be the same in all superconducting bands. In such units the electric charge is replaced by an effective coupling constant ẽ = 2πB 0 ξ 2 0 /Φ 0 so that Π = ∇ + iẽA. Below we omit the tilde for brevity. In the following, we consider another choice of the coupling matrix Λ, suggested to be relevant for ironbased superconductors Here ∆ 1,2 correspond to the gaps at hole Fermi surfaces and ∆ 3 is the gap at electron pockets so that the coefficients η = u hh and λ = u eh are respectively the hole-hole and electron-hole interactions. Neglecting the r.h.s. in The coupling matrix Λ-1 has only two positive eigenvalues G 1,2 whose eigenvectors are ∆ 1 = (-1, 1, 0) T and ∆ 2 = (x, x, 1) T with x = (η-η 2 + 8λ 2 )/4λ. Since only the fields corresponding to the positive eigenvalues can nucleate, the GL theory There, ψ 1 and ψ 2 are the order parameter of s ± pairing channels between two concentric hole surfaces and between hole and electron surfaces correspondingly. Now, substituting the ansatz (17) into the system of Ginzburg-Landau equations ( The parameters of the left hand side of the Ginzburg-Landau equations ( with As previously stated, the s + is state is symmetric under C 4 transformations, which implies that K yy = K (j) . The Ginzburg-Landau equations can thus be further simplified as follows where the coefficients of the gradient terms read as The total current where j = i. The two-component free energy functional that corresponds to the Ginzburg-Landau equations Here, the complex fields ψ j = |ψ j |e iθj represent the components of the order parameter. These are electromagnetically coupled by the vector potential A of the magnetic field B = ∇ × A, through the gauge derivative Π ≡ ∇ + ieA where the coupling constant e is used to parametrize the London penetration length. Note that for the energy to be positively defined, the coefficients of the kinetic terms should satisfy the relation Also, for the free energy functional to be bounded from below, the coefficients of the terms that are fourth order in the condensates should satisfy the constraint b 1 b 2 -(b 12 + b J ) 2 > 0. These conditions are of course satisfied by the microscopically calculated value Note that the three-band model considered considered here can describe the formation of s + id state due to the competition between electron-electron and electron-hole repulsion. In this case one can derive a two-component Ginzburg-Landau model in the same line as described above Depending on the relation between the parameters of the potential, qualitatively different superconducting phases can be identified. These are determined by the ground-state properties of the theory. Since the coefficients of the kinetic terms satisfy the relation k 1 k 2 -k 2 12 > 0, the ground state is homogeneous (Πψ k = 0) and thus it is determined only from the potential terms of ( where θ 12 = θ 2 -θ 1 is the relative phase between both condensates. The ground state is the state denoted by ψ k = u k e iθ k , and where the vector potential is a pure gauge (A = ∇χ for arbitrary χ) that can consistently chosen to be zero. The ground state [u 1 , u 2 , θ 12 ] is an extremum of that potential (∂V /∂u j = 0 and ∂V /∂θ 12 = 0) and thus satisfies: Besides being an extremum according to the condition Besides the normal state [u 1 , u 2 , θ 12 ] = [0, 0, θ 12 ], the model ( By definition, the normal state is the state with no superconducting condensate: [u 1 , u 2 , θ 12 ] = [0, 0, θ 12 ]. The Hessian matrix It gives the minimal stability condition a 1 , a 2 > 0 of the normal state. Here, the term phase-separated phase relates to the case where only one of Ginzburg-Landau component assumes a non-zero ground state density, while the second is completely suppressed. That is, either . For example, if only the first component has a non-zero ground-state density, the Hessian reads as Note that the case where only the second component is nonzero can easily be obtained by permuting "1,2" indices. These ground states correspond, in the microscopic 3-band model, to two physically different states. The case u 1 = 0 and u 2 = 0 gives the sign changing gap (s ± ) with ∆ 3 = 0. On the other hand, the case u 2 = 0 and u 1 = 0 gives the s ++ state. This is the phase were both u 1 , u 2 = 0, that we are principally interested in, in this paper. Observe that Eq. (25c) specifies the ground state relative phase between both condensates to be an integer multiple of π/2, when both condensates have nonzero density u 1 , u 2 = 0. Introducing for convenience d = b 12 +b J cos nπ, and since the b 1 b 2 -d 2 > 0, for the free energy functional to be bounded from below, the ground state is and the Hessian matrix becomes Obviously, if b J < 0 (resp. b J > 0) then the stable state has n which an even (resp. odd) integer and thus the ground state relative phase is ±π/2 (resp 0, π) and thus d = b 12 + |b J |. The condition for the stability of the coexisting phase thus boils down to having positive eigenvalues for the reduced Hessian D. Ginzburg-Landau phase diagram of the s + is state Here we are principally interested in the s + is state. That is in the phase where both condensates coexist and the time-reversal symmetry is spontaneously broken (i.e. when θ = ±π/2). The ground state thus reads as in the region of the parameter space defined by The physical system we are interested in here, is the microscopic three-band model The current basis for the superconducting degrees of freedom is quite convenient, as it allows to easily characterize the ground state and its stability properties. On the other hand, it is quite complicated to deal with the kinetic terms. This is why it is worth rewriting the model using a linear combination of the components of the order parameter that diagonalize the the kinetic terms: Within this new basis, the kinetic term has a much simpler form. The potential, on the other hand becomes much more complicated and at first glance it is not possible to find the ground state analytically. However, since it is known from the old field basis, it is actually quite simple to derive the analytic solution. It is also a convenient basis to investigate the physical length scales, critical fields, as well as describing various unusual properties. In the new field basis, the free energy reads as with η a = |η a |e iφa , φ 12 = φ 2 -φ 1 and the coefficients for the kinetic term are now The coefficients of the potential read as In the new field basis, the Ginzburg-Landau equations have no mixed gradients and read as while variation of the free energy This reparametrization simplifies drastically the Ginzburg-Landau equations as there is no more coupling of the components through mixed gradients. However, this comes with the price of more complicated potential terms. This is actually a minor problem, since the ground state within the new basis, can easily be determined from the one in the old basis according to the formulas Fig. To understand the role of the fundamental excitations, as well as the fundamental length scales of the Ginzburg-Landau free energy Here φ 12 ≡ φ 2 -φ 1 stands for the relative phase between the condensates. For this rewriting, we used the supercurrent defined from the Ampère's equation ∇ × B + J = 0, that now reads as As discussed below, this formulation allows better interpretation of the small perturbations and their length scales, together with a better understanding of the elementary topological excitations of the theory. The length scales characterizing matter field are the coherence lengths. These are, by definition, inverse masses of the infinitesimal perturbations around the ground state. More precisely, we consider small perturbations by linearizing the theory around the ground-state. The eigenspectrum of the obtained (linear) differential operator determines the masses of the elementary excitations and thus their corresponding length scales. The perturbation theory is constructed as follows. The fields are expanded in series of a small parameter : and collected order by order in the functional. The zeroth order is the original functional, while the first order is identically zero provided the leading order in the series expansion satisfies the equations of motion. Physically relevant correction thus appear at the order 2 of the expanded Ginzburg-Landau functional. The length-scale analysis is done by applying the previously discussed perturbative theory to the case where the leading order is the ground-state. As the ground state is homogeneous, the perturbation operator will drastically simplify. We choose the following perturbative expansion around the ground state where u a and φ denote the ground state and f a , φ, the perturbations. Collecting the perturbations in Υ = (f 1 , f 2 , φ) T the term which is second order in in the Ginzburg-Landau functional reads as: where the entries of the (squared) mass matrix are: Approaching the point where the system breaks U (1) × Z2 symmetry, at mean field level, there should be two divergent coherence lengths. Indeed we observe that the second-largest length-scale 2 diverges at a single point at Tc and where λ = η. Finally, the length scales are given by finding the eigenstates of The length scales that correspond to the phase diagram Fig. Notice that the other relevant length scale of the theory is the (London) penetration depth λ L of the magnetic field. It is relatively easy to see that the perturbations of the vector potential completely decouple (at the linear level) from those of the condensates. The penetration depth is given as the inverse mass of A and simply reads as which can easily be read of Fig. The perturbation operator (46) can be used not only to determine the relevant length scales of the Ginzburg-Landau theory, but also to obtain the second critical field H c2 . That is by considering the perturbation operator around the normal state. More precisely, in the original parametrization the normal state is |ψ 1 | = |ψ 2 | = 0. Using Close to the second critical field H c2 the magnetic field is approximately constant: B = B 0 e z and the densities are small. Thus the Ginzburg-Landau equations ( In the Landau Gauge, the vector potential reads as A = (0, B 0 x, 0) -1 . As a result, the equations read as We consider the simple Gaussian ansatz Υ = C exp -x 2 2ξ 2 with the vector C = (C 1 , C 2 , 0) T and eB 0 = 1/ξ 2 . The equation ( Thus 1/ξ 2 is an eigenvalue of -M 2 0 . More precisely, its largest: It is easy to realize from (47) that the perturbations of the relative phase Υ decouple from density perturbations. The (reduced) mass matrix thus becomes: ant its eigenvalues are As a result, we find the second critical field in the dimensionless units of Eq.( Notice that for example that for a given value of κ 1 , then having κ 2 1 implies that the second critical field can become very large. Tracing this back to the original parametrization implies that if the prefactor of the mixed gradients k 12 is close to the critical value √ k 1 k 2 where the energy would become unbounded, then the second critical field can become arbitrarily large. This limit for example can be realized for the microscopic coefficients satisfying K 1 K 2 , K 3 . Note that the instability never happens since κ 2 is always positive. Fig. The topological properties, as well as the structure of the ground state hints to a rich spectrum of topological excitations, or topological defects, that may occur in the theory of interest. Indeed, the theory features domain-walls that separate between different broken time-reversal phases; vortices that can either carry fractional or integer number of flux quanta. Moreover vortices can further be characterized by CP 1 invariants and in that case they are referred to as skyrmions. All these topological excitations are potential observable signatures of the s + is superconducting state. The ground state phase which is of principal interest here, is the s + is superconducting state Defining the flux quantization in the original Ginzburg-Landau model where C is the contour of the R 2 at spatial infinity. To obtain (56b), we use the relation There is no formal reason why both η 1,2 should have the same winding number n 1,2 . In that case, the resulting configuration carries only a fraction of the flux quantum. For example consider the simplest case where n 1 = 1 and n 2 = 0. Then the configuration carries only a fraction κ 1 |η 1 | 2 / 2 of the flux quantum. Hence it is called a fractional vortex. However, because this gives a nonzero winding of the relative phase in This divergence, which puts an heavy energy penalty on fractional vortices, is absent if both components have the same winding. As a result, configurations with fractional flux cannot be excited in bulk superconductors. Note however they can be stabilized near boundaries As discussed in the next subsection, the topological properties of the model can also be understood using the mapping to a nonlinear σ-model. In contrast to the topological invariant characterizing vortices (i.e. the winding number which is defined as a line integral over a closed path), an additional topological CP 1 index which is in general associated with skyrmionic excitations can be defined as an integral over the plane 2 ), and provided η = 0, the topological CP 1 index is given as an integral over the xy-plane: Provided η = 0, the CP 1 index Q is an integer number and is equal to the number of flux quanta: Q = B/Φ 0 = n (Φ 0 being the flux quantum and n the number of flux quanta) The mapping to a nonlinear σ-model consists of rewriting the theory in term a massive U(1) vector field (the current) coupled to a compact O(3) vector. Importantly, in this kind of mapping the supercurrent is coupled to Faddeev-Skyrme terms The following identity is useful to rewrite the free energy where summation on repeated indices is implied. Using the definition of the current and noting that where ε is the Levi-Civita symbol, the magnetic field reads as and the free energy (43) can be written as where V ( , n) is the potential terms The pseudo-spin is a map from the one-point compactification of the plane (R 2 S 2 ) to the two-sphere target space spanned by n. That is n : S 2 → S 2 , classified by the homotopy class π 2 (S 2 ) ∈ Z, thus defining the integer valued topological (skyrmionic) charge Heuristically, the topological charge (66) can be understood as the integer that counts the number of times the pseudo-spin wraps the target sphere. If a field configuration spans only a portion of the target sphere, then the associated flux needs not to be quantized. Note that this definition of the topological charge To summarize, we presented a microscopic derivation for N -component Ginzburg-Landau models with a focus on the time-reversal symmetry breaking s + is state for a three-band microscopic model. This model is widely believed to describe hole-doped 122 compounds. We consistently derived the two-component Ginzburg-Landau functional that is relevant for the case of an interbanddominated pairing. We discussed the elementary properties of these models: normal modes and length scales, critical fields and basic topological defects.