We report the development of a magnetically driven Persistent Current Switch operated in a dilution refrigerator. We show that it can be safely used to charge a 60 mH coil with 0.5 A at 11 mK, which heats up the dilution refrigerator to 60.5 mK. Measurements at 4 K on a 440 μH coil reveal a residual resistance of R 3.3 pΩ. There are many applications in which a stable, low noise magnetic field is desired, such as in MRI, NMR or qubit studies. An elegant way of establishing such a magnetic field is by the use of a Persistent Current Switch (PCS). In a PCS a superconducting coil is shunted by a superconducting shortcut such that together they form a closed resistanceless circuit. The coil can be charged by briefly switching the shortcut to the resistive state. The circuit then becomes an RL-circuit, and a power source can be connected to inject a current into the coil. Back in the superconducting state, the flowing current is in principle stable and low-noise, and, hence, so too is the magnetic field induced by the current in the coil. The switching of the shortcut can be accomplished in a number of ways: one can heat the shortcut to above its critical temperature, as is most often done for large magnets, or create a magnetic field higher than the shortcut's critical field We do SQUID-based experiments on the mixing chamber stage of a dilution refrigerator cryostat, which means that aside from being sensitive to magnetic noise, we are also concerned about heat input. It is our wish to place a PCS close to our experiment on the mixing chamber stage such that the wiring between PCS and experiment can be kept short -shorter wires are less susceptible to noise and also mechanically less vulnerable -while keeping the heat input manageable. The magnetic PCS presented in this paper provides us with a solution that suits our needs. We set out to design a PCS that: 1. Can be operated in a dilution refrigerator, i.e. an environment with very little cooling power on the order of 1 μW. ) resistance such that it may be used with small coils of * Electronic address: waarde@physics.leidenuniv.nl In black the basic electrical circuit for making a magnetic field with a coil Lexp and a current source. Added are a superconducting shortcut that is brought to its resistive state by a switch coil Lsw. The response is measured by a voltmeter. The blue dashed box contains the parts that are at low temperature inside a cryostat. 0.1 mH -0.1 H and still yield a long lifetime τ . 3. Can be charged with a user-adjustable current in the range of 0.01 A -1 A. 4. Has reasonable dimensions, preferably smaller than 5 cm. To our knowledge, a PCS that combines all of these features has not yet been constructed. In a magnetic PCS we distinguish two coils. The experiment coil, which is to be charged with a current I exp and used to perform the experiment of choice, and the switch coil with current I sw , which is used to bring a superconducting shortcut to the normal state. Figure We fabricate experiment coils from 100 μm diameter NbTi wire with a 13 μm Formvar insulating layer. We know the inductances of our experiment coils by integrating the voltage response upon charging them: The experiment coils discussed in this paper have inductances L exp = 60 mH and L exp = 440 μH. For convenience, we charge the experiment coil from empty I exp = 0 A to I exp = I 0 in a single step and we power up the switch coil as fast as our setup allows for. The energy dissipated in the shortcut while charging then totals 1 2 L exp I 2 0 as we will derive. Dissipation can also come from other sources. There is Ohmic dissipation in the current lines towards the coils, which we find to be negligible if care is taken to use superconducting wiring from 4 K to the mixing chamber stage of the dilution refrigerator and if care is taken to thermalize the wiring well. Further, the rapid change in magnetic field in both the experiment coil and the switch coil may cause dissipation due to eddy currents in normal metals in their vicinity. The superconducting shortcut is made of an insulated Niobium wire, 50 μm in diameter. We twist the wire around itself, such that the mutual inductance to the switch coil is minimized, thereby minimizing the noise input through this channel. We have chosen to make the shortcut out of Niobium because of its high critical current density and critical temperature and its relatively low critical field. This means that at the currents we intend to use, quasiparticle dynamics are of no concern, and that tests in liquid Helium are possible. All superconducting connections are made by spot welding The switch coil should be able to deliver at least B c2 = 400 mT, the upper critical field of Niobium at 0 K The NbTi wire leads of the switch coil are twisted and led from the mixing chamber stage of the cryostat, where the switch coil is mounted, uninterrupted to the 4 K stage, thermalized at the intermediary stages on Copper bobbins. From 4 K to room temperature, the wires are from Copper. We should avoid sending too high currents, because these could cause dissipation in the nonsuperconducting parts of the wiring. We aimed for a switching current I sw on the order of 1 A, at which the switch coil makes a field of We placed the PCS with a 60 mH experiment coil on the mixing chamber stage of a dilution refrigerator which reached a minimum temperature of 10.5 mK. After some tweaking, we found that we could charge and discharge the experiment coil without dangerously warming up the cryostat by using a switch current of I sw = 2 A during 2 seconds. Figure If we left the switch activated for longer than ∼ 10 s, we saw a sudden, vigorous increase in temperature. To avoid having to recondense into the dilution refrigerator every time we switch, we therefore limit ourselves to quick switches. Alternatively, one can choose to charge the experiment coil at a higher temperature when there is more cooling power available and cool further down afterwards. As we will see, the superconducting contacts have such a low resistance that there is ample time before the stored current is appreciably diminished, making this a viable possibility. However, we wanted to verify that it is possible to charge a coil even at the lowest temperature attainable in our cryostat without introducing a worryingly high heat input. The shape of V (t) can be understood by assuming that the normal state resistance of the superconducting shortcut grows exponentially to its final value R ns with a time constant τ ns upon switching ( The values of R ns and τ ns depend on a multitude of factors including the switching field B sw (∝ I sw ), temperature and cooling power. The general solution for the PCS's voltage response with time-varying R pcs (t) when charged I exp = 0 A → I 0 is given by T(mK) Fitting this to the measurement, using the exponential R pcs (t) of eq. ( The energy that is dissipated in the shortcut due to (dis)charging of the experiment coil is For large t, it is easy to show that E diss (t) converges to 1 2 L exp I 2 0 : the energy that needs to be dissipated in the shortcut is exactly the energy that is stored in the experiment coil. This contribution to the dissipation can be made smaller by charging the experiment coil in a number of steps rather than in a single step as is done now. However, in our experiment it is not the dominating factor. During (dis)charging of the coils, we monitor the temperature of the mixing chamber stage onto which the PCS is mounted. Figure Note that this is much more than the energy dissipated in the shortcut, 1 2 L exp I 2 0 = 7.5 mJ. We attribute this to eddy currents: for the sake of thermalization our coils are securely fastened to the mixing chamber stage of the dilution refrigerator, which is a gold-coated copper disk of 1 cm thickness. Being a normal metal, induced eddy currents are dissipated here and cause a heating that scales with (dB/dt) 2 We measured the quality of the spot welded superconducting joints by evaluating the residual resistance R in a long-lasting measurement. Because of the exceptionally low resistance of the joints, there is no measurable decrease in I exp even after a few days. We therefore placed a PCS with a 440 μH experiment coil in a vacuum dipstick inserted in a liquid Helium dewar, charged it from 0 A to 350 mA, and left it untouched for a little under 17 days before discharging. Figure The integration of V (t), eq. ( The amount of current still flowing thus allows us to measure the residual resistance in the superconducting circuit R. We measure I W = 346 mA, which translates to τ 4.2 years and R 3.3 pΩ. We have shown that it is possible to put a 60 mH coil in the persistent mode carrying a current of 0.5 A in a dilution refrigerator at 11 mK using a magnetic Persistent Current Switch. We find that spot welding all wires to each other via Nb sheets ensures a resistance of less than 3.3 pΩ.