The change in resistance of a material in a magnetic field reflects its electronic state. In metals with weakly-or non-interacting electrons, the resistance typically increases upon the application of a magnetic field. In contrast, negative magnetoresistance may appear under some circumstances, e.g., in metals with anisotropic Fermi surfaces or with spin-disorder scattering and semimetals with Dirac or Weyl electronic structures. Here we show that the non-magnetic semimetal TaAs 2 possesses a very large negative magnetoresistance (-98% in a field of 3 T at low temperatures), with an unknown scattering mechanism. Density functional calculations find that TaAs 2 is a new topological semimetal [Z 2 invariant (0;111)] without Dirac dispersion, demonstrating that a negative magnetoresistance in non-magnetic semimetals cannot be attributed uniquely to the Adler-Bell-Jackiw chiral anomaly of bulk Dirac/Weyl fermions. Magneto-transport continues to be an exciting topic in condensed matter physics. Some famous examples include discovering and understanding giant/collosal magnetoresistance If no accidental band crossings occur, can one still consider a semimetal as topologically non-trivial? The answer is yes. Similar to the classification for band insulators, Z 2 topological indices (ν 0 ;ν 1 ν 2 ν 3 ) (strong and weak) are still appropriate for a regular semimetal due to the presence of a continuous energy gap between electron-like and hole-like bands. The surface states associated with weak (strong) topological indices are expected to be sensitive (immune) to disorder. Herein, we investigate a novel non-magnetic semimetal TaAs 2 that is homologous to the OsGe 2 -type crystalline structure Figure Figure In the absence of magnetic field, TaAs 2 shows a metallic Fermi-liquid-like ρ xx (T ) profile, with a large residual resistivity ratio RRR ≡ ρ xx (300 K)/ρ xx (0.3 K)≈100 (inset to Figure Unlike the linear or sub-linear M R(B) observed in the Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 In Figure All these features are characteristic signatures of multi-band effects. Indeed, ρ yx (B) can be well fit to a two-band model, where n and μ are respectively carrier density and mobility, and the subscript e (or h) denotes electron (or hole). A representative fit to ρ yx (B) at T =0.3 K is shown in the inset to Figure One important feature of topological Dirac/Weyl semimetals is the so-called ABJ chiral anomaly the one seen in TaAs 2 is bigger in magnitude and survives at much larger φ and higher T . For example, Figure Figure We now return to the issue of the negative LMR. An electric current parallel to a magnetic field is not expected to experience a Lorentz force; however, in reality, negative LMR may exist stemming from a variety of mechanisms. First, because TaAs 2 is non-magnetic, a magnetic origin can be ruled out. Second, weak localization is also excluded, because ρ xx (T ) conforms to Fermi-liquid behavior at low temperatures, and no -log T or any form of upturn signature can be identified. Third, negative LMR was also observed in materials such as PdCoO 2 In the measurements of R 32,14 , the current is parallel to B, and we derived a negative LMR, but the MR of R 14,32 is positive. Similar results were reproduced on several other samples with different shapes. Because the direction of current is arbitrary when referenced to the crystalline axes, these measurements imply that the observed negative LMR is locked to the relative angle between E and B, rather than pinned to particular FS axes. Fourth, an improperly made contact geometry may also cause negative LMR especially when the material shows a large transverse MR, known as the "current-jetting" effect To study further the features of this negative LMR, we plot ∆σ This weak positive MR is probably due to a small angular mismatch that causes a parabolic M R(B) which becomes dominant as field strengthens (See also in SI V ). Given the absence of alternative possibilities, an interesting question is whether the presence of topological surface states coexisting with a bulk semimetallic electronic structure could produce the large negative LMR as we observe. We note that conductivity corrections are found when surface states interact with bulk conduction states In summary, we find that single crystals of TaAs 2 grown by vapor transport are semimetals with extremely large, -unsaturating transverse magnetoresistance characteristic of high mobilities. Strikingly, TaAs 2 hosts a negative longitudinal magnetoresistance that reaches -98%. TaAs 2 appears to be an example of a semimetal whose strong topological index is trivial, yet all three of its weak topological indicies are non-trivial. Similar properties also may exist in other OsGe 2 -type T mP n 2 compounds where T m=Ta and Nb, and P n=P, As and Sb. As was the case for giant magnetoresistance, potential applications exist if the scattering mechanisms in these semimetals can be understood and manipulated. Note added: When completing this manuscript, we became aware of several other related works Millimeter-sized single crystals of TaAs 2 were obtained as a by-product of growing TaAs by means of an Iodine-vapor transport technique with 0.05 g/cm 3 I 2 . First, polycrystalline TaAs was prepared by heating stoichiometric amounts of Ta and As in an evacuated silica ampoule at 973 K for three days. Subsequently, the powder was loaded in a horizontal tube furnace in which the temperature of the hot zone was kept at 1123 K and that of the cold zone was ∼1023 K. Several TaAs 2 single crystals with apparent monoclinic shape were picked from the resultant and their monoclinic structure x-ray diffraction (XRD) and energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS). No I 2 doping was detected, and the stoichiometric ratio is fairly homogenous. Three TaAs 2 single crystals (labeled S1, S2 and S3) were polished into a plate with the normal perpendicular to the ab-plane. Ohmic contacts were prepared on the crystal in a Hall-bar geometry, and both in-plane electrical resistivity (ρ xx ) and Hall resistivity (ρ yx , S1 only) were measured by slowly sweeping a DC magnetic field from -9 T to 9 T at a rate of 0.2 T/min. ρ xx (ρ yx ) was obtained as the symmetric (antisymmetric) component under magnetic field reversal. An AC-resistance bridge (LR-700) was used to perform these transport measurements in a 3-He refrigerator. Field-rotation measurements were carried out using a commercial rotator on a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-9, Quantum Design). Different contact geometries were made on S3 to show a possible currentjetting effect, and the measurements were performed in a 3-axis magnet. Magnetoresistance also was measured up to 65 T in a pulsed field magnet at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL, Los Alamos). Several additional samples with different shapes were measured to confirm the reproducibility of negative LMR. Density functional theory calculations were performed using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) as implemented in the WIEN2K code Tables: F i e l d r e f i n e d isothermal field dependent magnetization at 2.5 K as shown in the inset to Figure The magnetization reaches only 4×10 -4 μ B /f.u. at 1 T. All these results demonstrate that TaAs 2 is a non-magnetic compound, and the large transverse magnetoresistance and negative longitudinal magnetoresistance discussed in the main text do not have a magnetic origin. In addition, we may also conclude that time reversal symmetry is respected in TaAs 2 . Another important feature of the magnetotransport property of TaAs 2 is the SdH quantum oscillation atop of the large magnetoresistance signal. The analysis of SdH data is somewhat complicated. Further systematic measurements under higher magnetic field are needed to better clarify the details of the Fermi surface (FS) topology. We leave this task for future work. To estimate the carrier density we analyse the SdH oscillations based on our angular measurements up to 9 T. The SdH effect can be observed in both ρ xx (B) (Figure We derive the oscillatory part from ∆ρ ij =ρ ij -ρ ij (i,j=x,y), where the non-oscillatory part ρ ij is obtained by a fourth-order polynomial fit to ρ ij (B). The obtained ∆ρ xx (B) and ∆ρ yx (B) are displayed with the right axes of Figure By taking the Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) of ∆ρ xx as a function of 1/B, we obtain multiple SdH oscillation frequencies as shown in Figure in which ω c = eB m * is the cyclotron frequency with m * being the effective mass. We tracked the FFT amplitudes of α-and β-orbits as a function of T in Figure ؆ ( D e g . ) We also performed angular dependent SdH oscillation measurements. θ and φ respectively depict the angles between electrical current I and magnetic field B when the field is rotated in two different ways, see Figure For a three dimensional system, the carrier density is correlated with the size of Fermi surface via, where g is the multiplicity of the Fermi surface in the first Brillouin zone, k i F (i=x,y,z) is the magnitude of Fermi momentum along i-axis, and F i is the oscillatory frequency with magnetic field B parallel to i-axis. Here, we have included the spin degeneracy and adopted the Lifshitz-Onsager correlation F = 2πe S F , in which S F is the extremal cross-sectional area of the Fermi surface. As a rough estimate, we treat the electron FS as a spherical pocket, with F αx =F αy =F αz ≈100 T and g e =2. The carrier density of electrons is thus calculated n e =1.1×10 19 cm -3 . Due to the complex Fermi surface topology, we are not able to calculate the carrier density of holes directly, but considering the magnitude of oscillation frequency and the multiplicity g h =1, it is reasonable to set n e as the upper limit of n h . These estimates are quantitatively in agreement with the Hall effect measurement discussed in the main text. Finally, it should be pointed out that the observed F α peak weakly splits into two at low temperature, labeled as α and α (cf the inset to Figure In Figure When SOC is turned on, the band crossing along K-M opens a small gap with magnitude ∼117 meV. Intuitively, the band gap in K'-K" is further enlarged by SOC. The DFT calculations also allow us to analyse the Z 2 topological invariants (ν 0 ;ν 1 ν 2 ν 3 ) for a centrosymmetric crystal Table A sign change of δ between two TRIM points manifests a band inversion. The strong topological index ν 0 is defined by (-1) ν 0 = δ i , where goes through all the eight TRIM points. This leads to ν 0 =0. The weak topological indices are calculated via the product of δ i at four coplanar TRIM points in the BZ and we obtain ν 1 =ν 2 =ν 3 =1. This analysis suggests that TaAs 2 is a "weak" topological material in all three reciprocal lattice directions, but not a "strong" topological material. Improperly made contact geometry may also cause negative LMR, especially when the material shows a large transverse MR, a so-called "current-jetting" effect 