The condensation of an electron superfluid from a conventional metallic state at a critical temperature T c is described well by the BCS theory. In the underdoped copper-oxides, high-temperature superconductivity condenses instead from a nonconventional metallic "pseudogap" phase that exhibits a variety of non-Fermi liquid properties. Recently, it has become clear that a charge density wave (CDW) phase exists within the pseudogap regime, appearing at a temperature T CDW just above T c . The near coincidence of T c and T CDW , as well the coexistence and competition of CDW and superconducting order below T c , suggests that they are intimately related. Here we show that the condensation of the superfluid from this unconventional precursor is reflected in deviations from the predictions of BSC theory regarding the recombination rate of quasiparticles. We report a detailed investigation of the quasiparticle (QP) recombination lifetime, τ qp , as a function of temperature and magnetic field in underdoped HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ (Hg-1201) and YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x (YBCO) single crystals by ultrafast time-resolved reflectivity. We find that τ qp (T ) exhibits a local maximum in a small temperature window near T c that is prominent in underdoped samples with coexisting charge order and vanishes with application of a small magnetic field. We explain this unusual, non-BCS behavior by positing that T c marks a transition from phase-fluctuating SC/CDW composite order above to a SC/CDW condensate below. Our results suggest that the superfluid in underdoped cuprates is a condensate of coherently-mixed particle-particle and particle-hole pairs. First observed as stripe-like order in the "214" cuprates The basic premise of BCS theory is that the SC condensate is made up of Cooper pairs, which are bound states of two electrons with opposite momenta and spin Our experiments probe quasiparticle states in underdoped cuprates through time-resolved measurements of their lifetime against recombination, whereby two quasiparticles of opposite spin re-pair and scatter into the condensate. As we discuss below, this scattering rate is sensitive to the phase-coherence of quasiparticle superposition states. To measure the recombination lifetime, we first generate a nonequilibrium quasiparticle population by photoexcitation with an ultrashort optical pulse. We use a low pump fluence so as to probe the linear regime in which the photogenerated quasiparticle population is small compared to its thermal value near T c . The rate of return to equilibrium is measured by resolving the photoinduced change in optical reflectivity, ∆R(t), as a function of time, t, after absorption of the pump pulse. A wealth of experiments, as reviewed for example in In Figure with T c = 55, 71, and 91 K. At high temperature we observe a short-lived negative component of ∆R(t) that is associated with the pseudogap (PG) In Figures We turn now to measurements of the T dependence of the recombination lifetime of quasiparticles for T < T onset . The decay curves in Fig. In the near-optimal sample τ qp grows monotonically as T → T c , suggesting a tendency to diverge as ∆R qp (T ) goes to zero, while in underdoped samples the peak in τ qp at T c is a small feature on a smooth background. The behavior of τ qp in near-optimal Hg-1201, which is observed in other optimally doped cuprates as well The behavior of τ qp (T ) in underdoped samples is at odds with the mean-field picture described above. Two observations -continuous variation of ∆R qp for T < T onset and the smoothly varying background in τ qp (T ) that underlies the small peak -suggest that a quasiparticle gap has opened well above T c . Given a pre-existing gap, it is very difficult to explain the modulation of the quasiparticle lifetime near T c . In view of the difficulties with the mean-field picture, we are led to consider the onset of phase coherence at T c , rather than gap-opening, as the origin of the structure in τ qp (T ). Coherence effects have been observed previously elastic QP scattering, as detected by QP interference in scanning tunneling microscopy experiments The rate of QP recombination in a paired condensate is the product of the normal state rate and a "coherence factor" (F) that is a function of the Bogoliubov coefficients u and v. For the case of time-reversal invariant QP interactions the coherence factors for SC and CDW condensates are given by where ∆ and ∆ are the amplitudes of the SC gap at the two QP momenta, Φ and Φ are the analogous CDW gaps, and E and E are the QP energies We note that the result F CDW = 0 is related to the π phase shift between occupied and unoccupied states, which has recently been observed in CDW states in Bi2212 The simplest scenario, in which a phase-fluctuating superconductor becomes fully phase coherent at T c , is inconsistent with a peak in τ qp (T ) (or local minimum in recombination rate). Instead, SC coherence yields a doubling of the recombination rate, corresponding to the factor of two jump in F from 1/2 to 1 upon crossing from a normal to SC state. However, we have found that a model that takes into account the dual presence of fluctuating CDW and SC order leads to a singular feature in τ qp (T ) that agrees well with experiment. To formulate this model quantitatively, we derived the recombination coherence factor for a state with coexisting SC and CDW order. The composite SC/CDW condensate is made of particlehole quadruplets, pairing electrons at ±k and holes at ±(k + Q) separated by the CDW wavevector Q. The structure of the quasiparticle eigenstates of the composite SC/CDW condensate is shown schematically in Fig. where φ ∆ and φ Φ are the relative phases of the QP pair undergoing recombination. In the case of d-wave pairing, these phases will be 0 or π, depending on which k points the QPs occupy. STM QP interference demonstrates that the strongest scattering channels are between states with the same sign of gap amplitude In the presence of phase fluctuations, the cos φ factors are replaced by their ensemble average cos φ = e -τ 0 /τ c , where τ c is the phase-correlation time and τ 0 is the QP lifetime in the fully incoherent regime. The coherence factor obtained by this substitution would apply to systems with coexisting, but independent, CDW and SC order. However, in the light of evidence that these orders are strongly coupled in underdoped cuprates, we consider a description in terms of a multicomponent order parameter where tan 2 θ ≡ Φ 2 /∆ 2 . Fig. The mixing angle θ (T ) is plotted in Fig. To further examine the relationship between phase coherence and quasiparticle recombination, we investigated the effect of magnetic field, B, on τ qp (T ). An overview of τ qp (B, T ) in fields applied perpendicular to the Cu-O planes is shown in Figure The B dependence of τ qp can be understood to be a consequence of dephasing in the vortex liquid induced by the field. Assuming a total dephasing rate, τ -1 c + Γ(B), where Γ(B) is the dephasing rate associated with vortex diffusion, yields The dashed line in Fig. Equating this estimate with the measured Γ(B) yields a reasonable value for the coherence length of 2.4 nm, strongly suggesting that B-induced dephasing accounts for wipeout of the τ qp peak. To summarize, we have described measurements and analysis of the photoinduced transient reflectivity, ∆R(t, T ) in representative YBCO and Hg-1201 samples of underdoped cuprates. The onset of ∆R with decreasing temperature is correlated with the appearance of the incommensurate CDW detected previously by NMR, STM, and X-ray scattering measurements. This correlation leads us to conclude that, although the density of states depression known as the pseudogap is formed at a higher temperature, the CDW either enhances it, or leads to a new gap of different origin. A correlation between CDW and gap formation is suggested as well by recent ARPES measurements Our results show that quasiparticle recombination provides a new method for probing the onset of coherence in systems characterized by a fluctuating multi-component order parameter. small (∼ 10 -4 ) fractional change in reflectivity that was monitored by time-delayed probe pulses. At the low laser fluence used in this study, samples are weakly perturbed by the pump pulse, in the sense that the density of photogenerated quasiparticles is much less than the thermal equilibrium value. In this regime the decay rate is a measure of the quasiparticle recombination rate in thermal equilibrium. Measurements in zero magnetic field at Berkeley were performed under vacuum in an Oxford continuous-flow liquid He cryostat. Magneto-optic measurements at Berkeley were performed in a 6T Oxford Spectramag cryostat, and those at MIT in a 7T Janis cryostat. The mean-field Hamiltonian is given by Diagonalizing the CDW and SC subsystems via successive Bogoliubov transformations yields The eigenvectors give the composite QP operators In the above, u and s are assumed to be real, and the phases of v and t are determined by the phases of ∆ and Φ, respectively. We calculate the coherence factors following Ref. must be summed coherently before calculating the squared modulus of the matrix element that determines the quasiparticle scattering rate. Expressing the four bilinear operators in terms of the quasiparticle (γ) operators yields, where, and u ≡ u k . Summing over recombination channels and then squaring yields a coherence factor for quasiparticle recombination given by Here we describe details of the fits to ∆R(t)/R to demonstrate that the values of τ qp (T ) discussed in the main text are independent of the fitting procedure. extracted from these fits. For each temperature, the fit extends from the delay at which ∆R(t) first attains 50% of its peak value to t = 8 ps. The parameters B and τ r account for both the finite rise time of ∆R and the presence of the negative PG component. These two contributions cannot be easily disentangled, but they can be captured in the fit by a single negative term in ∆R. As can be clearly seen, the structure in τ qp near T c is not present in the other fit parameters. This confirms that the peak in τ qp (T ) is representative of the rate of quasiparticle recombination and is not related to structure in the other parameters. The time-independent component C reflects the long-lived photo-induced heating of the system and the non-exponential decay that occurs at low temperatures. This component is much smaller than the exponential components and does not affect the other fit parameters. In order to further demonstrate that the structure reported in τ qp is not related to the parameters B and τ r , we can limit the fit to an exponential decay plus constant, for example by considering ∆R only after it has decreased to 75% of its peak value. Chang J (2012) Direct observation of competition between superconductivity and charge density wave order in YBa 2 2Cu 3 O 6.67 Nature Physics 8: 871-876. Hücker M. et al. (2014) Competing charge, spin and superconducting orders in YBa 2 Cu 3 O y Phys. Rev. B 90: 054514.