The experimental value of H3S isotope coefficient decreases from 2.37 to 0.31 in the pressure range from 130 GPa to 200 GPa. We have shown that the value of 0.31 is correctly reproduced in the framework of the classical Eliashberg approach. On the other hand, the anomalously large value of the isotope coefficient (2.37) may be associated with the strong renormalization of the normal state by the electron density of states. The metallic hydrogen the most probably could be the superconductor with the very high value of the critical temperature (T C ) In 2004 Ashcroft suggested the existence of the superconducting state in the hydrogen-rich compounds with the critical temperature comparable to T C of the pure hydrogen, whereas the metallization pressure might be subjected to the significant decrease due to the existence of the chemical pre-compression The superconducting state in the hydrogen sulfide with the exceptionally high value of the critical temperature (T C ∼ 200 K) was discovered in 2014 The experimental results In the presented paper, we explained the experimental data for α on the basis of the classical and the extended Eliashberg formalism basing on the phonon pairing mechanism. FIG. In the first step, on the basis of the experimental results, we determined the approximation lines T H3S C (p) and T D3S C (p) which served for the calculation of the isotope coefficient: where m D and m H are respectively the deuterium's and protium's atomic mass. The shape of the function α exp (p) is plotted in Fig. where φ n = φ (iω n ) represents the order parameter function, and Z n = Z (iω n ) denotes the wave func-tion renormalization factor. The fermion Matsubara frequency is given by the formula: The electron-phonon pairing kernel has the following form: . The Eliashberg functions (α 2 F (Ω)) for p = 130 GPa and p = 200 GPa were calculated by Duan et al. The depairing electron correlations in the Eliashberg formalism are described with the use of the formula: The quantity μ ⋆ denotes the Coulomb pseudopotential, θ is the Heaviside function. ω C represents the cut-off frequency: ω C = 3Ω max , where Ω max is the Debye frequency. It should be noted that the Coulomb pseudopotential was defined by Morel and Anderson The symbol μ is given by the formula: μ = ρ (0) U , whereas ρ (0) is the value of the electron density of states at the Fermi level, and U is the Coulomb integral. The quantity ω e represents the characteristic electron frequency and the logarithmic phonon frequency is given by: Ω ln (Ω) . In Fig. where the electron-phonon coupling constant should be calculated from: λ = 2 Ωmax 0 dΩ α 2 (Ω)F (Ω) Ω . On this basis, it was found out that the values μ ⋆ corresponding to [T C ] exp were equal to 0.239 and 0.286, respectively for the pressure at 130 GPa and 200 GPa (the harmonic approximation), and 0.146 (the anharmonic analysis). The expression on the isotope coefficient was derived using the dependence: Thus: The theoretical results have the following form: α (130 GPa) = 0.432 and α (200 GPa) = 0.397 (the harmonic approximation), and α (200 GPa) = 0.477 (the anharmonic approach). It can be easily seen that the theoretical value of the isotope coefficient for p = 200 GPa in harmonic approximation qualitatively well reproduce the experimental data. In the case of p = 130 GPa the discrepancy between the Eliashberg result and the result of the measure is extremely high, which means the collapse of the classical theoretical description. The high value of the isotope coefficient in the terms of the lower pressures can be tried to explain by the pairing mechanism other than the electron-phonon mechanism Let us consider the renormalized Green function of the normal state, in which the depreciation of the electron density of states was taken into account where τ 0 , τ 3 are the Pauli matrices associated with the normal state and ε k is the electron energy. The parameters A ∈ 0, 1 and B determine the depth and the width of the decrease in electron density of states with respect to the baseline at the Fermi level. Deriving the Eliashberg equations for the renormalized Green function and using the approximations discussed in paper where: The symbol Ψ denotes the digamma function. We solved numerically equation ( In conclusion, basing on the experimental data we determined the range of variation of the isotopic coefficient for H 3 S superconductor in the function of the pressure. We showed that the isotope coefficient accepts the anomalously high values in the area of the lower pressures (∼ 130 GPa). On the other hand, for the higher pressures (∼ 200 GPa), the values of α are lower than those in the BCS theory. The conducted theoretical analysis proved that the low values of the isotope coefficient could be reproduced in the framework of the classical Eliashberg formalism. The anomalously high values of α could be induced by the strong renormalization of the normal state associated with the significant changes of the electron density of states with the change in the pressure. Note that the proposed model does not require the nonphonon pairing mechanism.