In this work we present a modeling tool designed to estimate the hysteretic losses in the coils of an electric generator with coils made of coated conductor tapes during transient operation. The model is based on a two-stage segregated model approach that allows simulating the electric generator and the current distribution in the superconducting coils using a one-way coupling from the generator to the HTS coils model. The model has two inputs: the rotational speed and the electric load signal. A homogeneous anisotropic bulk model for the coils allows computing the current distribution in the coils. From this distribution, the hysteretic losses are estimated. Beyond the interest on providing an estimate on the global energy dissipation in the machine, in this work we present a more detailed local analysis that allows addressing issues such as coil design, critical current ratting, electric load change rate limits, cryocooler design, identification of quench-prone regions and overall transient performance. Being lighter and more compact, and with higher efficiency at partial loads, superconducting generators could be advantageous with respect to their Cu based counterparts Modeling and simulation of these transients is a challenging task. In the particular case of coated conductor tapes, it requires considering a system that spans spatially 5 (or 6) orders of magnitude: from the 1 μm thick superconducting layers in the windings, to the actual generators in the kW (MW) class with an expected cross section in the order of decimeters (meters). Previous works aimed at estimating the losses in the superconducting coils of generators include among others A recent comparison between the multiscale and homogenization methods The main purpose of this study is to present a tool for estimating the hysteretic energy losses in the HTS coils made of coated conductor tapes of an electric generator during transient operation such as load changes during the operation. The model is driven by both rotational speed and electric load signals. A two-stage segregated model approach is used to separate the electromagnetic fields calculation in the generator from the superconducting coils. Calculation of AC losses is accomplished by using a homogeneous anisotropic bulk model. Although general interest is given to estimate the global energy losses, particular emphasis is also made on the local effects of the losses. Understanding these allows addressing several important design and performance issues such as critical current of the superconducting coils, electric load change rate, cryostat design and identification of quench-prone regions. The simulation goal was set on computing the AC losses in an electric generator with rotor windings made of coated conductor tapes during transient behavior. In that way, heating losses are to be computed as a response to the electric load and rotational speed signals. To cope with the size of the modeling problem at hand and for simplicity, a two-stage segregated model was pursued. In that way, the generator electromagnetic computation could be decoupled from the superconducting coils. Considering tightly packed coils, if each conductor in the rotor windings carries a net given current I(t), the magnetic field H in the coupling boundary, as shown in Figure Following from the assumption described above, the actual current density distribution in the conductors of the rotor's coils can be recalculated from the generator simulation data. Using the previously computed magnetic field H in the coupling boundary as a Dirichlet condition, a second simulation can be performed to calculate the AC losses. Consistent with the original assumption, no feedback is considered from the second to the first model. In what follows and for convenience, the first model will be referred as the "generator model" and the second as "the coils model". Hence, the overall strategy as depicted in Figure 2) The coils model uses the previously computed magnetic field H on a coupling boundary to calculate the actual current density distribution and the AC losses in the superconducting windings of the rotor's coils. For simplicity, in what follows, the coils will be referred to by their number as shown on the right side of Figure The generator model (Figure In principle, the coils could be modeled considering every layer of the coated conductor tape as described in To test the proposed modeling strategy, a simple load change was implemented as shown in Figure At t = 0.0s the generator was stationary with its rotor coils already cooled down to 77 K. The coils were not energized and no electric load was connected to the terminals of the stator windings. From t = 0.0s to t = 1.0s, the current in the rotor's coils was increased linearly until the desired value of 50 A was reached. At this point in time, the field winding provides magneto motive force of 10050 kAturns An equivalent circuit diagram of the generator and its load is presented in Figure Simulation of the whole transient of 14 seconds was carried out as described in the previous sections. In reporting the transient response, a selection of images describing it is presented in Figure Figure At t = 0.5 s, the current in the coils is still ramping up. While the ramp-up of the coils takes place, transport currents appear in all coils. However, magnetization currents also appear in coils 1 and 4. For this reason, coils 1 and 4 show bigger overcritical regions than coils 2 and 3. At t = 7.8 s, the overcritical currents exhibited at t = 1 s have already relaxed and with them, the instantaneous energy dissipation has been reduced by almost three orders of magnitude. This is in agreement with the transient fading out. Also at t = 7.8 s, when no load has been connected yet, no armature reaction is present and the magnetic flux density shows a symmetric profile. Once the load is connected, At t = 8.0 s, the magnetic flux density increases from the upper right corner of the coils. At this time overcritical current densities (dark red) are observed in coils 1 and 2, and to a smaller extent in the upper right corners of coils 3 and 4. In these overcritical regions the instantaneous energy dissipation is increased by almost three orders of magnitude. After this moment, small magnetization currents begin to appear in all coils and all subcritical regions are shrunk. By t = 9.8 s, significant relaxation has occurred, allowing the instantaneous energy dissipation to be reduced again. At t = 10.0 s, when the load is increased, a higher magnitude magnetic flux density enters from the upper right corner. The overcritical zones grow covering the upper part of coil 1 and the upper right corners of the other coils. This turns into a substantial increase of the instantaneous energy dissipation, in particular in coils 1 and 2. Towards t = 11.5 s, the overcritical current densities relax reducing the energy dissipation. When the load is reduced at t = 12.0 s, small overcritical regions appear in the lower right corner of the coils yielding regions of increased dissipation. At t = 14 s, the overcritical regions along with the corresponding energy dissipation fade after a small relaxation transient. Overall, Figure A broader perspective can be provided by considering the instantaneous loss ξ = ∫ E • JdS in all coils and multiplying it by the length of the machine (15 cm). This corresponds to the total instantaneous loss in the straight section of the superconducting race track windings. Figure During normal operation, but specially at increasing load changes, the upper part of coil 1 experienced the highest magnetic fields. Design tools such as coil optimization, addition of interpoles or the use of multiple excitation currents One important issue that can be clearly observed in the middle section of Figure Several other values for the transport current in the superconducting coils were tested, however, the choice of 50 A was justified since during both ramp-up and increasing load change, large regions of the coils reached overcritical current density values as seen in the middle section of Figure Furthermore, this simulation tool can be used for cryocooling system design. Notice that during the ramp-up period, the hot zones show a symmetric pattern. The top of coils 1 and 2 and the bottom of coils 3 and 4 present the hottest regions. However, the hot areas in coils 3 and 4 vary for changing electric loads. This is especially noticeable in the upper right corner. Hence, cryocooler system integration could take this issue into account. For instance, heat sinks located on top of all coils and covering their right side could secure a better heat removal during transient response, than if placed only at the bottom of the coils. In the same manner, the hot regions are at risk of becoming normal if excess heat is not removed fast enough. Once a region becomes normal, ohmic losses appear with a corresponding further increase in temperature. This process can damage the superconducting materials; hence quench protection is essential for safe operation The last plot presented, Figure Although in this work only the cases of ramp-up of rotor coils and electric load change were considered, a large collection of case scenarios can be analyzed using the same two-stage segregated model strategy, these include: short circuit of the stator's windings, connection to active loads, unbalanced loads, rotational speed change or the effect of including a damper cage, among others. Furthermore, when considering wind turbine applications, a mechanical model could be added to the generator model so that dynamics include the torque change due to wind speed variations. A natural next step would be to estimate the hysteretic losses during transient operation of a larger scale device such as the multimegawatt superconducting wind turbine planned in the EU-funded EcoSwing project A two-stage segregated model strategy to calculate the hysteresis losses in a superconducting generator during transient operation was presented. The strategy relied upon a one-way coupling from the generator model to the coils model. The latter used a homogenization technique to model the coils in the rotor windings. The proposed model was used to simulate ramp-up and electric load change events. Analysis of results allowed considering important factors such as critical current ratting of a coil designed for operation in an electric generator. The issues of electric load change rate limit, cooling system design and identification of quench-prone regions was also addressed. Finally, calculation of the overall hysteresis losses in the HTS coils during transient response of the machine was presented. Further studies must be carried out to compare and match the simulation results with experimental data and calibrate the simulator to make tailored predictions for specific transient operation cases. As an additional remark, it is also important to notice that this strategy can easily be implemented to analyze and study other large scale superconducting machines and devices like motors, transformers, cables and magnet coils. were plotted with the darkest shade of blue.