Bulk superconductivity has been discovered in Tl0.6Bi2Te3, which is derived from the topological insulator Bi2Te3. The superconducting volume fraction of up to 95% (determined from specific heat) with Tc of 2.28 K was observed. The carriers are p-type with the density of ∼1.8 × 10 20 cm -3 . Resistive transitions under magnetic fields point to an unconventional temperature dependence of the upper critical field Bc2. The crystal structure appears to be unchanged from Bi2Te3 with a shorter c lattice parameter, which, together with the Rietveld analysis, suggests that Tl ions are incorporated but not intercalated. This material is an interesting candidate of a topological superconductor which may be realized by the strong spin-orbit coupling inherent to topological insulators. The advent of topological insulators have created an exciting interdisciplinary research field which is vitalized by discoveries of new materials to realize new concepts Among such candidate TSCs, Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 was the first to show intriguing signatures of Majorana fermions on the surface. Very recently, it was found that bulk superconductivity can also be achieved in Bi 2 Se 3 by intercalation of Sr; in the resulting Sr x Bi 2 Se 3 , the maximum transition temperature T c of 2.9 K and the superconducting VF of up to 90% have been reported. Single crystalline samples with the nominal composition of Tl x Bi 2 Te 3 with various x values were synthesized from high-purity elemental shots of Tl (99.99%), Bi (99.9999%) and Te (99.9999%). We focus on samples with x = 0.6 in this paper, and results on other x values are presented in the Supporting Information. Before the synthesis, we performed surface cleaning procedures to remove the oxide layers formed in air on the raw shots of starting materials, as described in our previous paper. The crystal structure was analyzed with X-ray diffraction (XRD) using θ-2θ scan performed on Rigaku Ultima-IV X-ray apparatus. The Rietveld analyses of powder XRD data were performed by using FullProf software package. The actual composition was analyzed by using inductively coupled plasma atomic-emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) as well as energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). DC magnetic susceptibility was measured in a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design MPMS). The in-plane transport properties were measured by a standard six-probe method, recording the longitudinal resistivity ρ xx and the Hall resistivity ρ yx simultaneously. The single crystal samples for transport measurements were cut into a rectangular shape with a typical size of 2 × 0.5× 0.2 mm 3 , and electrical contacts were made by using room-temperature-cured silver paste. The specific heat c p was measured by a relaxation-time method using the Physical Properties Measurement System from Quantum Design equipped with a 3 He probe; the addenda signal was measured before mounting the sample and was duly subtracted from the measured signal. The c p measurements were done in 0 T as well as in various magnetic fields up to 2 T applied along the c axis. We found that quenched single crystals of Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 are invariably superconducting at low temperature. This composition suggests that Tl atoms are intercalated in the van der Waals gap of Bi 2 Te 3 ; however, as we show in the following, the crystal structure analysis suggests that intercalation is not taking place. Figure Hence, after the doping of Tl into Bi 2 Te 3 , the crystal structure remains essentially the same as that of the parent compound. However, in contrast to the cases of Cuor Sr-doped Bi 2 Se 3 , in which those dopants are intercalated into the van der Waals gap, the (00l) diffraction peaks in Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 shift to higher 2θ angles, as one can clearly see in the inset of Figure We also measured powder XRD patterns of Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 with Cu K α radiation in Bragg-Brentano geometry on powders obtained from crushed crystals, and the results are shown in Figure As one can see in Figure For the Rietveld refinement, the structure of Bi 2 Te 3 with symmetry R 3m (lattice constants a = b = 4.3850(16) Å, c = 30.438(9) Å, and γ = 120 • ) with additional Tl positions was used. The position of the Bi-atoms was refined to (0, 0, 0.3988(3)) at the Wyckoff position 6c, the positions of the Te-atoms were (0, 0, 0) at the Wyckoff position 3a and (0, 0, 0.8043(2)) at the Wyckoff position 6c. No significant occupation of additional Tl-atoms at (0.5, 0, 0.5) or (0.0, 0, 0.5) could be determined. All positions refer to the hexagonal setting of the rhombohedric cell. The TlBiTe 2 impurity phase was also described in space group R 3m (lattice constants a = b = 4.539(1) Å, c = 22.617(8) Å, and γ = 120 • ) and only the z position of the Te site was refined to (0, 0, 0.2446 (10)). Although TlBiTe 2 was reported to become superconducting below 0.14 K, In the past, the crystal structure of Tl-doped Bi 2 Te 3 with the composition of Tl x Bi 2-x Te 3 was studied. It is useful to note that both our ICP-AES and EDX analyses of the crystals indicate the presence of nearly stoichiometric amount of Tl, which would give rise to about 30% of the TlBiTe 2 phase if the sample phaseseparates into Bi 2 Te 3 and TlBiTe 2 . The amount of the TlBiTe 2 phase indicated in the Rietveld refinement is consistent with this estimate, which suggests that due to the mobility of Tl atoms at room temperature, the material actually phase separates into Bi 2 Te 3 and TlBiTe 2 upon grinding. This in turn suggests that it is very difficult to elucidate the crystal structure of the superconductor phase. A possible picture, which one can speculate for the superconducting phase based on the above result, would be to consider the formation of the nominal Te-Bi-Te-Tl-V •• Te defect layer in the Bi 2 Te 3 lattice, as is the case of the Tl x Bi 2-x Te 3 compound. Figure Te defect layer on the transport properties. While the direct impact of phase-separated TlBiTe 2 impurity phase is expected to be minor because the carrier density of this phase is similar to that of the main phase, Figure We have also synthesized Tl x Bi 2 Te 3 samples with various x values, and it was found that both T c and the shielding fraction become lower for x < 0.6, as is shown in Figure The magnetization curve M (B) measured at 1.75 K with the magnetic field applied parallel to the ab plane is shown in Figure Figure To determine the upper critical field B c2 , the magneticfield dependences of ρ xx at various temperatures down to 0.42 K were measured in fields perpendicular to the ab-plane [Figure The discovery of superconductivity in Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 widens the opportunities to elucidate topological superconductivity in topological-insulator-based superconductors, particularly since the superconducting VF of up to 95% is achievable. Various aspects of the superconductivity in Tl 0.6 Bi 2 Te 3 , including the unconventional resistive B c2 (T ) behavior and the very small B c1 value, are similar to those found in Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 . Nevertheless, the carrier type is opposite, which may prove useful for understanding the mechanism of superconductivity. The crystal structure of this material appears to be essentially unchanged from that of Bi 2 Te 3 with a slightly shorter caxis length and no interstitials, but it turned out to be difficult to elucidate the exact structure of the superconductor phase. 