We study the equilibrium and non-equilibrium physics of two qubits interacting through an ultrastrong coupled qubit-cavity system. By tuning the qubits energy gap while keeping the ultrastrong coupling system to its ground state, we demonstrate a strong two-qubit interaction as well as an enhanced excitation transfer between the two qubits. Our proposal has twofold implications: a means to attain multipurpose parity-protected quantum information tasks in superconducting circuits, and a building block for ultrastrong coupled cavity-enhanced exciton transport in disordered media. Light-matter interaction in the strong coupling regime lies at the root of numerous advances in quantum technologies and quantum information tasks Apart from fundamental interests in light-matter interaction at the USC regime, the ultrastrong coupled qubit-cavity system or quantum Rabi system (QRS) is also extensively studied for its potential impetus to speed up quantum information processing at subnanosecond time scales Here, we present a parity-preserving USC system that mediates effective two-body interactions, with four compelling characteristics that might have important implications in superconducting circuit-based quantum computing (i-iii) and solid-state physics (iv) communities. (i) Strong two-qubit interaction with an increase in the qubit-cavity coupling strength of the QRS (g p /ω cav ) is demonstrated. (ii) A tunable qubit-qubit interaction could be performed by sweeping only the qubits energy gap for fixed QRS parameters, without requiring complex flux qubit architectures of Refs. This work is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe our theoretical model, and discuss its associated parity symmetry. In section. 3, we present our results and discussions. Our model schematic. A qubit-cavity system interacting in the USC regime constitutes the QRS, while two additional qubits interact with the cavity mode. This system might also be considered as a building block for exciton transport mechanism, where qubit 1 is driven by an incoherent pumping, qubit 2 experiences spontaneous decay, and QRS undergoes lossy channels. Finally, we present our concluding remarks in section 4. We consider a qubit-cavity system in the USC regime, a QRS (see figure Here, b(b † ) is the single mode bosonic annihilation(creation) operator and σ x,z are the Pauli matrices. We denote ω cav as the cavity mode frequency, ω p and g p as the qubit frequency and the qubit-cavity coupling strength, respectively. In addition, two qubits with frequencies ω q1 and ω q2 are coupled to the QRS via the cavity mode with coupling strengths g 1 and g 2 . The Hamiltonian for our model reads This Hamiltonian could be implemented with transmon qubits coupled to a single-mode coplanar waveguide resonator the Hamiltonian in equation (2) remains unchanged, i.e., the system is symmetric with respect to an inversion of the pseudo-spin operator, and the field quadrature. To be precise, one can introduce the parity operator P = -e iπb † b σ z p σ z 1 σ z 2 such that [H, P ] = 0. Notice that this parity operator considers the qubit inside the QRS and two additional qubits coupled to the cavity. As the consequence, H and P can be simultaneously diagonalized by |φ j , where P |φ j = ±|φ j , and H|φ j = j |φ j , ∀j. Also, the parity symmetry establishes selection rules in our system. For instance, states with different parity can only be connected via an interaction that breaks the symmetry, while states with the same parity can only be connected by an interaction that preserves the symmetry. As one varies the qubits energy, this process does not change the parity symmetry, by allowing us to connect states with the same parity as shown in the avoided level crossings of figures 3(a) and 4(a,b). In the following section, we study the static and dynamical properties of the Hamiltonian (2) as a function of the qubits energy gaps, ω q1 and ω q2 , for fixed QRS parameters. This situation could be implemented in circuit QED, where qubits energy level spacing can be tuned via external magnetic fluxes In this section, we present the main features of our system. Firstly, we show the equilibrium properties and demonstrate the performance of a tunable strong qubit-qubit interaction in the context of superconducting circuits. Secondly, we show how our system might be used as a primitive unit cell for cavity mediated excitation transfer in the USC regime and its connection with cavity-enhanced exciton transport with organic matter and optical microcavities In this subsection, we show that the QRS can be used as a quantum bus mediating an effective two-body interaction. Analogous to the effective interaction mediated by a resonator bus in cavity/circuit QED setups To obtain the effective Hamiltonian describing qubit-qubit interaction, we consider a dispersive treatment beyond the rotating wave approximation (RWA). Different from the dispersive theory developed in Ref. where Onwards, we set = 1. If we project the total system onto the QRS eigenbases, we can rewrite Using the completeness relation and projecting the interaction Hamiltonian onto the QRS eigenbases, we obtain where χ kj = k|(b+b † )|j . Without invoking the RWA, we obtain the interaction Hamiltonian in the interaction picture as Here, ∆ n kj = ω qnω kj , and δ n kj = ω qn + ω kj . The relevant timescales in our system dynamics come from various energy level differences of the QRS and two qubits frequencies. Here, we are interested in the dispersive limit where the N qubits frequencies are far off-resonant with the lowest QRS transition frequency. In this case, fast oscillatory dynamics can be averaged out to zero and thus only slow dynamics contribute to the overall system dynamics. Hence, we proceed by defining the time average of an operator O(t) where f (t) is real and has unit area. As the consequence, the usual time-ordered evolution operator, satisfying the Schrödinger equation can now be rewritten as when we invoke the time averaging operator, defined in equation where Here, T represents a time-ordering operator. Though U (t, t 0 ) is unitary, its time averaged operator is in general not. Thus, H eff (t) shown above is not Hermitian, since we have traced out the high-frequency part/s. However, the effective Hamiltonian for the unitary part of the evolution is uniquely given by its Hermitian part Up to the first order Taylor series expansion, U (t, t 0 ) ≈ 1 + U 1 (t), where U 1 (t) = -i t t 0 dt HI (t ), Eq. ( Explicitly, U 1 (t) has the following expression By substituting equations ( In deriving the above expression, we have neglected oscillating terms that are proportional to exp (±iω kk t). This is provided by the condition ω kk {g n g n |χ jk | 2 /∆ n kj , g n g n |χ jk | 2 /δ n kj }, which can be guaranteed with suitable QRS parameters. When we restrict ourselves to the two-qubit case (N = 2), we arrive at Furthermore, when we confine ourselves with the two lowest energy levels of the QRS (i.e., j = 0, k = 1), we obtain where It is noteworthy that the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation Excitation number of the second qubit as a function of time. a) g p /ω cav = 0.1, ω p = 0.8ω cav , ω q1 = ω q2 = 0.2ω cav , and g 1 = g 2 = 0.02ω cav . These parameters lead to an effective qubit-qubit coupling strength 2J eff = 0.00176ω cav . b) Enlarged portion of (a). c) g p /ω cav = 0.3, ω p = 0.8ω cav , ω q1 = ω q2 = 0.2ω cav , and g 1 = g 2 = 0.02ω cav . These parameters lead to an effective qubit-qubit coupling strength 2J eff = 0.00267ω cav . d) Enlarged portion of (c). e) g p /ω cav = 0.5, ω p = 0.8ω cav , ω q1 = ω q2 = 0.2ω cav , and g 1 = g 2 = 0.02ω cav . These parameters lead to an effective qubit-qubit coupling strength 2J eff = 0.00573ω cav . In all the figures, blue (continuous) lines are evolution outcome under the full Hamiltonian, equation (2), and red (dashed) lines are evolution outcome under the effective Hamiltonian, equation The first observation we make after going through all this derivation is that the two target qubits interact via the central QRS, since the total system Hamiltonian, equation ( is not true any more. The second observation is that fast oscillations in the full Hamiltonian evolution become apparent with increase in g p /ω cav , while they are smeared out in the effective Hamiltonian evolutions, because we have employed the time averaging operators of the form in equation In particular, states |0 |D 2,1 and |1 |D 2,0 exhibit population inversion as shown in figure Until now, all the numerical analyses are done with the assumption that the two qubits are identical. One natural scenario is when the two qubits are not identical, which is always the case for superconducting qubits. In figure In a realistic implementation for observing Rabi oscillations between states |eg and |ge , one possibility is to make use of Gaussian and Stark control pulses as described in Ref. Step 1: we let the system to cool down to its ground state |0 |gg . Step 2: we apply a Gaussian π pulse acting upon the target qubit 1 in order to prepare the state |0 |eg . Step 3: a Stark pulse is applied to the target qubit 2 bringing the qubits into resonance for a variable time ∆t. In this way, the strong qubit-qubit interaction will induce the desired population transfer between states |eg and |ge . t(units of ⇡/2J e↵ ) Figure In our proposal, the time for entangling two qubits is drastically reduced with increasing g p /ω cav . For instance, if we consider the cavity frequency ω cav = 2π × 8 GHz for the USC system as in Ref. Our next task is motivated by recent developments in cavity-enhanced energy and charge transport with organic matter in optical microcavities Our idea follows from the photovoltaic models of Refs. Since our system governed by equation ( Here L x 1 and L x 2 are Liouvillian superoperators describing the incoherent pumping upon qubit 1 (γ pump ) and the spontaneous emission of qubit 2 (γ out ). Moreover, we include loss mechanisms acting on the QRS via transversal noise (γ x ), longitudinal noise (γ z ), and noise acting on the field quadrature (γ cav ), through Liouvillian superoperators L xp , L zp , and L b . In particular, The pumping and loss rates are γ pump = γ x = γ z = γ cav = 10 -2 ω cav , and γ out = 10 -1 ω cav . We note that a Fock space of N = 8 is enough to assure convergence for each value of the ratio g p /ω cav . The steady state solution of the density matrix can be found by means of the superspace operator method described in Ref. where each superoperator Notice that the superspace dimension is dim(S) = d 2 , and | ρ = d|ρ /dt. In the master equation above, I is the superspace identity and we take into account the transpose and conjugate of system operators. The steady state solution (ρ ss ) is found numerically under the condition | ρ = 0. This implies to find the eigenstate of L = -i H ⊗I+i I⊗H T + n Ln , with zero eigenvalue, i.e., L |ρ ss = 0. We study the steady-state excitation transferred to qubit 2 ( σ + 2 σ - 2 ss ) for two cases, namely, identical qubit case and nonidentical one. For the identical qubit case, the steady state population of the qubit 2, obtained from the master equation The flat behavior when decreasing the g/ω cav has an intuitive explanation if we study the system eigenstates of the effective qubit-qubit Hamiltonian where ). The eigenvalues and eigenstates of Hamiltonian ( It is apparent that for identical qubit frequencies ω q1 = ω q2 and qubit-QRS coupling strengths g 1 = g 2 , the eigenstates of the joint qubit-qubit system do not depend on the effective coupling strength J eff . This implies that neither the matrix elements of operators appearing in the microscopic master equation for the effective two-qubit system where ρ Q describes the two qubits density matrix, nor the energy differences will have an influence on J eff , since the dominating frequency scale is ω q1 (ω q2 ). Notice that the Liouvillian superoperator L n needs to be evaluated in terms of the effective qubit-qubit basis described above. We perform numerical calculations to obtain the steady state solution σ + 2 σ - 2 ss computed numerically from the master equation ) and the one from the master equation ( ). Figure in percentage, for the same parameters used in figure For nonidentical qubit case where ω q1 = ω q2 , the result of the steady state mean value of the excitation number of qubit 2, obtained from the master equation ( In this paper, we have investigated the equilibrium and non-equilibrium dynamics of two qubits interacting via a QRS. We have demonstrated a possibility of using the QRS as a quantum bus to mediate a strong and tunable qubit-qubit interaction. In particular, two-qubit entanglement time can be reduced as qubit-cavity coupling in the QRS increases. We also highlight that the manipulation of the qubits energy relaxes the requirement of complex flux qubit architectures, and thereby without requiring tunable qubit-cavity coupling to perform qubit-qubit interaction as in Ref. from the Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Científico y Tecnológico (FONDECYT, Chile) under grant No. 1150653. Our proposal could be implemented in a realistic circuit QED setup by making use of a fluxqubit galvanically embedded inside a λ/2 microwave resonator for implementing the QRS. Two additional transmon circuits can be positioned at the resonator edges, where the resonator voltage is maximum. In this way, possible crosstalk between on-chip flux lines can be avoided. We also note that since transmons are many-level systems rather than qubits, so we need to carry out additional analysis in order to demonstrate our proposal. The Hamiltonian for a single transmon device reads where E C is the charging energy, E J is the Josephson energy, and N g is the effective offset charge of the device. Also, N represents the number of Cooper pairs transferred to the superconducting island, and θ stands for the gauge-invariant phase difference across the Josephson junction. Figure In this simulation we have fixed the ground state energy to the zero. Notice that for parameters of the QRS ω p = ω cav and g p = 0.3ω cav , one can demonstrate that the frequency difference between the ground and excited state of the QRS is about ω 10 = 1.4ω cav . Also, at where E ( ) j and |j stand for the jth frequency and eigenstate associated with the th transmon, respectively. H p is the Hamiltonian of the QRS, g and N are the th transmon-QRS coupling strength and Copper pairs number, respectively. Figure 