The physics of a superconductor subjected to a magnetic field is known to be equivalent to neutrino oscillations. Examining the properties of singlet-triplet oscillations in the magnetic field, a sterile neutrino-shown to be a Majorana fermion-is suggested to be represented by singlet Cooper pairs and moderates flavor oscillations between three flavor neutrinos (triplet Cooper pairs). A superconductor-exchange spring system's rotating magnetization profile is used to simulate the mass-flavor oscillations in the neutrino case and the physics of neutrino oscillations are discussed. Symmetry protected triplet components are presented as weak process states. Phases acquired due to the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov effect produce a complex phase that may be responsible for charge-parity violation in flavor oscillations. Neutrinos In certain situations, a condensed matter system may possess properties that allow it to mimic a particle physics system. For example, dispersion relations causing electrons to obey the Dirac equation A model was constructed by Pehlivan-Balantehkin-Kajino-Yoshida (PBKY) in Ref. Investigating the coexistence of these competing phases of matter is an worthwhile topic of its own; applying a magnetic field can have a variety of effects on the superconducting state depending on its strength. Weak magnetic fields are expelled from a superconductor An intermediate regime of moderate magnetic fields exists where the magnetic field is not strong enough to break the paired electrons and hybridizes the up and down electron bands. Effectively, the electron with a spin collinear to the magnetic field has an increased momentum (and decreased momentum for the anti-parallel spin). This momentum splitting gives an oscillation in the superconducting order parameter between the singlet and triplet Cooper pairs and was demonstrated nearly simultaneously by Fulde-Ferrell FIG. One system to study the FFLO effect, and therefore neutrino oscillations, is a superconductor in proximity to a ferromagnet The motivating feature of the FFLO effect that begs comparison with neutrinos is that three triplet Cooper pairs are connected to the singlet Cooper pair, just as three flavored neutrinos are connected to a sterile neutrino-a simple extension of the Standard Model to include flavor oscillations In this paper, the connection between BCS superconductivity with an applied magnetic field and the PBKY model from Ref. Section III A provides an overview of superconducting proximity effects by first discussing transport equations of the superfluid. The physics of those equations is discussed in Sec. III B. The connection between quantities in the particle physics case and the proximity system are covered in Sec. IV. Section IV A identifies neutrino type based on the expansion of the Gor'kov function in the condensed matter case. Section IV B uses the symmetry of the singlet state to identify the sterile neutrino as a Majorana fermion. The minimally extended Standard Model (MESM) is shown to be analogous to Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory The PBKY model presented in Ref. The most general Hamiltonian we can write for the two-flavor neutrino oscillation is where the prefactors Ω are arbitrary complex coefficients. The operator â † (â) represents the creation (destruction) of a particle. Assuming that particles 1 and 2 correspond to the mass basis, the Hamiltonian becomes since the mass states propagate in a given system Had we written this Hamiltonian in the flavor basis, for flavors α and β, the unitary transformation can be used where θ is a mixing angle. Note that the term is a constant assuming a constant number of neutrinos. Subtracting it from Eq. ( where and Isospin operators in the mass basis can be defined based on Eq. (5) as which satisfy the SU(2) algebra Rewriting in terms of the vector J , and defining a vector B = (0, 0, -1), This term resembles the Zeeman term In the dense neutrino gas, there are also self-refractions of the neutrinos in addition to the flavor oscillations outlined above. The necessary terms for the Hamiltonian involve four particle terms where α scatters from β (also α = β) if the single angle approximation where t is the time. The ansatz for U p is The form of Eqs. ( To obtain BCS theory, the replacements ω → 2 p where p is the single-particle energy of an electron and of a Cooper pair if ∆ = 0 (i.e., a pair is created and then sent into a region where there is no pair potential), for fermionic operators c, Eqs. Before discussing the transport theory in depth, however, it is useful to show that the external magnetic field derived in the PBKY model is of interest. Keep in mind that for the condensed matter system, BCS theory is the physical theory and that Anderson's reformulation is an abstraction. But the neutrino case uses the mass or flavor vector as the physical quantity, describing a neutrino's oscillation, and is real. The appearance of a magnetic field on the superconducting state is of importance since the physics of the superconducting state changes greatly if a field is applied versus not applied. The magnetic field presented so far is not the same as a magnetic field applied on an individual electron. The PBKY model recognizes the external field as physical for the neutrino oscillations. For the mass basis, the field provides no source terms. The flavor basis contains an extra source term and implies the model is written in the mean field limit. The mass basis Hamiltonian appears as Eqs. ( where P is either J (mass) or J (flavor), P x = (P + + P -)/2, t = -1 for mass and -cos 2θ for flavor, and H = 0 for mass and sin 2θ for flavor. One can view the appearance of a source term applied for the Gor'kov function in the PBKY model to say that the flavor oscillations themselves are not conserved while the number of neutrinos is allowed to be. Earlier in writing Eq. ( The main points of the analysis of the PBKY model is that the Gor'kov function in the BCS superconductivity describes neutrino oscillations and that an external magnetic field is applied for the flavor basis, implying the flavor oscillations themselves have a source term. This produces very different physics for the BCS ground state than if there were no external field. The absence of a magnetic field for the mass basis will be recovered below and the external magnetic field will be introduced more easily in scalar field theory and the Standard Model after discussing the transport equations for superconductivity. The MESM presented in the text is chosen for its consistency with GL, though it could assume any other form that reduces to GL in the appropriate limit. Transport equations for superconductivity are summarized in Sec. III A with the resulting physics described in Sec. III B. The utility of having identified the PBKY model as equivalent to theories of superconductivity is that this determines the structure of the Green and Gor'kov functions The effect on the superconducting state by the external magnetic field is best exposed from the field theory by following a string of approximations summarized in Fig. Gor'kov connected the microscopic BCS theory and macroscopic GL theory to form what is known as Gor'kov's equations with time ordering operator T and ĉ is a fermionic lowering operator with subscripts for momentum and spin, respectively. Since the superconductor pairs electrons together, it is expected that this correlator creating two paired holes (the time-reversal creates two paired electrons) has a non-zero expectation value in the symmetry broken superconducting phase. A simplification of Gor'kov's equations by Eilenberger The key step to arriving at Usadel's equation is to expand the Green and Gor'kov function as Lüder's has done to give [74-77] where higher order terms are not necessary, f 0 denotes the Gor'kov function for singlet pairing only, v is the normalized Fermi velocity, f are the triplet Gor'kov functions, and an average over all momentum is taken as the final step in Usadel's derivation Usadel's equations are useful since they often allow for a simple parameterization of the Green and Gor'kov functions and the resulting solution of the parameters clearly displays the behavior of the fully interacting functions, though the same argument can be found from any level of approximation. Note that the Green's function, G, of the Cooper pairs also may be expanded as in Eq. ( where is the D'Alembertian operator and λ captures the pairing potential. The form of the mass term gives the oscillations discussed in this section. It may be desirable to keep the expansion to second order, but the resulting term is not renormalizable in the particle physics model and would imply extra physics (perhaps another variety of φ 0 particle). However, for simplicity, we will limit ourselves to one extra particle. The FFLO effect pairs electrons with momenta k + q and -k + q instead of k and -k as in traditional BCS superconductivity. Two particles (for a simpler example, consider two free particles) with these momenta relations imply an oscillation of the order parameter proportional to v F , the Fermi-velocity One may describe each pairing state in the | , s basis, where s = s 1 +s 2 , and note that = 1 (=0) for the triplet (singlet). Note that applying the interaction term on a singlet pair (|0, 0 ) gives since the external magnetic field carries an angular momentum changed by the raising and lowering operators, L± . Note that the spin operator controls which direction the angular momentum is applied. As pointed out nearly simultaneously by Bergeret-Volkov-Efetov So far, the discussion has focused around promoting a singlet pair to a so-called 'long-ranged' triplet pair with s = ±1. This is what is generally meant when discussing the (forward) FFLO effect since the s = ±1 pairs can be used to control supercurrents for spintronic application However, the reverse FFLO effects also apply. For example, applying a field in the direction of an s = ±1 component reverts it back to an s = 0 component which may undergo singlet-triplet oscillations To first order, this analysis describes what is expected at tree level in Eq. ( Many statements can be made about the connections made in the previous sections. The list of topics covered in each subsection are listed here: sterile and flavored neutrinos from Lüder's expansion (IV A), identification of sterile neutrinos as Majorana from symmetry relations (IV B), the physics of flavor oscillations by comparison with superconductor-exchange spring systems (IV D), discussion with particular regard to sterile neutrinos in (IV E), symmetry protected triplet components as weak process states (IV F), angular momentum in the neutrino case (Sec. IV G), MSW effects (IV H), CP violation (IV I), and other possibilities (IV J). The PBKY model establishes that a single neutrino oscillation is equivalent to a Cooper pair represented by a Gor'kov function, F. To establish each components f 0 , f in Eq. ( sian directions. To be more specific, the Eq. ( where the last equality uses the form in the PBKY model for the energy, p (= 2ω for neutrinos outside the gas). Formally defining this quantity in the diffusive limit where the momentum goes to zero requires the replacement p → p 2 + β 2 , where β is a small parameter on the order of δm. This allows for an expansion around p = 0 giving v = -(δm/β) 2 p. In the limit where δm and β, which is seen experimentally for neutrinos, go to zero together, Eq. ( Note that summing Eq. ( Repeating the derivation of Usadel's equation for an expansion in mass differences has no effect on the final form of Usadel's equations Having identified the correspondence between the vector f and the three flavors of neutrino, the component f 0 is a scalar in the condensed matter case and is invariant under rotation of the applied field. Contrastingly, f transforms like a pseudo-vector since it has acquired an angular momentum. This invariance of the singlet already points to its correspondence to the sterile neutrino, which is expected to not carry a flavor. The time reversal symmetry relations of the components in the condensed matter system are at each position where ω n is the Matsubara frequency The time reversal symmetry operator in the quantum field theory, based on the symmetries of the Dirac equation, does not mix particle and anti-particle components of the 4-vector For the condensed matter case, note that the Cooper pair is a Majorana particle when the weights of the Bogolyubov-Valatin transformation Another type of Majorana mode may be found in magnetic systems with a superconducting gap Given that BCS theory appeared for neutrino oscillations in the PBKY model, the Lagrangian formulation is provided by GL theory. This sections shows that a reduction of the MESM reduces to the GL Lagrangian, although it is possible that other model extensions also reduce to the desired result. This is the simplest extension that does not change the symmetry group of the model. The appearance of the sterile neutrino is justified by its appearance in the superconducting case (see Sections IV A and IV B). The simplest term one can add to the Standard Model to obtain Eq. ( where ν L is a left-handed Majorana field with mass m ν for each neutrino and c is the charge conjugation operator. When this term is written for energies above the electro-weak symmetry breaking, Eq. ( A candidate for the integrated out quantity is a right handed sterile neutrino. The Standard Model can be extended to include a right handed field for the sterile neutrino, ν 0 , where F is a tensor of Yukawa couplings, Φ is the Higgs boson with Φ = ( Φ) † where is the SU(2) antisymmetric tensor, and E L is a vector of doublets for each generation in L SM . The possibility of several sterile neutrinos are allowed with the Majorana mass matrix, M M . Equation ( where an index ρ indexes the neutrino flavors, ρ ∈ {e, τ, μ}. Adding Eqs. The constants multiplying each field are of the same order of magnitude, and so an approximation that all magnitudes, m, are equal is made for simplicity. Converting all fields to a scalar field (as is done commonly in scalar quantum electrodynamics calculations with χ = χ e , χ τ , χ μ and ŵ represents the flavor basis unit vector. This expansion is reminiscent of the symmetry breaking expansion used in the linear sigma model (but is used in the same way as the condensed matter system in Sec. IV A). The Lagrangian in the scalar field χ is where Bχ(=Bχ 0 + B ρ χ ρ from Eq. ( The field χ represents a neutrino particle whose oscillations are different representations of χ in the expansion of Eq. ( Neutrinos are typically written as in Eq. ( However, the superconducting-magnetic system does not use this two field (mass and flavor) construction. Instead, one can observe that a unitary rotation of the Hamiltonian Eq. ( The two-flavor case corresponds to a rotating Bloch domain wall as in the superconductor-exchange spring system of Ref. 82 which contains a graphical depiction of the system. Only two of the three cartesian directions have a non-zero magnetization in the Bloch domain wall, giving non-zero amplitude to two of the components of f , and this makes the Bloch domain wall an ideal system to study the two-flavor physics of the PBKY model. In the gapless case (free neutrinos), the Cooper pair will eventually break at some distance from the superconductor, and the physical effects of interest, namely the FFLO effect, appears close to the superconductor, typically within a few nanometers, though that length scale may be much different in the neutrino case as the diffusion coefficient is defined differently. The gapless case is the vacuum limit for the neutrinos and this pair breaking can be regarded as a loss of quantum coherence from the source if the neutrino is a fundamental particle, though it is not explicitly ruled out here that it may be composed of other particles. The complete computational details can be found in Ref. Having identified all the components of F in the condensed matter case with their corresponding particle physics representation in the previous section, now the results of previous works Shown are four panels in Fig. when a magnetic field is oriented in a constant direction (shown by oscillations on the figures) and correspond to s = 0. Meanwhile, the symmetry protected states (s = ±1) decay exponentially with a longer coherence length-a behavior characteristic of normal metals (no magnetic field). The long range decays (perpendicular components of the Gor'kov function to the field) can be assigned to mass eigenstates and oscillating curves (parallel components) to flavor eigenstates As the magnetization twists more and more in the top panel of Fig. Reference 101 suggests that sterile neutrinos can be found close to sources. This is wholly consistent with this analogy. In that situation, the flavored neutrinos would be produced and oscillate into the sterile state so long as an external field is present to change the flavor. That the sterile neutrinos are observable near the source merely implies that there are abrupt flavor oscillations near this region. Away from this region, the flavor oscillations do not interact with the field and produce less sterile components. Note also that f 0 need not be large even in a slow but constant rotation of the field. Contrastingly, abrupt rotations of the domain wall cause large populations of singlets to appear, for example, in discrete rotation of the domain wall analogous situation for neutrino oscillations is where the conserved background current is abruptly changed as is depicted in Fig. The bottom two panels in Fig. Adding back in the pairing amplitude of the superconductor corresponds directly to the neutrino gas. This allows for neutrino-neutrino scattering in Eq. ( The singlet in Fig. The summary statement is that the sterile neutrino controls the oscillations of the flavored neutrino states. The amplitude of the sterile neutrino is much less than the flavored states and is directly controlled by the magnitude and rotation of the applied field. Triplet states with s = ±1 have the same character as a weak process state in the neutrino case Reference 95 uses this idea to construct a theory where beta decays are guaranteed to give electrons and electrontype neutrinos only but also that entangle leptons and their partner neutrinos. After some distance, Ref. With regards to the energy and momentum conservation discussed after Eq. ( The clearest meaning of available from the PBKY connection is replacing the moment of inertia by a quantity in flavor space to give a flavor angular momentum. It is tempting to call the angular momentum quantum number, , for the neutrinos as a lepton number. This is since the sterile state has = 0 and the flavor components that have = 1. However, it is not clear if the quantum number appears similarly for leptons in the theory. Note that if components of f leave the region where the external field may act on it, it remains in the symmetry protected state (symmetry protected states from a ferromagnet survive in a normal metal Taking into account the effects of the external field from Sec. IV D, the behavior of the components of f behave similarly to neutrinos in the presence of matter. The MSW effect is a modification of neutrino couplings or masses in the presence of matter That the MSW effect appears so similar to a particular orientation of the domain wall implies the external field is connected to leptons, but this can be no more than a conjecture based on the analysis here. Taking the suggestion that an external field splits the momentum the Cooper pair, written with coefficients u, v for a spinor ξ. Under the FFLO effect, having a momentum q being transferred by the external field, this becomes +(iσ y )ξ * p+q â † p+q δ((p + q) 2 -m 2 ). This breaks the symmetry between the parts of the Majorana field that are particles and those components that are anti-particles in a way that is similar to the splitting of paired electrons. This would add an extra phase factor to calculated scattering amplitudes. A weak field produces a weak splitting. In the CP violation problem, a phase factor can account for particle-anti-particle a-symmetry seen in the universe Experimentally, the violation can be measured in kaon oscillations of color singlets (consisting of, for example, a strange and down quark) as moderated by the external fields For other particles that do not undergo flavor oscillations, there is no equivalent external field in the PBKY model (i.e., Eq. ( Many other explanations may account for CP violation Some exotic possibilities may also be realized. The literal analog of the connection between Josephson junctions and neutrinos is the appearance of a current flowing between two superconductors in the former and the transfer of particles between two interstellar bodies in the latter, but the same mechanism may appear in both systems (though the stellar phenomenon might be more of an instantaneous transfer akin to a lightning bolt as a local phase may be responsible in the particle physics case). Many non-intuitive effects exist in the proximity effect literature. It may be possible to realize these in the context of the particle or astrophysics sense such as superharmonicity in Refs. 116 and 117. The single angle approximation from Ref. 34 restricts the equivalent superconductor to that of an s-wave The general discussion of FFLO effects in this article applies to any flavor mixing process corresponding to Eq. (1). For example, FFLO effects on bound quark pairs describe glitches in the radio frequency pulses of a neutron star This paper connects the physics of neutrino flavor oscillations and superconducting proximity effects. The FFLO effect causes singlet-triplet oscillations of the superconducting state that physically resemble flavor oscillations in the neutrino case. This demonstrates the physical need for sterile neutrinos since they correspond to singlet states in the superconductor. Both are necessary for triplet/flavored states to oscillate. Neutrino oscillations can either be symmetry protected (analogous to mass eigenstates) or oscillate into another neutrino type (flavor eigenstates). This allows for the conservation of mass and energy in oscillations by only allowing them when an external source field is present. A cascade between all neutrino types available in a given system occurs when a changing external field is present. The symmetry relations of the quasi-particle states in the condensed matter case show that the sterile neutrino is a Majorana fermion. The sterile neutrinos are the intermediate states between other flavor states and appear wherever neutrinos are found-especially when the external field is rotated abruptly through the direction of the neutrino flavor. If the sterile neutrino is set to zero, no flavor oscillations occur. A quantum number analogous to the angular momentum quantity of the proximity system is defined for a neutrino; the sterile state has a quantum number of zero while the flavored neutrinos have a value of one. Weak process states bear a close similarity with symmetry protected s = ±1 triplet states of the superconductor. Other effects such as the MSW effect are contained in the physics of the proximity effect since both polarize the field. Phase factors acquired from the FFLO effect might account for the CP violation seen in kaon oscillations by adding the appropriate phase factors and also allow for their effects in neutrinos. Support is gratefully provided by the Pat Beckman Memorial Scholarship from the Orange County Chapter of the Achievement Rewards for College Scientists Foundation. Appendix A: Overview of Anderson's reformulation of BCS superconductivity In the rewritten theory of Ref. 61, the vectors J p (or J p ) appear as spin vectors. In a slight departure from the PBKY model, the Hamiltonian appears as where H = 2( k -F )ẑ+ k V kk J ⊥k with ẑ picking the z component of J p and "⊥" selecting the perpendicular components x and y. Note that a Fermi-energy, F , was defined and is equal to the chemical potential at zero temperature. The physics of this model can be understood in terms of a spin chain (see Fig. Note that the magnetic field H is not physically applied to the electrons in the condensed matter system, it is a mathematical construction. Adding a magnetic field B into the model introduces a spin-dependent F which shifts the vertical dashed lines in Fig. 