The negative-U impurity stripes confining the edge channels of semiconductor quantum wells are shown to allow the effective cooling inside in the process of the spin-dependent transport. The aforesaid promotes also the creation of composite bosons and fermions by the capture of single magnetic flux quanta on the edge channels under the conditions of low sheet density of carriers, thus opening new opportunities for the registration of the quantum kinetic phenomena in weak magnetic fields at high temperatures up to the room temperature. As a certain version noted above we present the first findings of the high temperature de Haasvan Alphen, 300K, and quantum Hall, 77K, effects in the silicon sandwich structure that represents the ultra-narrow, 2 nm, p-type quantum well (Si-QW) confined by the delta barriers heavily doped with boron on the n-type Si (100) surface. These data appear to result from the low density of single holes that are of small effective mass in the edge channels of p-type Si-QW because of the impurity confinement by the stripes consisting of the negative-U dipole boron centers which seems to give rise to the efficiency reduction of the electron-electron interaction. The Shubnikovde Haas (ShdH) and de Haasvan Alphen (dHvA) effects as well as the quantum Hall effect (QHE) are quantum phenomena that manifest themselves at the macroscopic level and have attracted a lot of attention, because they reveal a deeper insight into the processes due to charge and spin correlations in low-dimensional systems Firstly, the cyclotron resonance angular dependences have shown that the p + diffusion profile contains the ultra-narrow p-type silicon quantum well, Si-QW, confined by the wide-gap delta-barriers heavily doped with boron (Fig. Secondly, the one-electron band scheme for the delta barriers and the energy positions of two-dimensional subbands of holes in the Si-QW have been revealed using the tunneling and the infrared Fourier spectroscopy techniques (Fig. Then, the studies of the spin interference by measuring the Aharonov -Casher oscillations allowed the identification of the extremely low value of the effective mass of holes The planar silicon sandwich structures prepared were very surprised to demonstrate the high mobility of holes in the Si-QW in spite of the extremely high concentration of boron inside the delta barriers. Specifically, the cyclotron resonance spectra exhibit the long moment relaxation time for both heavy and light holes, >5 10 -10 s, and electrons, >2 10 -10 s (Fig. The scanning tunneling microscopy, STM, as well as the scanning tunneling spectroscopy, STS, studies showed that the negative -U dipole boron centers are able to form the stripes crystallographically oriented along the [110] axes (Fig. (d) The one-electron band scheme of the p-type Si-QW confined by the δ-barriers heavily doped with boron on the n-type Si (100) surface. 2Δ depicts the correlation gap in the delta barriers that results from the formation of the negative-U dipole boron centers. (e) Model for the elastic reconstruction of a shallow boron acceptor which is accompanied by the formation of the trigonal dipole (B + -B -) centers as a result of the negative-U reaction: 2B 0 → B + + B -. (f) STM image of the upper delta barrier heavily doped with boron that demonstrates the chains of dipole boron centers oriented along the [011] axis. (g) The fragments of the edge channels that contain the stripes consisting of the negative U dipole boron centers. (h) Experimental device prepared within the Hall geometry based on an ultra-narrow p-type silicon quantum well (Si-QW) confined by the delta barriers heavily doped with boron on the n-Si (100) surface. (i) The model of the edge channel in the silicon nanosandwich that is confined by the impurity stripes containing single holes. have carried out these experiments with the long edge channel, 2 mm, of the p-type Si-QW, taking account of the sheet density of holes, 3x10 13 m -2 , measured with similar device prepared within frameworks of the Hall geometry (Fig. Figures Owing to so high sensitivity of the balance spectrometer up to weak magnetic fields, the oscillations of the static magnetic susceptibility that is due to the step-by-step capture of single magnetic flux quanta appeared to be revealed against the background of the strong diamagnetism of the negative-U dipole boron stripes (Figs. And really, if we estimate the number of these centers in the volume occupied by a single hole in view of the concentration of boron, 5 10 21 cm -3 , and having compared everyone the magnetic moment equal to the Bohr magneton, it is possible to be convinced that it practically coincides with the value given above. Similar results are important to be obtained in the case of both parallel and perpendicular orientation of the magnetic field to the Si-QW plane, because the edge channel has square section (see Figs. Moreover, by increasing the magnetic field the static magnetic susceptibility begins to reveal the dHvA oscillations due to the creation of the Landau levels, E ν = ħω c (ν + 1⁄2), ν is the number of the Landau level. In particular, a prerequisite to cover the edge channel by single magnetic flux quanta appears to be accomplished when the external magnetic field is equal to B 0 = 1240G, see the relationship presented above, Φ 0 = ΔB•S = B 0 •S 0 , that is consistent with the first Landau level feeling, We studied carefully the dHvA oscillations created at both parallel and perpendicular orientation of the magnetic field to the Si-QW plane and registered except the dips related to the Landau levels, ν = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, the fractional peaks, ν = 4/3 and ν = 5/3 (Figs. In turn, the creation of the composite bosons ever in weak magnetic fields inside stripes containing single holes can lead to the emergence of the Faraday effect under the conditions of the source -drain current in the edge channel, I ds = dE/dΦ. This model has been suggested by Laughlin to account for the quantum staircase of the Hall resistance Firstly, the SdH oscillations and the quantum Hall staircase are demonstrated, with the identification of both the integral and fractional quantum Hall effects (Figs. However the preparation of dipolar configurations in this case appears to be accompanied by preliminary selective illumination at low temperatures. Nevertheless, the question ariseshow is possible to measure these quantum effects at high temperatures in weak magnetic fields? One of the reasons that are noted above is small effective mass, 10 -4 m 0 , which is considered within the concept of the squeezed silicon arising owing to the negative-U impurity stripes in edge channels (Fig. In order to interpret the experimental data presented above, we propose the following thermodynamic model of the self-cooling process in the silicon nanosandwich. In the frameworks of this model, the whole thermodynamic process consists of multiple self-cooling cycles, each of which includes the following two stages: A) the adiabatic electric depolarization process of the spontaneously polarized stripe that is due to the presence of holes in the edge channel, and B) the fast spontaneous isothermal polarization of the negative-U boron dipoles in the stripe with transition back into the ferroelectric state. The model presented is based on 1) the energy conservation law in the electric depolarization process, and 2) the expression for the free energy, f , and the internal energy, u, of the ferroelectric state related to the thermodynamic work reserved in the edge channel of the silicon nanosandwich, The one-electron band scheme of the p-type Si-QW confined by the delta barriers heavily doped with boron on the n-type Si (100) surface. The delta-barriers are of wide-gap as a result of the formation of the negative-U dipole boron centers (see also Fig. (2) Here T and s are the local effective temperature and the entropy of the nanosystem under consideration. Combining the equations 1 and 2, we obtain the fundamental relationship describing a single thermodynamic self-cooling cycle of the negative-U stripe that is induced by the drain-source current in the edge channel: (3) Here E, P and c p are related to the local electric field, spontaneous dielectric polarization and the local lattice thermocapacity of the negative-U stripe. Integration reveals a significant cooling effect in the edge channel of the silicon nanosandwich. (a) and (b) -The cooler effect is identified by the red shift of the radiation caused by the dipole boron centers from the edge channels of the silicon nanosandwich device (see Fig. Thus, this model allows our interpretation of high temperature quantum kinetic effects in silicon nanosandwiches confined by the negative-U ferroelectric or superconductor barriers. Specifically, the self-cooling effect of the edge channels can be derived as a red shift in the electroluminescence spectra that is enhanced by increasing the drain-source current, see Fig. Negative-U impurity stripes containing single holes appear to reduce the electron-electron interaction in the edge channels of the silicon nanosandwiches that allow the observations of quantum kinetic effects at high temperatures up to the room temperature. The edge channels of semiconductor quantum wells confined by the subsequence of negative-U impurity stripes containing single holes give rise to the creation of the composite bosons and fermions in weak magnetic fields by the stepby-step capture of magnetic flux quanta. The strong diamagnetism of the impurity stripes that consist of the negative U dipole boron centers surrounding the Si-QW edge channels allowed the high temperature observation of the de Haasvan Alphen oscillations as well as integer and the fractional quantum Hall effect. Finally, it should be noted that the step-by-step capture of magnetic flux quanta on all negative U impurity stripes in the edge channels is determined by the balance between the numbers of composite bosons and fermions that is very interesting for models of quantum computing.