Iron-based superconductors have been found to exhibit an intimate interplay of orbital, spin, and lattice degrees of freedom, dramatically affecting their low-energy electronic properties, including superconductivity. Albeit the precise pairing mechanism remains unidentified, several candidate interactions have been suggested to mediate the superconducting pairing, both in the orbital and in the spin channel. Here, we employ optical spectroscopy (OS), angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), ab initio band-structure, and Eliashberg calculations to show that nearly optimally doped NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As exhibits some of the strongest orbitally selective electronic correlations in the family of iron pnictides. Unexpectedly, we find that the mass enhancement of itinerant charge carriers in the strongly correlated band is dramatically reduced near the Γ point and attribute this effect to orbital mixing induced by pronounced spin-orbit coupling. Embracing the true band structure allows us to describe all low-energy electronic properties obtained in our experiments with remarkable consistency and demonstrate that superconductivity in this material is rather weak and mediated by spin fluctuations. Strong entanglement of various electronic and lattice degrees of freedom in the iron-based superconductors has become the leitmotif of recent condensed-matter research and has been identified with a vast variety of experimental probes Here, we show that in the nearly optimally doped NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As compound, low-energy orbitally selective renormalization of the band structure deviates markedly from the general experimental and theoretical renormalization trend in iron-based superconductors The effect of electronic correlations on the low-energy electronic structure of NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As is illustrated in Figs. Quite surprisingly, the outer hole band's dispersion reveals a departure from a parabolic shape (blue dashed line in Fig. This dramatic reduction of the effective mass at lower binding energies cannot be attributed solely to the effect of high-energy electronic correlations, which typically lead to an enhancement of the effective mass over the entire electronic band width. In the presence of orbitally selective renormalization the same is true for each band of a given orbital character. Our ab initio calculations (Fig. The aforementioned reduction of the effective mass due to orbital mixing does not rely on the existence of strong electronic correlations and should be observable already at the level of quasiparticle band masses. Indeed, Fig. The complex modification of the low-energy electronic structure with respect to theory observed in our experiment has a profound effect on the itinerant properties of NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As. It strongly affects the analysis and interpretation of the OS data obtained on the same compound, as we will demonstrate below. The itinerant quasiparticle response can be extracted from the OS data by eliminating the contribution of all clearly identifiable interband transitions (green lines in Figs. It is tempting to assign the narrow Drude component to the combined response of charge carriers on the electron sheets of the Fermi surface (which in iron-based compounds have been found to have higher mobilities than hole carriers based on Hall and quantum-oscillation measurements The strength of electronic correlations is frequently estimated by comparing the total itinerant spectral weight (area under the , where ω it,exp pl,tot is the total itinerant plasma frequency, to the predictions of theoretical band-structure calculations Fortunately, even in such complicated cases the spectral-weight analysis of the itinerant optical response bears fruit. It is wellknown that the total spectral weight of any system (including optical absorption in the ultraviolet and x-ray spectral range) is constant and does not depend on the details of the band structure: SW tot = ∞ 0 σ tot (Ω)dΩ = 4πne 2 /m e (in CGS units), where n is the electron density, e and m e are the bare electron charge and mass, respectively. Quite similarly, the itinerant spectral weight (devoid of all interband transitions) is also constant, with m e substituted by the quasiparticle band mass including renormalization at energies larger than the plasma frequency. Any low-energy mass renormalization due to, e.g., coupling to phonons or other bosonic excitations will not affect this spectral weight as long as its characteristic energy is smaller than the plasma frequency of free charge carriers. On the other hand, the low-energy band structure and the plasma frequency extracted from it will be affected by such renormalization. Therefore, the comparison of the total itinerant plasma frequency obtained from OS and ARPES data provides access to purely boson-exchange-induced effective mass renormalization even when it is not immediately apparent in the experimental band structure. In the present case of NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As this renormalization amounts to m OS /m ARPES = (ω it,OS pl,tot /ω ARPES pl,tot ) 2 = 2.15 (see Fig. Having established that only three out of five electronic bands predicted theoretically actually contribute to the itinerant carrier response of NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As and that electrons are coupled to an intermediate boson with a coupling strength of λ = 1.15, we now turn to the analysis of the superconducting state that develops in this electronic structure. Up to now, the character of superconductivity in optimally doped NaFe 1-x Co x As has remained unclear, with both weak and strong superconducting pairing suggested based on the ARPES measurements of the superconducting energy gap in Refs. 17,18, respectively. This uncertainty can be eliminated based on the analysis of our bulk OS measurements in the far-infrared and THz spectral range, shown in Fig. )dω, hatched area in Fig. The vanishing of the optical conductivity in the superconducting state (blue solid line in Fig. The onset of absorption at 2∆ (blue solid line in Fig. It is quite clear that the combination of such very different features characteristic of a weakly and strongly coupled as well as clean-and dirty-limit superconductor in the optical response of the same material necessitates a comparison with a theoretical model that encompasses all of these limiting behaviors. The Eliashberg theory of superconductivity is perfectly suited to this task. The key input parameter of the theory is the spectrum of the bosonic excitation that mediates superconducting pairing and the overall electronboson coupling strength. Spin dynamics in NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As has been shown to be sensitive to superconductivity, as manifested in the formation of a resonance peak in the imaginary part of the spin susceptibility below T c (Refs. 16,36), while the electron-phonon interaction has been demonstrated to be insufficient to account for the elevated superconducting transition temperature of iron-based superconductors In the presence of the disparate features observed in the optical response of NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As and an interband pairing interaction, the simplest, minimal, model would incorporate two effective electronic bands. The two-band Eliashberg formalism employed in our calculations has been detailed in Ref. 38. We assume the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter to be of the s ± -type. Given that the densities of states of all bands crossing the Fermi level are comparable and that all ARPES measurements find little variation in the size of the superconducting energy gap within and between the bands Figure Our theoretical analysis of the optical conductivity in the framework of an effective two-band Eliashberg model thus reconciles all of the characteristic energy scales and spectral features observed in NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As. The sharp onset of absorption at 2∆ is dominated by the band with large impurity scattering. Energy scale E 1 can be traced back to the onset of absorption in a clean superconductor via a Holstein-type process of breaking-up of a Cooper pair with a simultaneous creation of one spin-fluctuation quantum The remarkable agreement between different experimental probes and theoretical tools employed in this work demonstrates the importance of employing a realistic electronic band structure to interpret the low-energy electronic properties in such complex multiband systems as iron-based superconductors, if complete and consistent understanding of their properties is to be achieved. Our observation of a dramatic reduction of the effective mass in one of the electronic bands of NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As, accompanied by relatively weak superconducting pairing, underlines the intimate interplay between different electronic degrees of freedom and the importance of spin-orbit coupling for the ground-state properties of the iron-based superconductors. It further shows that the modification of the orbital character of the bands crossing the Fermi level by means of intrinsic or extrinsic strain may allow for unprecedented control of low-energy electronic properties of these compounds, including superconductivity. Angle-resolved photoemission measurements were performed using synchrotron radiation ("1 3 -ARPES" end-station at BESSY) within the range of photon energies 20-90 eV and various polarizations on cleaved surfaces of high-quality single crystals of NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As. The overall energy and angular resolution were ∼ 5 meV and 0.3 • , respectively, for the low temperature measurements. Optical-spectroscopy measurements were carried out in the THz and the far-infrared spectral range by means of the reflectance technique and from the far-inrared to the ultraviolet spectral range using spectroscopic ellipsometry. The air-sensitive samples of optimally doped NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As were cleaved before every measurement and loaded into the measurement chamber in the neutral atmosphere of argon gas, without exposing the sample to air at any time. High-accuracy absolute measurements of the sample's reflectance were carried out using the gold-overfilling technique. High-quality single crystals of superconducting NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As were synthesized by the self-flux technique and were characterized by x-ray diffraction, transport and magnetization measurements Band structure calculations were performed for the experimental crystal structure of NaFeAs (Ref. 42) using the PY LMTO computer code In order to confirm that the slight anisotropy of the photoemission intensity in the energy-momentum cut shown in Fig. The results of this comparison are shown in Fig. Figures Here we would like to demonstrate the degree of uncertainty in the extracted parameters of the free-charge-carrier response shown in Fig. In optimally doped NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As the Fermi surface consists of three sheets: two electonlike in the corners of the Brillouin zone and one holelike at the center [S 23]. It is well-known and a generic feature of iron-based superconductors that the bands generating the electron sheets are only weakly dispersive in the out-of-plane direction, giving rise to two quasi-cylindrical sheets of the Fermi surface with relatively small corrugations [ S 24]. Therefore, we can approximate these two sheets by two identical ideal cylinders with their radii equal to the average of the long and the short half-axis of the ellipsoids giving rise to the corrugation. The electronic band generating the hole sheet of the Fermi surface also disperses rather weakly along the Γ-Z direction of the Brillouin zone, as shown in Fig. where σ = x, y, z enumerates the coordinate axes, n is the band index, δ (x) is Dirac's delta function, E nk is the energy dispersion of the nth band, E F is the Fermi energy, e is the electron charge, h is the reduced Planck constant, and ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity. Assuming our two-dimensional approach and the tetragonal symmetry of NaFe 0.978 Co 0.022 As, ω pl,z = 0 and ω pl,x = ω pl,y = ω pl . Thus only one quantity ω pl needs to be calculated for each band. In the two-dimensional case and for an isotropic parabolic band with an effective band mass m eff [E k = h2 k 2 /(2m eff )] Eq. 1 can be rewritten as a simple and familiar expression: where c is the density of states at the Fermi level for an isotropic parabolic band in two dimensions, k F is the Fermi wave vector, and c is the out-of-plane lattice constant. Thus the calculation of the band-specific plasma frequencies is reduced to the determination of the Fermi wave vector and the quasiparticle effective mass for each band, which can easily be done based on the photoemission intensity distributions near the Fermi level presented in Figs. 