The recently discovered C4 tetragonal magnetic phase in hole-doped members of the iron-based superconductors provides new insights into the origin of unconventional superconductivity. Previously observed in Ba1-xAxFe2As2 (with A = K, Na), the C4 magnetic phase exists within the well studied C2 spin-density wave (SDW) dome, arising just before the complete suppression of antiferromagnetic (AFM) order but after the onset of superconductivity. Here, we present detailed x-ray and neutron diffraction studies of Sr1-xNaxFe2As2 (0.10 ≤ x ≤ 0.60) to determine their structural evolution and the extent of the C4 phase. Spanning ∆x ∼ 0.14 in composition, the C4 phase is found to extend over a larger range of compositions, and to exhibit a significantly higher transition temperature, Tr ∼ 65K, than in either of the other systems in which it has been observed. The onset of this phase is seen near a composition (x ∼ 0.30) where the bonding angles of the Fe2As2 layers approach the perfect 109.46 • tetrahedral angle. We discuss the possible role of this return to a higher symmetry environment for the magnetic iron site in triggering the magnetic reorientation and the coupled re-entrance to the tetragonal structure. Finally, we present a new phase diagram, complete with the C4 phase, and use its observation in a third hole-doped 122 system to suggest the universality of this phase. The recent discovery in Ba 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 of a new antiferromagnetic phase, which restores tetragonal symmetry at temperatures below the transition to the more commonly observed orthorhombic antiferromagnetism, has important implications for the nature of unconventional superconductivity in the iron pnictides. The organization of this report will be briefly described here to reduce ambiguity as to when, in the following discussions, the different phases of this system are being considered. Section II will detail the synthesis and preliminary characterization of the samples which were the basis of this study. Section III will present and discuss the results of our neutron and x-ray diffraction experiments. All results and final conclusions will be summarized in Section IV where a complete phase diagram is presented. The introduction of the new C 4 magnetic phase is not pertinent to all results discussed and at times needlessly complicates descriptions. Therefore, discussion of this phase will be reserved until Subsection III E and the fol-lowing sections, with brief allusions to its existence and effects on the structure being made only where necessary in preceding sections. Twenty-three compositions were synthesized, as polycrystalline powders, with nominal sodium contents x = 0.10, 0.20, 0.25, 0.26, 0.28, 0.29, 0.30, 0.32, 0.34, 0.35, 0.36, 0.37, 0.38, 0.39, 0.40, 0.42, 0.44, 0.45, 0.5, and 0.6. Duplicate samples have been prepared at different times for the diverse diffraction experiments. Samples prepared for neutron diffraction were approximately 5g each while samples used for synchrotron x-ray diffraction were only ∼ 0.5g each. Despite the overall agreement in structural and physical properties, subtle differences are occasionally observed due to the disparate sample size and the complex synthesis procedure. Handling of all the starting materials was performed in an M-Braun glovebox under an inert Ar atmosphere with less than 0.1 ppm of H 2 O and O 2 . Starting Sr (Aldrich, 99.9%) and Fe (Alfa Aesar, 99.99+%) elements were used as received. Small pieces of Na free of oxide coating were trimmed from large lumps (Aldrich, 99%). Granules of As (Alfa Aesar, 99.99999+%) were ground to a coarse powder prior to use. Precursor binary materials SrAs, NaAs, and Fe 2 As were synthesized from stoichiometric reactions of the elements at 800°C, 350°C, and 700°C, respectively. Polycrystalline samples of Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 were prepared from stoichiometric mixtures of SrAs, NaAs, and Fe 2 As, which were ground thoroughly with a mortar and pestle, and loaded in alumina crucibles. The alumina crucibles were sealed in Nb tubes under Ar, which were further sealed in quartz tubes under vacuum. The reaction mixtures were subjected to multiple heating cycles between 850-1000°C for durations less than 48 h (to minimize loss of Na by volatilization). The samples underwent grinding by mortar and pestle between heating cycles in order to homogenize the composition. Following the final heating cycles, the samples were quenched in air from the maximum temperature rather than being allowed to cool slowly. Initial characterization of the dark gray powders was conducted by laboratory magnetization measurements at 0.1 Oe on a home-built SQUID magnetometer to determine T c . Time-of-flight (TOF) neutron powder diffraction experiments were performed using POWGEN at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) of Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). Magnetic order parameter measurements using the same powder samples were performed at the triple-axis beamline HB-1A of the High Flux Isotope TABLE I. Fitted composition and structural and magnetic transition temperatures. Fit compositions were determined through the use of a Vegard's law-like behavior of the a lattice parameter. Samples which show significant departures from the nominal composition had been post-annealed with tiny excess amounts of Sr or Na in order to improve the quality of the superconducting transition. Tc's were determined as the onset of the diamagnetic response through the intersection of the linear fits of the curve before and during the transition. Due to the suppression of the orthorhombic and accompanying magnetic transitions (Ts and TN ) by the re-entrant C4 phase, these transitions were determined using the same technique. In samples which showed purely the C2 magnetic phase, a power law fit ( M (δ) ∝ (T N (s) -T ) β N (s) ) was used to determine the transition temperatures and critical exponents. Tr,s and Tr,N denote the structural re-entrance and magentic reorientation transitions respectively. Reactor (HFIR) where special attention was given to collecting data for the inherently weak magnetic reflections. High resolution synchrotron x-ray data were collected at beamline 11BM-B of the Advanced Photon Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). Detailed structural analyses were performed using the Rietveld method as implemented in the GSAS and EXPGUI software suite. In order to ensure the highest quality samples, the annealing was continually monitored by magnetization measurements after each heat treatment. Repeated grinding and annealing steps during the synthesis were found necessary not only to ensure the chemical homogeneity of the sample but also to produce sharp single superconducting transitions as shown in Figures As shown in Figure The substitution of Na on the Sr site causes two main changes from the parent compound which must be considered in understanding the doping dependence of the structure: first, the Na + ion contributes one less electron than Sr 2+ and so decreases the oxidation state of Fe (this shift in the charge of the Fe 2 As 2 tetrahedron greatly affects the geometry of these layers), and second, the smaller ionic radius of Na requires the lattice of the material to progressively accommodate the size mismatch as more Sr is replaced by Na. Figure Comparisons with the other prominent hole-doped 122 systems are presented in Fig It is worth noting that the non-linear doping dependence observed in the volume of Ba 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 is also present in the Sr system (Figure At 205K, SrFe 2 As 2 undergoes the same I 4/mmm to Fmmm symmetry breaking as the Ba-122 system. Figure For concentrations in the range 0.29 < x < 0.42 the lattice undergos a return to tetragonal symmetry for temperatures below 80K -behavior indicative of the recently discovered magnetic C 4 phase. The large thermal contraction along the c axis compared to the relatively small shift in the a axis at the transition obscures the first-order nature of the transition in variables which measure simultaneously changes in the basal plane and those in the orthogonal direction such as the volume. Introducing the parameter a tet = a 2 oth + b 2 orth /2) allows for a direct comparision of the tetragonal a axis through the transition and clearly shows a lattice anomaly at the transition. In Figure In Figure The observed re-entrance to a tetragonal structural phase for samples with dopings 0.29 < x < 0.45 is accompanied by a magnetic reorientation which is the hallmark of the magnetic C 4 phase. As described in a recent group theoretical analysis work, we determined that the double-Q model necessitates that half the Fe sites become nonmagnetic (nodes) while the remaining half allow the tetragonal SDW antiferromagnetic ordering. Recent theoretical work and capacitance dilatometry measurements performed on Ba 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 have suggested the presence of an incommensurate magnetic structure either at the edge of the C 2 dome or in the intermediate temperatures T r < T < T N for samples exhibiting C 4 re-entrance. In the tetragonal I 4/mmm symmetry seen in the AFe 2 As 2 materials there are six As-Fe-As angles in the Fe 2 As 2 layers. Due to the symmetry of the structure, these six can be reduced to two related angles defined as α 1 and α 2 . At the structural transition the lowered orthorhombic symmetry causes the α 2 angle to split into two separate angles denoted as α 2 and α 2 as shown in Figure Previously (ref 12), we have discussed the competing effects of the Na + ion's smaller ionic radius and reduced electron contribution, when compared to Ba, on bonding in the Fe 2 As 2 layers and the spirit of these considerations remains unchanged in application to the Sr material. The raised oxidation state of Fe causes a contraction along the Fe-Fe bonds (as directly observed by the contraction of the a axis) which, coupled with the rigidity of the Fe-As bond, causes an expansion of the cell along the c direction. The Fe-As bond rigidity is clearly seen in Fig This rather robust rigidity dictates that the previously discussed changes in the lattice and contraction of the Fe-Fe bond must be compensated almost exclusively by the As-Fe-As bond angles and the bonding between the alternating Fe 2 As 2 and Sr layers. Plotted in Fig x ‫|‬ = 29% w R p = 5.82% R p = 5.35% χ 2 = 6.396 x ‫|‬ = 34% w R p = 5.68% R p = 5.33% χ 2 = 5.091 d -s p a c i n g ( Å ) I n t e n s i t y ( a r b . u n i t s ) rating at a ∼ 0.02 Å difference at 10K for the 29% sample. With little temperature dependence in either the Fe-As or averaged Sr-As bonds the majority of the change in the lattice parameters must be due to the changing of the tetrahedral As-Fe-As bond angles. Figure Panels i and j show the the two As-Fe-As angles (α 1 and α 2 ) at 300 and 10K respectively (at 10K α 2 is the average of α 2 and α 2 for the compositions with the orthorhombic structure). Unlike the other hole-doped Ba systems the smaller Sr series with the lower cell anisotropy (as measured by c/a and discussed in Section III B) starts with an end member already close to the perfect tetrahedral angle of 109.46 • . Upon doping the larger α 1 closes while α 2 opens until x ∼ 13% where 109.46 • is achieved and α 2 becomes the larger angle with further doping. Comparing plots i and j it is clear that the composition at which this angle is achieved is significantly affected by the temperature: it changes from x 109.46 • = 0.135 to x 109.46 • = 0.294 between 300 and 10 K. It is interesting that despite the non-linear behavior of the lattice volume the doping dependence of the averaged angles appears linear across all measured compositions. The perfect tetrahedral angle at 10 K occurs at a composition near that of the start of the magnetic C 4 phase. It is likely that the proximity to the higher symmetry perfect tetrahedron might give way to a structural instabil- ity which leads to the re-establishment of the tetragonal structure. Calculating the ∆α = α 2 -α 1 for all samples which show C 4 re-entrance in both the Na doped BaFe 2 As 2 (taken from reference 12) and SrFe 2 As 2 it is found that only compositions with ∆α < ∼ 1 • show the magnetic reorientation and the structural re-entrance. We suggest that a combination of the magnetic ordering temperature of a given composition and its proximity to ∆α = 0 should play a role (along with considerations of the Fermi surface) in establishing the C 4 magnetic phase -explaining why the C 4 phase is not seen to extend to ∆α ≥ 1 • for compositions x < 0.294. The ability of the high C 2 SDW ordering temperatures to supress the formation of the C 4 phase has been corroborated by recent theoretical work, supporting this conjecture. Figure As recently reported for the Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 system (refs 22 and 23), we observe a strong competition between the C 4 state and superconductivity. As opposed to the smoothly sloping superconducting dome archetypical to the iron pnictides we report a large plateau in the T c at the onset of the C 4 magnetic phase where the superconducting transition is nearly constant until the end of the C 4 dome where it immediately begins to climb to its maximum value of 36K for x = 0.49. Whereas reference 23 observed non-monotonic doping dependence to T c in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 we see no such decrease at the onset of C 4 . We report coupled simultaneous magnetic and structural transitions both at the well known structural and magnetic transitions to an orthorhombic AFM structure and at the newly observed magnetic reorientation and tetragonal re-entrance, in general agreement with the strong magneto-elastic coupling in the hole-doped iron pnictide 122 materials. While in both the K and Na doped BaFe 2 As 2 the α = 109.46 • occurs near the composition of optimum T c here it is achieved well inside the SDW dome. It is possible that this observation was simply a coincidence in the previous two systems, which we think unlikely, or that in light of the well known competition between the two magnetic phases and superconductivity the maximum transition temperature is not found at the perfect tetrahedral angle due to the strong magnetic ordering present in this composition. With the observation of the magnetic C 4 phase in a third member of the hole-doped 122 iron pnictide superconductors it strongly suggests its universality to these systems. Moreover, it suggests that this new phase is important to the wider material group and not just an isolated observation. and at the ORNL High Flux Isotope Reactor and Spallation Neutron Source was sponsored by the Scientific User Facilities Division, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, US Department of Energy. The authors thank A. Huq, P. Whitfield and A.A. Aczel for providing help during experimental collection and analysis.