A review is given for the theoretical framework to give a reliable prediction of the superconducting transition temperature Tc from first principles, together with a practical strategy for its application to actual materials with illustrations of the results of Tc calculated for superconductors in the weak-coupling region like the alkali and alkaline-earth intercalated graphites as well as those in the strong-coupling region like the alkali-doped fullerides. In quantum mechanics, a ground state is determined through a compromise between the kinetic energy (which makes particles itinerant) and the potential energy (which makes them localized). If the latter includes the interaction between particles, there appears a further complication due to their correlated motion. In elucidating the microscopic mechanism of superconductivity, this intrinsic complexity in quantum mechanics cannot be avoided but is even more intensified, specifically because superconductivity is a phenomenon in which an assembly of electrons, negatively charged particles with one-half spin, goes into the pair-condensed phase as a consequence of the dominance of some effective attractions between electrons mediated by either phonons, plasmons, spin-fluctuations, or orbital-fluctuations over the short-range Coulomb repulsions, indicating the necessity of deeply understanding and carefully investigating the physics of this charge-spin-phonon(-orbital) complex before making a reliable evaluation of the transition temperature T c of this second-order phase transition. Thus one would imagine that the task of reliably calculating T c must be formidably difficult, but the ultimate goal in the theoretical study of high-T c superconductivity should be to construct a good theoretical framework for an accurate prediction of T c ; without such a theoretical tool, we could never conduct a research directly and intimately touched with the most salient feature of high-T c materials, namely, the very feature that T c becomes very high in those materials. McMillan was the first to provide a rather successful scheme for predicting T c in the phonon mechanism of superconductivity, starting from the microscopic electronphonon coupled Hamiltonian. The scheme is known as the McMillan's formula At present, this framework is usually regarded as the standard one for making a first-principles prediction of T c and widely used. In fact, the superconducting mechanism of many (so-called weakly-correlated) superconductors is believed to be clarified by employing this scheme. The key phonon modes to bring about superconductivity are identified by investigating the structure of α 2 F (ω). We can mention that superconductivity in MgB 2 with T c = 39K provides a very good example In spite of these and many other successful examples, however, this is not considered to be our ultimate scheme for calculating T c from first principles, primarily because a phenomenological parameter μ * is included in the theory. Actually, it cannot be regarded as the method of predicting T c in the true sense of the word, if the parameter μ * is determined so as to reproduce the observed T c . Besides, as long as μ * is employed to avoid a serious investigation of the effects of the Coulomb repulsion on superconductivity, this scheme cannot be applied to stronglycorrelated superconductors such as the high-T c cuprates. Even in weakly-or moderately-correlated superconductors, this scheme cannot treat superconductivity originating from the Coulomb repulsion via charge, spin, and/or orbital fluctuations (namely, the electronic mechanism including the plasmon mechanism The validity of the concept of μ * is closely related to that of the Eliashberg theory itself; the theory is valid only if the Fermi energy of the superconducting electronic system, E F , is much larger than ω 0 . Note that under the condition of E F ≫ ω 0 , the dynamical response time for the phonon-mediated attraction ω -1 0 is much slower than that for the Coulomb repulsion E -1 F , precluding any possible interference effects between two interactions, so that physically it is very plausible to separate them. After this separation, the Coulomb part (which was not anticipated to play a positive role in the Cooper-pair formation) has been simply treated in terms of a single parameter μ * . Thus, for the purpose of searching for some positive role of the Coulomb repulsion in superconductivity, the concept of μ * is irrelevant from the outset of the whole theory. As for the condition of E F ≫ ω 0 , it must also be noted that such a condition is violated in some recently discovered superconductors in the phonon mechanism including the alkali-doped fullerenes with T c = 18-38K If the condition of E F ≫ ω 0 is violated, especially if E F is about the same as ω 0 , another complication occurs in treating the screening effect of the conduction electrons. In the usual calculation scheme from first principles, the static screening is assumed in calculating α 2 F (ω), but it does not reflect the actual screening process working during the formation of Cooper pairs. This subtle problem of screening is, of course, also closely related to the problem of the first-principles determination of μ * and we will not be able to solve these problems unambiguously without confronting with a difficult task of treating both the Coulomb repulsion and the phonon-mediated attraction on the same footing in the calculation of the microscopic dynamical electron-electron effective interaction V . In order to overcome the above-mentioned problems inherently associated with the Eliashberg theory, the first and natural option would be to improve on it by considering both the gap equation and the electron-electron effective interaction V in entire energy-and momentumspace with properly including the vertex corrections Γ in V and without separating the Coulomb repulsion from V . However, this will not be easily accomplished at least in the near future, partly because the demand for computational resources becomes too much in the solution of the full nonlocal and dynamical gap equation and partly because no controlled approximation scheme has been known for Γ for the superconducting state. (Note that the controlled scheme is known for the normal state Fortunately, an alternative option has already been proposed by the extension of the density functional theory (DFT) to treating a superconducting state A. Hohenberg-Kohn-Sham Theorem According to the basic theorem in the density functional theory (DFT) due to Hohenberg and Kohn In an essentially similar way, in treating superconductivity in the framework of DFT, it would be better to construct the energy functional with employing both n(r) and the electron-pair density (or the superconducting order parameter) χ(r, r ′ )(≡ Ψ ↑ (r)Ψ ↓ (r ′ ) ) as basic variables In this framework of SCDFT, we can formally write down the fundamental gap equation to determine T c exactly as 30 where ∆ j is the gap function associated with jth KS orbital. In just the same way as its energy eigenvalue ε j (which is measured relative to the chemical potential), ∆ j is not the quantity to be observed experimentally but just introduced for the mathematical convenience so as to obtain the exact T c by solving this BCS-type equation, Eq. ( This formal framework of SCDFT was not applied to actual superconductors before the year 2005 when an attempt was made to provide a concrete approximate form for F xc [n, χ] in which the contribution from the phononmediated attraction was explicitly included up to the level of the Eliashberg theory In the judgement of the present author, the presently available form for F xc [n, χ] or the one for K jj ′ contains the information equivalent to that included in the Eliashberg theory for the part of the phonon-mediated attraction, indicating that no vertex corrections are considered in this treatment (amounting to the very insufficient treatment of the strong polaronic effect), while for the part of the Coulomb repulsion, it contains only very crude physics; the screening effect is treated in the Thomas-Fermi static-screening approximation, or the result in the random phase approximation (RPA) only in the static and the long-wavelength limit, neglecting both the dynamical and nonlocal feature in the effects of the Coulomb repulsion. This clearly indicates that the Coulomb repulsion is not treated on the same footing as the phonon-mediated attraction and this approximation for the Coulomb part will be just good for describing the physics represented by μ * at usual metallic densities (or r s ≈ 2 with r s the conventional nondimensional density parameter) from first principles, but it fails to take care of the detailed dynamical nature of the screening effect, especially, the positive role of the plasmons in superconductivity for lower densities (or larger r s ) It would be appropriate here to make a rather general comment on numerical errors. Currently, calculations of the normal-state properties are done in either the localdensity approximation (LDA) or the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) This unfavorable situation may be avoided, if we take the following two-stage strategy for the calculation of T c for a family of superconducting materials in consideration; in the first stage, combined with available experimental results on the normal state, we establish a good model system representing this family of superconductors by making a first-principles band-structure calculation and then in the second stage, we evaluate T c based on the model system not only for reproducing the experimental T c but also for suggesting not yet synthesized but promising superconductors with higher T c in this family. In the rest of this article, we shall discuss two families of the carbon-based superconductors for which T c s are calculated and predicted in accordance with this two-stage strategy. A. Pairing Interaction in the Weak-Coupling Region The three-dimensional (3D) homogeneous electron gas has been known to be a very useful system in constructing a successful functional form for V xc (r) in either LDA or GGA by its study with use of various powerful manybody techniques including quantum Monte Carlo simulations. In view of this success, we shall study superconductivity in the same system with the conventional Green's-function method in order to infer a good functional form for the pairing interaction K jj ′ in Eq. ( In a homogeneous system, momentum p is always a good quantum number and an electron can be specified by p and spin σ. If we write the electron annihilation operator by c pσ , the Hamiltonian H of the 3D electrongas system coupled with phonons is given by where ε p (≡ p 2 /2m * -μ) is the bare one-electron dispersion relation with m * the band mass and μ the chemical potential, V 0 (q) (≡ 4πe 2 /ǫ ∞ q 2 ) is the bare Coulomb repulsion with ǫ ∞ the optical dielectric constant, and H ph represents all contributions containing the phonon operators. For the time being, there is no need of our specifying a concrete form for H ph . In the thermal Green's-function method, we can treat superconductivity by introducing the abnormal thermal Green's function F (p, iω p ), which is defined at temperature T by Here ω p is the fermion Matsubara frequency, defined by πT (2p + 1) with an integer p. At T = T c where the second-order superconducting phase transition occurs, this function satisfies the following formally exact gap equation: where G(p, iω p ) is the normal thermal Green's function and J(p, p ′ ; iω p , iω p ′ ) is the irreducible electron-electron effective interaction. Let us assume that the effect of interaction is weak, so that it would be enough to retain the terms only in lowest order in the interaction. If we adopt the same assumption in the calculation of the normal-state properties in the Green's-function approach, we are led to the so-called G 0 W 0 approximation or the one-shot GW approximation in terminology prevailing in the present-day first-principles calculation community, where W is the effective interaction between electrons including both the Coulomb and the phonon-mediated interactions and W 0 represents W in RPA. Incidentally, in the same kind of terminology, the Eliashberg theory corresponds to the GW approximation. Historically, Cohen was the first to evaluate T c in degenerate semiconductors on the level of the G 0 W 0 approximation In the G 0 W 0 approximation, we replace G(p, iω p ) by the bare one G 0 (p, iω p ) [≡ (iω p -ε p ) -1 ] in Eq. ( as is usually the case for W 0 the effective interaction in RPA, though we do not intend to confine ourselves to RPA at this stage. By substituting Eq. ( Then, by making an analytic continuation on the ω plane to transform F (p, iω p ) to the retarded function F R (p, ω) on the real-ω axis and using the general relation due to the causality principle as ImV R (q, Ω), (7) with η a positive infinitesimal, we end up with a gap equation for F R (p, ω). Finally, by taking the imaginary parts in both sides of the gap equation and integrating over the ω variable, we are led to an equation depending only on the momentum variable p. More specifically, the equation can be cast into the following BCS-type gap equation: where the gap function ∆ p and the pairing interaction K p , p ′ are, respectively, defined as and With use of K p , p ′ thus derived, we can determine T c as an eigenvalue of Eq. ( The very definition of the gap function ∆ p in Eq. ( Although the spin-singlet pairing has been assumed in the derivation of Eq. ( FIG. Here V jj ′ (iΩ) is the dynamical effective interaction working for the scattering process from a pair of electrons in (j, j * ) orbitals to another pair in (j ′ , j ′ * ) orbitals, as schematically shown in Fig. In order to assess the quality of this basic framework in the G 0 W 0 approximation for calculating T c from first principles, we have applied it to polar degenerate semiconductors, specifically, the doped SrTiO 3 and compared the calculated results with experiments This material is an insulator and exhibits ferroelectricity under a uniaxial stress of about 0.16GPa along the [100] direction, but it turns into an n-type semiconductor by either Nb doping or oxygen deficiency, whereby the conduction electrons are introduced in the 3d band of Ti around the Γ point with the band mass of m * ≈ 1.8m e (m e : the mass of a free electron). At low temperatures, superconductivity appears and the observed T c shows interesting features; T c depends strongly on the electron concentration n and it is optimized with T c ≈ 0.3K at n ≈ 10 20 cm -3 . Its dependence on the pressure is unsual; T c decreases rather rapidly with hydrostatic pressures, but it increases with the [100] uniaxial stress, implying that the superconductivity is brought about by the polarcoupling phonons associated with the stress-induced ferroelectric phase transition, Taking those situations into account, we have assumed that the material is well represented by a model of the 3D electron-gas system coupled with polar-optical phonons in which a concrete form for V (q, iΩ) can be derived in RPA as with the dielectric function in the electron-optical phonon system as ǫ(q, iΩ) =ǫ ∞ + 4πe 2 q 2 Π 0 (q, iΩ) where Π 0 (q, iΩ) is the polarization function in RPA (or the Lindhard function) for the 3D electron gas, ω t (q) is the energy dispersion of the transverse optical phonon, and ǫ 0 (q) is the static nonlocal dielectric function, which is determined with use of the static dielectric constant ǫ 0 and ω t (q) as The dispersionless longitudinal-phonon energy ω l is related to the transverse-phonon energy in the longwavelength limit ω t (0) through the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller relation as By substituting V (q, iΩ) in Eq. ( C. Graphite Intercalation Compounds (GICs) The graphite intercalation compounds (GICs) have been investigated for a long time from physical, chemical, and technological points of view The first discovery of superconductivity in GICs was made in KC 8 with the superconducting transition temperature T c of 0.15K in 1965 In spite of all those efforts and the existence of such a generally accepted picture, we need to know more important and fundamental issues that include: Recently these three issues have been satisfactorily addressed by the present author The usual DFT-based self-consistent band-structure calculation is useful in elucidating the electronic structures of GICs in the normal state, basically because GICs are not strongly-correlated materials. According to such a calculation, no essential qualitative difference is found between alkali and alkaline-earth GICs. The main common features among these GICs may be summarized as follows: First of all, each intercalant metal atom in M C x acts as a donor and changes from a neutral atom M to an ion M Z+ with valence Z. Then, the valence electrons released from M will transfer either to the graphite π bands or the three-dimensional (3D) band composed of the intercalant orbitals and the graphite interlayer states The dispersion relation of the graphite interlayer band is very similar to that of the 3D free-electron gas, folded into the Brillouin zone of the graphite The value of f , which determins the branching ratio Zf : Z(1 -f ), can be obtained by the self-consistent band-structure calculation. In KC 8 , for example, it is known that f is around 0.6 As inferred from experiments With the above-mentioned common features in mind, we can think of a simple model of a 3D electron gas coupled with phonons for the GIC superconductors, which is schematically shown in Fig. Although there are some additional complications originating from the combined contributions from both optical and acoustic modes in the layered-lattice system, this coupling of an electron with the polar phonons is essentially similar to the one we have already considered in the previous subsection. Thus it is straightforward to derive the effective interaction V (q, iΩ) in RPA in which the bare Coulomb repulsion and the polar-phononmediated attraction are treated on the same footing with the screening effects of both the 2D and 3D electrons. A concrete form for V (q, iΩ) will not be given here, but for its detailed derivation we refer to the original paper We have evaluated T c from first principles by using V (q, iΩ) thus obtained to solve the gap equation ( In order to identify the controlling physical parameters to enhance T c in CaC 6 by a handred times from that in KC 8 , let us compare the values for the physical parameters between the two materials: (i) The valence Z; because the valence changes from monvalence to divalence, the value of Z in CaC 6 is doubled to make the bare polar-phonon-mediated attraction (which is in proportion to Z 2 ) stronger by four times. (ii) The interlayer distance d; it decreases from 5.42 Å to 4.524 Å, so that the 3D electron density n increases in CaC 6 . (iii) The factor f to determine the branching ratio; it decreases from about 0.6 to 0.16, which also makes a further increase in n. (iv) The effective band mass for the 3D interlayer band m * ; it increases from m e to about 3m e , leading to a large enhancement of the density of states at the Fermi level. (v) The atomic number of the ion A; it changes only from 39.1 in K to 40.1 in Ca. Thus the energies of phonons hardly change. We have recalculated T c by shifting each parameter, one by one, from the above-mentioned respective physical value and have found that two parameters, namely, Z and m * , are very important in controlling the overall magnitude of T c . In fact, T c is enhanced by one order of magnitude from that in KC 8 by doubling Z from Z = 1 to Z = 2 with m * kept to be m e . A further enhancement of T c by another one order is seen by tripling m * from m e to 3m e , with Z kept to be Z = 2. Thus we may conclude that the enhancement of T c in CaC 6 by about a hundred times from that in KC 8 is brought about by the combined effects of doubling Z and tripling m * . In this respect, the actual value of m * is very important. Appropriateness of m * ≈ 3m e is confirmed not only from the band-structure calculations As we have seen so far, our standard model could have predicted T c = 11.5K for CaC 6 in 1982 and it is judged that its predictive power is very high. Incidentally, the author did not perform the calculation of T c for CaC 6 at that time, partly because he did not know a possibility to synthesize such GICs, but mostly because the calculation cost was extremely high in those days; a rough estimate shows that there is acceleration in computers by at least a millon times in the past three decades. This huge improvement on computational environments is surely a boost to making such a first-principles calculation of T c in the G 0 W 0 approximation. We have explored the optimum T c in the whole family The optimized T c depends rather strongly on the parameters to control the polarcoupling strength such as Z and the atomic mass A; if we choose a trivalent light atom such as boron to make ω t (0) large, the optimum T c is about 100K, but the problem about the light atoms is that m * will never become heavy due to the absence of either d or f electrons. Therefore we do not expect that T c would become much larger than 10K, even if BeC 2 or BC 2 were synthesized. From this perspective, it will be much better to intercalate Ti or V, rather than Be or B. Taking all these points into account, we suggest synthesizing three-element GICs providing a heavy 3D electron system by the introduction of heavy atoms into a light-atom polar-crystal environment. In the BCS theory for superconductivity which is applicable to superconductors in the weak-coupling region, T c is directly related to the coherence length ξ 0 which characterizes the spatial extent of the wave function representing the bound state of a Cooper pair at zero temperature. More concretely, the relation between them is expressed as T c /E F = 2e γ /π 2 (p F ξ 0 ) -1 ≈ 0.361/p F ξ 0 with γ (= 0.57721 • • • ) the Euler-Mascheroni constant and p F the Fermi wave number. Because p -1 F is in proportion to the lattice constant a 0 , the relation is rewritten into the form as for a monovalent metal in the fcc-lattice structure. (For other valence and/or crystal structure, the coefficient of 0.0735 changes, but it always remains in the same order of magnitude.) For usual elemental superconductors, T c /E F is of the order of 10 -4 and thus ξ 0 is about a thousand times larger than a 0 , validating the approach in momentum space. On the other hand, the relation in Eq. ( A similar message can be obtained through the socalled Uemura plot This value of T c /E F (which must be the optimum value for fermionic superconductors) suggests ξ 0 ≈ 0.3 a 0 . Thus, in treating superconductivity in the strong-coupling region, we need to consider a situation of extremely short ξ 0 , validating the approach in real space, which is totally different from that of very long ξ 0 in the weak-coupling superconductors. In view of the above-mentioned difference in ξ 0 , we shall exploit the shortness of ξ 0 in reformulating the problem of making a quantitative calculation of T c for strong-coupling superconductors in the Green's-function approach where H is the Hamiltonian for a homogeneous electron system and Φ q is the electron-pair annihilation operator, defined by Φ q ≡ p c p+q↑ c -p↓ . In terms of the retarded pairing correlation function Q R sc (q, ω), we can define T c as the temperature at which Q R sc (q, ω) diverges at q = 0 in the static limit (ω → 0) with the decrease of T . As shown schematically in Fig. Then, the divergence in Q R sc (0, ω → 0) occurs at the zero of the denominator in Eq. ( we can rewrite Q sc in Eq. ( Since we can always calculate Π sc,0 easily, the problem of estimating T c is reduced to the evaluation of g in the limit of ω → 0 at q = 0. Note that g does not depend strongly on either q or ω, in sharp contrast with Π R sc,0 (q, ω). In the BCS theory, for example, g is taken as a constant which represents a weakly attractive and spatially local interaction working only in the vicinity of the Fermi level, given that the phonon energy ω 0 is much smaller than E F . Then the zero of the denominator in Eq. ( In the case of short ξ 0 , we may assume that the essential physics of electron pairing can be captured even if we treat only a small-cluster system, as long as the system size is large enough in comparison with ξ 0 . Under this assumption, we can take the following procedure for determining g: First, by representing the values for Π sc,0 and g in an N -site system as Π ) sc,0 and gN , respectively, we may write the pairing correlation function for the N -site system Q (N ) sc as in accordance with Eq. (20). In general, the exact bulk value g will be obtained by taking the large-N limit of gN , but expecting that gN0 with a small positive integer N 0 (for example, N 0 ≈ 2) is already close to g, we may estimate g by the relation of with Q (N0) sc evaluated rigorously, for example, by exact diagonalization. Of course, we can determine a better value of g by checking the saturation behavior of {g N0 } with the increase of N 0 . Pairing-Interaction Functional Based on the knowledge so far obtained, let us speculate an appropriate functional form for the pairing interaction K jj ′ in SCDFT. It would be natural to expand the electron field operator in terms of the Kohn-Sham orbitals {|j } in an inhomogeneous electron system, so that we can define the electron-pair operator Φ j as Φ j ≡ c j c j * with |j * the time-reversed orbital of |j . Then, we can introduce the pairing polarization function in terms of Φ j and Φ + j ′ . In particular, we can calculate this quantity in the noninteractiong system Π sc,jj ′ in analogy with Π sc,0 , as schematically introduced in Fig. In the strong-coupling region, we do not expect that this gjj ′ exhibits strong dependence on iΩ, because the Fermi energy, the scale for the electron kinetic energy, must be much smaller than the energy scale representing electron-electron interactions. In addition, gjj ′ does not depend strongly on orbital variables, either, because the pairing interaction should be short-ranged in real space in line with the shortness of ξ 0 . Thus we may regard gjj ′ as a constant. Then, if we take K jj ′ in Eq. ( The fulleride is a molecular crystal with narrow threefold conduction bands (with the band width W ≈ 0.5eV) derived from the t 1u electronic levels of each C 60 molecule. With the doping of three alkali atoms per one C 60 molecule, we obtain the half-filled situation in which superconductivity occurs with T c in the range 18 -38K The above picture, however, seems to be too much simplified and we may raise several fundamental questions. From a theoretical point of view, one of the serious problems is ill foundation to adopt the Eliashberg theory in the fullerides due to the importance of vertex corrections (i) The relation between T c and the lattice constant a 0 changes remarkably when the crystal structure changes from the face centered cubic (fcc) to simple cubic (sc) lattice by the introduction of Na, a smaller ion compared to K, Rb, or Cs, as a dopant ion 84 . (ii) The antiferromagnetic (AF) insulating behavior has been reported in ammoniated K 3 C 60 , which is peculiar in the sense that s-wave BCS superconductivity exists in the vicinity of an AF phase Although the experiment (i) may be reproduced in the Eliashberg theory with some judicious choice of parameters, the rest (ii)-(iv) cannot be explained even qualitatively in the theory. In addition, the behavior of T c as a function of n observed in the experiment (iv) cannot be predicted either by those theories proposed so far to account for the copper-oxide high-T c superconductivity based on some strong-correlation models, though such models may be favorable for the explanation of the experiment (ii). A successful theory for the fullerene superconductors should not only reproduce these experiments in a coherent fashion but also clarify the reason why the effect of vertex corrections, even if it is large, does not manifest itself in many superconducting properties. In quest of such a theory from a somewhat general viewpoint, the present author made intensive studies of the Hubbard-Holstein (HH) model and its extension in the past and successfully explained all the issues (i)-(iv) raised above In a molecular crystal, it is a very good approximation to regard each molecular unit as a "site" in a lattice. We shall adopt this approximation and describe the electron-phonon system in the alkali-doped fullerides by a model Hamiltonian H in site representation in which each site corresponds to each C 60 molecular unit. Since the conduction band width is narrow, the intermolecular hopping integral t must be small, indicating that only the nearest-neighbor hopping is relevant in modelling the kinetic energy of the system. Then, it would be appropriate to decompose H into the nearest-neighbor electrontransfer term H t and the sum of site terms i H i including both the electron-electron and the electron-local phonon interactions. In order to faithfully represent the threefold degenerate t 1u -conduction bands coupled with eight H g intramolecular Jahn-Teller (JT) phonons, we would need to include the t 1u ⊗ H g JT structure in H i , as has often been the case The concrete form for H in the HH model is given by with the site term H i , written as where i, i ′ represents the nearest-neighbor-site pair, c iσ the operator to annihilate a spin-σ electron at site i, μ the chemical potential, n iσ ≡ c † iσ c iσ , U the on-site (or intramolecular) Coulomb repulsion, α the nondimensional electron-phonon coupling constant which is related to the conventional electron-phonon coupling constant λ through λ = αω 0 /tz with ω 0 the optical-phonon energy and z the coordination number, and a i the operator to annihilate an optical phonon at site i. The characteristic features of the fullerenes can be well captured by an appropriate choice of the parameters involved in this Hamiltonian. In fact, the narrowness of the conduction band can be described by the smallness of t of the order of 0.1eV. The difference in the crystal structure as well as the effect of band multiplicity can be well accounted for by a suitable choice of z. The high-frequency intramolecular optical phonons coupled strongly to electrons can be treated by considering the local phonons with the energy ω 0 (≈ 0.2eV) at each site. The short-range Coulomb potential must be relevant in the fullerenes due to the proximity to the AF state and it can be included by the introduction of U . Note that this U is not the direct Coulomb repulsion between electrons on a carbon atom U atom which is of the order of 5-10eV. Rather it is the sum of U atom and the attraction -U pol due to the electronic polarization effect of 60 π-electrons in the C 60 molecule 99 . Because of a strong cancellation between U atom and -U pol , U is expected to be of the order of 0.1eV, which is about the same magnitude as that for the phonon-mediated attraction, -U ph ≡ -2αω 0 . Intensive studies on the ground state in this system by exact diagonalization of small-size clusters have revealed that the half-filled HH model exhibits interesting competition among charge-density-wave (CDW), spin-densitywave (SDW), and superconducting states FIG. In order to address the issue (i), we have applied our framework to calculate T c to the HH model by estimating g with use of a cluster as small as two molecules (i.e., N 0 = 2). We have evaluated the variation of t with the change of the lattice constant a 0 by fitting the change in the band width obtained by the band-structure calculation for each lattice structure 101,102 . More specifically, t is determined by with d = a 0 / √ 2 -6.95 Å , ∆ = 0.55 Å , and the corresponding parameters, t Rb and d Rb , for Rb 3 C 60 . By choosing t Rb = 1.70ω 0 suitable for Rb 3 C 60 and the common parameters such as U = 3.81ω 0 , α = 2, and ω 0 = 0.195eV with reference to band-structure calculations and relevant experiments, we obtain the results for T c as a function of a 0 , which agrees remarkably well with experiment as clearly demonstrated in Fig. The competing feature between U ph and U is also identified to be a key to the resolution of the issue (iii) Encouraged by the success in reproducing T c for the alkali-doped fullerene superconductors by the application of our theoretical framework to the HH model at half-filling in the nearly offset situation of U ≈ U ph , we have attempted to explore the optimum value of T c with the increase of the electron-phonon coupling constant α, whereby U is also increased to keep the offset situation. Examples of the calculated results of T c are plotted in Fig. By the band-structure calculation 103 , it is known that α is about three for the hole-doped C 60 in which hole carriers will be introduced into the h u -valence bands. On the other hand, in the crystal composed of C 36 , α will be about four 104 , if the C 36 solid is successfully doped to have an enough number of mobile carriers in the system, although it seems to be a very difficult task 105 . In this chapter, we have proposed a new functional form for the pairing interaction K jj ′ , a key quantity in the gap equation, Eq. ( fulness of this functional form by its applications to both the weak-coupling superconductors like the alkaliand alkaline-earth-intercalated graphites and the strongcoupling superconductors like the alkali-doped fullerides. We have also explored a possibility to enhance T c up to room temperature. The proposed functional form has just opened a challenging frontier of the research on high-T c superconductivity. Although we need to improve on the functional form itself by utilizing the information obtained by its application to a much wider range of materials, we can think of several ways to make use of this new theoretical tool. For example, we can make a quantitative assessment of the effectiveness of each superconducting mechanism, either phononic or electronic, so far proposed by investigating how much T c is actually enhanced with the introduction of the mechanism. The knowledge accumulated by such investigations will pave the way to reach a room-temperature superconductor.