Pair density wave superconductivity constitutes a novel electronic condensate proposed to be realized in certain unconventional superconductors. Establishing its potential existence is important for our fundamental understanding of superconductivity in correlated materials. Here we compute the dynamical magnetic susceptibility in the presence of a pair density wave ordered state, and study its fingerprints on the spin-wave spectrum including the neutron resonance. In contrast to the standard case of d-wave superconductivity, we show that the pair density wave phase exhibits neither a spin-gap nor a magnetic resonance peak, in agreement with a recent neutron scattering experiment on underdoped La1.905Ba0.095CuO4 [Z. The pseudogap regime of the underdoped cuprates is highly susceptible to spin and charge order. Unidirectionally (striped) modulated spin and charge order was first discovered near a hole doping of x = 1/8 in La 1.6-x Nd 0.4 Sr x CuO 4 An experimental study of the transport properties of striped La 1.875 Ba 0.125 CuO 4 The possibility of a PDW state was investigated within microscopic models, and numerical studies of the t-J model generally find that this state is energetically competitive with other more ordinary modulated superconducting states Experimentally, a recent neutron scattering study of the low-energy spin response in stripe ordered La 1.905 Ba 0.095 CuO 4 Motivated by the experimental findings of Ref. The stripe phase coexisting with superconductivity is studied within a phenomenological mean-field one-band Hubbard model with U > 0. For the hopping integrals t ij , we include NN t = 1 (setting the unit of energy) and NNN couplings t = -0.3. The details of the bandstructure are not important for the results discussed below. The associated Fermi surface of the tight-binding model is depicted in Fig. Here we use an 8 × 2 supercell to study the effects of stripe and PDW order on the magnetic excitation spectrum. The periodicity of the magnetic (charge) stripe order is therefore restricted to 8 (4) lattice sites along x and 2 (1) sites along ŷ. This restriction limits the possible solutions and a selfconsistent iterative procedure in general only obtains a saddle point in the free energy landscape. The actual minimum is often located at a different periodicity which is inaccessible due to the restriction to 8×2 periodic unit cells. In such cases the Goldstone modes either remain gapped or the spin-wave branches cross zero energy before reaching the ordering vector We apply a supercell formalism, where the total N ×N (here N = 96) system consists of supercells of size 8 × 2. The dynamical spin susceptibility χ +-(q, ω) = χ +-(q, iω n → ω + iδ) that determines the neutron scattering intensity may be obtained from which contains terms originating from both the intraand inter-supercell structure. Here r i = R i + i where R i yields the supercell containing site r i and i gives the site of r i in that supercell. The site dependent susceptibility is obtained from is the spin raising operator at position r i at (imaginary) time τ and S -(r i , τ ) the corresponding spin lowering operator. The bare susceptibility takes the standard form, consisting of contributions from both normal and anomalous Green functions as detailed in the (SM) where χ +- 0 (r i , r j , ω) is the bare susceptibility calculated with respect to the mean-field Hamiltonian in Eq. In order to disentangle the effects of superconductivity on the spin response from those of the striped magnetic order, we start by considering systems with either only dSC or only PDW order, i.e. without coexisting charge and magnetic order. In Fig. The corresponding results for the case with only PDW order are plotted in Fig. We now turn to the full coexistence phase with 8 × 2periodic magnetic and charge stripes as well as PDW or dSC orders present. Combining superconductivity with magnetic and charge order leads to a reconstruction of the Fermi surface, evidenced in Fig. Proceeding to study the spin-wave spectrum of the coexistence phase, we first note that the presence of Goldstone modes necessarily excludes the opening of a spingap. This is clearly seen in Fig. To illustrate this more clearly, we show in Fig. To summarize, we have studied the distinct signatures of a PDW state with intertwined striped spin, charge, and anti-phase superconducting bond order on the dynamic spin susceptibility. We find that in the PDW state both a spin-gap and a neutron resonance are absent, in contrast to the coexistence phase with standard in-phase d-wave superconductivity where the neutron resonance is preserved. This absence of the usual fingerprint of a signchanging superconducting gap in the PDW state can be Comparison of the integrated neutron resonance for the PDW and dSC cases. The blue curve shows the difference between the PDW and the non-superconducting case, while the red curve shows the difference between the dSC case and the non-superconducting case. The dSC shows clear signs of a resonance, which is absent for the PDW case. traced back to its gapless single-particle excitation spectrum. These results are in agreement with recent neutron scattering results on x = 0.095 The authors are grateful to W. A. Atkinson, P. J. Hirschfeld, A. P. Kampf, A. Kreisel, D. D. Scherer, F. Loder, N. Perkins, I. Rousochatzakis, A. T. Rømer, J. Tranquada, and G. Yu for useful discussions. MHC and BMA acknowledge financial support from a Lundbeckfond fellowship (grant A9318). TAM acknowledges support from the Center of Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility. Supplementary Material to "Magnetic fluctuations in pair-density wave superconductors" Morten H. Christensen 1 , Henrik Jacobsen 1 , Thomas A. Maier 2 , and Brian M. Andersen Here we provide the details of the derivation of the transverse susceptibility in real-space on a superconducting ground state. The bare transverse susceptibility is where S + (r i , τ ) [S -(r i , τ )] is the spin creation [annihilation] operator at position r i at (imaginary) time τ , Applying the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) transformation where the momentum k is contained in the reduced Brillouin zone of the superlattice, and using the fact that results in the expression where f 0 kk (i, j) is the following real space matrix (after analytical continuation, ω n → ω + iη) with N s = N sx N sy is the number of supercells, and i and j denote sites within one supercell and η is an artificial broadening. The real-space Dyson equation yields and since the dependence of the supercell vector R should be the same for the bare and RPA expressions, this expression can be used to derive an expression for f RPA : note that this is really just the standard RPA expression in momentum space, but the "susceptibilities" now have matrix structure. Application of Eq. ( To make contact with the cross section as measured by neutrons we take advantage of the fact that neutrons are not a local probe and in the Fourier transform to momentum space we average over sites, as indicated in Eq. ( When solving for self-consistent striped solutions, an assumption about the periodicity of the stripes has to be made. Hence, for a set of input parameters, the periodicity of the ground state might differ from the input periodicity, implying that the solution given from solving the self-consistent equations is not necessarily the ground state of the system. In the present case we are interested in stripes with a certain periodicity (8 × 2) and varying magnetization and since we are interested in the dynamics of the spin-waves, ensuring that they remain gapless is critical. The regular iterative selfconsistent approach typically results in saddle points in the free energy due to the enforced periodicity, and we therefore adopt an approach focused on enforcing gapless Goldstone modes. In practice this means that we choose a modulation of the electron densities corresponding to an 8 × 2-periodic state and adjust U such that the smallest eigenvalue of the real part of the denominator of the RPA susceptibility, is zero. The gapless excitations should appear at q = (π ± π 4 , π) as the underlying state exhibits 8 × 2-periodicity, and μ is adjusted to ensure that this is the case. Here we included U as a dependent in f 0 to remind the reader that f 0 also changes as a function of U , as is seen from the mean-field Hamiltonian. This procedure allows us to vary the size of the magnetic moments and the type of superconducting order independently, while remaining in the same parameter regime and simultaneously satisfying Goldstone's theorem. In practice this is carried out by choosing a certain density modulation, i.e. the values of n iσ , and solving Eq. ( 