Since the announcement in 2011 of the Materials Genome Initiative by the Obama administration, much attention has been given to the subject of materials design to accelerate the discovery of new materials that could have technological implications. Although having its biggest impact for more applied materials like batteries, there is increasing interest in applying these ideas to predict new superconductors. This is obviously a challenge, given that superconductivity is a many body phenomenon, with whole classes of known superconductors lacking a quantitative theory. Given this caveat, various efforts to formulate materials design principles for superconductors are reviewed here, with a focus on surveying the periodic table in an attempt to identify cuprate analogues. In 2011, the Obama administration announced the Materials Genome Initiative Related to this has been the development of design principles for discovering new materials. For instance, the properties of ferroelectrics are determined by atomic displacements from high symmetry positions. As such, these materials are well suited to density functional methods. As an example, Craig Fennie Predicting a new ferroelectric is one thing, but a new superconductor is quite a different matter. Even conventional superconductors involve a subtle interplay of electron-ion and electron-electron interactions. As such, predicting even the sign of the net interaction, much less the actual transition temperature, is tough business. Although it took only a few years from the advent of BCS theory Still, there have been several interesting attempts to apply both materials genome and materials design principles to the discovery of new superconductors. Here, these are reviewed, with some thoughts about where the field is headed. To the author's knowledge, there has been only one 'hit' using materials genome ideas to predict a new superconductor. In 2010, Kolmogorov and collaborators Still, despite materials like MgB 2 with a T c of 40K Perhaps the best known attempt along these lines is that of Klintenberg and Eriksson A related attempt has been reported by Curtarolo's group The formulating of design principles for superconductors has a long history. Perhaps the most famous advocate for this was Bernd Matthias. His design principles were based on the then known class of highest temperature superconductors, the cubic A15s like Nb 3 Sn, and was colorfully summarized in a lecture by Steve Girvin • Stay away from theorists This is not completely fair. Bernd was one of the early pioneers of non-conventional superconductors, and in fact advocated looking for uranium-based superconductors proximate to a magnetic phase Most unconventional superconductors are indeed found in proximity to a magnetic phase. In Fig. suppressed itself as the tuning parameter increases even further. This design principle was realized early on by Gil Lonzarich's group and led to the discovery by them of heavy fermion superconductivity in CePd 2 Si 2 and CeIn 3 Cuprates Another approach has been linked to the well known trend for bilayer cuprates to generally have a higher T c than monolayer cuprates, and trilayer ones to have a higher T c than bilayer ones (though layer numbers beyond three typically lead to a decreased T c ). The accepted idea is that the electronic structure of the inner and outer CuO 2 layers differ From the beginning, though, the hope was that by adjusting the metal and/or the ligand ion, one might achieve a new class of cuprate analogues (replacing oxygen by sulfur was already mentioned above The reason is that even if one finds a lower T c analogue, this might represent a new class of materials. A potential example is the quantum spin liquid Herbertsmithite, ZnCu 3 (OH) 6 Cl 2 We turn now to replacing copper by another transition element. Moving to the left along the periodic table, we first come to nickel. Interestingly, Sr-doped La 2 NiO 4 exhibits the same charge stripes as exhibited by underdoped cuprates There is, though, one potentially promising direction. A trilayer variant, La 4 Ni 3 O 8 , is known that has a crystal structure similar to that of electron-doped cuprates Similar physics occurs for the next element over, cobalt, with striped phases existing for Sr-doped La 2 CoO 4 over a wide range of doping, analogous to that of the nickelates The most popularly studied iron pnictide is the 122 material (XFe 2 As 2 , with X=Ca, Sr, Ba) which can be doped by substituting on the Fe or As sites. Surprisingly, this ThCr 2 Si 2 structure is somewhat ubiquitous for superconductors -the original heavy fermion superconductor CeCu 2 Si 2 Back to the cuprates, what should happen if we move down to the next periodic row instead? The element below copper is silver. One issue with silver is that it typically is a valence skipper, primarily forming either Ag + or Ag 3+ . But under certain conditions it can be stabilized as Ag 2+ . In that sense, fluorine is a more useful ligand than oxygen The next element over in the 4d row is palladium. As with nickelates, Pd 2+ is d 8 rather than d 9 and so is expected to differ from cuprates. On the other hand, Pd metal is nearly ferromagnetic, and so Pd compounds can be expected to have interesting magnetic properties. And if the magnetism is suppressed, who knows, perhaps some kind of superconductivity might be observed. The prediction of p-wave superconductivity in Pd goes back a long time No further remarks will be made about the 4d row, expect to note that low temperature, probably p-wave, superconductivity has been found in Sr 2 RuO 4 We now jump down to the very interesting 5d row. Although a variety of Pt and Au compounds have similar formula units to their cuprate counterparts, the discussion here is confined to two 5d elements, Os and Ir. Os is interesting in that it exhibits a variety of valence states, and so there is a vast materials space here remaining to be explored. A magnetically frustrated pyrochlore, KOs 2 O 6 , exhibits low temperature superconductivity, but this is likely due to K 'rattling' modes, making the material similar to the AgO clathrate that was mentioned earlier Of perhaps greater interest is iridium. Sr 2 IrO 4 exhibits a similar electronic structure to cuprates despite its d 5 configuration (Fig. This brings us to an important point. Although much theoretical work has been devoted to ideal materials, there has been much less attention given to doping. This is obviously an issue, since most of the interesting materials like cuprates, pnictides, and buckyballs, are rarely superconducting in their stoichiometric phases, and require some form of chemical doping to achieve superconductivity. Many interesting stoichiometric materials, like the above example of iridates, have proven difficult to dope. And others, once doped, often exhibit charge localization (nickelates and cobaltates being relevant examples). Earlier, the interesting case of Herbertsmithite was mentioned, which was predicted in its doped state to be a novel superconductor The above mentioned superconductors are not the only layered ones. There is a class of layered nitrates that have T c up to 26K, HfNCl and its siblings (ZrNCl, TiNCl) This brings us to a vast new field where in this short article, justice cannot be given. This is the study of engineered 2D materials. This takes two forms. First, superlattices of materials can be constructed by MBE growth. There have been a number of successes here. In cuprates, one can take blocks of material which are respectively undoped insulators and heavily overdoped non-superconducting metals, and then at their interface, high temperature superconductivity can be achieved Related to this has been the development of a new modular design principle that treats layers (or multilayers) much like Lego blocks that can be interchanged to engineer new materials. Several years ago, this was used to predict the existence of a complex iron oxide phase, Y 2.24 Ba 2.28 Ca 3.48 Fe 7.44 Cu 0.56 O 21 , related to that of Bi2212 Just because one has discovered a high temperature superconductor does not mean that technologically, it would have any relevance. A trivial example is the recent spectacular discovery of ultra-high temperature superconductivity (near 200K) in H 3 S under extremely high pressures I end, though, with a cautionary note. The history of superconductivity has been littered by bad ideas. Perhaps the most colorful description of this has been given by Bernd Matthias in a number of talks, that although over forty years ago now, still seem highly relevant today: • The electron-phonon interaction always reminds me of the man who is looking for his keys under a street light and his friends say "but you didn't lose them here, you lost your keys over there". "I know, but it is too dark over there." [111] • That of course leads you to Green's functions and the absence of any further predictions. 