We demonstrate theoretically all-electric control of the superconducting transition temperature using a device comprised of a conventional superconductor, a ferromagnetic insulator, and semiconducting layers with intrinsic spin-orbit coupling. By using analytical calculations and numerical simulations, we show that the transition temperature of such a device can be controlled by electric gating which alters the ratio of Rashba to Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling. The results offer a new pathway to control superconductivity in spintronic devices. The dissipationless flow of electric charge and phase coherence are major driving forces for the research and development of superconducting electronics along with phase coherence. For example, superconducting logic circuits have already been implemented, including computer processors and memory chips that work at frequencies up to several gigahertz 1-4 . For spintronics 5-8 the main aim is to create logic and memory devices that exploit both the charge and spin degrees of freedom of electrons, and which offer high operating frequencies and low energy consumption In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in the intersection of these fields, and new discoveries have enabled the new field of superconducting spintronics One important application of superconducting spintronics is to control the temperature T c at which a material becomes superconducting using spin-valves Here we propose a device comprised of a ferromagnetic insulator (FI) and a semiconductor with a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) in contact with a conventional superconductor (S). Experimentally, it is known that the Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling in a 2DEG can be tuned via a gate voltage Recently, it was demonstrated that the superconductor proximity effect depends strongly on the amount of Rashba and Dresselhaus coupling that is present in the system Here we investigate a setup where magnetism and spin-orbit coupling are split into two distinct layers rather than coexisting in the same material Proposed experimental setup. Our proposed experimental setup is sketched in Fig. . Therefore, modulations in T c due to V g can also be excluded by investigating variations in the spin-orbit-driven superconducting proximity effect as a function of the V g polarity. To explain the mechanism of the electric control of T c , we first approximate the multilayer structure as an effective monolayer structure where spin-orbit coupling and magnetic exchange fields coexist. This analogy is relevant because the spin-dependent phase-shifts induced by proximity to a FI are known to act as an effective exchange field in thin superconducting structures To the linear order in the superconducting pair amplitudes, the diffusion equations of the system are 52 The symbols s refer to the electron pair amplitudes with spin-singlet, short-range spin-triplet, and long-range spin-triplet projections, respectively. We have also defined the the triplet mixing factor The ferromagnetism is described by an in-plane exchange splitting h = h(cos θ e x + sin θ e y ), which is parametrized in terms of a magnitude h and direction θ. We also assume an in-plane spin-orbit coupling, which is described in polar coordinates by a magnitude α β ≡ + A 2 2 and type χ ≡ atan(α/β), where α and β are the Rashba and Dresselhaus coefficients. The spin-orbit coefficients are defined by the single-particle Hamiltonian , where m* is the effective mass, p the momentum, and σ the spin. Finally, D is the diffusion coefficient of the material, and  is the quasiparticle energy. The singlet component f s is produced in all conventional superconductors. When these pairs leak into the adjoining ferromagnet, eqs (1-3) show that a magnetic exchange splitting h induces a nonzero short-ranged triplet component f , as is well-known It is important to note that the spin-orbit coupling not only introduces a coupling between the different types of spin-polarized Cooper pairs, but that it also has a depairing effect. This is seen by how A modifies the diagonal terms in the equations above, resulting in an alteration of the effective energies in eqs ( We have calculated T c numerically and the results are shown in Fig. For all structures, we assumed a thickness of 0.65ξ for the superconductor and 0.15ξ for the 2DEG, where ξ is the zero-temperature coherence length of a bulk superconductor. Assuming ξ = 30 nm, this would imply a superconductor thickness of ~20 nm and thickness of ~4 nm for the spin-orbit coupled layer. As for the magnitude of the spin-orbit coupling, we normalized both α and β to ξ / 2  . If the effective quasiparticle mass m* is assumed equal to the bare electron mass, and we again set ξ = 30 nm, we find that α, β = 1 in dimensionless units corresponds to a coupling α/m * , β/m * = 2.2 × 10 -12 eV m. The spin-active interface was taken to have an experimentally realistic spin-polarization of 50%, a tunneling conductance G T /G ∈ {0.2, 0.3}, and a spin-mixing conductance G φ /G T = 1.25, where G is the bulk normal-state conductance of both materials (taken as equal for simplicity). We have run extensive T c calculations for other parameter values as well (not shown here), where we find qualitatively the same behavior as in Fig. The results in Fig. The most interesting observation is nevertheless that we can achieve all-electric control over T c for a fixed orientation θ of the FI magnetic moment. One particularly striking example is seen in Fig. Let us now interpret the numerical findings in terms of the previous analytical treatment. Although the 2DEG by itself has no intrinsic exchange field, rendering the distinction between short-ranged and long-ranged pairs more accurately described by the terminology "opposite and equal spin-pairing states relative the FI orientation", we will continue to refer to f as short-ranged pairs for brevity and easy comparison with the analytical treatment. When α → β and θ → -π/4, the short-ranged triplet energy , resulting in a strong suppression of these triplet pairs. By closing the triplet proximity channel, this reduces the leakage of Cooper pairs from the superconductor, thus increasing the critical temperature of the structure. On the other hand, when α → β and θ → + π/4, the energy , resulting in a minimal suppression of short-ranged triplets. This causes a larger leakage from the superconductor, and decreases the critical temperature. This leading-order analysis of the physics is in accordance with the numerical results in Fig. In the quasiclassical theory used to compute the critical temperature, one assumes that the thickness of the layer exceeds the Fermi wavelength. This criterion is not satisfied in a 2DEG, which means that phenomena such as weak localization/antilocalization cannot be described by quasiclassical theory. However, the coupling mechanism governing the appearance of a superconducting triplet proximity channel in the system is not expected to change because of this and hence our results should remain qualitatively valid even in this scenario. Moreover, we have considered the diffusive limit of transport which is of relevance for the in-plane motion, whereas the 2DEG thickness is much smaller than the mean free path. There is nevertheless scattering at the multiple interfaces of our structure which is expected to enhance the effective diffusive character of quasiparticle motion considered in our model. 2DEGs can also feature a rather strong spin-orbit interaction, in which case corrections to the Usadel equation have been examined Diffusion equation. In the diffusive and quasiclassical limit, we can describe the structures discussed herein with the Usadel diffusion equation where ĝ is the retarded quasiclassical propagator in Nambu ⊗ Spin space, τ ˆz is the third Pauli matrix in Nambu space,  is the quasiparticle energy of the electrons and holes, ), h is the ferromagnetic exchange field, σ is the Pauli vector in spin space, and D is the diffusion coefficient. The notation ) is a background field that accounts for spin-orbit coupling. In this paper, we assume that we have a thin-film structure oriented along the z-axis so ∇ → ∂ z . We assume the exchange field and Rashba-Dresselhaus coupling are both confined to the xy-plane, so they can be parametrized as x y x y x x y y Note that it is the orientation of the spin-orbit field A that defines the x-and y-axes of our coordinate system, since the Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling is determined by the crystal structure. Thus, the magnetic orientation is measured relative to the crystal structure. Numerically, solving directly for the propagator ĝ is impractical for two reasons. Firstly, the elements of ĝ are unbounded, and can be arbitrarily large complex numbers. Secondly, the propagator satisfies a normalization condition and particle-hole symmetry which reduces the number of degrees of freedoms, such that solving for each individual matrix element in ĝ would be redundant. Because of this, we have used the so-called Riccati parametrization of the propagators in the numerical simulations where the Riccati parameters γ and γ  are 2 × 2 matrices in spin space which are related by tilde-conjugation ( ), and the normalization matrices are defined by γγ ≡ -- N (1 ) 1 . For an in-plane spin-orbit interaction, eq. ( which is the form we use numerically. For more information about the derivation and interpretation of the above, see ref. 52. Before we can calculate the critical temperature of a material, we require not only a way to calculate the propagator ĝ, but also a way to dynamically update the superconducting gap Δ based on the calculated propagators. This gap equation can be written 52 Boundary conditions. Since our purpose is to model a system where the superconductivity, ferromagnetism, and spin-orbit coupling originate from different thin-film layers, we need boundary conditions that connect the propagators of these materials at the interfaces. Numerically, we focused on S/FI/N structures, in which case the ferromagnetic insulator itself is modelled as a strongly polarized spin-active interface. We have used the low-transparency limit of the general spin-active boundary conditions derived in ref. 53, where ÎL is the 4 × 4 matrix current on the left side of the interface, G T is the tunneling conductance of the interface, G 1 describes the interfacial depairing, G MR describes the magnetoresistance, G φ describes the spin-mixing, ), m is a unit vector that describes the interface magnetization, and ĝ L and ĝ R describes the propagators on the left and right side of the interface, respectively. An equivalent equation for the other side of the interface can be found by letting → - ˆÎ I L R and L ↔ R in the equation above. Assuming that all the interface scattering have the same polarization P, it can be shown that = + - 2 , so we can calculate G 1 and G MR directly from the interface polarization. The matrix current is related to the propagators at the interface by = ∇ ˆˆ ̃Î GL g g ( ) where G is the normal-state conductance and L the length of the material. It can then be shown that the Riccati parameters must satisfy the boundary condition Critical temperature. The critical temperature can be defined as the temperature T c such that the superconducting gap Δ = 0 if and only if T ≥ T c . However, in practice, we cannot expect to obtain the exact result Δ = 0 in simulations due to inexact numerical methods and random floating-point errors. For numerical simulations, we therefore use a more relaxed criterion |Δ | < δ to define the critical temperature T c , where we have set δ = 10 -5 Δ 0s , and Δ 0s is the zero-temperature gap of a bulk superconductor. See the solid black curve in Fig. We have instead used a much more efficient binary search algorithm to determine the critical temperature numerically. The main benefit of this algorithm is that after calculating Δ (T) for N particular values of T, we can determine the critical temperature to a precision T cs /2 N+1 . So in contrast to the linear search algorithm, an accuracy of around 0.0001T cs would require calculations at 12 temperatures instead of 10,000. Furthermore, we do not actually need to calculate Δ (T) exactly at these temperatures-it is sufficient to check whether |Δ | < δ or |Δ | > δ to determine whether T > T c or T < T c . Thus, at each of these 12 temperatures, we only have to initialize the entire system to a BCS superconducting state with Δ = δ, then solve the Usadel equation and gap equation a fixed number of times in each material, and finally check whether |Δ | < δ or |Δ | > δ to determine whether T is an upper or lower bound on T c . How the binary search algorithm converges is illustrated in Figs Scientific RepoRts | 6:29312 | DOI: 10.1038/srep29312