We investigate the dependence of the energy gap (G) on the temperature (T ) for the electrondoped high-temperature superconductors. The following compounds, in the form of the thin films, have been taken into consideration: La2-xCexCuO4 (LCCO), Pr2-xCexCuO4 (PCCO), and Nd2-xCexCuO4 (NCCO). It was found that G (T ) deviates from the BCS prediction more, if a concentration of cerium assumes the lower values. For the lowest concentration (in the case of LCCO and NCCO), the function G (T ) is not quite like the BCS curve, which is connected with the existence of the residual Nernst region. Next, it has been pointed out that the NCCO superconductor becomes structurally unstable for the maximum concentration of cerium, which is leading to the anomalous dependence of the energy gap on the temperature and the induction of the wide Nernst region. The high-temperature superconductivity in cuprates has been discovered in 1986 In the case of the hole-doped superconductors, the narrow antiferromagnetic region can be observed for the low values of the doping (δ). With the increase of δ, the distinct superconducting phase induces for the lower temperatures. The Cooper condensate borders from the high values of T with the Nernst region On the other hand, the antiferromagnetic phase is very extended in the group of the electron-doped superconductors, and it is bordered with the relatively small region corresponding to the superconducting state It should be noted that the hole-doped superconductors characterize the much higher values of the critical temperature (T C ) than the electron-doped compounds. Currently, the highest T C equal to ∼ 160 K has been measured for HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 8+y , located under the pressure of ∼ 31 GPa In the family of the electron-doped superconductors, the highest critical temperature is equal to ∼ 30 K, and it has been obtained for La 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (LCCO) The hole-doped superconductors have the d-wave symmetry of the order parameter In the case of cuprates, it was very quickly realized that the thermodynamic properties of the superconducting phase cannot be accurately calculated in the framework of the BCS theory or the Eliashberg formalism The second path of research is based on the experimental results, which underline the importance of the electron-phonon interaction In order to substantiate the discussion, let us consider the simplest version of the Hubbard model: where c iσ and c † iσ denote the annihilation and creation operators for the electron state. The index i labels the spatial lattice site and σ is the spin. Additionally: The symbol ε 0 represents the reference energy. The parameters included in the Hamiltonian (1) should be calculated by using the formulas: where the standard notation has been used as well as the Born-Oppenheimer approximation The Wannier function Φ i (r) depends on the instantaneous position of the atom. Therefore, having regard to the lattice vibrations, the Hubbard Hamiltonian has to be generalized as follows: H → H 0 + δH, where: The symbols g ε0 , q t0 , and g U0 denote the electronphonon coupling constants. Additionally: is the annihilation (creation) operator of the phonon state. The parameter ω 0 represents the value of the maximum phonon frequency. Next, the Hamiltonian H can be rewritten in the momentum representation. The canonical transformation eliminating the phonon degrees of freedom allows to ob- The influence of the cerium concentration on the value of (A) the critical temperature and (B) the energy gap for the superconductor LCCO tain the fundamental thermodynamic equation The parameters V and U denote the electron-phonon potential (EPh) and the electron-electron-phonon potential (EEPh), respectively: The order parameter is defined by the formula: ∆ ≡ ω0 k c -k↓ c k-↑ , while c kσ denotes the annihilation operator for the electron state with the momentum k. The symbol ... represents the thermodynamic average where k B is the Boltzmann constant. Let us notice that the band energy for the twodimensional square lattice can be written as: . Thus, the electron density of states has the form: The presented model can explain (at the qualitative level) the essential properties of the high-temperature superconducting state in respect to the critical temperature, very often observed for δ < δ max , can be explained by the high ratio U/V . It should be noted that in the considered case, the function G (T ) weakly depends on the temperature, which is also in agreement with the experimental data In the present paper, basing on knowledge of the experimental values of the critical temperature and the energy gap close to zero Kelvin, the full form of the function G (T ) has been determined. In particular, the following electron-doped superconductors, in the form of thin layers, have been taken into account: LCCO, Pr 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (PCCO), and Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 (NCCO). Additionally, it has been assumed that ε 0 = 0 and t 0 is equal to 380 meV In Fig. In the case of the critical temperature, it may be noted that the function T C (x) has the typical course observed in the high-temperature superconductors, corresponding approximately to the inverse parabola. The dependence of the energy gap on x is quite different -the value of G (0) quickly decreases with the increase of the cerium concentration. Next, based on the data from the paper To demonstrate this, we note that the BCS relationship between the energy gap and the temperature can be described by the formula: where the exponent [κ] BCS = 3 In the case of LCCO, the values of κ, which the best reproduce the numerical results, have been presented in Fig. Analysing the data plotted in Fig. correlations are stronger than the phonon exchange processes in the EEPh channel (U 0 > V U0 ). In the next step, the dependence of the energy gap on the temperature for the PCCO superconductor has been determined. The study has been based on the experimental results presented in Fig. In the case of the PCCO superconductor, for the low concentrations of cerium, there was no Nernst phase. Additionally, the potential U (0) does not change the sign for any value of x. As it was in the case for the LCCO superconductor, together with the increasing concentration of cerium, the exponent κ decreases and comes closes to the value predicted by the BCS theory (see Fig. In the last step, the dependence of the energy gap on the temperature for the NCCO superconductor has been determined. The experimental results, on which the calculation has been based, are collected in Fig. The results presented in Fig. Very unusual results have been obtained for the highest concentration (x=0.18), which follows directly from the experimentally observed increase in the low-temperature energy gap value (T = 4.5 K), (see Fig. In this case, our model predicts that below the critical temperature there are three non-zero branches of G (T ), which vary widely in the adopted values (Fig. tential minimizes the branch with the highest values Experimental data demonstrate, however, that physically realized is the middle branch, which is due to the structural instability of the studied material (above x>0.18, it is impossible to synthesize the thin film of NCCO In addition, note that above the superconducting state exists the wide Nernst region with the high value of the temperature T ⋆⋆ equal to 18.3 K. These predictions can be relatively easy checked experimentally, to which we strongly encourage. Finally, it should be emphasized that for all concentrations of cerium, the NCCO exponent κ significantly differs from the value predicted by the BCS model. In the paper, the full dependence of the energy gap on the temperature for the high-temperature superconductors LCCO, PCCO, and NCCO has been determined (the thin films). A wide range of the concentration of cerium has been taken into account. It has been shown that generally, the curves G (T ) are the more different from the BCS function, than the lower concentration of cerium has been taken into consideration. However, there are the derogation from the above scheme due to the structural instability of the system NCCO for x = 0.18. In this case, the increase of the energy gap together with the increasing of the temperature and the high value of T ⋆⋆ has been predicted. For the superconductors LCCO and NCCO (the lowest concentration of cerium) induces the Nernst region, which disappears at the temperature slightly higher than T C . In the future, the thermodynamic properties of the electron-doped cuprates will be analysed in the framework of the extended Eliashberg approach 