We study the proximity effect between an s-wave superconductor (SC) and the surface states of a Weyl semimetal. An interesting two-dimensional SC forms in such an interface with properties resembling in certain aspects the Fu-Kane superconductor with some notable differences. In a Weyl semimetal with unbroken time reversal symmetry the interface SC supports completely flat Majorana bands in a linear Josephson junction with a π phase difference. We discuss stability of these bands against disorder and propose ways in which they can be observed experimentally. Interfacing topological materials with conventionally ordered states of matter, such as magnets and superconductors, has led to important conceptual advances over the past decade. Notable examples of this approach include the Fu-Kane superconductor In this Letter we explore the physics of the interface between a Weyl semimetal and an s-wave superconductor. Surface states of a Weyl semimetal exhibit characteristic Fermi arcs that terminate at surface projections of the bulk Weyl nodes Nondegenerate Weyl points can occur in crystals with broken time reversal symmetry T or broken bulk inversion symmetry P. Recent experimental work reported convincing evidence for Weyl nodes and surface Fermi arcs in T -preserving noncentrosymmetric crystals in the TaAs family of semimetals and μ is the chemical potential. The normal state surface Hamiltonian for two parallel Fermi arcs with electron spin locked perpendicular to its momentum as in Fig. Here s α are Pauli matrices acting in electron spin space. One can easily check that Eq. ( Fermi arcs of length 2K along k y separated by distance η/v in the k x direction when μ = 0. It is possible to make this model more generic by allowing the velocity v and parameter η to depend on k y and the cutoff K on k x (which would curve and shift the arcs similar to Fig. where μ = μ + η and ∆ = ∆ 1 + i∆ 2 . For spatially uniform ∆ the spectrum of h BdG is fully gapped. Its topological character can be exposed by noting that for each allowed value of k y Eq. ( To exemplify this property within the effective surface theory (3) we replace k x → -i∂ x and assume ∆(x) to be purely real with a soliton profile such that ∆(x) → ±∆ 0 as x → ±∞. We next note that Hamiltonian (3) can be brought to a block diagonal form h BdG = diag(h + , h -) by a unitary transformation that exchanges its second and third rows and columns. Here h ± are 2 × 2 matrices and s = ±. It is easy to show that for each allowed value of k y and each s the above Hamiltonian (4) supports an exact Jackiw-Rossi zero mode exponentially localized near the junction. We shall demonstrate below by an exact numerical diagonalization of a 3D lattice model that the Majorana flat bands remain robust beyond the minimal low energy surface theory. Their stability however can be deduced from the surface theory alone and relies on the time reversal symmetry T and the bulk-boundary correspondence present in the Weyl semimetal. The most general surface Hamiltonian consistent with these requirements is of the form h(k) = (v ky •s)k x -η ky for |k y | < K where both the velocity vector and η ky are even functions of k y . Time reversal symmetry further permits a term (u ky • s)k y but this is not consistent with h(k) describing the surface state of a Weyl semimetal It is easy to see that breaking T lifts the zero modes: for instance interpolating between -∆ 0 and +∆ 0 through complex values of ∆(x) moves MZMs to finite energies. Flat Majorana bands are thus protected by T and by translation symmetry that is necessary to establish the underlying momentum space Weyl structure. We argue below that our results are in addition robust against weak nonmagnetic disorder. To ascertain the validity and robustness of the above analytic results we now study the problem using a lattice model for the Weyl semimetal. We consider electrons in a simple cubic lattice with two orbitals per site and the following minimal Bloch Hamiltonian, Here M k = (m+2-cos k x -cos k z ) and σ α are Pauli matrices acting in the orbital space. The Hamiltonian ( The lattice Hamiltonian (6) has high symmetry with Weyl nodes confined to lie on the k y axis. It is important to verify that the phenomena discussed above are not dependent on such a fine tuned lattice symmetry. To this end we perturb h latt by adding to it which respects T but breaks the C 4 rotation symmetry around the y axis thus allowing Weyl nodes to detach from k y . For = 0 the arcs rotate and curve as illustrated in Fig. Majorana flat bands should be directly observable in tunneling spectroscopy of the junction region by a technique developed in the context of other materials We demonstrated the existence and robustness of Majorana flat bands in minimal models with N = 4 Weyl nodes but expect their signatures to survive in materials with larger N . In this case each Kramers pair of Fermi arcs will produce a Majorana band at zero energy. In the presence of weak disorder there may be some additional broadening due to interband scattering but given that Fermi arcs are quite easy to resolve experimentally Majorana surface states, including flat bands, have been theoretically predicted to occur in various 2D and 3D topological and nodal superconductors 