The magnetic-field dependencies of the longitudinal and Hall resistance of the electron-doped compounds Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4+δ in underdoped region with x = 0.14 and with varying degrees of disorder (δ) were investigated. It was established experimentally that the correlation between the longitudinal electrical resistivity and the Hall resistivity can be analyzed on the basis of scaling relationships: ρ xy (B)∼ ρ β xx (B). For the totality of the investigated single-crystal films of Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4+δ /SrTiO 3 the universal value β = 1.5 ±0.4 is found. The observed feature in the electron-doped two-dimensional systems can be associated both with a displaying of anisotropic s -wave or d-wave pairing symmetry and with a rather strong pinning due to an essential degree of disorder in the samples under study. The change of the Hall coefficient sign in the normal state with changing of the dopant content and the sign inversion (sometimes double) in the mixed state of superconducting systems is currently a hot topic of research One of the most striking features of the vortex motion in the oxide superconductors is the behavior of the Hall resistivity which has attracted intense attention. Already in 1968 R.R.Hake Recently a scaling behavior between the Hall resistivity and the longitudinal resistivity, xx , with a universal power law (β = 2.0 ± 0.1) has been observed in MgB 2 thin films for a wide magnetic field and temperature regions The aim of our study was to establish the correlation between the longitudinal and the Hall resistivity in the mixed state of electron-doped compounds Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4+δ in underdoped region (x = 0.14) and with different degree of nonstoichiometric disorder (δ) near the antiferromagnetic -superconductor boundary. We have investigated epitaxial single-crystal films Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4+δ /SrTiO 3 synthesized by pulsed laser deposition 33 with x = 0.14 (underdoped region) with (001) -orientation (caxis is perpendicular to the substrate SrTiO 3 ). The films were subjected to a heat treatment (annealing) under different conditions to obtain samples with different contents of oxygen and, consequently, with different degrees of nonstoichiometric disorder. For films with x = 0.14 were obtained two types of samples: optimally annealed in vacuum (t = 60 min, T = 600 0 C, p = 10 -5 mmHg) and annealed in vacuum (t = 20, 30, 64 minutes, T = 600 0 C, p = 10 -5 mmHg). The thickness of the films was d = 1600-3800 Å. Consistently annealing Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4+δ (NCCO) under different conditions and comparing the results of the transport properties study The in-plane longitudinal ρ xx resistivity were measured as the functions of temperature at In the region of magnetic fields, where the longitudinal and Hall resistivity is vanishingly small it can be detected the appearance of a certain relation between them (Fig. where f L = (Φ 0 /c)j × n, j is the transport current density and Φ 0 = πhc/e is the flux quantum, F pin,i is the average pinning force. In Ref. which renormalizes only the frictional term but does not affect the Hall force term. The electric field induced by the vortex motion is E = (1/c)B× v and after solution of Eq. ( it was obtained: where γ(v) = γ(v) + η. It is seen that really pinning renormalizes the friction coefficient η only, whereas the Hall "conductivity" α remains unchanged. From (4) Vinokur et al. received for resistivity ρ = E/j: with Thus, Ref. Comparing (6) to the result of Ref's The effect of a strong pinning on the Hall effect is not well understood. Wang et al. where z is the unit vector in the direction of the magnetic field. Kopnin and Vinokur As a consequence of Eq.( It was shown in Ref. where n e and n h are the electron-like and hole-like charge carrier density, respectively. In TAFF region, since n e and n h are slowly varying functions while ρ xx is an exponential function of T , Eq.( While it is generally accepted that p-type cuprate superconductors are d-wave superconductors Generally, the values of β = 1.5 ± 0.4 observed in the investigated samples substantially less than the universal value β = 2 predicted by a widely used phenomenological flux-flow model of Vinokur et al. 