We investigate the interaction between the electrons of a two-dimensional metal and the acoustic phonons of an underlying piezoelectric substrate. Fundamental inequalities can be obtained from general energy arguments. As a result, phonon mediated attraction can be proven to never overcome electron Coulomb repulsion, at least for long phonon wavelengths. We study the influence of these phonons on the possible pairing instabilities of a two-dimensional electron gas such as graphene. Surface acoustic waves (SAWs) On the other hand, there is an increased interest in 2DEG since the isolation of graphene in 2004 and the production of other two-dimensional (2D) materials which followed it. Due to their unusual character, the properties of graphene electrons have been intensively studied during the last decade The coupling of the piezoelectric SAW to the electrons in a 2DEG or in graphene has been computed, within certain simplifying assumptions and for definite substrate crystal structures, in Ref. In the present work we calculate a general electronphonon interaction [see Eq. ( Equipped with the effective electron-electron interaction which results from taking into account the exchange of these acoustic phonons between the electrons in graphene (or other 2D materials), the question can be raised of whether these interactions might be attractive and, depending on some material parameters and the tunable electronic density of graphene, perhaps strong enough to generate electron Cooper pairing and superconductivity The system to be considered is depicted in Fig. and, from linearity, all quantities evaluated at the surface have the same 2D space-time dependence. We use SI units throughout this work. Because the medium at z > 0 has a dielectric constant ε vac , then, from Poisson's equation it follows that where D + 3 is the normal to the surface Fourier component of the electric displacement field over the surface (on the z → 0 + side) and φ is the electric potential, which is continuous because we do not allow for anything more singular than surface charges. The same ratio taken below the surface (z → 0 -) allows us to introduce the (relative) piezoelectric surface permittivity, which can also be straightforwardly expressed in terms of the surface impedance tensor ) Further analysis summarized in Appendix A shows that ε(q, ω) has a dependence of the form ε(q, ω) = ε(q/ω). An immediate conclusion from Eq. ( For the high-frequency limit we introduce εHF (θ) := ε(q/ω), ω → ∞. This should be the anisotropic dielectric function valid all the way up to the optical region, and should take into account all screening processes in the substrate except for the slow piezoelectric ones, which are estimated below for the substrate of the 2D electronic material. A central quantity in the evaluation of devices which use piezoelectric Rayleigh waves is the SAW electromechanical coupling coefficient K R (θ), introduced through the relation at In Appendix A we show that very general considerations require which is one of the central results of this work. The inequality (6) is crucial because, as we will show, it implies that at small frequencies piezoelectric phonons cannot provide the sufficient screening to overcome the bare Coulomb repulsion. In Ref. where A is the area of the sample, a k,σ , a † k,σ the electron operators with σ = ± the electron spin, b k , b † k are the piezoelectric phonon operators, α fs := e 2 /4πε vac v F and ε HF (θ) := (ε HF (θ)+1)/2. The validity of the shown interaction hamiltonian Eq. ( The resulting total Hamiltonian for the combined system of 2D electron gas and piezoelectric Rayleigh phonon is where E k is the electron energy for a 2D wave-vector k, ω q = v s (θ)q is the dispersion relation for the acoustic piezoelectric SAW phonon of 2D wave-vector q and v s (θ) is the SAW propagation velocity, and ρ(q) = k,σ a † k+q,σ a k,σ is the Fourier transform of the electron density. We use the bare Coulomb electron-electron interaction as which contains all high-frequency screening processes except for piezoelectric ones. The bare electron-electron interaction mediated by phonons is where is the bare piezoelectric acoustic phonon propagator (η → 0 + ). The resulting RPA-type approximation to the di-electric function and effective interaction are: which can also be written as In the low frequency limit, Π 0 (q, ω 0) -D(E F ) = -2k F /π v F , for monolayer graphene -D(E F ) = -m/2π 2 for a 2DEG with effective mass m Note that it is the acoustic phonon propagator G PA 0 (q, ω 0) that introduces the coulombic long-range dependence in q via the dispersion of the modes. In the next subsection we shall see that a similar final q dependence has a different origin. In the limit of low frequencies, ω 0, there can be no effective attraction for electrons close to the Fermisurface because, as shown in Eq. (A34), the following inequality is satisfied which is, in conjunction with the interaction vertex given by Eq. ( For simplicity, we focus a single branch of the longitudinal optical (LO) for which we assume a constant frequency ω 0 . The total Hamiltonian reads as in Eq. ( γ PA q → γ OP q := g e 2 ω 0 2ε vac q (20) where standard notation for dielectrics is used: ε ∞ the dielectric constant coming from very high frequency interband electronic transitions and ε 0 would be static dielectric constant in the absence of the piezoelectric phonons at frequencies much smaller than ω 0 . Again, as shown in the discussion around Eq. ( (22) However, in contrast to the piezoelectric case, here it is the vertex that introduces the coulombic dependence in q. At small frequencies, ω ω 0 , a single optical phonon is not enough to provide over-screening, because From ( where we note that we have not assumed q k F , as discussed in the paragraph following Moreover, in case such over-screening occurred, the static dielectric constant from Eq. ( On the other hand, the result ( A. Eliashberg formalism Leaving aside the first objection momentarily, we can use the Eliashberg formalism, as applied to graphene in Ref. where r s (θ) := α fs /ε(θ), and the symbols r s , v s , γ PA , K 2 R stand for the Fermi surface angle-averaged quantities of the same name. The constant μ * equals where ω c is some energy cutoff which should satisfy ω Debye ω c E F / and therefore, provided that one takes ω c k B T BG , so that log E F ωc log( v F 2vs ) 5. Thus, an estimate of the effective pseudo-potential is There could be intravalley [31] superconducting instabilities provided that which imposes a constraint on the value of K 2 R from the piezoelectric substrate with respect to quantities depending on r s . The coupling K R should be very large and actually greater than 1 for this choice of ω c , although there could exist superconductivity in this idealized case of a system consisting just of the graphene electrons and long wavelength piezoelectric phonons, provided that E F /ω c is larger and K 2 R close to 1. In order to amend the first objection, we have to consider proper phonons of the electronic system (here we go on considering graphene), in conjunction with the short range of the piezoelectric ones. Then, pairing instabilities due to intervalley scattering have to be considered as well, because intravalley scattering terms contribute also to the intervalley pairing gap. With the notation in Ref. The upshot of this discussion is that the longwavelength piezoelectric phonons work in favor of pairing FIG. instabilities, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have derived a general expression for the two-dimensional electron-phonon piezoelectric interaction valid for any piezoelectric substrate covered by a two-dimensional electron system, as in the classical 2D Fröhlich hamiltonian for the optical phonons, and characterized the magnitude of the interaction. Our results show that electron overscreening cannot be achieved just with the strongest piezoelectric phonons within our assumptions because K 2 R < 1 is always satisfied. Nevertheless, these phonons could help further in other contexts where the 2D superconductivity is known to exist, for example in bulk few-layer MoS 2 with most of the carriers confined to the first layer is the amplitude of the electric potential at the interface (see Eq. (A7)), and we have introduced the high-frequency limit εHF (θ) := ε(k/ω), ω → ∞ and the SAW electromechanical coupling coefficient, K R (θ) through the relation at 1 + ε(k/ω) = 0: The electrons of the graphene sheet (or any other charged two dimensional structure deposited at the piezoelectric substrate) feel the electric potential of the piezoelectric SAW. The interaction is then the total potential at the position of the electron On the other hand, the one-phonon normalization means that φ 0 from Eq. (A17) should be chosen so that H harm = ω = v s (θ)k, and thus we finally get the hamiltonian Eq. ( We now consider a 1D situation, in which flat electrodes parallel to the y-axis operate on top of the piezoelectric substrate shown in Fig. The charge-potential relation (A13) for the amplitudes is written so that we define the complex admittance χ(k, ω) as: where we have to allow now for the possibility of negative k, because we are omitting the θ dependence. From Eq. (A6), ε(k, ω) = f ((ω/k) 2 ) = f (v 2 ), and its analytical extensions can be guessed from the requirements of causality, which for ω > 0 means that the poles and zeros of γ(k, ω) are placed in the lower complex ω half-plane. We define the instantaneous part and the retarded and static contributions where εLF := ε(k/ω), ω → 0 and η is to be understood as η → 0 + . All this amounts to writing the general linear causal relation The power delivered to the electrodes to maintain a given φ(x, t), σ(x, t) (in this subsection we assume that all fields which depend on space-time are real) is: where √ A is the length along the y-direction. If starting from zero fields and charges, we adiabatically turn on a given surface charge distribution σ(x, t) = σ(x) exp(ηt), from Eqs.(A24-A25), the total energy supplied is: Analogously, an instantaneous charging to the same final charge distribution σ(x, t) = θ (t)σ(x), with θ (t) a differentiable approximation to the Heaviside θ-function such that θ τ (t) → θ(t), τ → 0 + , requires an amount of work given by: The second process being non-adiabatic, it absorbs more energy from the source that exerts a work on the system. This extra energy is employed in inducing surface and bulk wave excitations. As a result, ∆U inst > ∆U ad , which implies εHF < εLF . (A28) After the sudden charge, i.e. at t > 0, the time evolution and relaxation of the potential are, due to Eqs. (A23,A24): φ(x, t) = dx σ(x ) γ ∞ (x -x ) + t 0 dt φ(x -x , t -t ) t→∞ ---→ dx σ(x )γ 0 (x -x ) , (A29) this relaxed field being the same as that obtained after the adiabatic process to the same charge distribution. which, after use of Eq. (A4) can be seen to be a bilinear expression in the vectors (u a , u a,i ) and ( ub , ub,j ) (here i, j = 1, 2, 3 and a, b = 1, 2, 3, 4; where u 4 = φ). For a given pulse propagating in the x-direction, u a (x, y, z, t) = f a (x -vt, z), we are interested in the total energy which crosses x (is obviously independent of x) dt dy dz P 1 (x, y, z, t) dt dz g r (x -vt, z)P rs g s (x -vt, z) , where g r/s are taken from the components u a , u a,i , ua , ua,i with r, s = 1, 2, ..., 16, and P rs is a constant matrix with elements of the tensors ê, ĉ, ε. Fourier analyzing g r (x -vt, z) = (dk/2π) e ik(x-vt) g r (k, z), where because of reality g r (k, z) * = g r (-k, z), we obtain: dz g r (k, z)P rs g s (k, z) * , (A45) but then 