In recent years, Majorana physics has attracted considerable attention in both theoretical and experimental studies due to exotic new phenomena and its prospects for fault-tolerant topological quantum computation. To this end, one needs to engineer the interplay between superconductivity and electronic properties in a topological insulator, but experimental work remains scarce and ambiguous. Here we report experimental evidence for topological superconductivity induced in a HgTe quantum well, a two-dimensional topological insulator that exhibits the quantum spin Hall effect. The ac Josephson effect demonstrates that the supercurrent has a 4π-periodicity with the superconducting phase difference as indicated by a doubling of the voltage step for multiple Shapiro steps. In addition, an anomalous SQUID-like response to a perpendicular magnetic field shows that this 4π-periodic supercurrent originates from states located on the edges of the junction. Both features appear strongest when the sample is gated towards the quantum spin Hall regime, thus providing evidence for induced topological superconductivity in the quantum spin Hall edge states. The realization of Majorana bound states is theoretically expected in a one-dimensional p-wave superconducting phase without spin-degeneracy 1,2 . A convenient experimental implementation of this exotic phase can be obtained by combining recently discovered topological states with conventional s-wave superconductivity Unlike nanowires, this topological state is present in the absence of magnetic field, thus alleviating the requirements for high critical field superconductors On each edge, it contains one Andreev doublet with a topologically protected crossing for a superconducting phase difference φ = π (Fig. Here we report on the realization of a device that follows the proposal of Fu and Kane 10 using HgTe, the first material to be identified as a topological insulator 8 . Due to their inverted band structure 7 , HgTe quantum wells of suitable thickness are a quantum spin Hall insulator in which superconductivity can be induced by means of e.g. Al electrodes The anticipated presence of gapless Andreev bound states on the edges of such a device should be evidenced by two remarkable signatures, which we present as simulations in Fig. By changing the electron density, we find that the observed effect is predominant near the expected quantum spin Hall regime. In contrast, a non-topological HgTe quantum well is found to a conventional Shapiro response. Second, the response of the critical Energy Step amplitude [I c ] - For a uniform planar current, a Fraunhofer pattern (blue line) is depicted. For current flowing on the edges, a (dc) SQUID pattern (red line) is expected. current to a perpendicular-to-plane magnetic field provides information on the spatial dependence of the current density (Fig. Fraunhofer pattern (illustrated by a blue line in Fig. -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0. A typical I-V curve (measured at 30 mK) is presented in Fig. Hysteresis is observed between forward and reverse sweeps, with a retrapping current I r < I c . For voltages larger than the energy gap of the aluminium, the I-V curve reaches an asymptote that does not go through the origin (grey line). The slope indicates the normal state resistance of the device R n , while the intercept is the excess current I exc . The excess current This would contribute to the two-point normal state resistance R n and could obscure a correct identification of the QSH transition. The presence of gapless Andreev bound states can in principle be detected via the 4π-periodic contribution to the supercurrent. In practice such detection in dc transport can be complicated by additional contributions from conventional 2π-periodic modes To our knowledge, the only mechanism resulting in the suppression of odd steps is the presence of a 4π-periodic contribution in the supercurrent. While a pure 4π-periodic supercurrent should lead directly to an even sequence of Shapiro steps (as a direct effect of the substitution φ → φ/2 in the Josephson equations), it is in our experiment only visible at low rf frequency. Our junction may in practice contain both gapless bound states and a number of residual conventional modes such that the supercurrent I s could be written as I s (φ) = I 4π sin φ/2 + I 2π sin φ (+higher harmonics). Even in the presence of a strong 2π-periodic contribution, a 4π-periodic response can be observed when the time dependence of the voltage V to the current bias I is most anharmonic, namely at a low frequency We now address the dependence of the Shapiro steps on the rf power. Fig. Next we investigate the dependence of the Shapiro response on gate voltage V g . A general observation is that odd steps vanish at low frequencies for a very wide range of gate voltages, from about V g ≥ -1.3 V up to 0.5 V. The visibility of an even sequence is in agreement with the previously introduced criterion f < f 4π , and demonstrates that a 4π-periodic contribution is present in addition to a conventional 2π-periodic component. The latter most likely originates from the bulk signaling the expected coexistence of topological edge states with modes from the conduction band In Fig. Simulations using the RSJ model The measurement of the critical current I c enables the identification of the n-and pconduction regimes though the gap in between around V g -1 V is not very pronounced (see Fig. Finally we detail the response of the junction to a magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of the junction, and show that the previous observations are compatible with edge transport in the same range. With application of a magnetic field, the superconducting phase difference φ becomes position dependent spatial supercurrent distribution through modulations of the critical current I c with a period given by the magnetic flux quantum Φ 0 = h/2e. In Fig. It is tempting to associate our observations of the anomalous doubled period to a SQUID-like pattern | cos( πΦ 2Φ 0 )| with periodicity 2Φ 0 originating from the 4π-periodicity previously identified. But dc measurements are sensitive to relaxation processes that in principle restore a conventional Φ 0 periodicity Response of the critical current to a magnetic field -A) Maps of differential resistance dV /dI function of magnetic field B and dc current bias I four different gate voltages. For V g = 0 V and -2 V, the patterns are close to Fraunhofer diffraction ones, while at the lobe pattern nor the effect of temperature (see Supplementary Information) favour such models. An alternative mechanism to explain the interference pattern is the interplay of Zeeman effect and spin-orbit coupling, which should occur in our material system The interference pattern shows a peculiar symmetry relation of the critical current : Finally, we return to Fig. In this supplementary information, we present further measurements and detail several aspects not discussed in the main text. In particular, we provide raw measurements of the I-V curves in the presence of rf irradiation, that explicitly show the absence of multiple odd steps. Finally the temperature dependence of the SQUID pattern with doubled periodicity is also described. The mobility and charge density are evaluated from a Hall-bar produced separately from the same wafer as the junctions. The extracted density and mobility are typically n e = 2.2 × 10 11 cm -2 and μ = 3 × 10 5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . From these values, we calculate a mean free path of l 2.4 μm. Assuming an induced gap ∆ i ∆ Al , the natural coherence length ξ = v F π∆ i is typically around 600 nm in our system. The junction is expected to be in the ballistic limit with L ∼ ξ < l. For the sake of completeness, we provide in relation As the excitation frequency f is lowered, the overall visibility of the steps is progressively reduced, as both the step height (proportional to f ) and the step amplitude (on the current axis, see Ref. 31) decrease with f . The I-V curves measured for both sweep directions are presented in Fig. In this section we briefly recall the results of numerical simulations carried out in the framework of the RSJ model. For a more extensive presentation, we refer the reader to the modes with different transmissions) and our conclusions are the following. • A 4π-periodic (sin φ/2) contribution is in all cases necessary to get missing steps. • All odd steps progressively disappear as the frequency f is decreased, and the crossover frequency can be identified as predicted • The exact form of the gapped 2π-periodic modes in the CPR matters extremely marginally on the observed disappearance of the odd steps. Only the presence of a 4π-periodic contribution is required to observe the disappearance of odd steps. The RSJ model provides a minimal tool to simulate the dynamics of our system, using microscopic inputs from more elaborate theories, in the absence of a full microscopic model of the Josephson dynamics. (see SI). Odd steps are then missing if the rf excitation frequency f is lower than a frequency f 4π = 2eRnI 4π h . An estimate of the crossover frequency f 4π then yields the amplitude of the 4π-periodic supercurrent I 4π . Estimating the crossover frequency f * All three authors contributed equally to this work, email: erwann.bocquillon@physik.uniwuerzburg.de