Sn is a well-known classical superconductor on the border between type I and type II with critical temperature of 3.722K and critical field of 0.031T Nanostructuring materials can change their physical properties dramatically. It thus provides the opportunity to tailor new materials with improved or entirely new characteristics. In the case of superconductors, the confinement of Cooper pairs in the nanometer geometry in most cases is unfavorable for properties that are suitable for applications. Nevertheless, some rare cases where the constrained geometry of nanoscale superconductors can create interesting effects have been reported. For example, a slight increase in the superconducting transition temperature was observed in nanoparticles of In Sample fabrication Sn nanowires were synthesized using surfactant as soft template by a chemical reduction process. In a typical synthesis, 0.2g sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 0.4g tin sulfate were dissolved in 80mL distilled water and heated to 303K in a water bath under stirring. After 20 minutes, a sodium borohydride solution (0.02g of NaBH 4 in 5 mL of distilled water) was added. The nanowires formed after 20 minutes reaction. The resulting solution was separated by centrifugation and the precipitate was washed several times with distilled water and ethanol. The morphology and microstructures of the resulting nanowires were characterized by a field emission transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2100UHR/200kV), X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips X'pert Pro Alpha 1 Diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation,  = 1.5406 Å) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S-4800, Japan). Fig. The specific heat of the Sn nanowires was measured with a modulated temperature AC micro-calorimetric technique Our experiments show a strong enhancement of the onset T c and the upper critical field of Sn, when it is brought in the form of thin nanowires. In Fig. For the enhancement of the critical field several factors must be considered. Bulk Sn is a classical superconductor at the border between type-I and type-II. A reduction of the electron mean free path in a superconductor decreases the superconducting coherence length  and can drive it into the type-II region with larger critical field B c2 . This was shown, for example, for Pb doped with some Bi impurities We demonstrated that the superconducting characteristics of networks of freestanding Sn nanowires are substantially modified by nanostructuring, with a 1.8K increase of the onset T c and an increase in the upper critical field by an enormous factor of 100. The surface and the curvature mediated phonon softening in a 7 nm thin surface layer is suggested to be the reason to push the onset T c from 3.72K to 5.5K, while the giant enhancement of the upper critical field likely originates from the absence of closed orbits around the quasi-1D Fermi surface and strong spin-orbit coupling effects. A similar effect was observed previously in the in ultrathin Pb nanowires 