We report the experimental observation of high-order sideband transitions at the single-photon level in a quantum circuit system of a flux qubit ultrastrongly coupled to a coplanar waveguide resonator. With the coupling strength reaching 10% of the resonator's fundamental frequency, we obtain clear signatures of higher-order redand first-order blue-sideband transitions, which are mainly due to the ultrastrong Rabi coupling. Our observation advances the understanding of ultrastrongly-coupled systems and paves the way to study high-order processes in the quantum Rabi model at the single-photon level. Superconducting quantum circuits exhibit macroscopic quantum coherence (see, e.g., Despite its fundamental importance and wide interests, the experimental application of the ultrastrong coupling to quantum information processing remains challenging. It is known that higher-order processes can be achieved with an intense driving field The qubit is operated near the optimal flux bias point with an applied external flux Φ x = δΦ x + Φ 0 /2, where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum and δΦ x is a small offset from the optimal flux bias point Φ 0 /2. The qubit Hamiltonian can be written as H q = ( τ z + δτ x )/2, where δ is the quantum tunneling between the local potential wells, = 2I p δΦ x is the offset energy induced by the flux bias, with I p being the maximal persistent current, and τ z,x are the Pauli operators in the persistent-current basis {| , | } To be galvanically connected to the coplanar waveguide resonator In measuring the transmission spectrum of the qubitresonator system, we apply a single probe source of frequency ω p to the resonator via a vector network analyzer and measure the resonator output at the probe frequency. In the experiment, a low-power probe source is used to avoid producing any appreciable effects on the qubit-resonator system. Figure With ultrastrong Rabi coupling, single-photon-driven highorder sideband transitions can be observed in transmission spectroscopic measurements by using a weak pump field at frequency ω d to drive the qubit through the resonator. The pump Hamiltonian has the form H d = Ω d,q cos (ω d t)τ z in the persistent-current basis, with Ω d,q being the driving strength. A separate probe field with its frequency fixed at the resonance frequency of one of the resonator modes is applied to demonstrate the spectroscopic response of the coupled qubitresonator system in the presence of the pump field. The trans- ω q +ω 1 ω q -ω 1 ω q -ω 1 ω q ω q ω q -2ω 1 ω q -2ω 1 ω q -3ω 1 ω q -3ω 1 (g) The energy levels of the coupled qubit-resonator system as a function of the flux bias δΦ x using parameters extracted from Fig. To identify each transition, in Figs. 2(a), 2(c) and 2(e), we show the energy levels of the total qubit-resonator system as a function of the flux bias δΦ x with the colored arrows labeling the corresponding sideband transitions in the presence of the pump field. In these plots, besides the main peaks at the pump frequency ω d = ω q (see the red-circle denoted lines) that correspond to the direct single-photon transition |g00 ↔ |e00 (denoted by z 1 and z 2 ), we also observe single-photon-driven high-order sideband transitions due to the ultrastrong Rabi coupling. With a Schrieffer-Wolff transformation In Fig. The effective Hamiltonian derived with the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation is H eff = R (1) 3 (σ The transitions induced by these effective couplings are also labelled in Fig. Single-photon-driven higher-order sideband transitions are shown in Figs. and a cross-mode sideband transition |g01 ↔ |e10 (labelled by s 1 and s 2 ) by the effective coupling H eff = R (2) 13 (σ + a † 1 a 3 + a † 3 a 1 σ -). These two transitions have comparable frequencies because the cross sideband frequency ω 3 -ω 1 ≈ 2ω 1 in our device. Expressions for the coupling constants R (2) 1 and R (2) 13 can be found in Appendix B. The single-photon-driven third-order red-sideband transition |g30 ↔ |e00 (labelled by t 1 and t 2 ) is observed at a pump frequency ω d = ω q -3ω 1 . It originates from the effective coupling H eff = R (3) 1 (σ 2 (g 1 /∆ + 1 )/3, which reveals that this transition depends on the counter-rotating terms. In addition to the red-sidebands, the single-photon-driven first-order bluesideband is also observed, which represents the transition |g00 ↔ |e10 as indicated by the black arrow and the blackcross line (labelled by b) in Figs. 1 , which is purely due to the counter-rotating terms. In Fig. Note that the magnitude of the sth-order single-photondriven sideband transition has linear dependence on the qubitdriving strength Ω d,q as that of the zeroth-order process (i.e., the direct transition of the qubit states by the pumping field). Also, it has power-law dependence on the coupling ratio as (g n /∆ ± n ) s , as explained in detail in Appendix B. Thus, at the single-photon level to observe the zeroth-order process by using a very weak pumping field, the high-order processes can also be demonstrated with a strong enough qubit-resonator coupling. This is the case in our experiment, where the qubitresonator coupling is ultrastrong and the high-order processes are observed at the quantum limit. As shown in Appendix B, in the dispersive regime, the average photon number of the driving field is even much less than one in the resonator. Therefore, the transmission spectra in Fig. It is worthwhile to mention that the numerical fittings do not overlap perfectly with the slope of the experimental spectra for all regions of the flux biases, as shown in Figs. To further illustrate that our high-order sideband transitions are induced by the ultrastrong coupling rather than the driving power, here we show the spectroscopy measurement with the driving power increased to P d ≈ -92 dBm in Fig. processes with s = 0, 1, 2 rather than single-photon-driven higher-order processes with s = 4, 5, 6, . . . by intensifying the driving field further reveal that the single-photon-driven highorder sideband transitions in Fig. As shown in Fig. Higher-order processes at the few-photon level can play an important role in quantum information processing. In principle, the generation of higher-order processes requires large nonlinearity in the system, which can be either intrinsicallybuilt-in or externally-induced. When driven strongly, the system generates nonlinearity externally as in classical nonlinear optics. Therefore, high-order sideband transitions may be demonstrated using strong driving on a system with small coupling strength. However, in the present work, we demonstrate that the higher-order processes can also be produced in the weak limit of driving field (i.e., at the few-photon level) on the qubit, where the nonlinearity mainly comes from the intrinsic properties of the ultrastrongly coupled system. In fact, it is clearly analyzed in Appendix B that in the dispersive limit, the magnitudes of the single-photon-driven sth-order sideband processes have both a linear dependence on the amplitude of the driving field on the qubit and a power-law dependence on the coupling ratio as (g n /∆ ± n ) s . When the coupling strength is not strong enough, the higher-order sideband transitions can be very weak and become hard to be implemented with a weak driving field on the qubit. Therefore, our experimental observation of the high-order sideband transitions at the singlephoton-driven level reveals the importance of the ultrastrong coupling. When applying driving microwave powers to the resonator at the level of -90dBm or higher, though the effective driving field on the qubit is weak (see Appendix B), there can be a considerable amount of heat generated in the attenuator anchored to the mixing chamber stage of the dilution refrigerator. Even when the temperature of the plate itself does not change, hot electrons may radiate thermal fields which could drive the resonator and create excitations that would explain the appearance of higher-order sidebands at higher powers. In fact, similar techniques of increasing the effective resonator temperature were used in other experiments (see, e.g., In Fig. In conclusion, we have observed high-order sideband transitions in an ultrastrongly coupled qubit-resonator system at the single-photon level. These transitions, including redsideband transitions up to the third order and first-order bluesideband transition, are mainly induced by the ultrastrong Rabi coupling rather than the strong pump power. Also, we demonstrated the two-photon-driven high-order sideband transitions in this ultrastrongly coupled system by intensifying the driving field. Our results provide better understanding of high-order processes in the ultrastrong Rabi model at the single-photon-driven level. The coplanar waveguide resonator is fabricated by electronbeam lithography and reactive ion etching on a 3-inch thermally oxidized silicon wafer covered with a 50 nm thick d.c.magnetron sputtered niobium film [Fig. The quantum circuit is characterized at a temperature of 20 mK in a BlueFors LD-400 dilution refrigerator. A transmission measurement is conducted to measure the resonator properties in the low-power limit of the probe field. As shown in Fig. A. The ultrastrongly coupled system under a resonator driving In the persistent-current basis {| , | } of the superconducting flux qubit, the dynamics of the coupled qubitresonator system is governed by the Hamiltonian When applying a pump field of frequency ω d to the coplanar waveguide resonator, the total Hamiltonian becomes with Ω r,n being the Rabi frequency of the driving field on the nth mode of the resonator. To analyze the effect of the driving field on the flux qubit, we displace the field operator using a time-dependent dis- placement operator The displaced Hamiltonian now reads where α n (t) is chosen to be which satisfies the following equation Then the last term g n α n (t) + α * n (t) τ z in Eq. (A-4), which represents the effective driving filed on the qubit, can now be written as Ω d,q cos ω d t τ z , with where |Ω q,n | being the effective Rabi frequency of the driving field on the flux qubit via the nth-mode of the resonator. When the linewidth of the cavity mode is considered, ω n in Eq. (A-5) is replaced by ω n + iκ n /2, where κ n is the total photon damping rate of the nth cavity mode, which can be written as the sum of the individual contributions from the external and internal channels, i.e. κ n = κ n,in + κ n,ex In this case, the qubit driving term becomes where the second term in Eq. (A-8) can be safely ignored since κ n {ω n , ω d }, and Ω q,n then reads Since Ω r,n can be directly expressed in terms of the driving power as Ω q,n can then be written as Note that the effective Rabi frequency |Ω q,n | of the driving field on the qubit depends not only on the driving power P d but also on the frequency detuning ω n -ω d . In the dispersive region of the measured spectra where the sideband transitions appear, the driving frequency ω d is largely detuned from the frequency ω n of the resonator, i.e. |ω n -ω d | g n . The effective Rabi frequency |Ω q,n | of the driving field on the qubit is much reduced compared to the Rabi frequency Ω r,n of the driving field on the resonator, i.e., |Ω q,n | Ω r,n . In Fig. The average number of photons in the resonator that come from the driving field can be calculated from where we have used the same external loss rate for both sides of the resonator because they are nearly symmetric in our setup. It is clear from Eq. (A-12) that the mean number nd,n of the intracavity photons for the nth-mode, which are injected by the driving field, has a Lorentzian line shape centered around the frequency ω n of the nth-mode with a width of κ n,ex . Therefore, although the driving field may provide thousands of photons into the resonator when it is on resonance with the resonator mode, the intracavity photon number nd,n drops dramatically when the detuning |ω n -ω d | is getting larger. We see from Fig. C. Schrieffer-Wolff transformation and higher-order couplings In the qubit eigenbasis {|g , |e }, the displaced Hamiltonian Eq. (A-4) can now be rewritten as H = 1 2 ω q σ z + Ω d,q cos ω d t (cos θσ zsin θσ x ) [ ω n a † n a n + g n (a † n + a n )(cos θσ zsin θσ x )] (A-13) which includes both a σ z -component and a σ x -component. The σ z -component in the pump Hamiltonian induces periodic oscillations of the qubit frequency, which produces effective qubit resonances at frequencies ω q ∓ sω d , with s being an integer. When one of the effective resonances is near the frequency of a resonator mode, energy exchange between the qubit and the resonator will be enabled by the pump field. As a result, spectral lines in addition to the qubit frequency can be observed. The σ x -component in the pump Hamiltonian flips the qubit state when the pump frequency is on resonance with the qubit frequency. Furthermore, when combined with (higher-order) qubit-resonator coupling, it can also induce high-order transitions at appropriate pump frequen-0 -0. cies. Below we analyze the possible transitions in the qubitresonator system in the dispersive limit with |∆ ± n | g n , where ∆ ± n = ω q ± ω n . In this limit, although the qubit and resonator modes cannot exchange energy directly due to frequency mismatch, higher-order processes can be induced by the Rabi coupling even for a very weak pumping field. We apply a generalized Schrieffer-Wolff transformation to the Hamiltonian H, Heff = U † HU, (A-14) where the displacement operator U is with λ n,± = -g n sin θ/∆ ± n (A-16)