We study how the Rashba spin-orbit interaction influences unconventional superconductivity in a two dimensional electron gas partially spin-polarized by a magnetic field. Somewhat surprisingly, we find that for all field orientations, only the larger Fermi surface is superconducting. When the magnetic field is oriented out-of-plane the system realizes a topological p + ip pairing state. When the field is rotated in-plane the order parameter develops nodes along the field direction and finite center-of-mass-momentum pairing is realized. We demonstrate that the pairing symmetry of the system can be easily probed experimentally due to the dependence of various thermodynamic quantities on the magnetic field geometry, and calculate the electronic specific heat as an example. The idea that a superconducting state can arise from direct repulsive interactions between electrons was first introduced in a celebrated paper by Kohn and Luttinger 1 (see However, partially polarizing a two dimensional electron gas (2DEG) with an in-plane magnetic field can dramatically increase the strength of the effective pairing interaction at O(U 2 ), as has been shown by a perturbative diagrammatic expansion This interesting result represents one of the conceptually simplest illustrations of the Kohn-Luttinger mechanism of superconductivity. The natural association of the S z = +1 order parameter with the majority (spin up) band ensures its 'exotic' nature -the spatial part of the pair wave function must be an odd function of the momentum (an odd angular harmonic). The fact that the highest critical temperature is achieved for the smallest possible = 1 harmonic 8 brings this idealized set-up very close to the forefront of modern research in topological states of matter However, any physical discussion of two-dimensional superconductivity requires one to account for an omnipresent spin-orbit interaction The addition of SOC breaks spin conservation and induces coupling between spin-up and spin-down states. It was speculated previously We analyze the pairing symmetries realized on the majority band as a function of the magnetic field orientation. For as long as the magnetic field possesses a finite out-ofplane component the majority band is fully gapped with p + ip symmetry, albeit with an angle-dependent, modulated gap. When the field is oriented strictly in-plane, the order parameter develops nodes along the field direction. Moreover, we find that quite generally the emergent superconducting state is of FFLO kind, with a finite center-of-mass pair momentum Studying the details of the band structure and the direction of the nodes has been an area of intensive focus in recent experimental studies of unconventional superconductivity The structure of this paper is as follows. In section II we introduce the Hamiltonian and perform a unitary transformation which brings it into a form diagonal in the band indices. Self-consistent equations of the theory are derived in section III. In section III A we detail the resulting order parameter symmetries for different magnetic field orientations. Calculation of the electronic specific heat in section III B is followed by the discussion of our results in section IV. A complementary discussion of finite center-of-mass momentum pairing is presented in Appendix A. The geometry of the system we consider is shown in Figure We set = c = 1 throughout the paper. In order to conveniently treat SOC in perturbation theory, we choose to align the spin quantization axis parallel to the magnetic field. This is done with the help of a unitary rotation about the ŷ axis, R y = exp[-iδσ y /2], which transforms H 0 into where the matrix E(k) is given by and σ = (σ z sin δ + σ x cos δ) x + σ y ŷ + (σ z cos δ -σ x sin δ) ẑ represents the rotated spin σ σ σ. The Zeeman coupling strength is given by h = eg|H|/2m. We neglect the effect of the external field on the orbital motion of the electrons, an approximation which is justified if the g-factor is sufficiently large or if the orbital coupling term is absent. This is the case in systems of cold neutral atoms, which have been the subject of several recent experimental studies of SOC The electrons repel each other via the short-ranged (contact) interaction H I = d 2 r U n↑ (r)n ↓ (r) written in terms of electron spin densities nσ (r). Therefore the full Hamiltonian for our system in momentum space is where the primed sum is subject to the momentum conservation 1: Geometry of the system. We align the spin quantization axis along magnetic field H. In this Section we describe the single particle spectrum of Hamiltonian (3), and construct a canonical (Schrieffer-Wolff) transformation, which brings the interaction Hamiltonian into a form convenient for mean-field analysis. The Hamiltonian (3), for general values of α R , h and U , is extremely complicated, and is amenable only to numerical treatments. In what follows we make several physically-motivated simplifying assumptions, which restrict the generality of the obtained results, but make the problem analytically solvable. Throughout, we assume the spin-orbit interaction to be weak compared to the Zeeman coupling, allowing us to treat the ratio α R k f /h perturbatively, where k f is the Fermi momentum of either Fermi surface. The particle-particle interaction, U , is assumed to be weak, mU 1. As far as quantities of higher order of smallness are concerned, we will keep terms of order O(mU α 2 R k 2 f /h 2 ) while discarding those of order O(m 2 U 2 α R k f /h), which is permissible for not too small Rashba SOC, α R k f mU h. The utility of these approximations will become clear in what follows. We begin with the single-particle part of the Hamiltonian, H 0 . The problem of finding the spectrum and eigenstates of H 0 can be easily solved exactly; however, for our purposes we specialize to the case of weak SOC from the outset. To diagonalize H 0 , we perform a unitary transformation from the operators c kσ to band operators a kλ , where the index λ ∈ {1, 2} labels the two bands, with 1 denoting the larger (majority) band and 2 the smaller (minority) ones. To the required order in α R , the transformation to band operators is given by where φ k is the azimuthal angle of k. The exact band dispersion is calculated from Eq. ( with ζ λ denoting the helicity of each band defined with respect to the ẑ axis. We use for the majority (minority) band. It is worth noting that to the leading order in the expansion parameter r = α R k f /h 1 the obtained band dispersion can be approximated as where Q = mα R sin δ describes the center-of-mass momentum shift of the two bands. Observe that to this order the dispersion retains circular shape, and that the bands shift in the opposite directions, see Figure ??. Finally, note that vector Q = Qŷ ∝ ẑ×H/|H| is orthogonal to the ẑx plane. Next we turn to the interaction Hamiltonian H I . Our approach is motivated by the observation that in the absence of SOC, short-range repulsion is of purely interband character: particles with the same spin orientation feel no local interaction due to the Pauli exclusion principle. One may then utilize the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation As a first step, we recast the interaction Hamiltonian H I in terms of the band operators a kλ . As was mentioned before, we keep the leading interactions that go as O(U 2 ), and O(U α 2 R ), but drop those that go as O(U 2 α R ). With this prescription we find that and where, schematically, H 1 contains all terms of the form a † λ a † λ a μ a μ , and H 2 contains all terms of the form a † λ a † -λ a -λ a λ ∝ n λ n -λ (with -λ denoting the opposite to λ band index) as well as those with three operators of the same band index. Since we are only concerned with the interaction in the Cooper channel, the interaction Hamiltonian H 1 describes intraband interaction in this channel -repulsion (for μ = λ), as well as interband Josephson coupling (for μ = -λ). Both types of terms are of O(U α 2 R ) order. The interaction terms in H 2 are off-diagonal in the band index, but give effective intraband attraction at O(U 2 ) order where S = -S † is anti-Hermitian, leaving the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian unchanged. We choose the ansatz [S, H 0 ] = H 2 , and to the level of approximation stated earlier we obtain It is straightforward to show that S is given by the sum of each term in H 2 divided by the energy exchange mediated by each term. For example, for the term in H 2 of the form S contains the corresponding term Using the fact that ) and as such represents a higher order correction to our leading order approximation. Hence we are allowed to drop it. Commuting (11) with H 2 in (9) we generate three-particle (six a) terms where four a operators belong to the band λ, while the other two are from the opposite, -λ, band. Therefore the effective intraband interaction in the λband is obtained by projecting all a -λ operators to the non-interacting -λ band. Such a projection turns out to be equivalent to the replacement of number conserving operator products by the appropriate Fermi distributions: , where f denotes the Fermi distribution. Specializing next to the BCS (pairing) channel in the λ-band, we find that the last term in (9) produces an effective interaction between electron pairs on the Fermi surface of the λ band, (12) H KL captures the Kohn-Luttinger physics, and describes the λ-band pairing interaction generated by the particlehole fluctuations in the opposite, -λ, band. This result is fully equivalent to previous diagrammatic calculations Adding H 1 contributions to (12) we finally obtain for the transformed Hamiltonian ( where the full interaction matrix, g λμ (k, k ), is given by where k f,λ is the Fermi momentum on each band, φ k is the angle momentum k makes with x-axis, and, as before, ζ λ = 1 (-1) for λ = 1 (λ = 2) is the helicity of each band. The first term in g λμ (k, k ) represents the interactions generated by SOC and comes from H 1 contributions. The factor of ζ λ ζ μ tells us that the intra-band interactions generated by SOC are repulsive, while the inter-band Josephson terms are attractive. In writing the Hamiltonian (14) we neglected the shifts of the Fermi surfaces away from their zero-momentum centers, ζ λ Q. Keeping these shifts leads to small corrections beyond the assumed approximation described in the beginning of this subsection. A more complete form of the Hamiltonian, which takes into account these shifts, is derived in Appendix A (see (A.3)), where details of pairing with finite momentum are discussed. To compute the susceptibility, we set α R = 0 in (13), which is permissible since χ λ is multiplied by U FIG. Integrating (13) gives an explicit expression for the charge susceptibility 7 : where ρ λ is the density of states of the band λ. Again, the exact expression for ρ λ is band and momentum dependent, but the corrections to ρ λ = m/2π are O(α R ) and hence need to be dropped when they meet the factor of U 2 present in the interaction matrix. The fact that χ λ (q) reduces to a constant for q ≤ 2k f,λ is of major importance for our problem. It implies that electrons on the minority (λ = 2) Fermi surface do not experience any attractive potential from the particle-hole fluctuations produced by the majority (λ = 1) electrons. Indeed, the triplet nature of the electron pair on the majority/minority Fermi surface (the total spin of the pair is S z = +1/ -1, correspondingly) requires the coordinate part of the pair wavefunction to be an odd angular harmonic which, at the very minimum, requires that the interaction which mediates the attraction is momentumdependent. However, the maximum momentum transfer that minority electrons may experience is 2k f,2 which, by virtue of the finite magnetization M ∝ k f,1 -k f,2 > 0, is always less than the 'critical' 2k f,1 value needed in order for χ 1 (q) to acquire momentum dependence. The same argument, when applied to the electron pairs on the majority Fermi surface, shows that χ 2 (q) is certainly momentum dependent for 2k f,2 < q < 2k f,1 . Therefore, triplet pairing is possible on the majority surface. Furthermore, calculations The mean-field approximation is formulated by introducing the order parameters for each band as Using the Nambu spinor notation the mean-field approximation for the Hamiltonian ( where ξ kλ = ε kλ -μ and the matrix H λ (k) is represented by The diagonalization of H λ (k) is accomplished by a straightforward Bogolyubov transformation, which at zero temperature gives a thermodynamic potential of where the quasiparticle dispersion is We then derive the self-consistent equations for the theory by minimizing Ω with respect to each order parameter, obtaining The condensation energy of the system can be significantly simplified further by using the explicit form of ( A. Solutions and their symmetries Making use of ( ) Note that, as discussed in the end of section II, the Kohn-Luttinger mechanism provides only for the pairing in the majority (λ = 1) band. The χ 2 (kk ) term is handled by restricting both momenta to the λ = 1 Fermi surface, which is allowed due to the presence of ξ k is the denominator of the right-hand side, and expanding in relative azimuthal angle. The strongest pairing is in the = 1 channel to which we restrict ourselves in the following. (The coupling between different channels occurs only in higher orders of α R expansion.) We find that (26) admits two distinct kinds of solutions which we call coupled and decoupled. The coupled solution involves both bands and is characterized by the following angular structure where the ∆ λ = 0 are constants that must be solved for self-consistently. In this solution both bands are gapped, with momentum-space Josephson coupling (∝ U α 2 R ) inducing a superconducting gap on the minority band. In addition, however, this solution is also characterized by the presence of a repulsive intra-band interaction on each band (∝ U α 2 R (cos 2 φ +cos 2 δ sin 2 φ) > 0) that diminishes the attraction due to χ (1) 2 and the Josephson coupling. Since ∆ λ is exponentially sensitive to the magnitude of the overall attractive interaction, we are prompted to look for a pairing symmetry that minimizes their influence in the self-consistent equations. Observe that the repulsive intra-band interactions on the majority band will vanish if ∆ 1 (k) satisfies It is not difficult to see that ( In addition, if ∆ 1 (k) satisfies ( By combining ( where ω c is the standard upper-limit cutoff in the ξ integration. To determine which of the two found solutions is realized, we compare their condensation energies using Eq. (24). We find that for all values of the spin-orbit strength and all magnetic field orientations, the decoupled solution has the lower condensation energy, and hence is physically realized. The basic reason for that is the aforementioned exponential sensitivity of the energy gap to the magnitude of the attractive potential. This turns out to be a much stronger effect than the power-law gain (∝ U α 2 R ) of the condensation energy due to the induced superconductivity in the minority band. It is interesting to note that the self-consistent solution for the majority-band order parameter (31) in the decoupled phase has no explicit dependence on the spin-orbit interaction. This means that for small α R the presence of a spin-orbit interaction affects the type of pairing symmetry that is realized in the system, while the actual magnitude of the spin-orbit coupling does not influence the strength of the superconducting phase. At the same time, ∆ 1 does depend on the magnetic field orientation via the cos δ dependence in (31), and is larger when the magnetic field is in-plane (at δ = π/2). A less-obvious feature of the found decoupled solution is that it is actually of the FFLO kind. Thanks to Eq.( It is instructive to critically compare the symmetries of the decoupled and coupled phases for the limiting cases of completely out-of-plane (δ = 0) or completely in-plane (δ = π/2) magnetic fields. For δ = 0 the coupled solution (27) has ∆ 1 (k) ∝ e -iφ k , ∆ 2 (k) ∝ e iφ k while the decoupled one (31) has ∆ 1 (k) ∝ e iφ k , ∆ 2 (k) = 0. Thus the effect of the spin-orbit interaction is to lift the degeneracy between p + ip (∆(k) ∼ e iφ k ) and p -ip (∆(k) ∼ e -iφ k ) pairing states. We see that in the coupled solution, each order parameter has a chirality opposite to that of its parent band (ζ λ ), while in the decoupled one the chirality of ∆ 1 matches that of its parent band, ζ 1 = 1. The fact that the decoupled solution is favored suggests that the chirality of the order parameters likes to match the chirality of their respective bands. For in-plane fields (δ = π/2), the order parameters develop nodes. In the coupled phase both order parameters go as cos φ k with nodes along the normal to the magnetic field direction, while in the decoupled phase the majorityband order parameter goes as sin φ k and has nodes along the field direction. Before moving on, it is helpful to examine the spin structure of the pair. Because of the spin canting provided by the spin-orbit interaction, we expect that a singlet pairing component will be mixed into each band, along with along with admixtures of spin triplet pairing When the magnetic field is oriented along the SOC axis (δ = 0), the dominant | ↑↑ pairing shares the p + ip symmetry of the majority band order parameter. Triplet pairing of opposite spin | ↓↓ is admixed with magnitude id 2xy symmetry is realized, and so even in the decoupled phase all types of spin pairing except triplet pairing with S z = 0 exist in the system. From this, we see that the total angular momentum of the system is j z = 2. We also note that as expected, increasing the strength of SOC increases the amount of | ↓↓ and | ↑↓ -| ↓↑ pairing that is admixed. When the magnetic field is completely in-plane, the dominant spin-up triplet pairing state has two nodes along the magnetic field direction, while the minority spin-down triplet state has four nodes with d x 2 y symmetry and the singlet state also has four nodes, obeying a d xy symmetry with a small admixture of d x 3 y . Thus the triplet states share the ε(k x , k y ) = ε(-k x , k y ) symmetry of the larger Fermi surface, while the singlet state FIG. does not. To summarize, when the magnetic field is normal to the 2DEG plane the majority band has an isotropic gap with p x + ip y type pairing. As the field inclines, the cos φ k component of the order parameter decreases in strength with the inclination angle δ, causing the angular modulation of the superconducting gap around the Fermi surface. Eventually, at δ = π/2, the order parameter acquires a pure p y symmetry and develops nodes in the directions parallel to the magnetic field. The minority band remains in the normal state independent of the magnetic field orientation. The dependence of the pairing symmetry on the magnetic field orientation provides an ideal way for connecting our work with experiment, since the field orientation is easily tuned in the lab simply by rotating the sample. The fact that the gap develops nodes when the magnetic field is oriented in-plane produces signatures in a handful of experimentally accessible quantities (e.g. the T dependance of the London penetration depth We focus on the electronic specific heat as an example, and calculate C(T ) as a function of the magnetic field orientation. The electronic specific heat is calculated by (33) Here, k l,λ (k u,λ ) is the momentum corresponding to the energy at which we impose a lower (upper) cutoff to the energy integration. Although the full calculation must be carried out numerically, we can estimate the behavior of C(T ) in the low temperature limit. For all magnetic field orientations, the contribution from the gapless minority band is linear in T as ∆ 2 = 0. The contribution to the specific heat from the majority band depends on the type of pairing symmetry realized, and consequently on the magnetic field orientation. When the magnetic field is parallel to the SOC axis the integral over φ can be done easily, and the total specific heat is approximated by where as before, ρ λ is the density of states of the band λ. When the magnetic field is completely in-plane the order parameter of the majority band has nodes along the field direction, which affects the temperature dependence of the specific heat. The dominant contribution to the specific heat occurs near the nodal points at φ k = 0, π where the gap vanishes, from which we can estimate that at low temperature, The dependence of the specific heat on T 2 is a characteristic feature of order parameters with nodal symmetry, as has been pointed out in For general magnetic field orientations we resort to integrating (33) numerically. Figure The contribution from the minority band is linear in T , and does not affect the shape of the curves in figure In addition to the specific heat, thermal conductivity measurements offer another way of connecting our work to experiments. As in the case of the specific heat, the thermal conductivity will be exponentially suppressed when the magnetic field is out-of-plane and assume a power-law dependence on T when the field is in-plane. Finally, the thermal conductivity will be anisotropic when the field has an in-plane component, making the thermal conductivity an effective probe of the pairing symmetry's dependence on the field orientation. To summarize, we have investigated the role that the spin-orbit interaction plays in unconventional superconductivity in spin-polarized two-dimensional electronic gases. We showed that the spin-majority band has p+ip pairing when the Zeeman field is out of plane of the 2DEG and parallel to the SOC axis, but develops nodes along the field direction when the field is rotated in-plane. This physics of the system can be readily probed by a measurement of the electronic specific heat. Somewhat surprisingly, for not too large spin-orbit coupling (as compared to the Zeeman coupling), the minority band remains gapless for all magnetic field geometries, turning the considered system into an unusual nonunitary half-superconductor. Because only the majority band is gapped, this system realizes an effectively "spinless" superconducting state, even though both bands have non-zero occupation. This is in contrast with other ways of engineering spinless superconductors, which usually involve carefully tuning the chemical potential so that only a single band intersects the Fermi level Our treatment is limited to the leading, O(U 2 ), order in the electron-electron interaction strength U . It has been shown in Ref. 4 that the minority band becomes superconducting in the next, O(U 3 ), order of the perturbative expansion. This minority band superconductivity appears due to interaction-induced corrections to the susceptibility which violate the flatness of χ for q < 2k f , and does not require any critical threshold value of U . These considerations imply that, strictly speaking, our findings apply at temperatures above the critical one for the minority band, which is parametrically smaller than the critical temperature for the majority band. A study with arbitrary SOC strength and an in-plane magnetic field was carried out in Ref. 34. There and in Ref. 35, it was found that inter-band coupling can allow for a small gap on the minority band to be energetically favored for stronger SOC, suggesting that there may exist a phase transition between the coupled and decoupled solutions at α R k f ∼ h. As such, it would be valuable to formulate SOC non-perturbatively within our model in order to better understand these phase transitions. Despite being of a rather model nature, the considered Kohn-Luttinger-Rashba problem suggests an interesting possibility of purely electronic mechanism of superconductivity in LAO/STO oxide interfaces. Given the reported co-existence of the superconducting and ferromagnetic orders in this interesting system, one can imagine that a spontaneously developed ferromagnetic order promotes an exotic p-wave superconductivity considered in our work. While it does appear that the prevailing view of the topic consists in ferromagnetism and superconductivity originating from different electronic bands, and in addition the superconductivity originating from the standard phonon mechanism Regarding perhaps the most studied p-wave candidate superconductor, Sr 2 RuO 4 is most negative, i.e. most attractive, for η = 1/2.