Using a Josephson junction interferometer (DC SQUID) as a microwave source for irradiating a single-electron trap, both devices fabricated on the same chip, we study the process of photonassisted tunneling as an effective mechanism of single photon detection. High sensitivity down to a very small oscillation amplitude vJ ∼ 10 nV Eact hfJ and down to low photon absorption rates Γ ph ∼ (1-50)Hz, as well as a clear threshold type of operation with an activation energy Eact ∼ 400 μeV, are demonstrated for the trap with respect to the microwave photons of frequency fJ ∼ (100-200)GHz. Tunable generation is demonstrated with respect to the power and frequency of the microwave signal produced by the SQUID source biased within the subgap voltage range. A much weaker effect is observed at the higher junction voltages along the quasiparticle branch of the I -V curve; this response mostly appears due to the recombination phonons. Operation of single-electron tunneling (SET) circuits is known to be significantly influenced by microwave radiation coupled to tunnel junctions In this Letter, we report on the direct observation of the photon activated tunneling of charge in a hybrid Josephson-SET circuit, integrating on the same chip a tunable microwave source and an SET-based singlephoton detector coupled to this source via a superconducting coplanar waveguide. The experimental layout is shown in Fig. The oscillations amplitude and thus the microwave power generated by the SQUID source is designed in such a way that it can be varied by applying a magnetic field B ∼ Φ 0 /A ≈ 5 mT, where Φ 0 ≈ 2.07×10 -15 Wb is a flux quantum and A ≈ 0.4 μm 2 is a loop area of our device. The junctions, 0.2×0.24 μm 2 in size, are made of aluminum (see Ref. that of the parallel connection of the isolating resistors R V ≈ 1 kΩ and the specific impedance of the transmission line Z L ≈ 260 Ω terminated by a matched load, as discussed below. As shown in our previous work The microwave signal produced by the Josephson source is delivered to the detector via a coplanar waveguide fabricated from Al in the same layer as the SQUID. In order to achieve a high specific impedance Z L , and is e-beam-written for all junctions (see Ref. thus to increase the oscillation amplitude v J ∼ I C Z L , this coupling element was implemented as a two-wire transmission line. As the length of the line is on the same scale as the radiation wavelength, λ ∼ 1.2 mm at f ∼ 100 GHz, a matched R S -C S termination was included in the layout, as shown in Fig. For microwave detection, we used a double-junction SINIS-type SET trap with the activation barrier E act , enhanced by the superconductivity ("S") of the (floatingpotential) side terminals connected to the small normal conducting ("N") island via oxidation barriers ("I") , where E Q1 is a Coulomb energy required for charging up a small N-island by one electron in the step 1. The rate of the second tunneling step Γ 2 is related to a more favorable energy gain E 2 = -∆+E Q2 , where E Q2 is a Coulomb energy released by discharging the N-island in the step 2. For simplicity, we tune the gate voltage V g to achieve the symmetry point E Q1 ≈ E Q2 . Except for particular "degenerate" points where E Q1 ≈ E Q2 ≈ 0, the second rate is much higher than the first one, Γ 2 Γ 1 . In experiment, the second step is typically not time resolved by the DC electrometer used and the tunneling sequence appears as a single charge hopping event over the barrier E act at a rate Γ ph ≈ Γ 1 /2. The factor ×1/2 appears beside Γ 1 due to 1/2 probability of the backward tunneling in the second step through the first junction without producing an electrometer signal. At a low temperature, k B T E act , the rate of the spontaneous hopping is low, typically Γ 0 ph ∼ (0.001-1) Hz for E act /h > 100 GHz, and is mostly related to the absorption of background photons which appear due to microwave leaks into the sample cavity The statistics of state switchings is studied in more detail by biasing the source to the different operating regimes shown in Fig. Figure To evaluate the fraction of the response signal which appears due to the recombination phonons created by the quasiparticle component of the tunnel current, an uncoupled (i.e., without transmission line coupling) reference source of the same type was placed on the substrate at a similar distance from the detector, L = 600 μm. Despite a larger value of I C ≈ 130 nA (i.e., four times (!) higher irradiation power), no response was registered in the subgap voltage range of V J ; this proves an efficient electromagnetic decoupling of the uncoupled source, on the one hand, and strong sub-gap suppression of the quasiparticle leak current, on the other hand. Along the quasiparticle branch of the I -V curve, V J > 2∆, see Fig. We find it useful to compare the experimental data with a theory and, in particular, to obtain in this way the value of the activation energy E act and the frequency response curvature; both of these properties are important characteristics of the SINIS detector. Figure where R N is the tunnel resistance of one junction in the (uniform) SINIS double junction. The result of the calculation is shown in Fig. Finally, we note that, by varying the irradiation power over a wide accessible range, it is possible to estimate the dynamic range of the SINIS detector with respect to the measurable counting rates. The present, relatively narrow range, Γ 0 ph ( 1 Hz ) Γ ph 50 Hz, is limited by the non-deterioration condition for the counting statistics. In particular, we try to avoid the contribution of the microwave background at low frequencies and the statistical drop-out of the shorter lifetimes at the upper cutoff frequency. The latter is set by the time resolution of the DC electrometer biased by a low, pA-range current. However, considerable improvements should be expected by implementing a higher degree of microwave shielding of the sample cavity To conclude, using a hybrid Josephson-SET onchip circuit, we investigated the photon-assisted singleelectron tunneling rates enhanced by Josephson microwave radiation. The counting statistics was demonstrated to be governed by the quantum interaction of the microwaves in the frequency range 100 GHz f J 200 GHz with an SET trap as a discrete tunneling system. Tunable operation of the Josephson source was demonstrated with respect to the microwave power and frequency. Reasonable agreement with theory was observed. We acknowledge experimental support from T. Weimann and V. Rogalya. This work was funded by the Joint Research Project MICROPHOTON. Joint Research Project MICROPHOTON belongs to the European Metrology Research Programme (EMRP). The EMRP is jointly funded by the EMRP participating countries within EURAMET and the European Union.