We study the excitation spectra and the wave functions of quasiparticle bound states at a vortex and an edge in bilayer Rashba superconductors under a magnetic field. In particular, we focus on the quasiparticle states at the zero energy in the pair-density wave state in a topologically non-trivial phase. We numerically demonstrate that the quasiparticle wave functions with zero energy are localized at both the edge and the vortex core if the magnetic field exceeds the critical value. Superconductivity in locally noncentrosymmetric systems has recently attracted considerable interest In our previous study, we analyzed the electronic structure of a single vortex in the pair-density wave (PDW) state, in which the order parameter phase changes its sign in bilayer systems. Then we found the salient feature of the PDW state, that is, the zero energy quasiparticle states at the vortex core exist even in a high magnetic field, using the quasiclassical theory In this study, we do not touch the BCS phase, in which the order parameter phase does not change its sign, and focus on the PDW state. We obtain the microscopic information on the quasiparticle states in the PDW state with use of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes theory. We present the excitation spectra and the Bogoliubov quasiparticle wave functions of bound states at the vortex core and the edge. First of all, we characterize multilayer Rashba systems under a magnetic field. We incorporate the effect of the magnetic field into the theory through the Zeeman term reflecting the dominant paramagnetic effect and the spatial inhomogeneity of the order parameter due to a vortex line. Reflecting the lacking of mirror symmetry about each layer, the antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC) strength has the layer dependence α m with the layer index m. The layer dependence of the ASOC is (α 1 , α 2 ) = (α, -α) in the bilayer system. The net ASOC is zero due to the mirror symmetry of the entire system. We start with the following Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation for bilayer Rashba superconductors. with the normal state Hamiltonian in the real space representation where u jn (r) and v jn (r) are the wave functions of Bogoliubov quasiparticles with n and j the angular momentum (azimuthal) and the radial quantum number, respectively, and ξ(-i∇) = (-i∇) 2 /(2m) -μ with the mass of electron m and the chemical potential μ. h 1 and h 2 are the normal state Hamiltonian for the layer 1 and 2, respectively. μ B is the Bohr magneton, H is the magnetic field vector, σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) T is the vector of the Pauli spin matrices, σ 0 is the unit matrix in the spin space and t ⊥ is the interlayer hopping strength. We take the Rasba type ASOC characterized by the orbital vector g(-i∇) = (i∂ y , -i∂ x , 0)/k F with the Fermi wave number k F . We use the unit in which = 1. We consider a single vortex in a spin-singlet swave disk-shaped superconductor with its radius r c . The magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the layer H = (0, 0, H) and the vortex line is parallel to the z axis. The pair potential in the bilayer system is expressed as ∆(r) = ∆ 0 f (r)e iφr diag(iσ y , siσ y ) where s = 1 (s = -1) denotes the BCS (PDW) state. The vortex center is situated at the origin r = 0. We assume the spatial profile of the pair potential as the same in each layer and put f (r) = tanh(r/a)around a vortex. Here, a is the lattice constant, which is introduced as follows. Expanding the tight-binding model for the two dimensional square lattice, ε(k) = -2t[cos(k x a)+cos(k y a)] with respect to k x and k y up to the power of two and comparing with the free electron dispersion ε(k) = k 2 /2m, we have the relation, t = 1/(2ma 2 ). We have introduced the lattice constant a as a unit of length and the nearest neighbor hopping integral t as a unit of energy. The characteristic length scale of superconductivity is the coherence length, but in the present study, a Fermi surface is split due to the SOC, the Zeeman field and the inter layer hopping, and then the coherence length depends on them. To avoid this difficulty, we use a and t as the unit of length and energy, respectively. They are independent of the SOC, the Zeeman field and the inter layer hopping. The system has the rotational symmetry about a vortex line. So we can introduce the cylindrical coordinates. In this situation, we can separate the quasiparticle wave functions into the angular and the radial parts: with the spin index σ. Substituting these wave functions into the BdG equation (1) in the cylindrical coordinates, one can find the relation with respect to the quantum number of the orbital angular momentum such that n Then, we obtain the following dimensionless BdG equation. with Ĥn (r, ∂ r ) = ξ ni (r, ∂ r )σ 0 ⊗ I N ×N + Ân (r, ∂ r ), ( and where we have put We take the cut-off radius as r c = 250a and discretize the BdG equation in the real space by the mesh size 0.625a (mesh number N = 400). Then, we diagonalize the 2 3 N × 2 3 N BdG Hamiltonian with respect to each quantum number of the angular momentum n. For each n, we arrange the eigen energy E jn (0 < |j| < 2 3 N ) in ascending order for later discussions. Using the mirror symmetry of the system, the BdG Hamiltonian is block-diagonalized as shown in Fig. Fig. phase transition into the topological phase. In h + c < h < h - c , the mirror sector with μ B H + t ⊥ has the strictly zero eigen energy and in h > h - c , the both mirror sectors have the strictly zero eigen energy. Next, we investigate the wave functions belonging to the two lowest eigen energy with n = 0. Figs. n=0 (r) functions of quasiparticles in the layer 1 only. The quasiparticle wave functions are localized around the vortex and have no amplitude at the edge. This is consistent with Fig. We have formulated the bilayer Rashba superconductors in the presence of a vortex by means of Bogoliubov-de Gennes theory. We have investigated the energy spectra and the wave functions of bound Bogoliubov quasiparticles at a vortex and an edge in the pair-density wave state. Our calculations of the energy spectra confirm that the branches of the edge mode appear inside the gap if satisfying the condition of the topologically non-trivial phase. We can confirm the appearance of the zero energy vortex and edge quasiparticle states also from the spatial profiles of the zero energy eigen wave functions under the magnetic field above the critical values. This system undergoes a topologically non-trivial phase under the sufficiently large effective magnetic field |μ B H ± t ⊥ | > μ 2 + ∆ 2 0 Preprint submitted to Physica C