The physics of Josephson tunnel junctions drastically depends on their geometrical configurations and here we show that also tiny geometrical details play a determinant role. More specifically, we develop the theory of short and long confocal annular Josephson tunnel junctions in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field of arbitrary orientations. The behavior of a circular annular Josephson tunnel junction is then seen to be simply a special case of the above result. For junctions having a normalized perimeter less than one the threshold curves are derived and computed even in the case with trapped Josephson vortices. For longer junctions a numerical analysis is carried out after the derivation of the appropriate motion equation for the Josephson phase. We found that the system is modeled by a modified and perturbed sine-Gordon equation with a space dependent effective Josephson penetration length inversely proportional to the local junction width. Both the fluxon statics and dynamics are deeply affected by the non-uniform annulus width. Static zero-field multiple-fluxon solutions exist even in presence of a large bias current. The tangential velocity of a traveling fluxon is not determined by the balance between the driving and drag forces due to the dissipative losses. Furthermore, the fluxon motion is characterized by a strong radial inward acceleration which causes electromagnetic radiation concentrated at the ellipse equatorial points. The static An EAJTJ consists of two superconducting elliptic annuli coupled by a thin dielectric layer. An elliptic annulus, by definition, has a constant width and is implemented by drawing two closed curves parallel to a master ellipse, with constant but opposite offsets. The internal and external boundaries of such an annulus are not ellipses, but more complex curves There is, however, another configuration that generalizes the circular AJTJ: it is given by the Confocal Annular Josephson Tunnel Junction (CAJTJ) which is delimited by two ellipses having the same foci; for such geometry the annulus width is not constant. Therefore, as computer numerical control programmers know, elliptic and confocal annuli, although apparently similar, are quite different objects. In this work we develop the theory for both short and long CAJTJs in presence of an arbitrary in-plane magnetic field and will show that, despite the minor geometrical differences, their properties are markedly different from those of EAJTJs. More specifically, it will turn out that the phenomenology of CAJTJs, due to their non-uniform width, is much richer than that of EAJTJs, in both absence and presence of an external magnetic field. The paper is organized as follows. In the rest of this Section we state the problem by stressing the difference between elliptic and confocal AJTJs and introduce the mathematical notations and identities used in the paper. In next Section we consider small JTJs immersed in a uniform in-plane magnetic field and compute first the threshold curves for elliptic junctions having different ellipticity; later we extend the analysis to CAJTJs with possible Josephson vortices trapped in the annular barrier. In Section III we derive the appropriate partial differential equation for an electrically long CAJTJ; later, in Section IV, we present numerical simulations concerning the fluxon(s) static and dynamic properties. The conclusions are drawn in Section V. To clarify the difference between elliptic and confocal annuli, let us consider the master ellipse x 2 /a 2 + y 2 /b 2 = 1 centered in the origin of a Cartesian coordinate system whose X and Y axes are directed, respectively, along the principal ellipse diameters 2a and 2b. We define the axes ratio ρ ≡ b/a and the eccentricity e 2 ≡ 1 -ρ 2 . If a > b then the ellipse foci lie on the X-axis and it is possible to find two positive numbers, c and ν, such that a = c cosh ν and b = c sinh ν; then ρ = tanh ν and c = ± √ a 2 -b 2 are the abscissae of the ellipse's foci. The master ellipse is described by the the parametric equations: The parametric equation of the inner and outer boundaries of the elliptic annulus with (constant) width ∆w are given, respectively, by [3]: and where Very simply, the parametric equation of the inner and outer boundaries of the confocal annulus are, respectively,: x i (τ ) = c cosh ν i sin τ ; and where (ν o + ν i )/2 = ν. The width of such annulus is a π-periodic function of τ ; in fact,: If ∆ν ≡ ν o -ν i << 1, the expression of the width reduces to: Its maximum value is ∆w max = c cosh ν∆ν = a∆ν at the ellipse poles, τ = mπ (m integer), while ∆w min = c sinh ν∆ν = b∆ν is the minimum value achieved at the equatorial points, τ = mπ ± π/2. The width relative variation (∆w max -∆w min )/∆w min = coth ν -1 diverges as ν → 0. Therefore, the discrepancy (or disparity) between confocal and elliptic AJTJs are more evident for eccentric geometries. In Figure (resulting in ρ = 0.5, ν = arctanhρ 0.549 and c = √ 3); for the two confocal ellipses (blue solid lines) we choose ∆ν = 0.1ν, while for the two parallel ellipses (red dashed lines) it was ∆w = b∆ν. With such choices the two annuli have the same width at the equatorial points. To keep going with the parallelism we can state that, as an elliptic annuli has a constant ∆w, a confocal one has a constant ∆ν. Nevertheless, for a = b, both geometries reduce to the circular annulus. We now introduce the (planar) confocal elliptic coordinates (ν, τ ), such that, for a positive c value, any point (x, y) in the X-Y plane is given by (c cosh ν sin τ, c sinh ν cos τ ) with ν ≥ 0 and τ ∈ [-π, π]. The elliptic variable τ has a domain [-π, π] and plays a role similar to that of the polar angle in polar coordinates; The ν coordinates behaves as a radial variable and identifies confocal ellipses centered on the origin, that is, the ellipse in Eq.( T ≡ [cosh ν cos τ /q(ν, τ ), -sinh ν sin τ /q(ν, τ )], (6b) are, respectively, the (outward) normal and (clockwise) tangent unit vectors to the ellipse passing at the point (ν, τ ); in different words, N and T form an orthonormal basis on twodimensional vectorial space. Throughout the paper we will carry out the analysis assuming a > b; however, all the derived expressions will still be real when a < b, provided that c is replaced by its imaginary counterpart, î c In Josephson's original description the quantum mechanical phase difference, φ, across the barrier of a generic two-dimensional planar Josephson tunnel junction is related to the magnetic field, H, inside the barrier in which u z is a unit vector orthogonal to the junction plane and κ -1 ≡ Φ 0 /2πμ 0 d m , where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum, μ 0 the vacuum permeability, and d m the junction magnetic penetration depth With the in-plane magnetic field applied at an arbitrary angle θ with the Y -axis, H = (H sin θ, H cos θ), in force of Eq.( where H(ν, θ) = Φ 0 /2μ 0 d m c q(ν, θ). In Eq.( To begin with, we first consider a simply-connected planar Josephson tunnel junction delimited by an ellipse of principal semi-axes a = c cosh ν << λ J and b = 2c sinh ν in presence of a spatially homogeneous in-plane magnetic field. The tunnel currents flow in the Z-direction and the local density of the Josephson current in elliptic coordinates can be expressed as where the maximum Josephson current density, J c , generally speaking, depends on both ν and τ and is constant inside uniform barrier junctions. The Josephson current, I J , through the barrier is obtained integrating Eq.( Inserting Eq.( in which A = πab = πc 2 sinh ν cosh ν is the ellipse area and J n the n-th order Bessel function of the first kind. I J is largest when φ 0 = ±π/2, so the magnetic diffraction pattern (MDP), I c (H, θ), for a small elliptic junction is: where is the junction characteristic field . It can be shown that 2L( θ) is the length of the projection of the junction in the direction normal to the externally applied magnetic field; as expected, 2L(0) = 2a and 2L(π) = 2b. Eq.( The MDP of a small CAJTJ can be readily computed from Eq.(A-2) by setting the integration limits in ν from ν i to ν o , where ν i to ν o identify, respectively, the inner and outer ellipses delimiting the junction area (see Eqs.( with (ν, φ 0 ) given by Eq.(A-4). In the absence of trapped fluxons (n = 0), inserting Eq.(A-5) in Eq.( where For n = 0 the numerical computation of the integral in Eq.( The approximation gets better and better as either |n| and/or H increases or when both ν i and ν o get larger and larger, meaning that the confocal annulus tends to a ring. An exact expression for the MDP of a small CAJTJ can be obtained for arbitrary winding number when the annulus width is infinitesimal, i.e., when ∆ν = ν o -ν i << 1. In this case Eq.( where ν ≡ (ν o + ν i )/2. Inserting Eq.(A-4) and considering that the annulus area is ∆A = πc 2 cosh 2ν∆ν, we have: where ξ( θ) = ξ(ν, θ) and, as for elliptic junctions, It is possible to demonstrate that, in limit ν i → ν o , Eq.( As soon as ν exceeds the unity, then cosh 2ν >> 1; therefore, for slightly eccentric CAJTJs, Eq.( This equation has been already reported, but for the more restrictive case of narrow ringshaped junctions It is also evident that for a CAJTJ in a uniform field the minima in the magnetic pattern are not integer multiples of the first one, although they are (almost) equally spaced, the separation between two contiguous minima being about π. In this section we derive the partial differential equation (PDE) for the Josephson phase of a confocal AJTJ having the foci in (±c, 0) [and ν = (ν o + ν i )/2] in presence of a spatially homogeneous in-plane magnetic field of arbitrary orientation, θ. The total tunnel current density is given by: where the second term in the right side takes into account the quasi-particle tunnel current assumed to be ohmic, i.e., R is the voltage independent quasi-particle resistance per unit area. The subscripts on φ denote partial derivatives. By combining the previous equations with Maxwell's equations, one obtains a 2 + 1 non-linear PDE for φ where λ 2 J = Φ 0 /2πμ 0 J c d j and ω 2 p = 2πJ c /Φ 0 c s , d j being junction current penetration depth Further, we can introduce the parameter c ≡ ω p λ J = 1/ μ o d j c s which gives the velocity of light in the barrier and is called Swihart velocity Because of its local form, it is quite general and holds for planar junctions of any geometrical configuration. On the junction boundary the continuity of the induction field is provided by where H ext is the external field that, in general, is given by the sum of an externally applied field, H, and the self-field, H cur , generated by the current flowing in the junction. Using the elliptic coordinates, Eqs.( and with φ = φ(ν, τ, t). In the small width approximation, w max << λ J , the Josephson phase does not depends on ν and the system becomes one-dimensional, φ = φ(τ, t). Furthermore, the scale factor becomes f (ν, τ At last the elementary arc is ds = cQ(τ )dτ . Following Benabdallah et al. where: and we assumed sin φ sin φ. According to Eqs.( It turns out that (∇×H) z = 1 = 0 as expected for a spatially homogeneous magnetic field that is irrotational. The self-field induced on the annulus boundaries by a distributed bias current, I, can be computed by applying the Ampere's circuital law along the inner and outer junction perimeters: in the former case, H cur τ (ν i , τ ) = 0, because no current can flow through the annulus hole; in the latter case, the tangential field equals in amplitude the sheet current j z (τ ) = J Z (τ )w(τ ), i.e., H cur τ (ν o , τ ) = j z (τ ) = J Z (τ )w(τ ) = cJ Z (τ )Q(τ )∆ν (it can be easily checked that the field circuitation along the outer perimeter equals the bias current, S J Z (s)dS). Therefore, the phase normal derivative on the outer and inner annulus boundaries are: By subtracting the last two expressions, to the first order, we get: where h = H/J c c is the θ-independent normalized field for treating long CAJTJs and we have made use of the approximation κ ≈ 1/J c λ 2 J valid for thick electrode junctions where γ(τ ) ≡ J Z (τ )/J c ; for a bias current, I, uniformly distributed over the junction area A, it is J z (s) = I/A and γ(τ ) = γ 0 cosh 2ν/2Q 2 (τ ), where γ 0 ≡ I/J c A. Furthermore, is a forcing term proportional to the applied magnetic field. ∆ is a geometrical factor which sometimes has been referred to as the coupling between the external field and the flux density of the junction where n is an integer number, called the winding number, corresponding to the algebraic A. Some comments Notably, the PDE of CAJTJ does not differ by that of a circular one provided that the space dependent scaling factor cQ is replaced by the ring mean radius r and the tangential elliptic coordinate τ is changed into the polar angle θ. In the limit of a vanishing eccentricity (e 2 0 and cosh 2ν >> 1), it is 2Q 2 (τ ) = cosh 2ν + cos 2τ ≈ cosh 2ν, i.e., γ(τ ) = γ 0 . It is easy to demonstrate that, in the limits c → 0 and ν → ∞, the elliptic coordinates (ν, τ ) reduce to polar coordinates (r, θ) and Eq.( Following Ref. where now: We observe that in Eq.( The commercial finite element simulation package COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS (www.comsol.com) was used to numerically solve Eq.( Numerical solutions of Eq.( indeed, this feature is common to all long JTJs and can be erroneously interpreted as the signature of the full expulsion of the magnetic field from the junction interior (Meissner effect) that is not achievable in curved junctions In this subsection we analyze the dynamics of a magnetic flux quantum (current vortex) trapped in a current-biased long CAJTJ. We will limit to the case of no applied field; the consequences of an externally applied in-plane magnetic field will be considered in a future and is characterized by a trapping current, i.e., the minimum current at which a fluxon still moves along the system, not being trapped by the potential and a depinning current, i.e., the maximum current at which the fluxon is pinned in the potential well. Furthermore, the step profile is not smooth but shows some fine structures due to the resonance of the traveling fluxon with wavelets radiated by the fluxon itself subject to a periodic width-dependent potential Numerical simulations also showed that the fluxon (tangential) speed û ≡ d ŝ0 /d t = (c/λ J )Q(τ 0 )dτ 0 /d t is not constant. This is expected considering that a CAJTJ, by definition, does not have a constant width This acceleration, and so the radiation emitted by the fluxon, is largest where the curvature radius is smallest, i.e., at the ellipse's poles; in fact, at τ = ±π/2, we have | a ν |= (λ J /c) û0 2 cosh 3 ν/ sinh 4 ν. This indicates that very eccentric CAJTJs emit more radiation at the extremity as it occurs in linear Josephson transmission lines; in fact, for ν << 1 it is | a ν |≈ (λ J /c) û0 2 ν-4 . The radiation frequency can be finely tuned by the bias current. Furthermore, the frequency range and the radiation power can be increased by inserting a larger number of fluxons in the annular junction. We note that no external field is needed for the operation of such an oscillator, at the variance with the flux-flow oscillator In this work we focused on the the static and dynamic properties of a not simply connected planar Josephson tunnel junction shaped as an annulus delimited by two confocal ellipses, i.e., with a periodically varying width. We found that the nonlinear phenomenology of CAJTJs is richer than that of elliptic annular junction of constant width [1, 2], providing an elegant example of how the geometrical subtleties are of paramount importance in the physics of Josephson tunnel junctions. More specifically, it was found that the Josephson phase obeys to a modified and perturbed sine-Gordon equation that, although not integrable, admits (numerically computed) solitonic solutions. The key ingredient of this partial differential equation is an effective Josephson penetration length inversely proportional to the local junction width. This spatial dependence, in turn, generates a periodic zero-mean potential that alternately attracts and repels the fluxons (or antifluxons). The fluxon tangential speed is not constant, even in the absence of an external magnetic field, and its mean value cannot be determined by the balance between the driving and drag forces. Indeed, a fluxon traveling around a long CAJTJ undergoes an inward acceleration much larger that in a uniform elliptic motion. This acceleration is associated with a radio-frequency power emission mainly concentrated at the ellipse equatorial points. More analytical considerations on Eq.( where n is an integer number, called the winding number and φ 0 is an integration constant. The term nτ stems from the fact that the Josephson current density is an observable quantity and, according to Eq.( (A-4) with sin 2ξ = sin 2 θ sinh 2ν/(cosh 2ν + cos 2 θ) and cos 2ξ = (1 + cos 2 θ cosh 2ν)/(cosh 2ν + cos 2 θ). (ν) changes its sign for negative odd integers. For large field values one can use the asymptotic forms for the Bessel functions, J n (h) ≈ 2/πh cos(h -nπ/2 -π/4), observing that J n-2 (h) and J n+2 (h) oscillate in phase, while both are out of phase with respect to J n (h). The analytic primitive of (ν) exists only for n = 0, i.e., for 0 (ν) = π sin φ 0 [cosh2ν J 0 (h) + cos 2ξ J 2 (h)]; in fact, after some lengthy algebraic manipulations, exploiting the identity dh/dν = h sinh 2ν/2q 2 , it is possible to verify that: Inserting Eq.(A-5) in Eq.(A-2) we have (for n = 0):