Using polarized neutron diffraction and x-ray resonant magnetic scattering (XRMS) techniques, multiple phase transitions were revealed in an underdoped, non-superconducting Eu(Fe1-xIrx)2As2 (x = 0.06) single crystal. Compared with the parent compound EuFe2As2, the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural phase transition and the antiferromagnetic order of the Fe 2+ moments are significantly suppressed to TS = 111 (2) K and TN,Fe = 85 (2) K by 6% Ir doping, respectively. In addition, the Eu 2+ spins order within the ab plane in the A-type antiferromagnetic structure similar to the parent compound. However, the order temperature is evidently suppressed to TN,Eu = 16.0 (5) K by Ir doping. Most strikingly, the XRMS measurements at the Ir L3 edge demonstrates that the Ir 5d states are also magnetically polarized, with the same propagation vector as the magnetic order of Fe. With TN,Ir = 12.0 (5) K, they feature a much lower onset temperature compared with TN,Fe . Our observation suggests that the magnetism of the Eu sublattice has a considerable effect on the magnetic nature of the 5d Ir dopant atoms and there exists a possible interplay between the localized Eu 2+ moments and the conduction d -electrons on the FeAs layers. Among various parent compounds of the recently discovered Fe-based superconductors, Recently, superconductivity was observed in 5d transition metal element doped Eu(Fe 1-x Ir x ) 2 As 2 with T SC up to ~22 K. Here we present the results of our x-ray resonant magnetic scattering (XRMS) and polarized neutron diffraction measurements on an underdoped, non-superconducting Eu(Fe 1-x Ir x ) 2 As 2 (x = 0.06) single crystal, which displays multiple phase transitions. Compared with the parent compound, the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural phase transition and the antiferromagnetic order of the Fe 2+ moments are well seperated, significantly suppressed to T S = 111 (2) K and T N ,Fe = 85 (2) K by 6% Ir doping, respectively. In addition, the Eu 2+ spins order within the ab plane in the A-type antiferromagnetic structure similar to the parent compound, suggesting that the magnetic structure of the Eu 2+ spins starts to be tuned from AFM to FM within the intermediate Ir doping level between 6% to 12%. However, the ordering temperature is evidently suppressed to T N ,Eu = 16.0 (5) K by 6% Ir doping. Most strikingly, the XRMS measurements at the Ir L 3 edge demonstrates that the Ir 5d states are magnetically polarized with the same propagation vector as the magnetic order of Fe. With T N ,Ir = 12.0 (5) K, they feature a much lower onset temperature compared with T N ,Fe . Our observation suggests that the magnetism of the Eu sublattice has a considerable effect on the magnetic nature of the 5d Ir dopant atoms and there exists a possible interplay between the localized Eu 2+ moments and the conduction d -electrons on the FeAs layers. Single crystals of Eu(Fe 1-x Ir x ) 2 As 2 (x = 0.06) were grown from self-flux (Fe, Ir)As. The chemical composition of the crystals was determined by energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) analysis. A 3 mg platelike single crystal with dimensions 2 × 2 × 0.2 mm 3 was selected for both the XRMS and polarized neutron diffraction measurements. The mosaicity of the crystal was less than 0.03°, confirming the high quality of the chosen crystal. For macroscopic characterizations, the same crystal was used. The polarized neutron diffraction measurements were carried out on the diffuse neutron spectrometer (DNS) at Heinz Maier-Leibnitz Zentrum (MLZ), Garching (Germany). and respectively, where N * N denotes the coherent nuclear scattering and I SI denotes the total spin incoherent scattering, whereas M * ⊥Y M ⊥Y and M * ⊥Z M ⊥Z are the components of the moment parallel and perpendicular to the scattering plane, respectively. The symbol ⊥ indicates that the magnetic scattering is only sensitive to the component of the moment perpendicular to Q . Therefore, using x -polarization, the magnetic and nuclear scattering can be completely seperated into the SF and NSF channel, respectively. The XRMS measurements were performed at the Fe K edge and Ir L 3 edge at beamline I16 at the Diamond Light Source (Oxford, UK). Figure Figure The Eu(Fe 0.94 Ir 0.06 ) 2 As 2 single crystal was also measured using synchrotron x-ray diffraction to study its structural properties and the magnetism of the Fe sublattice. Figure As shown in Figure First of all, the origin of the resonance at the Ir L 3 edge in in Eu(Fe 0.94 Ir 0.06 ) 2 As 2 needs to be understood. Note that the resonant x-ray scattering signal in the πσ ′ channel can originate from either the spin or orbital ordering and the spin and orbital degrees of freedom are strongly coupled for 5d Ir. Therefore, possible orbital contribution from Ir to the observed (1, 0, 9) peak can't be excluded. In addition, it can also originate from some local structural distortion or preferred neighborhood around the Ir atoms, which makes the scattering amplitude of Ir anisotropic and leads to the resonant scattering at the Ir L 3 edge. Nevertheless, we speculate that it most likely results from the magnetic polarization of the Ir 5d states, due to two reasons. First, the resonant scattering set in below a relatively low temperature (1 2 K), In addition, doping more Ir into the Fe site is able to tune the magnetic ground state of the localized Eu 2+ spins, from the A-type AFM order in Eu(Fe 0.94 Ir 0.06 ) 2 As 2 to the FM order in Eu(Fe 0.88 Ir 0.12 ) 2 As 2 , 14 via the change of the indirect Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction mediated by the conduction d -electrons on the FeAs layers. 