The topological materials, including topological insulators They provide a natural understanding on the underlying origin of the resistivity anomaly at ∼135 K and its associated reversal of the charge carrier type. Our observations also provide key information on deciphering the topological nature of ZrTe 5 and possible temperature-induced topological phase transition. The transition metal pentatellurides like ZrTe 5 and HfTe 5 Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) ZrTe 5 is a layered compound which crystallizes in the orthorhombic crystal structure The ZrTe 5 crystal is constructed from layer-stacking along the b-axis of the ZrTe 5 sheets. The two-dimensional ZrTe 5 sheet (Fig. Each ZrTe 5 sheet is nominally charge neutral, and the distance between the adjacent two ZrTe 5 sheets along the b-axis is quite large (∼7.25 Å), giving rise to a weak interlayer coupling The ARPES data are taken with our new laser-based system equipped with the latestgeneration time-of-flight analyzer. It not only has high energy and momentum resolutions, but also has a new capability of covering two-dimensional momentum space simultaneously (see Methods for experimental details). Fig. They also exhibit a strong anisotropy: the bands are steeper along the horizontal or vertical high-symmetry directions (Fig. To understand the measured electronic structure, we have performed band structure calculations of ZrTe 5 (see Methods for details of the band structure calculations). The calculated band structures (Fig. We have carried out detailed ARPES measurements on ZrTe 5 at different temperatures in order to understand the origin of the anomalous transport properties and examine on possible temperature-induced topological phase transition in ZrTe 5 . Fig. These results are highly reproducible by measuring on the same sample with cycles of cooling down and warming up (see Fig. From Fig. On the other hand, the UB band is well above the Fermi level at high temperature (255K in Fig. Although the overall band structure shifts down with decreasing temperature, we find that it is not a rigid band shift. To keep track on the temperature evolution of the bands in a more quantitative way, we plot the photoemission spectra (EDCs) at Γ point measured at different temperatures in Fig. The strong suppression of the spectral weight in the valley region is indicative of an gap opening between the LB band and the UB band (Fig. The temperature dependence of the Fermi surface provides a clear evidence of a temperature-induced Lifshitz transition in ZrTe 5 . Fig. The identification of a temperature-induced Lifshtz transition provides direct information to naturally explain the origin of the transport property anomalies in ZrTe 5 . Because there is an energy gap between the LB band and UB band, and the bands shift with temperature (Fig. Our present results pose a new issue on the origin of the chemical potential variation with temperature in ZrTe 5 , i.e., how temperature can induce a dramatic chemical potential shift in ZrTe 5 without obvious charge carrier doping. In terms of usual understanding, our temperature-dependent results indicate that extra holes are present above ∼135 K, no carriers present in the semiconducting state around 135 K, and extra electrons appear below ∼135 K. Without external doping mechanism, these seem to violate the charge balance in the temperature variation process. We believe the measured temperature-dependent behaviors represent intrinsic properties of ZrTe 5 , not artifact caused by extrinsic factors like trivial absorption/desorption process. First, the measurements were performed in ultra-high vacuum and in different ARPES systems; the results are reproducible. Second, the results are consistent with other ARPES results on similar ZrTe 5 sample with similar resistivity anomaly temperature Our detailed electronic structure measurements of ZrTe 5 provide direct information to examine on the nature of its possible topological state, i.e., whether it is a topological insulator On the other hand, for the reports of three-dimensional Dirac semimetal Band structure calculations predict that single-layer ZrTe 5 is a two-dimensional topological insulator We finally examine on possible temperature-induced topological phase transition expected in ZrTe 5 To check whether the gap between the LB and UB bands near Γ is closed and possible emergence of the in-gap topological surface state at low temperature, we carried out ARPES measurement on ZrTe 5 to a very low temperature, ∼2 K (Fig. The topological transition from a weak to a strong three-dimensional insulators asks that the LB and UB bands at Γ point move close to each other with decreasing temperature, touch and merge together, and then open a new gap after band inversion. Our ARPES results (Fig. To check on this possibility, we carefully searched for the possible signature of the topological surface state that would be expected inside the gap region near Γ point at ∼2 K. As seen from Fig. Our present study indicates a clear trend of such a transition; further enhancement of the interlayer coupling is needed to materialize such a topological phase transition. In summary, we have carried out comprehensive high resolution ARPES measurements on ZrTe 5 . We have uncovered strong electronic evidence of a temperature-induced Lifshitz transition in ZrTe 5 . The sample undergoes a p-type-semimetal to a semiconductor, to an n-type-semimetal transition with decreasing temperature. This evolution provides a natural explanation on the long-standing issue of the origin of the resistivity anomaly in ZrTe 5 . It also indicates clearly that ZrTe 5 with a resistive anomaly at ∼135 K is not a threedimensional Dirac semimetal. We found electronic signatures that may be related to the edge states associated with two-dimensional topological insulator. With decreasing temperature, there is a trend of the transition from a weak topological insulator to a strong topological insulator, but the strong topological insulator has not been realized at the lowest temperature we measured (∼2 K). Further enhancement of interlayer coupling, either by external high pressure or internal chemical pressure, may facilitate to the realization of such a transition. High quality single crystal samples of ZrTe 5 were grown by the chemical vapour transport method with iodine as transport agent. The unique resistivity peak sits at a temperature of ∼135 K (Fig. The ARPES measurements were performed at our new laser-based system equipped with the 6.994 eV vacuum-ultra-violet (VUV) laser and the time-of-flight electron energy analyzer (ARToF 10K by Omicron Scienta) The band structure calculations are performed with the projector augmented wave (PAW) method SOC is included as a second vibrational step using scalar relativistic eigenfunctions as the bases after the initial calculation is achieved in the self-consistent iterations. Maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) for the p orbitals of Te atoms have been constructed by using the WANNIER90 code 