We introduce a two-orbital Hamiltonian on a square lattice that contains on-site attractive interactions involving the two eg orbitals. Via a canonical mean-field procedure similar to the one applied to the well-known negative-U Hubbard model, it is shown that the new model develops d-wave (B1g) superconductivity with nodes along the diagonal directions of the square Brillouin zone. This result is also supported by exact diagonalization of the model in a small cluster. The expectation is that this relatively simple attractive model could be used to address the properties of multiorbital d-wave superconductors in the same manner that the negative-U Hubbard model is widely applied to the study of the properties of s-wave single-orbital superconductors. In particular, we show that by splitting the eg orbitals and working at three-quarters filling, such that the x 2 -y 2 orbital dominates at the Fermi level but the 3z 2 -r 2 orbital contribution is nonzero, the d-wave pairing state found here phenomenologically reproduces several properties of the superconducting state of the high Tc cuprates. Simple model Hamiltonians that can capture the basic aspects of the electronic collective states observed in complex materials, such as in the cases of antiferromagnetism or superconductivity, are crucial to advance the theoretical understanding of these nontrivial phases and to interpret and guide experimental efforts. The standard Hubbard and t -J models have successfully allowed for the study of the properties of antiferromagnetic compounds in the undoped limit The discovery of high T c superconductivity in the ironbased pnictides and selenides has provided a novel playground to investigate the potentially crucial role played by having many simultaneously active degrees of freedom involved in the mechanism of superconductivity. The paper is organized as follows: in Section II the Hamiltonian for the new multiorbital d-wave model is presented. A mean-field study of the Hamiltonian is performed in Section III. Section IV is devoted to the exact diagonalization of the model in a small cluster and the calculation of the d-wave and s-wave pairing correlations. A final discussion of the main results is presented in Section V. The tight-binding term of the multiorbital d-wave model (dubbed the MD model) introduced here results from applying the Slater-Koster 24 method to the x 2 -y 2 and 3z 2 -r 2 d-orbitals using a square lattice. It is well known that these are the two orbitals of relevance in the colossal magnetoresistive manganites. where c † i,α,σ creates an electron at site i, orbital α, and with spin projection σ. The orbital label α = 1 (2) indicates the x 2 -y 2 (3z 2 -r 2 ) orbital. ν is a unit vector that takes the values x or ŷ. The hoppings are given by t 1,1 = t 1 , t 2,2 = t 2 , and t 1,2 = τ ν t 3 where τ x = 1 and τ ŷ = -1 (note that this last sign difference is crucial to obtain the d-wave pairing). While the actual amplitudes t i depend on the overlap of integrals, it is customary to consider them as free parameters that are chosen to reproduce the shape of the Fermi surface of the system to be studied. with While indeed the hoppings t i could be adjusted to reproduce the shape of a particular Fermi surface, to simplify the calculations we adopt the values and so that all the hoppings t i can be expressed in terms of one single parameter t 0 (again, note that the hopping t 3 also has a sign difference between the x and y directions, crucial tor d-wave pairing). The tight-binding dispersion, with the energy in units of t 0 , is shown in panel (a) of Fig. In fact, Eq. 2 can be rewritten as where ) and with σ i the Pauli matrices and and The expressions above establish that the orbital matrix σ 1 transforms like B 1g , while σ 0 and σ 3 transform like A 1g . The orbital composition of the band that determines the Fermi surface is displayed in Fig. will transform as B 1g and, therefore, it is a d-wave pairing operator. The next step is to construct an interaction term to be added to the Hamiltonian that would favor d-wave pairing. Based on the symmetry considerations above, this term can be written as by analogy with the attraction that leads to s-wave pairing (- ) in the negative-U Hubbard model. Expanding Eq. 15 in terms of the c † i,α,σ operators it can be shown that where Notice that these are precisely two of the terms that are already present in the interaction portion of the standard (repulsive) multiorbital Hubbard model, but now with couplings of opposite signs (qualitatively similar as to how the sign of U is reversed in the one-orbital Hubbard model to induce s-wave pairing). As in the case of the negative-U Hubbard model, the attractive interactions that appear in H int should be understood as effective interactions that mimic the net effect of the (often complex) actual physical mechanism that causes the attraction in the d-wave channel. This real pairing mechanism may involve the spin, orbital, and/or lattice, and our model is an effective-model representation of those physical processes. As in the case of the negative-U Hubbard model, a simple mean-field approximation is here expected to capture the essence of the ground state of the new proposed dwave model. The interacting term H int in momentum space is given by (18) Introducing the standard mean-field expectation val- and performing the substitution (and an analogous substitution for the product of annihilation operators), the mean-field results are obtained. As usual, the fluctuations around the average given by (c † k,α,↑ c † -k,-α,↓ -b † k ) are assumed to be small. The resulting mean-field Hamiltonian is given by where the generalized Nambu spinor is where we have defined α,↑ and N is the number of sites. Similarly as for the case of magnetic order in the multiorbital Hubbard model, where V intra = 2V ∆u k v k is the effective intraband pairing and ) is the effective interband pairing and u k and v k are the elements of the unitarian matrix U that performs the change of base transformation and satisfy u 2 k + v 2 k = 1. Since at the FS (see panel (d) of Fig. As in the case of multiorbital magnetism, gaps in the band structure appear not only at the Fermi surface (FS), but also at lower energies inside the Fermi sea. The mean-field band structure for the case of V = 2 is indicated by the red lines in panel (b) of Fig. ) which is negligible for small values of V , as in Fig. It is well-known that the tendencies towards s-wave pairing are clear in the negative-U Hubbard model even already in a rather small 2 × 2 cluster. In both models, the pairing operators expectation values rapidly increase with the attraction, but in the inset it can be noticed that in the negative-U model the pairing monotonously increases with |U | while in the MD model there is a jump at V ≈ 0.7 with a monotonous increase only afterwards. This behavior is in qualitative agreement with the mean-field result indicating that the superconducting state is stabilized only at a finite value of V of order unity. For comparison the onsite intraorbital s-wave pairing correlations for the MD model using the pairing operator ∆ were also calculated (see diamonds in the figure). Clearly, there is no pairing in the s-wave channel, as expected. Additional evidence of pairing in the MD model is obtained by studying the behavior of the ground state energy varying the chemical potential. In Fig. We have also verified explicitly, by inspection of the wave functions, that the relative symmetry between all the Neven ground states is B 1g , 38 as expected. In this publication, we presented a two-orbital Hamiltonian H MD that can generate on-site d-wave superconductivity due to the non-trivial symmetry of the overlap integrals between hybridized orbitals that form the bands at the Fermi surface. In particular, this minimum model for d-wave pairing contains two e g orbitals on a square lattice. Via a canonical mean-field calculation, we have shown that this model, that contains an attractive on-site interorbital interaction and an effective antiferromagnetic Hund interaction, indeed supports d-wave superconductivity if the orbitals x 2 -y 2 and 3z 2 -r 2 are hybridized and non-degenerate. In multiorbital materials, it is possible that interorbital pairing occurs at the Fermi surface. Moreover, it was shown that the interorbital attraction also opens gaps away from the Fermi surface, a phenomenon already experimentally observed, but not yet explained, in the pnictides. It is important to remark that the symmetry of the pairing order parameter in the MD model can be changed by modifying the lattice geometry or the orbitals involved. For example, if the d xz and d yz orbitals are considered, still using a square lattice, the symmetry of the on-site order parameter becomes B 2g , i.e., with nodes along the x and y axes of the Brilloun zone. 