We detect the persistence of the solidification and order-disorder first-order transition lines in the phase diagram of nanocrystalline Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 vortex matter down to a system size of less than hundred vortices. The temperature-location of the vortex solidification transition line is not altered by decreasing the sample size although there is a depletion of the entropy-jump at the transition with respect to macroscopic vortex matter. The solid order-disorder phase transition field moves upward on decreasing the system size due to the increase of the surface-to-volume ratio of vortices entailing a decrease on the average vortex binding energy. Understanding size-induced structural phase transitions and size-depression of transition temperatures is crucial for the development of devices made of nanoscale building-blocks of functional materials. These blocks can be as small as nanocrystals with hundred particles or less. In the case of hard condensed matter, the physical properties and stable phases of nanocrystals strongly depend on its size and shape. For instance, the size-induced depression of characteristic temperatures and thermodynamic properties in melting, Vortex matter in high-temperature superconductors is a rich soft-condensed matter playground where relevant questions on this issue can be easily answered. The number of particles (vortices) can be tuned by varying the applied fields since the inter-vortex spacing a ∝ 1/B. A model high-T c material to study these issues is the layered Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 compound that in its pristine form is a rather clean system. The FOT line H FOT in this material Figure Figure Therefore, the H FOT transition persists and no melting-point depression is observed even for a nanocrystal with less than hundred vortices. Ordinary melting is the result of thermal breaking of the inter-particle bonds. In nanocrystals the average binding energy, < E bin >, is smaller since the considerable fraction of particles located at the surface, n s , has a lesser binding energy. The ratio between the nanocrystalline-tomacroscopic < E bin > can be obtained in a rough estimation as ∆E bin = (0.5n s ) + (1 -n s ), the first term coming from considering that the binding energy of vortices of the outer shell is reduced to half the value for vortices at the interior of the sample, considered in the second term. For instance, for the smallest measured nanocrystal n s = 38 % and ∆E bin ∼ 80 %, a decrease of < E bin > that in hard condensed matter should be enough in order to produce a noticeable melting-point depression. In order to better understand these findings, theoretical work on the sample-size dependence of the entropyjump at the FOT and the electromagnetic-to-Josephson interactions ratio is required. Any attempt of quantitative explanation of this evolution should include a realistic model on the evolution of the binding energy on decreasing the system size for extremely-layered vortex matter. We also study the effect of decreasing the vortex number on the solid order-disorder H SP transition. Figure The non-thermodynamic line at which magnetic re-sponse becomes irreversible, H IL , is also affected by confinement. For nanocrystalline vortex matter this line is located at higher fields than for the macroscopic case, see Fig. 