The thermal conductivity κ of the iron-arsenide superconductor Ba1-xKxFe2As2 was measured for heat currents parallel and perpendicular to the tetragonal c axis at temperatures down to 50 mK and in magnetic fields up to 15 T. Measurements were performed on samples with compositions ranging from optimal doping (x = 0.34; Tc = 39 K) down to dopings deep into the region where antiferromagnetic order coexists with superconductivity (x = 0.16; Tc = 7 K). In zero field, there is no residual linear term in κ(T ) as T → 0 at any doping, whether for in-plane or inter-plane transport. This shows that there are no nodes in the superconducting gap. However, as x decreases into the range of coexistence with antiferromagnetism, the residual linear term grows more and more rapidly with applied magnetic field. This shows that the superconducting energy gap develops minima at certain locations on the Fermi surface and these minima deepen with decreasing x. We propose that the minima in the gap structure arise when the Fermi surface of Ba1-xKxFe2As2 is reconstructed by the antiferromagnetic order. Soon after the discovery of superconductivity in ironbased materials, 1 it was recognized that a conventional phonon-mediated pairing cannot account for the high critical temperature T c . In the iron-based superconductors, the superconducting gap structure has been studied most extensively in the oxygen-free materials with BaFe 2 As 2 (Ba122) as a parent compound. Single crystals of Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 were grown using a self-flux technique. The thermal conductivity was measured in a standard one-heater two-thermometer technique described elsewhere, In the right panels of Fig. The thermal conductivity of the same four samples, measured using the same contacts, is also displayed in Fig. Residual linear term κ0/T , normalized by the normal-state conductivity, κN/T , as a function of magnetic field H, normalized by the upper critical field Hc2 (defined in Fig. In the left panel of Fig. From Fig. Secondly, we see that the rate at which a magnetic field excites heat-carrying quasiparticles in K-Ba122 varies enormously with doping. In the absence of nodes, quasiparticle conduction proceeds by tunnelling between states localized in the cores of adjacent vortices, which grows exponentially as the inter-vortex separation decreases with increasing field, If the gap is large everywhere on the Fermi surface, the coherence length will be small everywhere, and the growth of κ 0 /κ N vs H will be very slow at low H/H c2 . This is what we observe in K-Ba122 near optimal doping (T c 37 K). If the gap is small on some part of the Fermi surface, compared to the maximum value that dictates H c2 , this will make it easier to excite quasiparticles, and so lead to an enhanced thermal conductivity at a given value of H/H c2 . This is what happens in K-Ba122 with decreasing x, whereby κ 0 /κ N becomes larger and larger with underdoping. A good way to visualize this evolution is to plot κ 0 /κ N vs x at H/H c2 = 0.15, as done in Fig. There are two ways in which the gap can be small on part of the Fermi surface. It can develop a strong anisotropy on one sheet of the Fermi surface, as is believed to happen in borocarbide superconductors. The third property of the κ 0 /κ N vs H data in Fig. In Fig. The question is: why does the gap develop a modulation? In a number of calculations applied to pnictides, the so-called s ± state is the most stable. This is a state with s-wave symmetry but with a gap that changes sign in going from the hole-like Fermi surface centred at Γ (∆ h > 0) to the electron-like Fermi surfaces centred at X and M (∆ e < 0). It is typically the gap on the electron Fermi surface centred at the M point of the Brillouin zone that shows a strong angular dependence within the basal plane. FIG. underdoped side of the phase diagram, having to do with the onset of antiferromagnetic order. This is based on the fact that the modulation of the gap and the magnetic order appear at the same concentration, as seen in Fig. Neutron scattering studies show that antiferromagnetic order in K-Ba122 coexists with superconductivity over a broad range of doping, up to x 0.25 (T c 26 K), and both magnetism and superconductivity are bulk and occupy at least 95% of the sample volume. In underdoped Co-Ba122, a similar thermal conductivity study revealed that a strong modulation of the gap also appears with the onset of magnetic order. However, there is a difference between K-Ba122 and FIG. In summary, the thermal conductivity of K-Ba122 in the T = 0 limit reveals three main facts. First, the superconducting gap at optimal doping, where T c is maximal, is isotropic, with no sign of significant modulation anywhere on the Fermi surface. This reinforces the statement made earlier on the basis of thermal conductivity data in Co-Ba122, 