The study of light-matter interaction has led to many fundamental discoveries as well as numerous important technologies. Over the last decades, great strides have been made in increasing the strength of this interaction at the single-photon level, leading to a continual exploration of new physics and applications. Recently, a major achievement has been the demonstration of the so-called strong coupling regime [1, 2], a key advancement enabling great progress in quantum information science. Here, we demonstrate light-matter interaction over an order of magnitude stronger than previously reported, reaching the nonperturbative regime of ultrastrong coupling (USC). We achieve this using a superconducting artificial atom tunably coupled to the electromagnetic continuum of a one-dimensional waveguide. For the largest coupling, the spontaneous emission rate of the atom exceeds its transition frequency. In this USC regime, the description of atom and light as distinct entities breaks down, and a new description in terms of hybrid states is required [4, 8]. Our results open the door to a wealth of new physics and applications. Beyond light-matter interaction itself, the tunability of our system makes it a promising tool to study a number of important physical systems such as the well-known spin-boson [9] and Kondo models [12]. Light propagating in a one-dimensional (1D) waveguide is described by a 1D electromagnetic field with a continuous spectrum of frequencies. The strong coupling regime A distinct regime of light-matter interaction is reached when Γ G becomes comparable to the atomic transition frequency Γ G /∆ ∼ 0.1, the ultrastrong coupling (USC) regime. Most studies involving atom-field interactions are in the regime Γ G ∆ where the common rotating-wave approximation (RWA) applies. In the USC regime, the RWA breaks down but perturbative treatments still allow an effective atom-field description when Γ G /∆ ∼ 0.1 Superconducting qubits are artificial atoms with transitions in the microwave range of frequencies. Recently, fluxtype superconducting qubits have been put forward as candidates to reach the nonperturbative USC regime The experiments are performed by applying a probe field with a variable frequency and recording the transmitted field amplitude and phase on a vector network analyzer. For emission rates Γ 1 /∆ 1, where Γ 1 is the total emission rate, and in the presence of thermal excitations, the transmitted coherent scattering amplitude at low driving power is given by Here Γ 2 ≡ Γ φ + (Γ 1 /2)(1 + 2n th ) is the total decoherence rate, Γ φ is the pure dephasing rate, δω = ω -∆ is the detuning of the probe field, and n th is the thermal photon occupation number at the qubit frequency (Supplementary Information). The maximum reflection amplitude is As in other experiments on superconducting quantum circuits We first show measurements on a device with a fixed coupling junction with β 3.5 (Fig. Having observed two devices with Γ 1 ∆ and Γ 1 > ∆, we now explore the intermediate region using a device with tunable coupling (Fig. 3.6, β (b) 2.0, β (c) 1.6. Fig. In order to understand the spectrum of the tunable coupling device and extract the corresponding emission rates Γ 1 , we need to take into account finite temperature effects. We can set an upper bound on n th , which is n max ≡ (1/2)(1/ √ r 0 -1) (Methods). Fig. with R Q = h/(2e) 2 = 6.5 kΩ the resistance quantum and Z 0 the characteristic impedance of the line. The matrix element values of the phase operator across the coupling junction β, |φ β | 2 , are calculated using the methods of reference 3. The observed values of Γ 1 /∆ agree very well with the calculated values based on our circuit Our system allows us to explore the spin-boson (SB) model in an ohmic bath. According to the SB model, the high frequency modes of the transmission line renormalize the bare qubit splitting ∆ 0 to ( α SB is the SB normalized coupling strength that is related to the spectral density of the environment J(ω). For an ohmic system such as our transmission line, α SB = J(ω)/πω. ω C ∆ 0 is the cutoff frequency of the environment and p is a constant of order 1. Up to α SB ∼ 0.5, we identify α SB = Γ 1 /π∆. Above α SB 0.5 (or Γ 1 /∆ π/2) this relation becomes a lower bound for α SB (Supplementary Information). In Fig. Euler constant. We find the best fit to the measured ∆ using a cutoff of ω C /2π = 50 GHz, which is consistent with characteristic system frequencies such as the plasma frequency of the qubit junctions and the superconducting gap. The agreement between the observed qubit splittings ∆ and our estimates of the renormalized gaps is clear We have presented measurements of superconducting flux qubits in 1D open transmission lines in regimes of interaction starting at strong coupling and ranging deeply into the ultrastrong coupling regime. In particular, we observed qubits with emission rates exceeding their own frequency, a clear indication of nonperturbative ultrastrong coupling. These results are very relevant for the study of open systems in the USC regime, opening the door to the development of a new generation of quantum electronics with ultrahigh bandwidth for quantum and nonlinear optics applications. The tunability of our system also makes it well-suited to the simulation of other quantum systems. In particular, we showed that the device can span the various transition regions of the SB model. With further development of our quantum circuit, the structure of the photon dressing cloud could also be directly detected, allowing the study of the physics of the Kondo model Note added in proof: After acceptance of our paper, a related manuscript was published Device details and fabrication. We made the device with tuneable coupling by replacing the β-junction with a SQUID threaded by a flux Φ β . The tuneable coupling device then consists of two loops, the main loop that changes primarily the qubit magnetic energy through the flux Φ and the β-loop that changes the effective coupling to the transmission line through Φ β . Changing β also modifies the minimum qubit splitting ∆. In order to minimize this effect, we make the SQUID junctions asymmetric, which lowers the sensitivity of ∆ to Φ β . Similar tuneable coupling architectures were already suggested in ref. The fabrication methods used are based on those of ref. The transmission line consists of a 6.5 mm long on-chip coplanar waveguide with a center line and gaps 8 μm and 4 μm wide, respectively, resulting in a 50 Ω characteristic impedance. Numerical simulations are run to verify the impedance of the circuit. We use a squared webbed ground to reduce superconducting vortex motion on the ground plane. Bounds on qubit emission rate. The dependence of r 0 and Γ 2 on n th shown below equation Experiments on the device in Fig. The circuit layout of a flux qubit galvanically tunably coupled to a transmission line with a SQUID-loop shared between the two can be seen in Fig. (a) Schematic of the circuit layout of a flux qubit sharing a SQUID-junction with a transmission line. The coefficients r1, r2, r3, r4, r5 represent the size of the junctions. For the device used in the experiment, r2 = 0.62, r4 = 2.6, r1 = r3 = r5 = 1. (b) Qubit potential with first four energy levels for Φ β = 0, Φ = Φ0/2 together with the wave functions of the lowest two levels for the ground (symmetric) and first excited state (antisymmetric). The parameters used are similar to the device with tunable coupling of the main text, EJ /EC 70, EJ /h 350 GHz. Notice that the levels lie above the barrier as is usual for flux qubits with level splittings in the GHz range The Lagrangian of the qubit can be written down by considering the fluxoid quantization condition on the separate loops: where f = Φ /Φ 0 , f β = Φ β /Φ 0 are the magnetic frustration in each loop. Using φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 4 as the independent degrees of freedom, the Lagrangian of the qubit reads Here we defined the reduced flux quantum φ 0 = Φ 0 /2π, C is the capacitance of junction with size r = 1, E J = I C φ 0 . The canonical momenta q i = ∂L/∂ φi are related to the derivative of the conjugate phase operator: (S4) where det(K) = r 2 r 3 (r 4 + r 5 ) + r 1 (r 3 (r 4 + r 5 ) + r 2 (r 3 + r 4 + r 5 )) is the dimensionless determinant of the capacitance matrix. We can now write down the Hamiltonian following a Legendre transformation H = i q i φi -L: Here we defined the quantized charge operator n i = q i as well as the charging energy E C = e 2 /2C. If we set f β = 0 the last term in the Josephson energy becomes r 5 cos φ 4 , which combined with the r 4 term becomes an effective junction of size (r 4 + r 5 ). For f β = 0.5, the last term becomes -r 5 cos φ 4 , which now leads to an effective junction of size (r 4r 5 ). Therefore we can tune the effective size of the coupling junction without affecting much of the rest of the qubit Hamiltonian. The different junction size will unavoidably lead to modifications of the qubit splitting. In order to diagonalize the Hamiltonian it is convenient to find its representation in the charge basis {|n } where the Josephson terms have a simple expression, since The Josephson terms are therefore not represented by a closed Hilbert subspace in the charge basis. Therefore we need to restrict the number of charges between -n max and n max for each degree of freedom. Usually for n max = 10 the error in the eigenenergies is less than 1%. Fig For a given set of fluxes (f , f β ) we can find the eigenenergies and eigenstates of the qubit. For all calculations shown in this section we take the values close to the experiment with the tunable coupling device r 1 = r 3 = 1.0, r 2 = 0.6, r 4 = 1.0, r 5 = 2.6, E J /E C = 70, E J /h = 300 GHz, n max = 10. The areas of the two qubit loops are seen to be A /A β 8.3, which agree with the data as seen in the calculations of Fig. The resulting spectra in Fig. In analogy with the usual flux qubit potential - In addition to equation We calculate the difference between consecutive qubit symmetry points in Fig. As shown in Ref. The limits of integration fall within a unit cell of the qubit potential. We use the representation of the phase operator in the qubit basis to obtain the different components of the qubit operator. We want only transverse coupling σ x with matrix element 0| φ4 |1 ≡ φ 4 , and not σ z terms that would otherwise induce dephasing in the qubit from the line. Using equation (S13) we can compute the form of the operator, shown in Fig. S5 Clearly, the coupling operator only has σ x component at the symmetry point while its magnitude increases by approximately a factor of 2.6, as expected due to the modulation of the size of the β-junction. The qubit gap is also modulated as expected due to the effective change in size of β. The change is approximately of a factor of 2. Therefore the normalized coupling Γ/∆ ∼ |φ β | 2 (see section S7) increases by a factor of ∼ 7 from Φ β = 0 to Φ β = Φ 0 /2. On Fig. Following from where the C n = √ γA n are the jump operators, with γ the rate for each process with collapse operator A n . Here H is the free Hamiltonian and contains the qubit part truncated to two levels, H qb / = ∆σ x /2σ z /2 and the external Following with r 0 ≡ Γ 1 /(2Γ 2 (1 + 2n th )) and Ω R ≡ Ω/ √ 1 + 2n th . The form of Eq. (S31) is the same as the usual reflection coefficient if n th = 0. Therefore the fitted values for r 0 and Γ 2 are going to be independent of temperature, the difference will appear in Γ 1 and Γ φ . The transmission coefficient will be given by t where the last step assumed weak driving The resulting expression is the function used to fit the data, equation 2 in the main article. The minimum of transmission on-resonance in this case is Setting n th = 0 one restores the result of t min (n The extracted values of Γ 1 from the experiment can be then bound assuming no thermal photons (lower bound) or the maximum number of photons allowed if Γ φ = 0 (upper bound), as seen in Fig. The fits in figures 2, 3 of the main text are performed simultaneously on both the real and imaginary parts. We show here the total fitted transmission components. Fig. The SQUID loop in the qubit with tunable coupling may be an additional source of decoherence, especially dephasing noise since fluctuations in the flux Φ β will directly convert into fluctuations of the qubit gap ∆. We have assumed in the main text that the enhanced linewidth of the qubit is due to thermal effects. The justification is made here where we put bounds on possible sources of dephasing. The sensitivity of the qubit gap as function of Φ β can be estimated by using the modulation of the qubit gap curve on Fig. Another possible source of flux noise would be through the qubit renormalization frequency as predicted by the spin-boson model. The model predicts (S33) Here we used that in our experiment (Fig. We want to establish more solid bounds on the maximum effective temperature T eff = 90 mK extracted from the fits of qubit spectra at different flux values, shown in Fig. In Fig. We can also calculate the bounds on the qubit emission rate 2Γ 2 r 0 < Γ 1 < 2Γ 2 √ r 0 , shown in Fig. Let us begin with the spin-boson Hamiltonian which is characterized by the spectral function, defined as where we have assumed an Ohmic spectral bath. As it is usual in condensed matter physics To this end, we will derive a quantum master equation for the qubit. We start from the combined qubit-bath density matrix in the interaction picture where the unitary transformation U (t) = exp(iH 0 t) brings us into the rotating frame. This yields the following time-evolution equation for the density matrix ρ(t) being H int (t) the coupling Hamiltonian in the interaction picture, given by S38) where A(t), X(t) are the system and bath operators, respectively. Equation (S36) can be formally integrated, yielding the following integro-differential equation As it is commonplace, we assume the Born approximation (weak coupling to the bath, which allows us to approximate ρ(t) = ρ sys (t)⊗ρ b (0), for any time t) and the Markov approximation (delta-correlated bath), which in turn corresponds with the Markovian dynamics of the spin-boson model defined by α SB < 1/2 where Tr b (A(t)X(t)) refers to the trace over the bath degrees of freedom X(t). Expanding the double commutator, and using the cyclic property of the trace, Tr(AX) = Tr(XA), we can rewrite the master equation as where the spontaneous decay rate Γ 1 is given by In equation (S43), we have introduced the symetrized bath correlation function which can be readily calculated using the bosonic commutation relations [a k , a k ] = 0, [a k , a † k ] = δ kk and the two-time correlation functions a † (t)a(t ) = k g 2 k n k e iω k (t-t ) , a(t)a † (t ) = k g 2 k (1 + n k )e iω k (t -t) . (S44) In the above expressions, n k is the average number of photons in the k-th oscillator, and is given by For the sake of simplicity, but without loss of generality, we will assume that we are at zero temperature, so that n k = 0. Therefore, the relaxation rate Γ 1 can be rewritten as The last term in Eq. (S46) is nothing but the Fourier transform of the delta function dτ e iω k τ , (S47) yielding the following expression for Γ 1 Using the second identity of Eq. (S35) we finally arrive at a relation between Γ 1 and α SB , It is worth mentioning that this result can be generalized for a bath at finite temperature T As detailed in The quantized flux field in a 1D-transmission line assuming periodic boundary conditions (suitable for infinite transmission lines) takes the form φ = k 2c 0 ω k L âk e i(kx-ω k t) + â † k e -i(kx-ω k t) , (S50) where the line has length L, capacitance and inductance per unit length c 0 , l 0 and mode frequency ω k . The dispersion relation is given by ω k = kc = k(l 0 c 0 ) -1/2 , c being the speed of light in the line. The coupling term takes the form (see Supplementary material in which is nothing but the current along the transmission line times the effective node flux generated by the qubit φ 0 φβ , with φ 0 = Φ 0 /2π the reduced flux quantum and φβ the phase operator across the qubit coupling junction β. δ(x) is the Dirac delta, since the qubit is assumed to sit at the origin x = 0. The strength of the coupling to mode k is given by with φ β ≡ 1| φβ |0 the matrix element of the phase operator across the qubit coupling junction β. The spectral density J(ω) Taking the limit to the continuum, using that the density of states is L/2π, Z 0 = (l 0 /c 0 ) 1/2 being the characteristic impedance of the transmission line. The factor of 2 in front of the integral is due to the fact that the frequency ω k is degenerate for wavectors k and -|k|. By integrating over k < 0 and k > 0 we are taking into account the current fluctuations of the two semi-infinite transmission lines, which represent two independent baths. Therefore, and connecting to the traces in Fig. 