We show that the dynamical freezing of vortex structures nucleated at diluted densities in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 samples with a dense distribution of columnar defects, B ∼ 10 -2 BΦ with BΦ = 5 kG, results in configurations with liquid-like correlations. We propose a freezing model considering a relaxation dynamics dominated by double-kink excitations driven by the local stresses obtained directly from experimental images. With this model we estimate the relaxation barrier and the freezing temperature. We argue that the low-field frozen vortex structures nucleated in a dense distribution of columnar defects thus correspond to an out-of-equilibrium non-entangled liquid with strongly reduced mobility rather than to a snapshot of a metastable state with divergent activation barriers as for instance expected for the Bose-glass phase at equilibrium. Vortices nucleated in high-temperature superconducting samples In field-cooling magnetic decorations, a hightemperature vortex state is driven into a frozen configuration at T freez , an intermediate temperature between the initial state and the lower temperatures at which experiments are performed. In this work we study via magnetic decoration the structural properties of vortex matter nucleated in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 samples with a large ratio of CD to vortices, n CD /n v = B Φ /B, with B Φ = n CD Φ 0 = 5 kG the matching field. Although transport and magnetic relaxation experiments were performed for the same system The single-crystal of optimally-doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 studied here was grown by the travelling-floating-zone method The H -T phase diagram of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 vortex matter with such a dense distribution of CD was obtained by means of local Hall-probe magnetometry up to 10 5 G, see Fig. Figure The high-temperature H FOT transition is detected in ac transmittivity measurements as a frequencyindependent so-called paramagnetic peak that develops in T at the same H as the jump in local induction detected in dc hysteresis loops. Figure In this limit, one can expect that the vortex structure presents similar topological order than in the case of pristine samples. Strikingly, the observed vortex structures are amorphous, irrespective of the vortex density within the studied range. These results follow the same trend than magnetic decoration data on samples with a lessdense distribution of CD (B Φ = 3.5 kG) were a complete destruction of translational order was reported. Similar amorphous structures were recently reported for the strongly-pinned vortex matter in pnictide BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 and Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 samples, In the field-cooling magnetic decoration experiments performed here, vortex matter is nucleated in the hightemperature liquid phase and vortices have a high mobility since the decoupled pancakes present a low shear viscosity. On cooling, vortex mobility gets reduced at T freez by the effect of the CD pinning potential and the vortex structure gets frozen, at lengthscales of the lattice parameter a 0 , in one of the many available metastable states. On further cooling to lower temperatures, vortices accommodate in order to profit from the pinning potential in all their length at lengthscales of the order of coherence length, ξ a 0 , a lengthscale that can not be resolved by means of magnetic decoration. As a consequence, the structural properties of vortex matter revealed by magnetic decorations at 4.2 K correspond to those of the structure frozen at T freez . Therefore this is the temperature that has to be considered in order to evaluate elastic and electromagnetic properties of vortex matter observed by means of magnetic decoration. As usually considered in the literature In spite of the absence of important fluctuations in vortex density, the pinning potential generated by a dense distribution of CD produces a strong impact in the lattice structural properties, particularly evident in the spatially inhomogeneous inter-vortex interaction energy and vortex-defect force. We will focus our study in the last magnitude since from its probability distribution we will get the experimental information considered as input to evaluate the typical energy barriers considered in the freezing dynamics model we propose in Section IV. The vortex-defect force is related to the inter-vortex repulsive force, f i . Figure K 1 is the first-order modified Bessel function, λ ab the in-plane penetration depth and ε 0 = (Φ 0 /4πλ ab ) 2 the vortex line-tension. The sum is performed up to a cutoff radius r cut = 10a 0 since f i does not change significantly when including terms at larger distances. For every magnetic field, f i is calculated considering the value of the penetration depth at the temperature at which the vortex structure is frozen that we approximate by T irr . We have considered the λ ab (T /T c ) evolution reported in Ref. 14 for pristine Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 samples and calculated λ ab (T irr /T c ) from the data of the vortex phase diagram shown in Fig. Figure Finally, Fig. Assuming that localized vortices relax the local excess stress by simple single-vortex excitations, linear extrapolation of f max i also allows the estimation of the field at which half-loop excitations are exhausted in favor of double-kink excitations In this section we discuss the experimental results in terms of a simple model for the dynamics of freezing of the vortex structure during field-cooling in the presence of the strong disorder associated to a dense distribution of CD. This model allows us to estimate the lifetime of the observed metastable vortex configurations and T freez from characteristic parameters of the system and considering information obtained from magnetic decoration images taken at low fields and 4.2 K (see Fig. During the freezing process, pinned vortices form metastable configurations α characterized by the set of occupation numbers of each CD, α ≡ {n k }, where n k = 1 if the k-th CD is occupied by a vortex, and n k = 0 otherwise. In each metastable state the interaction force f i must balance in average the defect-vortex force on vortex i. During the lifetime of the metastable state, controlled by thermal activation, vortices are bound to their columnar defects, only performing small futile fluctuations. Near freezing, the lifetime of metastable states are expected to be comparable to experimental times, and their typical configurations similar to the ones observed by magnetic decoration. We are thus considering that cooling down to 4.2 K for magnetic decoration has only the effect of further stabilizing the metastable configuration frozen at T freez . We will use this criterion for inferring information about the dynamics near the freezing of the observed vortex structures and ultimately unveil the relevant excitations that will allow us to discern on the nature of the frozen vortex structure. In order to model the non-stationary dynamics connecting different metastable states after a temperature quench, we will assume that the relaxation process is mainly dominated by single vortex hopping between the randomly-distributed CD. We are thus neglecting multiple vortex hopping, which might be important at higher vortex densities. For simplicity, we will consider identical CD, the so-called non-dispersive case. metastable states can thus be effectively viewed as a nonsteady transport process driven by the heterogeneous set of average local forces associated to the metastable state, {f α i }. The dependence of f i with α allow us to include the non-steady variation of vortex-vortex interactions during the relaxation and its magnetic field dependence. Half-loops excitations are expected to be relevant for pinned vortices such that f d < f α i < f c , where f d ≈ U 0 /d is the force at which a half-loop involves a displacement of the order of the average separation between defects, d, and f c ≈ U 0 /r r is the critical depinning force from a single defect. As we show below, half-loops drive the relaxation at very short time-scales; for larger times most local forces f α i drop below f d and half-loop excitations are exhausted. Figure where τ 0 is a characteristic time, or inverse of the attempt frequency. The last formula is an estimate for the escape time of a vortex i feeling the interaction force f α i with all the other vortices on a given metastable state α. We can define the lifetime of a given metastable configuration α as the minimum single-vortex escape-time among all vortices, as one vortex hop changes a pair of CD occupation numbers, producing a new metastable state α . Such a minimal escape time corresponds to the minimal escape barrier Therefore, it corresponds to the escape time of the least bounded vortex, feeling the maximum force f α max = max i [f α i ] in the metastable configuration α. Remembering that U 0 ∼ ε 0 (r 2 r /2ξ 2 ), we finally get the escape time for a given metastable configuration where we have defined the effective energy barrier associated with a given pinned configuration α, ) as a function of the characteristic lengths a 0 , λ ab , d and r r . The dimensionless force f α max = f α max λ ab /2ε 0 , is defined as obtained from the f max i data shown in Fig. Within this model, the field-dependence of the lifetime comes from the field-dependence of the maximum value of the defect-vortex force distribution for the given frozen configuration. The insert to Fig. Let us first start estimating the lifetime τ of the decorated metastable vortex configurations -we will drop the supraindex α when referring to the frozen metastable state-by making again the reasonable assumption that they were frozen at, or very near to, the irreversibility line, namely T freez ≈ T irr . From expressions of equations ( Recalculating f α max and U α as a function of T using this approximation for λ ab (T ), and setting τ (T freez ) ∼ τ exp , with τ exp ranging from seconds to hours, we get freezing temperatures in the range T freez ≈ 60 -70 K as shown in Fig. We conclude our theoretical analysis discussing the validity of some of the main assumptions of our model. We have assumed that CD are perfectly parallel to the applied magnetic field, so vortices individually localize in a single defect before a thermally activated event drives it to a neighbor, more favorable pin. However, in the experiments there might exist a misalignment between the applied field and the CD direction of less than 5 degrees. At low temperatures, below the irreversibility line, pinned vortices aligned with a single CD are stable only below the characteristic tilting "locking angle" θ L , between the applied field and the defects. For misalignements larger than θ L vortices can still feel the effect of CD but develop a kinked structure (staircase like) connecting more than one defect. Only above a larger characteristic "trapping angle" θ t , vortices are not locked by CD and the response to a tilt becomes linear. In our model we have neglected the contribution of half-loop excitations. As argued in the previous section this is justified from the fact that these excitations are important for forces smaller than fc = (U 0 /r r )(λ ab /2 0 ) ≈ 100 and larger than fd = fc (r r /d) ≈ fc /20 ≈ 5 at T irr , which is larger than the adimensional forces of Table . Since for our case f d = U 0 /d ≈ 202 0 /λ, we get the adimensional force fs ≡ f s (λ ab /2 0 ) ∼ 0.5. From these estimates we first note that the characteristic force extracted from magnetic decoration images is fmax ∼ 1 (see table Finally, we have also neglected the possible thermal renormalization of the pinning potential expected to become important above a characteristic temperature The predictions from the model discussed in the previous section, based on quantitative information obtained from decoration experiments at 4.2 K, suggest that the decorated structures were dynamically frozen at a much larger temperature T freez by the strong decrease of vortex mobility with temperature induced by the CD dense pinning potential. Within the model, this mobility is dominated by Arrhenius activation through the temperaturedependent finite barriers associated with DK excitations, as barriers for half-loops can be overcame in typical times of the order of milliseconds while the larger barriers expected for super-kinks were disregarded on the basis that DK alone are able to yield metastable states with macroscopic lifetimes. Within this scenario, it is worth mentioning that previous works studying samples with B Φ = 5 kG from the same batch than ours reported that the low-field regime presented non-divergent activation barriers varying linearly with the ac driving current. Note that this is in contrast with the barriers expected for instance for the Bose glass phase, which tend to diverge near equilibrium, a signature of the strong localization of vortex lines at very long times with a broad variable range hopping. The amorphous order observed in the decorations can then be interpreted as a snapshot of a non-entangled liquid-like structure metastable at T freez , a temperature located below the first-order transition line. This non-entangled highly viscous and far from equilibrium liquid-like structure contrasts with the quasi-longrange positionally-ordered vortex structures observed in pristine samples of the same compound at T < T FOT . Figure A previous work We have analyzed, through magnetic decoration images, dynamically frozen vortex configurations in heavy-ion irradiated Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 samples with a very dense distribution of columnar defects. For low vortex densities compared with the CD density, we find an amorphous phase with liquid-like correlations, and an approximately Gaussian defect-vortex force distribution indicating a randomly-oriented pinning scenario. By assuming vortices individually trapped at identical CD, we show that the observed translational order is fairly consistent with a relaxation dynamics dominated by DK excitations near the freezing temperature T freez . Using a simple model and input from the f max i experimental data obtained from magnetic decoration images, we predict a freezing temperature of the same order but smaller than the irreversibility temperature. We argue that magnetically-decorated structures hence correspond to a typical configuration of a non-entangled vortex-liquid state with strongly reduced mobility, rather than to a metastable state of an equilibrium glassy phase with divergent relaxation barriers associated to the localization of vortices in CD even at very long times. Experiments with significantly larger cooling times or glass-annealing techniques are mandatory in order to dilucidate if, as naïvely expected, the equilibrium vortex phase nucleated in a very dense distribution of strong pins is a more ordered one.