The proximity effect at the interface between a topological insulator (TI) and a superconductor is predicted to give rise to chiral topological superconductivity and Majorana fermion excitations. In most TIs studied to date, however, the conducting bulk states have overwhelmed the transport properties and precluded the investigation of the interplay of the topological surface state and Cooper pairs. Here, we demonstrate the superconducting proximity effect in the surface state of SmB 6 thin films which display bulk insulation at low temperatures. The Fermi velocity in the surface state deduced from the proximity effect is found to be as large as 10 5 m/s, in good agreement with the value obtained from a separate transport measurement. We show that high transparency between the TI and a superconductor is crucial for the proximity effect. The finding here opens the door to investigation of exotic quantum phenomena using all-thin-film multilayers with high-transparency interfaces. Topological insulators (TI), which show exotic metallic surfaces with insulating bulk, have attracted tremendous interest in the condensed matter physics community. The topologically protected surface state of TI has been regarded as a promising platform for exploring exotic quantum phenomena in solid materials. In particular, it has been suggested that the superconducting proximity effect occurring at an interface between a TI and a superconductor may give rise to chiral topological superconductivity Samarium hexaboride (SmB 6 ) has recently emerged as an ideal material to explore TI-based quantum phenomena because of its true insulating bulk In this paper, we demonstrate direct observation of the proximity effect induced in the surface state of SmB 6 for the first time. We apply the Usadel formalism to the systematic change in the superconducting transition temperature of a series of in-situ deposited SmB 6 /Nb bilayers with different Nb layer thicknesses and arrive at the normal coherence length of the surface state of SmB 6 to be ≈ 10 nm. From a separate transport study on SmB 6 thin films, we find the thickness of the surface state to be ≈ 7 nm. The Fermi velocity (v F ) obtained from the transport measurements is in good agreement with v F calculated using the normal coherence length, and it is of the order of 10 5 m/s. These numbers paint a picture of a material whose bulk insulation provides a unique opportunity to probing and exploiting its surface state in thin-film multilayer devices. SmB 6 thin films were prepared by co-sputtering of SmB 6 and B targets; additional B sputtering was performed for compensating B deficiency and the base pressure was ~ 2×10 -8 Torr. The thin films were grown on Si (100) substrate at 800 ̊C in an atmosphere of Ar (99.999%) and the working pressure was kept at 10 mTorr. After deposition, further annealing process was performed at 800 ̊C for 3 hours in high vacuum. X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy results can be found in the reference The electrical properties were measured by Physical properties measurement system (PPMS). We performed transport measurements on SmB 6 thin films with varying film thickness. In order to perform the transport measurements, each film was patterned into a Hall-bar with a channel width of 200 μm. Resistance vs. temperature (R-T) was measured for all SmB 6 films, and their sheet conductance (G☐) values at 300 K and 2 K are plotted in Figure To see if there is any thickness dependent effect in our samples, we plot G at 2 K and 300 K as a function of film thickness (Figure To determine the thickness of the surface conduction channel, we adopt a simple parallel conductance model where the electronic conduction is through two channels: a surface channel including contributions from both the top and the bottom surfaces and a bulk channel Therefore, we apply this model to the transport results in a temperature range below 120 K, at which the Kondo gap starts to open in SmB 6 The use of the bulk conductivity in the G bulk term allows us to add a thickness of bulk channel (t bulk ) as fitting parameters, and subsequently to estimate a thickness of surface channel (t surface ) because the total film thickness is 2t surface + t bulk . The bulk conductivity, σ bulk,300K , is 7.66×10 5 S m -1 which is the slope of G at 300 K obtained from the data shown in Fig. From the above analysis, we obtain t surface ≈ 7 nm. To obtain v F , we used v F = E g t surface /ħ derived from the solution of the effective low-energy Hamlitonian for topological insulators with a surface state where E g is the bulk energy gap The superconducting proximity effect describes a phenomenon at a superconductor-normal metal interface where Cooper pairs diffuse into the normal metal resulting in the suppression of the critical temperature (T c ) of the superconductor while inducing surface or local superconductivity in the normal metal. We fabricated Nb/SmB 6 bilayers and observed a change in T c depending on the thickness of Nb layer due to the proximity effect at the interface. To characterize the proximity effect of the bilayers, we treat the Nb/SmB 6 bilayer as a superconductor/metal bilayer system, where the metallic layer in SmB 6 is the surface conducting channel (Figure ! ! = 1.17 where T cb and T cs represent the T c of the Nb/SmB 6 bilayer and the T c of a single Nb layer, respectively. T cb is evaluated by the Ginzburg-Landau equation, and γ and p(γ) are approximated by the expressions above Figure To evaluate ξ SmB6 , we performed a fitting process based on the expression discussed above. Using measured values of ρ Nb = 8.5×10 -6 Ω•cm, the mean free path (l) of Nb was estimated from ρ Nb l = 3.75 × 10 -6 μΩ•cm 2 4 nm The value of v F and the effective mass of quasiparticles in the surface state of SmB 6 have been the subjects of much debate. Early theoretical calculations had suggested the presence of relatively heavy Dirac quasipaticles with small v F (~ 10 3 m/s) With the ξ SmB6 obtained from the fitting above, we are able to evaluate γ which is a measure of the strength of the superconducting proximity effect. The values of γ for in-situ and ex-situ bilayer are 7.9×10 -2 and 1.0×10 -2 , respectively. This implies that the strength of the proximity effect of the in-situ sample is roughly 8 times larger than that of the ex-situ sample. The strength of the superconducting proximity effect is naturally one of the most important factors in superconductor -normal-superconductor Josephson junctions, and it directly affects the I C R N product. It is interesting to note that significantly reduced I C R N products, presumably due to lack of the pristine surface of the TI during the fabrication process, have been observed in various studies on chalcogenide-TI-based Josephson junctions Specifically, the observed I C R N products in such studies are typically around 20 μV, which is far below the theoretical value, i.e., I C R N ~ πΔ(0)/2e ≈ 4.7 mV, for junctions in the clean limit In summary, thickness-independent behavior in the transport properties was observed in ultrathin SmB 6 films, and the thickness of the surface state was deduced to be ≈ 7 nm. We provide first direct evidence of the superconducting proximity effect in the surface state of A mobility, μ of carriers can be calculated from μ= G☐ /en. We obtain both n and μ for each thin film and plot them as a function of film thickness in Figure For comparison, we also included the reported Sm 4d spectrum Binding Energy (eV) Single crystal R H = 0.0254 Ω/T