In complex transition metal oxides (TMO) an arrested electronic phase separation (PS) appears by tuning the system near a Lifshitz transition in multiband Hubbard models. The PS in La 2 CuO 4+y near insulator to metal transition (IMT) is made of short range Charge Density Wave (CDW) order inhomogeneity coexisting with quenched lattice disorder. While at high doping y=0.1 percolation gives a single superconducting phase, near the IMT at y=0.06 two coexisting superconducting phases appear: the first one with a critical temperature T c1 = 16 K and the second one with T c2 = 29K. It is known that the two superconducting phases are characterized by two different space geometry because of two different spatial distributions of both CDW order and dopants self-organization. Here we show that these two phases show different flux dynamic regimes using alternating current (AC) multi--harmonic susceptibility experiments. This is a unique technique capable to investigate multi--phase superconductors and characterize their transport properties in a percolative scenario. Results point out that the low critical temperature phase is well described by a bulk--like flux pinning with a 2D geometry while the phase with higher critical temperature shows a 'barrier pinning' mechanism providing direct evidence of two different superconducting vortex dynamics in different complex geometrical spaces. The quenched disorder, due to spatial distribution of functional ion defects At 30 years from the discovery of high temperature superconductivity (HTS) in transition metal oxides, the complex multiscale arrested phase separation between competing phases in a correlated quenched disorder has emerged recently as a universal feature of all families of cuprate superconductors Cuprate superconductors are made of active superconducting layers alternated by charge storage layers that play the role of spacers, forming a hetero--structure at atomic limit with CuO 2 planes separated by insulating rocksalt oxide layers La 2 CuO 4+δ is the most simple cuprate perovskite showing the IMT at a critical concentration of oxygen interstitials (O--i) δ c =0.055. The mobile O--i in the crystal structure of La 2 CuO 4+δ have a tendency toward phase separation at temperature larger than 200 K. In particular, in the insulating phase of La 2 CuO 4+δ with a doping range of 0.01<δ<0.055, a phase separation occurs between two different structural phases: an oxygen--poor insulating and antiferromagnetic phase and a minority Fmmm oxygen--rich superconductive phase While it is well known that in underdoped phase of cuprate perovskites, doped by mobile oxygen interstitials, the system is in the verge of a chemical phase separation where in some case, two different underdoped superconducting phases coexist no investigation on different pinning mechanisms in the two competing phases have been published. Since recently new electronic and structural scanning probes have shown that the inhomogeneity extends at nanoscale and mesoscale where the vortex lattice pinning takes place, the characterization of the different pinning mechanisms is now mandatory. For this purpose, we propose to use the technique of the 'magnetic multi--harmonic susceptibility" combined with the analysis of Cole--Cole plots of the third harmonic, to clearly recognize the dominant pinning type mechanism in the two phases observed in the investigated superconducting La 2 CuO 4+y single crystal. This original approach shows how the dynamics of transport--driven flux quanta is correlated--with/driven--by different nano/micro-scale texture geometries of striped domains of oxygen interstitials (O--i) and striped charge density wave (CWD) puddles present in the sample. No other techniques have been used before to correlate the vortex dynamics with the sample morphology. This original approach has a more general point of view, it can be used to monitor the evolution and the redistribution of nano--and micro--structures activated by different mechanisms such as heating, thermal quenching, doping, x--ray photo induction or other set--ups applied to functional materials that have a measurable magnetic response. The low--frequency AC complex susceptibility dynamic technique has been already used to investigate dissipative effects in high--temperature superconductors This experimental approach has the following advantages: i) the signal of the first harmonic contains information due to non--linear processes of the superconducting phases and to linear processes associated to losses that limit the superconducting state (i.e., the free motion of the quantum flux in a liquid--like configuration and of unpaired electrons). On the contrary, the high harmonics contributions to the magnetic susceptibility depend only by non--linear processes associated to the superconducting phases (e.g., correlations, pinning, etc.); ii) if only one ac field is applied, because of the symmetry of the sinusoidal excitation field the even harmonics are not present; iii) among the high harmonics, the third one is that with the most intense signal. In this work, using the AC multi--harmonic magnetic susceptibility we show the occurrence of different flux pinning dynamics in different domains of the same single crystal, due to a self-organization of oxygen interstitials The two coexisting phases in the La 2 CuO 4.06 system (T c1 = 16 K and T c2 = 29 K) show different behaviors in the susceptibility third harmonic component as a function of temperature and amplitude of the magnetic field and underline two diverse flux dynamics, which are in turn connected with the coexistence/competition between different O--i ordered superstructures in La 2 CuO 4+δ that is associated to different percolative mechanisms While a bulk--like flux pinning with a 2D geometry can be associated to the low temperature phase (T c ~ 16 K) exhibiting a stronger superconducting flux pinning response The sample magnetic susceptibility has been measured by a first derivative configuration gradiometer based on a bridge of two pick--up coils connected in series, wounded in the opposite sense and surrounded by a driving excitation coil The third harmonic analysis allows to enhance the sensitivity to the non--linear flux pinning dynamic processes of the two superconducting phases and to better identify micro--structural pinning defects. Indeed, compared with the other harmonics, the third harmonic component of the susceptibility offers a better signal to noise ratio, discriminating directly between linear losses and non--linear flux--pinning response. This panel clearly shows two peaks corresponding to the two superconducting phases present in the La 2 CuO 4+δ . As expected, increasing the DC magnetic field both phases shift towards lower temperatures and their amplitudes decrease. However, the peak temperature shift, ΔT p , is greater for the phase at higher T c pointing out that the magnetic field has a larger effect on this phase. This is consistent with its weaker pinning respect to the low temperature phase. If we define δ=ΔT/ΔH, we have δ p2 =1.09 K/T and δ p1 =0.83 K/T for the high-and low--temperature phase, respectively. The different trend of T p confirms the occurrence of different flux pinning behaviors and dynamic responses of the two superconducting phases. To gain more information on the flux pinning dynamic it is very useful to represent the third harmonic components of the AC susceptibility in the complex--plane, i.e., χ" 3 versus χ' 3 , also called Cole--Cole plot Recognizing the pinning type it is also important to give an evaluation of the sample geometry of the ratio between the width and thickness (d/W) thus to have a more effective comparison among experimental data and numerical analysis available in the literature In the figures 2 and 3 we show separately the third harmonic Cole--Cole plots for the low--T c (blue) and high--T c (blue) phase of the La 2 CuO 4+δ single crystal. In the polar plane the low--T c phase placed in the third quadrant shows a "lens" shape, while the high--T c phase located in the third and fourth quadrants has an elliptical shape. Respect to the high--T c phase curve, the low--T c one encloses a larger area, confirming its stronger flux pinning characteristic. with an ideal 'bulk Bean pinning model' in a parallel field (black curve) due to the response of an infinite slab (n-->∞ and W-->∞) In figure In addition, because in the La 2 CuO 4+δ the phase separation occurs within a striped domain scenario we point out that for the high--T c phase, the 'surface barrier pinning' mechanism within a thin striped geometric structure is connected to the local lattice distortion striped domains characteristic of the La 2 CuO 4+δ , in particular, to the observed CDW domains To additionally support this interpretation, a comparison between the third harmonic components of the two La 2 CuO 4+δ phases and other strongly layered Bi2223 data in the panel B of Figure Because the magnetic response of a superconductor is proportional to the sample volume, we discuss only the shape of Cole--Cole plots, which have been proportionally rescaled to allow the comparison. From the comparison with figure We have showed that the AC multi--harmonic susceptibility technique is a suitable and almost unique method to characterize the vortex pinning behavior of two coexisting phases in the underdoped La 2 CuO 4+δ . This cuprate with T c1 = 16 K and T c2 = 29 K is indeed characterized by different flux dynamic properties, pinning strengths and percolative mechanisms. In particular, the low--T c phase of the underdoped La 2 CuO 4+δ has strong pinning characteristics with a bulk--like pinning behavior and a 3D--like percolative behavior. The high T c phase exhibits a weaker pinning strength being characterized by a surface barrier pinning mechanism and a bidimensional percolative behavior associated to superconducting puddles. We sincerely acknowledge the technical staff of the DAΦNE--Light laboratory. A special thanks is due to F. Tabacchioni for his continuous technical support in the LAMPS laboratory.