We report on observations of thickness dependent Josephson coupling and multiple Andreev reflections (MAR) in vertically stacked molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2 ) -molybdenum rhenium (MoRe) Josephson junctions. MoRe, a chemically inert superconductor, allows for oxide free fabrication of high transparency vertical MoS 2 devices. Single and bilayer MoS 2 junctions display relatively large critical currents (up to 2.5 μA) and the appearance of sub-gap structure given by MAR. In three and four layer thick devices we observe orders of magnitude lower critical currents (sub-nA) and reduced quasiparticle gaps due to proximitized MoS 2 layers in contact with MoRe. We anticipate that this device architecture could be easily extended to other 2D materials. Transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDC), and in particular MoS 2 , have gained increased attention in the wake of the rise of graphene Among the unique attributes of MoS 2 , perhaps one of its most intriguing features is that the electronic band structure gradually changes with layer number Here we probe the thickness dependence of interlayer electrical transport in MoS 2 flakes using the Josephson effect between two coupled molybdenum-rhenium (MoRe) superconductors. In addition to slow oxide growth of MoRe thin films Figure We now turn to the low temperature characteristics of the vertical MoRe-MoS 2 junctions. By irradiating the junction with an RF field, we observe the appearance of Shapiro steps signaling the coupling of the Josephson junction to the RF field In Figure Starting with the single layer device (Figures Schotkky barrier-free contact to MoS 2 flakes Subsequent layers below the top contacted layer remain semiconducting. A model of this scenario for the single layer device is shown in Figure Finally, the trilayer and four layer devices show the expected tunneling behavior through an undoped semiconductor. The formation of a reduced quasiparticle gap (black arrows in Figure In conclusion, we have presented interlayer transport measurements on vertical MoRe-MoS 2 -MoRe Josephson junctions. We found that the transport characteristics are dependent on the number of MoS 2 layers between the MoRe electrodes and, in particular, we observe a threshold between metallic-like weak link behavior and tunneling-like weak link behavior occurring between the bilayer and trilayer flake thicknesses. We propose that the metallic characteristics (appearance of MAR) of the single and bilayer devices are due to hybridization with the electrodes, as suggested in literature, that results in metalized MoS 2 layers. In the three and four layer devices the uncoupled layers (not directly in contact with the MoRe contacts) provide a tunnel barrier which reduces the critical current densities and results in more well-defined quasiparticle transport gaps. We anticipate the extension of this device architecture to other 2D materials and an interesting technological direction would be the use of insulating boron-nitride layers as uniform tunnel barriers replacing the standard AlOx barrier where less than 10% of the barrier area is active in transport 