The low energy electronic structure of LaFeAsO 1-x H x (0.0 ≤ x ≤ 0.60), the system which exhibits two superconducting domes in its phase diagram, is investigated by utilizing the laser photoemission spectroscopy. From the precise temperature-dependent measurement of the spectra near the Fermi level, we find the suppression of the density of states with cooling, namely the pseudogap formation, for all doping range. The pseudogap in the low x range (i.e. the first superconducting dome regime) gets suppressed with increasing x, more or less similarly to the previous results in F-doped LaFeAsO system. On the other hand, the pseudogap behavior in the second superconducting dome regime at high-x becomes stronger with increasing the H-doping level. The systematic doping dependence shows that the pseudogap is enhanced toward the both ends of the phase diagram where the different types of antiferromagnetic order exist. Superconductivity in iron arsenides was discovered by applying F-doping to antiferromagnetic LaFeAsO, with a maximum superconducting critical temperature (T c ) of 26 K. The phase diagram of LaFeAsO 1-x H x is further characterized by two antiferromagnetic (AF) states, namely the AF1 (x < 0.05) and AF2 (0.4 < x), as shown in Fig. AF2 has been clarified by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) In this study, we use angle-integrated photoemission spectroscopy (AIPES) to investigate the polycrystalline LaFeAsO 1-x H x in a wide range of temperatures (6 -300 K) and compositions (0.0 ≤ x ≤ 0.60). The temperaturedependent density of states near the Fermi energy (E F ) can be precisely acquired by using the laser-AIPES. We find a new pseudogap in the high-x region (x = 0.35 -0.60), evolving from the temperatures above SC2 and AF2 phase transitions. The x-dependence of the pseudogap in SC2-AF2 region is clearly distinguished from the pseudogaps in low-x AF1-SC1 region. The V-shaped doping dependence of the pseudogap temperature (T PG ) in the whole phase diagram indicates that these pseudogaps originate from respective electronic ground states of the AF1 (x ~ 0.0) and AF2 (x ~ 0.50), respectively, which may be also crucial for the occurrence of two-dome superconductivity. Polycrystalline LaFeAsO 1-x H x (x = 0.0, 0.10, 0.20, 0.35, 0.50, 0.60) samples were synthesized as described in Ref. High-energy-resolution laser AIPES measurements were performed with a spectrometer built using a VG-Scienta R4000 electron analyzer and an ultraviolet-laser of 6.994 eV as a photon source at the Institute for Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo. Figure When we look at the energy positions of the triangle markers as a function of temperature, we notice two different behaviors. At high temperature, the black triangles show a monotonic decrease of the energy scale with cooling. In contrast, below a certain temperature [here named T 0 , see Fig. In the case of x = 0.10, the optimal composition of SC1, we find the evolution of the pseudogap below ~170 K with energy scale of Δ PG1 ~40 meV, as shown in Fig. For the SC2 and AF2 regions (x > 0.35), we also find the pseudogap evolution on cooling (PG2). As shown in Figs. 3(g) and 3(k), the PG2 with Δ PG2 = 30 meV starts to evolve at T PG2 = 100 K for x = 0.35 (SC2). Partly because the PG2 is smaller compared to x = 0.10, it is difficult to discuss the possible presence of an additional low-temperature pseudogap in the present data. The observed pseudogap feature seems to be enhanced with increasing x to x = 0.5, as shown in Figs. Here we confirm the bulk superconductivity of LaFeAsO 1-x H x by AIPES measurements below T c . Figures The pseudogaps in iron pnictides have been experimentally and theoretically discussed in relation to the spin/orbital fluctuations. Considering the smooth doping dependence of T PG1L that follows after T N in AF1 phase, the spin fluctuation derived from hole and electron Fermi surface nesting is a possible candidate for the origin of PG1L, as also raised in the previous photoemission studies. In summary, we performed laser AIPES on LaFeAsO 1- x H x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.60) for a wide temperature region, and observed peculiar pseudogaps of energy scales 20 ~ 45 meV existing throughout the phase diagram. While the pseudogap in x ≤ 0.20 (PG1) becomes suppressed on doping away from x = 0, PG2 in x ≥ 0.35 enhances toward the high-x region. It thus indicates the different origins of PG1 and PG2, possibly related to two antiferromagnetic phases, AF1 (x = 0) and AF2 (x = 0.6). We further observed the superconducting gap at SC1 and SC2 with an energy scale much smaller than Δ PG , indicating that pseudogap formation is not due to precursor pairing. The present result indicates that there are two types of spin/orbital fluctuations existing in LaFeAsO 1-x H x system, which should lead to the two pseudogap phases and possibly also to the two superconducting domes.