We study the influence of non-magnetic impurity scatterings on the tunneling conductance of a junction consisting of a normal metal and a disordered unconventional superconductor by solving the quasiclassical Eilenberger equation self-consistently. We find that the impurity scatterings in both the Born and unitary limits affect the formation of the Andreev bound states and modify strongly the tunneling spectra around zero bias. Our results are interpreted well by the appearance of odd-frequency Cooper pairs near the interface and by the divergent behavior of the impurity selfenergy. The present paper provides a useful tool to identify the pairing symmetry of unconventional superconductors in experiments. The effects of impurity scatterings on superconducting phenomena are a key issue in the field of superconductivity. While the BCS s-wave pairing state is robust against nonmagnetic impurities Theoretically, the tunneling spectroscopy is formulated as a differential conductance in a normal metal/superconductor junction. Although effects of the potential disorder on the conductance have been studied in a number of papers, many of them focus on the disorder in the normal metal In this article, we present a self-consistent calculation of the tunneling spectra in a normal-metal/disorderedsuperconductor junction with flat or chiral surface band states. For the former case, occurring in nodal superconductors, we find that the symmetry of the emergent odd-frequency pairing states The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, we describe our model and derive the essential formulas. In section III, we discuss impurity effects in junctions with nodal superconductors. The order parameters and tunneling spectroscopy are studied. In section IV, we show our result for chiral superconductors. Some concluding remarks are given in section V. Let us consider a two-dimensional normal metalsuperconductor junction with a flat interface at x = 0 as shown in Fig. accompanied by the normalization condition (ĝ αα ) 2 = -1. Here v f is the quasi-particle Fermi velocity and τi are Pauli matrices. ∆(θ α , x) and â (x) are the superconducting order parameter and the self-energy induced by impurities, respectively. In the normal metal region, ∆(θ α , x < 0) = â (x < 0) = 0. We consider superconductors with different kinds of pairing symmetries: d xy , p x , p y , and chiral states, so it is convenient to express the order parameter in the superconducting side x > 0 as For d xy -, p x -, and p y -waves, ∆ 1 (x, θ α ) = 0 and the gap equation ∆ 2 (x, θ α ) = ∆ (x) χ (θ α ) is given by using the quasi-classical Green's function as , where χ (θ α ) is chosen as cos θ α (p x -wave), sin θ α (p ywave), and sin 2θ α (d xy -wave). T c and ω c are the critical temperature of the bulk superconductor and the Debye frequency, respectively. For chiral wave states, ∆ 1 (x, θ α ) = ∆ im (x) χ im (θ α ) and ∆ 2 (x, θ α ) = ∆ re (x) χ re (θ α ) are given by We only consider the cases with chiral p-wave (λ = 1), chiral d-wave (λ = 2), and chiral f -wave (λ = 3). The self-energy in the superconducting side can be decomposed as â = a 1 τ1 + a 2 τ2 + a 3 τ3 and is connected to the quasiclassical Green's function by with ĝαα = i g αα i τi . Here, 1/τ and σ denote the normal scattering rate and strength of a simple impurity potential, respectively. In the Born limit one finds that σ → 0, while in the unitary limit σ → 1, resulting in In the superconducting region, the Riccati parameterization The Riccati parameters G S ± , F S ± obey the equations with the definitions At the interface x = 0, we have the boundary conditions 57,59-61 with R = Z 2 / Z 2 + 4 cos 2 θ , Z = 2mH/k f , m the electron mass, and k f the Fermi momentum. In this work, we only consider the low transmitting case with fixed Z = 5. The local density of states (LDOS) ρ S is given by (10) To obtain the conductance, we write down the wave functions in terms of the Riccati parameter ḠS ± = G S ± (E, θ ± , x = 0) at the interface, which are , with a, b (c, d) reflection (transmission) amplitudes. Using BTK theory where with dθ cos θσ N the conductance in normal states. In the numerical calculations, we take the temperature T = 0.05T c . For convenience, we do not consider thermodynamic phenomena and assume the Debye frequency ω c = 2π for all the considered pairing states. To summarize, we presented a general symmetry analysis of a model Hamiltonian describing a two-dimensional SNS junction, including an arbitrarily oriented magnetic Öeld, both Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit interaction, and disorder and other structural asymmetries. We related basic properties of the anomalous current and the critical currents to the absence or presence of spe-ciÖc ingredients in the Hamiltonian, thereby providing a qualitative connection between easily measurable quantities and the relative strength of the di §erent underlying mechanisms. We supported our analysis with numerical calculations of the Josephson current, agreeing with the qualitative predictions we made. In conclusion, we have studied the Josephson e §ect in a junction between a topological and an ordinary (topologically trivial) superconductor. Within the quasi-one-dimensional model they are characterized by an odd and even number of channels, respectively. A topological superconductor inevitably breaks timereversal symmetry at its end, which leads to the appearance of an unpaired Majorana mode at zero energy. We have derived general expressions ( In summary, we demonstrate the successful trapping and detection of an electron ensemble above the surface of superáuid helium in the circuit QED architecture. The measurement technique we introduce here could extend traditional electrons on helium experiments to smaller ensembles and enable observation of the electron dynam-ics. The observation of the large dispersive shift and the good agreement with our numerical simulations indicate that it should be possible to perform cavity QED experi-ments in a single electron quantum dot. Though small, the áuctuations in the helium Ölm thickness are an important source of decoherence for the electron motional states, and merit further study. Finally, the sensitivity of the device to helium thickness changes can be exploited for novel cavity optomechanics experiments with superáuid ripplons. To summarize, we presented a general symmetry analysis of a model Hamiltonian describing a two-dimensional SNS junction, including an arbitrarily oriented magnetic Öeld, both Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit interaction, and disorder and other structural asymmetries. We related basic properties of the anomalous current and the critical currents to the absence or presence of spe-ciÖc ingredients in the Hamiltonian, thereby providing a qualitative connection between easily measurable quantities and the relative strength of the di §erent underlying mechanisms. We supported our analysis with numerical calculations of the Josephson current, agreeing with the qualitative predictions we made. In conclusion, we have studied the Josephson e §ect in a junction between a topological and an ordinary (topologically trivial) superconductor. Within the quasi-one-dimensional model they are characterized by an odd and even number of channels, respectively. A topological superconductor inevitably breaks timereversal symmetry at its end, which leads to the appearance of an unpaired Majorana mode at zero energy. We have derived general expressions ( In summary, we demonstrate the successful trapping and detection of an electron ensemble above the surface of superáuid helium in the circuit QED architecture. The measurement technique we introduce here could extend traditional electrons on helium experiments to smaller ensembles and enable observation of the electron dynam-ics. The observation of the large dispersive shift and the good agreement with our numerical simulations indicate that it should be possible to perform cavity QED experi-ments in a single electron quantum dot. Though small, the áuctuations in the helium Ölm thickness are an important source of decoherence for the electron motional states, and merit further study. Finally, the sensitivity of the device to helium thickness changes can be exploited for novel cavity optomechanics experiments with superáuid ripplons. To summarize, we presented a general symmetry analysis of a model Hamiltonian describing a two-dimensional SNS junction, including an arbitrarily oriented magnetic Öeld, both Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit interaction, and disorder and other structural asymmetries. We related basic properties of the anomalous current and the critical currents to the absence or presence of spe-ciÖc ingredients in the Hamiltonian, thereby providing a qualitative connection between easily measurable quantities and the relative strength of the di §erent underlying mechanisms. We supported our analysis with numerical calculations of the Josephson current, agreeing with the qualitative predictions we made. In conclusion, we have studied the Josephson e §ect in a junction between a topological and an ordinary (topologically trivial) superconductor. Within the quasi-one-dimensional model they are characterized by an odd and even number of channels, respectively. A topological superconductor inevitably breaks timereversal symmetry at its end, which leads to the appearance of an unpaired Majorana mode at zero energy. We have derived general expressions (7) and (8) for the supercurrent for a class of short topological junctions in terms of the normal-state scattering matrix S. For the minimal model of the junction with two channels and one channel in the leads, the current (13) explicitly depends on the four invariants of the scattering matrix (11). The result ( In summary, we demonstrate the successful trapping and detection of an electron ensemble above the surface of superáuid helium in the circuit QED architecture. The measurement technique we introduce here could extend traditional electrons on helium experiments to smaller ensembles and enable observation of the electron dynam-ics. The observation of the large dispersive shift and the good agreement with our numerical simulations indicate that it should be possible to perform cavity QED experi-ments in a single electron quantum dot. Though small, the áuctuations in the helium Ölm thickness are an important source of decoherence for the electron motional states, and merit further study. Finally, the sensitivity of the device to helium thickness changes can be exploited for novel cavity optomechanics experiments with superáuid ripplons. First, we show the spacial variation of the order parameter amplitude in the left panels of Fig. We plot the normalized conductance σ t for spin-triplet p x -wave in Fig. In this section, we show the results of superconductors with chiral edge states. There is an increasing amount of evidence supporting that Sr 2 RuO 4 is a candidate for a chiral p-wave superconductor λ êz , where êz is a unit vector along the tetragonal crystal c-axis and λ = 1. However, such a chiral triplet superconductor features a spontaneous edge supercurrent which has not yet been observed in experiments. Several theories have suggested that λ could be larger than 1, e.g., λ = 2 (chiral d-wave) or λ = 3 (chiral f -wave), leading to a suppression of the edge current Finally, we show the results for chiral f -wave states in Fig. -(--) means a decrease (strong decrease) of conductance with respect to the ballistic limit. bias conductance and LDOS are more sensitive in the unitary limit. For E ∼ ∆ b and E ∼ ∆ in , the appearance of continuum bands greatly enhances Ĝ (E, x = 0, θ) θ and makes the self-energy terms a i smaller. As a result, the unitary limit would retain the double peak structure mostly outside the bulk gap ∆ b (e.g., see panel (b) of Fig. In conclusion, we have theoretically studied the tunneling spectroscopy in normal metal-disordered unconventional superconductor junctions at low transparency for various pairing symmetries. For nodal superconductors with flat surface bands, the influence of the impurity scattering can be classified into three types according to the behavior of zero bias conductance: (1) when Cooper pairs at the surface have odd-frequency s-wave symmetry, the zero-bias conductance peak is immune to the impurity scattering; (2) for non s-wave odd-frequency pairing, the zero-bias conductance peak is strongly suppressed by impurities; and (3) in the accidental absence of Andreev bound states, the zero bias conductance dip is easily smeared by impurities in the unitary limit. For chiral superconductors, we have shown the selfconsistent result of conductance spectra and found that a zero-bias conductance peak for chiral p-wave pairings remains in the presence of impurities. The zero bias conductance for chiral waves is more sensitive to impurity scattering in the unitary limit than that in the Born limit. Moreover, the double peaks occurring in the LDOS and conductance spectra at the gap edges for all chiral waves are very sensitive to impurity scattering and are especially blurred in the Born limit. We expect that our results can be exploited for the experimental identification of pairing symmetries by analyzing the tunneling spectroscopy of unconventional superconductors.