We solve the nonperturbative renormalization-group flow equations for the two-dimensional XY model at the truncation level of the (complete) second-order derivative expansion. We compute the thermodynamic properties in the high-temperature phase and compare the non-universal features specific to the XY model with results from Monte Carlo simulations. In particular, we study the position and magnitude of the specific heat peak as a function of temperature. The obtained results compare well with Monte Carlo simulations. We additionally gauge the accuracy of simplified nonperturbative renormalization-group treatments relying on φ 4 -type truncations. Our computation indicates that such an approximation is insufficient in the high-T phase and a correct analysis of the specific heat profile requires account of an infinite number of interaction vertices. It has since long been recognized The Kosterlitz-Thouless transition is relevant in a number of physical contexts The universal aspects of the KT transition are conventionally described in the language of vortex-antivortex pair unbinding and a mapping to a Coulomb gas or sine-Gordon field theory. The predictivity of such formulations is typically restricted to the behavior in the vicinity * electronic address: pawel.jakubczyk@fuw.edu.pl † electronic address: eberlein@physics.harvard.edu of the transition, which makes it harder to access the nonuniversal, system specific properties, such as the critical temperature or the position, magnitude and width of the specific-heat peak. In the present work we develop and extend the description of the KT transition using the non-perturbative renormalization group (RG). We build upon earlier works The nonperturbative RG is among the methods allowing for accurate computations of critical behavior in diverse systems. Its applicability is in addition by no means restricted to the vicinity of a phase transition. It has proven useful in a wide range of complex physical contexts. Examples include models with competing orders (2) fluctuation effects are stronger (and lead to ultimate obliteration of long-range order) due to the presence of the Goldstone mode. Our framework automatically encodes the Mermin-Wagner theorem and is (upon slight modifications) extendable to more complex systems characterized by similar low-energy behavior at finite temperatures. These include quantum spins as well as interacting bosons or fermions in d = 2. Such systems were already studied within simpler nonperturbative RG truncations, see e.g. The classical XY model on a lattice is defined by the Hamiltonian where i, j ∈ {1 . . . N } label the sites of the lattice, , and the summation is implicit wherever the index appears exactly twice in a product expression. The corresponding partition function is given by { s} e -βH , where Here β -1 = k B T and θ i denotes the angle between the vector s i and the x-axis, so that s i s j = cos(θ iθ j ) and θ i ∈ [0, 2π[ for each i. In order to cast the problem of evaluating the partition function in the language of field theory, we employ the identity where the normalization factor is given by Here ψ i is a two-dimensional vector attributed to the lattice site i. Eq. ( i.e. shifting it by a constant equal 1 2 N c. Specifying we apply Eq. (3) to Eq. ( { s} e si ψi = (2π) Here I α (x) denotes the hyperbolic Bessel function of first kind. This way we cast the partition function in the form In order to make all the temperature dependencies explicit, we rescale the interaction matrix A and the fluctuating field ψ according to: This way the partition function becomes expressed as with and Importantly, the change of variables of Eq. ( This aspect is crucial for the validity of the subsequent approximate RG procedure of Sec. III and IV. The choice introduced in Eq. ( Eq. where This establishes the explicit form of the kinetic term. A. Mean-field theory for ferromagnetic order Assuming a form of J favoring ferromagnetic ordering, one identifies the mean-field free energy as the minimum of S[ φ]. Restricting to uniform field configurations the mean-field equilibrium value of |φ| is given by The mean-field critical temperature is obtained by expanding the above around | φ| = 0 up to terms linear in | φ|. This relates the critical temperature to Ã0 : The corresponding critical exponents are classical and the critical temperature of Eq. ( For the square lattice with nearest-neighbor interactions we obtain where J is the nearest-neighbor coupling and a denotes the lattice spacing. The latter will be put equal to 1 in all numerical calculations. The central idea of the nonperturbative renormalization group approach to equilibrium condensed-matter systems is to recast the problem of computing the partition function Z in a form of a (functional) differential equation. There exists a number of variants of this program. The presently applied formulation, developed by Wetterich upon changing k is governed by the flow equation where Γ (2) In Fourier space, the trace (Tr) sums over momenta and the field index a ∈ {1, 2}. The quantity R k (q) is the momentum cutoff function added to the inverse propagator to freeze the fluctuations with momenta q < k. An exact solution of Eq. ( In this work we apply the derivative expansion where ρ = 1 2 φ 2 . We impose restrictions neither on the effective potential U k (ρ) nor the gradient functions Z k (ρ), Y k (ρ), which are allowed to depend on the cutoff scale k. The occurrence of two gradient terms is due to the fact that the transverse and radial components of the field are characterized by different stiffness coefficients. We also observe here that the initial condition Eq. ( where ρ = v -1 2 Z k ρ and the factor v -1 2 = 8π is conventional. The k-dependent constant Z k (wave-function renormalization) is defined by imposing the condition Zk (ρ r ) = 1 where ρr is an arbitrary renormalization point on the rescaled grid. The scale-dependent anomalous dimension η is then given by and the physical anomalous dimension follows from η = lim k→0 η k . We refrain from quoting the lengthy explicit expressions for the flow equations. These are given in Ref. The proposed approach relies on two approximations. First: the flowing effective action Γ k [ φ] is parametrized by the ansatz of Eq. ( An interesting alternative is provided by the lattice non-perturbative RG framework Our strategy to perform the q-expansion from the outset instead of the slightly more accurate treatments mentioned above also stems from the aim to develop a numerically modest and stable framework flexibly extendable to other contexts (such as interacting quantum gases in d = 2). The present approximation allows to avoid any two-dimensional integrations in the flow equations. Also observe that the dominant contributions to all the integrals come from small momenta also for k large, and, of course, upon reducing k the approximation becomes progressively more accurate. By reasoning a posteriori our results suggest that the error from neglecting the cosine dispersion amounts to a shift of the critical temperature (see Sec. IV). The second derivative matrix in the propagator at the beginning of the flow thus reads We extract Z k=k0 (ρ) and Y k=k0 (ρ) from the q 1 2 coefficients of the expansion of Ã-1 q1 around q 1 = 0. Here k 0 ≫ a -1 is the initial cutoff scale. In fact, we obtain Y k=k0 (ρ) = 0 and Z k=k0 (ρ) = const > 0. We note that alternative to Eq. ( The momentum integrations in the flow equations are computed over a disc of radius k UV = π/a. In a nonapproximate treatment they should run over the Brillouin zone (] -π a , π a ]×] -π a , π a ] for a square lattice). The scale k UV is often identified with the scale k 0 where the flow is initiated. In fact these quantities are distinct, and, in principle k 0 should be taken infinite to assure that all fluctuations are frozen, so that the action Eq. ( Numerical integration of the flow equations proceeds along the line of Ref. where x = q 2 /k 2 and the dimensionless ρ-dependent longitudinal and transverse inverse propagators are given by A reliable calculation demands high numerical accuracy. This is because we solve the flow equations for a set of initial conditions parametrized by temperature T and subsequently evaluate the entropy and the specific heat by numerically computing the first two derivatives of the result for the free energy with respect to T . We also observe that, since we explore the hightemperature phase and the vicinity of the phase transition in the low-T phase, the principal problem of encountering the pole of the flow equations described in Ref. In the practical numerical solution we employ the smooth Wetterich cutoff The inclusion of the wave-function renormalization in R k ( q) is a requirement for the possibility of obtaining scale-invariant solutions. The parameter α is in principle arbitrary. Ref. For the nearest-neighbor XY model J q is given by Eq. ( while the initial effective potential is given by We observe that both U 0 (ρ) and Z 0 depend on the arbitrary parameter c. In fact, as we already pointed out, the mean-field transition temperature of Eq. ( The critical temperature T KT is estimated by following the flow of the minimum of the (rescaled) effective potential. This quantity reaches zero at a finite scale k > 0 for the system in the high-T phase, and attains an (approximate) fixed-point in the KT-phase. Equivalently, one may inspect the evolution of the anomalous exponent η k , vanishing in the high-T phase for k sufficiently small and attaining a "plateau" otherwise. The procedure follows Ref. We believe that the mechanism responsible for the annihilation (or significant reduction) of the c-dependence of the critical temperature is related to the fact that even though the position of the minimum of U 0 (ρ) carries a strong c-dependence, the minimum ρ0 of the initial rescaled potential Ũ0 (ρ) shows only a very weak sensitivity to the variation of c. On the other hand, the profile of Ũ0 (ρ) for ρ < ρ0 does depend on c. The dependence of T KT on c should be efficiently eliminated by the flow in situations, where the essential features of the flow are captured by the behavior of the effective action around ρ = ρ0 . The mechanism is expected to be less efficient otherwise. This condition is better fulfilled in d = 3. Our procedure of performing the q-expansion from the beginning is also of relevance for the results for T KT . The dependence of our estimate of T KT on c is an unpleasant feature and we perceive it as a deficiency of the present approach. It is possible to choose c so that we obtain T KT in precise agreement with MC, but this is not what we aim at. We note however that the c-dependence of T KT is by far weaker than at mean-field level. In addition, the thermodynamic quantities discussed below are insensitive to the choice of c provided they are computed relative to T KT . This suggests that the error related to our approximation is absorbed by a shift of T KT , leaving other thermodynamic quantities hardly affected. We proceed by evaluating the entropy at zero magnetic moment (or, equivalently, zero magnetic field), which, by elementary thermodynamics follows from S(T, N ) = N s(T ) = -∂F ∂T . The free energy F (T, φ = 0, N ) is obtained from the integrated flow via F = k B T lim k→0 U k (0). It is also possible to extend the analysis to non-zero fields since the magnetic field, the order parameter field and free energy are related by h = k B T lim k→0 ∂ |φ| U k (|φ|). By computing the flow for different T we extract the free energy profiles U (ρ) for a range of temperatures and subsequently evaluate the (discrete) derivative with respect to T . The results are shown in Fig. The results obtained for different choices of c are plotted in Fig. Note however, that the free energy plotted in Ref. It is striking that the rich thermodynamic structure described in this section emerged via the functional RG flow from the mean-field free energy, which is trivially equal zero in the high-T phase (see Sec. II A). The magnetic field h at given φ is extracted from the definition which yields the equation of state h(T, φ). The isothermal susceptibility at zero field is given as the derivative (30) and becomes very large upon lowering temperature towards T KT . The dependence φ(h) is shown in Fig. It is useful to compare the above calculation to a much simpler treatment relying on the φ 4 -type expansion. It is natural to invoke a largely simplified ansatz for the effective potential and also restrict Z k (ρ) and Y k (ρ) to flowing couplings corresponding to the functions evaluated at the potential minimum (ρ 0 ). The problem may then be cast onto a set of five coupled ordinary differential flow equations for the couplings ρ 0,k , λ k , γ k , Z k and Y k . The initial condition for the potential is extracted by expanding the effective potential in Eq. ( The free energy may then be extracted from lim k→0 γ k . In fact, a very similar truncation (neglecting Y k and γ k ) was employed in Ref. We have solved the above mentioned set of flow equations and compared the results to those obtained within the complete derivative expansion in Sec. IV. Even though the estimate of the critical temperature T KT is in a reasonable range, the φ 4 approximation badly fails for the thermodynamic quantities. In fact the obtained free energy F (T ) is not a concave function of temperature, yielding, for example, a negative specific heat in a range of temperatures. The reason for this becomes clear after inspecting Eq. We have solved the non-perturbative RG flow equations for the two-dimensional XY model at the approximation level of the complete second order derivative expansion. From the obtained free energy F (T, φ, N ) we computed the non-universal thermodynamic properties in the the high-temperature phase. Wherever possible, we compared the results to Monte Carlo simulations. We found satisfactory agreement for the entropy and specific heat. In particular, the location and magnitude of the specific heat peak relative to T KT compare very well to MC data. This is one of the few RG-based computations for this quantity in this model. As we pointed out, the specific heat peak occurs in a regime which on one hand is off the asymptotic critical region, and, on the other, is characterized by large correlation length. Such a situation is somewhat atypical. An interesting RG calculation was performed in Ref. Our estimate of the Kosterlitz-Thouless temperature is not far from the correct value, however the present method cannot serve as a high-precision tool in this case. We argue that the location of the transition is the quantity that is most strongly affected by the approximations, in particular by the relatively simple treatment of the dispersion at the initial stages of the flow. As we pointed out, the thermodynamic functions become insensitive to the arbitrary parameter c of the Hamiltonian upon scaling by T KT . We compared the full derivative expansion to a simplified treatment invoking vertex expansion (φ 4 -type theory), which is commonly applied in different contexts. The latter framework turns out not to be sufficient for computing the non-universal thermodynamic quantities, since it truncates relevant temperature dependencies in the neglected vertices. The present calculation bridges a microscopic model with macroscopic thermodynamics via the functional flow equation, accounting for the low-energy asymptotics specific to two-dimensional systems with U (1) symmetry. It will now be natural and interesting to perform analogous studies of systems characterized by similar infrared physics, including interacting quantum gases in d = 2.