Investigations of perovskite oxides triggered by the discovery of high-temperature and unconventional superconductors have had crucial roles in stimulating and guiding the development of modern condensed-matter physics. Antiperovskite oxides are chargeinverted counterpart materials to perovskite oxides, with unusual negative ionic states of a constituent metal. No superconductivity was reported among the antiperovskite oxides so far. Here we present the first superconducting antiperovskite oxide Sr 3 À x SnO with the transition temperature of around 5 K. Sr 3 SnO possesses Dirac points in its electronic structure, and we propose from theoretical analysis a possibility of a topological odd-parity superconductivity analogous to the superfluid 3 He-B in moderately hole-doped Sr 3 À x SnO. We envision that this discovery of a new class of oxide superconductors will lead to a rapid progress in physics and chemistry of antiperovskite oxides consisting of unusual metallic anions. xides with perovskite-based structures have had one of the central roles in condensed-matter research for decades. In particular, the discoveries of hightemperature superconductivity in cuprates 2) have driven the science community to deepen the concepts of strongly correlated electron systems substantially. These research efforts led to the discoveries of novel phenomena also in cubic perovskite oxides that are in the base of these materials. Examples are colossal magnetoresistance Perovskite oxides have their counterparts, antiperovskite oxides A 3 BO (or BOA 3 ), in which the position of metal and oxygen ions are reversed. Antiperovskite oxides were first found accidentally in an attempt to produce Sr 3 Sn, which turned out to be stable only with inclusion of oxygen, forming Sr 3 SnO (ref. 6). Upon this discovery, various A 3 BO with A 1⁄4 Ca, Sr, Ba and B 1⁄4 Sn, Pb, were synthesized and their structure identified. Antiperovskite oxides crystallize in cubic or pseudo-cubic structures with reverse occupancy of metal and oxygen relative to their perovskite counterparts, as illustrated in the inset of Fig. Recent band calculations for a closely related antiperovskite oxide Ca 3 PbO reveal slightly gapped three-dimensional Dirac cones in the very vicinity of the Fermi level, owing to the energylevel inversion of the Ca-3d and Pb-6p bands near the G point In this article, we present the evidence for bulk superconductivity in polycrystalline Sr 3 À x SnO samples through observation of zero resistivity and Meissner diamagnetism. Superconducting samples are found to have dominant hole carriers with the carrier density of 1 Â 10 27 m À 3 at 300 K. We propose possible realization of a topological odd-parity superconducting state, which can have the condensation energy comparable to that of the ordinary s-wave superconductivity with the aid of the mixing of Sr-4d and Sn-5p orbitals (as outlined in Methods section 'Topological superconductivity'). Sample preparation and characterization. The powder X-ray diffraction of superconducting samples reveals cubic Sr 3 À x SnO to be dominant as presented in Fig. Superconducting properties. The resistivity of Sr 3 À x SnO exhibits a sharp drop with an onset of 4.9 K and zero resistivity below 4.5 K in zero field (Fig. The superconducting phase diagram is shown in Fig. Normal-state properties and electronic states. The resistivity R(T) shows metallic behaviour from room temperature with a relatively high residual resistivity ratio of B16 and a small residual resistivity of 62 mOcm for a polycrystalline sample (Supplementary Fig. Besides being the first superconductor among the antiperovskite oxides, Sr 3 À x SnO has the prospect of topological superconductivity. When Cooper pairs are formed in Sr 3 À x SnO, their parity reflects the orbital texture of the underlying FS. Thus electrons on the FS portion with strong orbital mixing favour forming odd-parity and correspondingly spin-triplet pairs. This oddparity state belongs to the same representation as that of the fully gapped superfluid In this article, we report evidence for bulk superconductivity in Sr 3 À x SnO with an onset of about 5 K, marking the first superconductivity among antiperovskite oxides. Mirroring the rich variety of properties in perovskite oxides, the present work opens a door to superconductivity as well as other interesting phenomena in antiperovskite oxides with unusual metallic anions. (1) Batches A, B and C. Bulk polycrystalline samples of Sr 3 À x SnO, approximately 0.5 g in each batch, were synthesized by reaction of Sr chunk (Furuuchi, 99.9%) and SnO powder (Furuuchi, 99.9%) in an alumina crucible sealed inside a quartz tube under vacuum. Preparations of synthesis were performed inside an Ar-filled glove box. The sealed quartz tubes were heated to 800 °C over 3 h and kept at 800 °C for 3 h. Then the tubes were immediately quenched in water and were opened inside the glove box. The obtained samples were stored and prepared for measurements in the glove box. A crude estimation of the amount of evaporated strontium by weight in batches A, B and C indicates that it was about 18% of the starting strontium amount. (2) Batch D. In further investigations on the synthesis, we observed that the evaporation of strontium can be suppressed to o1% if the reaction was carried out in glass tubes that were sealed under 0.3 bar of argon pressure at room temperature instead of vacuum. Batch D was synthesized in this way with Sr 2.46 SnO as starting composition instead of Sr 3 SnO. (3) Batch E. An excess of 25% strontium was used and the glass tube was sealed under vacuum for synthesis of batch E. For this batch, a 100% yield of Sr 3 SnO by weight with respect to the starting quantity of SnO was obtained. This batch E was considered an almost stoichiometric Sr 3 SnO phase. A sample from batch E, with approximately stoichiometric composition, showed semiconducting resistivity behaviour down to low temperature, with an anomaly at 4 K, suggesting an inclusion of a small superconducting region. However, in the magnetic measurement, this sample did not show evidence of superconductivity down to 0.15 K. The observed semiconducting behaviour agrees with the result from Sr 3 SnO thin-film reports Characterization of superconductivity. Transport, AC magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity measurements were carried out in a commercial apparatus (Quantum Design, PPMS). For the resistivity and Hall coefficient measurements, a five-probe method was typically employed from 1.8 to 300 K with fields up to 4.5 T. On a sample with a typical size of 1.8 Â 1.8 Â 0.6 mm 3 , 50-mm-diameter gold wires were attached using silver epoxy (EPOXY TECHNOLOGY, H20E) inside a He-filled glove box. The samples were protected from exposure to air with vacuum grease (Apiezon, N-grease) before taken out from the glove box. The AC susceptibility was measured using a small susceptometer compatible with the PPMS and its adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator option The direct current magnetization M was measured using a commercial SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design, MPMS). Samples were sealed inside plastic capsules under Ar environment. Degaussing of PPMS and MPMS prior to measurements ensured the accuracy of the applied field values. The remnant field inside the MPMS was occasionally measured using a Pb (99.9999%) reference sample, and it was found to be r0.1 mT after degaussing. Sample decomposition. After exposed to air overnight, the sample decomposes into Sr(OH) 2 and Sn metal as confirmed by X-ray diffraction. Such sample exhibits a superconducting transition with T c 1⁄4 3.7 K as expected for pure Sn. Band-structure calculation. The tight-binding model simplifies the calculation of orbital texture and enables us to study possible pairing. The band structure and the FS of Sr 3 SnO were calculated from tight-binding model, with the model parameters chosen to fit the band spectrum near the G point of the first-principles calculation performed by Hsieh et al. Topological superconductivity. From the orbital texture of the FS around the G point, a Cooper pair of Sr 3 À x SnO may form between electrons in different orbitals, when the effective pairing interaction is dominated by an attractive inter-orbital interaction. The resultant inter-orbital Cooper pair realizes an odd-parity superconducting state as Sn-5p and Sr-4d orbitals have opposite parity under inversion. Detailed theoretical analysis using the tight-binding model shows that the odd-parity pairing state is spin-triplet. The pairing symmetry is consistent with the G À 1 representation in the cubic point group, which is the same representation as the fully gapped Furthermore, if the hole FS exists around the R-point, as the first-principles calculation suggested NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 7:13617 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13617 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications