Resistive, magnetization, torque, specific heat and scanning tunneling microscopy measurements are carried out on the hole heavily doped CsFe2As2 single crystals. A characteristic temperature T * ∼ 13 K, which is several times higher than the superconducting transition temperature Tc = 2.15 K, is observed and possibly related to the superconducting fluctuation or the pseudogap state. A diamagnetic signal detected by torque measurements starts from the superconducting state, keeps finite and vanishes gradually until a temperature near T * . Temperature dependent resistivity and specific heat also show kinks near T * . An asymmetric gap-like feature with the energy of 8.4 meV and a symmetric superconducting related gap of 2.2 meV on the scanning tunneling spectra are detected, and these pseudogap-related features disappear at temperatures up to at least 9 K. These observations by different experimental tools suggest the possible existence of superconducting fluctuation or pseudogap state in the temperature range up to 4 -6 times of Tc in CsFe2As2. The iron-based superconductors and cuprates are the only two unconventional systems with high temperature superconductivity. Superconductivity (SC) can be achieved by doping electrons or holes to the parent compounds in these two systems when the antiferromagnetic order is suppressed, so these two systems have rather similar doping phase diagram Although there is very rich physics in the two high-T c systems as mentioned above, the superconducting mechanism has not been settled yet. For the gap symmetry, cuprates have the well-known and dominant d-wave gap, while the situation in iron-based superconductors is very complex because Fermi-surface topologies possess tremendous difference in different materials The CsFe 2 As 2 single crystals were synthesized by using the self-flux method shows the temperature dependence of the mass magnetization (M) after zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) processes at 10 Oe. shows temperature dependence of resistivity at different fields with the lowest temperature to 1.9 K, by which one can determine the zero-resistance transition temperature T c0 = 2.11 K at 0 T. Then we use a power function ρ(T ) = ρ 0 + AT n to fit the experimental resistive curve measured at 0 T from 2.4 K to 10 K, the fitting result with ρ 0 = 1.43 μΩ•cm and n = 1.7 is shown as a solid red line in Fig. A diamagnetic magnetization signal above T c measured in cuprates by torque magnetometry is shown to be an efficacious proof of the superconducting fluctuation beside the Nernst signal We have observed that a diamagnetic signal disappeared above 12 K in torque measurement, however the fluctuation seems not so strong from the resistive measurement near the transition as shown in Fig. We also carried out the STS measurements on the CsFe 2 As 2 single crystals to detect the local electronic properties. A typical set of STS spectra measured at different temperatures is shown in Fig. In the cuprates, the pseudogap is regarded as a symmetric gap directly developed from the superconducting gap above T c , and getting support from the bulk measurements, e.g., resistivity, nuclear magnetic resonance, specific heat, Nernst effect, etc. One of the early understandings for the pseudogap in cuprates is its close relationship to Cooper pairing above T c , however critical temperatures for superconducting fluctuation and pseudogap state are divorced from each other by a careful STS measurement V. CONCLUDING REMARKS By using the torque measurement, we have observed the diamagnetic signal at temperatures of 6 times of T c in CsFe 2 As 2 single crystals. This may be explained by the superconducting fluctuation effect. Supporting evidence is obtained through analyzing the derivative of resistivity and specific heat, both illustrate a characteristic temperature T * ∼ 13 K. In addition, the pseudogap feature is detected as the appearance of a second set of larger gaps existing until 9 K on the tunneling spectra. All these facts point to a convergent picture that there is a pseudogap effect in CsFe 2 As 2 . Our results present a picture of strong pairing with weak phase coherence in the extremely hole doped system, which will provide extra information to the superconducting mechanism in iron based superconductors.