It is generally believed that the laws of thermodynamics govern superconductivity as an equilibrium state of matter. Here we point out that within the conventional BCS-London description of the normal-superconductor transition in the presence of a magnetic field, the transition cannot be reversible, in contradiction with the thermodynamic description and with experiments. This indicates that the conventional theory of superconductivity is internally inconsistent. We argue that to describe a reversible transition it is necessary to assume that charge transfer occurs across the normal-superconductor phase boundary, as proposed in the theory of hole superconductiviy. This provides also a solution to the angular momentum puzzle pointed out in previous work. Our explanation can only apply if the current carriers in the normal state are holes. An experimental test of these ideas is proposed. The experimental discovery of the Meissner effect in 1933 In this paper we point out that within the conventional London-BCS theory of superconductivity In recent work we have argued that charge transfer in direction perpendicular to the normal-superconductor phase boundary is necessary to explain the dynamics of the Meissner effect In a seminal paper H c e (x-x0)/λL so as to satisfy the London and Ampere equations The system is at temperature T < T c and the thermodynamic critical field at that temperature is H c . With the current given by J y = en s v s , n s the number of superconducting carriers of charge e per unit volume, and using the standard relation 1/λ 2 L = 4πn s e 2 /(mc 2 ) London where ∆F is the difference in free energy per unit volume between the normal and the superconducting phase. For the case where the phase boundary moves into the superconducting region the situation is shown schematically in Fig. In thermodynamics a sharp distinction is made between quasistatic and reversible processes. Both processes have to happen slowly enough that the system can be considered to be in thermodynamic equilibrium at all times, so reversible processes are also quasistatic. However, a quasistatic process will be irreversible if it gives rise to an entropy increase. Instead in a reversible process entropy is not generated at any time. We argue that the normal-superconductor transition in the presence of a magnetic field cannot be reversible within the conventional description. As the phase boundary is displaced and the magnetic flux changes, a Faraday field E y will necessarily be generated which will give rise to a current J y in the normal region, as shown schematically in Fig. Consider the rectangular geometry shown in Fig. where R is the initial length of the normal region in the x direction. The phase boundary position at time t is given by According to Faraday's law, an electric field exists in the y direction in the normal region given by giving rise to a current J y = σE y , with σ the normal state conductivity. The total Joule heat dissipated per unit time is over a volume V (t) = x 0 (t)A, with A the cross-sectional area of the sample. Integrating over time we obtain for the total heat dissipated per unit volume Using a Drude form for with τ the Drude collision time, together with the usual relation for the London penetration depth [7] we can write Eq. For example, for R = 1cm, λ L = 500 Å so that for a typical collision time at low temperatures τ = 10 -11 s if it took t R = 10s for the phase boundary to move 1cm the Joule heat dissipated is 4% of the condensation energy. In typical experiments the time to reach equilibrium is several seconds, so this simple calculation suggests that the heat dissipated in this irreversible process can be an appreciable fraction of the condensation energy. This appears inconsistent with the experimental reports that indicate near perfect reversibility in these processes We can obtain a more accurate estimate of the energy dissipated using the procedure of Refs. where the parameter α is determined by the condition The induced current in the normal region at position x and time t is given by [9] and the total time for the phase boundary to move from The energy dissipated per unit volume is with E y = J y /σ, and a straightforward calculation yields Note that this result is very similar to what was obtained in the earlier calculation, since replacing p in Eq. ( the same as Eq. ( The results discussed above were for a planar geometry where the calculations are simplest, however we have found that the results are very similar for a cylindrical geometry The derivation of the relation between change in entropy per unit volume and temperature derivative of critical field rests on the assumption that the heat transfer to render the superconductor normal is given by where dS is the change in entropy. In other words, that the process is reversible. The Rutgers relation for the specific heat jump at follows from this equation. In addition, at any temperature T < T c the latent heat involved in the normalsuperconductor transition for a sample of volume V is assuming no irreversible increase in entropy takes place during the transition. Keesom and coworkers did careful tests of the relation Eq. ( as the time it takes for the transition to take place in applied magnetic field H c (1 + p) for sample dimension R. According to Eq. ( with Q given by Eq. or 4.6 hours for the duration of the experiment. Instead, according to Ref. Consider again motion of the phase boundary into the normal region at speed ẋ0 . We cannot negate Faraday's law, so an electric field E y = (H c /c) ẋ0 will necessarily be generated at the boundary and by continuity in the normal region nearby. Is it possible that no current J y is generated on the normal side of the phase boundary so as to avoid the irreversible Joule heating J y E y resulting from it? The answer is yes, provided the normal phase mobile charges are drifting at speed ẋ0 in the same direction as the phase boundary. If so, the electric and magnetic forces are exactly balanced, both for positive and negative charges (holes or electrons) as shown schematically in Fig. As a consequence, the phase boundary can move into the normal region as the superconducting phase expands without generation of Joule heat. The same argument holds for the opposite motion of the phase boundary into the superconducting region as the normal phase expands, with the normal charges now moving in opposite direction again following the motion of the phase boundary. The flow of normal charges in direction perpendicular to the phase boundary depicted in Fig. We have argued in previous work that the perfect diamagnetism of superconductors implies that superfluid electrons reside in mesoscopic orbits of radius 2λ L The consequence of this orbit enlargement as carriers become superconducting for the process where the phase boundary moves into the normal region is shown schematically in Fig. and the speed in the ŷ direction that an electron acquires in time ∆t is which is precisely the speed of the carriers in the Meissner current Eq. ( Experiments that measure the gyromagnetic effect Figure This then implies that the normal carriers of materials that become superconducting in a reversible process and exhibit a Meissner effect are necessarily holes. For several years we have been pointing out that the Meissner effect raises a puzzling question concerning angular momentum conservation In Ref. Consider once more the process of backflow in the planar geometry, shown now in Fig. But the electric and magnetic forces point in the same direction for the negative electron. How is it possible that it moves purely in the -x direction? The answer is, of course, that there is another force acting on the electron. The lattice exerts a force on the electrons when the charge carriers are holes. In order to balance the forces in the -ŷ direction on the electrons, the lattice has to exert a force F L = F E + F B on the electron, pointing in the +ŷ direction, as shown in Fig. And, by Newton's 3rd law, the electrons in the 'backflow' current exert a force -F L = -(F B + F E ) pointing in the -ŷ direction, also shown in Fig. In addition, the electric field E y exerts directly a force F E on the positive ions in the crystal that points in the +ŷ direction and is half the magnitude of F L (not shown in Fig. This then explains how the lattice can acquire a momentum (or angular momentum) opposite to that dictated by Faraday's law when the Meissner current is generated, and resolves the 'angular momentum puzzle'. The key to the solution is, the carriers in the normal state have to be holes. that this transfer of momentum to the lattice is a non-dissipative process, different from the process that we had proposed earlier involving scattering by impuri- The induced electric fields Ey point in opposite directions and so do the induced Foucault currents in the conventional description. In the superconducting region the current is the same for both cases. . ties Consider the growth of the superconducting phase in the presence of a magnetic field in a planar geometry as shown in Fig. For example, for H c = 200G = 60, 000V /cm, the boundary moving at speed ẋ0 = 0.1cm/s, and distance between contacts d = 1cm, the measured voltage will be V H = 0.6μV . The voltage will appear during the time interval ∆t where the boundary layer of thickness λ L is moving across the x-position where the contacts are, ∆t = λ L / ẋ0 . For λ L = 500A, ∆t = 50μs. The polarity of the measured voltage will be as shown in Fig. In previous work It should be pointed out that some degree of irreversibility will always exists if there are regions of the sample that are not part of boundary layers, since in those regions eddy currents will flow. This will certainly be the case if for example a single domain grows from the center in a cylindrical sample as shown in Fig. pletely reversible and take a finite amount of time. This is qualitatively different from the conventional description where the transition cannot occur without entropy production. Furthermore we showed that this suppression of eddy currents that would otherwise render the process irreversible will only occur if the carriers in the normal state are holes. Notably, this agrees with the prediction of the theory of hole superconductivity [23] that superconductivity can only occur if the normal state current carriers are holes. Furthermore, we showed that this physics also explains the angular momentum puzzle pointed out in previous work An essential aspect of the physics discussed here is that the wavefunction ('orbit') and the charge of superconducting electrons close to the normal-superconductor phase boundary penetrates into the normal region. It is likely that this physics is related to the well known proximity effect, where signs of weaks superconductivity are observed in junctions of superconducting and normal metals As discussed in this paper, the way in which a metal expels a magnetic field from its interior in the process of becoming superconducting, while conserving angular momentum and overcoming Faraday's law, is far from trivial. We had pointed out in earlier work that expulsion of magnetic field necessarily has to involve a radial outward motion of charge Instead, the conventional BCS-London theory of superconductivity explains the reversibility of the normalsuperconductor transition in the presence of induced Faraday fields, the dynamics of the generation of the Meissner current in apparent violation of Faraday's law, the transfer of momentum from the charge carriers to the lattice required to conserve momentum and angular momentum, and the disappearance of the Meissner current without irreversible heat loss, in a much simpler way: by simply postulating that it happens and that it needs no further explanation One way to test the physics discussed in this paper would be to repeat the experiments measuring the latent heat in the superconducting transition in a field 