In a short review-article we first discuss the results, which are mainly devoted to the generalizations of the famous Kohn-Luttinger mechanism of superconductivity in purely repulsive fermion systems at low electron densities. In the context of repulsive-U Hubbard model and Shubin-Vonsovsky model we consider briefly the superconducting phase diagrams and the symmetries of the order parameter in novel strongly correlated electron systems including idealized monolayer and bilayer graphene. We stress that purely repulsive fermion systems are mainly the subject of unconventional low-temperature superconductivity. To get the high temperature superconductivity in cuprates (with T C of the order of 100 K) we should proceed to the t-J model with the Van der Waals interaction potential and the competition between short-range repulsion and long-range attraction. Finally we stress that to describe superconductivity in metallic hydrogen alloys under pressure (with T C of the order of 200 K) it is reasonable to reexamine more conventional mechanisms connected with electron-phonon interaction. These mechanisms arise in the attractive-U Hubbard model with static onsite or intersite attractive potential or in more realistic theories (which include retardation effects) such as Migdal-Eliashberg strong coupling theory or even Fermi-Bose mixture theory of Alexandrov, Ranninger and its generalizations. Recent discovery of Cooper pairing at 190 K in metallic hydrogen sulfide H 2 S under high pressure revives our hopes to move forward from high-temperature to room-temperature superconductivity In the beginning of the review-article we discuss the mechanisms of unconventional superconductivity in 3D and 2D fermionic systems with purely repulsive interaction at low densities. We briefly discuss the phase-diagrams of these systems in free space and on the lattice and find the areas of the superconductive state in the framework of the Fermi-gas model with hard core repulsion, the Hubbard model The proposed theory is based on the Kohn-Luttinger mechanism of superconductivity To get really high superconductive temperatures we should either consider the repulsive models at high electron densities (for instance in parquet situation close to Van Hove singularities If we change the sign of the interaction completely and consider an attractive-U Hubbard model ) temperature behaviour of the resistivity in the 2D case At higher electron densities in this class of models the two-component Fermi-Bose mixture of local pairs and one-particle excitations arises We should stress that unconventional mechanisms compete for different materials with electron-phonon interaction in more conventional weak-coupling (BCS) p r p r in the effective interaction U eff of two femions via polarization of the fermionic background in 3D. Unfortunately they predicted very low critical temperatures of d-wave pairing for superfluid transition in He-3 and superconductive transition in electron plasma of metals and that was a reason why their results were unjustly forgotten. Later on Fay and Layzer is an effective gas parameter of Galitskii , where 0 r is the range of the potential). The authors got T C of the order of 1 mK for superfluid He-3 and (1-10) mK for electron plasma in metals in the limit of intermediate electron densities where is an effective 2D gas parameter of Bloom  in 2D case prohibits the superconductive pairing in the second order of the gas parameter for the effective interaction U eff . However in the third order of the gas parameter the character of the Kohn's anomaly changes on the opposite one Re 2 F p q  ,and as a result a large 2D Kohn's anomaly becomes effective for superconductivity problem bringing nonzero critical temperature in Eq.2 Soon after the first papers on p-wave pairing, Baranov, Kagan and Chubukov in 2D IV) Superconductivity in the Shubin-Vonsovsky model. The Shubin-Vonsovsky model In terms of the angle θ between incoming and outgoing momenta in the Cooper channel the Kohn's anomaly changes its form from in the absence of spin polarization on  ln in the presence of it, where C  differs from π proportionally to / 1 . Thus it becomes stronger when the ratio of the Fermi momentum of the two components / 1 In the same time the number (and the density of states) of down spins decreases with an increase of the spin-polarisation. As a result we have strongly nonmonotonous dependence of the triplet p-wave T C from the ratio of / 1 Moreover both in 3D and especially in 2D case (where we get now superconductivity already in the second order of the gas parameter for the effective interaction) we have a very pronounced and a very broad maximum for the optimal density ratio. In the 2D case the optimal density ratio / 4 n n    and the main exponent for triplet p-wave T C in maximum increases in several times bringing quite substantial values The dependence of 1 T  in 2D polarised Fermi-gas with repulsion on the polarization degree is presented on Fig. Concerning electron systems, the theory predicts p-wave superconductivity in superlattices PbTe-SnTe and dichalcogenides CuS 2 -CuSe 2 for geometrically separated bands belonging to the neighbouring layers It also predicts T C of the order of 0.5 K in very clean low density 2D heterostructures in a strong (parallel to the electronic layer) magnetic field Finally the theory Fig. Usually Kohn-Luttinger mechanism and its generalizations are very effective to provide us with unconventional low temperature superconductivity in purely repulsive fermionic systems. To get really high T C superconductivity we should consider the models with not purely repulsive potentials. In this context the very important role belongs to the famous t-J model, which in fact is the model with the Van der Waals potential. It corresponds to strong onsite Hubbard repulsion and weak intersite AFM attraction. As it was shown by Kagan, Rice The symmetry of the order parameter in this case corresponds to Let us go further on and consider purely attractive short-range potentials. In the absence of the lattice we have then an attractive Fermi-gas. In the lattice case we are dealing with the attractive-U Hubbard model. Note that the attractive Hubbard model is a static model which does not contain the retardation effects. The phase-diagram of this model (as well as of the attractive Fermi-gas model) in the 3D case corresponds to the BCS-BEC crossover between extended Cooper pairs (formed in momentum space in the presence of filled Fermi-surface at small values of |U|/W) and local pairs or dimers (formed by two fermions in vacuum at large values of |U|/W ≥ 1). In the BCS domain of extended pairs in both models the s-wave scattering amplitude corresponds to attraction a < 0 , and in the same time the one-particle chemical potential is positive μ > 0. Vise versa in the BEC domain of local pairs the scattering length is positive a > 0 (signaling the appearance of the two-particle bound state in vacuum) and correspondingly the chemical potential is negative (μ < 0). Moreover for the BEC domain we have two characteristic temperatures. The higher crossover (Saha) temperature where |E B | is a binding energy of a local pair. Let us emphasize that T* in Eq. 5 corresponds to the thermodynamic equilibrium between creation and dissociation of local pairs [101]. In the same time the lower (BEC) critical temperature corresponds to the real phase-transition and in the principal approximation is given by Einstein formula [102]: where m B is a bosonic mass (a mass of a local pair or a dimer). In the strong-coupling limit |U|>W in a lattice model with discrete hoppings only on neighbouring sites a bosonic mass will be enhanced B U m m W  according to the second order perturbation theory of  in BEC domain where a 3D gas parameter 0 2 / F f a p   . The situation in 2D attractive-U Hubbard model as well as in the 2D Fermi-gas model is qualitatively similar to the 3D case in a low density limit. The only substantial difference is connected with an appearence of the intermediate coupling case which is realized in the (see where according to [110] is a 2D coupling constant which describes the repulsive interaction between the dimers. In low density 2D Fermi-gas the mean field BEC C T in Eq. 9 is only slightly different from the exact Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless critical temperature [111, 112]: The crossover Saha temperature in 2D yields: where a binding energy is given by For intermediate temperatures * we again have a phase of normal bosonic metal. In 2D attractive-U Hubbard model in this phase even in a very clean limit (no impurities) the resistivity behaves as   (due to boson-boson scattering with Umklapp processes on the lattice In the same time the BCS critical temperature in 2D is given by Miyake formula [113] Note that for symmetric potentials in 2D the two-particle bound states appear already at infinitely small attraction [114] (in contrast with the 3D case where we have a threshold for bound state formation Note also that for the weak-coupling case B F E   , as it was shown in in Eq. ( The recordly high conventional superconductivity in metallic H 2 S under pressure brings our attention back to more standard electron-phonon mechanisms. Note that the classical strong coupling Migdal-Eliashberg theory The theory works pretty well in many conventional superconductors discovered in the past as well as in several new systems like K 3 C 60 Moreover the material should be characterized by large electron-phonon coupling constant λ > 1. Experimentally the bipolaron theory should correspond to large effective masses of small radius bipolarons and the systems with an unconventional negative curvature (with a strong increase) of the upper critical field [124] yield the electron-phonon coupling constant λ ~ 1/2 even for the bismuth family of cuprates (where strong-coupling effects were mostly probable), so bipolaron formation is unlikely here. The conditions for local pairs formation and their stability (as we already mention in section VII) are milder in the model of the two component Fermi-Bose mixture firstly introduced by Ranninger et al. Note that the formation of local pairs of the exсitonic nature is possibly realized in BiO 6 clusters in superconducting alloys BaKBiO 3 due to valence skipping considerations of Note that the role of disorder is very interesting also in the attractive-U Hubbard model. Here according to BdG analysis The conventional mechanisms can be also rather effective especially in the systems with high phonon frequencies ω and relatively large coupling constant λ ~ 1 (which is not compensated in these systems by the small Coulomb pseudopotential μ*), as well as in the systems with anharmonic two-well potentials Note that historically the first discussion on the phase transition from molecular to metallic hydrogen phase at high pressures belong to Wigner and Huntington in 1935 Thorough examination of the important families of the local minima of the thermodynamic potential for metallic hydrogen at different pressures in a normal (nonsuperconducting) state belongs to Brovman, Yu. Kagan and Kholas In this context an important unresolved problem is to construct the gross phase diagram of solid hydrogen under pressure and to determine the global minima both in molecular and metallic phases as well as the position of the transition line P*(T) between them. The main difficulty here is connected with a big uncertainty in the calculation of the thermodynamic potential for molecular phase. Here we should mention the first experimental results of Eremets, Troyan, Drozdov During last 30 years after discovery of high-T C superconductivity we observe a lively discussion between different theoretical schools which support conventional or unconventional scenarious of superconductivity. The experimentalists are constantly supplying the both parties with the new evidences and new superconducting families which belong either to conventional or unconventional class of materials. The dispute clearly enriches the fascinating and rapidly developing field of high-T C superconductivity. The broad and objective (unbiased) outlook is necessary for the new predictions on the most perspective materials with critical temperatures approaching the room temperature superconductivity. XIII) The author acknowledges stimulating discussions with many colleagues and especially grateful to N.M. Plakida, G.V. Shlyapnikov, A.S. Alexandrov*, A.V. Chubukov, M.A. 