We study the spin-resolved spectral properties of the impurity states associated to the presence of magnetic impurities in two-dimensional, as well as one-dimensional systems with Rashba spin-orbit coupling. We focus on Shiba bound states in superconducting materials, as well as on impurity states in metallic systems. Using a combination of a numerical T-matrix approximation and a direct analytical calculation of the bound state wave function, we compute the local density of states (LDOS) together with its Fourier transform (FT). We find that the FT of the spin-polarized LDOS, a quantity accessible via spin-polarized STM, allows to accurately extract the strength of the spin-orbit coupling. Also we confirm that the presence of magnetic impurities is strictly necessary for such measurement, and that non-spin-polarized experiments cannot have access to the value of the spin-orbit coupling. The electronic bands of materials that lack an inversion center are split by the spin-orbit (SO) coupling. A strong SO coupling implies that the spin of the electron is tied to to the direction of its momentum. Materials with strong SO coupling have been receiving a considerable attention in the past decade partly because SO is playing an important role for the discovery of new topological classes of materials. 1,2 Two-dimensional topological insulators, first predicted in graphene, Although SO coupling has been playing an essential role in the discovery of new topological materials, it is also of crucial importance in the physics of spin Hall effect, Based on the prominent role played by SO in the past decades, it is thus of great interest to be able to evaluate the SO coupling value in a given material accurately, though in general this is a very difficult task. Inferences can be made from ARPES measurements; On the other hand we focus on the effects of the spinorbit coupling on the impurity states of a classical magnetic impurity in one-dimensional and two-dimensional metallic systems such as Pb By studying the two classes of systems described above we show that the SO coupling can directly be read-off from the FT features of the SP LDOS in the vicinity of the magnetic impurity. We note that such a signature appears only for magnetic impurities, and only when the system is investigated using spin-polarized STM measurements, the non-spin-polarized measurements do not provide information on the SO, as it has also been previously noted. We focus on Rashba SO coupling as assumed to be the most relevant for the systems considered, but we have checked that our conclusion holds for other types of SO. To obtain the SP LDOS we use a T-matrix approximation, In Sec. II, we present the general model for twodimensional and one-dimensional cases and the basics of the T-matrix technique. In Sec. III we show our results for the SP LDOS, calculated both numerically and analytically, for 2D systems, both in the SC and metallic phase. Sec. IV is devoted to SP LDOS of impurity in one-dimensional systems. Our Conclusions are presented in section V. Details of the analytical calculations are given in the Appendices. We consider an s-wave superconductor with a SC paring ∆ s , and Rashba SO coupling λ, for which the Hamiltonian, written in the Nambu basis Ψ p = (ψ ↑p , ψ ↓p , ψ † ↓-p , -ψ † ↑-p ) T , is given by: The energy spectrum is ξ p ≡ p 2 2m -ε F , where ε F is the Fermi energy. The operator ψ † σp creates a particle of spin σ =↑, ↓ of momentum p ≡ (p x , p y ) in 2D and p ≡ p x in 1D. Below we set to unity. The system is considered to lay in the (x, y) plane in 2D case, whereas in 1D case we set p y to zero in the expressions above, and we consider a system lying along the x-axis. The metallic limit is recovered by setting ∆ s = 0. The Rashba Hamiltonian can be written as in 2D and simply as H SO = λp x σ y ⊗ τ z in 1D. We have introduced σ and τ , the Pauli matrices acting respectively in the spin and the particle-hole subspaces. The unperturbed retarded Green's function can be obtained from the above Hamiltonian via , where δ is the inverse quasiparticle lifetime. In what follows we study what happens when a single localized impurity is introduced in this system. We consider magnetic impurities of spin J = (J x , J y , J z ) described by the following Hamiltonian: where J is the magnetic strength. We only consider here classical impurities oriented either along the z-axis, J = (0, 0, J z ), or along the x-axis, J = (J x , 0, 0). This is justified provided the Kondo temperature is much smaller than the superconducting gap. The real-space dependence of the non-polarized, δρ(r, E), and SP LDOS, S n(r, E), with n = x, y, z, can be found as where ∆G ij denotes the ij-th component of the matrix ∆G, and G 0 (E, r) is the unperturbed retarded Green's function in real space, given by the Fourier transform The FT of the SP LDOS components in momentum space, S n(p, E) = dr S n(r, E)e -ipr , with n = x, y, z, as well as the FT of the non-polarized LDOS, δρ(p, E) = dr δρ(r, E)e -ipr are given by δρ(p, E) = i 2π dq (2π) 2 [g 11 (E, q, p) + g22 (E, q, p)], (9) where dq ≡ dq x dq y , -G * 0 (E, p + q)T * (E)G * 0 (E, q), and g ij , gij denote the corresponding components of the matrices g and g. Note that while the non-polarized and the SP LDOS are of course real functions when evaluated in position space, their Fourier transforms need not be. Sometimes we get either or both real and imaginary components for the FT, depending on their corresponding symmetries. In the figures we shall indicate each time if we plot the real or the imaginary component of the FT. To obtain the FT of the non-polarized and the SP LDOS, we first evaluate the momentum integrals in Eqs. (4-9) numerically. For this we use a square lattice version of the Hamiltonians (1) and (2), where we take the tight-binding spectrum Ξ p ≡ μ -2t(cos p x + cos p y ) with chemical potential μ and hopping parameter t. We set the lattice constant to unity. It is also worth noting that all the numerical integrations are performed over the first Brillouin zone and that we use dimensionless units by setting t = 1. Alternatively, as detailed in the appendices, we find the exact form for the non-polarized and SP LDOS in the continuum limit by performing the integrals in the FT of the Green's functions analytically. Moreover, when considering the SC systems, the energies E of the Shiba states together with the corresponding eigenstates for the Shiba wave functions Φ at the origin can be obtained from the corresponding eigenvalue equation 66 The spatial dependence of the Shiba state wave function is determined using The real-space Green's function is obtained simply by a Fourier transform of the unperturbed Green's function in momentum space, G 0 (E, p). The non-polarized and the SP LDOS are given by and where we take into account only the hole components of the wave function, and not the electron ones. This is because the physical observables are related to only one of the two components, for example in a STM measurement one injects an electron at a given energy and thus have access to the allowed number of electronic states, not to both the electronic and hole states simultaneously. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian contains the socalled particle-hole redundancy, and the electron and the hole components can be simply recovered from each other by overall changes of sign, and/or changing the sign of the energy. Below we compute only the hole components, but there would have been no qualitative differenced had we computed the electron component. A. Real and momentum space dependence of the 2D Shiba bound states For a 2D superconductor with SO coupling in the presence of a magnetic impurity one expects the formation of a single pair of Shiba states. where α = πνJ and ν = m 2π . (See Appendix A for details of how the energies of the Shiba states are calculated.) Up to the critical value α c = 1 these energies are ordered the following way: E 1 > E1. As soon as α > α c , energy levels E 1 and E1 exchange places, making the order the following: E1 > E 1 . This corresponds to a change of the ground state parity. The averaged SP LDOS induced by an impurity as a function of the impurity strength for an in-plane magnetic impurity. The dashed line shows the superconducting gap. A similar result is obtained when the impurity spin is perpendicular to the plane. Note that the two Shiba states with opposite energies have opposite spin. We set t = 1, μ = 3, δ = 0.01, λ = 0.5, ∆s = 0.2. We are interested in studying the spatial structure of the Shiba states in the presence of magnetic impurities oriented both perpendicular to the plane, and in plane. This can be done both in real space and momentum space by calculating the Fourier transform of the spin-polarized LDOS using the T-matrix technique detailed in the previous section. We focus on the positive-energy Shiba state, noting that its negative energy counterpart exhibits a qualitatively similar behavior. In Fig. To overcome this problem we focus on the FT of these features, as it is oftentimes done in spatially resolved STM experiments, which allow for a more accurate separation of the different wavevectors. These results, which are obtained using a numerical integration of the T-matrix equations, are also supported by analytical calculations which help to understand the fine structure of the FT of the SP LDOS (see Appendices for details). These calculations yield for the SP LDOS generated by a magnetic impurity perpendicular to the plane with We have introduced e iφr = x+iy r , and with v = v 2 F + λ 2 , and v F = 2ε F /m. Here p σ F , p λ and p s are the different momenta which can be read off from the SP LDOS. For an in-plane magnetic impurity we have with tan β = α. The S x component is the sum of symmetric part a S s x and an asymmetric part S a x . Note that the features observed in the FT of the SP LDOS plots are well captured by the analytical calculations. In particular we note that the oscillations in the SP LDOS are dominated by the following four wavevectors: which should give rise in the FT to high-intensity features at these wavevectors (the red arrows in Fig. The most important observation is that all the components of the FT of the SP LDOS exhibit a strong feature at wave vector p λ . Thus an experimental observation of this feature via spin-polarized STM would allow one to read-off directly the value of the SO coupling. The spin orbit can also be read-off from the distance between the 2p + and 2p -peaks, though the intensity of these features is not as strong. This appears clearly in Fig. Note that the only wave vector present in the nonpolarized LDOS is 2mv, which has only a very weak dependence on λ for not too large values of the SO with respect to the Fermi velocity, thus it is quasi-impossible to determine the SO coupling from a measurement without spin resolution. Note also the typical two-dimensional 1/r decay of the Friedel oscillations is overlapping in this case with an exponential decay with wave vector p s . A similar analysis can be performed for impurity states forming in the vicinity of a magnetic impurity in a metallic system. Here the classical magnetic impurity does not lead to any localized bound states at a specific energy, and the intensity of the impurity contribution is roughly independent of energy. Thus in Fig. while for an x directed impurity (in-plane): with p F = mv F , p σ = p σ F + E/v = 0, p ε ≡ p + + p -= 2 (mv + E/v) and ν σ = ν 1 -σ λ v . Note that these expressions are very similar to those obtained in the SC regime, except that the wave vectors of the oscillations now do not include p λ . However, this could still be read-off experimentally from the difference between p -and p + . Another important difference between the SC and non-SC regimes is the presence of the exponentially decaying term in the expressions describing the LDOS dependence for the Shiba states in the SC regime. The Shiba states have an exponential decay for distances larger than the superconducting coherence length, while the impurity states in the non-SC regime only decay algebraically as 1/r. In the Fourier space this is translated into a much larger broadening of the features corresponding to the Shiba states in the SC regime with respect to that of the features corresponding to the impurity contributions in metals. The width of the peaks in the latter is solely controlled by the inverse quasiparticle lifetime δ and is generally quite small. Note also that in both regimes one needs to use the spin-polarized LDOS and magnetic impurities to be able to extract the value of the SO coupling, while the nonpolarized LDOS is not sensitive to this wavevector. Last but not least, as described in Appendix B, the LDOS perturbations induced by a non-magnetic impurity do not show any direct signature of the SO coupling (the only contributing wavevector is 2mv in the metallic regime, while in the SC regime no Shiba state form for a nonmagnetic impurity), thus the only manner to have access to the SO coupling is via spin-polarized STM in the presence of magnetic impurities. While in one-dimensional systems superconductivity is not intrinsic, a superconducting gap can be opened via proximitizing them with a superconducting substrate. For such systems it is thus particularly interesting to study the FT of the SP LDOS for both the superconducting and non-superconducting regimes, as both these regimes can be achieved experimentally at low temperature for the same materials. We consider the Hamiltonian given by Eqs. (1-3), where we set p y → 0, and we perform a T-matrix analysis similar to that described in the previous section for both the SC and non-SC phases, for different directions of the magnetic impurity. The wire is considered to be oriented along the x direction, and the SO coupling is oriented along y. The energies and wave functions of the Shiba states can be found using the same procedure as for the twodimensional systems (see Appendix C). This yields for the energies of the states: The FT of the positive energy state as a function of momentum and the SO coupling is presented in Fig. These results are confirmed by analytical calculations. Below we give the spin components and the LDOS in the SC state for an impurity directed along z obtained analytically (see Appendix C), for the positive energy Shiba state: where tan θ = α. We also present the FT of the SP LDOS for the non-SC phase for the impurity contribution corresponding to the energy E (see Appendix D): As before, in the expressions above p ε = 2(mv + E/v), p λ = 2mλ. Indeed these calculations confirm our observations, in the SC state the dominant wave vectors are 2p ± F = 2mv± p λ , 2mv and p λ , while in the non-SC phase only p ǫ ± p λ , and 2mv. Similar results are obtained if the impurity is oriented along x, with the only difference that the x and z components will be interchanged, up to on overall sign change (see Appendices C and D). For impurities parallel to y, and thus to the SO vector, we expect the SP LDOS to be less exotic, and indeed in this case the only non-zero component of the impurity SP LDOS is S y . In the SC regime we thus find while in the non-SC regime we have We see that S y exhibits features only at the 2mv and correspondingly at the p ǫ wave vectors, same as the nonpolarized LDOS, thus not allowing for the detection of the SO coupling. For intermediate directions of the impurity spin, all three components will be present, with the x and z exhibiting all the wave vectors, while the y component solely the 2mv, and with relative intensities given by the relative components of the impurity spin. Thus, we conclude that, same as in the 2D case, the SO can be measured using spin-polarized STM and magnetic impurities; moreover, in the 1D case one needs to consider impurities that have a non-zero component perpendicular to the direction of the SO. We have analyzed the formation of Shiba states and impurity states in 1D and 2D superconducting and metal-lic systems with Rashba SO coupling. In particular we have studied the Fourier transform of the local density of states of Shiba states in SCs and of the impurity states in metals, both non-polarized and spin-polarized. We have shown that the spin-polarized density of states contains information that allows one to extract experimentally the strength of the SO coupling. In particular the features observed in the FT of the SP LDOS split with a magnitude proportional to the SO coupling strength. Moreover, the Friedel oscillations in the SP LDOS in the SC regime show a combination of wavelengths, out of which the SO length can be read off directly and nonambiguously. We note that these signatures are only visible in the spin-polarized quantities and in the presence of magnetic impurities. For non-spin-polarized measurements, no such splitting is present and the wave vectors observed in the FT of the SP LDOS basically do not depend on the SO coupling. When comparing the results for the SC Shiba states to the impurity contribution in the metallic state and we find a few interesting differences, such as a broadening of the FT features corresponding to a spatial exponential decay of the Shiba states compared to the non-SC case. Moreover, the FT of the SP LDOS in the SC regime exhibits extra features with a wavelength equal to the SO length which are not present in the non-SC phase. It would be interesting to generalize our results to more realistic calculations which may include some specific lattice characteristics, more realistic material-dependent tight-binding parameters for the band structure and the SO coupling values. However, we should note that our results have a fully general characteristic, independent of the band structure or other material characteristics, and that the features in the FT of the non-polarized LDOS will correspond to split features in the spin-polarized LDOS, and thus the spin-orbit can be measured unequivocally from the split obtained from the comparison between the non-polarized and spin-polarized measurements. We have checked that up to a rotation in the spin space our results hold also for other types of SO coupling such as Dresselhaus. According to our knowledge, the FT-STM is a wellestablished experimental technique which does not deal with large systematic errors. For any realistic parameters the first two factors on the left side are of the order of unity, and ∆ s /ε F ∼ 10 -3 for superconductors. However, for realistic values of the spin-orbit coupling λ, this inequality holds and therefore there should not be any technical problem with resolving those features. Our results can be tested using for example materials such as Pb, Bi, NbSe 2 or InAs and InSb wires, which are known to have a strong SO coupling, using spinpolarized STM which is nowadays becoming more and more available. Consequently, the non-polarized and the SP LDOS are given by Thus, in order to find the energies and the wave functions corresponding to the Shiba states we need to find the real-space Green's function. This is obtained simply by a Fourier transform of the unperturbed Green's function in momentum space, G 0 (E, p). We start by writing down the unperturbed Green's function in momentum space, which is given by G where where ω = ∆ 2 s -E 2 , ξ σ = ξ p +σλp. To obtain its real-space dependence one needs to perform the Fourier transform: We will have four types of integrals: Since the spectrum is split by SO coupling, there will be two Fermi momenta which can be found the following way: For p > 0 we linearize the spectrum around the Fermi momenta, thus: where ν σ = ν 1 -σ λ v , with ν = m/2π. Due to the symmetry all the integrals are zero at r = 0 except for the first one, namely, All the coordinate dependences can be calculated using the formalism introduced in Ref. 60. Finally we get: where Ω σ = ω/p σ F v defines the inverse superconducting decay length, and p S = ω/v. Therefore, the Green's function can be written as Thus we have: The coordinate dependence of the eigenfunctions is given by Using these expressions we can compute the asymptotic behavior of the non-polarized and SP LDOS in coordinate space for the state with positive energy (thus we omit index 1 below): , and p λ = 2mλ. Performing the Fourier transforms of these expressions we can obtain information about the main features and symmetries that we observe in momentum space: with tan β = α. Same as before, performing the Fourier transforms of these expressions allows us to obtain information about the most important features and symmetries we observe in momentum space: where ξ p = p 2 2m -ε F . The corresponding spectrum is given by E = ξ p ± λp. The retarded Green's function reads To compute the eigenvalues for a single localized impurity we calculate where ξ σ = ξ p + σλp. For p > 0 we linearize the spectrum around Fermi momenta, thus: and thus we rewrite: where ν σ = ν 1 -σ λ v , with ν = m/2π. Thus we get: and therefore: Since there is no energy dependence, there will be no impurity-induced states. To find the coordinate dependence of the Green's function we calculate: Below we use the Sokhotsky formula: We calculate separately the first integral: The second integral is We calculate separately the first integral: Therefore: Finally: where p σ = p σ F + E/v = 0. Thus the Green's function for r = 0 can be written as: Below we compute the T-matrix for different types of impurities. Impurity potentials take the following forms: The corresponding T-matrices are For each type of impurity we can compute the SP and non-polarized LDOS using Since the integrals are expressed in terms of Neumann function and Bessel function of the first kind, we give their asymptotic behavior for x → +∞: Fourier transforms in 2D F [f (r)] = 2π We denote α = πνJ and write the asymptotic expansions of the non-polarized and SP LDOS components in coordinate space: where p ε = 2 (mv + E/v). and we get for p σ > 0: With the corresponding Fourier transforms: where ξ σ = ξ p + σλp. To get the coordinate value one needs to perform the Fourier transform: We will have two types of integrals: where ω 2 = ∆ 2 s -E 2 . Since the spectrum is split by SO coupling, there will be two Fermi momenta which can be found the following way: For p > 0 we linearize the spectrum around Fermi momenta, thus: Using the formula cos 2 γ = (1 + cos 2γ)/2 we can write the momentum space expressions for the non-polarized and SP LDOS components: where ξ p = p 2 2m -ε F . The corresponding spectrum is given by E = ξ p ± λp and the retarded Green's function reads To compute the eigenvalues for a single localized impurity we calculate where ξ σ = ξ p + σλp. For p > 0 we linearize the spectrum around the Fermi momenta, thus: where p σ F = m [-σλ + v], and thus we get: This leads to: Since there is no energy dependence, there will be no impurity-induced states. The Green's function coordinate dependence is given by the following expression: To find the coordinate dependence of the Green's function we calculate: e ipx E -ξ σ + i0 (D6) Below we use the Sokhotsky formula 1 x+i0 = P 1 x -iπδ(x): We compute explicitly only one of the integrals in the brackets since the other one can be computed in the similar fashion: dξ σ e iξσ x/v E -ξ σ + i0 = P dξ σ e iξσ x/v E -ξ σ -iπ dξ σ δ(E -ξ σ )e iξσ x/v = -iπ (1 + sgn x) e iEx/v Finally we have: and the Green's function can be written as: ) 