We theoretically study intrinsic superconductivity in doped Dirac semimetals. Dirac semimetals host bulk Dirac points, which are formed by doubly degenerate bands, so the Hamiltonian is described by a 4 × 4 matrix and six types of k-independent pair potentials are allowed by the Fermi-Dirac statistics. We show that the unique spin-orbit coupling leads to characteristic superconducting gap structures and d vectors on the Fermi surface and the electron-electron interaction between intra and interorbitals gives a novel phase diagram of superconductivity. It is found that when the inter-orbital attraction is dominant, an unconventional superconducting state with point nodes appears. To verify the experimental signature of possible superconducting states, we calculate the temperature dependence of bulk physical properties such as electronic specific heat and spin susceptibility and surface state. In the unconventional superconducting phase, either dispersive or flat Andreev bound states appear between point nodes, which leads to double peaks or single peak in the surface density of states, respectively. As a result, possible superconducting states can be distinguished by combining bulk and surface measurements. A. Superconducting gap structure Unconventional superconductivity is one of the main topics in condensed matter physics. In the last decade, it has been revealed that surface states, called surface Andreev bound states (SABSs), and nodal structures in unconventional superconductors can be characterized by topological numbers of a bulk wave function The concept of topology has also been expanding widely in the normal state since the discovery of topological insulators (TIs) having a surface Dirac cone protected by time-reversal symmetry Recent theoretical studies have revealed that the doped topological materials can be promising candidates to realize unconventional superconductivity due to their unique spin-orbit interaction In this paper, we study superconductivity in doped rotation symmetric Dirac semimetals (DSs). DSs are materials that host bulk Dirac cones However, the physical properties of the superconducting states in doped DSs have not been examined systematically, and thus it has been difficult to identify the pairing symmetry experimentally. One of our purposes of this paper is to clarify the physical property and topological structure of possible superconducting states in doped DSs. Due to the presence of time-reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry, the electronic states near the Dirac points are minimally described by a 4 × 4 Dirac Hamiltonian with spin and orbital degrees of freedom. For the superconducting state, doubly degenerate bands allow six types of k-independent Cooper pairs and the unique orbital texture favors an equal-spin pairing, giving rise to point nodes on the Fermi surface. From this view point, the superconductivity in doped DSs can be unconventional and its physical implication deserves further exploration. Superconductivity in Dirac systems has also been studied for doped TIs, Weyl semimetals, and bilayer Rashba systems. These superconducting states also show unconventional superconductivity, but we emphasize that the crystal symmetry and spin-orbit coupling of DSs are different from them. Hence the Cooper pairs respect different irreducible representations, implying that they can show unique superconducting gap structures and d vectors on the Fermi surface. To clarify these points, we derive an analytical formula of possible pair potentials in the band basis and reveal the superconducting gap structure and d vector on the Fermi surface. It is found that the superconducting gap structure can be classified into four types, i.e., isotropic full gap, point node at poles, horizontal line node, and vertical line node. We also show that these superconducting gap structure can be interpreted from the orbital structure of the DS and possible pair potentials. Moreover, for the odd-parity pairings, the direction of the d vector is either parallel to x-y plane or parallel to z-direction. These characteristics of the superconducting states are completely different from those of other topological materials. We also solve the linearized gap equation to make a superconducting phase diagram, in which an unconventional superconducting state (∆ 2 or ∆ 3 in this paper) is realized when the inter-orbital attraction is sufficiently stronger than the intra-orbital one. To examine whether we can distinguish the possible pair potentials experimentally, we calculate the temperature dependence of the specific heat that reflects the superconducting gap structure and spin susceptibility that reflects the Van-Vleck effect and the direction of the d vector. Furthermore, we calculate the surface state by using the recursive Green's function method. The unconventional superconducting states show either dispersive or flat Andreev bound states on the surface depending on the parity of mirror-reflection symmetry. Using mirrorreflection symmetry, we discuss topological numbers relevant to zero-energy states. As a result, these physical implications conclude that the possible superconducting states can be distinguished by combining bulk and surface measurements. This paper is organized as follows. First, we introduce a model Hamiltonian for DSs and consider possible pair potentials in Sec. II. In Sec. III, by transforming the pair potentials from the orbital basis to the band basis, we obtain a single-band description of the pair potentials. We also show the superconducting gap structure and d vector on the Fermi surface. In Sec. IV, we show that the superconducting gap structure can be interpreted from the orbital structure of DSs. In Sec. V, we obtain the phase diagram for the superconducting state. Numerical results for the bulk and surface states are shown in Secs. VI and VII, respectively. In Sec. VIII, we discuss the difference between superconductivity in DSs and TIs and briefly mention superconductivity in other classes of Dirac semimetals. Finally, we summarize our results in Sec. IX. DSs have both time-reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry, which lead to doubly degenerate bands. Thus, to construct a model with four-fold degenerate Dirac points, it is necessary to take into account the orbital degrees of freedom in addition to the spin degrees of freedom. In the broad sense, there are two types of DS, i.e., accidental ones and symmetry protected ones. The former type appears just on the topological phase transition point between a TI and a normal insulator where s i and σ i (i = 0, x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices in the spin and orbital space, respectively where m 0 , m 1 , m 2 , η, β and γ are material dependent parameters. The energy dispersion is shown in Fig. (ii) inversion symmetry: (iii) four-fold rotational symmetry along z axis: (iv) x-y mirror-reflection symmetry: (v) y-z mirror-reflection symmetry: (vi) (110) mirror-reflection symmetry: The corresponding symmetry axis and planes are shown in Fig. Next, we consider the superconducting state. We assume the following pair interaction where U and V are intra-and interorbital interactions, respectively, and n i (i = 1, 2) is the density operator for orbital i. Then we construct the Bogoliubov de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian in the mean-field regime: where τ x and τ z are the Pauli matrices in the Nambu (particle-hole) space, μ and ∆ i denote the chemical potential and pair potential, respectively. Here, the basis is taken as ĉ ). Then, we discuss possible pair potentials. For the two orbital system, there are sixteen combinations of two Pauli matrices, s i and σ i (i = 0, x, y, z), but six combinations out of them satisfy the Fermi-Dirac statistics, which are described by ∆σ 0 s 0 ≡ ∆ 1a , ∆σ z s 0 ≡ ∆ 1b , ∆σ y s y ≡ ∆ 2 , ∆σ y s x ≡ ∆ 3 , ∆σ x s 0 ≡ ∆ 4a , and ∆σ y s z ≡ ∆ 4b . These pair potentials can be classified into inter-or intraorbital in addition to the spin-singlet or triplet classes. ∆ 1a and ∆ 1b are spin-singlet intraoribtal pairings. ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 , and ∆ 4b are spin-triplet interoribtal pairings. ∆ 4a is a spin-singlet inter-oribtal pairing. Moreover, these pair potentials are classified into four irreducible representations of the D 4h point group : A 1g (∆ 1a and ∆ 1b ), B 1u (∆ 2 ), B 2u (∆ 3 ) and E u (∆ 4a and ∆ 4b ), which are summarized in Table Weyl semimetals In this section, to understand the superconducting gap and spin structure on the Fermi surface, we derive the pair potentials in the band basis, where H n (k) is diagonalized where s = ±1 and L(k) = d 2 (k) + e 2 (k) + b 2 (k). The corresponding eigenvectors are given by where cos . By using the eigenvectors, the following relations are obtained as where l(k) = d 2 (k) + e 2 (k), si (i = 0, x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices for the spin helicity basis. Next, we diagonalize the orbital part. The eigenvalues are given by where σ = ±1. The corresponding eigenvectors are where . Finally, the eigenvectors for the normal Hamiltonian are obtained as By using the eigenvectors |u s,σ , we obtain the pair potentials in the band and spin helicity basis. Then, with Eqs. ( where σi (i = 0, x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices in the band basis and r(k In the case of the DS, the Fermi surface consists of either an electron or a hole band. If the chemical potential is large enough compared with the magnitude of the pair potential, |μ| >> ∆, we can consider that the superconductivity occurs in either conduction or valence band (quasi-classical approximation). Thus the inter-band and valence (or conduction) band component can be ignored. Namely, it is sufficient to consider only the (1,1) [or (2,2)] component of σi . The conduction band components of pair potentials are as follows: It is found that, in the single-band description, ∆ 1a and ∆ 1b are regarded as spin-singlet even-parity pairings, and ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 , ∆ 4a and ∆ 4b are spin-triplet odd-parity pairings. In the single-band description, the spin-singlet or triplet completely correspond to even or odd under the inversion operation for all pairings. Although ∆ 4a is a spin-singlet inter-orbital pairing in the orbital basis, it is considered as a spin-triplet pairing in the band basis. In other words, the spin-triplet component of ∆ 4a is induced by the spinorbit interaction. In addition, if the parameters related to the spin-orbit interaction are absent η = β = γ = 0, the odd-parity pairings ∆ 2 = ∆ 3 = 0, which means that the spin-orbit interaction is essential to realize unconventional superconductivity. As shown below, these singleband representations are useful to capture bulk superconducting properties such as the heat capacity and the spin susceptibility. In Fig. It has been revealed that if the pair potential satisfies the four fold rotational symmetry C 4 ∆ i C t 4 = e -iπφ/2 ∆ i with non zero φ, the superconducting state inherits the C 4 invariant Dirac points of the normal state For spin-triplet superconductors, the pair potentials can be described with d vectors, which behave like threedimensional vectors in spin space where s = (s x , s y , s z ) For the possible pair potentials, d(k) is easily obtained from Eqs. ( In this section, we interpret the superconducting gap structures from the orbital texture of DSs. In the previous letter, two of the present authors have argued how the orbital texture is consistent with ∆ 2 and ∆ 3 Here we generalize the argument and explain the nodal structures of all possible pairing symmetries in terms of the orbit-momentum locking. For simplicity, we ignore the k 3 terms in this section. First, we discuss the orbit-momentum locking of DSs. Consider the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( These Hamiltonians have two characteristic features. First, the first terms in Eqs. The above features give rise to a unique orbital texture on the Fermi surfaces surrounding the Dirac points. Near the poles of the Fermi surface, the first terms in Eqs. For a Cooper pair between electrons in the same spin sector, the orbital texture in Fig. In this section, we obtain the U -V phase diagram by solving the linearized gap equation in a manner similar to the superconducting TI Here, q i (i = 1a, 1b, 1ab, 1ba, 2, 3, 4a) is the irreducible susceptibility: where N is the number of the unit cell, k B is the Boltzman constant, G 0 (k) is the single-particle Green's function for the normal state, G 0 (k) = P c (k)/(iω n -E n+ (k)) with the projection operator onto the conduction band , and F i (k) is the form factor originating from the orbital degrees of freedom. F i (k) for each pair potential is given by If the interorbital attraction V is sufficiently stronger than the intraorbital attraction U , the unconventional superconducting phase (∆ 2 or ∆ 3 ) is realized. We can expect that the Coulomb repulsion leads to stronger V as is discussed in the superconducting TI In this section, we obtain bulk physical properties for the possible pair potentials. Here, we calculate the temperature dependence of the electronic specific heat for the superconducting states. The temperature dependence of the specific heat reflects the superconducting gap structure Here, and ζ j (k) (j = 1a, 1b, 2, 3, 4a, 4b) for each pair potential is We assume that the superconducting gap has the following phenomenological temperature dependence obtained from the BCS theory: where T c is the superconducting critical temperature. In Fig. We have seen a wide variation of the temperature dependence of the specific heat for the superconducting state. However, it should be worth mentioning that ∆ 1a and ∆ 1b can be mixed with each other since they belong to the same irreducible representation. Hence, depending on the ratio of the mixture, the line shape of the specific heat can be similar to those of other pair potentials. Nevertheless, the behavior of the spin susceptibility of ∆ 1a and ∆ 1b is different from others, as we show below. In this section, we calculate the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility for the possible pair potentials. From the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility, we can see the spin structure, i.e. d vector, on the Fermi surface If the magnetic field is parallel to the d vector, the spin susceptibility decreases with decreasing T . In contrast, the magnetic field is perpendicular to the d vector, the spin susceptibility does not depend on T . The effect of the Van Vleck susceptibility, which originates from in-terband scattering, is also important to understand the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility. If the Van-Vleck effect is strong, the spin susceptibility has a finite value at T = 0 even for the spin-singlet pairing. For the DSs, the Zeeman terms h i (i = x, y, z), which express the coupling between electronic spin and magnetic field H = (H x , H y , H z ), are given by where μ B is the Bohr magneton and the g factor is taken as 2 for simplicity. The in-plane Zeeman effect for the p-orbital is absent since |p x + ip y and |p x -ip y are orthogonal to each other. From the linear response theory, the spin susceptibility is given by where α and β are the band indices. In Fig. where we ignore the k 3 terms for simplicity. It is found that hx and hy have an interband component σx , which leads to the Van Vleck susceptibility. However, hz has only an intraband component. In addition, the intraband component of hx(y) is k-dependent, while that of hz is not. Therefore, there is an anisotropy between χ x(y) and χ z . Moreover, the inter-band component is proportional to η 2 which is a parameter related to the spin-orbit interaction. Therefore, the anisotropy can be tuned by η. It is noted that the anisotropy stemming from the spinorbit interaction can be seen in superconducting doped TIs In Fig. The azimuthal-angle dependence of the spin susceptibility at T /T c = 0.4 is shown in Fig. In summary of this subsection, we have revealed that there are wide variations of the temperature dependence of the spin susceptibility. In particular, at low temperature, the combinations of the spin susceptibility for three directions are completely different among ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 (∆ 3 ) and ∆ 4a (∆ 4b ). It is worth mentioning that even if ∆ 1a and ∆ 1b are mixed, χ i for any direction is small enough at low temperature, which is different from the cases with other pair potentials. In addition, we have clarified that the line shape of the temperature dependence of spin susceptibility is useful to reveal the superconductivity in the doped DSs. We conclude that it is possible to distinguish the superconducting states, except the difference between ∆ 2 and ∆ 3 , by measuring the x-y plane and z-direction Knight shift. It has been well known that unconventional superconductors host exotic SABSs First of all, we briefly review the surface state in the normal state where n ±i is the Chern number for mirror subsectors labeled with mirror eigenvalues ±i. The non-zero mirror Chern number ensures the existence of surface states as shown in Figs. In Fig. First, we would like to mention the surface state along the Γ1 -Z1 ( Γ2 -Z2 ) direction for the (010) [(110)] surface. As can be seen from the upper column of Fig. To interpret the surface states, we see the topological nature of the system. Since the unconventional pair potentials, ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 and ∆ 4 , support nodes in the bulk superconducting gaps, bulk topological numbers are defined within lower dimensional subspaces in the Brillouin zone. In time-reversal-invariant odd-parity superconductors, the stability of point nodes is ensured by a one-dimensional winding number with the aid of mirrorreflection symmetry In the case of the DS, there are two mirror planes parallel to z axis, i.e., y-z (z-x) plane and the (110) plane. As is summarized in Table To examine the stability of the flat SABSs, we numerically calculate the one-dimensional winding number on the mirror-even plane for each pair potential. Here, we focus on the y-z plane in the case of ∆ 3 . For the BdG Hamiltonian, the y-z mirror operator, time-reversal operator, and particle-hole operator are given by Combining these operators, we can define the mirrorchiral operator: which satisfies With this mirror-chiral operator, we can define the onedimensional winding number for a fixed k z : To evaluate Eq. ( As a result, we find that the winding number W is where k di (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) are the momenta of the disconnected Fermi surfaces around the Dirac points as shown in Fig. In the case of ∆ 4a , the gap function is odd under the yz mirror operation, and hence there are dispersive SABSs between the point nodes along the Γ1 -Z1 direction for the (010) surface. On the other hand, in the case of ∆ 4b , the gap function is even under the y-z mirror operation, where we can define the one-dimensional winding number. However, the winding number is zero for any k z . Correspondingly, there is no SABS along the Γ1 -Z1 direction as shown in Fig. Next, we refer to the surface state along the Γ1 -X1 ( Γ2 -X2 ) direction for the (010) [(110)] surface. As is seen from Figs. We can understand whether the normal surface states remain gapless or not in the superconducting state with the parity of the pair potential under the mirror operation M xy ) at E = 0, and hence it becomes gapped. On the other hand, if the parity of the pair potential under the mirror operation is odd, each mirror eigensector has the particle-hole symmetry. Then, the bands with opposite mirror eigenvalues cross each other at E = 0, namely, 2 in the case of ∆ 2 and ∆ 3 , which corresponds to the zero-energy states. The remaining zero-energy SABS on the Γ1 -X1 for the (010) surface in the case of ∆ 4a is protected by a different reason. In this case, the zero-energy state can be interpreted with a zero-dimensional topological number that is defined by combining the y-z mirror operator M ′ yz and the chiral operator T ′ C with the surface BdG Hamiltoninan and surface normal Hamiltonian: By changing k x , ρ(k x ) changes its sign when k x passes through the momentum of the zero-energy surface state, which means that the surface state is protected topologically. This zero-dimensional topological number can be defined when the parity of the pair potentials under the relevant mirror operation is odd. Therefore, we can also explain the remaining zero-energy SABS on the Γ1 -X1 for the (010) surface in the case of ∆ 2 [the Γ2 -X2 for the (110) surface in the case of ∆ 3 ] with the zerodimensional topological number for the y-z [(110)] mirror plane in addition to the mirror Chern number for the x-y mirror plane. For more details and derivation of the zero-dimensional topological number ρ(k x ), see the supplemental material in Ref. Here, we make a comment on the previous work done by two of the present authors. In the previous work, the minimal required symmetries of the DSs, namely, timereversal, inversion, and four fold rotational symmetries, have been assumed. Under this assumption, surface Majorana quartet has been predicted when four fold rotation symmetry is broken into two fold one. On the other hand, in the present paper, full D 4h crystal symmetries have been taken into account, which enables us to realize different surface states such as the flat surface state. It should be noted that the Majorana quartet appears even in our model in the case of ∆ 2 and ∆ 3 by breaking the four fold rotational symmetry. In summary of this section, we have found that wide variation of exotic SABSs appear depending on the pair potentials and surface direction. We have revealed that the zero-energy SABSs can be interpreted with three topological numbers: one-dimensional winding number, two-dimensional-mirror Chern number, and zerodimensional topological number. The mirror-reflection symmetry plays an essential role to protect SABSs in this system. The zero-energy SABS and relevant topological number are summarized in Table In this section, we calculate the surface density of state (SDOS) by integrating the spectral function with respect to the wave number k obtained in the previous section. In Fig. We briefly mention the experimental results of point contact spectra for Cd 3 As 2 So far, we have revealed the superconductivity in DSs. Here, we briefly mention the difference between superconductivity in the DSs and that in Bi 2 Se 3 type TIs focusing on the superconducting gap structure and the symmetry of the pair potential. In Table We have studied the superconductivity in Cd 3 As 2 type DSs. By obtaining a single-band description of the pair potentials, we have clarified the superconducting gap structure and d vector on the Fermi surface. It has been found that the superconducting gap structure can be classified into four types: isotropic full gap, point node at poles, horizontal line node and vertical line node (effectively) . For the spin-triplet case, the direction of the d vector is classified into two types: d ⊥ z-axis and d zaxis. These characteristics of the superconducting states are completely different from those of the superconducting TIs and other topological materials. By solving the linearized gap equation, we have found that the nodal spin-triplet pairing (∆ 2 and ∆ 3 ) can be stabilized when the interorbital attraction is sufficiently stronger than the intraorbital one. Moreover, we have revealed that orbitmomentum locking in the DS plays a key role to interpret the superconducting gap structure of the possible superconducting state. We have also calculated the physical properties of each pair potential. Our calculation results of the bulk physical properties, especially the spin susceptibility, are useful to reveal the pairing symmetry. Moreover, we have shown that exotic SABSs exist in ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 , ∆ 4a , and ∆ 4b , and interpreted each SABS with three types of topological numbers. We have concluded that it is possible to distinguish the possible superconducting states by combining the bulk and surface measurements. The low energy electronic state of three-dimensional topological insulator Bi 2 Se 3 is described by 4 × 4 Dirac Hamiltonian [100]: H TI (k) = mσ x + v z k z σ y + v(k x s y -k y s x )σ z , (A1) where σ i and s i (i = 0, x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices in the orbital and spin space and the effective orbitals consist of two p z orbitals. For this model, we can consider the six types of k-independent pair potentials: ∆σ 0 s 0 , ∆σ z s 0 , ∆σ y s y , ∆σ y s x , ∆σ x s 0 and ∆σ y s z x + k 2 y , ν = m 2 + v 2 z k 2 z , and λ = m 2 + v 2 k 2 + v 2 z k 2 z . In the case of the TIs, two fully gapped spin-singlet pairings, one fully gapped spintriplet pairing, and three point-nodal spin-triplet pairings (point nodes exist on different axis, k x , k y or k z ) can appear, which are completely different from the superconductivity in the DSs as summarized in Table V in the main text. d vector d(k) is defined as x s y -k y s x ) ,