We have studied the temperature dependence of the upper critical fields, μ0Hc2, of KxFe2-ySe2-zSz single crystals up to 60 T. The μ0Hc2 for H ab and H c decrease with increasing sulfur content. The detailed analysis using Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) theory including the Pauli spin-paramagnetic effect shows that μ0Hc2 for H ab is dominated by the spinparamagnetic effect, which diminishes with higher S content, whereas μ0Hc2 for H c shows a linear temperature dependence with an upturn at high fields. The latter observation can be ascribed to multiband effects that become weaker for higher S content. This results in an enhanced anisotropy of μ0Hc2 for high S content due to the different trends of the spin-paramagnetic and multiband effect for H ab and H c, respectively. Since the discovery of LaFeAsO 1-x F x with T c = 26 K, The single crystals of K x Fe 2-y Se 2-z S z used in this study were grown and characterized as described previously. Figure For the sample S-99 [Fig. where ψ(x) is the digamma function, γ ≡ [(αh) 2 -(λ so /2) 2 ] 1/2 , and When α > 1, spin paramagnetism becomes essential. For H c, μ 0 H c2,c at low temperatures is enhanced when compared to the WHH model. Such an enhancement cannot be explained by α > 0 or λ so > 0. Indeed, it suggests that multiband effect become important when the magnetic field is oriented along the c direction. A similar behavior has been observed in Tl 0.58 Rb 0.42 Fe 1.72 Se 2 . For the single-band clean limit, the Maki parameters for H ab and H c should be related by the ratio of the Fermi velocity v ab in the ab plane to v c along c. The cylinder-like Fermi surface in iron-based superconductors results in v ab ≫ v c . Therefore, this ratio is larger than 1 and the α for H ab is expected to be larger than for H c, The anisotropy of the upper critical field, γ = H c2,ab /H c2,c , supplies further information on the effect of S substitution on the evolution of μ 0 H c2 . As shown in Fig. In summary, we have investigated the upper critical fields of K x Fe 2-y Se 1-z S z single crystals up to 60 T. The μ 0 H c2 for both H ab and H c decreases with increasing S content. For H ab, the μ 0 H c2,ab follows the WHH model including strong spin paramagnetism. The μ 0 H c2,c for low S content shows a behavior that suggests multiband effects and the single-band orbitally limited field gradually becomes dominant at high sulfur content. The anisotropy of μ 0 H c2 is enhanced with increasing S content which can be explained by weakened spin paramagnetism and reduced multiband effects for H ab and H c, respectively.