The semimetal-superconductor quantum phase transition on the two-dimensional (2D) surface of a 3D topological insulator is conjectured to exhibit an emergent N = 2 supersymmetry, based on a one-loop renormalization group (RG) analysis in the expansion. We provide additional support for this conjecture by performing a three-loop RG analysis and showing that the supersymmetric fixed point found at this order survives the extrapolation to 2D. We compute critical exponents to order 3 , obtaining the more accurate value ν ≈ 0.985 for the correlation length exponent and confirming that the fermion and boson anomalous dimensions remain unchanged beyond one loop, as expected from non-renormalization theorems in supersymmetric theories. We further couple the system to a dynamical U (1) gauge field, and argue that the transition becomes fluctuation-induced first order in an appropriate type-I regime. We discuss implications of this result for quantum phase transitions between certain symmetry-preserving correlated surface states of 3D topological insulators. Supersymmetry (SUSY), a spacetime symmetry that exchanges fermions and bosons, plays an important role in modern theories of elementary particles such as superstring theory and the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model Here we will focus on emergent N = 2 SUSY in 2+1 spacetime dimensions, which was conjectured to occur at the semimetal-superconductor QCP of 2D Dirac fermions on the surface of a 3D topological insulator In this paper we expand upon these previous studies in two directions: (a) we go beyond leading order in the expansion, and (b) we investigate the effect of coupling the Dirac fermions and Cooper pairs to a dynamical U (1) gauge field. The motivation for (a) is twofold. First, while there is no reason to doubt the existence of the SUSY fixed point found at one-loop order for infinitesimal If the SUSY fixed point is found to remain stable at this order all the way down to 2+1 dimensions, our second motivation is to provide more accurate values of universal critical properties. While certain such properties can be determined exactly from SUSY, such as the fermion and boson anomalous dimensions Finally, the motivation for studying the effect on the QCP of coupling the system to a dynamical U (1) gauge field is also twofold. First, an interesting result was reported in Ref. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we review one-loop RG results for the semimetalsuperconductor QCP on the surface of a 3D topological insulator. We then show that at three-loop order the critical spacetime dimension below which the SUSY QCP disappears is D c ≈ 1.62. Thus, at three-loop order the SUSY fixed point remains stable all the way down to 2+1 spacetime dimensions. In Sec. III, we compute various critical exponents. In Sec. IV, we consider the critical theory coupled to a U (1) gauge field. We argue by a combination of mean-field and RG arguments that in this case, the phase transition becomes fluctuationinduced first order. Finally, we conclude in Sec. V. Technical details can be found in Appendix A-E. While N = 2 SUSY has been proposed to emerge in a variety of physical systems, for definiteness we focus here on its potential realization on the 2D surface of a 3D Tinvariant topological insulator where ψ = -iψ † γ 0 and / ∂ = γ μ ∂ μ , and we define γ 0 = σ 3 , γ 1 = σ 1 , and γ 2 = σ 2 the Pauli matrices. Note that a fermion mass term ∝ ψψ is forbidden by T symmetry. The semimetal with φ = 0 is found for m 2 > 0 and the superconductor with φ = 0 is found for m 2 < 0; the QCP is obtained by tuning m 2 to zero where both fermionic and bosonic fields are gapless (here m stands for the renormalized mass). The Lagrangian is invariant under global U (1) transformations ψ → e iθ ψ, φ → e 2iθ φ, implying that φ carries twice the charge of ψ. The Lagrangian is also Lorentz invariant; while this is not an exact symmetry in general, a one-loop RG analysis of a Lorentz-breaking version of theory The critical properties of the Landau-Ginzburg theory (1) have been investigated previously using one-loop RG in D = 4 -spacetime dimensions on the critical hypersurface m = 0. The physical case of (2+1)D Dirac fermions corresponds to = 1. The (ultraviolet) one-loop beta functions β h 2 = dh 2 /d ln μ and β λ 2 = dλ 2 /d ln μ for the rescaled couplings h 2 (4π) 2 → h 2 and λ 2 (4π) 2 → λ 2 are Here μ is the energy scale parameterizing the flow of couplings. To leading order in the expansion, there are two unstable fixed points, the Gaussian fixed point (h 2 * , λ 2 * ) = (0, 0) and the O(2) Wilson-Fisher fixed point (h 2 * , λ 2 * ) = (0, 20 ), and one stable fixed point (h 2 * , λ 2 * ) = ( 12 , 12 ). To this order in perturbation theory, the latter fixed point remains stable as one extrapolates → 1. As this fixed point has only one relevant direction corresponding to the tuning parameter m 2 , it is identified with the semimetal-superconductor QCP. h 2 * = λ 2 * implies that the critical theory is invariant under the N = 2 SUSY transformations where η is a two-component Grassmann spinor that parametrizes the transformation. The QCP thus has emergent N = 2 SUSY at the one-loop level. As argued in Sec. I, an important question is the stability of the SUSY fixed point against higher order terms in the RG beta function. We attack this problem by performing a three-loop RG analysis in D = 4 -spacetime dimensions on the quantum critical hypersurface m = 0. We first introduce some notations. For the RG procedure, we interpret Eq. ( where we define wave function renormalization constants Z ψ and Z φ and vertex renormalization constants Z λ and Z h . The renormalized Lagrangian can be obtained from the bare one by rescaling the fields, which implies the two relations Because the bare couplings are independent of μ, the relations ( where 1 is the tree-level term and the loop correction δZ x,L (h 2 , λ 2 ) is decomposed into products of coupling constants Here L denotes the order of the expansion and the coefficients δZ x,L (i, j) contain poles of maximum order L at = 0. The renormalization constants at three-loop order (N loops = 3) are listed in Appendix A. Having obtained these renormalization constants, the beta functions for the coupling constants h 2 and λ 2 can be computed from Eq. ( where we define for x ∈ {ψ, φ, λ, h}, since the renormalization constants are functions of the (renormalized) coupling constants. Equations ( where So far the beta functions are exact in terms of renormalization constants. In practice, we can only compute these renormalization constants to finite order in perturbation theory and we obtain the beta functions at the same order as the renormalization constants. Specifically, by inserting the renormalization constants Z ψ , Z φ , Z h , and Z λ in the matrix M and expanding in powers of the coupling constants, we obtain the beta functions to the desired order in the coupling constants h 2 and λ 2 . Using the three-loop renormalization constants (see Appendix A), we obtain the three-loop beta functions: where the Riemann zeta function. Two limiting cases previously considered in the literature can be recovered. Setting h = 0, the free Dirac fermion ψ and the complex scalar φ decouple, and Eq. ( The fixed points of the RG flow can be solved for order by order in (Fig. and the infrared stable fixed point with At this fixed point, the theory exhibits emergent N = 2 SUSY as in the one-loop case (Sec. II A). The critical spacetime dimension below which the fixed point couplings (23) become negative is D c ≈ 1.62. Thus, at threeloop order the SUSY fixed point in (2+1)D is still in a physical range of coupling constants (Fig. In this section, we compute anomalous dimensions γ φ , γ ψ for the bosonic and fermionic fields and the correlation length exponent ν. All other critical exponents can then be obtained from γ φ , γ ψ , ν by scaling relations. The anomalous dimensions γ * φ and γ * ψ for the bosonic field φ and the fermionic field ψ are obtained by evaluating the logarithmic derivatives of the renormalization constants ( Using the renormalization constants Z φ , Z ψ from Appendix A, we obtain To obtain the anomalous dimensions at the SUSY fixed point, we insert Eq. ( as expected for a fixed point with emergent SUSY, since all fields within the same supermultiplet should have the same scaling dimensions. Furthermore, the three-loop result The anomalous dimensions have no quantum corrections beyond one loop, that is, the one-loop expansion is exact; the perfect cancellation of terms of order 2 and 3 in Eq. ( To define the correlation length exponent ν, one typically keeps a bare mass term m 2 0 |φ 0 | 2 in the theory (1). The renormalized theory (5) then contains a renormalized mass term Z m 2 m 2 μ 2 |φ| 2 , with a renormalization constant Z m 2 and dimensionless renormalized mass m 2 . Setting the bare and renormalized mass terms equal to each other, we obtain the relation between bare and renormalized masses, from which the RG beta function for the mass can be obtained as where Using this method which gives ν ≈ 0.75 in (2+1)D, corresponding to a 18% difference with the conformal bootstrap result ν ≈ 0.917 where is the slope of the beta function in the massless theory (i.e., on the critical hypersurface), evaluated at the SUSY fixed point. We define the beta function along a SUSY-preserving trajectory. The exponent ω, sometimes known as the stability critical exponent, characterizes the approach to the fixed point (ω > 0 means the fixed point is infrared stable with respect to the coupling h 2 , while ω < 0 means it is unstable) as well as leading corrections to scaling behavior in the critical region Knowing the three-loop beta functions ( Let us evaluate the correlation length exponent for our theory (1) at the SUSY fixed point by using the exact relation Thus, the correlation length exponent ν can be obtained from Eq. ( In 2+1 dimensions (i.e., = 1), Eq. ( The derivation of Eq. ( Our starting point is the (bare) Lagrangian (1) on a SUSY-preserving trajectory λ 2 = h 2 , m 2 = 0 and written in the superspace notation (see Appendix B), where Φ 0 is the chiral superfield. We use the subscript 0 to denote bare quantities. Following the particle physics terminology we will call Eq. ( Remarkably, in the superspace formalism the full Lagrangian L soft = L rigid +L soft-breaking for the softly broken theory can be written as i.e., the soft SUSY-breaking mass term enters as a Grassmann-valued multiplicative correction to the kinetic term Φ † 0 Φ 0 of the rigid theory. We can rewrite L rigid in terms of a renormalized superfield Φ, wave function renormalization constant Z, and dimensionless renormalized coupling h, Non-renormalization theorems ensure there is no renormalization of the superpotential where we have introduced a dimensionless renormalized mass m. To proceed with the renormalization of the softly broken theory, we use the fact that the renormalization superfield Z of the softly broken theory and the renormalization constant Z of the rigid theory are related by the equality Then, by expanding the right-hand side of Eq. ( One way to derive Eq. ( Now L soft in Eq. ( Inserting this relation in Eq. ( Next, we take a derivative with respect to ln μ on both sides of the equations and obtain the beta functions, where we define We can now derive the relation On the other hand, ω can be computed from Eq. ( The two expressions are identical. Thus, we conclude that Finally, we comment on the relation between Eq. ( In the first line of Eq. ( The advantage of working in the superspace formalism is that we are able to compute the right-hand side of Eq. ( In this section, we couple the system to a U (1) gauge field. The Lagrangian we consider is where ξ is a gauge-fixing parameter, and we define the gaugecovariant derivatives We consider a manifestly Lorentz-invariant Lagrangian, in which the velocities of the fermion (v F ), boson (v B ), and gauge field (c) are all equal and set to one. Even if the bare values of these velocities are different, it was shown in Ref. We first use mean-field arguments to show that the coupling to a dynamical U (1) gauge field destroys the continuous character of the semimetal-superconductor and makes it first order, as in the purely bosonic case. At the mean-field level, we consider that the Cooper pair field φ is constant and uniform, such that Eq. (57) becomes where we have rescaled h → h/2 in this section only for convenience. We rewrite the fermionic part of the Lagrangian (59) in terms of the Nambu spinor Ψ = (ψ, C ψT ), where C = iσ 2 is a charge-conjugation matrix. Using the property Cγ μ C = γ T μ , we can write where C = C ⊕ C and the inverse fermionic propagator is given by G -1 = G -1 0 + X where Integrating out Ψ and ignoring a constant contribution arising from the matrix C in Eq. ( where is the bosonic Landau-Ginzburg action in the absence of the gauge field, is the action for the gauge field, and is the one-loop correction to the gauge field action, to quadratic order in the gauge field. In the long-wavelength limit we can evaluate Regulating the ultraviolet divergences in i.e., the gauge field acquires a mass via the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. We note that by contrast with the purely bosonic problem The mean-field analysis we have just presented neglects the fluctuations of the order parameter φ. To take these fluctuations into account as well as those of the Dirac fermion ψ and gauge field A μ , we perform a perturbative RG analysis of the gauged Landau-Ginzburg theory Following the same procedure as in Sec. II B, we interpret Eq. ( where Z A is a wave function renormalization constant for the gauge field, and the covariant derivatives are given by Gauge invariance (i.e., the Ward identity) implies that there is no separate renormalization constant for the charge e or for the gauge-fixing parameter ξ. However, because Z ψ , Z φ depend on the chosen gauge, we have to take into account the μ dependence of the gauge-fixing parameter ξ. The renormalized Lagrangian can be obtained from the bare one by rescaling the gauge field and the matter fields as in Eq. ( Equation ( where β ξ = dξ/d ln μ. From the relations ( At one-loop order, the RG beta functions for the rescaled couplings h 2 (4π where we used the one-loop renormalization constants given in Appendix A. On the e 2 = 0 hypersurface, the above beta functions reproduce Eq. ( and another pair with h * = 0, These imaginary fixed points correspond to runaway trajectories (Fig. Of course, one may call into question the validity of both the mean-field theory and the expansion. As is well known, the superconducting transition in the (2+1)D bosonic Abelian Higgs model remains continuous in the strongly type-II regime corresponding to κ 1 where κ ∝ λ/e is the Ginzburg parameter Finally, we note that our results disagree with those of Ref. The results of Sec. IV A-IV B are directly relevant to a subject of much recent interest: correlated surface states of 3D topological insulators and the phase transitions between them. Recently, Ref. in Minkowski spacetime, where A em μ is the external (nondynamical) electromagnetic gauge field, ψd = ψ † d γ 0 and γ μ are 2 × 2 Dirac matrices with μ = 0, 1, 2. Here the dual fermion ψ d can be viewed as a composite fermion with 4π flux of the A em μ gauge field bound to the original electron while a 4π-flux instanton in the dual gauge field a μ carries one unit of electron charge e and corresponds to the electron creation operator ψ † . Time-reversal symmetry for the original topological insulator is mapped under the duality to charge-conjugation symmetry, such that the dual fermions must be at zero chemical potential. Folllowing Ref. (2) it could in fact be dual to the free massless Dirac fermion describing the noninteracting topological insulator surface. Several known correlated surface states of 3D topological insulators can be accessed from the dual Dirac liquid (78) by adding various interaction terms. In particular, if we add a pairing interaction to condense pairs of ψ d fermions such that ψ T d iσ 2 ψ d = 0, the resulting surface state in terms of the original electrons is a topologically ordered state called the T-Pfaffian state. This is a gapped phase with non-Abelian topological order that preserves the symmetries of the topological insulator, i.e., U (1) particle-number conservation symmetry and timereversal symmetry In this work we have expanded upon previous studies of the semimetal-superconductor quantum critical point on the surface of a 3D topological insulator in two directions. First, we have established that at three-loop order, the critical dimension below which the SUSY fixed point disappears is D c ≈ 1.62, such that at this order in perturbation theory the quantum critical point is indeed endowed with emergent N = 2 SUSY. We then derived an exact relation stemming from SUSY between the correlation length and stability critical exponents, which allowed us to obtain the correlation length exponent ν to order 3 , giving ν ≈ 0.985 in 2+1 dimensions. This reduces the difference between the -expansion result and the conformal bootstrap result ν ≈ 0.917 by more than half, compared to the order-result ν ≈ 0.75. Second, we studied the coupling of the critical Dirac fermion and Cooper pair degrees of freedom to a dynamical U (1) gauge field. By a combination of mean-field and RG arguments, we found that the quantum critical point was destroyed by the gauge fluctuations, most likely replacing it with a fluctuation-induced first-order transition. According to a recent duality conjecture, this gauged Landau-Ginzburg theory was found to also describe the transition between two symmetry-preserving, correlated surface states of 3D topological insulators: the dual Dirac liquid and the T-Pfaffian. Our analysis thus led us to conjecture that the latter transition should also be fluctuation-induced firstorder, at least in an appropriate type-I regime for the transition. (A4) Our results can be checked against known results in the limit λ = h where SUSY is manifest at the bare level, rather than emergent. In that limit, we find that Z h = 1, which is a consequence of the non-renormalization of the superpotential in SUSY theories: see Eq. ( In the presence of the gauge field, the renormalization constants at one-loop order are given by As a sanity check, if we turn off the gauge coupling by setting e 2 = 0, the two sets of renormalization constants above are the same at one-loop order. called supermultiplets. One can associate to each supermultiplet a superfield which contains all the components of the supermultiplet. In the superspace formalism, the superfield is a function of not only the usual (commuting) spacetime coordinates but also of anticommuting coordinates. In this paper, we consider the theory of a chiral supermultiplet which consists of a complex scalar field φ, a two-component fermionic spinor field ψ and a complex auxiliary scalar field F . We can assemble these component fields into a chiral superfield Φ, where the fields are a function of the superspace coordinate Here θ and θ are two-component Grassmann spinors and γ μ are gamma matrices. For convenience, we define where ε αβ = (-iσ 2 ) αβ . We then have the Grassmann integrals For λ = h and m 2 = 0, the Lagrangian L in Eq. ( modulo a total derivative. To this free theory we add the superpotential W , which is a holomorphic function of the chiral superfield, By Taylor expanding in θ and using Eq. (B6), we obtain modulo a total derivative. Integrating out the auxiliary field F, F * , which is equivalent to using its equation of motion F = -hφ * 2 , F * = -hφ 2 , we obtain flow parameter. The contribution δS < to the action for the low-energy modes that is generated by integrating out the high-energy modes is where D = 4 -, C = iσ 2 , and . . . denotes boson-gauge field interactions. We do not write these terms here explicitly as they are not necessary to derive the RG beta functions ( In Ref. where we used the identity γ μ/ pγ μ = (2-D) / p. This yields Four diagrams contribute to the boson two-point function (Fig. and we obtain δZ Finally, the renormalization of the gauge field propagator is given by the diagrams in Fig. where the right-hand side contains δ μν /2 rather than δ μν /D with D → 4. This was shown to be a consistent procedure for restoring gauge invariance in theories with a hard momentum cutoff Λ There is no renormalization δξ of the gauge-fixing parameter, as in field-theoretic RG A (q 2 δ μν - which also violates gauge invariance. However, adding the two diagrams restores gauge invariance, δZ A + δZ We now turn to the renormalization of the three-point functions: the fermion-boson vertex (Fig. where I denotes the unit 2 × 2 matrix appearing in the Clifford algebra {γ μ , γ ν } = 2δ μν I. This yields δZ The second diagram in Fig. hence we obtain δZ The renormalization of the fermion-gauge field vertex (Fig. where we used the identity / qγ μ/ q = 2q μ/ q -q 2 γ μ . Thus, Comparing with Eq. (D8), we see that δZ ψ , which is the well-known Ward identity in QED at oneloop order e + δZ ψ , as expected. We finally turn to the renormalization of the boson four-point function (Fig. where the negative power of λ 2 simply indicates that a four-boson coupling can be generated by a fermion loop, at zeroth order in λ 2 . The third diagram in Fig. Likewise, here the negative power of λ 2 indicates that a four-boson coupling can be generated by a gauge field loop. The fourth diagram in Fig. and we obtain δZ Adding the contributions from all diagrams, the renormalization constants are given by δZ ψ = (2h 2 + ξe 2 )S 4 d , (D41) ) ) As observed before, the Ward identity δZ ψ = δZ e is satisfied. The non-gauge invariant terms ∝ ξ 2 disappear from δZ 2 λ , as a result of cancellations between the three diagrams in Fig. ) where we used S 4 = 2/(4π) 2 . All the non-gauge invariant ξ-dependent terms drop out of the beta functions. Using d = -d ln μ, one precisely recovers the beta functions in Eq. ( Appendix E: Calculation of the renormalization constants at three-loop order: technical aspects In this Appendix we provide some technical details concerning the calculation of the renormalization constants of the theory (57) at three-loop order. In Table In order to generate the complete set of Feynman diagrams we use the program QGRAF In order to prevent dimensional regularization (DREG) from generating infrared poles in , we use a common regulator mass m in all propagator denominators. Because the UV structure of the theory does not depend on this mass and we are allowed to choose the external momenta in a convenient way, we can extract the proper UV pole structure in just by calculating single-scale massive tadpole integrals after expanding in at most one external momentum. At one-loop order this procedure is trivial, because one can just discard all terms artificially depending on m (m-terms). At higher-loop orders one has to impose a proper local subtraction of the artificial m-terms, because an m-term in a sub-diagram/integral can lead to unwanted m-free terms in the full diagram/integral. The method of subtracting such terms order-by-order in perturbation theory is known as infrared rearrangement; it was suggested in Ref. The counter-terms include the field (wave function) renormalization counter-terms stemming from propagators and all vertex counter-terms. The latter are related to coupling renormalization and field renormalization constants. In practice one determines the field renormalization constants from the divergent structure of the corresponding two-point function and vertex renormalization constants from the divergent structure of the corresponding vertex functions. This is done iteratively starting at one-loop order. Here the divergent pieces of the n-point function define the corresponding one-loop renormalization constant. At loop order L, one has to insert the expressions already obtained for all counterterms at lower loop orders 0 < L C < L in all contributing lower loop order (0 < L C d < L) counter-term diagrams (with L = L C + L C d ) and add their contribution to the genuine L-loop amplitude in order to obtain the remaining L-loop divergence which then defines the corresponding L-loop counter-term. The large number of diagrams again requires that the generation of all possible counter-term insertion diagrams is performed automatically. From a technical point of view this can be easily dealt with by introducing additional vertex labels and the insertion of an explicit counter-and subtraction-term expansion for every propagator. From the perspective of the automated software packages mentioned previously, one necessary modification arising from the theory However, before one can deal with any expression within FORM one needs to generate the Feynman diagrams including the identical fermion vertices. Although QGRAF provides the correct absolute value for the symmetry factor of all diagrams using identical fermions at one vertex, it does not allow in our setup for an unambiguous definition of the sign of the Wick contraction, stemming from the anticommuting property of the fermionic field operators. This is so because the sign stemming from the Wick contraction is correlated with the order of the indices used in the two-dimensional ε αβ , but since QGRAF in our setup only works with generic expressions for the vertex involving only the identical names of the connected fields (and thus without explicit dependence on α and β) we run into a sign ambiguity when working with identical fermions. To circumvent this problem we first run QGRAF in the identical-particle setup. Then we simply choose a direction in all fermion chains to be the proper fermion flow direction or Denner current Due to the large number of diagrams we need to perform the modification steps above in a fully automated way. For the reordering of the fermion flow we use the PERL script majoranas.pl written by R. Harlander in order to resolve the indefinite fermion flow direction problem appearing in supersymmetric theories with Majorana fermions In order to test our setup including the renormalization routines we reproduced the QED beta function up to three loops. We explicitly checked our QED result against the Abelian limit of the QCD result presented in the four-loop calculation of Ref. . List of all relevant n-point functions and the associated number of Feynman diagrams in dependence with the number of loops (γ: gauge field, φ: Cooper pair field, e: Dirac fermion).