Near the critical temperature of a superconducting transition, the energy of the threshold perturbation δF thr that transfers a superconducting bridge to a resistive state at a current below the critical current Ic has been determined. It has been shown that δF thr increases with a decrease in the length of a bridge for short bridges with lengths L < ξ (where ξ is the coherence length) and is saturated for long bridges with L ≫ ξ. At certain geometrical parameters of banks and bridge, the function δF thr (L) at the current I → 0 has a minimum at L ∼ 2 -3ξ. These results indicate that the effect of fluctuations on Josephson junctions made in the form of short superconducting bridges is reduced and that the effect of fluctuations on bridges with lengths ∼ 2 -3ξ is enhanced. It is known that a superconducting state becomes unstable with respect to infinitely small perturbations of the superconducting order parameter ∆ when the current I flowing in a superconductor is larger than a certain critical value, I > I c . However, switching to a resistive state can occur at a lower current if the appearance of a finite perturbation in the system is possible. This effect is well known from the theory of Josephson junctions It will be shown below that threshold perturbation δF thr in bridges with the length L < ξ increases rapidly with a decrease in L because of enhanced suppression of superconductivity in banks. For this reason, Josephson junctions based on short bridges/constrictions are more stable with respect to fluctuations at a decrease in the length of the bridge/constriction. At the same time, small δF thr is necessary in some other situations. 1) e-mail: observermp@yandex.ru In particular, this is important when studying macroscopic quantum tunneling in superconducting systems To calculate threshold perturbation, it is necessary to determine a saddle-point state in the system nearest in energy to the ground state. For a long (L ≫ ξ, where ξ is the coherence length) one-dimensional (transverse dimensions smaller than ξ) superconducting bridge, such a problem was solved in well-known work , where F 0 = Φ 2 0 S/32π 3 λ 2 ξ, Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum, S = wd is the area of the cross section of the bridge with the width w and thickness d, λ is the London penetration depth of the magnetic field, and I dep = 2I 0 /3 √ 3 (I 0 = cΦ 0 S/8π 2 λ 2 ξ) is the depairing current in the Ginzburg-Landau model, which coincides with the expected critical current of the long (L ≫ ξ) bridge. We calculate the energy of threshold perturbation for the superconducting bridge with an arbitrary length L, which can be both smaller and larger than ξ. This problem is of interest because of the development of technologies and the appearance of superconducting bridges with a length of about the coherence length We consider a model system consisting of the superconducting bridge with the area of cross section S and length L, which connects two superconducting banks whose cross section has the area S pad (Fig. where ξ GL (0) and ∆ GL (0) -are the coherence length and superconducting order parameter in the Ginzburg -Landau model at zero temperature where the condition of the constant current in the system, I = const, is used (here, j = f 2 dφ/dx = I/S is the current density in the bridge and j = I/S pad < I/S is the current density in banks). In (3), the magnitude of the superconducting order parameter f , length, and current density are measured in units of ∆ GL = ∆ GL (0) 1 -T /T c , ξ = ξ GL (0)/ 1 -T /T c , and I 0 /S, respectively. Equation ( where f L , f C and f R are the magnitudes of the order parameter in the left bank, bridge, and right bank, respectively. Condition (4a) appears from the variation of the Ginzburg -Landau functional for the superconductor with the cross section depending on x (which is responsible for the appearance of the derivative d/dx(S(x)df /dx)] in the Ginzburg -Landau equation). This condition is exact in the case of a continuous change in S slow at the scale ξ, where the dependence of f on the transverse coordinate can be neglected. In our model, this change is stepwise. Consequently, the ratio S/S pad here is not the actual ratio of the areas of the cross sections but is a reference parameter characterizing a change in the derivative of the function f in the x direction at the transition through the bankbridge interface. We also assume that the entire system is connected to wider banks (located at x = ±L sys /2)), where the current density is almost zero and the order parameter reaches its equilibrium value f = 1. In order to exclude the effect of these banks on the transport characteristics of the bridge, we set L sys -L = 20ξ in numerical calculations. The energy of threshold perturbation can be determined using the expression where δφ is the additional phase difference between the ends of the bridge appearing in the saddle-point state and F saddle and F ground are the dimensionless free energies of the saddle-point and ground states, respectively: Equation ( To analytically find the energy of the saddle-point state, we take into account that the order parameter varies rapidly at scales much smaller than ξ. Therefore, the linear and cubic terms can be neglected in Eq. (3) for a short bridge. In this case, we arrive at the equation which has the first integral and the solution Here, u(x) = f 2 (x). Owing to the symmetry of the system, du dx x=0 = 0. At this step, we assume that variations of f are small in banks and use the boundary condition u (L/2) = u (-L/2) = 1 to find the constant E: where E + and E -correspond to the saddle-point and ground states, respectively, and I c is the critical current of the short bridge with the solution where the signs + and -correspond to the left and right banks, respectively. The constant C is determined from boundary conditions Taking into account a decrease in the order parameter in the banks in Eq. ( where γ = I/I c . If a decrease in ∆ in the banks is disregarded, the first term in Eq. ( Figure which coincides with the known result Our numerical calculations show that the current dependence of the ratio δF thr (I/I c )/δF thr (0) varies slightly and is determined primarily by the length of the bridge even when condition(17) is invalid and δF thr (0) depends on the ratio S pad /S (see inset in Fig. However, the sizes of the bridge and banks at which the dependence δF thr (L) at I → 0 is nonmonotonic can be found beyond the one-dimensional model. To this end, we considered a two-dimensional model system shown in Fig. with fixed f (x = ±L sys /2, y) = 1, normal derivative ∂f /∂n = 0 at the other edges of the superconducting system, and additional condition f (x = 0, y) = 0 (see Fig. We also analyzed the dependence of δF thr (0) on the width of the banks in the two-dimensional model (the data are shown in Fig. where R n is the resistance of the bridge in the normal state, R q = π /2e 2 is the resistance quantum and δF thr (0) is given by Eq. ( It is worth noting that the fluctuation resistance of the bridge depends strongly not only on its length but also on the size of the banks in view of the dependence of δF thr (0) on S pad /S (see inset in Fig. under condition (17). However, since δF thr (0) appears in Eq. (20) in the exponential, variations of the size of the banks affect the fluctuation resistance R more strongly than its critical current. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project no. 15-42-02365).