We analyze the creation and emission of pairs of highly nonclassical microwave photons in a setup where a voltage-biased Josephson junction is connected in series to two electromagnetic oscillators. Tuning the external voltage such that the Josephson frequency equals the sum of the two mode frequencies, each tunneling Cooper pair creates one additional photon in both of the two oscillators. The time-resolved statistics of photon emission events from the two oscillators is investigated by means of single-and cross-oscillator variants of the second-order correlation function g (2) (τ ) and the waiting-time distribution w(τ ). They provide insight into the strongly correlated quantum dynamics of the two oscillator subsystems and reveal a rich variety of quantum features of light including strong antibunching and the presence of negative values in the Wigner function. Started by a pioneering experiment at Saclay Here, we extend previous work investigating correlation function and waiting-time distribution for a single cavity After introducing model and observables in Sec. II, we extensively study three interesting simpler scenarios (Secs. III B to III D) arising for special choices of parameters from the generic two-cavity case, which is finally investigated in Sec. III E building on those earlier results. In this section, we briefly discuss our theoretical modeling consisting of an effective Hamiltonian in rotatingwave approximation (RWA) and a quantum master equation of Lindblad form. On the basis of this masterequation formalism, we introduce different versions of the second-order correlation function g (2) (τ ) and waitingtime distribution w(τ ) allowing for either single-oscillator or cross-oscillator measurements. We consider a setup (see Fig. The system can be described where the photonic number operator n a = a † a and the phase φ a = √ κ a (a † + a) of oscillator a are given in terms of the conventional bosonic creation and annihilation operators a † and a with [a, a † ] = 1 and analogous for oscillator b. The dimensionless parameter κ a = E Ca / ω a characterizes the granularity of charges in the circuit via the charging energy E Ca = 2e 2 /C a and is at the same time a measure for the zero-point quantum fluctuations in oscillators a. aa (τ ), w ā aa (τ ) Performing a rotating wave approximation after a unitary transformation to a rotating frame via Here, ∆ a = ω aωa denotes the detuning with respect to the resonance condition ω J = ωa + ωb (we assume, however, ∆ a = ∆ b = 0 in the remainder of the paper) and ẼJ = E J exp [-(κ a + κ b )/2] represents a renormalized Josephson energy. The colons indicate normal ordering. The inherent nonlinearity of the Josephson junction enters here as a nonlinear driving term in form of a normal-ordered product of Bessel functions of the first kind renormalizing the fundamental creation/annihilation term, a † b † + ab. The effect of these nonlinearities on the system's dynamics depend on both the Josephson energy E J , which can be interpreted as the driving strength, and the κ a(b) parameters, which reflect the charge quantization of the Cooper pair current and crucially influence the transition matrix elements of the drive Hamiltonian between neighboring resonator states (see below, Sec. III A). Experimentally, E J is easily tunable to a certain extent via the magnetic flux when using a SQUID geometry. Notably, the recent development of ultra-low temperature scanning tunneling microscopes The finite quality factor Q a = ω a /γ a limiting the lifetime 1/γ a of excited photons in resonator a is dominated by photon leakage into microwave output ports. The dynamics of the density operator of the system in the zerotemperature limit can hence be described by a master equation in Lindblad form which can be written in terms of the Liouvillian superoperator L. The asymmetry of the two decay rates is characterized by r = γ a /γ b . Note that we have not included here the impact of local voltage fluctuations at the JJ into our model, which would enter in form of an additional dissipator associated with rate γ J in the master equation above. This is justified since both experimental and theoretical investigations The full time evolution of the system's dynamics L = L āb + J a + J b is basically constituted from three parts To investigate the time-resolved statistics of the emitted photons, we make use of two different but closely related observables, the second-order correlation function g (2) (τ ) and the waiting-time distribution (WTD) w(τ ), which are both well-established tools in the field of quantum optics kl (τ ) function measures correlations between an emission event from oscillator k and a prior event from oscillator l separated by a time interval τ . The w k kl (τ ) function is the probability distribution to detect a delay τ between an emission event from oscillator l and the first subsequent detection of a photon from oscillator k, see Fig. The dynamics of the JJ-cavity system is driven by Cooper pairs tunneling across the junction and creating photons in the cavities which in turn act back on the tunneling process -stimulating or hindering further emission processes. To understand the resulting complex interplay of the (nonlinear) creation process and backaction, we turn to the heart of the nonlinearity of the Josephson junction. In contrast to many other nonlinear resonator systems, the nonlinearity of the JJ-cavity system stems from a nonlinear driving, not a nonlinear spectrum of excitation energies. It is thus best understood by investigating the γτ aa (τ ) and g (2) ab (τ ) in the limit of a nondegenerate parametric amplifier (κ a(b) → 0) in the subthreshold regime, EJ /E c J < 1, for r = 1. Simultaneous excitation of photons in both resonators results in a bunching for cross-and intra-cavity correlation functions. transition matrix elements between neighboring occupation states |m a , m b and |m a + 1, m b + 1 of the cavities a and b. Due to the obvious factorization into matrix elements involving a single cavity only, the physics of the two-cavity excitation processes carries over many of the features found in the single-mode case Taking the limit κ a , κ b → 0 in the Hamiltonian [Eq. ( which diverges once the driving strength reaches the amplification threshold Note that this divergence occurs only here in the simplified linearized model but is cured in the full problem due to higher order terms in the RWA Hamiltonian regularizing the energy gain (cf. Ref. For the time-resolved statistics, we follow a similar scheme employing a quantum regression approach The common two-photon excitation process of the PA Hamiltonian leads to a bunching, both for photons leaking from the same cavity with g (2) aa (0) = 2 (for any driving strength), and more obvious and more pronounced for photons from different cavities with g ab (0) in leading order diverging as (E J /E c J ) -2 for weak driving (cf. the two-photon creation processes within a single cavity discussed in Refs. This divergence reflects the simple fact that with a certain fixed probability the first detected photon [within the numerator in the definition of g (2) (τ )] is actually the first photon of a simultaneously created pair of photons to leave the cavity. Hence, it will shortly be followed by the remaining counterpart photon. In consequence for weak driving, the two-photon detection probability for short delay times is proportional to the excitation probability, its long-time limit [at the same time the denominator in g (2) (τ )] is proportional to n 2 st , as the observed photons stem from distinct pairs. The bunched nature of photon creation thus results in the observed divergence and more generally in the appearance of different timescales. In the waiting-time distribution (not shown), crossover of an exponential decay over a scale associated with the typical duration of a bunch, ∼ 1/γ, and over the typical time between While a single two-level system (dashed) can not be driven to population inversion, the less strongly damped of the two TLSs will reach inversion, n st > 0.5, for sufficiently strong driving. EJ /E c J > 1 is required in the limit r → 0. bunches, ∼ 1/γ n st , occur. Notably, due to the exclusion of decays during the "waiting time", the dynamics becomes non-Gaussian and equations of motion in the calculation of the WTD do not close. This non-Gaussian feature inherent in the WTD for a parametric amplifier stands in contrast to the simplest linearized version of Josephson photonics: For the driven harmonic oscillator, which results for the fundamental single-mode resonance, the stationary state is an eigenstate of the jump operator describing decay from the cavity, and the resulting WTD is a trivial exponential decay Directly solvable models other than the PA case are realized, when the state space accessible is limited. In Josephson photonics this occurs (within rotating wave approximation and at zero temperature) due to vanishing transition matrix elements of the drive Hamiltonian as discussed above. The simplest of these cases is here achieved for κ a = κ b = 2, where the cavities are effectively reduced to two linked two-level systems. Again, it is instructive to highlight similarities and differences to the corresponding one-mode case of a single TLS. Considering stationary properties first, we find for the mean occupation of the TLS a, where n b st follows by replacing r → 1/r. For any deviation from the strictly symmetric case, r = 1, that cavity which is less strongly damped can achieve occupation inversion, n a(b) st > 1/2, for suffi- J for symmetric damping, r = 1. The additional dashed lines in (a) refer to the waitingtime distribution w(τ ) of a single two-level system with the identical stationary mean photon number, which shows pronounced Rabi-type oscillations for strong driving. The presence of a second TLS b has a strong impact on w ā aa (τ ) in that regime, as (de-)excitation by a tunneling Cooper pair can only happen simultaneously in both TLSs resulting in a more complex dynamics. The time dependence of the cross-resonator WTD, w ā ab (τ ), in (b) sensitively depends on the driving strength EJ /E c J . ciently strong driving, see Fig. In the time-dependent properties, the partial blockade of Rabi-type oscillations is also apparent. In Fig. If renewal theory holds, the two functions g aa and w ā aa are directly related in Laplace space and provide identical information and is directly linked to g (2) aa (τ ) If emission events are described by renewal processes, then F FCS a = F WTD a . In fact, using analytical results for n a st , g aa (τ ), and w ā aa (τ ), proving that a subsystem of the two linked TLSs has no renewal character, except for the limiting cases of weak driving E J /E c J → 0 (where individual tunneling processes are uncorrelated) or r → 0 and r → ∞. Only in the latter cases, (nearly) every emission from a resets the system to the very same state, while in general renewal theory does not hold and consecutive waiting times are indeed correlated. Such correlations can alternatively be directly revealed employing the concept of joint waiting-time distributions is the probability distribution to detect two subsequent time delays τ 1 and τ 2 between emitted photons from resonator a. Displayed in Fig. For uncorrelated, statistically independent and equally distributed successive waiting times τ 1 and τ 2 (as expected in the renewal case), the joint distribution would factorize to the individual distributions and the difference ∆w ā aaa (τ 2 , τ 1 ) = w ā aaa (τ 2 , τ 1 )w ā aa (τ 2 )w ā aa (τ 1 ), shown in Fig. As the last instructive special case, we consider the combination of a harmonic oscillator and a TLS with an anti-JC driving, which (de-)excites both systems simultaneously. This is realized by the two-cavity Josephsonphotonics Hamiltonian for the specific values κ a → 0 and κ b = 2. The physics of the anti-JC system can also been seen as approximate description of a more generic scenarios of two cavities with highly different κ: one cavity with small quantum fluctuations behaving only weakly nonlinear, and one cavity with sufficiently large κ to restrict excitations within a few-level system. Due to the presence of (symmetry-breaking) dissipative processes, the damped anti-Jaynes-Cummings system is not trivially linked to the standard Jaynes-Cumming case the two cavities leads on the one hand to population inversion in the TLS b, which for the anti-JC system can be reached even for r < 1 for sufficiently strong driving. On the other hand, it leads to a clear signature of the state-space restrictions of the TLS (or generically a cavity with large κ) in the occupation as well as in the dynamics of the harmonic resonator a. This imprinting of the nonlinear quantum character (i.e., of the restricted level spectrum) of subsystem b on the harmonic subsystem a allows for the creation and observation of non-Gaussian or even quantum states in a continuous variable system. While highly unequal damping and very strong driving enabled Fock-state generation in two TLSs (see above and Ref. aa (τ ) and (b) g bb (τ ) for κa → 0 and different values of κ b in the weak-driving limit EJ /E c J → 0 for symmetric damping rates, r = 1. Changing κ b tunes the system from a nondegenerate parametric amplifier (κ b → 0) to an anti-Jaynes-Cummings system (κ b = 2.0). Depending on κ b , the photon statistics of the two resonators range from strong bunching to complete antibunching. in Fig. If a photon jump out of the TLS b is detected, the central dip in the resulting Wigner function of the harmonic system a immediately after the jump [Fig. Wigner-density dynamics -conditioned on the observation or absence of various emission events -can thus be used to distill the nonclassical imprint of the TLS on the harmonic system. E. Crossover in the weak-driving limit Numerical results for generic κ a(b) parameters are readily available but offer few new insights. Here, we now turn instead to the weak-driving regime, where we can actually gain analytical results for the time-dependent statistics by employing a perturbative approach. In Fig. Superconducting circuits based on a voltage-biased Josephson junction and one or several series-connected electromagnetic oscillators constitute excellent candidates for designing versatile sources of quantum microwaves. Various basic excitation processes can be selected by the choice of the bias voltage; here, we have concentrated on the resonance, where each tunneling Cooper pair excites a pair of photons, one in each of the two cavities coupled to the junction. The impact of the nonlinearity of the Josephson junction on the system's dynamics and the properties of the emitted radiation is governed by the Josephson energy E J determining the overall driving strength and the dimensionless parameter κ a(b) characterizing the importance of charge quantization in the circuit. Entering the transition matrix elements of the drive, κ a(b) specifies if nonlinearities matter already on the single-or on the many-photon level only. Adjusting κ a(b) thus allows to find a nondegenerate parametric amplifier, an anti-Jaynes-Cummings system, or two linked two-level systems realized in the system. We have analyzed second-order correlation functions g (2) (τ ) and waiting-time distributions w(τ ) and found various scenarios, where bunched, antibunched, and other non-classical light sources are attained. The great variety of highly nonclassical states can be traced back to the complex interplay of the two oscillator subunits, which cannot be found for simple single-mode creation processes. Future work (in preparation) will extend the concepts studied here and employ the correlated excitation process and the resulting correlated emission in a two-or multi-mode setup to generate highly entangled multiqubit states.