Spacial variation of the orbital part of the order parameter of 3 He-A in aerogel is represented as a random walk of the unit vector l in a field of random anisotropy produced by the strands of aerogel. For a range of distances, where variation of l is small in comparison with its absolute value correlation function of directions of l(r) is expressed in terms of the correlation function of the random anisotropy field. With simplifying assumptions about this correlation function a spatial dependence of the average variation δl 2 is found analytically for isotropic and axially anisotropic aerogels. Average projections of l on the axes of anisotropy are expressed in terms of characteristic parameters of the problem. Within the "model of random cylinders" numerical estimations of characteristic length for disruption of the long-range order and of the critical anisotropy for restoration of this order are made and compared with other estimations . The order parameter of the A-phase of superfluid 3 He has a form: In the bulk liquid it is continuously degenerate with respect to separate rotations of its spin part -unit vector dμ and of its orbital part mj + in j , where mj and nj are two mutually orthogonal unit vectors. Usually these two vectors are appended by the third orbital vector l = m × n to form an orthogonal triad. Orbital degeneracy is partly lifted by walls of a container or by extraneous objects. Aerogel when immersed in 3 He-A creates a random local anisotropy, which orients the orbital part of the order parameter. The anisotropy varies on a length scale of the order of the average distance ξ c between the strands of aerogel. Following the argument of Larkin Many observable properties of of 3 He-A (e.g. the NMR-shift, the anisotropy of the superfluid density) depend on orientation of the l . The proposed theory makes possible to find a dependence of δl 2 = (l(r 2 )l(r 1 )) 2 on a distance |r 2r 1 | in a region where δl 2 ≪ l 2 0 . The angular brackets here and in what follows denote average over ensemble. Extrapolation of the obtained expression to δl 2 /l 2 0 ∼ 1 renders an alternative estimation for ξ LIM and for the critical global anisotropy, stabilizing the OF state. Both estimations by the order of magnitude do not contradict to these made in Ref. The LIM state of 3 He-A in aerogel is also a good example of a pseudo-gap state. The averaged density of states here is practically gapped but there is no superfluidity. Situation is reminiscent of that in high-T c superconductors. That increases interest in investigation of glass-like states of 3 He-A. Formally interaction of aerogel with the order parameter of superfluid 3 He is described by the additional term in the free energy density. This term is proportional to η jl (r)A μj A * μl , where η jl (r) is a random real symmetric traceless tensor. The isotropic part of interaction is included in the local suppression of the T c , it affects the absolute value of the order parameter, but not its orientation. Not too far from the transition temperature the equilibrium texture can be found by minimization of the Ginzburg and Landau functional. For high porosity aerogels η jl (r) can be treated as a perturbation. Only orientation dependent contributions to this functional are significant: where Taking projections of this equation on each of the directions m, n, l we arrive at three scalar equations: where shorthand notations In a zero order approximation over η jl arbitrarily oriented spatially homogeneous triad (m, n, l) satisfies Eqns. ( one can introduce an average orientation of the triad m 0 , n 0 , l 0 , so that e.g. l(r 1 ) = l 0 + λ(r 1 ) and l(r 2 ) = l 0 + λ(r 2 ) etc.. Both λ(r 1 ) and λ(r 2 ) are small. With account of the normalization condition for l(r) the increment λ(r) can be represented as λ(r) = θ(r) × l 0 , where θ(r) is a vector of small rotation. The same θ(r) determines rotation of all triad (m, n, l) : Of a principal interest is the average (l(r 2 )l(r 1 ) is the projection of θ(r) on a plane, normal to l 0 . To find a first order solution of Eqns. ( These equations can be solved by Fourier transformation: , where V is a normalization volume: Only θ x and θ y enter expression for (l(r 2 )l(r 1 )) 2 ≡ [δl(r)] 2 , where r = r 2r 1 . Interaction term in the functional (2) can be rewritten as -η jl l j l l . It contains only l . Then, in a principal order over η jl The numerator is the ratio of the "longitudinal" and "transverse" elasticities, in our case it equals to 3). When l(r) experiences a random walk [δl(r)] 2 grows with r . Approximation Eq. ( where ξ LIM = 8πγξ 4 s K . Since ρ is a distance, compressed along the direction of l 0 the real disruption length is anisotropic -the condition [δl(r)] 2 l 2 0 ∼ 1 is met for r ∼ ξ LIM if r is perpendicular to l 0 and for r ∼ γξ LIM if they are parallel. To be more specific we evaluate here K(k) for an ensemble of randomly distributed and randomly oriented identical uniaxial impurities. Following the theory of "small objects" in superfluid 3 He where r s are positions of impurities, â(s) j -a unit vector in the direction of symmetry axis of the impurity at a point r s and σ (i) tr and σ (a) tr are respectively isotropic and anisotropic parts of the transport cross-section for scattering of quasi-particles by the impurity defined in Refs. If positions and orientations of different impurities are not correlated then in the sum over s and t only contribution of terms with s = t remains finite after averaging. The angular averaging renders a factor 1/15 . The resulting tr ) 2 does not depend on k , it can be substituted in Eq. ( This result renders an estimation of the characteristic disruption length tr ) 2 . For a numerical estimation we assume that impurities are circular cylinders with the hight b and radius ̺ . Then the concentration n can be expressed in terms of porosity P via nπ̺ 2 b = 1 -P . Cross-section σ (a) tr = -(πb̺)/8 Global anisotropy can occur in a process of preparation of a sample or be a result of deformation In zero-order approximation over η jl (r) Eqns. ( We consider in detail an axially symmetric aerogel when two of the three principal values coincide. Then all three can be expressed in terms of one parameter κ : κ u = κ v = κ and κ w = -2κ . There are two possibilities: 1) κ < 0 , then the maximum principal value κ w is not degenerate. Such anisotropy is produced by a uniaxial compression of isotropic aerogel. In this case κ x -κ z = κ y -κ z = 3κ and a procedure, used at derivation of Eq. ( where p 2 = 3|κ|/ξ 2 s . In case of k -independent K(k) ρ -dependence of [δl(r)] 2 can be written explicitly: For small distances pρ ≪ 1 we are back to a linear growth of [δl(r)] 2 with a distance ρ as described by the Eq. ( If the anisotropy is induced by deformation of aerogel κ ∼ ǫ , where ǫ is a parameter, characterizing a uniaxial deformation. E.g. for a simple compression along z-axis ǫ = δh z /h z . The dependence of q on ǫ is then: depends on a structure of aerogel. Within the "random cylinders" model for a simple compression . For 98% aerogel with ̺ ≈ 2 nm and ξ 0 ≈ 20 nm we arrive at ǫ c ≈ 10 -2 ÷ 10 -3 as in Ref. In the case 2) ( κ > 0 ) each of the coinciding principal values is greater than the third value. Vector l belongs to the u, v -plane, e.g. is parallel to u -axis, then κ z = κ y ≡ κ . The third principal value is κ x = -2κ . With the same model assumption about the correlation function in this case: At pρ ≫ 1 the first term in the brackets dominates and a glass state is realized, but it is different from the state, described by Eqns. ( The proposed linear theory relates statistical properties of random orbital textures in 3 He-A to correlation functions of the random anisotropy created by the strands of aerogel. Here the procedure was illustrated with the aid of simple model of aerogel, which admits an analytical treatment. Accuracy of the obtained numerical evaluations of characteristic parameters of textures depends on a model and it can be improved by choice of a more realistic model or by a direct use of experimental data for correlations in aerogel. More restrictive is requirement imposed on distances r ≪ ξ LIM . It means that the theory describes local properties of random textures. Relation between local and global properties of glass-like states of 3 He-A and analysis of their superfluid properties deserve further investigation. I thank V.V.Dmitriev for useful discussions and comments. This work was supported in part by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, project # 14-02-00054-a