One of the most important goals of condensed matter physics is materials by design, i.e. the ability to reliably predict and design materials with a set of desired properties. A striking example is the deterministic enhancement of the superconducting properties of materials. Recent experiments have demonstrated that the metamaterial approach is capable of achieving this goal, such as tripling the critical temperature T c in Al-Al 2 O 3 epsilon near zero (ENZ) core-shell metamaterial superconductors. However, transport properties of such metamaterials remained much worse compared to conventional superconductors. Here, we demonstrate that an Al/Al 2 O 3 hyperbolic metamaterial geometry is capable of a similar T c enhancement, while having superior transport and magnetic properties compared to the core-shell metamaterial superconductors. This result opens up numerous new possibilities for metamaterial enhancement of T c in other practically important simple superconductors, such as niobium and MgB 2 . It also indicates that the recently discovered hyperbolic properties of high T c superconductors may play considerable role in superconductivity enhancement in cuprates. One of the most important goals of condensed matter physics is reliably designing new materials with enhanced superconducting properties. Recently, a metamaterial strategy, consisting of deliberately engineering the dielectric properties of a nanostructured "metamaterial superconductor" that results in an enhanced electron pairing interaction that increases the value of the superconducting energy gap and the critical temperature, T c , was suggested to achieve this goal Electromagnetic properties are known to play a very important role in the pairing mechanism of superconductors where V C is the Fourier-transformed Coulomb potential in vacuum, and  eff (q,) is the linear dielectric response function of the superconductor treated as an effective medium. Following this "macroscopic electrodynamics" formalism, it appears natural to use the recently developed plasmonics where  xx =  yy = 1 and  zz = 2 have opposite signs. As a result, the effective Coulomb interaction of two electrons may become attractive and very strong along spatial directions where Demonstration of the resulting superconductivity enhancement in hyperbolic metamaterials would open up numerous new possibilities for metamaterial enhancement of T c in such practically important simple superconductors as niobium and MgB 2 . Here, we report the first successful realization of such an artificial hyperbolic metamaterial superconductor, which is made of aluminum films separated by thin layers of Al 2 O 3 . This combination of materials is ideal for the proof of principle experiments because it is easy to controllably grow Al 2 O 3 on the surface of Al, and because the critical temperature of aluminum is quite low (T c Al = 1.2 K (11)), leading to a very large superconducting coherence length = 1600 nm To demonstrate that our multilayer samples exhibit hyperbolic behavior, we studied their transport and optical properties (Figs. The Kramers-Kronig analysis of the FTIR reflectivity spectra of Al and Al 2 O 3 measured in (4) also allowed us to calculate the  1 and  2 components of the Al/Al 2 O 3 layered films in the LWIR spectral range using the Maxwell-Garnett approximation as follows: where n is the volume fraction of metal, and  m and  d are the dielectric permittivities of the metal and dielectric, respectively Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry with photon energies between 0.6 eV and 6.5 eV on the Al/Al 2 O 3 metamaterial have been performed using a Woollam Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometer (W-VASE). For a uniaxial material with optic axis perpendicular to the sample surface and in plane of incidence, ellipsometry provides the pseudo-dielectric function which, in general, depends both on ε 1 and ε 2 . However, as demonstrated by The T c and critical magnetic field, H c , of various samples (Figs. The measurements of H c in parallel and perpendicular fields are shown in Fig. We have also studied changes in T c as a function of Al layer thickness in a set of several 8layer Al/Al 2 O 3 metamaterial samples, as shown in Fig. The observed combination of transport and critical properties of the Al/Al 2 O 3 hyperbolic metamaterials is very far removed from the parameter space typical of the granular aluminum films The multilayer Al/Al 2 O 3 hyperbolic metamaterial samples for our experiments (Fig. The metamaterial parameters were extracted from the polarization reflectometry data as described in detail in where (11) We measured p-and s-polarized absolute reflectance on the metamaterial sample using the reflectance mode of the ellipsometer. The reflectance was measured at two photon energies, 2.07 eV (600 nm) and 2.88 eV (430 nm), as shown in Fig. Let us assume that the dielectric response function of the metal used to fabricate the hyperbolic metamaterial shown in Fig. where  is the characteristic temperature for a bosonic mode mediating the electron pairing interaction (such as the Debye temperature  D in the standard BCS theory), and  eff is the dimensionless coupling constant defined by V(q,)=V C (q)  (q,) and the density of states see for example ) where V C is the unscreened Coulomb repulsion. The integral in Eq. ( Let us consider the region of four-momentum (q,) space, where >  1 (q). While  m = 0 at =  1 (q),  m (q,) is large in a good metal and negative just above  1 (q). Compared to the bulk metal, the poles of the angular-dependent V product of the hyperbolic metamaterial are observed at shifted positions compared to the zeroes of  m , and additional poles may also appear where x = cosandvaries from 0 to . The latter expression has two poles at As the volume fraction, n, of metal is varied, one of these poles remains close to  m = 0, while the other is observed at larger negative values of  m : This situation is similar to calculations of T c for ENZ metamaterials The respective contributions of the poles to d(V)/dx may be written as Near n=0 and n=1 these expression may be approximated as respectively. Note that at the  1 (q) zero of the dielectric response function of the bulk metal the effective Coulomb potential inside the metal may be approximated as so that the coupling constant  eff of the hyperbolic metamaterial obtained by angular integration of the sum of Eqs. ( where  is a constant of the order of 1 and x 0 is defined by the maximum negative value of  m , which determines if the second pole (Eq. ( assuming the known values T cbulk = 1.2 K and  m = 0.17 for bulk aluminum 