We have systematically studied the low-temperature specific heat of the BaFe2-xNixAs2 single crystals covering the whole superconducting dome. Using the nonsuperconducting heavily overdoped x = 0.3 sample as a reference for the phonon contribution to the specific heat, we find that the normal-state electronic specific heats in the superconducting samples may have a nonlinear temperature dependence, which challenges previous results in the electron-doped Ba-122 iron-based superconductors. A model based on the presence of ferromagnetic spin fluctuations may explain the data between x = 0.1 and x = 0.15, suggesting the important role of Fermi-surface topology in understanding the normal-state electronic states. The normal-state electronic states of the iron-based superconductors have been heavily studied by the specific heat technique 1 . The most important parameter is γ n = C/T , which is proportional to the density of states at the Fermi energy and the effective electron mass. The measurements in the iron-based superconductors have given a variety of values of γ n for different materials For the specific heat in the iron-based superconductors, phonon contribution is often dominated above T c . To reveal the electronic specific heat, one may try to fit the data above T c with certain functions 2,3 or find a reference sample without superconductivity by assuming that the specific heat of phonons change little with doping In this paper, we systematically study the lowtemperature electronic specific heat of the electron-doped BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 to address the role of spin fluctuations. Similar to other iron-based superconductors, the BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 system shows a superconducting dome with the total suppression of static AF order near the optimal doping level x ∼ 0.1 High-quality single crystals of BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 and BaFe 2-x-y Ni x Cr y As 2 were grown by the self-flux method as reported previously Fig. Since the x = 0.3 sample shows neither superconductivity nor static AF order, it may be used as a reference to remove the phonon contribution. The presence of a large ( 50 meV) spin gap in the x=0.3 sample 33 means that one can safely ignore the spin-fluctuation contribution to the specific heat in this material. In the following analysis, the phonon specific heat of the x = 0.3 sam- ple is calculated as CT 3 where C is the fitted parameter as shown in Fig. The doping dependence of parameters a and b is shown in Fig. First, we find that different results will be achieved in some samples if we choose different temperature range to subtract the phonon contribution. Fig. Second, the change of the phonon contribution to specific heat due to Ni dopings should be smaller than that suggested by Fig. as shown by the solid line in Fig. Fig. compromised by the a-b method since the latter mainly affect the specific heat above 10 K. As shown in Fig. Unfortunately , using Cr-doped nonsuperconducting samples to obtain the normal-state electronic specific heat of the corresponding superconducting samples does not work for the samples below the optimal doping level. For example, the entropy is not conserved for the x = 0.1 sample using the x = 0.1 Cr-doped sample as the reference, suggesting that the electronic specific heats of the two samples are not the same. As shown in Fig. The above results suggest that no adjustment is needed in deducting the phonon specific heat of x = 0.3 sample. Fig. If there is indeed a non-linear temperature dependence of the normal-state electronic specific heat, one may ask how significant the effect is in determining the relevant physical properties. Fig. Fig. From the above results of section III.A, we find that the a-b method cannot give the correct normal-state electronic specific heat in BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 . In some of the studies It is rather surprising that we cannot observe the contribution to the specific heat from AF spin fluctuations. As shown by the neutron scattering and NMR experiments Another possible origin of FM spin fluctuations is the presence of magnetic impurities In the end, we give a brief discussion on spin glass and its effect. It has been shown by neutron scattering experiments In this paper, we have systematically studied the specific heat of the electron-doped iron-based superconductors BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 . Our detailed analysis shows that the a-b method that is frequently used in the literatures cannot give the correct electronic specific heat for samples with x from about 0.1 to 0.15. The temperature dependence of the normal-state electronic specific heat within this doping range can be described by the spinfluctuation theory, where the FM fluctuations may come from the Stoner instability of the hole pocket at Γ point or a tiny amount of magnetic impurities. Our results suggest that the a-b method should be carefully used around the AF instability.