We report on the switching current distributions in nano-hybrid Josephson junctions made of InAs semiconductor nanowires. Temperature dependence of the switching current distribution can be understood by motion of Josephson phase particle escaping from a tilted washboard potential, fitted well to the macroscopic quantum tunneling, thermal activation and phase diffusion models, depending on temperature. Application of gate voltage to tune the Josephson coupling strength enables us to adjust the effective temperature for the escaping process, which would be promising for developing gate-tunable superconducting phase qubits. A Josephson junction The supercurrent switching event in a current-biased Josephson junction is equivalent to an escaping motion of a Josephson phase particle in a tilted washboard potential In this paper, we report on the stochastic switching current distribution in InAs nanowire (NW) JJ. The switching current distributions in the NW JJ were obtained with varying temperature and gate voltage. The escape rate of a phase particle was numerically obtained from the switching current distribution data and fitted well by an appropriate theoretical model. The effective escape temperature T esc of phase particle was also obtained by fitting the switching current distribution to the escape model, confirming the validity of the fitting results. Application of gate voltage induces change of T esc , indicating a gatetunable T esc . We believe that our observations provide useful information for developing nano-hybrid phase qubit based on semiconducting nanowires. InAs NWs were grown via a catalytic process by using vapor-liquid-solid mechanism Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a typical NW device is shown in the inset of Current-voltage (I-V) curves of InAs NW JJ at different temperatures are displayed in Fig. The effective capacitance is given by C eff = ħ/R N E Th , where ħ is the Planck's constant divided by 2π, R N (~ 330 Ω) is the normal-state resistance of the junction and E Th is the Thouless energy. Since E Th ~ 0.1 meV (will be discussed below), it is estimated to be C eff ~ 20 fF. We note that this capacitance value is comparable to the one estimated from the switching current distributions, as will be discussed later. Temperature dependences of I C and I R are displayed in Fig. where a and b are fitting parameters and k B is the Boltzmann constant. From the normal-state transport, E Th = ħD/L 2 is obtained to be ~ 0.1 meV, where D = v F l e /3 ~ 95 cm 2 /s is the diffusion constant, v F ~ 10 8 cm/s is the Fermi velocity and l e ~ 30 nm is the elastic mean free path of InAs NW, respectively. Temperature dependent behavior of the switching current (I C ) distribution is displayed in Fig. The escape rate Γ(II CC ) can be obtained from the switching probability P(II CC ) via the relation Figure The escape rate in the MQT regime 2 is a retrapping barrier, and Q 0 = 4I C0 /πI R0 is the fluctuationfree quality factor. The fitting results of Γ TA and Γ PD are shown in Fig. When we fit the P(II CC ) data using the TA and PD model, we obtain the escape temperature T esc , which is perceived by the escaping phase particle. Figure The crossover temperatures of TT MQT * In conclusion, we have studied the escape process of the Josephson phase particle in InAs NW JJ with varying temperature and gate voltage. The switching current distribution of the NW JJ at each temperature is understood by the MQT, TA and PD models, depending on temperature. Application of gate voltage to suppress the critical current results in an effective increase of the escape temperature. Our results indicate that the nano-hybrid JJ would be a good platform to develop gate-tunable superconducting phase qubits. 