We study the vortex lattice in a two-dimensional s-wave topological superconductor with Rashba spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman field by solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations self-consistently for the superconducting order parameter. We find that when spin-orbit coupling is relatively weak, one of the two underlying chiralities in the topological superconducting state can be strongly manifest in the vortex core structure and govern the response of the system to vorticity and a nonmagnetic impurity where the vortex is pinned. The Majorana zero mode in the vortex core is found to be robust against the nonmagnetic impurity in that it remains effectively a zero-energy bound state regardless of the impurity potential strength and the major chirality. The spin polarization of the Majorana bound state depends on the major chirality for weak spin-orbit coupling, while it is determined simply by the vorticity when spin-orbit coupling is relatively strong. One of the most promising models proposed so far for platforms to realise topological quantum computation is the two-dimensional (2D) s-wave topological superconductivity (TSC) model with Rashba spin-orbit (SO) coupling and Zeeman field. The purpose of the present work is to examine the effects of the two chiralities inherently present in 2D s-wave TSC states on vortex structure, by solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations The paper is organised as follows. The model is described in Sec. II, results are presented and discussed in Sec. III, and the work is summarised in Sec. IV. We use the tight-binding model for a 2D s-wave topological superconductor: where we consider hopping among nearest-neighbour lattice sites ij only with the hopping amplitude t ij ≡ -t, μ is the chemical potential, V i is the single-particle potential due to a nonmagnetic impurity at site i, h is the Zeeman field, α > 0 is the Rashba SO coupling strength, ∆ i is the s-wave superconducting order parameter at site i, and H.c. stands for the Hermitian conjugate. We set the lattice constant to be unity, and x and ŷ are the unit vectors in the x and y directions. c † iσ and c iσ creates and annihilates, respectively, the electron at site i with spin σ (=↑, ↓). We solve the BdG equations with the Hamiltonian (1) and solve for the order parameter {∆ i } self-consistently for a given coupling constant for the pairing interaction, U i ≡ U : (2) When the system has translational symmetry, the realspace Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where ) Here c † kσ and c kσ are the creation and annihilation operators of the electron with momentum k = (k x , k y ) and spin σ, ǫ(k) = -2t(cos k x +cos k y )-μ, L(k) ≡ (L x , L y ) = (sin k y , -sin k x ), and σ ≡ (σ x , σ y ) and σ z are the Pauli matrices. The above Hamiltonian in momentum space can be diagonalized to obtain the quasiparticle spectrum as )h 2 and we have assumed an isotropic s-wave order parameter, ∆(k) ≡ ∆. Depending on the values of μ, h, and ∆, the system can be in a trivial or nontrivial (Abelian or non-Abelian) topological phase according to the first Chern number or the Thouless-Kohmoto-Nightingale-Nijs (TKNN) number, where G = (iω -H(k)) -1 . The spectral gap E 0 is the minimum value of E ± (k) in Eq. ( The vortex lattice is formed by uniform magnetic field applied in the +z direction, H = H ẑ. The electron wavefunction acquires the Peierls phase factor while traversing from site j to i (coordinate from r j to r i ) due to the associated vector potential so that the hopping amplitude is modified as where the vector potential A(r) = (H × r)/2 in the symmetric gauge. To ensure obtaining Majorana fermions that come in pairs as a solution to the BdG equations, For all the results shown, an odd number of lattice sites N x = N y has been used so that the vortex inside the system is centred at the centre site of the square lattice. We have used the convention that the electron charge is negative (e > 0) and hence the quasiparticle bound states carry the angular momentum of -about the vortex centre. The phase winding of the order parameter is referred to as the vorticity (-1 in our calculation) hereafter. To study the effects of nonmagnetic impurities, we place a single nonmagnetic impurity with potential V i ≡ V imp at the centre site of the system. This is where one of the vortices is centred at, which is a reasonable assumption as a vortex tends to be pinned by an impurity or a defect in real materials, and V imp can be thought of as a pinning potential. We stop self-consistent iterations for the order parameter at the l-th iteration step, when the order parameter as a complex vector ∆ of length N x N y satisfies ∆ (l) -∆ (l-1) where we set δ = 10 -6 . We have found that results do not change with tighter convergence criteria with δ as small as 10 -10 . The energy spectrum (5) depends only on the magnitude of the Zeeman field h and so the phase transition between different topological phases is independent of the sign of h. In a given topological phase, however, which one of the two underlying chiralities, where ∆ǫ(k In the normal state, the eigenspectrum in Eq. ( The major chirality in a non-Abelian TSC state stems from the chirality (spin winding) of the single Fermi sur- face in the normal state. The TKNN number ν reverses its sign under h → -h, whereas it does not under μ → -μ. Whether trivial or nontrivial, the underlying chirality in the TSC staterather than the TKNN number itself -governs how the system responds to vorticity and nonmagnetic impurities in the presence of a vortex. We have studied the vortex lattice states for a wide variety of parameter sets (μ, α, h, U and the resulting bulk order parameter ∆ and spectral gap E 0 ) within our tight-binding model (1), in particular exploring the effects of the strength of SO coupling α and the sign of the Zeeman field h. We find that for α t the sign of h hardly makes any difference in a pure vortex lattice state (i.e., with no impurity). The converged order parameter, the excitation spectrum, and the ground-state energy are practically the same for positive and negative h in the absence of impurity. We will discuss the influence of chirality on the vortex structure that can be apparent even in a pure system for relatively small α in Sec. III C. In Fig. The LDOS at the vortex centre (where the nonmagnetic impurity is placed at) is plotted as a function of quasiparticle energy in Fig. This spin polarization at the vortex centre is consistent with the findings of Ref. 46, where Majorana bound states in a three-dimensional topological superconductor with spin-orbit coupling have been found to be spinpolarised in a vortex core. Assuming circular symmetry around the vortex centre, the spin-up and spin-down wavefunctions are given by the Bessel function of the first kind, J n (r) and J n-1 (r), respectively, where n and n -1 are the orbital angular momentum carried by the spinup and spin-down components of a quasiparticle, for the chirality of +1. Figures For both signs of h, the energy of the Majorana bound state remains practically the same (∼ 0.001t on the 41×41 lattice) with or without the impurity. This turns out to be the case also for stronger impurity potential, or stronger spin-orbit coupling as discussed in Sec. III B, where the vortex bound states are significantly affected by the impurity for h > 0 as well as for h < 0. We also find that the minigap is increased by the presence of a nonmagnetic impurity at the vortex centre, regardless of the (nonzero) magnitude, or the sign of the potential -in case of a positive potential, as long as the magni- tude is large enough so that the order parameter is suppressed at the impurity site in the absence of vortices. The order parameter can be enhanced at the impurity site for a relatively weak, positive potential, For the systems studied in the previous subsection, the chemical potential μ = 3.5t is fairly close to the top of the band and also the SO coupling constant α = t is rela- tively small so that the Fermi surface in the normal state is nearly perfectly circular. This means that the system has rotational symmetry to a good approximation and the difference between the two intrinsic chiralities can be apparent in vortex states. In this subsection, we examine a case where the chemical potential is far away enough from the top or bottom of the band and/or SO coupling is relatively strong so that the Fermi surface is nowhere close to having circular symmetry. For this purpose we use μ = -2t and α = h = 2.5t. The normal-state Fermi surface E -is shown in Fig. The converged order parameter for μ = -2t, α = 2.5t, and U = -8t (∆ ≃ 0.67t, E 0 ≃ 0.39t, and ν = -1) in the 41×41 vortex lattice with V imp = -2t at the centre of the system is shown in Fig. Masaki and Kato have found In this subsection, we illustrate that when SO coupling is relatively weak, vortex structure can be markedly different for the two opposite directions of the Zeeman field even in a pure vortex state. It has been found in Ref. 15 that the weaker the SO coupling, the closer the average angular momentum per Cooper pair to -in the (p x -ip y )-dominated states. Thus, in terms of the direction of the Zeeman field (or alternatively the external field applied to create the vortex lattice) one can make one of the two intrinsic chiralities strongly manifest in the vortex core structure. Shown in Fig. Striking is the difference between the α = 0.5t and α = t cases for h = -t [Figs. The suppression and enhancement of the order parameter around the vortex centre for h = t and h = -t, respectively, seen in Figs. Finally, we demonstrate the manifestation of chirality in the vortex lattice in the trivial phase. Shitade and Nagai We show in Fig. For these and other systems we have examined, we have not found any direct correlation between the minigap and the bulk order parameter nor the spectral gap. In this particular example (also for h > 0), simply the smaller the |h|, the larger the minigap. The formula for the minigap for s-wave or chiral p-wave superconductors, where k F is the magnitude of the Fermi wave vector and ξ is the coherence length, As discussed at the end of Sec. III A, the minigap is increased by a nonmagnetic impurity which the vortex is pinned by, and the increase in the minigap can be substantial as illustrated in Figs. 6 and 10, depending on the major chirality and the strength of SO coupling. The larger the minigap, the shorter the minimum time required for braiding operation of vortices to avoid nonadiabatic transitions of the Majorana zero mode to excited states. In summary, we have performed a self-consistent study of the vortex lattice in a two-dimensional topological superconductor with an s-wave pairing interaction, Rashba spin-orbit coupling, and Zeeman field. When a vortex is pinned at a nonmagnetic impurity, one of the two intrinsic chiralities in the non-Abelian topological superconducting state can manifest itself in the vortex structure and affect the low-energy excitation spectrum for relatively weak spin-orbit coupling. One can make one chirality dominant over the other by changing the direction of the Zeeman field, or alternatively, the sign of the chemical potential. In such states, (non-Majorana) vortex bound states are less influenced by the impurity if the dominant chirality is opposite to the vorticity, compared to the case where it is in the same direction as the vorticity. For stronger spin-orbit coupling, where orbital angular momentum is less of a "good quantum number", lowenergy spectra tend to be more affected by the impurity regardless of the direction of the Zeeman field. The Majorana zero mode effectively remains a zero-energy bound state, and its spin is polarised according to the vorticity unless spin-orbit coupling is rather weak, in which case the spin polarization depends on the major chirality as well. We have shown in Sec. III C that when spin-orbit coupling is weak, the vortex core structure can be strikingly different for the two directions of the Zeeman field: The order parameter is suppressed and enhanced around the vortex centre when the major chirality is antiparallel and parallel, respectively, to the vorticity. We have demonstrated this phenomenon not only in non-Abelian topological phase, but also in trivial phase where the TKNN number is zero. The major chirality in such a trivial TSC state is the chirality of the dominant (or single) Fermi surface. The enhancement of the order parameter implies some extra superconducting order being induced. This occurs, however, in the vortex core region where the chirality and the vorticity are in the same direction, and appears to be counterintuitive in view of the vortex physics in spin-triplet p x ± ip y superconductors. Moreover, it is not immediately obvious how to map out chirality-based order parameters Finally, the suppression (the enlargement of the vortex core) and enhancement of the self-consistent order parameter around the vortex centre will be reflected in the supercurrent and hence the field distribution in the vortex core area. Thus, particularly in a 2D s-wave topological superconductor where spin-orbit coupling is relatively weak, manifestation of different chiralities can be detected by probing the field distribution in the vortex lattice, e.g., by NMR and by switching the direction of the applied magnetic field.