Microwave cavities have been widely used to investigate the behavior of closed few-level systems. Here, we show that they also represent a powerful probe for the dynamics of charge transfer between a discrete electronic level and fermionic continua. We have combined experiment and theory for a carbon nanotube quantum dot coupled to normal metal and superconducting contacts. In equilibrium conditions, where our device behaves as an effective quantum dot-normal metal junction, we approach a universal photon dissipation regime governed by a quantum charge relaxation effect. We observe how photon dissipation is modified when the dot admittance turns from capacitive to inductive. When the fermionic reservoirs are voltage biased, the dot can even cause photon emission due to inelastic tunneling to/from a Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer peak in the density of states of the superconducting contact. We can model these numerous effects quantitatively in terms of the charge susceptibility of the quantum dot circuit. This validates an approach that could be used to study a wide class of mesoscopic QED devices. Circuit QED techniques In this context, it is crucial to understand how tunneling processes between a discrete energy level and the continuum of states of a reservoir can affect cavity photons. This situation is epitomized by a single quantum dot circuit coupled to a cavity, a case which has been studied elusively so far In this work, we study experimentally and theoretically the behavior of a single quantum dot in a carbon nanotube, coupled to normal metal (N) and superconducting (S) reservoirs, and embedded in a high finesse microwave cavity. In a first step, we study a dot with a discrete level coupled only to the N reservoir. In this case, the current response of the dot to a direct gate voltage excitation V RF can be developed as RF ), provided the frequency ω RF of the excitation is smaller than the tunnel rate Γ N of the N/dot junction. This development maps onto that expected for a RC circuit with capacitance C Q and resistance R AC . The capacitance C Q characterizes the ability of the dot to host electrons at DC or low frequencies. The resistance R AC describes the dynamics of charge tunneling through the junction, which leads to the relaxation of the charge imbalance caused by V RF . For an incoherent device, R AC depends on the detailed properties of the dot circuit. However, in the coherent non-interacting limit with ω RF ≪ Γ N , Büttiker and coworkers have predicted that R AC should take a universal value, independently of the dot parameters In a second step, we study the finite bias voltage regime where the dot level is also coupled to the S reservoir. Contextually, the implementation of mesoscopic QED experiments with superconducting hybrid circuits is very recent. Atomic contacts between superconductors have been used to form a new type of quantum bit based on Andreev bound states In order to understand our measurements, we use a Keldysh Green's function approach. We can reproduce simultaneously the quantum dot conductance and the microwave response of the cavity, versus the dot gate and bias voltages, with an unprecedented accuracy for this type of hybrid system. We thereby validate the description of mesoscopic QED experiments in terms of an electronic charge susceptibility. To illustrate the broad scope of this approach, we present its multi-dot generalization, which can be used for many different geometries, like for instance Cooper pair splitters and topological hybrid nanocircuits. Our work also opens wide experimental perspectives since microwave cavities appear as a powerful probe for quantum charge relaxation, photon-assisted tunneling, and all other effects involving tunneling between a discrete level and fermionic reservoirs. This article is organized as follows. Section II presents our experimental setup. Sections III and IV analyze our experimental data, for the N/dot and N/dot/S limits respectively. Section V summarizes our results, presents the multi-dot generalization of our approach, and various perspectives. Appendix A shows experimental details and supplementary data. Appendix B discusses our theoretical approach. We use a carbon nanotube on which we evaporate a superconducting contact (S) surrounded by two normal metal (N) contacts, visible in Fig. A single dot level coupled to a N reservoir is the most basic configuration for studying the light matter interaction in a mesoscopic circuit. Our device realizes such a situation for V b = 0 due to the absence of subgap Andreev reflections. Figure To understand the behavior of our device, we use the Hamiltonian where H d describes the quantum dot circuit (see appendix B for details), d † σ adds an electron with spin σ in the dot level, â † adds a photon in the cavity and b † p describes a bosonic bath which accounts for the cavity intrinsic linewidth Λ 0 . We assume that cavity photons modulate the chemical potential of the quantum dot with a coupling constant g = eκV rms , with V rms the cavity root mean square voltage and e the electron charge. The dimensionless coupling constant κ depends on the overlap between the electron wavefunction associated with the dot level and the photonic pseudopotential, which is spatially non-uniform The quantum dot charge susceptibility χ(ω) can be cal-culated within the Keldysh formalism as The retarded and advanced Green's functions Ǧr/a of the quantum dot and the lesser self energy Σ< (ω) are defined in Appendix B. The matrix τ = diag(1, -1) describes the structure of the photon/particle coupling in the Nambu (electron/hole) space. Note that this degree of freedom is not necessary for describing the N/dot junction, but we introduce it for a later use in section IV. In the present section, we disregard the S reservoir and use E c = 0 so that the susceptibility χ(ω) can be simplified as Eq. ( Below, we interpret our data by using the exact noninteracting expression (5) of χ(ω), which depends only on two parameters: the tunnel rate Γ N between the dot and N and the temperature T . We obtain a quantitative agreement between the measured (∆φ, ∆A) and the values calculated from the transmission ratio which follows from Eq.( A deeper analysis of the cavity response can be performed by studying the cavity frequency shift ∆ω 0 and cavity linewidth shift ∆Λ 0 , which can be obtained from the experimental signals as 62,63 ∆ω 0 = Λ 0 (A 0 /A) sin(∆φ) and ∆Λ 0 = Λ 0 ((A 0 /A) cos(∆φ) -1) and modeled theoretically from ∆ω 0 + i∆Λ 0 = g 2 χ(ω 0 ). To study the relation between ∆Λ 0 and ∆ω 0 , we define the ratio which can be modeled theoretically as The top panel of Fig. The full gray line in Fig. To illustrate the large variety of regimes achieved with our experiment, we show with crosses the fitted values of θ 0 , calculated from Eqs. ( The remarkable scaling between ∆Λ 0 and (∆ω 0 ) 2 is directly related to the universality of the AC resistance of a quantum dot circuit, which was predicted by M. Büttiker et al. two decades ago The fact that we model the charge susceptibility of the quantum dot circuit with a non-interacting model in spite of Coulomb blockade is non trivial. This approach is useful to understand our data because we are in a deep Coulomb blockade regime (Γ N ≪ E c ) where correlations effects induced by interactions (e.g. Kondo effect) are weak. In this limit, one can expect G and χ to show variations similar to those of the non-interacting case, with only quantitative modifications. In particular, a reduction of the amplitude of the signals is expected, due to the reduction of the dot occupation by Coulomb blockade A common belief is that a fermionic reservoir should necessarily damp cavity photons since it calls for irreversible processes. Is it possible to go against this natural trend? To answer this question, we consider the finite bias voltage regime V b = 0 where our device implements a N/dot/S bi-junction. This can be confirmed from the bi-junction conductance versus V b and the dot gate voltage V g (Fig. We have measured the cavity signals simultaneously with G (Figs. To model the cavity response, we use again Eqs.( Vg (V) 0.7 0.9 0.9 (3), ( not resolvable in our experiment. In contrast, ∆φ and A are calculated to second order in g. We have again used a non-interacting approach to model the dot behavior. This approximation is relevant to understand our data because we are in the deep Coulomb blockade regime and because Andreev reflections (which are very sensitive to interactions) are negligible in the small Γ S limit. Therefore, interactions should only induce quantitative modifications of the dot/lead resonances. Note that a temperature T = 60 mK is optimal to interpret the low bias voltage data of section III, but we need a higher temperature T = 90 mK to interpret the finite bias voltage data of section IV. This may be due to heating effects caused by V b = 0, or to interactions which can modify the dot occupation and thus the amplitude of dot/lead resonances in the out-of-equilibrium regime. Are the G < 0 and ∆A > 0 effects related? In order to answer this question, Fig. It is important to replace the above results in a wider context. Photon-assisted tunneling has been observed for 40 years in SIS junctions N S dot N S dot ω 0 ω 0 FIG. resolvable. More precisely, along lines (1) and (3), the rate of photon absorption/emission (Γ e/a ) by the quantum dot circuit is Γ e/a ≃ 2n ph Λ 0 ∆A/A 0 , with an average photon number n ph ∼ 120 in the cavity We have studied experimentally the behavior of a spindegenerate N/dot/S hybrid structure based on a carbon nanotube, coupled to a microwave cavity with frequency ω 0 . We have observed a large variety of effects depending on the values of the tunnel rates and on the bias voltage applied to the device. For intermediate N/dot tunnel rates Γ N ∼ 2.5ω 0 and equilibrium conditions, the cavity frequency and linewidth shifts follow a scaling relation which is independent of the quantum dot gate voltage. This behavior is related to the universality of the quantum charge relaxation resistance R AC predicted by Büttiker and coworkers Considering the agreement of our theory with experimental data, it is interesting to generalize it to more complex hybrid structures. The versatility of nanofabrication techniques allows to envision a large variety of experiments combining quantum dot circuits and cavities. In practice, nanoconductors can be tunnel-coupled to various types of fermionic reservoirs such as normal metals, superconductors In the linear response limit, the susceptibility χ ij (ω) for orbital indices i, j can be calculated within the Keldysh formalism as 80 Tr Šij (ω) Ǧr (ω) Σ< (ω) Ǧa (ω) (11) with These expressions involve multisite Keldysh Green's functions Ǧr(a) , a lesser self energy Σ< and the electron/photon coupling element τi at site i, which are defined in Appendix VIII D. In principle, the susceptibility χ ij (ω) can be calculated with other techniques than the Keldysh formalism 81,82 . However, one interest of this approach is that it is particularly convenient for describing non equilibrium configurations with multiple quantum dots and multiple reservoirs (normal metals, ferromagnets, and superconductors), as illustrated for instance by Ref. The above formalism could be instrumental for understanding the behavior of complex cavity/nanocircuit hybrid structures. In particular, it is suitable for understanding the interaction between cavity photons and Cooper pair splitters, or topological hybrid nanocircuits. Non-local entanglement and self-adjoint Majorana bound states are intensively sought after in these devices, and new investigation tools such as cavity photons could be instrumental in this quest. More generally, our results show that mesoscopic QED represents a powerful toolbox to investigate quantum charge relaxation, photonassisted tunneling, and all other effects involving tunneling between a discrete level and fermionic reservoirs. This opens many possibilities. For instance, the dynamics of the many body Kondo effect could be explored thanks to circuit QED techniques. Quantum dot circuits could also open new possibilities for the socalled "quantum reservoir engineering" The cavity is a half-wavelength superconducting Nb transmission line resonator, with a bare frequency ω 0 /2π ∼ 6.65 GHz and a quality factor Q ∼ 12800. We measure the cavity transmission b t /b in with a homodynelike detection scheme. To form the quantum dot circuit, we use a carbon nanotube grown by chemical vapor deposition, which is stamped into the cavity to preserve Q 88 . We evaporate on the nanotube two N contacts formed by 70 nm of Pd, and a S contact formed by 4 nm of Pd proximized with 100 nm of Al. The nanotube sections on the left and right of the S contact are coupled to remote DC gates with voltages V L g and V R g (see Fig. The sample is placed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 16 mK. We apply the same bias voltage V b to the two N contacts. We measure the current I in the S contact with a DC measurement, and we use a Lock-In detection to determine the corresponding differential conductance G. For e |V b | > ∆, the current I versus V L g and V R g and the cavity signals correspond to a pattern of parallel lines (see Fig. g to represent the data. In section III, we use level-dependent lever arms α and gate voltage offsets V 0 g to express the gate voltage axis in terms of the energy ε d = α(V g -V 0 g ) of the considered dot level with We first show the effective gate voltage V 0 g and the lever arm α extracted from our experimental data, and the fitting parameters ΓN and g used to model the cavity signals ∆φ and ∆A. We also show, when possible, the value of the N/dot tunnel rate ΓN estimated from the conductance data through the S/dot/N structure for a voltage V b > ∆/e. Each block in the table corresponds to the one shot measurement of a given gate voltage range. The signals ∆φ, ∆A and G were measured simultaneously in each measurement shot. respect to the Fermi energy of the N reservoir (see Table of Fig. In order to demonstrate further the quantitative agreement between our theoretical approach and the data, we present supplementary data together with their theoretical modelling. Figure Near each dot/reservoir resonance, we calibrate the bare cavity linewidth Λ 0 ∼ 2π × 0.26 MHz and the bare cavity transmission amplitude A 0 ∼ 6.1 mV. The average photon number n ph in our measurements is estimated from setup transmission calibration. Assuming a 6dB uncertainty we obtain a lower bound n ph > 20 which ensures the validity of the semiclassical approximation used in our theory (see Appendix B). The agreement between our theory and data also confirms that we remain in the linear response regime invoked in Appendix B. Otherwise, the width of the resonances in the cavity response would not match with the theory 87 . The parameters V 0 g , α, Γ N and g for the 12 resonances presented in Figs. Since we are in the regime Γ N ≫ Γ S , we could expect that, for each dot orbital considered in section III, a fit of the N/dot conductance peak for a bias voltage V b > ∆/e should give the value of the N/dot tunnel rate. Then, the only remaining fitting parameter for ∆φ and ∆A should be g. Indeed, for the 6 upper resonances in Fig. To model the behavior of our setup, we use the total Hamiltonian (1) of the main text, with To account for the broadening of the BCS peaks in the density of states of S, we use an auxiliary reservoir n whose states can be populated by the operators bn † kk ′ σ . For simplicity, each level kσ of S is coupled to an independent set kk ′ σ of levels in n. We assume that a bias voltage V b is applied to the N contact whereas the S contact is grounded. For simplicity, we disregard Coulomb interactions in the whole Appendix B. Throughout this paper, we use = 1 and define the quantities Γ N , Γ S , Γ n , ε d , ω 0 , ω RF , ∆ω 0 , ∆Λ 0 and g as pulsations. The 2-port transmission of the cavity can be calculated with the input-output formalism for microwave cavities Eq. ( with t 0 < t an initial time before the interaction of the propagating modes with the cavity. The term H RF cor-responds to a classical input signal in port L. Disregarding quantum fluctuations in the input modes of the cavity, Eqs.( with n(t) = If the number of photons in the cavity is larger than ∼ 10, we can use the semiclassical approximation â ≃ â . In the linear response limit and stationnary regime, â has a negligible component in e iωRF t provided the loaded quality factor of the cavity remains good and ω RF ∼ ω 0 . In the framework of Eq.( This expression involves the dot charge susceptibility calculated in the absence of the cavity. Throughout appendix B, we use the quantum mechanics convention for the Fourier transform, i.e. χ(ω) = +∞ -∞ dt χ(t)e iωt . Injecting Eq.( For an agreement with the experimental data, one has to keep in mind that microwave equipment uses the electrical engineering Fourier transform convention, which is complex conjugated to the usual quantum mechanics convention. Hence, combining Eqs.( Using the time-dependent Keldysh formalism with G ω = -i(ω + i Γn 2 )/D ω , F ω = i∆/D ω and The parameter Γ n is often omitted (see for instance Refs. In the case V b = 0 and Γ S ≪ Γ N , ∆ the effect of the superconducting contact can be disregarded i.e. Γ S = 0. In this limit, Eq.(3) leads to for T = 0 and Eq.( For completeness, we mention that the DC current through the spin-degenerate quantum dot can be calculated for g = 0 as This expression includes quasiparticle tunneling as well as Andreev processes. With our non-interacting approach, when Γ S increases, subgap Andreev processes appear much more quickly than what is expected in the Coulomb blockade regime, because Coulomb interactions forbid 2e charge fluctuations necessary for Andreev reflections One can generalize the approach of Appendices VIII B and VIII C to geometries with several quantum dots/sites or several orbitals, denoted with an index i. In the case where each discrete level i ∈ [1, N ] of the nanocircuit is shifted by the cavity field â + â † with a constant g i , a semiclassical linear-response description leads to Eqs. (10), (11), and (12) of the main text. These equations involve generalized advanced and retarded Greens functions Ǧa/r (ω) which enclose N × N site/orbital subblocks. The element Ǧa/r ij (ω) has a Nambu structure: with G a/r A,B scalar Greens functions defined in Appendix B, and Σ< the lesser self energy of the discrete levels. Above d † iσ creates an electron with spin σ in the orbital level i. The matrix τi is a diagonal matrix which corresponds to τ in the orbital block (i, i) and is zero otherwise. Note that our formalism assumes that the cavity electric field shifts only the discrete energy levels i. This can be obtained by using AC top gates to reinforce the coupling between cavity photons and the quantum dot. If one uses a different fabrication technology with e.g. remote AC gates, it can be necessary to assume that the cavity field also shifts by a different amount the potentials of the different reservoirs coupled to the dot. In such a case, one can obtain supplementary effects like for instance a direct influence of the quantum dot circuit conductance on the cavity linewidth shift 