Here we report the discovery of superconductivity in multiple phases of the compressed GeSb2Te4 (GST) phase change memory alloy, which has attracted considerable attention for the last decade due to its unusual physical properties with many potential applications. Superconductivity is observed through electrical transport measurements, both for the amorphous (a-GST) and for the crystalline (c-GST) phases. The superconducting critical temperature, TC, continuously increases with the applied pressure reaching a maximum Tc =6K at P=20 GPa for a-GST, whereas the critical temperature of the cubic phase reaches a maximum Tc =8 K at 30 GPa. This new material system, exhibiting a superconductor-insulator quantum phase transition (SIT) has an advantage over disordered metals since it has a continuous control of the crystal structure and the electronic properties using pressure as an external stimulus, which was lacking in SIT studies until today. In conventional metals and alloys coulomb interactions are screened by the conducting electrons but an attraction between electrons due to the electron-phonon interaction results in Superconductivity, which appears at a critical temperature Tc determined by the Debye frequency and the electron-phonon coupling constant. A system where the crystal structure can be tuned and the material can undergo a transition from a metallic to an insulating state by applying an external stimulus can therefore become a laboratory for studying fundamental questions about superconductivity. GeSb2Te4 (GST) is a phase change material whose unusual physical properties The dramatic drop in resistance for a-GST sample is corroborated with the corresponding change of the mechanism of conductivity. For low pressures, below 5 GPa the variation of the resistance versus temperature indicates that the a-GST is an Anderson insulator with a typical transition from a simply activated to Mott variable range hopping mechanism of the electronic transport. (For more information see supplementary material, supplementary Fig. In Fig. , taking TR CR =7 K for bcc-GST, we find, vv ff ≈ 3 • 10 5 nn/ss . Additional current-voltage measurements can be found in the supplementary information, supplementary Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated superconductivity in both amorphous and a few crystalline phases of GeSb2Te4 compound with the maximum transition temperature of Tc=8 K at a pressure of 30 GPa. The different superconducting transitions are well correlated with the observed structural transitions. We believe that in addition to being a phase change material, GST becomes a laboratory for studying superconductor-to-insulator transitions with the pressure being an external tuning parameter. It also provides a unique opportunity to correlate the quantum phase transition with crystallographic transformations. E. Greenberg 1 † , B. Hen 1 † , Samar Layek 