The symmetry of the superconducting order parameter in quasi-two-dimensional BEDT-TTF organic superconductors is a subject of ongoing debate. We report ab initio density functional theory calculations for a number of organic superconductors containing κ-type layers. Using projective Wannier functions we derive parameters of a common low-energy Hamiltonian based on individual BEDT-TTF molecular orbitals. In a random phase approximation spin-fluctuation approach we investigate the evolution of the superconducting pairing symmetry within this model and point out a phase-transition between extended s + d x 2 -y 2 and dxy symmetry. We discuss the origin of the mixed order parameter and the relation between the realistic molecule description and the widely used dimer approximation. Based on our ab initio calculations we position the investigated materials in the obtained molecule model phase diagram and simulate scanning tunneling spectroscopy experiments for selected cases. Our calculations show that many κ-type materials lie close to the phase transition line between the two pairing symmetry types found in our calculation, possibly explaining the multitude of contradictory experiments in this field. Quasi-two-dimensional organic charge transfer salts of bis-ethylenedithio-tetrathiafulvalene molecules, abbreviated BEDT-TTF or ET, have attracted much interest due to their rich phase diagrams 1,2 . Among these materials, the family of κ-(ET) 2 X salts, where κ refers to a specific arrangement of the ET molecules and X corresponds to a monovalent anion, stands out due to the realization of fascinating states of matter like Mott insulator, unconventional superconductor or spin-liquid 1-6 . Especially the immediate vicinity of the superconducting phase to an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator suggests a deeper connection between two-dimensional organics and high-temperature cuprate superconductors Although superconducting κ-type charge transfer salts have been investigated, for instance, in studies of specific heat In theoretical approaches, the κ-(ET) 2 X family of materials is often described by a half-filled Hubbard model of (ET) 2 dimers on the anisotropic triangular lattice Although the triangular lattice Hubbard model has been remarkably successful in explaining the overall phase diagram 1, We use ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations within an all-electron full-potential local orbital (FPLO) In contrast to the customary dimer approximation, we model the κ-(ET) + 2 layer taking into account each individual ET molecule as a lattice site (see Fig. In the following model investigation, we only keep the four largest in-plane hopping elements (t 1 ,t 2 ,t 3 ,t 4 ) between ET molecules [see Fig. Alternatively, because ET molecules in κ-type arrangement are quite strongly dimerized, it is popular to approximate the κ-(ET) + 2 layer by dimers on an anisotropic triangular lattice, integrating out the intra-dimer degrees of freedom. The parameters of this dimer model can be calculated directly from the molecule model using geometric formulas By convention the dimer approximation uses the crystallographic unit cell containing two dimers [see Fig. The two-band dimer model can be unfolded to a oneband model by transforming to a unit cell of half the size and rotated by 45 degrees. The so-obtained model is directly related to the square lattice Hubbard model, but with an additional coupling along one of the diagonals. Results obtained in the one-band model are therefore rotated by 45 degrees with respect to the physical Brillouin zone of organic charge transfer salts, so that e.g. different d-wave order parameters exchange their designation when going from one to the other Brillouin zone (see Fig. An overview of unit cell and hopping paths for molecule and dimer model is shown in Fig. In κ-(ET) 2 X materials there is strong evidence for antiferromagnetic spin-fluctuations The low-energy Hamiltonian is given by the kinetic part H 0 , derived with the Wannier function method described above, and the intra-orbital Hubbard interaction H int . Here, σ represents the spin and n iσ = c † iσ c iσ . The sum over i runs over all ET sites in the unit cell. The interaction strength U is treated as a parameter. Note that the Coulomb repulsion on a dimer and the Coulomb repulsion on a molecule are not identical. Especially the role of intermolecular Coulomb repulsion is currently unclear. The investigation of interaction terms beyond on-site repulsion is left for future studies. We calculate the non-interacting static susceptibility χ 0 , where matrix elements a l μ ( k) resulting from the diagonalization of the initial Hamiltonian H 0 connect orbital and band space denoted by indices l and μ respectively. The E μ are the eigenvalues of H 0 and f (E) is the Fermi function. N is the number of sites in the unit cell. ) In our calculation both q and k run over uniform grids spanning the reciprocal unit cell. Temperature enters the calculation through the Fermi functions. The fraction in Eq. 4 becomes problematic in numerical calculations, when the band energies E ν and E μ become degenerate. However, the expression can be rectified using l'Hospital's rule, which we use in practice when the magnitude of the denominator falls below a certain threshold (e.g. 10 -7 eV). Here, β denotes the inverse temperature The static spin-and orbital-susceptibilities (χ s,RPA and χ c,RPA ) are constructed in an RPA framework. Since the interaction term defined in Eq. 3 is local and we have only one orbital per lattice site, we can restrict the calculation to the diagonal elements of the susceptibility and use scalar equations for the RPA-enhanced susceptibilities. Here, χ L with L = {llll} denotes the diagonal element of the susceptibility tensor associated with an ET site indexed by l. Note that this formulation allows us to treat multiple inequivalent ET sites in the unit cell, keeping the individual q-dependence of their associated susceptibilities. Therefore, the symmetry of the susceptibility follows the symmetry of the ET layer in the crystallographic unit cell, which is important for checking the simplified four-parameter model against ab initio Hamiltonians, which can have monoclinic, as e.g. in κ-(ET) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 , or even triclinic symmetry, as in κ-α 1 -(ET) 2 Ag(CF 3 ) 4 (TCE). The total spin susceptibility is given by the sum over all site-resolved contributions: The pairing vertex in orbital space for the spin-singlet channel can be calculated using the fluctuation exchange approximation In the pairing vertex, the momenta k and k are restricted to the Fermi surface. As vectors k -k do not necessarily lie on the grid used in the calculation of the susceptibility χ 0 ( q), we interpolate the grid data linearly. The pairing vertex in orbital space is transformed into band space using the matrix elements a l μ ( k): ) Finally, we solve the linearized gap equation by performing an eigendecomposition on the kernel and obtain the dimensionless pairing strength λ i and the symmetry function The integration runs over the discretized Fermi surface and v F ( k) is the magnitude of the Fermi velocity. For the computations presented in this paper, we evaluated the susceptibility χ 0 ( q) using 50×50 point grids for q and the integrated-out variable k (see Eq. 4). The inverse temperature in the susceptibility calculation is fixed to β = 160/t 1 for the molecule model and β = 60/t for the dimer model. These values result in about the same effective temperature. The Fermi surface is determined by inverting linear interpolants for the band energies on a fine grid. For the models considered here about 250 points on the Fermi surface are sufficient. The Hubbard repulsion parameter U is chosen in all calculations so that the leading eigenvalue in Eq. 10 is λ = 0.99 ± 0.001. For most combinations of input parameters this leads to a clear separation of the leading and the first subleading eigenvalue. The pairing symmetries corresponding to the leading and sub-leading eigenvalues do not change as a function of U . The central quantity measured in the scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) experiments on superconductors is the local density of states (DOS) in the superconducting phase. Here we start from the standard Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory for isotropic s-wave superconductors. A simple approximate extension allows us to treat realistic Fermi surfaces and unconventional pairing symmetries derived from the ab initio calculations combined with RPA spin-fluctuation theory as presented above. To derive an approximation for the DOS of a superconductor, we start with the Hamiltonian for Cooper pairs with vanishing total momentum The interaction can be treated in mean field theory (δ(c , where terms quadratic in δ are neglected. The resulting Hamiltonian can be diagonalized using the Bogoliubov-Valatin transformation which introduces quasiparticle creation and annihilation operators γ † kσ and γ kσ . The quasiparticle excitation energies are given as The BCS Hamiltonian can be rewritten in terms of the quasiparticle creation and annihilation operators: The excitation spectrum of the quasiparticles E k is gapped and defined only for positive energies. The density of states of quasiparticles in an isotropic s-wave superconductor can be calculated from the normal state The previous derivation assumed an isotropic gap and an energy dispersion of free electrons to identify the normal state DOS ρ 0 . For realistic electronic structure and anisotropic gap ∆ k this factorization of contributions is not easily possible due to the non-trivial momentum dependence of both functions: However, in a widely used ansatz We introduce in this expression a finite quasiparticle lifetime In this form, the connection to the ab initio and RPA spin-fluctuation calculations is easily obtained: the vectors k in Eq. 16 all lie on the Fermi surface determined from the ab initio derived tight-binding model and the gap ∆( k) on the Fermi surface can be substituted by the symmetry function g i ( k) extracted from RPA (Eq. 10). Note that the overall energy scale of the superconducting gap is not included in g i ( k) because our formalism neglects the electronic self-energy and lacks a selfconsistency condition. We checked that our approximation agrees well with a direct calculation of the quasiparticle spectrum based on Eq. 12, which is numerically more costly. The quasiparticle DOS ρ qp (E) corresponds to the local density of states (LDOS) measured in STS experiments. For a direct comparison, thermal smearing and additional effects such as electronic disorder might have to be taken into account Using ab initio density functional theory calculations and subsequent Wannier downfolding we determine the parameter sets (t 1 ,t 2 ,t 3 ,t 4 ) corresponding to superconducting κ-(ET) 2 X materials with anions Br}, as well as polymorphs κ-α 1 -(ET) 2 Ag(CF 3 ) 4 (TCE) and κ-α 2 -(ET) 2 Ag(CF 3 ) 4 (TCE), which also contain chargeordered insulating α -type layers. The calculated parameters are listed in Table I. In the case of (ET) 2 Ag(CF 3 ) 4 (TCE) polymorphs (TCE abbreviates 1,1,2-trichloroethane) we rely on a previous ab initio calculation with identical setup We observe that all materials fall into a narrow region of parameters: t 1 ∈ [165,190] We sorted the materials according to their superconducting transition temperature T c , but we found no correlation of T c with either t 1 , t 2 , t 3 or t 4 . The ratios t 2 /t 1 , t 3 /t 1 or t 4 /t 1 are also not obviously connected to T c . First, we apply the RPA spin-fluctuation formalism to the dimer model in the range t /t ∈ [0,1]. We evaluate the superconducting order parameter in fine steps of t /t and compare the leading eigenfunctions. In all cases we find that a d xy -state is the leading pairing symmetry. Relating the dimer model back to the one-band model explained in the methods section, the d xy -state we find is identical to the d x 2 -y 2 -state of the square lattice Hubbard model after unfolding the Brillouin zone (see Fig. An early theoretical study of the antiferromagnetic phase of κ-type materials concluded that the two molecules within a dimer carry the same spin and that the spins are flipped between neighboring dimers We would also like to note that the authors of Ref. 18, referring to the physical Brillouin zone, invoked a d xy superconducting symmetry close to insulating patches and a d x 2 -y 2 state in the bulk to explain the findings of their STS study on deuterated κ-(ET) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Br. As the antiferromagnetic insulating state is dimerized (see Ref. 22), the dimer approximation naturally applies and gives a d xy order parameter in accordance with the experimental observation. What remains to be answered in an approach beyond the dimer model, as presented in the next sections, is why the superconducting order parameter of the bulk is d x 2 -y 2 . The obvious step for going beyond the dimer model is to use the original crystal lattice, i.e. the molecule model explained above (see Fig. The degree of dimerization obviously decides whether the dimer approximation applies to a material or not. Its influence on the superconducting pairing was quantified by Kuroki et al., who found a transition to a d x 2 -y 2 state in the physical Brillouin zone at low dimerization (see Ref. 47). Less obvious is how this d x 2 -y 2 state emerges from the underlying hopping structure and how important the anisotropy between t 2 and t 4 is for the pairing state. To investigate these issues, we construct a series of molecule models with fixed value of t 3 /t 1 = 0.333 and vary the ratio t 4 /t 2 in the range [0,1] (for the values realized in real materials see Table In Fig. As an example we show in Fig. These peak shifts in the spin susceptibility are reflected in the pairing symmetry: the gap maxima of different sign in the d xy -symmetry are separated by a wave-vector q 1 , while q 2 is responsible for the sign change between the upper and lower half of the elliptic Fermi surface. Furthermore, q 2 enforces an enlarged nodal region close to (±π, 0), since it would otherwise connect parts of the Fermi surface with the same sign of the gap. In the intermediate region of t 4 /t 2 , q 2 connects the 1D parts of the Fermi surface, where it induces an additional set of nodes. The large gap on the elliptic part of the Fermi surface is connected to the 1D sheets by q 1 . The shift of the vertical lines in the susceptibility, which widen towards k x ≈ ±π/2, merely reflect the changing shape of the Fermi surface. For t 4 t 2 the additional set of nodes on the 1D sheets vanishes, because they are no longer connected by q 2 , which now instead points from 1D sheet to the elliptic parts just like q 1 . This consideration shows that the pairing-symmetry transition in the molecule model is driven by a peculiar competition between q 1 and q 2 nesting vectors. Now we connect the structure of the susceptibility and the superconducting pairing to the underlying lattice model. The feature at q 1 is obviously connected to the t 3 hopping parameter, since it is the only hopping exclusively in x-direction (compare Fig. Rotated into the Brillouin zone of κ-type materials, gap functions f dxy and f s2 are to be expected from antiferro- magnetic exchange along square-like bonds (t 2 , t 4 ), while f s1 and f d x 2 -y 2 correspond to exchange paths along diagonal bonds (t 3 ), see Fig. For the d xy -state we find c dxy = 1 and all other contributions zero, i.e. except for the not well reproduced extended nodal region close to (±π, 0) the dimer model and the molecule model at t 4 /t 2 < ∼ 1 are dominated by the square-lattice physics of t and t 2 , t 4 respectively. For the d x 2 -y 2 -like solution at t 4 t 2 we find negligible contributions from f s1 and f dxy , dominant f s2 and sub-dominant f d x 2 -y 2 . For increasing t 4 /t 2 the ratio of coefficients c d x 2 -y 2 /c s2 decreases, i.e. the square-lattice physics becomes dominant when the asymmetry between t 2 and t 4 is removed. Using the symmetry functions f i , all details of the superconducting gap in the d x 2 -y 2 -like state including the additional nodes can be reproduced by Eq. 18. Our findings provide a clear picture of the pairing competition in the molecule model: in the realistic region of parameters, where the dimerization measured by t 1 /max(t 2 , t 3 , t 4 ) and the anisotropy of t 2 and t 4 are finite, the competition of square-like (t 2 , t 4 ) and diagonal (t 3 ) hopping realizes a unique linear combination of functions f d x 2 -y 2 and f s2 as the leading pairing symmetry. We refer to this linear combination as s ± + d x 2 -y 2 , or extended s + d x 2 -y 2 . The s-wave contribution is equivalent to the s ± pairing state believed to be realized in iron-based superconductors (see e.g. Ref. 76) and has been overlooked entirely in the literature on quasi-twodimensional organic charge transfer salts. When the lattice becomes more square-like (t 4 < ∼ t 2 ), i.e. the molecule model approaches the dimer limit, the d xy -symmetry known from the dimer model takes over. In other words, in the context of realistic modelling of κ-type materials, the d xy symmetry found in the dimer model (d x 2 -y 2 in the unfolded one-band model) is mostly an artifact of the underlying approximation to the real lattice structure (Eq. 2). Finally, we checked our results obtained with the four parameter molecule model against the original hopping structure obtained from projective Wannier functions, which includes longer range processes. As expected, the differences induced by the distance cutoff and parameter averaging are negligible. To complete our study of the pairing symmetry competition, we investigated the leading pairing symmetry of the molecule model as a function of t 2 /t 1 , t 3 /t 1 and t 4 /t 1 in the range of parameters realized in actual superconducting κ-type materials. In Fig. while the rest of the phase diagram shows a s ± + d x 2 -y 2 state. The consecutively numbered symbols in Fig. At low t 2 /t 1 the phase boundary is almost horizontal, i.e. independent of the precise value of t 2 /t 1 . For larger values of t 2 /t 1 the model becomes more asymmetric with respect to t 2 and t 4 and a smaller diagonal coupling t 3 is sufficient to drive the system into the s ± + d x 2 -y 2 state. The size of the d xy -symmetric region is obviously determined by the value of t 4 /t 1 as explained in the previous section. In the numerical calculations we observed that the leading two pairing symmetries are almost degenerate in a broad parameter region. This is to be expected, because the s ± + d x 2 -y 2 state emerges precisely as a compromise between two different nesting vectors, of which Finally, based on our parameter estimates, all materials investigated lie in the s ± + d When materials are close to the phase transition line, small changes of the hopping parameters might drive them into the d xy state, which is always present as a sub-dominant pairing symmetry. For such local changes of parameters, for instance lattice defects In Ref. 22 a square lattice-like antiferromagnetic order was found for the insulating state of κ-type materials. Therefore, we expect significant competition between antiferromagnetism and d xy -symmetric superconductivity, while the s + d x 2 -y 2 -symmetric state is realized farther away from the magnetically ordered insulating phase. Within this picture, recent results by Oka et al. At this point we would like to point out that most experimental studies assume a four-node d-wave order parameter upon data analysis, which excludes from the start the detection of the s ± -component we found. In particular, the realization of the s ± + d x 2 -y 2 state with eight nodes which lie along the diagonals and close to the crystallographic axes, may explain the considerable disagreement in the experimental literature regarding the node positions. Most transport experiments on κ-(ET) 2 X materials have proven to be difficult to interpret and could not resolve the symmetry of the superconducting pairing so far. However, recent improvements in sample preparation for low-temperature scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) experiments have allowed for progress towards a resolution of the superconducting order parameter In the d xy case we ignore the small anisotropy found in the RPA calculation. In Fig. The magnitude of the gap versus the angle is distributed anisotropically on the Fermi surface [Fig. We emphasize that our predictions are to be taken as qualitative, not quantitative, regarding the overall energy scale and the relative gap sizes. The main features explained above are however robust. The detection of such low-energy structures is certainly not an easy task, but we believe it will be possible with state-of-the-art equipment and proper sample preparation. In summary, we investigated the superconducting state of κ-(ET) 2 X charge transfer salts in an individual molecule model based on a combination of ab initio density functional theory and random phase approximation spin-fluctuation calculations. We obtained kinetic parameters of the molecule Hamiltonian for eight superconducting κ-type materials using projective Wannier functions. We found that the superconducting order parameter in a realistic molecule model is different from the one in the usual dimer approximated Hamiltonian for all investigated materials. The superconducting phase diagram of the molecule description is dominated by an extended s + d x 2 -y 2 -symmetry that emerges from the competition between square-like and diagonal hopping processes on the original κ-type lattice, while the physics of the dimer model is reproduced also for finite dimerization in the limit of isotropic parameters t 4 < ∼ t 2 . The anisotropy of square-like hoppings t 2 and t 4 is however not negligible in real materials. For precisely this reason, the dimer approximation does not apply to superconducting κ-(ET) 2 X charge transfer salts. It overestimates the importance of square lattice physics through the averaging contained in the geometric formulas, which are exact only in the limit of infinite dimerization. Furthermore, the s ± + d x 2 -y 2 -state, which features nodes both along the crystallographic axes and the Brillouin zone diagonals, might explain the multitude of contradictory experimental results regarding the nodal positions. We also simulated tunneling spectroscopy experiments for all nodal configurations encountered in our phase diagram. The difference between those pairing states unfortunately manifests itself only at very low energies, making experimental detection difficult, but not impossible. Based on the ab initio calculated model parameters we found that the well-studied material κ-(ET) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ]Br is situated near the phase transition line between s ± +d x 2 -y 2 and d xy superconducting states, which supports the interpretation of recent scanning tunneling spectroscopy experiments. A question unanswered by our study is why superconducting transition temperatures among quasi-twodimensional charge transfer salts can differ by more than a factor of four. As there is no obvious connection between T c and the parameters of the kinetic Hamiltonian, a method that can qualitatively reproduce the ordering of transition temperatures in real materials is required to elucidate this issue. In conclusion we believe that a significant part of the physics in quasi-two-dimensional charge transfer salts has unfortunately been overlooked so far, because theory has adhered to the dimer model for too long and too many experiments have been interpreted based on a dichotomy of d xy and d x 2 -y 2 states, which is inappropriate for the orthorhombic lattice realized in κ-(ET) 2 X materials. It is an interesting open question, whether the magnetic, insulating and possible quantum spin-liquid states known from the anisotropic triangular lattice are also present in the molecule model. The investigation of these phases is left for future studies. N. Toyota, M. Lang, and J. Müller, Low-Dimensional Molecular Metals, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg (2007). B. J. Powell, R. H. McKenzie, Strong electronic correlations in superconducting organic charge transfer salts, J.