We study lattice superconductors such as attractive Hubbard models. As is well known, Bloch's theorem asserts absence of persistent current in ground states and equilibrium states for general fermion systems. While the statement of the theorem is true, we can show that the theorem cannot exclude possibility of a surface persistent current. Such a current can be stabilized by boundary magnetic fields which do not penetrate into the bulk region of a superconductor, provided emergence of massive photons, i.e., Meissner effect. Therefore, we can expect that a surface persistent current is realized for a ground/equilibrium state in the sense of stability against local perturbations. We also apply Elitzur's theorem to superconductors at finite temperatures. As a result, we prove absence of symmetry breaking of the global U(1) phase of electrons for almost all gauge fields. These observations suggest that the nature of superconductivity is the emergence of massive photons rather than the symmetry breaking of the U(1) phase of electrons. Superconductivity still has some mysteries to solve although it has been one of the central issues in condensed matter physics. Bloch's theorem If the superconducting state which carries the persistent current in the experiments is neither a ground state nor a thermal equilibrium state, then the state must be an excited state or a nonequilibrium state which has a very long lifetime. Such a state is often said to be metastable In the present paper, we consider possibility of a ground/equilibrium state which carries a persistent current, and show that Bloch's theorem cannot exclude such a state if the persistent current is localized near the surface of the sample with boundary magnetic fields which are stabilized by Meissner effect. Therefore, we can expect that a surface persistent current is realized for a ground/equilibrium state in the sense of stability against local perturbations. Such a current carrying state has a long lifetime even in a finite size system, because a transition from the corresponding state to other states costs larger and larger energy as the system size increases. In order to explain Meissner effect in the above argument, one has to deal with the interactions between electrons and electro-magnetic fields. As mentioned above, however, Elitzur's theorem These observations in the present paper strongly suggest that the nature of superconductivity is the emergence of massive photons rather than the symmetry breaking of the U(1) phase of electrons. In fact, it is known that, in Higgs models coupled with gauge fields The present paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 2, we give the precise definition of the models which we consider, and examine Bloch's theorem in a mathematically rigorous manner. As a result, we show that Bloch's theorem cannot exclude the possibility of surface persistent current. In Sec. 3, we apply Elitzur's theorem to two situations, the present models with annealed and quenched gauge fields. In both cases, we prove absence of the U(1) symmetry breaking. In this section, we show that Bloch's theorem does not exclude possibility of a surface current in a ground/equilibrium state, by examining the proof in a mathematically rigorous manner. Consider a d-dimensional connected graph G := (Λ, B), where Λ is a set of lattice sites and B is a set of bonds, i.e., pairs of lattice sites. The graph-theoretic distance, dist(x, y), between two lattice sites x, y is defined as the minimum number of bonds in B that one needs to connect x and y. We consider a tight-binding model on the lattice Λ. The Hamiltonian H Λ is given by ) where c † x,σ , c x,σ are, respectively, the creation and annihilation fermion operators at the site x ∈ Λ with the internal degree of freedom, σ, such as spin or orbital; the hopping amplitudes t α,β x,y are complex numbers which satisfy the Hermitian conditions, x,y * , and the coupling constants W x 1 ,σ 1 ;x 2 ,σ 2 ;...;x I ,σ I of the interactions are real numbers. As usual, we have written n x,σ = c † x,σ c x,σ for the number operators of the fermion with σ at the site x. We assume that both of the hopping amplitudes and the interactions are of finite range in the sense of the graph-theoretic distance, and assume that all of the strengths are uniformly bounded as t β,α y,x ≤ t 0 and |W x 1 ,σ 1 ;x 2 ,σ 2 ;...;x I ,σ I | ≤ W 0 with some positive constants, t 0 and W 0 . Consider a cylindrical region Ω which is written a disjoint union of (d -1)-dimensional discs D j with a common radius R as with a large positive integer L. Namely, the region Ω consists of L-layers of the segments D j of the (d-1)-dimensional hyperplanes. We assume that the distance between two discs D i and D j satisfies dist(D i , D j ) = |i -j| for i, j = 1, 2, . . . , L. In order to define the current operator on the region Ω, we consider a larger region Ω which is written a disjoint union of large discs Dj as where L is a large positive integer satisfying L > L. We choose the discs Dj so that the following conditions satisfy: where the boundary ∂ Ω of the region Ω is given by and r 0 is the maximum hopping range, i.e., r 0 := max{dist(x, y) | t α,β x,y = 0}. Clearly, one has Ω ⊂ Ω. Let φ ∈ l 2 (Λ, C M ) be a wavepacket of single fermion, where C M is the space of the internal degree of freedom with a finite dimension M. We assume that the support of the wavepacket φ is contained in the region Ω. We define the position operator X as (Xφ)(x) = jφ(x) for x ∈ Dj . We introduce the step functions, with the kink Dj , where we have written Then, the position operator X is written as in terms of the step functions. We write H Ω for the single-fermion Hamiltonian on the region Ω. The current operator is given by From the above expression of the position operator X, we have J (1) for the above wavepacket φ. Since the summand in the right-hand side is nothing but the current density operator across the disc Dj , we write for the operator. In order to obtain the corresponding current density operator for many fermions, we introduce the step function as by using the number operators n x,σ of fermions. In consequence, the current density operator across the disc Dj for many fermions is written for the wavefunction Φ which is supported by the region Ω, where the Hamiltonian H Ω is the restriction of the Hamiltonian H Λ of (2.1) to the region Ω. By using the expression (2.1) of the Hamiltonian H Λ , we obtain the explicit form of the operator J j as Clearly, the above summand is a local current density. Relying on this expression, we define the current operator J Ω per volume on the region Ω as where | • • • | stands for the number of the elements in the set, and we have written In order to realize persistent current in the ground state of the present model, we consider a toroidal geometry for the graph as an example. We impose a boundary condition which mimics the plus boundary condition for ferromagnetic Ising models leading to the symmetry breaking phases with plus spontaneous magnetization. To be specific, we apply a magnetic field tangential to the surface ∂Λ of the toroidal lattice Λ so that surface current perpendicular to the magnetic field can appear along the boundary of the toroid. Clearly, the total number operator σ x∈Λ n x,σ of the fermions commutes with the Hamiltonian H Λ . We consider the N-fermion ground state Φ (N ) Λ,0 of the Hamiltonian H Λ with the above boundary condition. The ground-state expectation is given by with the norm Φ (N ) Λ,0 = 1. We take the infinite-volume limit |Λ i | → ∞ by using the sequence of the lattice Λ i and of the total number N i of the fermions so that the density Λ i /N i of the fermions converges to a positive constant ρ as i → +∞, and that the expectation value ω (N ) Λ,0 (a) converges to the expectation value ω 0 (a) with respect to the infinite-volume ground state ω 0 for all the local observables a which we consider. The statement of Bloch's theorem is as follows: Theorem 2.1 The expectation value of the current operator J Ω per volume is vanishing for the infinite-volume ground state ω 0 , i.e., where Ω is the cylindrical region with length L and radius R. Remark: (i) For the two or higher dimensional systems, the order of the double limit in (2.4) is not interchangeable. In fact, for a fixed R, the upper bound of the expectation value in the limit L ր ∞ becomes infinity and meaningless in the proof below. If we want to measure the strength of surface current which is localized near the surface of the sample, we must take R to be finite so that the support Ω of the current operator J Ω is localized near the surface. Then, Bloch's theorem tells us absolutely nothing about the surface current. (ii) Clearly, in one dimensional systems, the surface current itself is meaningless, and the net current along the direction of the chain always vanishes, in contrast to higher dimensional systems. This is a consequence of lack of a mechanism which stabilizes the current against local perturbations. In other words, any current is destroyed by local perturbations in one dimension. (iii) The boundary magnetic fields are expected to be realized by Meissner effect, and once it is generated, the surface current remains stable in a ground states, i.e., a persistent current. (iv) The extension of the statement of Bloch's theorem to the systems at finite temperatures is straightforward by relying on "passivity" which is a stability property of thermal equilibrium states. More precisely, an infinite-volume state ω is said to be passive if for any local unitary operator U, where H is the Hamiltonian. As is well known, all of thermal equilibrium states are passive Proof: We introduce two local unitary transformations, where Using these local transformations, we set Since these two states are a local perturbation for the ground state, we have By using these relations and the expression (2.1) of the Hamiltonian, one has (U The right-hand side can be decomposed into three parts as (U where (2) where we have used (2.6) and (2.7). Let us first estimate the second term ∆H ∂Ω . For this purpose, we decompose Ω into three parts as Using this decomposition, the operator ∆H ∂Ω further decompose into three parts as ∆H where ∆H and ∆H We assume that all of the discs D j satisfy ), where R is the radius of the discs. Then, the volume |Ω| of the region Ω satisfies |Ω| = O(R d-1 × L). We also assume that the area of the side of the cylindrical region Ω satisfies Since the hopping range is of finite, we have from the definition (2.6) of θ ± (x). In the same way, one has Combining these, we obtain (2.10) In the same way, we also have Next, consider ∆H Ω . From (2.6) and (2.7), one has Write k = l(y)l(x) for the factor in the summand in the right-hand side. In the expression (2.3) of the current J Ω on the region Ω, the nonvanishing contributions for x, y satisfying k = l(y)l(x) appear k times in the sums. From these observations, we have 1 2π Combining this, (2.8), (2.9), (2.10) and (2.11), we obtain where ω 0 is the infinite-volume ground state, and the double limit is taken so that L/R → 0 in the limit. This implies the vanishing of the bulk persistent current, i.e., (2.4). In this section, we extend Elitzur's theorem to fermionic models. Consider the Hamiltonian H Λ of (2.1) on a d-dimensional finite lattice Λ ⊂ Z d . For simplicity, we assume that the Hamiltonian H Λ contains only the nearest neighbor hopping, and that the fermions have only spin-1/2 as the internal degree of freedom, i.e., we consider usual electrons. In order to take into account the fluctuation of an electromagnetic field, we introduce a U(1) gauge field A as follows: For each nearest neighbor pair x, y of sites x, y ∈ Λ, the gauge field A x,y takes the value A x,y ∈ R mod 2π, and satisfies the conditions, The hopping amplitudes of the Hamiltonian H Λ of (2.1) is replaced with tα,β x,y (A) := t α,β x,y e iAx,y for each nearest neighbor pair x, y of sites. Then, the Hamiltonian of electrons coupled to the gauge field A is given by HΛ (A) := x,y∈Λ α,β tα,β x,y (A)c † x,α c y,β As a local order parameter to detect the U(1) symmetry breaking, we consider the Cooper pair c u,↑ c v,↓ of electrons for fixed two sites u, v, where we assume that the site v is in a neighborhood N u of the site u. The total energy containing the energy of the gauge fields and the terms of the symmetry breaking fields is where N Λ is the total number operator of electrons with the chemical potential μ, i.e., and B p is the magnetic flux through the plaquette p (unit square cell); the Hamiltonian H ext,Λ of the symmetry breaking field is given by the sum of the local order parameters as and the last term in the energy (3.2) is also the Hamiltonian of the symmetry breaking field, Hext,Λ (A) : for the gauge field A. Here, B is the set of the bonds (the nearest neighbor pairs of sites), and we have written A b = A x,x+e i with the unit vector e i in the i-th direction. The three parameters, κ, h and h, are taken to be positive. The expectation value of the Cooper pair at an inverse temperature β is given by where Z Λ (β) is the partition function. In the following, we take the limit κ ↑ ∞ so that all the magnetic flux B p through the plaquette p are vanishing. We stress that our result still holds for a finite κ. But we impose this strong condition because a nonvanishing magnetic flux generally is believed to suppress superconducting states. In the infinite limit κ ↑ ∞, the gauge fixing degree of freedom still remains. Therefore, in order to lift the gauge fixing degree of the freedom, we have introduced the Hamiltonian Hext,Λ (A) of (3.3) which prefers the gauge fixing A b = 0 for all the bonds b. Let us consider the spontaneous magnetization for the Cooper pair in the infinitevolume limit and the zero magnetic field limit. Namely, we define More precisely, the left-hand side denotes all of the accumulation points in the limit. We have: Theorem 3.1 The spontaneous magnetization for the Cooper pair is vanishing in the infinite-volume limit and in the zero magnetic field, i.e., for any inverse temperatures β. Remark: (i) Instead of the Cooper pair amplitude, the statement of Theorem 3.1 holds for any local observable which transforms nontrivially under the local gauge transformations. (ii) Consider the situation without the symmetry breaking fields. But, instead of the symmetry breaking fields, we introduce gauge fixing terms into the Hamiltonian as in Kennedy and King In the same situation for the present lattice fermion systems, we can prove that the twopoint Cooper pair correlations do not show long-range order in spatial dimensions d ≤ 4 except for the Landau gauge. Further, if the corresponding Gribov ambiguity appears, then the two-point correlations vanish at noncoinciding points even in the Landau gauge. We will publish the details elsewhere. Proof: We introduce the unitary transformation with twisting angle θ ∈ R mod 2π at the site u for the Cooper pair c u,↑ c v,↓ as the hopping amplitudes in the Hamiltonian HΛ (A) of (3.1) for electrons change under the transformation as tα,β x,y (A) → tα,β x,y (A ′ ), where A ′ x,y = A x,yθ for x = u and y = u + e i , A ′ y,x = A y,x + θ for x = u and y = ue i , and A ′ x,y = A x,y , otherwise. Therefore, the energy operator of (3.2) is transformed as and ∆ Hext := Hext,Λ (A) -Hext,Λ (A ′ ). Clearly, both of these are local. Then, we have Λ (A ′ ) -h∆H ext -h∆ Hext . Using this unitary transformation and changing the variables in the integral for the expectation value of (3.4), we have where we have written ∆H ext := h∆H ext + h∆ Hext for short. Let O be an observable. Note that where (O 1 , O 2 ) is the Duhamel two-point function for the observables O 1 , O 2 . In order to evaluate the right-hand side of (3.8), let us consider log Tr exp[-βH Using this and the inequality (3.10), ∆N(O) of (3.8) can be estimated as where a and ã are some positive constant. By using ∆N(c u,↑ c v,↓ ) of (3.8) for the right-hand side of (3.7), we obtain From the inequality (3.11), the second term in the right-hand side is estimated as This implies the desired result (3.6). Next, we extend Elitzur's theorem to the present models whose configurations of gauge fields are quenched. For a given gauge fields A, let us consider the Hamiltonian, with the Hamiltonian of the symmetry breaking field, Then, the expectation value is given by where Z Λ (β, A) is the partition function. As an example, we consider the expectation value of the Cooper pair c u,↑ c v,↓ Λ (β, h, A). Here, we have not introduced the Hamiltonian of the symmetry breaking field (3.3) because the term plays no role in the expectation value. The average with respect to the gauge fields A is given by with the probability density, . In the limit κ ր ∞, the zero magnetic field is realized. In the following, we take the limit as in the preceding section. We write Here, we consider all of the accumulation points again. We obtain: Theorem 3.2 Both of the spontaneous magnetization M(β, A) and the long-range order σ(β, A) for the Cooper pair are vanishing for almost all gauge fields A. Remark: (i) Theorem 3.2 does not exclude the possibility that the U(1) symmetry breaking occurs for some particular gauge fixing. As mentioned in Remark (ii) of Theorem 3.1, Kennedy and King Proof: Using the gauge transformation in the same way as in the preceding subsection, we have where the deformed partition function is given by This expectation value can be written as The first and the second terms in the right-hand side can be evaluated in the same way as in (3.11) and (3.10), respectively. In consequence, we obtain with some positive constant a. This implies Note that the global U(1) transformation contains the reversal of the orientation of the external symmetry breaking field. Under this transformation, the free energy is invariant. Combining this fact with the concavity of the free energy, one can show the positivity of the magnetization, i.e., M Λ Λ (β, h, A) ≥ 0 for h ≥ 0. Let ε be a small positive number, and consider the probability that the events satisfying M Λ Λ (β, h, A) ≥ ε occur. Then, Markov's inequality yields where Prob [M(β, h, • • •) ≥ ε] is the probability that the magnetization M(β, h, A) in the infinite-volume limit satisfies M(β, h, A) ≥ ε. This implies that the probability that the spontaneous magnetization M(β, A) is greater than or equal to ε is vanishing. Since the small positive number ε is arbitrary, we obtain that the spontaneous magnetization M(β, A) is vanishing with probability one. In order to show that the long-range order σ(β, A) for the Cooper pair is vanishing, we recall the relation (3.23) In their derivation, they relied on the existence of the thermodynamic limit of the free energy per volume. However, for an inhomogeneous system such as the present system with a fixed configuration of random gauge fields, the thermodynamic limit of the free energy per volume may not be unique. Therefore, we consider all of the accumulation points in the limit, by relying on the boundedness of the free energy per volume. Combining the inequality (3.23) with the vanishing of the spontaneous magnetization M(β, A), we obtain the desired result, i.e., the vanishing of the long-range order with probability one.