We discover a robust coexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetism in an iron arsenide RbEuFe4As4. The new material crystallizes in an intergrowth structure of RbFe2As2 and EuFe2As2, such that the Eu sublattice turns out to be primitive instead of being body-centered in EuFe2As2. The FeAs layers, featured by asymmetric As coordinations, are hole doped due to charge homogenization. Our combined measurements of electrical transport, magnetization and heat capacity unambiguously and consistently indicate bulk superconductivity at 36.5 K in the FeAs layers and ferromagnetism at 15 K in the Eu sublattice. Interestingly, the Eu-spin ferromagnetic ordering belongs to a rare third-order transition, according to the Ehrenfest classification of phase transition. We also identify an additional anomaly at ∼ 5 K, which is possibly associated with the interplay between superconductivity and ferromagnetism. Doped EuFe 2 As 2 superconductors stand out among Fe-based superconductors (FeSCs), because the Eu 2+ local spins (S=7/2) may order ferromagnetically in the superconducting state Nevertheless, there have been some debates on the details of the Eu-spin ordering. In Refs. Local-moment FM and spin-singlet SC are known to be mutually incompatible The crucial factor that leads to Eu local-moment FM should be the interlayer RKKY interaction, since the in-plane RKKY coupling remains ferromagnetic even in the parent compound EuFe 2 As 2 . The interlayer exchange coupling (J ⊥ R ) is simplified to be proportional to cos(2k F r)/r 3 for a large r, where k F is the Fermi wave vector and r denotes the distance between local moments. This means that J ⊥ R can be changed from negative (AFM) to positive (FM) by tuning the k F r value. The AFM-to-FM transition in EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 The above statement suggests an alternative approach to realize the AFM-to-FM transition which may lead to an FM+SC state as well. By constructing a crystal structure in which r ⊥ changes significantly, the sign of J ⊥ R may be altered accordingly. We previously designed a related structure, exemplified as KLaFe 4 As 4 (1144) Very recently, we became aware of the report of AkAeFe 4 As 4 (Ae=Ca, Sr, Ba) superconductors which possess the identical 1144-type structure RbEuFe 4 As 4 polycrystalline samples were prepared via a solid-state reaction method. First, FeAs, EuAs and RbAs were prepared using source materials Rb (99.75%), As (99.999%) and Eu (99.9%) pieces and Fe powder (99.998%). The presynthesized arsenides were then ball milled separately for 10 minutes in a glove box filled with pure Ar (the water and oxygen content is below 1 ppm). Second, stoichiometric mixtures (namely, Rb:Eu:Fe:As=1:1:4:4) of Fe, FeAs, EuAs and RbAs were homogenized, pressed into pellets, and then loaded in an alumina tube-like crucible which was sealed in a Ta tube. The Ta tube was protected in a quartz ampoule filled with Ar gas (∼ 0.6 bar). Third, the sampleloaded ampoule was heated rapidly to 1123-1173 K in a muffle furnace. After holding for 6 hours, the sample was quenched, similar to the approach in synthesizing AkAeFe 4 As 4 Powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out on a PANalytical x-ray diffractometer with a monochromatic Cu-K α1 radiation. The crystal structure was refined by a Rietveld analysis using a RIETAN software The as-prepared sample was characterized by powder XRD. The result shows that most of the reflections can be indexed using a tetragonal lattice, whose unit-cell size (a ∼ 3.89 Å and c ∼ 13.31 Å) is close to other 1144-type compounds Figure Figure Figure Interestingly, there is an anomaly at around 15 K in the superconducting state, featured by a sign change in χ FC at H=10 Oe. At first sight, this behavior resembles the ac magnetic susceptibility (χ ac ) curve of the classical reentrant superconductor ErRh 4 B 4 in which SC disappears when the Er magnetic long-range order sets in In order to further identify the 15-K transition under the superconducting state, we performed isothermal magnetization [M (H)] measurements. As shown in Fig. To further characterize the superconducting and magnetic transitions, we conducted heat capacity measurement for RbEuFe 4 As 4 . From the raw C(T ) data shown in Fig. ) ) has to be ascribed to the Eu-spin magnetism, because electronic and phonon specific heat (C el and C L ) generally do not change with magnetic fields. The external fields force the Eu spins along the field direction, which severely broadens the phase transition, making the C(T ) weight shifts to higher temperatures consequently. Similar effect is also observed in EuFe 2 (As 0.7 P 0.3 ) 2 The C(T )-weight transfer under different magnetic fields is explicitly shown in the C/T plot shown in Fig. Shown in the inset of Fig. Intriguingly, the specific-heat anomaly at T Curie is very different from those of most magnetic orderings (such as those in EuFe 2 As 2 In the present case for RbEuFe 4 As 4 , however, it simply shows a kink instead. We thus plot the derivative of specific heat, as shown in Fig. RbFe 2 As 2 is known to be a 2.6 K superconductor Notably, the T sc value of RbEuFe 4 As 4 is unexpectedly high, which is nearly equal to the maximum T sc of 36.8 K for CsSrFe 4 As 4 in the AkAeFe 4 As 4 series In addition to the robust SC, evidence of Eu FM is also strong and sufficient. The M (H) data show an obvious magnetic hysteresis (with a coersive field of 360 Oe at 2 K) as well as a saturation magnetization (6.5 μ B /Eu) that corresponds to Eu 2+ -spin ferromagnetic alignment. Besides, both the positive paramagnetic Curie temperature and the increase of T Curie with magnetic field support the ferromagnetic transition scanario. Hopefully, future measurements of the anisotropic magnetic properties using single crystal samples will give more informa-tion on the magnetic state. Needless to say, investigations of the Mössbauer spectra, x-ray resonant magnetic scattering and neutron scattering will be definitely helpful to clarity the Eu-spin orientation and other related information. The appearance of Eu FM in RbEuFe 4 As 4 can be explained in terms of modification of J ⊥ R , since J ⊥ R [∝ cos(2k F r)/r 3 ] oscillates and tends to decay with r ⊥ . In RbEuFe 4 As 4 , the interlayer Eu interatomic distance r ⊥ becomes 13.31 Å, which is almost twice as the r ⊥ value in EuFe 2 As 2 (6.657 Å). This may change the sign of J ⊥ R , resulting in an Eu FM. The lowered Curie temperature [about 4 K lower than that of EuFe 2 (As 0.7 P 0.3 ) 2 ] seems to be associated with the decay of J ⊥ R . The weak interlayer magnetic coupling not only accounts for the relatively low Curie temperature, but also justifies the robustness of SC. Additionally, it could be related to the third-order transition observed, because of the enhanced two dimensionality which allows strong magnetic fluctuations above T Curie . Finally, let us discuss how SC and FM compromise in RbEuFe 4 As 4 . There were a few theoretical proposals available on the FM+SC issue decades ago To summarize, we have discovered an iron-based compound RbEuFe 4 As 4 in which an unprecedented coexistence of SC and FM is observed. The new material crystallizes in an intergrowth structure of body-centered RbFe 2 As 2 and EuFe 2 As 2 , which drastically changes the physical properties. The FeAs layers are found to be hole doped by the material itself, presenting a large normalstate electronic specific-heat coefficient (∼ 150 mJ K -2 mol -1 ) and a Pauli spin susceptibility (∼ 0.00178 emu mol -1 ). Bulk superconductivity at T sc = 36.5 K and Euspin ferromagnetism at 15 K are unambiguously demonstrated. The specific-heat jump at T sc is as high as 7.5 J K -1 mol -1 . The Eu-spin ferromagnetism is manifested by a magnetic hysteresis with a 360-Oe coersive field at 2 K, a saturation magnetization of 6.5 μ B /Eu, and a saturation field of ∼ 1.5 kOe at low temperatures. There are two additional novel phenomena observed in RbEuFe 4 As 4 . First, the Eu-spin ferromagnetic transition is of a rare third order, evidenced by the continuity in C(T ) and discontinuity in dC/dT at T Curie . Second, a weak anomaly at about 5 K possibly reflects the interplay between SC and FM. These intriguing observations together with the robust coexistence of SC and FM call for further investigations on the interesting title material. . Crystallographic data of RbEuFe4As4 at room temperature with a = 3.8897(1) Å, c = 13.3146(6) Å and space group P 4/mmm (No. 123).