We study one-dimensional topological superconductivity in the presence of time-reversal symmetry. This phase is characterized by having a bulk gap, while supporting a Kramers' pair of zero-energy Majorana bound states at each of its ends. We present a general simple model which is driven into this topological phase in the presence of repulsive electron-electron interactions. We further propose two experimental setups and show that they realize this model at low energies. The first setup is a narrow two-dimensional topological insulator partially covered by a conventional s-wave superconductor, and the second is a semiconductor wire in proximity to an s-wave superconductor. These systems can therefore be used to realize and probe the time-reversal invariant topological superconducting phase. The effect of interactions is studied using both a mean-field approach and a renormalization group analysis. The pursuit of realizing topological phases in condensed matter systems continues. These phases are generally characterized by having unique surface properties which are dictated by the topological properties of the bulk. The first and most famous example is the quantum Hall effect (QHE) Since then it has been realized that upon invoking symmetries, a rich variety of topological phases can emerge The various topological phases are classified according to the possible symmetries present in a given system One is then prompted to ask: what is the superconducting analog of the topological insulator? This would be the time-reversal invariant topological superconductor (TRITOPS) which belongs to class DIII Class-D TSC is currently a subject of intense study, following the prediction that this phase can be engineered by combining well-understood building blocks such as conventional s-wave superconductors and spin orbitcoupled material In contrast, to the best of our knowledge, no attempts have been made on experimentally realizing the TRI-TOPS phase in low-dimensional systems. Some theoretical works have proposed using unconventional superconductivity in order to realize this phase It was suggested In this paper we adopt a more general perspective of interaction-driven TRITOPS. We consider a general "minimal" model (see Fig. While we consider clean systems in this work, we expect our results to hold also for systems with weak disorder. Namely, we expect the topological phase to survive as long as the mean free time associated with disorder is large compared to the inverse energy gap, similar to the case of the class D topological SC Several studies have examined the effect of repulsive interactions on topological superconductors with broken time-reversal symmetry The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the low-energy minimal model and the conditions for it to be in its non-trivial phase. In Sec. III we examine the two microscopic models mentioned above and show that they are described at low energies by the minimal model. We then study the effect of repulsive interactions in Sec. IV, showing that it drives the lowenergy model into the topological phase. This is done first on a mean-field level in Sec. IV A, and then using a perturbative RG analysis in Sec. IV B. We conclude and discuss our results in Sec. V. Our minimal model is described in the absence of interactions by the following Hamiltonian where R s (L s ) is an annihilation operator of a right (left) moving fermionic mode of spin s. Here, ∆ + and ∆ -are two induced pairing potentials. ∆ + describes pairing between the modes of positive helicity, R ↑ and L ↓ , while ∆ - describes pairing between the modes of negative helicity, L ↑ and R ↓ [59]. Similarly, v ± are the velocities of the modes with positive and negative helicity, respectively. The dispersion of H 0 is shown in Fig. where {σ i } i=x,y,z is the set of Pauli matrices operating in spin space. Requiring that H obeys time-reversal symmetry, THT -1 = H, imposes the constraints that both ∆ + and ∆ -are real. In the absence of inversion symmetry, the Fermi momenta k + F and k - F generally differ from one another (see Fig. The time-reversal operation in Eq. ( where Q = -1 corresponds to the topologically nontrivial phase, having a Kramers' pair of Majorana bound states at each end of the system. For completeness we derive this result in Appendix A using a scattering-matrix approach. It is instructive to write the superconducting part of the Hamiltonian in the following form where ∆ s,t = (∆ + ± ∆ -)/2 are the singlet and triplet pairing potentials respectively. Inserting this in Eq. ( Namely, the topological phase (Q = -1) is obtained when the triplet pairing term exceeds in magnitude the singlet pairing term. For a noninteracting system in proximity to a conventional s-wave SC the system will always be in the topologically trivial phase Before studying in detail the effect of repulsive interactions in the proximitized system, we first present two examples of microscopic models for systems which are described at low energies by the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( In this section we concentrate on two specific examples of proximity-coupled systems where both a singlet and a triplet pairing terms are induced. We then move on to show in Sec. IV that repulsive electron-electron interactions suppress the singlet pairing compared to the triplet pairing, thereby driving the systems to the TRITOPS phase. (b) In the absence of induced superconductivity and tunneling between opposite edges, the low-energy electronic spectrum is described by two pairs of helical edge states, the helicity being opposite for the two edges. (c) If the width of the sample d is of the order of the characteristic correlation length ξQSHI or less, then the opposite edges are coupled (with a coupling constant t), and an energy gap is opened. Such a coupling between the edge modes is necessary in order to have nonzero backscattering interaction, which is crucial for realizing the topological phase (see Sec. IV). We consider a narrow two-dimensional quantum spin Hall insulator (QSHI) in proximity to an s-wave SC A QSHI In the absence of interactions, the two coupled edges are described by the following Hamiltonian where a † ks (b † ks ) creates an electron with momentum k and spin s =↑, ↓ on the lower (upper) edge of the sample. {τ i } i=x,y,z and {λ i } i=x,y,z are sets of Pauli matrices in the particle-hole space and the lower edge-upper edge space, respectively. Here, v is the propagation velocity of the edge modes, t is the coupling constant between the lower and upper edge modes (which results from the finite width of the sample), μ ± δμ are the chemical potentials at the upper and lower edge, respectively, and ∆ ind is the pairing potential induced by the SC on the lower edge of the sample [cf. Fig. We consider the case where, in the absence of proximity, the chemical potential lies inside the upper band [see Fig. with the effective pairing potential Here, c † ks describes electronic modes in the upper band with momentum k and spin s. It is related to the left and right edge modes through where we have used a convention in which s = 1 corresponds to spin ↑, and s = -1 corresponds to spin ↓. Assuming weak pairing where and The velocity of the modes at the Fermi points is given by and the Fermi momenta are given by k ± F = (μv/v ∓δμ)/v (Notice that since the chemical potential is assumed to lie inside the upper band one has μ > |t|). The Hamiltonian of Eq. ( As discussed in Sec. II, the system is in its topological phase when sgn(∆ + ) sgn(∆ -) = -1. Alternatively stated, this occurs when |∆ t | > |∆ s | [see Eq. ( As expected, in the absence of interactions Importantly, however, ∆ t is nonzero, and can generally be of similar magnitude to ∆ s , making the system susceptible to being driven into the TRITOPS phase by shortrange repulsive interactions. The existence of a nonvanishing triplet pairing term can also be understood from a simple qualitative argument. The lower and upper edges of the QSHI host modes of positive and negative helicity, respectively. Since the SC is coupled to the lower edge, the pairing of the positive-helicity modes, ∆ + , is larger in magnitude than that of the negative-helicity modes, ∆ -, and consequently ∆ t = 0. This agrees with Eqs. ( Next we concentrate on another system which can be driven into the TRITOPS phase by repulsive interactions, a spin-orbit coupled semiconductor nanowire. We now show that this system is described at low-energies by the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Consider a semiconductor spin-orbit coupled nanowire in proximity to a bulk three-dimensional s-wave SC as depicted in Fig. where c † ks creates an electron in the lowest transverse mode of the wire with spin s and momentum k along the x direction. Here m * is the effective mass of electrons in the wire, μ is the chemical potential, and α is the spinorbit coupling strength. The induced pairing potential in the lowest transverse band is approximately given by where β is a constant which arises due to spin-orbit interaction. Equation ( If the chemical potential lies inside the band, then there are two pairs of Fermi points ±k + F and ±k - F as depicted in Fig. , and ∆ ± = ∆(±k ± F ). The velocities of the modes at the Fermi points are given by v + = v -= 2μ/m * + α 2 ≡ v, and the Fermi momenta are given by k ± F = m * (v ∓ α). The momentum dependence of ∆(k) results in the following singlet and triplet pairing terms Equation ( The eigenfunctions of H wire are exp(ikx)η n (y + uks), where s is the spin, and η n (y) are the eigenfunctions of an harmonic oscillator of mass m * and frequency ω c . It is now apparent that states with ks > 0 are shifted towards the SC (y < 0), while states with negative ks < 0 are shifted away from the SC (y > 0) After showing how the low-energy Hamiltonian of Eq. ( The full Hamiltonian is given by H 0 + H ∆ + H int , with H 0 and H ∆ given in Eq. ( where ρ Rs (x) = R † s (x)R s (x) and ρ Ls (x) = L † s (x)L s (x). Here, g ⊥ 1 is a backscattering interaction term, while g + 2 , g - 2 , and g 2 are forward scattering interaction terms. In the absence of symmetry under inversion (x → -x), the Fermi momenta are generally different, k + F = k - F (see Fig. Before analyzing the effect of interactions using the renormalization group, it is instructive to study the mean-field solution. In this analysis we replace the lowenergy interacting Hamiltonian by a quadratic Hamiltonian of the form of Eq. ( The g 2 term in Eq. We begin by writing In the mean-field approximation we assume that the system has a superconducting order, and accordingly the averages of the pairing terms, L ↓ (x)R ↑ (x) and R ↓ (x)L ↑ (x) , are large compared to their respective fluctuations, δ + and δ -. We therefore substitute Eq. ( Since H MF is a quadratic Hamiltonian, one can easily calculate the above pair correlation functions and arrive at self-consistent equations for ∆+ and ∆-. One then obtains (see Appendix B) These coupled equations can be solved numerically for ∆± , after which the topological invariant of H MF is obtained by Q = sgn( ∆+ ) sgn( ∆-). One can, however, make further analytical progress by searching for the phase boundary between Q = 1 and Q = -1. This occurs when either ∆-= 0, or ∆+ = 0. By Plugging ∆± = 0 in Eq. ( while if it occurs at ∆-= 0, As a relevant example we can consider a Hubbard-type interaction, g 1 = g + 2 = g - 2 = U , and furthermore v + = v -= v. Let us assume without loss of generality that |∆ + | > |∆ -|. This means that the phase boundary will occur when ∆-= 0, namely when Figure In this section we study the full interacting Hamiltonian H 0 + H ∆ + H int , given in Eqs. ( electrons, described by H 0 . Both the singlet and triplet induced pairing potentials are relevant perturbations to H 0 , namely this is an unstable fixed point. Below we show that the introduction of H int causes the instability to be more towards triplet pairing compared to singlet pairing. To derive the flow equations of the various terms in H ∆ and H int we use perturbative momentum shell Wilsonian RG for Fermions where we have defined v = (v + + v -)/2, and the di- πv -, and y 2 = g + 2 /2πv + + g - 2 /2πv --g 2 /πv. The above equations have been derived using a perturbative treatment and they are valid when y 1 , y 2 , y ± 2 and ∆ ± /v ± Λ are all smaller than 1. Equations (28a,28b) give rise to a Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) type of flow for y ⊥ 1 and y 2 . It is described by the constant of motion A 2 = y 2 2 -y 2 1 , where y 1 ≡ y ⊥ 1 (v 2 /v + v -+ 1)/2. Of greatest interest for us is the region y 2 > y 1 ≥ 0, this corresponds to an interaction which is repulsive on all length scales. In this case, the flow of y 1 and y 2 is given by Both y 1 and y 2 flow down, saturating after an RG time sat ∼ A -1 , at 0 and A, respectively. One can insert these solutions into Eqs. (28c) and (28d), and integrate to obtain y + 2 and y - 2 , respectively. The interaction couplings y ⊥ 1 , y + 2 , and y - 2 can then be inserted into Eqs. (28f,28e) which generally require a numerical solution for ∆ ± . We wish to determine the topological phase diagram of the system as a function of its initial couplings. We solve the above flow equations up to an RG time * , at which one of the pairing potential flows to strong coupling, namely |∆ ± ( * )|/v ± Λ = 1. Beyond this point the perturbative RG treatment is not valid anymore. Let us assume, without loss of generality, that ∆ + flows to strong coupling first. This in particular means that the interaction couplings (which have flown down) are small in comparison to it, namely y ⊥ 1 , y 2 , y ± |∆ + ( * )|/v + Λ = 1. If at this point ∆ -( * )/v -Λ happens also to be large in comparison to y ⊥ 1 , y 2 , y ± 2 , then we can neglect the interaction couplings. One can then use the topological invariant of a noninteracting system [see Eq. ( Generally, however, ∆ -( * ) can be small, and one has to modify the expression for Q to account for the non-negligible interaction terms. To this end we note that since ∆ + ( * ) is large, the positive-helicity degrees of freedom [R ↑ (x) and L ↓ (x)] are gapped, and we can safely integrate them out. Upon doing that, one is left with an action containing only the negative-helicity fields [R ↓ (x) and L ↑ (x)], with a pairing potential ∆ -= ∆ -( * ) + δ∆ -. To leading order in the interaction couplings, the correction is given by (see appendix D) At this point we can continue the RG procedure, applied only to the negative-helicity degrees of freedom, ẏ-2 = 0, (31a) namely ∆ -flows to strong coupling (without changing sign), while y - 2 remains perturbative. We can therefore use the topological invariant of noninteracting systems, only with ∆ -( * ) substituted by ∆ -, Q = sgn[∆ + ( * )] sgn[∆ -]. Finally, accounting also for the possibility that ∆ -flows to strong coupling before ∆ + , we can write where * is the RG time when the first of ∆ + and ∆ - reaches strong coupling. To understand how repulsive interactions drive the system into the TRITOPS phase, let us concentrate on the special case, The effect of forward scattering and of backscattering on the pairing potentials is now apparent. The forward scattering term y + 2 equally suppresses the singlet and triplet pairing terms. The backscattering term y 1 , on the other hand, suppresses ∆ s , while strengthening ∆ t , causing the latter to flow faster to strong coupling. From Eq. ( If the time it takes y 1 to flow to zero, sat , is much shorter than * , we can approximate the ratio ∆ t ( * )/∆ s ( * ) by taking the upper limit of above integral to infinity. Using Eq. (29a), one obtains in this case Furthermore, since by our assumption y 1 ( * ) 0 (follows from sat * ), Eq. ( We wish to understand when this approximation is valid. To this end, we can estimate the time it would take for one of the pairing potentials to reach strong coupling, * ∼ ln(v ± Λ/∆ 0 ± ) [69]. Namely, the above long RG-time approximation will be valid if the initial pairing potentials are small enough such that ∆ 0 ± v ± Λ exp(-1/A). Note that the above approximation will necessarily be violated close to the separatrix of the KT flow, since there A → 0. We can now use the result, Eq. ( namely, the system is in the topological phase above this line in the y 1 y 2 -plane. The topological region becomes bigger as the ratio ∆ 0 t /∆ 0 s increases. In Fig. Let us now reconsider the case of a Hubbard-type interaction, g ⊥ 1 = g + 2 = g - 2 = U , and g 2 = 0. Note that for v + = v -this mean y 2 = y 1 , while for v + = v -, this means y 2 ≥ y 1 [see the definitions below Eq. ( The results presented in Figs. are more susceptible to being driven into the topological phase by the effect of repulsive interactions. We have presented and studied a general low-energy model for a one-dimensional system where the interplay between externally-induced superconductivity and repulsive Coulomb interactions stabilizes a time-reversal invariant topological superconducting phase. This phase is characterized by a Kramers' pair of zero-energy Majorana bound state at each end of the system. We have suggested two experimentally-accessible setups of proximity-coupled systems which realize this lowenergy model, and which can therefore serve as a platforms for realizing time-reversal invariant topological superconductivity. These are (i) a narrow strip of a 2d topological insulator, partially covered by an s-wave superconductor, and (ii) a quasi 1d semiconductor nanowire in proximity to an s-wave superconductor. We expect the excitation gap of the system to protect the topological phase against a moderate amount of disorder, namely disorder with associated mean free time which is large in comparison with the inverse energy gap. This is the case for the class-D TSC An experimental signature of this phase can be obtained by probing the Kramers' pair of Majorana bound states which reside at each end of the system. By coupling the end of the system to a normal-metal lead, the differential conductance can be measured. At zero temperature this should yield a zero-bias peak which is quantized to 4e 2 /h It is interesting to examine the strength of electronelectron interactions in the suggested experimental setups of Sec. III. Given an estimate for the induced pairing potentials, ∆ s and ∆ t , one can then try and place a given system on the phase diagram of Fig. First we note that the Coulomb interaction between the electrons is screened by the presence of the SC. This sets a finite range for the interaction, given roughly by the lateral distance between the SC and the electrons in the system. This can be estimated as the width d of the QSHI strip (or of the wire in the case of the setup in Sec. III B). At short electron-electron distances (|x -x | d) the divergence of the Coulomb interaction is regularized by the finite width of the system, V (x -x ) ∼ e 2 /4πεd, where ε is the permittivity. If the Fermi wavelength is sufficiently larger than the interaction range d, then the forward and backward scattering interactions are of the same order, and accordingly the dimensionless interaction strength is U/π v ∼ e 2 /4π 2 vε. The velocity v depends on details such as the chemical potential. However, a reasonable estimate is v ∼ 10 5 m/s. Takeing ε ∼ 10ε 0 results in U/π v ∼ 0.7. Based on recent experiments with E k± = ∆2 ± + (v ± k) 2 , and with α k± and β k± given by where cos(2θ k± ) = v ± k/ ∆2 ± + (v ± k) 2 and sin(2θ k± ) = ∆± / ∆2 ± + (v ± k) 2 . By inverting Eq. (B3), and using the fact that α k± and β k± annihilate the ground state of H MF , one obtains (at zero temperature) and similarly Inserting Eqs. (B4) and (B5) in Eq. ( Appendix C: Derivation of the low-energy wire Hamiltonian In this appendix we derive the low-energy Hamiltonian for a Rashba spin-orbit coupled wire in proximity to a three-dimensional s-wave SC. We show that it has the form of Eq. ( We consider an infinite quasi one-dimensional wire with lateral dimensions w y w z . As depicted in Fig. where m sm is the effective mass of electrons in the semiconductor wire, V c (y, z) is the confining potential to be FIG. described below, and λ(y, z) is a spin-orbit coupling field which stems from the internal effective electric field felt by the conduction electrons in the wire. Here, σ is a vector of Pauli matrices in spin space. The SC is described by the Hamiltonian where μ sc is the chemical potential, m sc is the effective mass of electrons in the normal state of the SC, ∆ sc is the superconducting gap, and ψ † s is a creation operator of electrons with spin s =↑, ↓ in the SC. Our goal is to derive an effective low-energy Hamiltonian for the semiconductor nanowire. To this end we first construct a tunneling Hamiltonian by following Bardeen's transfer Hamiltonian approach In principle, to quantitatively account for the effect of the spin-orbit coupling term, one needs to have knowledge of the functional form of λ(y, z). Deriving λ(y, z) from a microscopic theory, however, is a formidable task which we do not attempt here. Instead we shall rely on symmetry considerations, while treating λ(y, z) perturbatively, in order to infer its main effect on the low-energy theory. To construct a tunneling Hamiltonian we introduce an insulating layer between the SC and the nanowire. The width of the layer is w b and the hight of the potential barrier is V b . The nanowire occupies the space defined by y ∈ [-w y /2, w y /2], z ∈ [-w z /2, w z /2], and is infinite along the x direction. The SC occupies the half space defined by y < -(w b + w y /2) as depicted in Fig. Following where E k x is the corresponding eigenenergy of φ k x , and H is the Hamiltonian with the true confining potential as depicted in Fig. We solve H sm in the limit of a high barrier, η b ≡ 1/ √ 2m sm V b w y 1, and we concentrate on energies much smaller than V b . To first order in η b , and to zeroth order in λ(y, z) one has . We now turn to the first-order corrections of both the energies and the wave functions in the nanowire due to spin-orbit coupling. From symmetry considerations we can infer that λ x = 0. To see this we first note that the vector field λ stems from the electric field in the wire. Since the system is translationally invariant and symmetric under mirror reflection x → -x, the field component λ x must be zero. Moreover, since the system is symmetric under z → -z, we must have λ z (y, -z) = -λ z (y, z). Taking into account the fact that the wave functions φ (0) m,n,kx have a definite parity under z → -z, the firstorder correction to the energies is given by where s = 1 for spin ↑, and s = -1 for spin ↓. We note that this term vanishes for a system with a symmetry y → -y. It is the breaking of this symmetry by the SC which allows for a nonzero α. This is the usual term considered in one-dimensional Rashba systems We now wish to obtain a correction to the wave functions. We concentrate on the lowest transverse band, namely m, n = 1, which is justified for a thin wire. We make use of the limit w z w y , and accordingly consider only the correction due to the second lowest transverse band |φ 1,2,kx , Invoking once more the symmetry λ z (y, -z) = -λ z (y, z), one obtains to first order where for the sake of brevity we have defined This term survives even if the system is symmetric under y → -y, i.e. its existence does not rely on a substrate which breaks inversion symmetry. Its main effect is to push the wave functions either towards or away from the SC, depending on the sign of k x σ z with and with cos Θ k ≡ k y /|k|. Apparently the effect of the inversion-symmetric part of λ y (which is the source of β) is to introduce a term k x σ z in the coupling between the wire and the SC. The presence of the factor cos Θ k stems simply from the fact that modes which approach the surface of the SC at small angles have a higher probability to tunnel into the wire. We can now write the full tunneling Hamiltonian of the system as where ξ k = k 2 /2m sc -μ sc , ε kx = k 2 x /2m sm -μ sm , and with Φ k x = (c † kx↑ , c † kx↓ , c -kx↓ , -c -kx↑ ), Ψ k = (f † k↑ , f † k↓ , f -k↓ , -f -k↑ ). Here, c † kxs create a spin-s electron in the state φ 1,1,kx of the wire, and f † ks creates a spin-s electron in the state χ k of the SC. {τ i } i=x,y,z is a set of Pauli matrices in particle-hole space. To obtain an effective Hamiltonian for the wire we integrate out the supeconductor's degrees of freedom. where G sc (ω, k) is the Green function of the bare SC, given by To perform the integral in (C14) we use the fact that μ sc is typically much bigger than the relevant energy scale in the semiconductor wire, so we can neglect k 2 x /2m sc compared to μ sc . For the same reason we also have μ sc ω which means that the main contribution to the integral comes from momenta satisfying (k 2 y + k 2 z )/2m sc μ sc . With the help of these simplifications one obtains to first order in β where ν 2d is the density of states of a two-dimensional system with an effective mass m sc at a chemical potential μ sc . Finally, in case one concentrates on energies much smaller than the bare superconducting gap (namely ω ∆ sc ), the self-energy becomes independent of ω and the effective low-energy Hamiltonian is given by H eff sm = (ε kx + αk x σ z )τ z + ∆ ind (1 + βk x σ z )τ x , (C17) with ∆ ind = ν 2d |t 0 | 2 . Appendix D: Derivation of RG flow equations In this section we derive the flow equations of Eq. ( Above we have used a compact notation for the action S, by using the Green functions G R,L kωs and the couplings ∆ s1s2 and u s1s2 s3s4 , which are defined by u s1s2 s3s4 = -g ⊥ 1 σ x s1s2 σ x s2s3 σ x s3s4 + g 2 δ s1s2 δ s2s3 δ s3s4 + (g + 2 δ s1↑ + g - 2 δ s1↓ )σ x s1s2 δ s2s3 σ x s3s4 . (D4c) On the right-hand side of Eq. (D4a) we have used a convention where η = R(L) corresponds to η = 1(-1), and s = ↑(↓) corresponds to s = 1(-1). To study the low-energy physics of the system, we iteratively integrate out the high-momentum modes within a small momentum shell, thereby obtaining an action with an effectively-decreasing cutoff, Λ exp(-), where is the so-called RG time At tree level, all the interaction couplings g ⊥ 1 , g 2 , g + 2 , and g - 2 are marginal with respect to the fixed point action S 0 . The induced pairing potentials ∆ s,t (or equivalently ∆ ± ) are relevant, on the other hand, with a scaling dimension of 1. Importantly, the one-loop corrections will cause a difference in the flow of ∆ s and ∆ t . To obtain the one-loop corrections to the flow, we treat S = S ∆ + S int as a perturbation to S 0 and apply the 