Single crystalline, single phase CaKFe4As4 has been grown out of a high temperature, quaternary melt. Temperature dependent measurements of x-ray diffraction, anisotropic electrical resistivity, elastoresistivity, thermoelectric power, Hall effect, magnetization and specific heat, combined with field dependent measurements of electrical resistivity and field and pressure dependent measurements of magnetization indicate that CaKFe4As4 is an ordered, stoichiometric, Fe-based superconductor with a superconducting critical temperature, Tc = 35.0 ± 0.2 K. Other than superconductivity, there is no indication of any other phase transition for 1.8 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K. All of these thermodynamic and transport data reveal striking similarities to that found for optimally-or slightly over-doped (Ba1-xKx)Fe2As2, suggesting that stoichiometric CaKFe4As4 is intrinsically close to what is referred to as "optimal-doped" on a generalized, Fe-based superconductor, phase diagram. The anisotropic superconducting upper critical field, Hc2(T ), of CaKFe4As4 was determined up to 630 kOe. The anisotropy parameter γ(T ) = H ⊥ c2 /H c2 , for H applied perpendicular and parallel to the c-axis, decreases from 2.5 at Tc to 1.5 at 25 K which can be explained by interplay of paramagnetic pairbreaking and orbital effects. The slopes of dH c2 /dT -44 kOe/K and dH ⊥ c2 /dT -109 kOe/K at Tc yield an electron mass anisotropy of m ⊥ /m 1/6 and short Ginzburg-Landau coherence lengths ξ (0) 5.8 Å and ξ ⊥ (0) 14.3 Å. The value of H ⊥ c2 (0) can be extrapolated to 920 kOe, well above the BCS paramagnetic limit. BaFe 2 As 2 has become one of the archetypical examples of Fe-based superconductivity Recently, another consequence of the size of the Caions has been discovered. Iyo et al. In their discovery paper, Iyo et al. synthesized and studied polycrystalline samples. CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystals were grown by high temperature solution growth out of FeAs flux in a manner similar to CaFe 2 As 2 and K 2 Cr 3 As 3 . 11,17 Lump, elemental K (Alfa Aesar 99.95%) and distilled Ca pieces (Ames Laboratory, Material Preparation Center (MPC) > 99.9%) were combined with ground, pre-reacted Fe 0.512 As 0.488 precursor in a ratio of K : Ca : Fe 0.512 As 0.488 = 1.2 : 0.8 : 20, with a total mass of roughly two grams, in a fritted, alumina crucible set (Canfield Crucible Set, or CCS). Single crystalline CaKFe 4 As 4 grows as mirror-like, metallic, micaceous plates of 0.1-0.2 mm thickness which can, in some cases, be limited in area by the inner diameter of the crucible (see inset to Fig. CaFe 2 As 2 and KFe 2 As 2 can be second phases in such growths and care had to be taken in optimizing our final growth protocol as well as in selecting our crystals to be sure that we have little or no amount of either of these phases. The ∼170 K phase transition of CaFe 2 As 2 9 is most apparent in temperature dependent resistance measurements and the low temperature superconducting phase transition in KFe 2 As 2 (T c = 3.8 K 21 ), as seen in the low field magnetization measurement, is the most sensitive way to detect its presence. All samples used in these studies were screened for both impurity phases. A more detailed discussion of how crystal growth was optimized to the current protocol, in part by minimizing these diagnostic signatures of second phases, will be presented in a separate paper. Single crystals of CaKFe 4 As 4 are soft, malleable, and not amenable to grinding for powder x-ray diffraction measurements. In this sense, CaKFe 4 As 4 is mechanically more similar to CaFe 2 As 2 7 than to BaFe 2 As 2 3 . Diffraction measurements on a single crystal were carried out inhouse using a Rigaku MiniFlex II powder diffractometer in a Bragg-Brentano geometry Temperature and field dependent magnetization, resistance and specific heat measurements were carried out using Quantum Design (QD), Magnetic Property Measurement Systems (MPMS) and Physical Property Measurement Systems (PPMS). Temperature dependent specific heat measurements taken for H c in applied magnetic field resulted in significant torque on the thin, platelike samples. Even with care, the calorimeter platform rotated by 10°as a result of measurements in applied field up to 140 kOe, and in some cases there was a loss of some sample mass due to exfoliation. As a result, specific heat data measured in applied fields are shown normalized to the zero-field data in the normal state. Hall resistivity data were collected using the AC transport option of a QD PPMS in a four-wire geometry with switching the polarity of the magnetic field H c to remove any magnetoresistive components due to misalignment of the voltage contacts. Thermoelectric power (TEP) measurements were performed using a DC, alternating temperature gradient technique Optical imaging of the magnetic flux distribution was performed in a 4 He flow -type cryostat by using the magneto-optical Faraday effect. In the experiment a transparent bismuth-doped iron-garnet ferrimagnetic "indicator" film with in-plane magnetization is placed directly on top of the sample. In the images, brightness is proportional to the value of B z ( r) with black level set at B z ( r) = 0 and the colors are related to the absolute orientation of B z ( r): green for out of page and yellow for into the page directions for our setup. More details on the technique and magneto-optical imaging of other Fe-based superconductors can be found elsewhere The pressure dependence of T c was determined by measurements of pressure dependent magnetization. Data up to 1.2 GPa were taken in a commercial, piston-cylinder, HMD cell using Daphne 7373 as pressure medium and Pb as a manometer The samples for anisotropic resistivity measurements were cleaved from larger crystals with sides along 100 directions using a razor blade. Samples used for inter-plane (I c) measurements typically had dimensions of 0.5 × 0.5 × 0.02 mm 3 (a × b × c). The samples for in-plane (I ⊥ c) measurements were typically of 1.5 × 0.2 × 0.02 mm 3 size. Contacts for standard four probe, in-plane resistivity measurements were soldered using Sn H c2 (T ) was determined via magnetoresistance measurements with I ⊥ c. Both DuPont 4929N silver paint and Epotek-H20E silver epoxy were used to attach contact leads onto the samples (Pt for measurements static field measurements and twisted copper wires for pulsed field measurements). For static fields below 140 kOe, resistance was measured using a QD PPMS-14 (T = 1.8- 305 K, H = 0-140 kOe, f = 17 Hz.). Higher field data were obtained in a 630 kOe pulsed magnet at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), Los Alamos, using a high-frequency, synchronous digital lock-in technique (f = 148 kHz). Elastoresistivity was measured using a piezostackbased setup, similar to that described in Refs. 34 and 35. Samples of approximate dimensions, 1 × 0.3 × 0.04 mm 3 , were glued on one side of a Piezomechanik GmbH PSt 150/5x5/7 piezostack, as shown in the inset in Fig. Figures The anisotropic, temperature dependent, normalized electrical resistivity and magnetization of CaKFe 4 As 4 are shown in Figs. Hall resistivity data, as a function of temperature and magnetic field and thermoelectric power data as a function of temperature, S(T ), from measurements on CaKFe edly has multiple bands , where R 1,2 and σ 1,2 (T ) are partial Hall constants and conductivities for band 1 and 2 The thermoelectric power S(T ) is near 25 μ V/K at room temperature, rises to over 45 μ V/K at 100 K and smoothly drops to near 35 μ V/K just above T c = 35 K, as shown in Fig. Turning now to the superconducting phase transition, Fig. Magneto-optical imaging of new superconductors is an- other powerful tool to help confirm the bulk nature of superconductivity via screening of the external magnetic field and study of the vortex physics and irreversible magnetic properties. The inset of Fig. Our magneto-optical and magnetization data show that CaKFe 4 As 4 exhibits a classical irreversible magnetic behavior close to the critical state of a strong type-II superconductor The superconducting state can also be studied as a function of applied field. Figure Fig. Specific heat data for H c, H 140 kOe were also collected and are shown in Fig. CaKFe 4 As 4 is an ordered example of a Fe-based superconductor with a relatively high T c value and no discernible signature of any other ordering. The data presented in Figs.3-13 are remarkably similar to that measured for optimally-or slightly over-doped (Ba,K)Fe 2 As 2 and Ba(Fe,Co) 2 As 2 compounds. As argued previously The anisotropic H c2 (T ) data inferred from the temperature-dependent and field-dependent resistance data, summarized in Fig. 640 kOe, which is close to the maximum field in our pulse magnet. Thus, Pauli pairbreaking is essential, similar to the majority of other Fe-based superconductors 45 . (2) As a result of different temperature dependencies of H c2 (T ) and H ⊥ c2 (T ) the anisotropy parameter γ(T ) = H ⊥ c2 (T )/H c2 (T ) decreases as T decreases (see lower inset in Fig. (3) No crossing of H c2 (T ) and H ⊥ c2 (T ) was observed for 0 < H < 630 kOe, although a possibility that it may happen at higher fields cannot be ruled out. The initial (H 140 kOe) H c2 (T ) anisotropy shown in Fig. 12. (Color online) (a) Anisotropic Hc2(T ) data for CaKFe4As4 inferred from the temperature-dependent electrical resistivity data presented in Fig. for (Ba 0.55 K 0.45 )Fe 2 As 2 where ∆C = 8.33×10 5 erg cm -3 K -1 and infer values of κ to be: 141 and 57 for H ⊥ c and H c respectively. In the two-band model the slope dH c2 /dT at T c can be expressed in terms of the band parameters as follows 45 where the effective Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ ⊥ determines the magnitude of the temperature-dependent λ 11 and λ 22 are dimensionless pairing constants in bands 1 and 2, and λ 12 and λ 21 are interband pairing constants. Eqs. ( Here Here Q is the wave vector of the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) modulations of the order parameter, v j is the in-plane Fermi velocity in band j = 1, 2, j = m ⊥ j /m j is the mass anisotropy ratio, μ is the magnetic moment of a quasiparticle, α ≈ 1.8α M , α M = H orb c2 / √ 2H p is the Maki paramagnetic parameter. Eqs. ( where 1 and b is a solution of Eq. ( The fit shows that the upper critical fields at T = 0 extrapolate to H c2 (0) ≈ 710 kOe and H ⊥ c2 (0) ≈ 920 kOe, the shape of H c2 (T ) being mostly determined by orbital effects moderately affected by the Pauli pairbreaking. By contrast, the shape of H ⊥ c2 (T ) is consistent with the essential Pauli pairbreaking in both bands, because of large respective Maki parameters α It should be mentioned that in the available field range 0 < H < 630 kOe where the H c2 data were obtained, the fit is not very sensitive to the particular values of the pairing constants and the band asymmetry parameter η, yet it suggests the possibility of a FFLO state for T < 13 K and for higher fields H parallel to the ab planes. In fact, the data shown in Fig. To further explore the similarity between CaKFe 4 As 4 and near-optimally doped (Ba 1-x K x )Fe 2 As 2 we determined the elastoresistivity coefficients 2m 66 and m 11m 12 of CaKFe 4 As 4 using a piezo-stack-based setup; these data are presented in Fig. In typical Fe-based superconductors, m 66 is closely related to the nematic susceptibility χ nem . It is expected to diverge on approaching the nematic (tetragonal-toorthorhombic) transition in under-doped samples This mode does not directly couple to the nematic order parameter of typical under-doped Fe-based systems. All in all, the elastoresistivity data of CaKFe 4 As 4 indicates that it is close to a nematic structural instability, similarly to other optimally-doped Fe-based superconductors. We have synthesized single phase, single crystalline samples of CaKFe 4 As 4 and measured temperature dependent unit cell dimensions, temperature and field dependent specific heat as well as thermoelectric power, Hall effect, elastoresistivity, and anisotropic temperature and field dependent magnetization and electrical resistivity. There is no indication of any phase transition, other than superconductivity with T c = 35.0 ± 0.2 K, taking place in this compound for 1.8 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K. The temperature dependence of our thermodynamic and transport measurements, the resistive anisotropy, the pressure dependence of T c , and the anisotropy and size of H c2 (T) are consistent with near optimally doped members of the (Ba 1-x K x )Fe 2 As 2 series. In addition CaKFe 4 As 4 falls directly onto the BNC scaling plot at the near optimal end of the AeFe 2 As 2 structure manifold. All of these m H c2 , the above equation for h m yields