The mechanism of unconventional superconductivity in iron-based superconductors (IBSs) is one of the most intriguing questions in current materials research. Among non-oxide IBSs, (Ba1-xKx)Fe2As2 has been intensively studied because of its high superconducting transition temperature and fascinating evolution of the superconducting gap structure from being fully isotropic at optimal doping (x ≈0.4) to becoming nodal at x >0.8. Although this marked evolution was identified in several independent experiments, there are no details of the gap evolution to date because of the lack of high-quality single crystals covering the entire K-doping range of the superconducting dome. We conducted a systematic study of the London penetration depth, λ(T ), across the full phase diagram for different concentrations of point-like defects introduced by 2.5 MeV electron irradiation. Fitting the low-temperature variation with the power law, ∆λ ∼ T n , we find that the exponent n is the highest and Tc suppression rate with disorder is the smallest at optimal doping, and they evolve with doping being away from optimal, which is consistent with increasing gap anisotropy, including an abrupt change around x 0.8, indicating the onset of nodal behavior. Our analysis using a self-consistent t-matrix approach suggests the ubiquitous and robust nature of s± pairing in IBSs and argues against a previously suggested transition to a d-wave state near x = 1 in this system. Understanding the mechanisms of superconductivity in iron-based superconductors (IBSs) is a challenging task, partially due to the multiband character of interactions and scattering Among various IBSs, (Ba 1-x K x )Fe 2 As 2 (BaK122) is, perhaps, one of the most interesting and intensively studied compounds, exhibiting an unusual variation of the superconducting gap structure across the superconducting dome that exists between x ≈ 0.18 and 1. In the optimally-doped region, x ≈ 0.35 to 0.4, two effective isotropic superconducting gap scales (roughly with a 2:1 magnitude ratio) were identified in many experiments, for example, thermal conductivity An important feature of the overdoped Ba122 system is the Lifshitz transition reported for both electron-doped Here, we measured low-temperature variation of London penetration depth, ∆λ(T ), down to 50 mK in 16 different compositions of BaK122, for most of which the effect of artificial point-like disorder induced by 2.5 MeV electron irradiation at several doses was examined. By analyzing both the rate of T c suppression and changes in ∆λ(T ), we conclude that increasing gap anisotropy on one of the hole bands at the Γ point leads to the development of accidental nodes, and when the electron band no longer crosses the Fermi level at the M point, s ± pairing is realized between two hole bands. This is illustrated schematically in Fig. Figure As shown in Fig. In terms of the rate per irradiation fluence, the normalized suppression rate of optimally doped samples (Fig. To understand the evolution of the superconducting gap with doping and disorder, we analyze the lowtemperature behavior of the London penetration depth in terms of the power law, ∆λ(T ) = A (T /T c ) n , as shown in Fig. The lower panels of Fig. At small x, in the coexistence regime, the gap anisotropy increases, but we find no evidence of nodes, consistent with the previous studies In previous studies of London penetration depth and thermal conductivity in overdoped samples, nodal behavior was identified above x = 0.8 and attributed to a crossover from a fully isotropic s-wave state with sign change between electron and hole pockets to a new type of s ± pairing with sign change between the hole pockets We use the self-consistent t-matrix formalism and sign-changing s ± state to describe both the London penetration depth and T c suppression rate for different levels of disorder. To keep the analysis tractable and to fit the experimental data, we minimize our parameter set by working in the 2Fe-BZ and modeling the gap structure as shown schematically in Fig. First, we fit the data for the pristine samples and then include impurity scattering within self-consistent tmatrix formalism We note that if one concentrates exclusively on Fermi surface integrated quantities, such as thermal conductivity or penetration depth, distinguishing d-wave states from anisotropic, deeply nodal s-wave states can be very difficult. As shown in Fig. An additional argument favoring s ± pairing with accidental nodes over the d-wave is the non-monotonicity of ∆λ(0.3T c , x) near x ∼0.8 (see Fig. N o d a l FIG. In the opposite limit, the nodes appear. This is shown by inscribed triangles in the figure for h1 contribution. Consequently, the s± pairing switches from hole-electron pockets below the Lifshitz transition to hole-hole above. near the expected nodal region transits to a linear-in-φ dependence through an intermediate quadratic, ∆(φ) ∼ φ 2 , dependence. Accidental nodes not only are more probable for s-wave pairing as opposed to d-wave pairing but also are expected to appear around the Lifshitz transition Nevertheless, our systematic measurements and analysis of many different compositions add to the growing experimental support for the s-wave origin of the pairing interaction near x ∼ 1 (and therefore over the whole phase diagram). This in turn indicates that any competing d-wave channel, as predicted by many theoretical approaches, is competitive but sub-leading all the way up to x = 1. The extent of this competition can be addressed by probing collective modes in the non-pairing channel using other experimental techniques (for example, Raman Scattering). We note that some studies of the x = 1 composition under pressure also propose a change of pairing symmetry from d--wave to s-wave In conclusion, we used deliberately introduced pointlike disorder as a phase-sensitive tool to study the compositional evolution of the superconducting gap structure in BaK122. Measurements of both the low-temperature variation of London penetration depth and T c suppression provided stringent constraints on the possible gap structures. By using a generalized s ± model and t-matrix calculations, we were able to describe the compositional evolution of the superconducting gap, including a crossover from nodeless to nodal concomitant with the Lifshitz transition. Our model provides a natural interpretation of the rich physics of this system and shows that s ± pairing is a very robust state of iron pnictides. We developed an inverted temperature gradient method to grow large and high-quality single crystals of BaK122. The starting materials-Ba and K lumps, and Fe and As powders-were weighed and loaded into an alumina crucible in a glove box. The alumina crucible was sealed in a tantalum tube by arc welding. The tantalum tube was then sealed in a quartz ampoule to prevent the tantalum tube from oxidizing in the furnace. The crystallization processes from the top of a liquid melt help to expel impurity phases during the crystal growth, compared to the growth inside the flux. Details of the growth and detailed characterization for the entire dome can be found elsewhere Sixteen different compositions ranging from x = 0.20 to 1.00 were identified using WDS. More than one sample of each composition was studied. The crystals had typical dimensions of 0.5 mm × 0.5 mm × 0.03 mm. All samples were pre-screened using a dipper version of the tunnel diode resonator (TDR) technique The variation of in-plane London penetration depth ∆λ(T ) was measured down to 50 mK using a selfoscillating TDR Irradiation by 2.5 MeV electrons was performed at the SIRIUS Pelletron in Laboratoire des Solides Irradiés at École Polytechnique (Palaiseau, France). The electrons created Frenkel pairs that acted as point-like atomic defects. Throughout the paper, the total acquired irradiation dose was conveniently measured in coulombs per squre centimeter, where 1 C/cm 2 =6.24 × 10 18 electrons/cm 2 . With a calculated head-on collision displacement energy for Fe ions of 22 eV and cross section to create Frenkel pairs at 2.5 MeV of 115 barn (b), a dose of 1 C/cm 2 resulted in about 0.07% of the defects per iron site. Similar numbers were obtained for other sites -cross sections for Ba and As are 105 and 35 b, respectively. It is known that the interstitials migrate to various sinks (surface, dislocations, etc) and vacancies remain in the lattice. The electron irradiation was conducted in liquid hydrogen at 22 K, and recombination of the vacancy-interstitial pairs upon warming up to room temperature was 20 to 30 %, as measured directly from the decrease of residual resistivity Figure A minimal two band model is used to fit the penetration depth data for pristine samples. One of the band represents the hole pocket throughout the phase diagram. Before the Lifshitz transition, the second band represents the electron band and after the Lifshitz transition the second band represents the other hole band. We use gap magnitudes as the fitting parameters and along with an overall scaling factor, which takes care of the Fermi velocities and density of states for various doping. Model gap functions are We first fit the low temperature penetration depth for the pristine samples, and find the gap values in the units of pristine sample's transition temperature T c0 . The fits are shown in Fig. Once we determine the gaps, we find the interactions which generate these gaps within the weak-coupling BCS approximation. We parameterize the interaction potential in a simple form, where, to reduce the number of parameters, we have assumed the angular form factors in the interactions to be the same as in the one in the gap structure Here V ij denotes the interaction between i th and j th band. After finding the interaction parameters, impurity scattering is treated within self-consistent t-matrix approximation 