Within the conventional theory of superconductivity superfluid carriers respond to an applied magnetic field and acquire a speed according to their effective (band) mass. On the other hand it can be shown theoretically and is confirmed experimentally that the mechanical momentum of the supercurrent carriers is given by the product of the supercurrent speed and the bare electron mass. By combining these two well-established facts we show that the conventional BCS-London theory of superconductivity applied to Bloch electrons is internally inconsistent. Furthermore, we argue that BCS-London theory with Bloch electrons does not describe the phase rigidity and macroscopic quantum behavior exhibited by superconductors. Experimentally the speed of the supercurrent in superconductors has never been measured and has been argued to be non-measurable, however we point out that it is in principle measurable by a Compton scattering experiment. We predict that such experiments will show that superfluid carriers respond to an applied magnetic field according to their bare mass, in other words, that they respond as f ree electrons, undressed from the electronion interaction, rather than as Bloch electrons. This is inconsistent with the conventional theory of superconductivity and consistent with the alternative theory of hole superconductivity. Furthermore we point out that in principle Compton scattering experiments can also detect the presence of a spin current in the ground state of superconductors predicted by the theory of hole superconductivity. Consider a superconducting cylinder of radius R and height h in an applied magnetic field H smaller than the lower critical field H c1 in direction parallel to its axis (ẑ direction), as shown in Fig. and the current density is given by as follows from Ampere's law ∇ × H = (4π/c) J and the requirement that B = 0 inside the superconductor. The current density is given by where n s is the density of superconducting carriers and v s the superfluid velocity. From Eqs. ( The London penetration depth λ L can be measured by standard techniques We assume an isotropic superconductor for simplicity. Optical In this paper we argue that this is not so. We point out that even though v s has never been experimentally measured, it can in principle be measured through Compton scattering experiments By measuring v s through Compton scattering experiments hence our prediction that m * is necessarily m e can be tested experimentally. In this section and in Appendix A we review the conventional arguments from which it follows that the mass in Eq. ( We consider a simple one-band model to make our point clearly. The ground state wave function in BCS theory is given by where k labels Bloch states (we omit vector labels on the k's for simplicity). The mechanical momentum of a Bloch electron Ψ k ( r) with wavevector k is where m e is the bare electron mass and ǫ k is the band energy. Note that the electron's mechanical momentum is not k, nor is it m * v k . Following the semiclassical model of electron dynamics we assume that in the presence of slowly varying external fields electrons can be described by wavepackets labeled by wavevector k, centered at r and spread out over many lattice constants but of spatial extent much smaller that the wavelength of any applied fields, with velocity v k ( r). The semiclassical equation of motion in the presence of an external force F ext is so that the time evolution of the electron mechanical momentum is, on one hand and on the other hand In Eq. ( Under application of a magnetic field to the cylinder the Faraday electric field that develops within a London penetration depth of the surface is in the azimuthal direction, exerting an external force F ext = e E F on electrons, so that their mechanical momentum changes according to equation and the change in mechanical momentum and velocity of the electron when the magnetic field increases from 0 to respectively. At zero temperature the occupancy of the Bloch state with wavevector k is where vk , ūk are the BCS amplitudes in Eq. since the first term gives zero. Using eq. ( For a band that is close to empty we can assume that m * k ∼ m * approximately independent of k for the states for which n k = 0, and Eq. ( with the number of superfluid carriers per unit volume. The velocity shift Eq. ( v s is the speed of the supercurrent carriers, and the supercurrent Eq. ( Similarly for a band that is close to full we use that and defining m * = -m * k , assumed independent of k for the states for which (2 -n k ) = 0 we have with the superfluid density now given by so that the same expression Eq. ( The fact that we end up with the band effective mass m * in the expressions for the London penetration depth Eq. ( The mechanical momentum of a Bloch electron is given by Eq. ( where we used Eq. (21a) for the superfluid velocity. The mechanical momentum density per unit volume (which is zero in the absence of current) is or alternatively where we have used Eqs. The total mechanical angular momentum L e is independent of λ L , m * and n s . Hence from measurement of L e we cannot determine whether it is m * or m e that enters the equations, since m * does not enter in Eq. For the superconducting cylinder under consideration the relation between magnetic field and magnetic vector potential is simply as follows from the relation ∇ × A = H. A points in the azimuthal direction. Eq. ( Now the canonical momentum p that enters the Schrödinger equation for a particle of mass m and charge q moving with velocity v s in the presence of a vector potential A is where m v s is the mechanical (or 'kinematic') momentum, that equals the canonical momentum when A = 0. For a superconductor it is assumed that Eq. ( In Eq. ( The right-hand side of Eq. ( We next discuss the consequences of the phase equation Eq. ( (i) Flux quantization: in a superconducting ring, integration of Eq. ( with n an integer and φ the magnetic flux, hence φ = nφ 0 with φ 0 = hc/(2e) the flux quantum. This is verified experimentally (ii) Setting the canonical momentum p = 0, as appropriate for the Meissner effect, yields for Eq. ( using Eq. ( (iii) Setting A = 0 in Eq. ( hence where we have used Eq. (21a) for the supercurrent velocity, or equivalently set ∇φ = 0 in Eq. To reiterate this crucial point: to the extent that the BCS superfluid can be described by a macroscopic wavefunction Ψ S ( r) with an amplitude and a phase as given by Eq. (36a) Eq. (36a) would yield for the total mechanical angular momentum instead of Eq. ( which disagrees with experiment There is no way to 'fix' Eq. ( we will satisfy (i) (flux quantization) and (iii) (mechanical momentum) but obtain for (ii), i.e. setting A=0 in contradiction with Eq. (21a). Finally, if we write instead of Eq. ( we will satisfy (ii) and (iii) but fail to satisfy (i), i.e. the flux quantum would depend on the ratio of bare mass to effective mass, in contradiction with experiment. Or in other words, Eq. ( We propose that to resolve this inconsistency it is necessary to assume that the expression Eq. (21a) for the superfluid velocity is incorrect, and that the correct expression is which is consistent with Eq. ( The importance of the canonical momentum of superconducting electrons was already realized by F. London with χ the 'superpotential', which we now would call φ/2. London deduced that the right-hand-side of Eq. ( and a uniform magnetic field B gives rise to a magnetic vector potential Substitution of Eqs. ( which predicts a uniform magnetic field in the interior of a superconductor rotating with angular velocity ω as experimentally measured A large number of experiments with superconductors, particularly involving Josephson junctions and weak links, can be understood and described by the assumption that there exists a macroscopic single-particle-like wavefunction that describes the Cooper pair condensate with vk , ūk the amplitudes in the BCS wavefunction Eq. Assuming the phase equation Eq. ( (48) In a simply connected superconductor the phase φ is assumed to be uniform and not affected by the application of a vector potential A. This is termed the 'phase rigidity' of the wavefunction. Hence the left-hand side of Eq. (48), the expectation value of the canonical momentum of the superfluid, vanishes and this implies the Meissner effect. More generally, Eq. (48) implies that superfluid flow is irrotational in first quantized form. We show in Appendix A that the expectation value of this operator (in second quantized form) with the many-body BCS wavefunction in the presence of a vector potential A is which is not zero in a simply connected superconductor subject to a magnetic field. Comparing Eq. ( From Appendix A Eq. (A22) we deduce that within BCS theory or equivalently using Eq. (A23) Eq. ( Note also we can rewrite Eq. ( The 'many body' version of Eq. ( which yields using Eq. ( which disagrees with the result predicted by BCS theory Eq. (A20). Therefore, the phase equation Eq. ( (56) and comparing Eq. ( In summary, in this section we have shown in detail that the BCS formalism applied to Bloch electrons is incompatible with the existence of a macroscopic singleparticle-like superfluid wavefunction Ψ S ( r) with a welldefined macroscopic phase φ( r) that obeys either Eq. Consideration of the kinetic energy of carriers of the supercurrent furnishes another independent argument for the incorrectness of Eq. (21a) for the superfluid velocity. The kinetic energy density of the supercurrent is given by This follows from general arguments Replacing H in terms of v s from Eq. (21a) yields and using Eq. ( Eq. ( with ∆k = eλ L /( c)H. Eq. ( To calculate the extra kinetic energy of a carrier in the supercurrent, consider the work done on a superfluid electron labeled by wavevector k under the influence of a force F : where d x k is the displacement of this wavepacket. When a magnetic field is applied, the force is the sum of the external force originating in the Faraday electric field and the force exerted by the lattice on the electron, F latt From the semicassical equation of motion we have hence where we have used that for this electron In addition we have assumed that no work is spent in changing the potential energy of the carrier. Therefore we deduce from Eq. ( The velocity change is given by v k → v k + v s , hence the change in the right-hand-side of Eq. (67) when work W k is done on the carrier is The total work per unit volume is obtained by summing Eq. ( since the sum over the first term in Eq. (68) gives zero. Eq. ( rather than Eq. (60). Eq. ( which disagrees with Eq. ( Compton scattering experiments in a superconductor, as shown in Fig. which is approximately the lower critical field H c1 and Eq. (73) takes the simple form If instead of Eq. (72) we assume the superfluid speed is given by the BCS formula Eq. (21a) we obtain instead In the absence of supercurrent, the Compton scattering profile will be Doppler broadened by the velocity of the Bloch electrons. In the presence of the supercurrent the velocity of any given electron in the supercurrent will be with v k its velocity in the absence of supercurrent. Thus, the Compton profile for an incident monochromatic beam will be shifted by the amount given by Eq. (72). Even though the shift is much smaller than the Doppler broadening, because it is the same for all scattering angles θ it will hopefully be detectable with currently available resolution by accumulating measurements for many angles. Thus a quantitative measurement of this Compton shift together with an independent measurement of λ L should be able to prove (or disprove) experimentally that it is the bare electron mass that enters Eq. ( In addition, Compton scattering can check the prediction of the theory of hole superconductivity [24] that a spin current exists in the ground state of superconductors that flows within a London penetration depth of the surface in the absence of applied fields where n is the outward pointing normal to the lateral surface of the cylinder. The carriers moving clockwise, with spin σ// H, are brought to a stop when the magnetic field reaches the value Eq. ( In this paper we have pointed out that the speed of the supercurrent carriers in superconductors v s , or equivalently the effective mass of carriers of the supercurrent m * , or equivalently the density of superfluid carriers n s , can be measured experimentally. This is contrary to the generally accepted view that only the combination n s /m * can be directly measured, and the related generally accepted view that the superfluid velocity v s is not a physical observable, only the current density J given by Eq. (21b) is. Measurement of the superfluid velocity should be able to confirm the theoretical claim discussed in this paper. However, even if the experimental accuracy required will not be attainable in the foreseeable future, it is useful to think of it as a 'gedankenexperiment' that can in principle determine what the value of the superfluid speed v s is. The fact that v s is a physical observable allows us to make the theoretical claim that BCS theory applied to Bloch electrons is internally inconsistent. In the following we summarize our arguments. In essence, we claim that BCS theory cannot describe supercurrent flow of carriers that have an effective mass m * in the normal state that is different from the bare electron mass m e , and at the same time be consistent with a wide range of experimental properties of superconductors. Before we start we should address the predictable objection of critical readers that we have ignored a large number of factors that will modify the effective mass besides the electron-ion interaction, as well as other effects not considered here: Fermi liquid effects, non-Fermi-liquid effects, electron-phonon interactions, renormalizations, multiband effects, long-range Coulomb in-teractions, spin-orbit interactions, magnetic interactions, Kondo physics, disorder, topological effects, relativistic effects, etc. In a real material all these effects may play a role. Nevertheless, we argue that it is a valid and useful theoretical approach to establish the inconsistency of BCS theory and band theory of solids assuming all these other effects can be ignored. While it is not impossible that including some or all of these other effects could restore the consistency of BCS theory we don't see a shred of a hint for why this would be the case. In any event it is a matter for the future to decide. In this paper we assume electrons interact with ions as described by the standard Bloch theory of electronic energy bands in solids, disorder can be ignored, and electrons behave as independent particles except for a weak attractive interaction that leads to the BCS superconducting state below a critical temperature. We furthermore assume only one band is partially filled and hence conducts electricity, all other bands are either full or empty. For simplicity we have assumed in Appendix A that the partially filled band is the lowest band, but this restriction can be removed without altering our arguments and conclusions. We assume the system is at zero temperature. Consider the following five points that we argue are well established: (1) Using semiclassical transport theory (Sect. II) or equivalently the standard Kubo linear response formalism (Appendix A) it follows that within BCS theory or London theory the speed of electrons in the supercurrent is given by Eq. (21a), involving the band mass m * rather than the bare electron mass m e , for the cases when a band is nearly empty or the band is nearly full. In the first case, the density n s of carriers carrying the supercurrent at zero temperature is the total electron density, in the second case it is the total hole density. (2) The mechanical momentum of the carriers carrying the supercurrent is the product of the bare electron mass m e and the superfluid velocity: This follows theoretically from the semiclassical treatment or equivalently from linear response theory, and is quantitatively verified by gyromagnetic effect experiments. (3) The kinetic energy density of the supercurrent is given by This follows from general properties of the superconducting state. (4) Superconductors exhibit many properties that establish that the superfluid is described by a singleparticle-like macroscopic wavefunction Ψ( r) that has a well-defined macroscopic phase φ( r). The gradient of the phase is related to the superfluid velocity and the magnetic vector potential. (5) For a rotating superconductor, the superfluid speed is given by Eq. ( We believe that the points (1)-( To start, we need to decide what is the equation relating the gradient of the phase, the superfluid velocity and the magnetic vector potential. We argue that Eq. ( If Eq. ( If instead Eq. ( and this is inconsistent with Eq. ( In addition, we have shown in Sect. VI that BCS theory in the standard many-body treatment of Appendix A is incompatible with the phase rigidity that is implied by either the phase equations Eq. Finally and independently, we have argued that BCS theory is incompatible with the known expression for the kinetic energy density of the supercurrent Eq. ( However this is not the kinetic energy of electrons within Bloch theory of solids under any circumstances. Using m e as prefactor in Eq. ( In summary, we have given several different independent arguments that establish that BCS theory to describe superconductivity in nature and Bloch theory of solids are mutually incompatible. The conclusion is that BCS theory in its current form is only consistent if we assume it applies to a free electron system, i.e. if m * = m e . When F. London first introduced Eq. ( he called the left-hand-side the 'mean momentum field of the superelectrons' and pointed out that ∇ × p s = 0 describes the Meissner effect The findings discussed in this paper imply that the conventional BCS-London theory of superconductivity applied to electrons in energy bands of solids, as done in Refs. The problem, we propose, lies in the key BCS assumption that the states that define the BCS wavefunction Eq. ( The considerations in this paper suggest that the only consistent way to interpret experiments in superconductors is to assume that electrons in the superconducting state of metals respond to applied external fields as perfectly free electrons. In other words, that carriers condensing into the superfluid state and contributing to the supercurrent become completely 'undressed' from electron-ion, electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions, that in the normal state dress the electron and make it respond with an effective mass m * rather than its bare mass m e . This assumption consistently explains the experimental observations discussed in this paper, and it says that Eq. ( We have assumed an isotropic band structure in this paper for simplicity. Of course many real solids are anisotropic. In the conventional treatment it is assumed that the effective mass is a tensor and the London kernel is so that along a principal axis the current is given by with the superfluid velocity given by and the superfluid mechanical momentum for one carrier in a simply connected superconductor is given by It follows from the discussion in this paper that whether to ascribe observed anisotropies in the London penetration depth to an effective mass tensor or to a carrier density tensor is not semantics, as generally assumed. The latter is the only possible choice, and it is experimentally verifiable through Compton scattering experiments. Assuming readers agree that the points made in this paper are correct, and even before experimental confirmation by Compton scattering experiments, we suggest that the focus of theoretical research in superconductivity should switch to understanding how normal carriers in solids, governed by complicated band structures and 'dressed' by electron-ion, electron-electron and electronphonon interactions, become completely 'undressed' from these interactions so that they respond as free electrons in the superconducting state. This was in fact the generally held view in the early days of superconductivity Within the alternative theory of hole superconductivity In first quantized form, the electric current density is given by J = (e/V ) i v i with V the volume and the velocity of the i-th particle given by with p i canonical momentum operator for the i-th particle ( p i = ( /i) ∇ i ), so the current density is with J 1 and J 2 the so-called paramagnetic and diamagnetic currents. We assume the vector potential A is in the Coulomb gauge, ∇ • A = 0. Next we rewrite J 1 and J 2 in second quantized form using as single particle basis the Bloch eigenfunctions of the single electron problem in the lattice ionic potential: with n labeling the n-th band and k momentum (we omit vector notation on k for simplicity) to obtain assuming a uniform vector potential A. The operator c † nkσ creates an electron with wavefunction Ψ nk ( r) and spin σ in the n-th band, with band energy ǫ nk . We assume for simplicity an isotropic system and zero temperature. To lowest order in A the currents are given by with K 1 and K 2 the so-called 'paramagnetic' and 'diamagnetic' London kernels. K 2 is simply obtained by taking the expectation value of J 2 in the BCS ground state where the partially filled band n = 0 is the band giving rise to superconductivity. We assume for simplicity this is the lowest energy band, so that all other bands n > 0 are empty at zero temperature in the absence of applied fields. To lowest order in A, the diamagnetic current is simply the expectation value of J 2 in the BCS ground state: so that the diamagnetic kernel is with n k = 2|v k | 2 as given by Eq. ( To compute the paramagnetic kernel we need the ground state wavefunction to first order in A. The perturbing Hamiltonian in first quantized form is given by expanding ( p -(e/c) A) 2 /2m e as Its second quantized form for uniform A is The wavefunction to first order in A is given by where E G is the energy of the BCS ground state, and E m the energy of the excited state |Ψ m >. Taking the expectation value of the paramagnetic current J 1 with this wavefunction yields (A12) When H 1 operates on the BCS ground state it destroys an electron in band n ′ = 0 and creates one in band n, either n = 0 or n > 0. Thus, there are two types of contributions to Eq. (A12) resulting from the states with n = 0 and n > 0 respectively. For the contribution from the n = 0 states the calculation is exactly as described in Tinkham the BCS quasiparticle excitation energy, μ the chemical potential and ∆ the BCS gap. We are assuming an isotropic system and p is any one component of the momentum operator. Now the oscillator strength sum rule for Bloch electrons for isotropic energy bands yields with m * k defined by Eq. ( which should be an excellent approximation when |v k | 2 = 0. Eq. (A13) then yields we obtain for the paramagnetic London kernel and for the total kernel in agreement with Eq. which agrees with Eq. ( and the mechanical momentum density is Note that P 1 is the canonical momentum density for the many-electron system. The fact that its T = 0 expectation value Eq. ( Assuming the validity of Eq. ( which also applies to tight binding models such as the Hubbard model. Comparing Eqs. (B2) and (B3), The density of electrons in the system described by the BCS wavefunction Eq. ( When solving for the BCS wavefunction one picks the chemical potential μ so that n e given by Eq. (B5) yields the density of electrons in the normal state. μ will be very close to the Fermi energy in the normal state. For a band close to empty we will have m * k ∼ m * for the occupied states independent of k, hence from Eqs. (B4) and (B5) Similarly for a band close to full we will have m * k ∼ (-m * ) independent of k for the empty states, the density of empty states in the band is and These equations are valid in the absence of disorder at zero temperature. In the presence of disorder they will remain essentially unchanged in the clean limit Eqs. (B6) and (B8) say that the number of carriers in the supercurrent, n s , at zero temperature, in the clean limit, is not equal to the number of electrons in the Bloch or tight binding band when the band is almost empty, nor equal to the number of holes when the band is almost full. An explanation of this inconsistency has not been proposed in the scientific literature to our knowledge. It implies that a perfect conductor and a superconductor would behave differently under application of a magnetic field, which is contrary to the general understanding. Note that it resembles what has been termed the 'condensate saga' in the study of superfluid 4 He 