FeSe is an iron-based superconductor of immense current interest due to the large enhancements of Tc that occur when it is pressurized or grown as a single layer on an insulating substrate. Here we report precision measurements of its superconducting electrodynamics, at frequencies of 202 and 658 MHz and at temperatures down to 0.1 K. The quasiparticle conductivity reveals a rapid collapse in scattering on entering the superconducting state that is strongly reminiscent of unconventional superconductors such as cuprates, organics and the heavy fermion material CeCoIn5. At the lowest temperatures the quasiparticle mean free path exceeds 50 μm, a record for a compound superconductor. From the superfluid response we confirm the importance of multiband superconductivity and reveal strong evidence for a finite energy-gap minimum. A recurring theme in correlated electron research is the sensitivity of such materials to small perturbations, which, when applied, can tune the material through a range of distinct electronic ground states. FeSe is one of the simplest iron-based materials, superconducting at its stoichiometric composition and available as high quality single crystals grown using vapour transport methods. In the low frequency limit the electrodynamics of a superconductor are dominated by the superfluid response, giving rise to perfect dc conductivity. Far from being a quiescent state, Cooper pairs are continually being broken apart into quasiparticle excitations then reforming in a phase-coherent manner -such scattering does not degrade a steady current and is important in establishing the equilibrium superfluid density. Surface impedance. The experimentally accessible quantity is the surface impedance, Z s = R s + iX s , with R s ≈ 1 2 ω 2 μ 2 0 λ 3 σ 1 and X s ≈ ωμ 0 λ. As we will show below the quasiparticle lifetimes in FeSe are extraordinarily long for a compound superconductor. Experimentally, this means that the GHz-frequency resonators typically used in this type of measurement are too fast, not allowing the quasiparticles sufficient time to relax during the measurement period. That said, surface resistance measurements face significant difficulties at lower frequencies and are rarely attempted: 39 R s falls off as ω 2 and the characteristic size of resonators increases like 1/ω, making a mm-sized single crystal a negligible perturbation inside a large resonator volume. Our solution has been to employ a special self-resonant coil, of diameter 4 mm and length 10 mm, wound from superconducting Nb wire and operating at ω 1 /2π = 202 MHz and ω 2 /2π = 658 MHz, with empty-coil quality factors of several hundred thousand. Such a resonator has sufficient sensitivity to resolve both the superfluid and quasiparticle response of a mmsized crystal of FeSe. Figure Microwave conductivity. From the surface impedance we obtain the high frequency conductivity σ = σ 1 -iσ 2 . The real part of the conductivity is plotted in Fig. The imaginary part of the conductivity is dominated by the superfluid term, σ s = 1/iωμ 0 λ 2 L , where λ L is the London penetration depth. We plot the frequency-dependent superfluid density, 1/δ(ω) 2 ≡ ωμ 0 σ 2 (ω), in Fig. To gain further insight into the superconducting charge dynamics we have fit a generalized two-fluid model (see Methods) to the complex conductivity: at each temperature this gives the average quasiparticle relaxation rate, Γ, and the London superfluid density. The relaxation rate is plotted in Fig. We will argue below that the energy gap in FeSe has an extended s-wave form, with deep gap-minima -such a state is accompanied by a linear DOS at energies immediately above the gap minimum and possibly leads to FIG. ∝ T in the intermediate temperature range. Below T = 0.5 K, there is insufficient quasiparticle conductivity to carry out accurate fits to the two-fluid model, so Γ is not plotted in this range. At the lowest temperatures the scattering rate is Γ min /2π ≈ 200 MHz, corresponding to hΓ min /k B ≈ 10 mK in temperature units. Using a value of v F ≈ 7 × 10 4 m/s for the Fermi velocity, We emphasize that while the two-band model is used mainly for illustrative purposes, the importance of multiband effects and the presence of finite gap minima -also visible in R s (T ) and σ 1 (T ) -are robust conclusions. In fact, each of the gap values can be directly tied to qualitative features in the temperature dependence of the superfluid density: the gap minimum, ∆ min , is fixed by the small range of temperatures over which thermally activated behaviour is observed; ∆ 2 , the average value of the gap in the subdominant band, is linked to the upwards curvature in ρ s (T ), which occurs in a range near T c /3; and the dominant gap, ∆ 1 , is set by T c itself. It is worth mentioning that the factor of 3 ratio between ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 is difficult to obtain in purely repulsive models of pairing, as the dominant interaction in that case is the interband pairing, The observation of activated exponential temperature dependence in our low temperature data and the concomitant identification of finite gap minima are at odds with reports of line nodes in FeSe, in particular the measurements of superfluid density and thermal conductivity in Ref. 30. As pointed out in the introduction, several tunnelling spectroscopy experiments present V-shaped spectra that at first sight appear to be indicative of gap nodes, Samples. High quality single crystals of FeSe were grown by vapour transport using the method described in Ref. 19. The sample used for the microwave conductivity experiment was a mm-sized platelet, cleaved from a thicker crystal to have a thickness along the c direction of t = 15 μm. Surface impedance and microwave conductivity. Measurements of surface impedance, Zs = Rs + iXs, were made at two frequencies using cavity perturbation Generalized two-fluid model and modified Drude conductivity. For the purposes of extracting relaxation rate Γ and extrapolating superfluid density to the zero-frequency limit we fit conductivity data to a generalized two-fluid model 54 where Γ = Γ × y 2 sin( π y ) is a convenient scaling that makes the integrated quasiparticle spectral weight independent of y. The imaginary part of the quasiparticle conductivity is obtained using a Kramers-Krönig transform Two-band extended s-wave superconductor. To model the superfluid density, calculations are made for a clean-limit, two-band superconductor in which the angle dependence of the superconducting order parameter in bands ν = 1, 2 has the form ∆ν (T )Ων (φ), where Ων (φ) = 1 + √ 2αν cos(2φ) / 1 + α 2 ν takes an extended s-wave form, normalized so that Ω 2 ν (φ) φ = 1. Here αν controls the degree of gap anisotropy, with gap nodes appearing for αν ≥ 1/ √ 2. We follow the weak-coupling Eilenberger method described in Ref. 62, modified to incorporate angle-dependent order parameters. Specifically, we solve the self-consistent gap equation where the ωn are the fermionic Matsubara frequencies and the frequency cut-off ω D is set by the measured Tc. The relative densities of states nν and the coupling constants λνμ have the same form as in Ref. 62 and, subject to the constraints n 1 + n 2 = 1 and λνμ = λμν , are adjustable parameters. The normalized superfluid density, ρs = λ 2 (0)/λ 2 (T ), is directly computed from ∆ 1 (T ) and ∆ 2 (T ) and is a simple linear combination of the contribution from each band: ρs(T ) = γρ 1 (T ) + (1 -γ)ρ 2 (T ), where the parameter γ controls the relative magnitude of the superfluid weights.