Sr2RuO4 is a prototypical multi-band superconductor with three bands crossing the Fermi level. These bands exhibit distinct dimensional characteristics, with one quasi-2D γ-band and two quasi-1D αand β-bands. This leads to the expectation that the superconductivity on the γ-band may be only weakly Josephson-coupled to that on the other two bands. Based on an explicit microscopic weak coupling calculation appropriate for Sr2RuO4, we study the collective Leggett modes associated with the relative phase oscillations between the bands and show that a relatively soft Leggett mode exists due to the comparatively weaker inter-band Josephson coupling. These calculations also provide insight into why the superconducting gap magnitudes may be comparable on all three bands, despite the noticeable differences between the γ and α/β bands. The analyses can be readily applied to other multi-band superconductors. Multi-band superconductors possess physical properties that are not present in single-band superconductors. Depending on the nature of the interactions driving the Cooper pairing and the orbital character of the bands, the superconducting order parameter may not be dominated by one band with only much weaker induced superconductivity on the other bands. This is particularly so in multi-band systems with unconventional pairing symmetry, where the correlations underlying the superconductivity often involve electrons on different bands strongly interacting with each other. These inter-band interactions give rise to effective Josephson couplings between the superconducting order parameters of the different bands Under external perturbations or at finite temperatures, the relative phase between the multiple order parameters can fluctuate, costing a finite amount of energy that is determined by the inter-band couplings. These collective excitations are commonly referred to as Leggett modes. There is some experimental evidence in favor of comparable superconductivity on all three bands of Sr 2 RuO 4 , Zhitomirsky and Rice In a chiral p-wave superconductor, whether single-band or multi-band, additional phase modes may also arise in connection with the relative phase fluctuations between the two chiral components. These are referred to in literature as "clapping" modes. Finally, although there is strong evidence for the timereversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) chiral p-wave superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 , The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first formulate in Sec I a qualitative description of the multi-band superconductivity in Sr 2 RuO 4 , and then substantiate in Sec II with inputs obtained from microscopic weak coupling calculations. We then make specific analyses of the Leggett modes, along with a discussion of the experimental consequence in connection with Raman scattering in Sec III. Finally we examine the possibility of exotic TRSB multi-band chiral and helical pairings in Sec IV. As is clear from the above discussion, a study of the multi-band dynamics in Sr 2 RuO 4 requires a knowledge of the Josephson couplings between the multiple order parameters on the three bands. We start here by introducing an effective model to qualitatively capture the main features of the interband couplings. Despite the lack of microscopic accuracy, this model is instructive for understanding the properties of the ground state and the collective phase modes. The effective Hamiltonian may be written as, Here μ = α, β, γ are the band indices, m μ is the effective mass for band-μ, and σ represent pseudospins which differ from the original spin indices due to spin-orbit coupling. The second term describes the effective electron-electron interactions between band-μ and band-ν in a particular presumed pairing channel (different channels are characterized by different effective interactions). These interactions presumably originate from Coulomb correlations and their associated particle-hole density-wave fluctuations. Note that we are only considering intra-and inter-band interactions which scatter pairs of electrons, respectively, within a band and from one band to another. Effectively, this amounts to having no inter-band Cooper pairs. No particular forms are specified for the interactions V μν (rr ′ ) at this point. However, it is assumed that such interactions lead to the highly anisotropic chiral p-wave pairing with comparable pairing amplitudes on all of the bands, as found in earlier calculations. As is elaborated in Appendix A, the eigenvectors of the interaction matrix V qualitatively approximate the possible order parameter configurations in the presumed pairing channel. In particular, the eigenstate with the most attractive eigenvalue corresponds to the most favorable configuration. After a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation in the Cooper channel using auxiliary fields ∆ μ (the superconducting order parameter) and integrating out the fermionic fields, the effective action becomes, where the first term may be simplified to , and the Gor'kov Green's function is given by Ĝ In this action we have ignored the vector potential which is irrelevant to our discussion. Particular attention is due for the coupling matrix V, whose off-diagonal elements describe inter-band Josephson couplings. Our expectation of much weaker V αγ and V βγ compared to V αβ as well as the other interactions immediately leads to interband couplings of similar nature. On these bases, we take, with Here V 0 sets the overall interaction energy scale, the quantities λ and η 1 /η 2 describe respectively the inter-band α-β and γ-α/β Josephson couplings, while the a i 's are the intra-band couplings irrelevant to the rigidity of the relative phases between the bands. Noting the similarity between the quasi-1D bands, one may approximate The rigidity of the relative phase between the bands is determined by the inter-band couplings. Assuming the same order parameter amplitude on all bands, and setting λ > 0, η 1 ∼ η 2 = η < 0 in light of our numerical results to be presented in the next section, our analyses follow the standard procedure where for simplicity we have assumed similar density of states N 0 and gap amplitudes on all bands. This mode is a consequence of phase fluctuations on the γ-band with respect to the other two bands. In the limit of vanishing interaction between the two sets of bands, this mode becomes massless. The particular set of inter-band couplings considered above is free of frustration (see Sec IV). On the other hand, a set of frustrated inter-band interactions not realized in our model of Sr 2 RuO 4 , such as one that would lead to λ > 0, η 1 > 0 and η 2 < 0, gives rise to an anomalously soft Leggett mode, as has been shown previously We now present a microscopic calculation of the interaction matrix V for Sr 2 RuO 4 . The first step is to obtain the effective band interactions using the microscopic Hamiltonian of the three Ru t 2g 4d-orbitals. This can be achieved following the weak coupling renormalization group calculations by Scaffidi et al. Most crucially, the study starts with on-site Coulomb inter-actions in the orbital basis, where i is the site index, a = xz, yz, xy is the orbital index, s denotes the spin, n ias ≡ c † ias c ias , U ′ = U -2J, and J ′ = J where J is the Hund's coupling. Following Raghu et al., For a range of interaction and tight-binding parameters thought to be appropriate for Sr 2 RuO 4 , an anisotropic chiral p-wave pairing emerges as the most attractive solution to the gap equation (although a helical pairing represents a close competitor, see also Sec IV). We denote this gap in the following form, where φ μ (k) is the normalized form factor of the full anisotropic chiral p-wave gap function on band-μ, and the vector ∆ = (∆ 0α , ∆ 0β , ∆ 0γ ) T , with its elements indicating the relative phase and magnitude of the order parameters on the three bands, specifies the order parameter configuration. Note that these anisotropic pairing gaps in general lead to noticeably reduced edge current, where v μ (k) is the μ-band Fermi velocity at Fermi wavevector k. For the parameters J/U = 0.06, λ SOC = 0.1t, 56 used in Scaffidi et al. where V 0 > 0 sets the overall interaction energy scale in the pairing channel under consideration. Most notable features of this matrix include: a rather strong interaction between the two quasi-1D bands, considerably weaker inter-band interactions between the quasi 1D and 2D bands, and comparable intra-band couplings on the two quasi-1D bands, all of which are roughly consistent with the qualitative observation in the previous section. We verify that these main features are generic for a broad range of interaction parameters (also see (12) in Sec IV), and for spin-orbit coupling smaller than 0.1t. Note that in this calculation, λ SOC = 0.1t already represents a rather strong spin-orbit coupling Following Appendix A, solving the compact gap equation (A4) which is related to (9), we obtain two attractive solutions, with the leading one given by ∆ ∼ (0.33, 0.31, 0.89) T , 57 i.e. comparable gap amplitudes on the three bands similar to what was originally obtained in Ref. 15. In this regard, the Vmatrix encapsulates crucial information about the multi-band character of the superconducting state in the pairing channel under consideration. The noticeable attractive interaction on the γ-band can be attributed to the proximity to the van Hove singularity on that band. Interestingly, the quasi-1D bands experience repulsive intra-band interactions which disfavor Cooper pairing. This is however compensated by a strong interaction induced by the pronounced incommensurate spin fluctuations between the two bands, which is even stronger than the intra-band interaction on γ, to make the pairing strengths on the two sets of bands comparable. In fact, over a wide parameter range (0 < J/U < 0.3) one finds comparable gap magnitudes on all bands. In addition, in contrast to the results found here and originally in Scaffidi et al. To analyze the collective phase modes, we turn to the Josephson coupling matrix V = -V -1 using (9), The qualitative features of the inter-band couplings we discussed below (4) are reproduced. The excitation gap of the soft Leggett mode may now be obtained following Appendix B, where we have used the relation 2.8∆ 0α ≃ 2.8∆ 0β ≃ ∆ 0γ = ∆ 0 obtained above. One may use a rough weak-coupling estimate N 0 V 0 ≃ 0.2. Thus the energy required to excite this mode (∼ 0.64∆ 0 ) is lower than the 2∆ 0 needed to break a Cooper pair in a fully gapped isotropic superconductor. Nevertheless, due to the strong anisotropy of the superconducting gap structure, low-lying quasi-particles should also exist well below 2∆ 0 . Furthermore, with weaker spin-orbit coupling, η 1 and η 2 decrease, thus the Leggett mode becomes softer accordingly. Finally, at constant ∆ 0γ , w L increases (decreases) with increasing (decreasing) ∆ 0α,β . We now discuss the experimental consequences for the Leggett modes. These collective phase modes couple indirectly to external electromagnetic fields and hence can be excited by photons in optical probes, such as electronic Raman spectroscopy. The Raman response can be derived via standard linear response theory, and we refer to Refs 49,58-60 for details. Essentially, when the frequency difference between the appropriate incident and scattered photons matches the excitation gap of a collective mode, the Raman spectrum exhibits a sharp resonance, as has been observed in the multiband MgB 2 superconductor In addition to the Leggett modes, there exists another form of collective phase fluctuations in chiral superconductors -the so-called clapping modes Following the derivations in Ref. 49, we plot in Fig 2 typical A 1g Raman response for a three-band chiral p-wave model of Sr 2 RuO 4 using (10). We have considered two different scenarios, one with smaller gap amplitude on the α and β-bands, another with approximately equal gaps on all bands. In both cases, the Leggett mode manifests as a peak in the spectra. In the cases of sufficiently distinct gaps on the two sets of bands, however, the Leggett mode peak can in principle overlap (as in Fig. In summary, the existence of a low-frequency peak in the A 1g channel of the Raman spectrum should be a characteristic feature of the relatively soft Leggett mode in the multiband Sr 2 RuO 4 . However, some technical difficulties in Raman spectroscopy, such as laser heating, must be overcome in order to perform measurement at sub-Kelvin temperatures. Furthermore, since the Leggett mode resides at sub-meV frequency range, it may be obscured by the wings of the elastic peak in the Raman spectrum. Here we examine the possibility of TRSB multi-band pairing. This has been predicted for some multi-band (three or more bands) systems when there are two degenerate or near degenerate order parameters, as can occur when the inter-band interactions are frustrated. For the chiral channel of Sr 2 RuO 4 , the inter-band interactions in ( If two solutions are sufficiently close to degeneracy, whether the two solutions would form a TRSB complex order parameter can then be analyzed using an effective Ginzburg-Landau theory (see Appendix C). Taking order parameter fields ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 to denote the respective amplitudes of the leading and subleading solutions, we find that the relative phase between the two is determined by three quartic terms in the free energy: , the first two of which favor a non-TRSB real superposition of the two fields, while the last term promotes complex superposition. Since ∆ 1 dominates below T c , the β ′ term is most significant. We thus conclude that this type of complex multi-band order parameter is unlikely to develop in our system. Another interesting possibility is a TRSB helical state. However, we verify through our microscopic calculations that the inter-band interactions in the helical channel are qualitatively similar to those of the chiral channel (thus our previous discussions of a relatively soft Leggett mode equally applies to the helical channel). For example, using J/U = 0.08, λ SOC = 0.1t, as in Ref. 15, we obtain for the helical channel, similar to (9), Thus the inter-band interactions are also unfrustrated. The leading attractive order parameter has ∆ ∼ (0.50, 0.65, 0.57), i.e. comparable gap amplitudes on the thee bands as in the chiral channel. Combined with the Ginzburg-Landau analysis, we see that the TRSB multi-band pairing is equally unlikely in this channel. In this work we have focused on some novel aspects of Sr 2 RuO 4 associated with the multi-band nature of the superconductivity in this material. Our qualitative and quantitative analyses yield a consistent description of the multi-band interactions and couplings between the three bands. In particular, in line with an earlier argument, In addition, our microscopically evaluated band interactions indicate comparable pairing interactions on the quasi-1D and 2D bands, although from quite different origins, thus clarifying the origin for Sr 2 RuO 4 to exhibit comparable gaps on the three bands. We note this is compatible with specific heat measurements Finally, although our discussions are focused on Sr 2 RuO 4 , the analyses are suitable for studying the nature of multi-band superconductivity in other systems. We define the effective interactions between the bands as, For a one-band system, this returns the effective interaction originally formulated in Ref. 55. Note that if we take a loose approximation A α ≃ A β ≃ A γ = A 0 (which is roughly correct for most of our numerical calculations), the eigen vectors of V0 (or V ) constitute the solutions to the gap equation. In conjunction with the discussions below (2) in the main text, we obtain for the inter-band Josephson coupling, up to an overall constant of the order of the density of states, As a side remark, the relative signs of the ∆ 0μ 's depend on the choice of gauge but the physics remains the same. For example, one can assign an arbitrary sign to the form factor of, say band-i, which according to (A3) results in a change in the signs of both V ij 0 and V ik 0 for i = j and i = k. This yields sign changes in the corresponding Josephson couplings V ij and V ik . However, neither the eigenvalues of (A4) nor the masses of the collective phase excitations are altered because of the sign change. A gauge transformation cannot change the sign of only one of the three inter-band couplings. Thus one can classify the multi-band superconductivity based on the configuration of the signs of the inter-band Josephson couplingsa classification beyond the lattice point group symmetries. by diagonalizing (B5), Here w G denotes the usual U (1) Goldstone mode, which would be massive had we properly included the vector potential in our formalism; w L1 and w L2 are the relative phase Leggett modes. Crucially, the excitation gap of the L1 mode, as determined by the γ-α/β inter-band Josephson coupling, may be considerably smaller than the superconducting gap. This is the soft Leggett mode we anticipated. Interestingly, in our case described by, e.g. ( To summarize, a relatively soft Leggett mode exists in all scenarios, provided the ground state features comparable pairing gaps on the three bands. Here we discuss the scenario where two nearly degenerate attractive order parameter configurations emerge, T c2 ), and the two fields ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 describe the amplitude of the superconducting order parameter in the corresponding solutions. In correspondence with the interactions given in (9), for example, η1 = (0.33, 0.31, 0.89) T and η2 = (0.70, 0.67, -0.25) We wish to see if it is favorable for ∆ 2 to coexist with the primary ∆ 1 below the superconducting transition and form a complex order parameter. The free energy density reads, where "..." stands for higher order terms, α i ∼ (T -T c,i )/T c,i , and all of the β-coefficients can be derived from the microscopic band structure and (C1). Here ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 share the same point group symmetry and U (1) symmetry (instead of separate U (1)), thus the terms with β ′ and β ′′ are allowed. It can be shown that β 1,2 , β 12 , β > 0, while β ′ and β ′′ can take both signs and are in general non-vanishing. Note in Maiti and Chubukov Although ∆ 2 is not expected to condense right below T c1 , the coupling between ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 associated with the β ′ term immediately induces a non-vanishing ∆ 2 growing with ∆ 1 as |∆ 2 | ∝ |∆ 1 | 3 ∝ [(T c -T )/T c ] 3 Irrespective of how a non-vanishing ∆ 2 may arise below T c1 , when the two fields coexist, their relative phase is determined by the last three quartic terms in the free energy, of which the β-term favors a TRSB complex superposition, while the β ′ -and β ′′ -terms favor non-TRSB order parameters. Since |∆ 1 | ≫ |∆ 2 |, the β ′ term dominates. Thus we conclude that our system is unlikely to sustain a TRSB complex multi-band order parameter.