We study effects of a chiral helimagnet (CHM) on vortex states in a superconductor, solving the Ginzburg-Landau equations in a chiral helimagnet/superconductor bilayer system. We found that vortices form a periodically modulated triangular lattice, because the magnetic field from the chiral helimagnetH CHM oscillates spatially. An increase of a critical current is expected, because vortices are pinned by the H CHM . A vortex state is one of important features for applications of superconductors. Vortex states depend on an external magnetic field and an external current. It is known that a magnetic field from a ferromagnet affects the vortex state of the superconductor Magnetic materials like a ferromagnet affect a superconductor. One of magnetic materials that attracts attention recently is a chiral helimagnet(CHM). The CHM has an interesting magnetic structure. The CHM consists of spins that form the helical rotation along one direction. A spin structure of the CHM comes from two interactions between nearest neighbor spins; a ferromagnetic exchange interaction and the Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya (DM) interaction In the previous study, we found that the chiral helimagnet affects a vortex configuration in a superconductor In this paper, we study effects of a chiral helimagnet on a vortex configuration in a superconductor in more detail. We compare vortex configurations with/without the magnetic field from the CHM under the applied homogeneous magnetic field. In order to investigate vortex configurations, we solve the Ginzburg-Landau equations with the finite element method. We consider a chiral helimagnet/superconductor bilayer system in Fig. We assume that the effect of the chiral helimagnet on the superconductor is given by an external magnetic field H CHM but effects of the superconductor on the chiral helimagnet are neglected. In this study, the superconducting layer is considered as a two-dimensional system and only the perpendicular component of the magnetic field H CHM is taken into account. In order to investigate vortex configurations in this bilayer system, we solve the Ginzburg-Landau equations, where α = α 0 (T -T c ), T is a temperature, T c is a critical temperature, α 0 (> 0) and β(> 0) are coefficients, ψ is an superconducting order parameter, m * is an effective mass, e * is an effective charge, A is a magnetic vector potential, H ext is an external magnetic field, and J is a supercurrent density. In the second equation, the Maxwell equation is included. The magnetic field from the chiral helimagnet H CHM is included in the external magnetic field H ext . H CHM is obtained from a Hamiltonian for chiral helimagnet The first term is a magnetic field from the chiral helimagnet H CHM , where H 0 is strength of the magnetic field from the CHM. The second term is an applied magnetic field H appl . H * is a normalized magnetic field, where a is a lattice constant. k (0 ≤ k ≤ 1) is a modulus of the Jacobi's elliptic function sn(x|k) and determined by, φ = tan -1 (D/J) and E(k) is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind. A relation between k and H * is shown in Fig. A period of the helical rotation L ′ is given by, where K(k) is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind. A relation between L and H * is shown in Fig. We show vortex configurations in a twodimensional superconductor system under the H CHM and H appl . We take the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ = λ 0 /ξ 0 = 10 (λ 0 and ξ 0 are a penetration length and coherence length at T = 0, respectively), the temperature T = 0.3T c , and the ratio between two interactions D/J = 0.16, which is taken from the experimental data for Cr 1/3 NbS 2 We show vortex configurations under the applied magnetic field in Fig. We can explain this result by a following reason; this modulation comes from the magnetic field from the chiral helimagnet H CHM . The chiral helimagnet has a helical magnetic structure, so z-component of the magnetic field (H CHM ) z oscillates spatially. For H 0 /(Φ 0 /ξ 2 0 ) = 0.0025 (Fig. Therefore, a periodic modulated triangular lattice is formed. Here, we discuss a dynamics of a vortex under the applied magnetic field and the magnetic field from the chiral helimagnet. When a current flows along the y-direction, vortices move along the x-direction. However, under H CHM , vortices is difficult to move through the region where the magnetic field is low or negative. Therefore, a movement of a vortex is restricted and a pinning effect of the vortex due to the chiral helimagnet is expected. This leads to the increase of the critical current. We have investigated the effect of the chiral helimagnet on the vortex configuration. Under the applied magnetic field and the magnetic field from the CHM, vortices form the periodically modulated triangular lattice. It is expected that this vortex configuration leads to a pinning effect and the increase of the critical current.