The conventional approach to circuit quantization is based on node fluxes and traces the motion of node charges on the islands of the circuit. However, for some devices, the relevant physics can be best described by the motion of polarization charges over the branches of the circuit that are in general related to the node charges in a highly nonlocal way. Here, we present a method, dual to the conventional approach, for quantizing planar circuits in terms of loop charges. In this way, the polarization charges are directly obtained as the differences of the two loop charges on the neighboring loops. The loop charges trace the motion of fluxes through the circuit loops. We show that loop charges yield a simple description of the flux transport across phase-slip junctions. We outline a concrete construction of circuits based on phase-slip junctions that are electromagnetically dual to arbitrary planar Josephson junction circuits. We argue that loop charges also yield a simple description of the flux transport in conventional Josephson junctions shunted by large impedances. We show that a mixed circuit description in terms of node fluxes and loop charges yields an insight into the flux decompactification of a Josephson junction shunted by an inductor. As an application, we show that the fluxonium qubit is well approximated as a phase-slip junction for the experimentally relevant parameters. Moreover, we argue that the 0-π qubit is effectively the dual of a Majorana Josephson junction. Superconducting circuits offer the opportunity to study quantum mechanics on mesoscopic scales unimpeded by dissipation. The great flexibility in design of the superconducting circuits has created the field of circuit quantum electrodynamics where superconducting circuits are used as artificial atoms featuring strongly enhanced light-matter coupling compared to standard cavity QED. Due to weak dissipation, such systems can be described quantum-mechanically with an appropriate Hamiltonian. Finding such a Hamiltonian is the task of circuit quantization. In recent years, there has been a large interest in realizing purely reactive impedances, called "superinductances" L, with small parasitic capacitance C such that the characteristic impedance Z = L/C is much larger than the superconducting resistance quantum R Q = h/4e 2 . In view of the growing interest in superinductances and phase-slip junctions in the large-impedance setting, we provide here a dual approach to circuit quantization in terms of loop charges. As we will show, it yields a simple description of planar circuits involving phase-slip junctions in the same way as the use of node fluxes yields a simple description of circuits involving Josephson junctions. Loop charges are the time-integrated currents circulating in the loops of a planar circuit and their canonical momenta are the physical fluxes within the loops. While in the node flux formulation terms in the Hamiltonian relate to the transport of the physical charges on the islands, the loop charge formulation describes the transport of the physical fluxes within the loops. In contrast, here we are interested in presenting a formulation that makes circuit quantization straightforward in the sense that the Lagrangian can be obtained immediately from the circuit graph using a set of simple rules. In Sec. II A, we give a brief introduction to the node flux formulation, including a more extensive discussion of its problems with the description of phase-slip junctions. In Sec. II B, we introduce the new loop charge formulation. We provide simple rules for the construction of the Lagrangian of a lumped element circuit and discuss the Legendre transform to the Hamiltonian formulation. We also discuss how to handle offset charges, external fluxes, and voltage or current sources. In Sec. III, we discuss the duality between the node flux and the loop charge formulation. In Sec. III A, we consider passive duality transformations where the same system is described using different variables and explicitly construct the transformation from the node flux to the loop charge representation of a given circuit. This section may be skipped on first reading since in practice it is sufficient and much easier to use the rules given in Sec. II B for the construction of the loop charge Lagrangian. In Sec. III B, we consider active duality transformations which yield new circuits electromagnetically dual to a given circuit. We show how to construct electromagnetic duals of arbitrary circuits using the loop charge formulation. In Sec. IV, we discuss how to introduce dissipation in circuits described by loop charges. In Sec. V, we extend the formalism to mixed circuit descriptions where part of the circuit is described in terms of node fluxes and some other part in terms of loop charges. This leads to additional insights regarding the flux decompactification of inductively shunted Josephson junctions. As a last point, let us, for the convenience of the reader, briefly comment on the conventions and the terminology that we will use in this paper. We will represent a circuit as a directed graph which we will occasionally also refer to as the (electrical) network. Following conventions from electrical engineering, we will also use the term branches when referring to the edges of the circuit and the word node when referring to the vertices. In contrast, we will simply refer to the loops of the circuits as loops and refrain from using the word meshes. Throughout this work, φ will denote fluxes in terms of which the superconducting phase differences are given by 2πφ/Φ Q with the superconducting flux quantum Φ Q = h/2e. In the lumped element approximation, an electrical circuit is described as a graph where each branch represents a two-terminal electrical element such as a capacitor, an inductor, a voltage source, and so forth. In order to consistently keep track of the orientations, we assign an orientation to each branch of the graph which specifies the direction in which a positive current flows and the direction of a positive voltage drop. The lumped element approximation yields a simplified circuit description that is valid as long as the propagation time of electromagnetic waves between the circuit elements is negligible, i.e., the circuit dimensions are much smaller than the wave-length of electromagnetic radiation at the frequencies of interest. While in the general case, characterizing the circuit requires the calculation of the microscopic electric and magnetic fields within the circuit from Maxwell's equations, within the lumped element approximation, it is sufficient to know the voltage drops V br It is convenient to work exclusively with independent voltages V or currents I which determine all the voltage drops V br (V ) and current flows I br (I) within the circuit in such a way that either the Kirchhoff voltage law or the current law is automatically fulfilled. The dynamics of the voltages V or currents I is governed by differential equations obtained after applying the remaining Kirchhoff law together with the constitutive laws. The constitutive laws are most easily stated in terms of branch fluxes φ br and branch charges q br defined as where V br and I br are the vectors of branch voltages and currents, respectively. For a capacitor on branch b, q br b can be interpreted as the (polarization) charge on one of the capacitor plates 31 and the constitutive law assumes the form where the voltage is given by f V (q) = q/C for an ideal capacitor C. For a phase-slip junction, on the other hand, the function f V (q) is periodic with period 2e. In the simplest model, we obtain the expression f V (q) = V c sin(πq/e), with V c the critical voltage. For inductors, Faraday's law yields an interpretation of φ br b (t) as the flux threading the inductor and the constitutive law takes the form with f I (φ) = φ/L for an ideal inductance L. The constitutive relations (3) and ( The choice between a flux-based or a charge-based approach is restricted by two considerations. The first restriction comes from circuit quantization. For circuit quantization, we require the circuit Lagrangian L(x, ẋ) for the degrees of freedom x i to be of the standard form L = T ( ẋ) -U (x) known from classical mechanics, where T is a quadratic form corresponding to a kinetic energy term and U is a potential energy term. The other restriction comes from the constitutive laws. For example, the constitutive relation (3) shows that the charge q br b may be a convenient degree of freedom for the description of a capacitor since it determines both the current I br b = qbr b and the voltage V br b through relation (3). Similarly, the flux φ br b may be a convenient degree of freedom for the description of an inductor since it determines the voltage V br b = φbr b and the current through relation ( The Kirchhoff voltage law states that the "vector field" φ br is conservative. Therefore the Kirchhoff voltage law can automatically be satisfied provided the fluxes φ br are represented via the "gradient" of a potential. In the discrete graph setting, the potential is given by the node fluxes φ n that are placed on each node n of the circuit. For a branch b directed from node n to node n , the branch flux φ br b is obtained as the discrete gradient φ br b = φ n -φ n of the node fluxes (along b). In this way, the node fluxes determine all the voltage drops over the branches Example network with the loop charges Q1 and Q2, which are the time-integrated currents circulating in the loops in the specified orientation, and their conjugate momenta Φ1 and Φ2, which are the fluxes in the respective loops. For comparison, we also indicate node fluxes φ1 and φ2 at two nodes (shown as dots) of the network together with their conjugate momenta q1 and q2 which are the charges on the islands. For general networks the physical charge across a branch is related to the charges on the islands in a highly nonlocal way. In contrast, it is easy to see that using the loop charges Q1 and Q2, we obtain the local expression q br b = Q1 -Q2 for the polarization charge across the phase-slip junction (diamond) taking their respective orientations into account. We have also indicated the transverse flux flow through the phase-slip junction (gray double-headed arrow). In contrast to a normal capacitor, in a phase-slip junction, the flow of flux is quantized in units of the superconducting flux quantum ΦQ. This expresses the duality to a Josephson junction which features longitudinal charge-transport in the direction of the element which is quantized in units of the Cooper-pair charge 2e. of the circuit. Since the physical voltages depend only on differences of node fluxes, we may arbitrarily set the flux of one of the nodes (called the ground node) to zero. The voltage φn associated with a node flux can then be interpreted as a voltage relative to ground. The Kirchhoff current law is implemented through the equations of motion of a Lagrangian L(φ, φ) which is constructed as follows. Each inductive element at a branch b adds the term -U (φ br b ) to the Lagrangian, where is simply the magnetic field energy as can be easily verified by integrating the power V br b (t)I br b (t) over time and using the relation (4). Similarly, each capacitive element with capacitance C adds a term C φ2 b /2 which is just the electric field energy. The equations of motion with respect to a node flux φ n are given by the Euler-Lagrange equations In both cases, we therefore obtain the current flowing away from node n. We conclude that the equations of motion for the node flux φ n reproduce the Kirchhoff current law at node n. The formalism can straightforwardly be extended to include electromotive forces due to external magnetic fields, see Ref. 14. The form of the constitutive relation (4) indicates that the node flux representation is well-suited for the description of nonlinear inductances. The knowledge of the branch flux φ br b over an inductance readily gives access to the voltage and the current through Eq. (4). Moreover, the terms (5) added to the Lagrangian can simply be interpreted as (possibly nonlinear) potential energy terms which pose no problem for circuit quantization. In contrast, the node flux formulation cannot be used for the description of nonlinear capacitors. The constitutive relation (3) shows that the natural variable for a capacitor is the branch charge q br b rather than the branch flux φ br b . Determining the current flow through the capacitor solely from the knowledge of φ br b is generally impossible. Although for invertible f V,b , we may in principle obtain generating this term through the equations of motion requires adding a term of the form V,b (V ) to the Lagrangian. This will only lead to a quadratic kinetic energy term C φ2 b /2 when considering a linear capacitor C. In contrast, a circuit containing a nonlinear capacitance cannot readily be quantized when described in terms of node fluxes φ n . To that end, we need a charge-based description which we will describe in details in the next section. While the idea of representing the 'vector field' φ br by a 'scalar potential' φ in order to guarantee the Kirchhoff voltage law is rather natural, it may be less obvious how to define charge degrees of freedom which automatically guarantee current conservation. For a planar graph that is effectively two-dimensional such that it can be drawn on a sheet of paper without crossing lines, the correct degrees of freedom for that purpose are the loop charges Q l . They are the time-integrated loop currents circulating within every loop l of the network that does not have any inner loops, c.f. Fig. Similar to the node fluxes, the loop charges are unphysical degrees of freedom in the sense that they generally do not correspond directly to a physical charge on a branch of the network. For example, by simple inspection of Fig. The loop charge construction can also be justified directly from Maxwell's equations. According to Maxwell's equations, current conservation (in a stationary situation) is guaranteed when the current I flowing through some area bounded by a contour γ is obtained from the circulation of the magnetic field according to I ∝ γ ds•B. For each branch b of the network, we can decompose the current I b into a sum of currents I l ∝ γ l ds • B, where each part γ l of the contour is associated with a specific face of the circuit that is pierced by the contour, see Fig. Lagrangian expression of precisely two loop charges when the circuit is planar, i.e., effectively two-dimensional. Having identified the loop charges Q as variables guaranteeing current conservation, we are left with the task of defining a Lagrangian whose equations of motion guarantee the Kirchhoff voltage law. The construction of this Lagrangian is analogous to the construction of the Lagrangian for the node fluxes. Specifically, each capacitive element adds a term -U (q br b ) to the Lagrangian, where is just the electric energy stored in the capacitor. Specifically, for the simplest model f V (Q) = V c sin(πQ/e) of a phase-slip junction, we obtain the term (up to a constant) with the characteristic energy E S = eV c /π. For each linear inductor L, we add a kinetic term of the form L( qbr b ) 2 /2. In this way, the equations of motion with respect to a loop charge Q l yield the balance of voltage drops obtained from a counter-clockwise traversal of the loop l. The relevant terms that have to be added to the Lagrangian are summarized for different components in Fig. A Hamiltonian description requires the introduction of canonical momenta Each Φ l can be interpreted as the loop flux in the loop l of the circuit. If the relation ( and obtain the circuit Hamiltonian which can be readily quantized through the introduction of canonical commutation relations [Φ j , Q k ] = δ jk i . It may happen that the relation ( it is obvious that the state of the system depends only on the current Q through the inductor and not on the currents through the capacitive branches. As a consequence, the Lagrangian does not depend on Q which gives the constraint ∂L/∂ Q = 0 = Φ for the momentum Φ conjugate to Q which cannot be solved for Q . However, the fact that the Lagrangian does not depend on Q also means that the Euler-Lagrange equations for Q are purely algebraic equations (constraints) which can be solved immediately. Resolving the constraint for Q and reinserting the solution into the Lagrangian yields the regular Lagrangian . Resolving all constraints in such a way in general leads to a reduced Lagrangian involving only dynamical degrees of freedom such that the Legendre transformation (10) and quantization can be performed. Superconducting circuits with Josephson junctions or phase-slip junctions may involve transport of strictly quantized charges or fluxes through the circuit. The former situation occurs when a superconducting island is connected to the rest of the network only by capacitors and Josephson junctions. The isolation of the island demands that the node charge q n of the island is quantized in units of 2e which corresponds to a Φ Q -periodicity of the wavefunction in terms of the node flux φ n . The latter situation occurs if a loop l involves only inductors and phase-slip junctions. In this case the flux Φ l in the loop is quantized in units of Φ Q corresponding to a 2eperiodicity of the wavefunction with respect to the corresponding loop charge Q l . Instead of focusing on the circuit to identify islands with integer node charges (in units of 2e) or loops with integer loop fluxes (in units of Φ Q ) to determine the appropriate boundary conditions for the quantization of the fluxes or charges, we may also determine the appropriate choice of boundary conditions by looking at the symmetries of the Hamiltonian. The quantization of fluxes or charges is due to the periodicity of the underlying potentials. If one ignores the periodicity considerations of the wavefunction as described above and works with node fluxes φ or loop charges Q defined on the entire real axis, the periodicity leads to the existence of conserved quantities which correspond to Bloch quasi-momenta. A specific choice of Bloch momentum then corresponds to a choice of initial condition. Due to the relations ( A typical lumped element circuit does not just involve passive elements like capacitors and inductors, but also involves active elements like voltage and current sources. It will also feature electromotive forces due to timevarying fluxes or offset charges on some island of the network. Voltage sources generating a voltage drop V ex i are easily described by adding a term -q br i V ex i to the Lagrangian, where q br i is the corresponding branch charge expressed in terms of the loop charges. Similarly, for a loop l with loop charge Q l and external flux Φ ex l which generates a positive voltage drop V = Φex l in the loop current direction, a term Ql Φ ex l should be added to the Lagrangian. Offset charges are slightly more difficult to handle since they modify the current balance rather than the voltage balance. This means that they cannot be described in terms of loop charges with the simple rules given in Sec. II B since no term added to the equations of motion can modify the current balance. Instead, one must represent them through additional branches which are described in terms of node fluxes. This requires a mixed loop charge/node flux formulation that we will describe in detail in Sec. V. In the end, however, we obtain a simple rule that we will state now for convenience and whose proof we defer to Sec. V. To understand the rule, we first note that the lumped element description requires overall charge neutrality since otherwise there is a net electric field that extends through the circuit and is not confined to the lumped elements. This means that we can only specify n-1 offset charges q ex i with i = 0 on the n islands of the circuit since overall neutrality implies that the offset charges leave behind a charge q ex 0 =i =0 q ex i on the ground node with i = 0. In order to handle the offset charges q ex i , one must consistently keep track of the paths through which the polarization charge propagates on its way from the ground FIG. node to node i. To that end, we use the concept of a spanning tree. For a graph, a spanning tree is defined as a subgraph which does not have any loops and connects all nodes. The branches of the graph that belong to the spanning tree are called tree branches. Since a spanning tree of a connected graph with n nodes has n -1 tree branches, we obtain a one-to-one relation between the n -1 tree branches and the n -1 offset charges. The offset charges can now be included following a number of simple steps. We first choose a ground node and construct a spanning tree of the circuit. In a second step, we express the branch charges q br of the circuit as differences of loop charges, following the same reasoning that we apply in absence of offset charges. As a last step, for all tree branches b, we shift the resulting charge expression q br b by replacing q br b → q br b ± Σ ex b . We use the plus sign if the branch b is directed away from the ground node and the minus sign otherwise. The sum Σ ex b is the sum of all the external offset charges q ex i that have passed through the tree branch b on their unique way from the ground node to node i (within the tree). Note that the specific choice of spanning tree is a gauge in the sense that it has no physical consequences. It only amounts to a redefinition of the meaning of the charges q br b that no longer give the physical charge on the respective tree element. As an example, consider the capacitive network depicted in Fig. Proceeding in a similar way with the other branches, we obtain the Lagrangian We note that in line with our previous discussion, the charge expressions of the branches b 4 and b 6 which do not belong to the tree have not been modified by the offset charges. With the offset charge description, we can simply represent a current source, which injects a current I ex into the circuit and points from node n to node n by adding the offset charge t dt I ex (t ) at node n and the offset charge -t dt I ex (t ) at node n. In the previous section, we have discussed two representations of the Lagrangian of a circuit, one in terms of node fluxes and the other in terms of loop charges. In the following, we will call such a change in description of the same system from node fluxes to loop charges a passive duality transformation. Besides those passive duality transformations of the same circuit, one can also consider active duality transformations which yield a different, electromagnetically dual circuit whose charge dynamics is identical to the flux dynamics of the original circuit or vice-versa. Electromagnetic circuit dualities have been discussed on a per-case basis in the mesoscopic physics literature In this section, we will explain how to explicitly construct both passive and active duality transformations with the help of loop charges. We will start by discussing the explicit construction of passive duality transformations. Previously, we have focused on the question on how to read off the appropriate Lagrangian in either representation directly from a given circuit graph. We now show how one can transform one representation into the other. While this is of technical interest, we want to highlight that this subsection may be skipped on first reading since in practice it is sufficient and much easier to use the rules given in Sec. II B for the construction of the loop charge Lagrangian. We proceed by outlining in Sec. III B a straightforward way of constructing electromagnetic circuit dualities using loop charges. The transformation from the node flux to a loop charge representation is particularly easy to perform in the path integral picture. where the path-integration is performed over the n -1 node fluxes of the circuit graph with n nodes. Note that we have also suppressed the dependence of the Lagrangian on φbr for brevity. The description in terms of branch fluxes φ br is linked to a description in terms of branch charges q br b = ∂L(φ br , φbr )/∂ φbr b through the Legendre transformation. For the following, it will be convenient to perform this Legendre transformation in a slightly more general form through the Fourier transformation e (i/ ) t dt L(φ br ) = D[q br (t)]e (i/ ) t dt [ L(q br )-q br • φbr ] , (13) where the Lagrangian L(q br , qbr ) is defined implicitly such that Eq. ( To proceed further, we need to relate the node fluxes φ to the branch fluxes φ br . For this, we make use of the basis node-edge incidence matrix A which is a R (n-1)×b matrix for the n -1 nodes fluxes and the b branches. Its entries A ij ∈ {1, -1} indicate whether the branch j enters (-1) or leaves (+1) node i. It allows us to express the Kirchhoff current law in the form A qbr = 0 and it relates the branch and node fluxes via φ br = A T φ. Performing a partial integration on the term -q br • φbr = -q br • A T φ in the exponent of expression (13), inserting the resulting expression into Eq. ( in terms of loop charges. For the convenience of the reader, we repeat this derivation in a slightly more rigorous way in App. B. We have thus explicitly constructed the passive duality transformation linking a representation in terms of node fluxes to a representation in terms of loop charges. We want to stress once again that in practice it is much easier and much less error-prone to perform the construction of the circuit Lagrangian using the rules explained in details in Sec. II B, rather than starting with a node-flux representation and repeating the calculation outlined above. It is interesting to note that the duality transformation used here is essentially the same as the one used in the analysis of the classical two-dimensional XY-model In the previous section, we have explained the representations of circuits in terms of node fluxes or loop charges which are related by a passive duality transformation. We now want to show that loop charges are also useful for constructing active duality transformations. Specifically, given a graph g of a circuit that is described in terms of node fluxes and has a corresponding Lagrangian L(φ, φ), we define its electromagnetically dual circuit with graph G as the circuit whose description in terms of loop charges yields a Lagrangian that is of the same form as L(φ, φ) with φ replaced by a vector of loop charges Q. We will see below that a dual circuit exists for planar circuits which are effectively two-dimensional such that the closure of flux lines in the third dimension can be ignored; this is in contrast to classical electromagnetism where electromagnetic dualities only exist in vacuum due to the absence of magnetic monopoles. FIG. this reason, we construct the dual graph g by placing one node into each loop of the original graph g, including the "loop" at the exterior. To construct the dual circuit G, we start by considering the dual graph g of g as a lumped element representation of an actual circuit different from the original circuit. As we have explained before, we can understand the loop charge formulation of g by thinking about the loop charges of g sitting on the nodes of (g ) . Now, since (g ) is just the original graph g with all branch orientations reversed, we effectively obtain the branch charges of g as the gradient of the loop charges positioned on the nodes of the original graph g. Thus, we obtain the result that the node fluxes of g are in one to one relation with the loop charges of g . From g , we obtain the dual circuit G by replacing circuit elements of g in such a way that the loop charges of G have the same dynamics as the node fluxes of g. In order to have the same dynamics, the terms in the Lagrangian corresponding to the circuit elements have to be equal (up to interchanging φ with Q). For example, a capacitive element in g corresponds to a (kinetic) term of the form C φ2 /2 and its dual is thus given by an inductor L Q2 /2 (which leads to a kinetic term in the loop charge description). More generally, we obtain the electromagnetically dual circuit G from the dual graph g of g by replacing all elements in g according to the rules given in Table So far, we have analyzed closed systems where the energy is conserved. We have given a recipe to calculate the Lagrangian L(Q, Q) that corresponds to a specific lumped-element circuit. In a typical application, we would then go on by introducing the Hamiltonian and canonically quantizing position Q and momentum Φ = ∂ QL. Given an initial configuration Ψ t0 (Q), we obtain a wavefunction Ψ t (Q) that describes the evolution of the probabilities |Ψ t (Q)| 2 to find the system in a specific state Q at time t. An altogether different but equivalent approach is the path integral method, that sums over all paths Q(t) fulfilling the boundary conditions Q(t 0 ) = Q and Q(t) = Q. Note that in this approach there is neither a need to go over to a Hamiltonian nor to postulate canonical quantization rules. In conventional electronics, there are elements called resistors that do not conserve energy. In a quantum setting, this corresponds to open systems, i.e., a system coupled to an environment; an example is an electronic cir-cuit which is coupled to the outside via a electromagnetic transmission line. We note that recently there has been a lot of progress in quantizing general linear environments in terms of a few relevant degrees of freedom. In the theory of open systems, the interest is in characterizing the system in questions without having to specify the full wavefunction of the system together with its environment. As in this case the system does not stay in a pure state, it necessarily has to be characterized by its density matrix ρ t (Q + , Q -) whose diagonal elements give the probability to observe the system in a particular state Q -= Q + and the off-diagonal terms characterize the coherences. We see that the fact that the system is open requires to double the degrees of freedom, i.e., going from Q to Q ± . The dynamics of the system is simply given by where S = S S + S E has a contribution due to the system (without the environment) The influence of the environment can be captured by the so-called influence functional S E . where the Fourier-transform Q± ω = t t0 dt q br,± b (t )e iωt enters. Note that in the reactive part, similar to the system, the variables Q+ and Qare not coupled which corresponds to the fact that the evolution of the ket and bra in a pure state ρ t = Ψ t (Q + )Ψ * t (Q -) are independent of each other. In particular, for a simple inductance L with impedance Z ω = -iωL or a capacitance C with impedance Z ω = i/ωC, the expression (19) reproduces the results of Fig. The dissipation destroys this factorization and makes the doubling of the degrees of freedom inevitable. In fact, it is useful to introduce new variables Qcl ω = 1 2 ( Q+ ω + Qω ) and Qq ω = Q+ ω -Qω in terms of which the dissipative part of the action reads here, n ω denotes the occupation probability of the mode at frequency ω in the environment. In particular, in equilibrium, we have the Bose-Einstein distribution n ω = (e ω/k B T -1) -1 . The two terms in (20) have different tasks: the first term introduces dissipation in the equation of motion and the last term leads to fluctuations, see also below. As an example, we would like to analyze a setup where a phase-slip junction in series with an inductor and a resistance is voltage biased at voltage V 0 , which is illustrated in Fig. involving both the phase-slip junction as well as the voltage bias. The action of the system is obtained via (18). The Ohmic resistance is modelled by dissipative action (20) with Re(Z ω ) = R. How the system dynamics is modified by dissipation depends on temperature. Let us first consider the case T = 0, which can be analyzed using the well-known results for the dual problem of the resistively-shunted Josephson junction. For the following, we consider the case V 0 = 0. It is then advantageous to decompose the total flux within the loop in the form φ + Φ with φ ∈ [0, Φ Q ] and Φ/Φ Q ∈ Z. The former flux can be interpreted as the Bloch momentum associated with the dynamics of Q in the 2e-periodic potential due to the phase-slip junction, while the latter is connected to the dynamics within a single unit cell of size 2e. For zero shunt resistance, R = 0, the flux φ (Bloch momentum) is conserved, corresponding to a complete delocalization of Q over the valleys of the cosine potential. Localizing the charge Q in a single valley of the periodic potential requires a superposition of all Bloch momenta φ. The fluctuation-dissipation theorem, S φ (ω) ∝ Re(Z ω ), shows that increasing Re(Z ω ) will increase the fluctuations of φ at frequency ω as described by the spectral density S φ (ω) = dt e iωt φ(t)φ(0) . This suggests that for R sufficiently large such that the fluctuations of φ exceed Φ Q , Q will eventually localize within a single valley of the periodic potential. The transition from a state delocalized over different valleys of the periodic potential to a localized state is known as the Schmid-Bulgadaev quantum phase transition that was mainly studied in the dual problem of the resistively shunted Josephson junction (for zero current bias). For finite temperature T , the Schmid-Bulgadaev transition is formally absent because thermal activation will always lead to a finite probability for the charge Q to transition between different valleys of the potential. with V c = πE S /e. Next, we introduce the fluctuation ξ of the voltage over the resistor via a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation. In fact, we have that . (23) After this transformation, the action is linear in Q q which allows for performing the path-integral over Q q . The result is the Langevin equation for Q cl (t). In the end, as Q q = Q + -Q -is small, we obtain a result for the time-evolution of the probability distribution It is given by where Q cl (t) fulfills the Langevin equation with Q cl (t 0 ) = Q and Q cl (t) = Q. In particular, the fluctuating part of the voltage ξ(t) is Gaussian with mean ξ = 0 and variance where we used the fact that 2n ω + 1 = coth( ω/2k B T ) in equilibrium. In the previous section, we have reviewed the node flux description and explained in some detail the loop charge description of circuits. We now want to show that one can also combine both descriptions such that part of the circuit is described in terms of node fluxes while the other is described in terms of loop charges. As an example, we will use this approach to prove the rules for the inclusion of offset charges given above. Let us assume that we decide to describe a only a certain subset of the branches of the graph in terms of loop charges. In the following, we will refer to the part of the graph spanned by the corresponding branches as the subgraph, while the remaining branches belong to what we will call the subgraph complement. The boundary nodes of the subgraph are the nodes that possess both incident φn φ n q tr q tr q tr q trq tr FIG. branches that belong to the subgraph as well as incident branches that belong to its complement. We denote the vector of node fluxes at the boundary nodes by φ ∂ . Similarly, the boundary loops of the subgraph with loop charges denoted by Q ∂ are the loops with branches that partly belong to the subgraph and partly belong to its complement. Since the voltage drops over the branches to which the boundary loops belong as well as the currents in the branches incident on the boundary nodes are partly described in terms of node fluxes and partly in terms of loop charges, the Kirchhoff voltage law at the boundary loops and the Kirchhoff current law at the boundary nodes is no longer automatically fulfilled. We therefore have to ensure it manually by adding appropriate terms to the Lagrangian. Let us denote the current flowing from a boundary node i to a neighboring node j within the subgraph by qij . Since the Euler-Lagrange equations with respect to the node flux φ i yield the currents flowing away from node i, we can ensure the Kirchhoff current law by adding the termi φ ∂ i j qij to the Lagrangian. Similarly, for the boundary loops with charges Q ∂ i , we can guarantee the Kirchhoff voltage law by adding a termi Q ∂ i j φij , where φij are the voltage drops (in the loop current direction) over the parts of the loop that are in the subgraph complement. The first of the terms just described manifestly guarantees current conservation while the second manifestly guarantees the Kirchhoff voltage law. Importantly, both terms are identical up to a total time derivative, as we show in App. C. As a consequence, if one wants to guarantee both the Kirchhoff current law as well as the Kirchhoff voltage law, we have to add one (and only one) of them to the circuit Lagrangian. Let us now use these results to prove the rules for the inclusion of offset charges described in Sec. II B. As we have discussed there, offset charges must be modeled through the inclusion of additional lumped elements in the circuit. These elements are naturally described in terms of node fluxes since they modify the current balance. Therefore, in order to describe the presence of offset charges q ex on the nodes of the circuit, we add to each of the tree branches with charges q tr another virtual parallel branch which will represent the action of the displacement currents and will be described in terms of node fluxes. As a consequence, only a fraction q tr of the total charge q tr entering the branches will remain on the original tree element, while the charge q trq tr will reside on the virtual branch. Since the equations of motion with respect to φ yield the currents flowing away from the respective nodes, offset charges q ex on the nodes of the circuit correspond to a term φ•q ex in the Lagrangian. In order to ensure the Kirchhoff laws, we also have to add the terms -φ tr • ( q trqtr ), c.f. Fig. We have already discussed in in Sec. III A that the node-edge incidence matrix A relates the branch fluxes and the node fluxes as φ br = A T φ. A decomposition of q br = (q ch , q tr ) into the vector of chord charges q ch and tree charges q br gives rise to a corresponding decomposition of A = (A ch , A tr ) with A tr a square matrix. Since there are no loops in a tree, we have the result A tr v = 0 for every vector v ∈ R b , implying that A tr has full rank and the inverse A -1 tr is well-defined. For completeness, we note that no such simple rule emerges if one intends a mixed description of the circuit. In that case, one does not get around representing external fluxes and offset charges explicitly through virtual additional circuit elements. For an external flux Φ ex l in some loop l with loop charge Q l which is part of the subgraph or an offset charge q ex n at some node n which is either part of the subgraph complement or a boundary node, those virtual elements are easy to handle. In that case, they simply add the terms Ql Φ ex l , φn q ex n to the Lagrangian without requiring additional terms to guarantee the Kirchhoff laws. For external fluxes in loops that lie completely within the subgraph complement or offset charges at the nodes of the subgraph (without the boundary nodes), however, the additional terms guaranteeing the Kirchoff laws have to be added by hand. As an example, we consider the fluxonium circuit depicted in Fig. with Here, the first two terms are due to the Josephson junction and its associated capacitance, which are described in terms of node fluxes, while the term L Q2 /2 is due to the inductive shunt within the subgraph which is described in terms of loop charges. The voltage drop φ in the direction of the loop charge Q gives the term -Q φ guaranteeing the Kirchhoff voltage and current law. The external flux Φ ex within the boundary loop adds the term QΦ ex . Since we describe the inductive shunt in terms of the polarization charge Q, we have to take φ to be Φ Q -periodic since only integer number of Cooper-pairs can flow from the ground to the node with flux φ in absence of the inductive shunt. Performing the Legendre transformation, we obtain the Hamiltonian 53,54 where q = ∂L/∂ φ and the total flux Φ = ∂L/∂ Q are canonically conjugate to φ and Q. The Hamiltonian acts on wavefunction of the form ψ(φ, Φ), where φ is periodic (with period Φ Q ). The capacitive term of the Hamiltonian (28) reveals that the physical charge q = q + Q on the capacitor plate is the sum of the charge q ∈ 2eZ (flowing through the Josephson junction) and Q (flowing through the inductor). As the charges do not enter individually, the operator e i(φ-Φ)/Φ Q commutes with the Hamiltonian. As a result, we obtain that the fluxes are equal with φ = Φ = φ, where the last equality holds modulo Φ Q . With that, we have decompactified the phase φ (defined on the interval [0, Φ Q ]) to φ (defined on the complete real line). This gives the conventional form of the fluxonium Hamiltonian (acting on the wavefunction ψ) with q the conjugate variable to φ. Alternatively, in the path integral formulation, one can start with (28) and integrate out the harmonic mode Q in order to arrive at (30). As another example of the mixed formulation, we discuss in the App. E the derivation of a Hamiltonian for the experimental setup of Ref. 28. As we have discussed in the previous sections, Josephson junctions cannot be handled directly using loop charges. On the other hand, it is well-known that Josephson junctions are approximately self-dual In particular, we discuss the example of a single Josephson junction: the effective nonlinear capacitor is given by the 2e-periodic ground-state energy ε 0 (Q), where Q is the polarization charge. An instructive way to understand the 2e periodicity is provided by writing the total charge on capacitor plate as the sum q+Q of the integer charge n = q/2e and the continuous polarization charge Q, cf. Eq. ( The separation of the charge q+Q remains useful when shunting the Josephson junction by a large (complex) impedance Z ω that allows the exchange of the polarization charge between the capacitor plates. As long as the impedance is large, there will be an adiabatic separation of the fast flow of integer charges n through the Josephson junction and the polarization charge flow through the shunt. We will make this idea in two examples more explicit. We now want to apply this idea in the description of the fluxonium circuit of Fig. such that , where ε s (Q) is the 2e-periodic instantaneous eigenenergy to the (constant) polarization charge Q. In the adiabatic approximation, we make the ansatz ψ(φ, Q) = u Q,s (φ)χ s (Q) for the total wavefunction of H flux in Eq. (28). Inserting this ansatz and neglecting derivatives of u Q,s with respect to Q, we arrive at the lowest-order adiabatic approximation 32,56,57 for the Hamiltonian of the wavefunction χ s (Q) which is 2e periodic. The Hamiltonian (32) is the (passive) dual description a Josephson junction shunted by a large impedance as alluded to in the introduction and depicted in Fig. We want to comment on the connection of the wavefunctions χ s,n (Q) for the n-th eigenstate obtained in this manner to the wavefunction ψ( φ) of the (conventional) fluxonium Hamiltonian Hflux of Eq. (30). Using the relation (29) as well as the adiabatic ansatz, we obtain as an approximate expression of the exact eigenstates. To highlight the accuracy of the approximate expression (33), we have numerically calculated the eigenstates ψm ( φ) of the Hamiltonian (30), as explained in App. F, and the eigenstates χ s,n (Q) and u Q,s (φ) of the Hamiltonians (32) and (31). In Fig. chosen real due to the symmetry under φ → Φ Q -φ (or, (φ, Φ) → (-φ, Φ Q -Φ), respectively) and are centered vertically at their corresponding energy value. Especially for the low-lying states, one sees good agreement between the exact eigenstates and the approximate states (33). In particular, for the exact lowest energy states ψg , ψe of the fluxonium Hamiltonian (30), we find the correspondence ψg , ψe → ( ψ0,0 , ψ0,1 ), i.e., the states ψg , ψe are all associated with the lowest s = 0 band of the Cooper-pair box. As we show in Fig. We thus arrive at the conclusion that the fluxonium can effectively be understood as a phase-slip junction with a constitutive relation Instead of using the original fluxonium circuit from Fig. where E 01 > 0 denotes the energy difference between the states χ 0,1 and χ 0,0 and S φ (ω) = dt e iωt φ(t)φ(0) = 2 R(n ω + 1)/ω is the spectral density of flux fluctuations over the resistor. In units of the RL-time τ RL = L/R, the result reads Γ 1 τ RL = (n B + 1)Φ 2 01 /LE 01 with n B the photon number at frequency ω = E 01 / . As a result, the decay Γ 1 is proportional to the ratio of the magnitude of energy fluctuations Φ 2 01 /L due to the (quantum) fluctuations of Φ to the energy difference of the transition. As another example, we consider the 0-π qubit, which is based on a special type of Josephson inductance that is Φ Q /2-periodic in the phase φ. This has to be contrasted with the Φ Q -periodicity found in conventional Josephson junctions. There exist two different proposals for its realizations. The first proposal, the superconducting current mirror, is based on an energetic suppression of single Cooper-pair tunneling, 2 whereas the second proposal, the Josephson rhombus, is based on destructive interference of single Cooper-pair tunneling guaranteed through symmetry. where q = -i ∂/∂φ is conjugate to φ, E J2 gives the strength of the Φ Q /2-periodic junction and we have included a charging energy with polarization charge Q. There exist two possible choices of qubit states. When the junction strength is much larger than the charging energy, E J2 /E C 1, the states can be approximated as states localized at the potential minima φ = 0 or φ = Φ Q /2 of the junction term. On the other hand, it is clear that the correct eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (36) are characterized by Cooper-pair parity as a good quantum number, since the E J2 term only connects charge states differing by 4e. Indeed, tunneling between the minima of the junction leads to a hybridization of the states localized at φ = 0 or φ = Φ Q /2 into odd and even superpositions ψ o , ψ e which are in direct correspondence to states characterized by odd or even Cooper-pair parity. For the lowest band, the exact charge dispersion (solid line) and its asymptotic expression (37) (dashed line) is illustrated in Fig. For the following, we are interested in the regime where E J1 is smaller than E eo . Note that this is, e.g., the regime of the experiments discussed in Ref. 62. In this case, the Cooper-pair parity and the offset charge Q in the interval (0, 2e) remain good quantum numbers and the level structure can be represented as indicated in Fig. It is intriguing to note that there is an obvious duality between the charge dispersion of the 0-π qubit shown in Fig. In this paper, we have discussed a charge-based approach to circuit quantization using loop charges which are the time-integrated currents circulating in the loops of a planar circuit. We have shown that the appropriate circuit Lagrangian can be read off the electrical network using a set of simple rules. In this approach, we obtain a local Hamiltonian description in terms of charges in a planar circuits of arbitrary topology. We have discussed how to handle dissipative elements by going over from closed systems to open systems. We have shown explicitly that a passive duality transformation relates the charge-based circuit description in terms of loop charges to the flux-based description in terms of node fluxes which is conventionally employed for the quantization of superconducting circuits. While the flux-based formulation is convenient for the description of charge currents, the charge-based formulation yields a simple description whenever the dynamics is characterized by flux currents. In particular, we have argued that passive duality transformations are useful for Josephson junctions in large-impedance environments, which behave as nonlinear capacitors supporting a quantized flux flow at low energies. We have shown that the loop charge formulation can be used more generally for the description of arbitrary circuits involving phase-slip junctions which are nonlinear capacitors electromagnetically dual to Josephson junctions. We have explained that electromagnetic duality can be used as an active transformation yielding new circuits whose charge dynamics is identical to the flux dynamics of the original circuit. We have shown how the loop charge formalism allows the straightforward construction of such active duality transformations. In particular, Josephson junctions have to be replaced by phase-slip junctions. The duality between the node fluxes and the loop charges guarantees that the loop charges are useful for the description of latter circuits in the same way that node fluxes are useful for Josephson junction circuits. We have introduced a mixed circuit description in terms of loop charges and node fluxes. We have shown that the mixed formulation gives additional insights into the decompactification of the flux φ over a Josephson junction that is shunted by an inductor. We have explicitly illustrated how passive duality transformations yield simplified circuit descriptions for Josephson junctions shunted by large impedances using the fluxonium qubit and the 0-π qubit as an example. We have shown that regarding the fluxonium as a nonlinear capacitor yields an approximate though accurate description of the qubit states for relevant qubit parameters. We have illustrated how this may be used, e.g., for a simplified description of relaxation caused by environ-mental noise. As another example, we have considered the 0-π qubit. We have shown that in the absence of conventional Cooper-pair tunneling, the junction dynamics becomes electromagnetically dual to the dynamics of a Majorana Josephson junction. From this work, several interesting routes arise that could be explored in the future. It will be highly interesting to use the loop charge formalism for quantitative analysis of recent experiments involving phase-slip junctions. It will also be interesting to exploit the duality of the 0-π qubit to a Majorana junction and explore existing proposals for Majorana physics from a dual perspective. Performing a partial integration on the term -iλA T tr φ/ in the exponent, inserting the resulting expression in Eq. ( for the time-evolution operator. In a planar circuit, we may finally exploit the relation q ch = B T ch Q and replace the integration over q ch by an integration over the loop charges Q. We then recover expression (15) from the main text. We want to prove the equality (up to a total time-derivative) of the termi φ ∂ i j qij manifestly guaranteeing the Kirchhoff current law and the term i Q ∂ i j φij manifestly guaranteeing the Kirchhoff voltage law. Let P ∈ R b×b be the matrix projecting on the branches (the subgraph) that shall be described in terms of loop charges. We note that we have the identity where B is the fundamental circuit matrix introduced in App. A corresponding to the loop charges Q. This identity can be understood by noting that P B T Q is the projection of the vector of branch currents onto the branches of the subgraph. The expression (AP B T Q) i gives the current balance for each node i of the subgraph. According to the definition of the basis node-edge incidence matrix A, positive currents flowing away from node i come with a plus sign, while positive currents flowing into node i come with a minus sign. In line with the definition of the qij , one thus obtains in both cases the current flowing away from node i. Crucially, due to the usage of the loop charge, the current balance is nonzero only for the boundary nodes i with corresponding node flux φ ∂ i , which proves the equality. Using the orthogonality AB T = 0 and performing a partial integration, we 11. In order to describe the presence of external fluxes, each chord branch of the circuit (solid lines) is split into two branches, one representing the original element (black solid line), the other representing the electromotive force (solid gray line). As a consequence, the total flux φ ch along the elements splits into the flux φ ch along the original element and the flux φ chφ ch along the virtual branch. Ensuring the Kirchhoff laws therefore requires adding the terms can rewrite the expression (C1) as where (ttd.) stands for a total time-derivative. Here, (1 -P )A T φ is the vector of voltage drops over the branches of the subgraph complement. The expression [B(1 -P )A T φ] i gives the voltage balance for each loop i of the subgraph complement, which is nonzero only for the boundary loops i with corresponding loop charges Q ∂ i . This proves the last equality sign. Appendix D: Proof of the rules for the inclusion of external fluxes using the mixed formulation In this section, we want to show that the mixed formulation allows to understand the origin of the rules for the inclusion of external fluxes into the node flux formulation that were given in Ref. 14. To that end, let us assume the presence of fluxes Φ ex in the loops corresponding to the loop charges Q. We split each chord of the circuit graph into two branches, one which represents the original chord element and a second virtual branch which represents the electromotive force due to the external flux. As a consequence of the splitting, the total flux φ ch over the chord and the virtual branch will split up into a flux φ ch over the chord element and a flux φ chφ ch over the virtual branch. Describing the virtual element in terms of charges requires adding the terms Q • Φ exq ch • ( φchφ ch ) to the Lagrangian, c.f. Fig. 12. Circuit corresponding to the setup in Ref. 28. We only want to describe the Josephson junction (the subgraph complement depicted in black) in terms of node fluxes, whereas we describe the rest of the circuit (the subgraph depicted in gray) in terms of loop charges. by +1 (-1) for all loops that lie within the face having the chord loop as its boundary and zero for all other loops. That means that all the non-zero entries in the rows of B -1 ch are of absolute value 1 and have the same sign. To see that this description of the entries yields indeed the inverse of B ch , let us consider the expression ch all have the same sign we also obtain M bb = 0 upon summing over l. For b = b , there is only one loop l which lies in the face having the chord loop corresponding to b as its boundary, and the entries (B -1 ch ) bl , (B ch ) bl are both either plus or minus one, giving M bb = 1. Therefore, M bb = δ bb . This shows that we may simply work with the original circuit graph without the virtual branches, provided we add to each expression involving the flux in a chord the external flux in its corresponding loop. As an example, consider the circuit depicted in Fig. where we have defined Q N +1 = 0 and φ i = φ i -φ i . Note that the last term -(Q i -Q i ) φi just corresponds to the termi Q ∂ i j φij that appears in the mixed formulation as discussed in the main text. Note that the term φi Q i enters with an overall plus sign since the voltage drop φi is measured in the direction opposite to the anticlockwise orientation of the loop current Q i . There is no kinetic term for the coordinates Q i such that their Euler-Lagrange equations are algebraic with the solution Q i = -C J φi . Inserting this solution back into the Lagrangian and performing the Legendre transformation with respect to φi and Qi yields the Hamiltonian where (q i , φ i ) and (Φ i , Q i ) are canonically conjugate pairs. Eq. (E2) reproduces the result derived in Ref. 28. Appendix F: Diagonalization of fluxonium using a higher-order matrix Numerov method An efficient way of diagonalizing the fluxonium Hamiltonian consists in projecting the Hamiltonian onto the eigenstates of the harmonic part due to charging energy and inductive shunt, and diagonalizing the resulting matrix. The disadvantage of this method is the fact that it requires calculating explicitly all matrix elements of the cosine potential using the harmonic oscillator eigenstates. This can be done analytically but the resulting expressions are quite involved. A more direct approach, which is simpler in practice, consists in diagonalizing the Hamiltonian in real space. This requires discretizing the second-order derivative operator. For this, one usually employs the lowest-order Numerov approximation of order O(a 4 ), where a is the lattice spacing. The resulting discretized Schroedinger equation can be recast in matrix form We consider at time-independent Schroedinger equation of the form D 2 ψ(x) = -i∂ x + A(x) 2 ψ(x) = -f (x)ψ(x), (F1) where D = -i∂ x + A(x) is the covariant derivative operator and f (x) equals f (x) = 2m[V (x) -E] for a Hamiltonian of the standard form H = (p + A) 2 /2m + V (x). For a wave function ψ(x) defined as ψ(x) = e i x dx A(x ) ψ(x), (F2) we find the relation e -i x dx A(x ) (-i∂ x ) n ψ(x) = D n ψ(x), (F3) which gives a convenient way of evaluating the higher orders of the covariant derivative acting on ψ(x) through conventional derivatives of ψ(x). Using Eq. (F3), we obtain through Taylor expansion with respect to λ the result Numerov's idea is to improve the accuracy of the expansion by a factor of a 2 by exploiting the structure of the differential equation (F1). Including the term of order λ 2n+2 in Eq. (F4) (that we previously dropped in order to arrive at Eq. (F5)) and solving for the unknowns D 2j ψ(x) with j ∈ {1, . . . , r} while keeping D 2r+2 ψ(x) as a free parameter yields which is better by a factor of a 2 in accuracy compared to the naive form (F5). Extending ideas of Ref. 68, we can convert this system of equations into a generalized eigenvalue problem. We introduce a matrix A having c j /a 2 on the j-th diagonal, where j > 0 refers to the upper diagonals and j < 0 refers to the lower diagonals, a diagonal matrix V = diag(V j ) representing the potential, and a matrix B having -(r!) 2 d j /(2r + 1)!(r + 1) on the j-th diagonal. All of these matrices are sparse and allow writing Eq. (F1) as the sparse generalized eigenvalue problem where ψ is the discretized wave function vector. This Hermitian generalized eigenvalue problem can be solved efficiently by standard methods.