We study persistent currents in a Josephson junction array wrapped around a cylinder. The T = 0 quantum statistical mechanics of the array is equivalent to the statistical mechanics of a classical xy spin system in 2+1 dimensions at the effective temperature T * = √ 2JU , with J being the Josephson energy of the junction and U being the charging energy of the superconducting island. It is investigated analytically and numerically on lattices containing over one million sites. For weak disorder and T * J the dependence of the persistent current on disorder and T * computed numerically agrees quantitatively with the analytical result derived within the spin-wave approximation. The high-T * and/or strong-disorder behavior is dominated by instantons corresponding to the vortex loops in 2+1 dimensions. The current becomes destroyed completely at the quantum phase transition into the Cooper-pair insulating phase. Persistent currents in closed chains of Josephson junctions (JJ) have been studied for more than two decades (see, e.g. Refs. 1-5 and references therein). Being conceptually similar to small superconducting rings they provide a testing ground for models of quantum phase slips There exist even a greater volume of work on SIT in disordered ultrathin films (see, e.g. Ref. A system that bears some relevance to the JJ array wrapped around a cylinder is a JJ ladder made of capacitively coupled one-dimensional JJ rings, e.g., JJ necklaces stuck together. It was studied theoretically by the numerical density-matrix renormalization group with an emphasis on the role of excitons To make this problem relevant to experimental systems it must also include disorder. Positional disorder in a planar JJ array is known to give rise to random phases when the array is placed in the transverse magnetic field At first we neglect disorder. Let θ ij be the phase of the superconducting order parameter Ψ = |Ψ| exp(iθ) at the ij-th superconducting island, with i = 1, 2, ..., N denoting the islands in the j-th ring (j = 1, 2, ..., N ) of the 2D JJ array shown in Fig. where the vector potential A is due to the magnetic flux Φ enclosed by the cylinder. Summation along each j-th ring gives where φ ≡ Φ/Φ 0 , Φ 0 = h/(2e) is the flux quantum, and m j is an integer. This allows one to write where the reduced phases θ are defined in such a way that the change of θi around the j-th ring is zero. The total accumulation of the original phase θ ij in a closed path around the cylinder is accounted for by the quantum number m j . The persistent current in the cylinder is given by The energy minimum corresponds to all θij and all m j being the same (m j = m), leading to the ground state (5) the last expression being the large-N case. Branches of E For, e.g., half a fluxon, Φ = Φ 0 /2, the current has the same absolute value but flows in opposite directions for m = 0 and m = -1. The dynamics of the JJ array is due to the electrical charging of the superconducting islands by the excess (or lack) of Cooper pairs n ij at the ij-th site. It is determined by the finite capacitances of the islands to the ground and the capacitances of the junctions. Different limits, with both capacitances present, can be achieved in experiment and have been studied in literature, see, e.g., Ref. 4 and references therein. In this paper we are considering the limit in which the capacitances of the islands, C, greatly exceed the capacitances of the junctions. In this case the charging energy is given by where U = (2e) 2 /(2C). The second of Eq. ( The Lagrangian of the model is L = E C -E J . Its quantum mechanics is formulated in terms of the path integral where τ = it and S E = ́dτ L is the Euclidean action with Statistical mechanics of this quantum model at T = 0 is equivalent with H 1+1 = -1 2 rr J rr cos (θ r -θ r + φ rr ), where r is a discrete three-dimensional vector r = (i, j, l) representing the space-time lattice, while J rr = J for the nearest neighbors and zero otherwise. In the numerical work we use the N × N × N lattice with the l direction corresponding to the imaginary time and periodic boundary consitions. Non-zero phase shifts are given by φ i,j,l;i±1,j,l = ±2πφ/N . Notice that, in principle, the periodic boundary condition imposed on the imaginary time introduces a finite physical temperature into the original quantum problem, T ∼ T * /N . At large N the effect of that temperature on the persistent current can be ignored. The statistical model presented above can be reformulated in terms of the three-component classical spin vectors of the 3D xy model at temperature T * = √ 2JU that describes the strength of quantum fluctuations. That model has a ferromagnetic-paramagnetic phase transition at T * = T c that in the original model corresponds to the quantum phase transition into the Cooper-pair insulator state in which the islands connected by Josephson junctions maintain their superconductivity but no Josephson current can circulate around the cylinder. The natural way to test this prediction is to study the dependence of the persistent current on U . Phase slips corresponding to quantum tunneling between different m require formation of vortex loops in 2+1 dimensions. At small U satisfying T * = √ 2JU T c ∼ J such loops nucleate with exponentially small probability. Consequently, at a small T * , if one induces a persistent current by placing the cylinder with the JJ array in the magnetic field, the phase slips may not occur on the time scale of the experiment. In this case all m j in Eq. 3 are the same, m j = m, and the persistent current computed with the help of Eq. ( We now recall that the statistical mechanics of our model is that of the 3D xy model at T = T * , for which the low-temperature (spin-wave) result for the cubic lattice is cos (θ r -θ r+δ ) = 1 -T * /(6J), with δ being the nearest neighbor in any direction. This gives for large N We shall now consider the effect of quenched disorder by adding a static random phase φ ij to the phase difference, θ i,j+1 -θ ij , between neighboring superconducting islands i and j in Eq. ( As was shown in Ref. The Imry-Ma argument In our case, random field in Eq. ( In the case |φ ij | 1 and | θi+1,j,lθi,j,l | 1 the continuous model of Eq. ( The effects of low temperature and weak static randomness must be additive. It suffices, therefore, to compute the contribution of quenched randomness at T * = 0 just minimizing the energy, Eq. ( having the solution where G(r) = (2π) -1 ln(r/a) is the Green function of the 2D Laplace equation, ∇ 2 G(r) = δ(r). With the help of this equation one obtains so that [∇θ(r) -q(r)] 2 = ˆd2 r ˆd2 r q β (r )q γ (r ) We shall assume that Then where we have used Fourier transforms: The last step is to establish the relation between q R and φ R used in the numerical experiment. If φ ij are chosen randomly between -φ R and φ R , one has Inserting this into the above formula and combining it with Eq. ( As we shall see, this formula agrees well with numerical results. Higher T * and φ R tend to create topological defects. Destruction of the persistent current by the latter and spin waves can be investigated numerically using the equivalent magnetic model of two-component vectors s of fixed length instead of the grain phase θ. The case T * = 0 is classical, so that one can minimize the energy of the 2D system of Josephson grains by the method of Ref. 5 that uses successive rotations of the grain's vectors s into the direction of the effective field H eff with probability α and overrelaxation (reflecting s with respect to H eff ) with probability 1 -α. Small α provide the highest efficiency. In this work we used α = 0.01 everywhere. The results of energy minimization are averaged over realizations of the disorder φ ij . For this, many runs were done until averages stabilized and smooth curves, such as I(T * ), were obtained. For non-zero T * the original 2D quantum problem was solved as the effective classical 3D problem with the effective temperature T * using the standard Monte Carlo procedure. For each classical spin (Josephson grain) we used the Monte Carlo update with probability α = 0.01 and overrelaxation with probability 1 -α. For each parameter value (T * or φ R ) at least 1000 system updates were performed. This was sufficient for local equilibration and averaging over thermal fluctuations. On top of it, averaging over realizations of disorder (runs) was performed. In the case of strong disorder the system demonstrates glassy properties, so that relaxation leads to different final states depending on the initial state and other factors. Here Monte Carlo routine does not lead to global equilibration for T * J. To average out glassy fluctuations, one has to perform many runs with different realizations of disorder. The numerical problem for the persistent current I is tougher than computation of the magnetization of a ferromagnet. With a given number of fluxons φ, the current is inversely proportional to the length of the rings N and directly proportional to the number of the rings N , so that I is independent of N , Eq. ( In Conclusion, we have proposed a novel system for the study of quantum phase transitions: Josephson junction 