Striating HTS coated conductor (CC) tapes into narrow filaments offers the possibility of reducing the tapes' magnetization losses without unreasonably decreasing their current-carrying capability. However, realizing well-separated striations presents technological challenges, especially if the number of filaments is large and/or if a thick layer of metallic stabilizer is present. In these situations, the filaments can be easily coupled and their effectiveness to reduce magnetization losses is strongly diminished or eliminated. While the onset of coupling is well visible from magnetization loss measurements, the actual path of the coupling current is unknown. In this contribution we present a systematic study of the transverse resistance in HTS CC samples in order to get a deeper understanding of those paths. The measured samples differ in terms of manufacturer (SuperPower and SuperOx), and presence and thickness of stabilizer material. In addition, oxidation is used as a means to increase the resistance between the filaments in non-stabilized samples. The results are interpreted with a chain network model. This work provides useful insights on the factors determining the transverse resistance in striated HTS CCs, thus indicating ways to improve the effectiveness of the striation process for AC loss reduction. It has been long proved that striating an HTS tape into electrically insulated filaments by means of a laser scribing reduces the magnetization losses (see for example Transverse resistance is a key parameter that influences the coupling loss Where is the r.m.s. power of the coupling loss, is the barrier volume, is the frequency, is the peak magnetic field intensity and is the twist pitch. is the transverse resistivity defined as, Where ρ b is the barrier resistivity, n the number of filaments and W b and W YBCO are the barrier and YBCO widths, respectively. According to Oberly et al. In this paper the transverse resistance between filaments of SuperOx and SuperPower tapes, with and without copper stabilization has been investigated. The tapes were prepared with a more optimized scribing method, compared to previous work from our institute Most striations were prepared using Cu stabilised tapes with optimised laser parameters for the given copper thickness. Samples prepared with this method will be referred to as "Striated After Electroplating" (SAE). The second method used was the striation of the Ag-cap tapes, followed by oxidation and electroplating of copper (in the case of SuperOx samples). Samples prepared with this second method will be referred to as "Striated Before Electroplating" (SBE). Oxidation was done in pure oxygen atmosphere at 500 °C for one hour to oxidize the laser grooves (Hastelloy) and thereby increase the resistivity of the groove Measurements of transverse resistance were done in two different configurations: filament-to-filament resistance (R FTF ) and profile resistance (R profile ) at 77 K. Filament-to-filament resistance measurement refers to forcing current across one single groove at a time, measuring the voltage drop across it. Consequently, R FTF represents the resistance of one single laser striated groove. In a profile resistance measurement current is forced across all 10 filaments while the voltage drop is measured cumulatively, with reference to the first filament. In this measurement a profile plot is obtained that shows how the resistance of the tape changes along its width and consequently serves with information on where the transversal currents possibly flow. The resistances were calculated from I-V curve measurements where the voltage was measured by spring pins, using the four-point probe method, placed on the filaments and the current was calculated from a shunt resistance inserted in the circuit. 20 to 40 data points were recorded for Ag-cap and Cu-cap tapes, respectively, using a range of -200 mA to +200 mA DC current and a nanovoltmeter. Hence the values shown in this paper represent statistical averages of 20 to 40 readings. To explain the transversal coupling current path the previously developed chain resistor model was used, shown in Where ρ is the resistivity and w groove , h groove and L sample are the groove width, groove height (or depth) and sample length, respectively. The groove height, width and sample length depend on the defined architecture. However, the resistivity also depends strongly on the laser parameters: power, pulse duration, repetitions; and therefore it may not be identical for two tapes with identical architecture, but different laser scribing settings. In this section the resistance between filaments of nonstabilized, Ag-cap tapes is discussed, with and without oxygenation process as shown in Table Referring to Fig. R HS,fil in Fig. This behaviour is shown in Fig. Hence the slope of the middle points, ∆C ∆D ⁄ , of such a plot can be considered as an indication of where the current flows. A slope close to that of the Hastelloy indicates that most of the current flows in the Hastelloy, which causes low coupling. A shallower slope, however, indicates that there is a path less resistive than that of the substrate. This is only possible through a parallel connection of resistors, resulting in current splitting between paths A and B. This then indicates a certain degree of coupling for which higher ac losses are expected. It is important to mention that the transverse resistivity of such a tape cannot be described with (2), since it assumes a simple series connection of the barriers. Even though this is true in the case where C ≅ C ?@,GH5 , it does not apply to Agcap tapes or to tapes where the barrier resistance is considerably larger than the Hastelloy's resistance under the filaments. In copper stabilized tapes the barrier resistance is in the same order of magnitude as the substrate's resistance under the laser groove, as shown in Table The SBE tape shows no sudden onset of resistance, but has a steady resistance slope, close to that of a 5 μm thick pure copper plate of the same dimensions. This can be explained by the fact that R b is much smaller than R HS,fil (Table The effect of externally induced coupling current loops between internal filaments was also investigated for both SuperPower and SuperOx Ag-cap tapes, as illustrated in Fig. Based on the chain resistor model of transverse resistivity a simple, equivalent circuit equation was derived to describe a tape's behaviour. Taking an n filament HTS tape and starting the circuit from one end of the tape an equation was derived describing any intermediary filament. However, the same equation does not describe the last, n th filament's resistance. To calculate the last point's resistance the two edge filaments were taken as fixed points with a repeating structure between them. Therefore the modelled resistance can be written as a function of the filament N f : where N f is the actual filament number and n is the total number of filaments. Using the derived equations the Ag-cap tapes were modelled by using experimentally obtained barrier resistance values. The results are shown in Fig. The transverse resistance of various striated coated conductors with and without stabilization from SuperOx and SuperPower samples was measured. Results indicate that due to the relatively high barrier resistance in Ag-cap samples, in the orders of a few mΩ up to a few hundred mΩ, transversal currents predominantly flow across the Hastelloy substrate after overcoming the first barrier resistance. In comparison, the barrier resistance in the measured copper stabilized samples was below 1 mΩ, in some occasions under 10 μΩ. This resistance is low enough to provide an alternative path for the current to flow, which leads across the laser grooves and thereby introduces higher coupling losses in AC applications. It has also been found that transverse currents in all of the probable coupling current loops in Ag-cap samples would behave similar to each other. In every loop the current has to bypass an initial barrier resistance, however, thereafter the most favourable path is through the substrate layer. This is due to the fact that the encountered resistance along the substrate is lower than that across the grooves (barrier resistance). Using equivalent circuit equations, derived from the single cell model of transverse resistivity, the profile resistance measurements of SuperOx and SuperPower Ag-cap samples could be modelled with reasonable accuracy. Nevertheless, some discrepancies are present due to uncharacteristic groove resistances, caused most likely by the laser scribing process. The models serve with information about the transversal current paths, which can be derived from ∆C ∆D ⁄ of the intermediary section of the model. Using this information then one can conclude on the degree of filament coupling in a tape and engineer a certain level of coupling in future samples.