A new iron-oxychalcogenide (CaO)(FeSe) was obtained which crystallizes in the orthorhombic space group Pnma (No. 62) with a = 5.9180(12) Å, b = 3.8802(8) Å, c = 13.193(3) Å. The unique structure of (CaO)(FeSe) is built up of a quasi-two-dimensional network of corrugated infinite layers of corner-shared FeSe 2 O 2 tetrahedra that extend in the abplane. The corrugated layers composed of corner-shared FeSe 2 O 2 tetrahedra stack along the c-axis with Ca 2+ cations sandwiched between the layers. Optical spectroscopy and resistivity measurements reveal semiconducting behavior with an indirect optical band gap of around 1.8 eV and an activation energy of 0.19(1) eV. Electronic band structure calculations at the density function level predict a magnetic configuration as ground state and confirm the presence of an indirect wide gap in (CaO)(FeSe). The mixed anion systems such as oxypnictides and oxychalcogenides have shown fascinating properties highlighted by the discovery of iron-based superconductors with T c up to 56 K. FeX (X = pnictide) layers of antifluorite-like edge-shared FeX 4 tetrahedra are responsible for the superconductivity while oxide spacer layers act as charge reservoirs which can be doped. Since β-FeSe (under high pressure), In an effort to synthesize a new analogue containing FeSe layers and CaO spacer layers for a new iron-based superconductor which was also aimed by other groups, Sample Preparation. Single-crystalline (CaO)(FeSe) was grown from the melt. Our initial target was to prepare CaFe 2 Se 2 O with the following procedure: Precursor FeSe was firstly synthesized by direct combination of powdered Fe (Alfa Aesar, 99.9+% metals basis) and Se (Alfa Aesar, 99.999% metals basis). Starting materials of CaO powders (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.9% trace metals basis) and the pre-reacted FeSe with the molar ratio of 1:2 and total mass of around 3 g were mixed and placed in an alumina crucible. All handling was performed in a glove box under Argon atmosphere (both H 2 O and O 2 are limited below 0.1 ppm). The alumina crucible was jacketed by an evacuated silica tube. The tube was heated to 1000 o C in a box furnace and kept at 1000 o C for 10 hours. A slow-cooling process from 1000 o C to 700 o C was carried out during 60 hours. From the powder X-ray diffraction data, we found the resultant product consisted of CaSe, FeSe, FeO, and an unindexed phase. With the help of an optical microscope, we found some red transparent crystals covered by black melt in the product. A hand-picked crystal isolated from the black matrix is shown Figure Band Structure Calculations. The electronic band structure calculations have been carried out by using the full potential linearized augmented plane wave method as implemented in WIEN2K package. Crystal Structure. The layered structure of (CaO)(FeSe) projected onto the ac-plane is depicted in Figure When 1000/T is more than 3.9 K -1 (T < 256 K), the lnρ vs 1/T curve begins to deviate from the original linearity. Initially we attempted to attribute this deviation to a smaller activation energy E a at lower temperatures, however, below 256 K the lnρ vs 1000/T curve does not obey strict linearity. Instead, three-dimensional variable range hopping (3D-VRH) can better describe the resistivity behavior at low temperatures. We can see a new linear behavior in lnρ vs T -1/4 curve, Figure The existence of 3D-VRH behavior in other layered transition metal compounds has been reported, which somehow indicates the strong correlation between layers. Band Structure Calculations. In the structure of (CaO)(FeSe), the Fe sublattice can be considered two staggered distorted square nets, as shown in Figure 2 U 11 + ... + 2hka*b*U 12 ].