We analyze the divergent zero-point energy of a dilute and ultracold gas of atoms in D spatial dimensions. For bosonic atoms we explicitly show how to regularize this divergent contribution, which appears in the Gaussian fluctuations of the functional integration, by using three different regularization approaches: dimensional regularization, momentum-cutoff regularization and convergence-factor regularization. In the case of the ideal Bose gas the divergent zero-point fluctuations are completely removed, while in the case of the interacting Bose gas these zero-point fluctuations give rise to a finite correction to the equation of state. The final convergent equation of state is independent of the regularization procedure but depends on the dimensionality of the system and the two-dimensional case is highly nontrivial. We also discuss very recent theoretical results on the divergent zero-point energy of the D-dimensional superfluid Fermi gas in the BCS-BEC crossover. In this case the zero-point energy is due to both fermionic single-particle excitations and bosonic collective excitations, and its regularization gives remarkable analytical results in the BEC regime of composite bosons. We compare the beyond-mean-field equations of state of both bosons and fermions with relevant experimental data on dilute and ultracold atoms quantitatively confirming the contribution of zero-point-energy quantum fluctuations to the thermodynamics of ultracold atoms at very low temperatures. The experimental achievement of Bose-Einstein condensation The study of the uniform weakly-interacting Bose gas in 1, 2 and 3 dimensions has a long history. In their seminal papers In this article we show that the finite-temperature equation of state of interacting bosons can be derived by functional integration In this paper we also discuss current theoretical investigations related to the regularization of the zero-point energy of a more complex physical system: the D-dimensional Fermi superfluid in the BCS-BEC crossover, i.e. the crossover of a fermionic superfluid from weakly-bound BCS-like Cooper pairs to the Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) of strongly-bound molecules We consider a D-dimensional (D = 1, 2, 3) Bose gas of ultracold and dilute neutral atoms either noninteracting or with a repulsive contact interaction. We adopt the path integral formalism, where the atomic bosons are described by the complex field ψ(r, τ ) where g > 0 is the strength of the contact inter-atomic coupling where is the Euclidean action and β ≡ 1/(k B T ) with k B the Boltzmann's constant. The grand potential Ω of the system, which is a function of the thermodynamic variables μ, T and of the parameter g, is then obtained as We work in the superfluid phase where the global U(1) gauge symmetry of the system is spontaneously broken where η(r, τ ) is the complex field of bosonic fluctuations around the order parameter ψ 0 (condensate in 3D or quasi-condensate in 1D and 2D) of the system. We suppose that ψ 0 is constant in time, uniform in space and real. First we analyze the case with g = 0, where exact analytical results can be obtained in any spatial dimension D. In fact, the Euclidean action of the ideal Bose gas can be written in a diagonal form as where Q = (q, iω n ) is the D + 1 vector denoting the momenta q and bosonic Matsubara frequencies ω n = 2πn/(β ), and is the diagonal inverse fluctuation propagator of the quadratic action. Integrating over the bosonic fields η(Q) and η(Q) in Eq. ( where ξ q is the shifted free-particle spectrum, i.e. The sum over bosonic Matsubara frequencies gives Strictly speaking, there should also be an additional infinite term on the right side of Eq. ( where is the grand potential of the order parameter, is the zero-point energy of bosonic single-particle excitations, i.e. the zerotemperature contribution of quantum fluctuations, and takes into account thermal fluctuations. In the continuum limit, where q → L D d D q/(2π) D , the zero-point energy of the ideal Bose gas is clearly ultraviolet divergent at any integer dimension D, i.e for D = 1, 2, 3. Here S D = 2π D/2 /Γ(D/2) is the solid angle in D dimensions with Γ(x) the Euler gamma function. We shall show that this divergent zero-point energy of the ideal Bose gas is completely eliminated by dimensional regularization, or momentum-cutoff regularization, or convergence-factor regularization. Consequently, the exact grand potential of the ideal Bose gas is given by We notice that ψ 0 is not a free parameter but must be determined by minimizing Ω 0 , namely from which one finds that The number density n = N/L D is obtained from the thermodynamic relation which gives: We stress that, for the ideal Bose gas, only after fixing the total density n one can find the value of ψ 0 as a function of the chemical potential μ and temperature T . Moreover, in the continuum limit where q → L D d D q/(2π) D , by setting ψ 0 = μ = 0 from Eq. ( as the implicit equation determining the critical temperature T c for Bose-Einstein condensation. It is well known where ζ(x) is the Riemann zeta function. It is important to stress that, also in the absence of true Bose-Einstein condensation (as in D = 1 and in D = 2 for T > 0), one can have quasi-condensation, i.e. algebraic-long-range-order of the two-body density matrix, where the use of the order parameter ψ 0 is still meaningful -2 Figure Let us now consider a system of bosons with a repulsive contact interaction, i.e. let us set g > 0 in Eq. (1). In this case one finds immediately the partition function of the order parameter where the grand potential Ω 0 reads (see Fig. Again, the constant, uniform and real order parameter ψ 0 is obtained by minimizing Ω 0 as from which one finds the relation between order parameter and chemical potential μ = g ψ 2 0 Inserting this relation into Eq. ( Clearly, this equation of state is lacking important informations encoded in quantum and thermal fluctuations. As previously pointed out, the main goal of this paper is to discuss and take into account these fluctuations, and in particular zero-temperature quantum fluctuations which are crucial in reduced dimensionalities where is the Gaussian action of fluctuations in reciprocal space with Q = (q, iω n ) a D + 1 vector denoting momenta q and bosonic Matsubara frequencies ω n = 2πn/(β ), and again is the inverse fluctuation propagator. Integrating over the bosonic fields η(Q) and η(Q) in Eq. ( where is the familiar Bogoliubov spectrum when Eq. ( and the total grand potential may then be written as where Ω 0 is given by Eq. ( again is the zero-point energy of bosonic collective excitations, i.e. the zerotemperature contribution of quantum Gaussian fluctuations, while takes into account thermal Gaussian fluctuations. Note that if g = 0 one finds E q = ξ q and Eq. ( We notice that the continuum limit of the zero-point energy for the interacting Bose gas is ultraviolet divergent at any integer dimension D. We stress the formal similarities between Eq. ( Before concluding this section we wish to comment on two points: a) the limits of validity of the Gaussian approximation, i.e. of Regarding point a), we observe that the Gaussian approximation may be seen as an expansion in terms of the adimensional parameter γ = (m/ 2 )gn (D-2)/D with n the number density of bosons. So, we expect Bogoliubov's approximation to be asymptotically correct when γ ≪ 1. As for point b) we notice that in the low-momenta regime, when q ≪ √ 2mμ, Bogoliubov's spectrum of Eq. (39) reduces to the familiar linear phonon spectrum E q = c B q (see Fig. Indeed, even at T = 0, c s is a complicate function of μ and therefore of the density n, since the derivatives of the grand potential have contributions both from Ω 0 and from Ω (0) g . Only for densities such that the latter is negligible one finds c s =c B . The choice of a contact interaction has allowed us to perform analytical derivations, at the price, however of obtaining divergent results. To get finite physical values, we must therefore regularize the otherwise divergent Eq. ( We recall that in 3D This equation may be easily deduced from the Lippman-Schwinger equation for the T -matrix T (E) (see where At very low energy one may relate the s-wave scattering length a B , a physical measurable quantity, to T (E) according to with γ = 0.577... the Euler-Mascheroni constant In 3D one can safely set E = 0, so that T (0 + i0 + ) = 4π 2 a B /m, and Eq. ( The second term in Eq. ( In Subsection 3.4 we shall see how one can recover Bogoliubov's result by introducing convergence factors into Eq. ( Before discussing in details these methods, we illustrate a regularization procedure largely employed in the renormalization program of gauge theories: the method of Analytic or Dimensional Regularization (DR). We refer to Analytic regularization exploits the concept of analytic continuation in some complex parameter. In its best known version, developed by 't In this section we illustrate the main ingredients of this method to get finite physical values from the otherwise divergent Eq. ( We begin by recalling the fundamental 't Hooft and Veltman (1972) conjecture stating that in the context of dimensional regularization integrals over a polynomial identically vanish, i.e. where D may assume non integer values. The proof of this astonishing relation can be found in Sect IV of implying that in dimensional regularization the strength g of a 3D contact interaction is the bare scattering length a B , apart from a multiplicative constant inversely proportional to the mass of the interacting particles. As a second ingredient of dimensional regularization, one notices that for any complex z with Re(z) > 0 one may write where is Euler's Gamma function. To discuss situations where Re(z) ≤ 0, we must analytically continue the definition of Eq.( may be continued to complex values of x and y as (Ryder, 2001) Using Eq. ( Let us now analyze in detail the consequences of Eqs. ( The zero point energy Eq. ( As said before, the zero-point fluctuations of the ideal D-dimensional Bose gas are then fully removed by regularization and the exact grand potential is given by Eq. ( In the case of an interacting Bose gas, we rewrite Eq. ( This expression is now finite when For the repulsive Bose gas in D = 1, from Eq. ( The corresponding total grand potential thus reads One may show that in the range of validity of Bogoliubov approximation, i.e. γ(D = 1) = m 2 g n ≪ 1 with n the 1D number density, this expression agrees with the exact result obtained by In the three-dimensional case, setting D = 3 in Eq. ( Notice that Gaussian quantum fluctuations, Eqs. ( This is exactly the grand potential obtained by Dimensional regularization of the repulsive Bose gas is more delicate in 2D. In fact, for D = 2 Eq. ( where the regulator κ is an arbitrary scale wavenumber which enters for dimensional reasons. Since in the limit ε → 0 one has: to leading order in 1/ε we get Comparing Ω (0) where the renormalized coupling constant g r given by The parameter g r is a "running coupling constant" for our theory which varies by changing κ. To extract its dependence on κ within a renormalizationgroup scheme we obtain from (61) the differential flow equation In the limit ε → 0 we get the solution By setting the Landau pole we obtain when κ is such that 2 κ 2 /(2m) = μ. Thus, the running coupling constant g r is indeed a function of the chemical potential μ and of an energy ǫ 0 . By inserting the renormalized coupling constant g r (κ) from Eq. ( This is exactly the equation of state derived by Popov The energy ǫ 0 appearing in Eq. ( Grand potential For the sake of completeness, in Table In this subsection we show how to regularize the divergent zero-point energy of the bosonic gas by means of an ultraviolet cutoff Λ in the wavenumber q and a subsequent renormalization of the bare parameters of the theory. By using a high wavenumber cutoff Λ, the zero-temperature contribution of quantum fluctuations to the grand potential of the ideal Bose gas reported in Eq. ( The term proportional to Λ D+2 is independent of μ and can therefore be ignored. The other term depends linearly on μ but it can be absorbed into L D by redefining the order parameter ψ 0 in the zero-temperature grand potential In fact, by setting with the counterterm one finds the total grand potential in the form This is exactly Eq. ( For the interacting Bose gas Eq. ( where Z = 2 Λ 2 /(4mμ). These expressions are now well defined for D = 1, 2, 3 but obviously diverge as Z → +∞. As we shall see however, also in this case the divergent contributions may be removed by introducing appropriate counterterms For the one-dimensional repulsive Bose gas we set D = 1 in Eq. ( In the large-Λ limit, the zero-temperature total grand potential is then given by The term proportional to Λ 3 is independent of μ and can then be ignored. The term proportional to Λ which depends on μ may be absorbed by redefining the bare chemical potential appearing in the original zero-temperature mean-field grand-potential. By defining Eq (74) becomes: which indeed coincides Eq. ( For the three-dimensional interacting Bose gas we set D = 3 in Eq. ( where Z = 2 Λ 2 /(4mμ). The zero-temperature total grand potential is then given by in the large-Λ limit. The term proportional to Λ 5 is independent of μ and can be ignored. Since now there are two relevant (containing μ) divergent terms, we need to renormalize both parameters μ and g to absorb them into the mean-field form. As reported by Schakel so that the renormalized grand potential becomes which is equivalent to the equation of state Eq. ( It is worth noticing that the result (81) obtained by redefining the parameters of the theory μ and g so that Eq. ( The momentum-cutoff regularization of the two-dimensional repulsive Bose gas requires a very careful analysis. We first set D = 2 into Eq. ( where Z = 2 Λ 2 /(4mμ). The zero-temperature total grand potential is then given by in the large-Λ limit. The term proportional to Λ 4 is independent of μ and can be ignored. The terms proportional to Λ 2 and ln (Λ 2 ) depend on μ and therefore they must be properly treated. First of all, we separate terms proportional to integer powers of μ from a term containing a logarithmic dependence by writing where the energy ǫ c is completely arbitrary. Now we can absorb the divergent terms by setting to obtain the renormalized total grand potential which can finally be rewritten as where Again the renormalized coupling constant coincides with the expression obtained from the scattering theory, Eq. ( We now analyze a third method of regularization of zero-point fluctuations. This method, mainly used in condensed-matter physics As explained in detail by where e iωn0 + means lim δ→0 + e iωnδ . Consequently, the grand potential is given by Eq. ( In the case of the repulsive Bose gas the introduction of a convergencefactor into Eq. (32) leads to As a consequence, in the continuum limit the zero-temperature grand potential reads where E q is given by Eq. ( confirming the equation of state (54) obtained above by both the dimensional and momentum-cutoff regularization. In the three-dimensional case the integral of Eq. ( with g r = 4π 2 a B /m. The integral in the right hand side of Eq. ( This integral is now finite and the zero-temperature grand potential once again is found to be 3.4.3. Repulsive Bose gas in 2D -CFR Also in the two-dimensional case the integral of Eq. ( leads to the zero-temperature grand potential Here the ultraviolet divergence has been cancelled but the last term introduces an infrared divergence which must be cured by introducing a lowenergy cutoff ǫ c (and its corresponding wavenumber k c = (mǫ c ) 1/2 / ). In this way, we find which, after some algebraic manipulations, gives back the total grand potential of Eq. ( In conclusion, also for the two-dimensional interacting Bose gas the three methods of regularization (dimensional, momentum-cutoff, and convergencefactor) of divergent Gaussian fluctuations give rise to the same equation of state. However, in 2D the convergence-factor regularization plus scattering theory needs also a further momentum-cutoff regularization of the residual infrared divergence. Despite the very large number of experiments with bosonic gases made of dilute and ultracold alkali-metal atoms, only in recent years zero-point energy (i.e. beyond-mean-field) effects have been measured. In 2008 In the regime of high-momentum excitations this quantity becomes Thus, measuring E q -2 q 2 /(2m) at high momenta In fact, by using the one-loop grand potential given by ( ¿From this equation one can easily determine μ as a function of n and a B , that is where is the mean-field result with g = 4π 2 a B /m and is the zero-temperature Gaussian correction, under the condition na 3 B ≪ 1. In 2012 The contact C 2 characterizes the tail of the momentum distribution of a many-body system of identical particles Both Eq. ( In 2011 the thermodynamics of a 2D Bose gas was investigated by The idea is the following: starting from Eq. ( (110) while the corresponding number density n is given by Using the local density approximation where U (r) is the space-dependent confining potential and μ is the chemical potential of the non homogeneous system, one gets the local number density n(r) as Reversing this procedure, from the local number density n(r) of the non homogeneous system one gets the pressure of the homogeneous system. The experimental data of P (μ, T ) extracted by In 2004 Kinoshita et al. This experiment confirms that in the weak-coupling regime (γ ≪ 1) the 1D system is a quasi-condensate very well described by the one-loop grand potential (54). In the strong coupling regime, also studied with a completely different experimental setup by and the corresponding chemical potential reads The failure in this case of the one-loop Gaussian approximation, which at T = 0 gives the grand potential Ω of Eq.( We have seen that after regularization, the zero-point energy of the Gaussian quantum fluctuations contributes a non-trivial term to the equation of state of an interacting D-dimensional Bose superfluid. Three different regularization approaches (dimensional regularization, momentum-cutoff regularization and convergence-factor regularization) produce the same finite result, which is however dependent on the dimensionality of the system. Moreover, at variance with both dimensional regularization and momentumcutoff regularization which are self-contained, convergence-factor regularization explicitly needs scattering theory (or, again, dimensional or cutoff regularization). Extremely interesting is the study of the divergent zero-point energy of a D-dimensional two-spin-component Fermi superfluid in the BCS-BEC crossover. As will be discussed in detail below, the crossover from the weakly-paired Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) state to the Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) of molecular dimers has been experimentally achieved using ultracold fermionic alkali-metal atoms a few years ago in 3D where ∆ 0 is the pairing gap, and bosonic collective excitations with energy where λ = 0 gives the first correction to the familiar low-momentum dispersion E col (q) ≃ c B q. Eq. ( Starting from the familiar BCS Lagrangian density of paired (attractive) fermions where ψ s (r, τ ) and ψs (r, τ ) are Grassman variables describing the fermionic field and g < 0 is the strength of the s-wave inter-atomic coupling, the partition function Z of the uniform fermionic system in a D-dimensional volume L D , and with chemical potential μ reads where is the Euclidean action functional. Through the exact Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation In this way the partition function Z of the fermionic system can be rewritten exactly as where is the the (exact) effective Euclidean action. Notice that now there is a functional integration also over ∆(r, τ ). This is the price to pay for having an effective Lagrangian that is quadratic, instead of quartic, in the fermionic fields ψ s (r, τ ) and ψs (r, τ ). The effect of fluctuations of the field ∆(r, t) around its mean-field value ∆ 0 (the pairing gap) may be analyzed at the Gaussian level by taking where η(r, τ ) is the complex pairing field of bosonic fluctuations. In particular, we are interested in the one-loop grand potential Ω, given by where is the mean-field partition function and is the partition function of Gaussian pairing fluctuations, i.e. neglecting cubic and quartic contributions of η. Thus, one may write the total oneloop grand potential as In Eq. ( is the so-called mean-field grand potential, which includes the grand potential of the order parameter ∆ 0 the zero-point energy of fermionic single-particle excitations and the finite-temperature grand potential of the fermionic single-particle excitations Ω In addition, is the grand potential of the bosonic Gaussian fluctuations, which includes the zero-point energy of bosonic collective excitations and their finite-temperature contribution Clearly both Ω (0) mf and Ω (0) g are ultraviolet divergent in the dimensions D = 1, 2, 3. Regularization of these divergent terms is now complicated by the presence of the BCS-BEC crossover. Very recently we have obtained interesting analytical results in the BEC regime of the BCS-BEC crossover by removing the divergences of single-particle and collective excitations both in 3D Scattering theory plays an essential role in the description of a threedimensional attractive Fermi gas which undergoes BCS-BEC crossover. As recalled above, the bare interaction strength g appearing in the Lagrangian density ( where, as usual, the ultraviolet cutoff Λ is introduced to avoid the divergence of the second term on the right side. We recall at this point that the low energy scattering length is negative for an attractive potential if no bound states are present, while it becomes positive when the interaction is so attractive as to admit a bound state. Eq. ( Therefore, in the weak-coupling BCS limit, where g → 0 -, the first term on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( and consequently from Eq. ( After integration over momenta one obtains and comparing Eq. ( In the limit Λ → +∞ from this interesting formula one gets that is the familiar relation between the bound-state energy and the 3D s-wave scattering length a F . In 2015 with α = 2 due to zero-point Gaussian fluctuations, performing cutoff regularization and renormalization of Gaussian fluctuations (with a procedure very similar to the one discussed in Section IV.B for three-dimensional interacting bosons), and taking into account the result from Eq. ( This expression may be obtained following Leggett seminal paper on the BEC-BCS crossover The term proportional to Λ 5 can be neglected since it does not depend on μ in the deep BEC limit where λ = 1/4. In the same limit the term proportional to Λ 3 can be absorbed by renormalizing μ. Notice that the term proportional to Λ is finite because in the BEC limit c 4 B goes to zero faster than 1/Λ Remarkably, the term of Eq. ( in the deep BEC regime is subleading with respect to the cutoff-regularized term proportional to Λ. Thus, in the deep BEC regime, where |μ| = 2 /(2ma 2 F ), λ = 1/4 and mc 2 B = ∆ 2 0 /(8|μ|) (notice that λ and c B appear in the collective bosonic excitations of Eq. ( with α = 2 In conclusion, in the deep BEC regime the leading term of the zerotemperature one-loop grand potential can be written as having taken into account the result Eq. ( of weakly-interacting repulsive composite bosons of mass m B = 2m, density n B = n/2, chemical potential μ B = 2(μ + ǫ B /2), and the boson-boson scattering length This result is in good agreement with other beyond-mean-field theoretical predictions: a B /a F ≃ 0.75 based on a diagrammatic approach In the analysis of the two-dimensional attractive Fermi gas one must remember that, contrary to the three-dimensional case, two-dimensional realistic interatomic potentials for alkali atoms always exhibit a bound state and correspondingly a positive two-dimensional s-wave scattering length where γ = 0.577... is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. Moreover, the attractive (negative) interaction strength g of s-wave pairing is related to the binding energy ǫ b > 0 of a fermion pair in vacuum by the expression Randeria et al. taking into account that the zero-temperature 2D gap equation gives By using one immediately finds the chemical potential μ as a function of the number density n = N/L 2 , i.e. In the BCS regime, where ǫ b ≪ ǫ F , with ǫ F = π 2 n/m, one finds μ ≃ ǫ F > 0 while in the BEC regime, where ǫ b ≫ ǫ F one has μ ≃ -ǫ b /2 < 0. Clearly, both Eqs. ( By performing dimensional regularization of Gaussian fluctuations (with a procedure that is very similar to the one discussed in Section III.C for twodimensional interacting bosons), we have recently found in the deep BEC regime of this two-dimensional Fermi superfluid, where the chemical potential μ becomes negative and λ of Eq. ( In addition, the Bogoliubov's sped of sound c B which appears in Eq. ( and consequently the 2D zero-temperature Gaussian grand potential becomes with λ = 1/4 in the deep BEC regime Introducing μ B = 2(μ + ǫ b /2) as the chemical potential of composite bosons with mass m B = 2m and density n B = n/2, the zero-temperature total grand potential (160) can be rewritten as As usual, the total density of bosons n B = n/2 is obtained in terms of μ B = 2(μ + ǫ b /2) from the zero-temperature thermodynamic formula which leads to: Inserting Eq. ( provided that we identify the effective bosonic scattering length a B with Remarkably, the value a B /a F = 1/(2 1/2 e 1/4 ) ≃ 0.551 from this analytical formula is in full agreement with a B /a F = 0.55(4) obtained by Monte Carlo calculations Even if we know that the Gaussian approximation is inadequate to treat strongly interacting Bose systems in 1D More than twenty years ago Casas et al. where ǫ B = mg 2 /(4 2 ) is the binding energy of fermionic pairs In addition, also in 1D the Bogoliubov's speed of sound c B which appears in Eq. ( again with λ = 1/4 in the deep Tonks-like regime. Clearly, Eqs. ( showing that in the deep Tonks-like regime the mean-field contribution to the zero-temperature grand potential is subleading with respect to the Gaussian one. Using the thermodynamic relation for the 1D number density n = N/L of fermions and the leading Gaussian term for the grand potential we find in the deep Tonks-like regime of strong interaction, which corresponds to the very dilute limit. The term -ǫ b /2 of Eq. ( 6. Experiments vs theory for fermionic superfluids Beyond-mean-field effects in the frequencies of collective excitations of a 3D fermionic superfluid under external confinement were first predicted by where ω ⊥ and ω z are the cylindric radial and longitudinal frequencies, respectively. The collective dynamics of the system is described efficiently by the hydrodynamic equations of superfluids (for a review see where the zero-temperature equation of state is encoded in the explicit expression of the chemical potential μ as a function of the local density n and of the s-wave scattering length a F of fermions. For a 3D system of attractive fermions one may find analytical solutions of Eqs. ( while the collective longitudinal breathing mode Ω z is This approach A direct measurement of the equation of state of an attractive ultracold fermions system was performed by Recently Makhalov, Martiyanov, and Turlapov (2014) have realized a quasi-2D Fermi system with widely tunable s-wave interactions nearly in a ground state, investigating an ultracold gas of atoms by measuring the pressure P as a function of the density n. The experiment of Within our one-loop Gaussian approach, the pressure P is immediately obtained from Eqs. ( crossover, E col (q) can be obtained numerically setting det(M(Q)) = 0, where M(Q) is the inverse propagator for the pair fluctuations, which appears in the Gaussian action (see having introduced the Fourier-transformed version of the fluctuation fields, with Q = (iΩ n , q), Ω n = 2πn/β being the Bose Matsubara frequencies. The matrix elements of M(Q) are defined by where ), E ′ = E sp (k + q). The remaining matrix elements are defined by the relations: M 22 (q) = M 11 (-q), M 21 (q) = M 12 (q). Quite remarkably, which is regularized by convergence factors At the mean-field level one has c s (μ mf ) = v F / √ 2 across the whole BCS-BEC crossover, v F being the Fermi velocity. The inclusion of Gaussian fluctuations gives a quite different sound velocity: it slowly tends to the aforementioned value in the BCS limit, showing, on the other hand, a remarkable difference in the intermediate and BEC regimes. The preliminar experimental data of We can conclude that the one-loop Gaussian theory of fermionic superfluids shows good agreement with very recent experimental data The observation of pairing phenomena in a 1D Fermi gas of 40 K atoms was reported by We have shown that the zero-point energy of both bosonic and fermionic ultracold atoms contains a finite contribution which plays a relevant role in the determination of a reliable equation of state. In the case of repulsive bosonic atoms the final convergent equation of state, which depends on the dimensionality of the system, is independent of the regularization procedure. On the contrary, we have found that the dimensional regularization cannot be used for three-dimensional attractive fermionic atoms which exhibit a BCS-BEC crossover. In fact, the sign of the scattering length whose change from negative to positive across the crossover may be accounted for by using a cutoff regularization, would remain always negative under dimensional regularization. However, the dimensional regularization can be used for the study of the two-dimensional BCS-BEC crossover because in the two-dimensional problem the scattering length does not change sign. By using momentum-cutoff regularization in the three-dimensional case There are several open problems for the physics of ultracold atoms which can be faced employing the regularization techniques of Gaussian fluctuations discussed in this paper. In the two-dimensional case (for both bosonic and fermionic superfluids) the Berezinsky-Kosterlitz-Thouless critical temperature 