The response of nonlinear metamaterials and superconducting electronics to two-tone excitation is critical for understanding their use as low-noise amplifiers and tunable filters. A new setting for such studies is that of metamaterials made of radio frequency superconducting quantum interference devices (rf-SQUIDs). The two-tone response of self-resonant rf-SQUID meta-atoms and metamaterials is studied here via intermodulation (IM) measurement over a broad range of tone frequencies and tone powers. A sharp onset followed by a surprising strongly suppressed IM region near the resonance is observed. Using a two time scale analysis technique, we present an analytical theory that successfully explains our experimental observations. The theory predicts that the IM can be manipulated with tone power, center frequency, frequency difference between the two tones, and temperature. This quantitative understanding potentially allows for the design of rf-SQUID metamaterials with either very low or very high IM response. Nonlinearity is a key consideration in a wide range of important applications including amplifiers Rf-SQUID metamaterials combine the advantages of superconducting electronics and nonlinear metamaterials Basically, an rf-SQUID is a nonlinear resonator with a manipulatable resonant frequency and absorption that depend on the dc and rf flux amplitudes, the temperature, and the drive signal history In this paper we report comprehensive results from experimental and theoretical IM studies of rf-SQUID meta-atoms and metamaterials around resonance. We focus on the case where two input signals have the same amplitude, as opposed to IM amplification experiments where one tone is much stronger than the other. We find that under certain combinations of tone power and frequency, the SQUID shows a sudden onset of the 3 rd order IM generation followed by a near-zero 3 rd order IM generation (gap). This phenomenon is a result of the bi-stable properties of rf SQUIDs. This intrinsic suppression of IM generation may be useful as a mechanism for depressing signal mixing in communication applications. A detailed theoretical model is presented to explain this surprising gap feature in IM generation. The intensity of IM generation sensitively depends on the parameters of the rf-SQUIDs, and can be modulated by dc/rf magnetic field, and temperature, potentially allowing one to design and tune the IM generation to meet various requirements for applications. Two dimensional metamaterials were constructed by positioning rf SQUID meta-atoms in a square grid array on a planar substrate (Fig. In the experimental setup Fig. An example of the generation of an IM spectrum in the metamaterial around resonance (of a 27×27 array of rf SQUIDs) is shown in Fig. The IM spectrum changes considerably as the center frequency and tone power are varied. We mainly examine the modulation of the 3 rd order IM power. Again we first search for resonance in a single-tone experiment as the input power varies. In the intermediate power regime, higher input power results in a shift of the resonant frequency to lower values Figure In this section we explore a simple circuit model that reproduces the effects seen in the previous sections. A single rf SQUID can be treated as a Resistively and Capacitively Shunted Josephson Junction (RCSJ-model) in parallel with superconducting loop inductance (Fig. The time evolution of the phases is determined by the RCSJ circuit equation Here, I c sin δ + V /R + CdV /dt is the total current through the loop, which flows through the parallel combination of the junction, shunt resistance R and capacitance C in the RCSJ model. Replacing Φ tot by Φ 0 δ/2π and V by Φ 0 dδ/dt in Eq. ( where Typical parameter values are as follows. The inductance, L = 280 pH, of the single SQUID meta-atom is calculated numerically by Fasthenry based on its geometrical structure The time-dependent functional form of the rf flux is determined by the driving signal. To study intermodulation, the circuit is driven with two tones, which generally can be written where Ω 1,2 = 2πf 1,2 /ω geo and f 1 and f 2 are the frequencies of the two injected signals. Here the two tones have different amplitudes φ rf,1 and φ rf,1 , and phases θ 1 and θ 2 . The driving flux can also be written in the form of a complex phasor envelope modulated by a carrier at the mean frequency Ω = (Ω 1 + Ω 2 )/2, where the envelope function φ e (τ ) = φ rf,1 exp(-i∆Ωτ /2+ iθ 1 ) + φ rf,2 exp(i∆Ωτ /2 + iθ 2 ) and ∆Ω = Ω 2 -Ω 1 > 0 is the difference frequency. For the situation in our experiment, ∆Ω << Ω, i.e., the carrier frequency is much greater than the envelope frequency. This will lead to a number of simplifications in the analysis. At present it allows us to argue that the results will not depend on the relationship between the carrier and the envelope phases. Since the relative phase between the carrier and the envelope is unimportant we may shift the time axis in the carrier and the envelope independently. Shifting time in the carrier by τ sc = -Ω -1 (θ 1 + θ 2 ) and in the envelope by τ se = ∆Ω -1 (θ 1 -θ 2 ) removes the phases θ 1 and θ 2 from the problem. Equivalently we can set θ 1 = θ 2 = 0. We first consider the case of equal amplitude tones (set φ rf,1 = φ rf,2 = φ s to be the amplitude) and set θ 1 = θ 2 = 0. We then solve Eq. ( Further to investigate IM, we extract the amplitude and phase of δ i for frequency component f i via Fourier transform of δ(τ ). Since magnetic flux is related to δ through δ = 2π(Φ tot /Φ 0 ), we can extract the generated third order IM magnetic flux Φ 3,4 . The IM flux translates into an IM magnetic field inside the SQUID loop of area A, i.e., B 3,4 = Φ 3,4 /A. The excited IM magnetic field transmits through the rectangular waveguide and generates the third order IM powers at the detector. The SQUID is inductively coupled to the waveguide via a coupling coefficient g Since δ i is a surrogate for the output tone power P fi (δ i ∼ P fi ) and a direct solution of the nonlinear equation, we use this quantity to analyze the degree of IM generation. Figure In this section we develop an analytical model to understand the unique phenomena revealed in the experiment and the numerical solutions of the previous sections. We adopt the observation that the gauge-invariant phase δ(τ ) and the driving flux can be represented as in Eq. ( where Ω = (ω 1 + ω 2 )/(2ω geo ) and δ, δ and θ are taken to be constants that depend parametrically on τ through the slow variation of φ rf (τ ) = φrf = φ e . Here δ and δ denote the dc part and the slowly varying envelope of δ, respectively, θ is the phase of δ (which can also vary slowly with time). For the nonlinear term in Eq. ( δ + β rf sin δJ 0 ( δ) = φ dc For two equal amplitude input tones with a fixed center frequency and a fixed tone power, φrf is a sinusoidal function with a peak value of 2φ s , and a frequency of ∆Ω/2, i.e. φrf = 2φ s cos ∆Ωτ /2. Figures Between 17.3 GHz to 18.6 GHz, however, the peak value of φrf exceeds the upper bi-stable transition rf flux amplitude φ lh , while the minimum value of φrf is below φ hl , so there are four discontinuous jumps in δ(t) during a beat period. Changing the center frequency from 17.35 GHz to 17.7 GHz makes the solutions for δ stay on the high-amplitude branch longer (Fig. We extract the IM components of δ by Fourier transform as discussed for the numerical simulation, and extract the amplitude of two main tones and two third order IM tones of δ, plotted in Fig. The ringing behavior of δ(t) during state jumps indicates that the system requires time to transition from one stable state to another. We study this process using a dynamical model for the complex amplitude of the phase δ, where δ(τ For two equal amplitude input tones, the envelope of the rf flux φrf = φ e = 2φ s cos(∆Ωτ /2) is real. In this case, sin δ is expanded as sin δJ 0 (| δ|) + 2 cos δJ 1 (| δ|)Re( δe iΩτ -iπ/2 )/| δ| with negligible higher order terms assuming that the higher harmonics of δ are much smaller than the base frequency component. In deriving an equation for the envelope, we adopt the approximations that Q >> 1 and that δ(τ ) changes slowly, |Ω δ| >> |d δ/dτ |. Thus in Eq. ( To analyze the dynamics, we express δ as an in-phase part and a quadrature part, i.e. δ = δ R + iδ I , and write the real and imaginary parts of Eq. ( where is the Hamiltonian. Equilibrium states of the system Eq. (10b) are the same as those described by Eqs. ( Note that the Hamiltonian is symmetric about δ I = 0. In Figs. Because of the high value of Q, the system's transition trajectory from one stable state to another follows the constant contour lines of the Hamiltonian surfaces in a spiral manner. We can find the trajectory of δ(t) for φ dc = 0 by solving Eq. ( The in-spiraling orbits during a transition are predicted by the Hamiltonian analysis. The shape of the trajectory before jumping to state A matches the contour lines in Fig. Figure Three models for IM generation in rf-SQUIDs have been discussed. The solutions to the full numerical nonlinear model contain the most complete information for the response of rf-SQUIDs to two-tone excitation, yet gives little insight into the underlying physics. The steady-state analytical model greatly simplifies the 2 nd order nonlinear differential equation to three coupled algebraic equations, and sheds light on the origin of the unique IM featuresthe state jumps during a beat period cause an abrupt increase in IM products. While it predicts the same level of IM generation as calculated by numerical simulation (Fig. The models all include dc flux as a variable that affects the response of the SQUID. In this paper we focus on the zero dc flux case. Varying the dc flux value would modify the relationship between the envelope of δ and the envelope of φ rf (zero flux case shown in Fig. We also note that utilizing two equal-amplitude tone inputs always results in the rf flux envelope passing through zero during the beat period. Thus the IM products of the SQUID are independent of the system's history, even in the bistable regime. As long as the rf flux envelope peak (determined by tone power) exceeds the transition point φ lh , the SQUID will experience four discontinuous jumps during a beat period. However, if the two tones have different amplitudes, so that the minimum value of the envelope is higher than φ hl , the amplitude of the phase envelope depends on the direction of tone power sweep. In an upward sweep the phase amplitude δ resides in the low-amplitude branch during the whole beat period until the tone power increases to the point that the rf flux envelope peak exceeds φ lh ; δ will then keep oscillating in the high-amplitude branch during a beat period. In a downward tone power scan though, δ would modulate with the beating rf flux in the high-amplitude branch until the peak drops below φ hl . The IM amplification experiment of an 11 × 11 SQUID array metamaterial, where the power amplitude of one tone is always 20 dB higher than the other, shows significantly more hysteresis in rf power scanning than the equal-amplitude IM case. The lack of discontinuous jumps during a beat period in the hysteretic IM amplification process brings in new phenomena worth investigating in the future. We have shown that the rf-SQUID meta-atoms and metamaterials have a rich nonlinear spectrum due to the nonlinearity of the Josephson junctions. Experiment, numerical simulation, and analytic models all show a sharp onset, followed by a dip, in the third order IM output. Rf-SQUID array metamaterials display behaviors that are similar to those of single rf-SQUID meta-atoms. The sharp onset of IM generation comes from a series of asymmetric jumps between two stable states of the rf SQUID as the drive amplitude modulates during a beat period of the input signal. Each state jump creates a transient response appearing as ringing in the time domain. The time evolution of the junction gauge-invariant phase δ(t) can be explained by a dynamical model employing a Hamiltonian analysis with damping. Our analytical models can potentially be used to design SQUID metamaterials to generate either very high or very low IM products in response to multi-tone excitation. In addition, these models can also be applied to design other nonlinear systems employing Josephson junctions, such as the Josephson parametric amplifiers.