Recent angle-resolved photoemission experiments have observed a proximity-induced superconducting gap in the helical surface states of a thin film of the 3D topological insulator Bi2Se3 grown on a superconducting NbSe2 substrate. The superconducting coherence peaks in the electronic density of states are strongly suppressed when the topological insulator is doped with magnetic Mn impurities, which was interpreted as the complete destruction of helical superconductivity in the topological surface states. Motivated by these experiments, we explore a different possibility: gapless helical superconductivity, where a gapless electronic density of states coexists with a nonzero helical superconducting order parameter. We study a model of superconducting Dirac fermions coupled to random magnetic impurities within the Abrikosov-Gor'kov framework, and find finite regions of gapless helical superconductivity in the phase diagram of the system for both proximity-induced and intrinsic superconductivity. For the latter, we derive universal rates of supression of the superconducting transition temperature due to magnetic scattering and, for a Fermi level at the Dirac point, a universal rate of increase of the quantum critical attraction strength. The interplay between topological and conventional forms of order is a central theme of current research in condensed matter physics. In particular, superconductivity on the 2D boundary of a 3D topological insulator, sometimes referred to as helical superconductivity, is qualitatively distinct from conventional 2D s-wave superconductivity. By contrast with the latter, vortices in a helical superconductor are predicted to support Majorana fermions An important question in this context is the role of time-reversal-symmetry-breaking perturbations on helical superconductivity. One expects such perturbations to be particularly detrimental to this type of superconductivity for two reasons. First, the topological surface states owe their very existence to time-reversal symmetry, which protects the bulk topology of the normal state. Time-reversal-symmetry-breaking perturbations can in principle gap out the surface states and destroy the parent metallic state necessary for helical superconductivity. Second, superconductivity itself is triggered by the formation of Cooper pairs, in which electrons occupy two time-reversed single-particle eigenstates that are degenerate by Kramers' theorem. While the latter holds in the presence of time-reversal invariant forms of disorder, such as nonmagnetic impurities, time-reversal-symmetrybreaking forms of disorder such as magnetic impurities destroy Kramers' degeneracy and suppress superconductivity In this paper we suggest another possible scenario: that in certain parameter regimes, magnetic impurities might induce a gapless superconductor in the topological surface states, rather than destroy superconductivity altogether. In this gapless helical superconductor, coherence peaks in the density of states are suppressed by disorder, but the helical superconducting order parameter itself (i.e., the presence of Cooper pairs) is nonzero. To demonstrate these ideas, we organize the rest of the paper as follows. In Sec. II, we review the basic principles of superconductivity in the topological surface states in the clean limit, and introduce a theoretical framework to study the effect of magnetic impurities in this system. In Sec. III and IV, respectively, we apply these ideas to separately investigate the effect of magnetic impurities on proximity-induced and intrinsic superconductivity. We briefly conclude in Sec. V. In order to study the effects of magnetic impurities on superconducting surfaces of 3D topological insulators, we begin with a brief review of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity applied to the Dirac surface states without any impurities. The effective Hamiltonian for noninteracting Dirac electrons on the surface is given by where c † kσ (c kσ ) creates (annihilates) an electron with spin σ =↑, ↓ and momentum k, μ is the chemical potential, v F is the Dirac velocity, σ is a vector of Pauli matrices representing spin, and ẑ is a vector normal to the surface. The Hamiltonian (1) is diagonal in the helicity basis described by the operators d † k± that create electrons on the upper (+)/lower (-) branch of the Dirac spectrum, where e iθ k = (k y -ik x )/|k|. These operators create eigenstates of the noninteracting Hamiltonian (1) with energy eigenvalues ± k -μ as measured from the chemical potential, where k = v F |k|. An attractive interaction leading to intrinsic superconductivity can be introduced via the reduced BCS inter-action Hamiltonian, where g is positive and only s-wave interactions in the Cooper channel are kept. In going from the first line to the second we have used Fermi statistics, which implies that fermions of the same spin cannot interact via a contact interaction. The prime on the sum signifies that the latter is restricted to momenta within a shell of width Λ/v F around the Fermi surface, where Λ is a high-energy cutoff. Assuming that attractive interactions are mediated by electron-phonon coupling, the cutoff Λ would be given roughly by the Debye frequency ω D of the phonons. In this paper we will be interested in two separate limits: the limit of large chemical potential μ Λ, and the limit of zero chemical potential μ = 0. In the former only electrons on the upper branch of the Dirac spectrum pair, assuming μ > 0 without loss of generality, while in the latter there is pairing of electrons on both branches. To take both cases into account in a unified framework it turns out to be convenient to work in the basis of helicity eigenstates (2). In the μ Λ limit, we can discard the negative-helicity operators d k-, d † k-entirely, and the interaction Hamiltonian (3) becomes Decoupling this interaction in the particle-particle channel, we obtain the mean-field interaction Hamiltonian where the helical order parameter ∆ For zero chemical potential, only spin-singlet pairing is allowed However, fermions of both helicities must be kept. In the helicity basis, the mean-field interaction Hamiltonian becomes where the self-consistency condition obeyed by the order parameter ∆ is Using Eq. ( at temperature T and chemical potential μ. In the case of proximity-induced superconductivity, the parameter ∆ is imposed by the bulk superconductor. Strictly speaking, the proximity effect causes ∆ to be frequency-dependent, but this frequency dependence can be neglected if we are only interested in the behavior of the system for frequencies ω much less than the gap ∆ 0 of the bulk superconductor We now introduce Nambu spinors Ψ k , in terms of which the mean-field Hamiltonian (10) can be written as where H MF (k) is the mean-field Hamiltonian matrix. For μ Λ, a two-component Nambu spinor is sufficient, and the Hamiltonian matrix is where the Pauli matrices τ 1,2,3 act on particle-hole indices and k = (cos θ k , sin θ k ) = (k y , -k x )/|k| is a unit vector perpendicular to k. For μ = 0, we must keep fermions of both helicities and a four-component Nambu spinor is necessary, In this case, the mean-field Hamiltonian matrix is given by where here the Pauli matrices σ 1,2,3 act on helicity indices. Finally, we introduce an imaginary-time Nambu Green's function where T is the time-ordering operator in imaginary time and the superscript (0) signifies that the Green's function of the clean system (16) will act as the unperturbed Green's function for the system with disorder to be considered in the following sections. Fourier transforming to the fermionic Matsubara frequencies ω n = (2n + 1)πT where T is the temperature and n ∈ Z, the Green's function G (0) (k, iω n ) is given by the solution of the Dyson equation, The anomalous propagator or Gor'kov function for electrons with helicity η can be extracted from the Nambu Green's function 12 (k, τ ) and, for μ = 0, also as 34 (k, τ ). These are then used in the self-consistency conditions ( where ξ k = k -μ and D(μ) is a multiplicity factor that takes on the values D(μ) = 1 for μ Λ and D(μ) = 2 for μ = 0. This multiplicity factor appears due to the fact that fermions of only one helicity pair in the μ Λ limit, while both pair with equal amplitude for μ = 0. The superconducting transition temperature T 0 c for the clean system is obtained by setting the order parameter ∆ to zero in Eq. ( For μ Λ, this gives the BCS-like expression where N (0) is the density of states at the Fermi level and γ ≈ 0.577 is Euler's constant. The black line in Fig. depicts T c as a function of g: there is a nonzero critical temperature for an arbitrarily weak attraction strength. For μ = 0 the density of states N ( ) = | |/2πv 2 F vanishes at the Fermi level, and its energy dependence must be kept in Eq. The curve of T 0 c versus g deriving from this relation is plotted as a red line in Fig. which corresponds to a quantum critical point between the Dirac semimetal for g < g 0 c and the helical superconductor for g > g 0 c . There has been much interest in this quantum critical point recently, owing to the fact that it is predicted to display an emergent supersymmetry In general, near a quantum critical point with dynamic critical exponent z = 1, one has T 0 c ∼ (g -g 0 c ) ν where ν is the correlation length exponent Having established the properties of the clean system, we now introduce impurities. The scattering of electrons off a collection of N imp magnetic impurities at random positions {R i }, i = 1, . . . , N imp , can be described by the following exchange Hamiltonian where V is the area of the topological insulator surface, J is the exchange coupling between the magnetic impurities and the electron spin, and S i is the impurity spin. In the helicity basis, the Hamiltonian reads where we define the vector m kk = (m kk x , m kk y , m kk z ) of 2 × 2 matrices with matrix elements In the Nambu basis, we have where the Hamiltonian matrix and we define the vector for μ = 0. For μ Λ, one only keeps the top left 2 × 2 block of Eq. y, z, as can be checked explicitly from Eq. ( To study the effect of magnetic impurity scattering on the superconducting properties of the system, we adapt the Abrikosov-Gor'kov formalism Treating impurity scattering perturbatively, the impurity-averaged Green's function G(k, iω n ) obeys a translationally invariant Dyson equation where the self-energy Σ(k, iω n ) can be computed order by order in the exchange coupling J and the impurity concentration n imp = N imp /V . To leading order in n imp , we have Because the spin orientation of the impurities is random, we also have where S is the spin of the impurity. To first order in J, the self-energy is proportional to the impurity average of a single spin operator, which vanishes. To second order in J, the self-energy is given by An explicit evaluation of the sum over p in Eq. ( In other words, we use an ansatz of the form where H MF (k, ∆n ) is the mean-field Hamiltonian matrix ( We will start by studying proximity-induced superconductivity. As argued before, the parameter ∆ appearing in the mean-field Hamiltonians ( For μ Λ, the ansatz (37) for the disorder-averaged Green's function becomes Performing the sum over p in Eq. ( is the impurity scattering rate, with units of inverse time. Substituting which have precisely the same form as for a conventional s-wave superconductor doped with magnetic impurities The density of states N s (ω) of the superconducting surface state can be determined from the electron component of the Nambu Green's function where δ is a positive infinitesimal. Using the selfconsistency condition In a clean superconductor, the superconducting gap is dictated by ∆, but in a dirty superconductor this one-toone correspondence can break down For ∆ = 0, we have a non-superconducting topological surface with quenched magnetic disorder, which can be mapped to a single flavor of 2D Dirac fermions with a random gauge field and a random mass For μ = 0, we must retain the full 4×4 structure of the Nambu propagators with two helicities, and the disorderaveraged Green's function Unlike the doped case μ Λ, because here the normalstate density of states N ( ) = | |/2πv 2 F vanishes at the Fermi level we must retain its energy dependence when performing the sum over p in Eq. ( where the parameter is similar to the impurity scattering rate ( The density of states in the superconducting state is where we define Expressing Eq. ( and substituting Eq. ( (54) In Fig. Figures In the previous section we treated the pair amplitude ∆ appearing in the Hamiltonian as a constant imposed by the bulk superconductor. This parameter could be interpreted as the induced pair amplitude in the clean limit, while the actual pair amplitude ∆ eff was somewhat reduced by disorder relative to ∆ (Fig. In the μ Λ limit, the self-consistency equation for the order parameter ∆ is obtained by evaluating the right-hand side of Eq. ( In conjunction with Eq. ( where ψ(z) is the digamma function, which is precisely the Abrikosov-Gor'kov result for a conventional s-wave superconductor with magnetic impurities i.e., the suppression rate is universal, which has been observed experimentally in conventional superconductors For generic values of the disorder strength, the critical temperature can be determined from Eq. ( In this expression γ denotes Euler's constant, not to be confused with the dimensionless disorder strength in Eq. ( In the μ = 0 limit, we evaluate the right-hand side of Eq. ( where g 0 c is the critical interaction strength at zero temperature, defined in Eq. In addition, the green line, corresponding to ∆ = 0.05, separates the helical superconducting phase into gapped (SC) and gapless (GSC) regions. With increasing disorder strength (not shown), the transition temperature is lowered for a fixed interaction strength g, and the critical interaction increases for a fixed temperature. In particular, pairing at zero temperature remains a quantum critical phenomenon in the disordered system, but the quantum critical interaction strength g c is larger than that [Eq. What is the μ = 0 analog of the universal Abrikosov-Gor'kov T c suppression rate (57)? The first difference between the μ Λ and μ = 0 regimes is that in the clean limit, one has the infinitesimal Cooper instability for μ Λ while pairing requires overcoming a threshold interaction strength for μ = 0. A first question one may thus ask is whether the current theory predicts a universal rate of increase of the zero-temperature critical BCS coupling which can be interpreted as a quantum critical version of In order to derive an analytical expression for the suppression of T c at zero chemical potential, we first invoke the following simple argument. Assume that in the disordered system T c vanishes linearly near g c , as it does in the clean system [Eq. ( where we consider g > g c and α is a constant that depends on the disorder strength γ. This linear vanishing is expected from mean-field theory and is consistent with our numerical observations (see, e.g., Fig. which can be thought of as the Dirac analog of the Abrikosov-Gor'kov formula In this paper we have studied the effect of random magnetic impurities on helical superconductivity in the Dirac surface states of 3D topological insulators. Such impurities disturb both the topological protection of the surface states and the formation of Cooper pairs by virtue of breaking time-reversal symmetry; thus one would doubly expect that they lead to the complete suppression of helical superconductivity. Contrary to this expectation, however, we find there exist parameter regimes in which helical superconductivity survives in the form of a gapless helical superconductor. In this gapless helical superconductor, the usual correspondence between superconducting order parameter and superconducting gap breaks down: the gap closes and the usual BCS coherence peaks disappear, but the order parameter (and thus the existence of Cooper pairs) remains. Our results indicate that in the presence of magnetic impurities, one cannot unambiguously infer the presence or absence of helical superconductivity in the topological surface states from the existence of a gap in the electronic density of states or lack thereof, as is well-known for conventional bulk superconductors In this Appendix we explain how Fig. dξ N (ξ) ∆(ω) where ξ is the normal-state single-particle energy measured with respect to the Fermi level, Λ ∼ ω D is a cutoff for pairing interactions, N (ξ) is the normal-state density of states, and we denote by Ω(ω) and ∆(ω) the zerotemperature versions of ωn and ∆n , respectively. In the absence of disorder Ω(ω) and ∆(ω) reduce to ω and ∆, respectively. One can study the ratio between the disordered and clean pair amplitudes, which goes to one in the limit of vanishing disorder. Let us first focus on the highly doped limit μ Λ. In this case the denominator of Eq. (A2) is for k = 0, 1, 2, . . ., with the initial conditions Ω(0) (ω) = ω and ∆(0) (ω) = ∆. The procedure is repeated until two successive iterations produce values that differ by less than a fixed tolerance. The frequency integral in Eq. (A5) is then also performed numerically. We now turn to the undoped limit μ = 0. In this case the denominator of Eq. (A2) is thus the dimensionless ratio of amplitudes is . (A12) In the undoped limit the self-consistency conditions for Ω(ω) and ∆(ω) are 