The discovery of superconductivity in A x Fe 2-y Se 2 (A = K, Cs, Rb, Tl/Rb, Tl/K) [1][2][3][4][5][6] triggered another surge of research on iron-based superconductors, which previously were only featured by iron pnictides [7][8] One of the most controversial issues is whether the SC phase is Fe-vacancy-free or not, i.e. the FeSe layers in A x Fe 2-y Se 2 are stoichiometric (y ≈ 0); or off-stoichiometric due to the existence of considerable Fe vacancies. The origin of this issue is largely due to the phase separation that inevitably occurs in these systems at 500 ~ 578 K measurements Apart from Fe vacancies, the possibility of the existence of about 20% excess Fe in an SC phase with transition temperature (T c ) of 44 K in the K-Fe-Se system was also reported Another puzzling issue is the existence of several SC phases with different T c from 30 K to 46 K, which are often mixed in a single sample. For instance, apart from a dominated 30 K phase, a 44 K phase of trace amount sometimes can be observed in a K x Fe 2-y Se 2 sample obtained by high-temperature route To begin with, we study the formation energy for the process of K intercalation. The process can be expressed as a chemical reaction: The formation energy per unit cell can be described as ΔE I = E KxFe2Se2 -E K0Fe2Se2 -xE K , where E KxFe2Se2 and E K0Fe2Se2 are the total energies of K x Fe 2 Se 2 and an assumed K 0 Fe 2 Se 2 with a similar bct structure but without any K ion, E K is the energy of elemental K. The variation of ΔE I vs. K content is shown in Figure Then we break down ΔE I in terms of energy from the structural constituent units and their interactions. For K intercalation process, as shown in Figure 1) The formation of K ion layers: ΔE K ion layers = E (K ion layers)x+ -xE K ; 2) The electron doping in FeSe layers: ΔE e-doping = E (FeSe layers)x--E FeSe layers ; 3) The deformation of FeSe layers: ΔE FeSe layer deformation = E FeSe layers -E K0Fe2Se2 ; 4) The Coulomb attraction between K ion layers and FeSe layers: And E (K ion layers)x+ is the energy of K ion layers, E (FeSe layers)x-the energy of charged FeSe layers, and E FeSe layers the energy of FeSe layers in K x Fe 2 Se 2 . Therefore, the total formation energy can be written as the sum of these four energy changes: ΔE I = ΔE K ion layers + ΔE e-doping + ΔE FeSe layer deformation + ΔE C . The variations of these four energy contributions as a function of K content are calculated and the results are shown in Figure To understand the tendency for appearance of Fe vacancy in the K-intercalated iron selenides, we go further to consider the energy change ΔE Fe vacancy (= ΔE I ' -ΔE I -μ Fe , where ΔE I ' = E KxFe1.94Se2 -E K0Fe1.94Se2 -xE K is the formation energy per unit cell in the Fe deficiency structure and μ Fe is the Fe chemical potential.) by removal of an Fe atom from the unit lattice of K x Fe 2 Se 2 and its dependence on the K content. It is found that ΔE Fe vacancy only fluctuates above and below zero when x ≤ 0.6 as shown in Figure The K 2 Fe 4 Se 5 phase contains 20% Fe vacancy corresponding to x = 0.8 is a manifestation of this argument. This tendency of appearance of Fe vacancy with K content is supported by the experimental results Besides the above considerations on the formation energy, the influence of lattice dynamics on the structural stability should also be accounted for. This is, in particular, true for the compounds with low levels of intercalated K, which can induce lattice instability. And the predicted lattice constants a and c for K 0.5 Fe 2 Se 2 , 3.69 Å and 13.92 Å, are consistent with the periods observed using scanning tunneling microscope along [110] and [001], 5.5 Å (√2a) and 14.1 Å Furthermore, we explore the temperature-dependent stability of structures in the K region of interest. To this end, we perform the molecular dynamics (MD) simulations on K 0.25 Fe 2 Se 2 and K 0.5 Fe 2 Se 2 . Both structures can survive for at least 1 picosecond using 2√2 × 2√2 × 1 supercells at temperatures up to 500 K, indicating that they are stable at this temperature The free energy is more favorable for K 0.5 Fe 2 Se 2 at temperatures above 268 K, consistent with the result obtained by MD. Despite their variations in stability, both of them have the electronic structures similar to KFe 2 Se 2 (see Figure respectively. The relative stability difference could also explain the difficulty to obtain the 44 K phase. Based on the results presented above, we schematize a phase diagram for the K x Fe 2-y Se 2 system in Figure Moreover, in alkali-metal-intercalated FeSe compounds prepared at low temperatures, the synergic effect of NH 3 , NH 2 , or C 2 H 4 (NH 2 ) 2 along with alkali metal can stabilize the structures Because of the calculation limit and accuracy, we do not consider the slight off-stoichiometric cases, say, the Fe vacancy concentration is less than 3 at.%. It should be pointed out that such slight off-stoichiometry is tolerated in K x Fe 2 Se 2 just like many other materials, which may be the reason that superconductivity was observed in previous reports of refs. [33, 40]. In conclusion, we carefully investigate the energetic change and structural evolution of K x Fe 2-y Se 2 as a function of intercalated K content using first-principles calculations. Two factors dominating the formation of the phases and the structural evolution are confirmed. One is due to the accumulation of negative charge in FeSe layers; the other is due to Coulomb attraction between K ion layers and negatively charged FeSe layers. The structural evolution of this series of phases is summarized: at 0.25 ≤ x ≤ 0.6, the bct lattice is stable and Fe is favored to full occupy its site; at x > 0.6, FeSe layers tend to exclude Fe atoms and create Fe vacancies; and at x < 0.25, the structure will collapse for the dynamic instability. A schematic phase diagram is constructed accordingly and the possible route to further improve T c is suggested. The phases responding to the observed superconductivity are proposed to be K 0.25 Fe 2 Se 2 and K 0.5 Fe 2 Se 2 in terms of stoichiometry, formation energy, stability and electronic structures. Though based on the study of K x Fe 2-y Se 2 , our results should be meaningful to understand the SC and related phases in metal-intercalated iron selenides and other similar SC systems. ) is with the superstructure √2 × √2 of K ion layers, which is actually with composition of K 0.5 Fe 2 Se 2 . This may be the structure mentioned in previous reports All the first-principles calculations employ generalized gradient approximation based on density functional theory in the form of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof function The initial model of KFe 2 Se 2 is isostructural to BaFe 2 As 2 