We study a proof-of-principle example of the recently proposed hybrid quantum-classical simulation of strongly correlated fermion models in the thermodynamic limit. In a "two-site" dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) approach we reduce the Hubbard model to an effective impurity model subject to self-consistency conditions. The resulting minimal two-site representation of the non-linear hybrid setup involves four qubits implementing the impurity problem, plus an ancilla qubit on which all measurements are performed. We outline a possible implementation with superconducting circuits feasible with near-future technology. Using highly controllable quantum devices to study other quantum systems, i.e., quantum simulation Classical numerical methods have limited ability to study even significantly simplified toy models of strongly correlated fermions. For instance, exact diagonalization faces exponential scaling with the system size, while quantum Monte Carlo methods Another well-established approach to the study of strongly correlated fermionic lattice systems is dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) The 'impurity' itself consists of a single lattice site taken from the original problem, and so inherits on-site interactions from the Hubbard model. This impurity site is then immersed into a time-dependent, self-consistent mean-field with which it can dynamically exchange fermions. The mean-field thus attempts to model the rest of the lattice and by being dynamical can describe retardation phenomena. Overall the impurity problem can be represented by a Hamiltonian in which the interacting impurity site is coupled to a discrete set of non-interacting 'bath' sites. The bath sites represent the mean-field and if there is an infinite number of them then the self-consistency condition is guaranteed to be satisfied. However, in practical implementations only a finite number of bath sites are used, which restricts the frequency resolution of the bath so self-consistency condition can only be fulfilled approximately. Nevertheless, many strongly-correlated features, e.g., the Mott transition, are still be captured correctly Although DMFT maps a Hubbard model to an impurity model this is still a non-trivial quantum many-body problem to solve because of the interactions at the impurity site. It is usually solved by classical numerical methods, e.g., specialised versions of those used to tackle the original problem, which attempt to keep track of the quantum correlations between impurity and bath sites. Again this limits the number of bath sites that can be treated accurately. Here, we consider an alternative approach where the impurity problem is solved with a quantum simulator, thus avoiding many issues that are inherent to the classical methods. Quantum simulation of fermionic models has so far been mostly restricted to the analogue paradigm, especially with ultracold atoms in optical lattices To demonstrate this method we focus on the minimal incarnation of DMFT, the so-called "two-site" DMFT The two-site system corresponds to four qubits, two for the impurity site and two for the bath site, while a fifth, ancillary qubit is used for measurements. This number of qubits is readily available in current digital quantum simulator platforms, with IBM having made a five-qubit quantum processor available to the public The self-consistency conditions are taken care of iteratively in a classical feedback loop, which thus completes the non-linear, hybrid quantum-classical device we introduce. Dynamical mean-field simulations have already been proposed for such hybrid devices This paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we further elucidate the framework of DMFT applied to the Hubbard model in infinite dimensions. Section 3 introduces the two-site DMFT scheme in detail. Section 4 discusses the implementation of this two-site scheme with special attention to superconducting circuits. In Section 5, we show the results of our analysis. We end with a summary in Section 6 and give an outline of the single-qubit interferometry measurement scheme in the Appendix. A standard model to describe strongly correlated electron systems in thermodynamic equilibrium is the Hubbard Hamiltonian In this model, electrons with spin projections σ =↓, ↑ 'hop' between adjacent lattice sites with tunnelling energy t. This process is described in the first term, where j, k denotes the sum over all nearest-neighbour sites j and k, and ĉ † j,σ and ĉk,σ denote the fermionic creation and annihilation operators, respectively. The electrons interact with on-site Coulomb repulsion U > 0, described in the latter term by the product of the local number operators nj,↓ = ĉ † j,↓ ĉj,↓ and nj,↑ = ĉ † j,↑ ĉj,↑ . Here, we consider the paramagnetic Hubbard model in an infinite-dimensional Bethe lattice in the thermodynamic limit at zero temperature. This setup has very simple self-consistency relations, which makes it an ideal test-bed for a proof-ofprinciple demonstration of a hybrid quantum-classical scheme. The DMFT approach The solution of the effective single-site, or impurity, problem also yields the solution of the infinite-dimensional Hubbard model due to the self-consistency condition. This leads to the retarded single-particle impurity Green function in the frequency domain being given by where μ is the chemical potential, and Σ imp (ω) denotes the impurity self-energy. We set = 1 throughout the paper. The impurity Green function describes the response of the many-body system after a localized removal or addition of a particle on the impurity site and is defined in the time domain and at zero temperature as where i is the imaginary unit, τ is real time, {•, •} denotes the anticommutator, θ(τ ) is the Heaviside step function, and the average is computed in the ground-state |GS of the impurity model. The fermionic creation and annihilation operators are given in the Heisenberg picture. In the paramagnetic phase the Green function is spin symmetric and we therefore only need to work out G R imp (ω) for one spin configuration. The initially unknown mean-field ∆(ω) has to be chosen such that G R imp (ω) matches the local part of the retarded lattice Green function G R latt,jj (ω), i.e., where j is the (randomly chosen) lattice site from which the removal or addition of a particle occurs in the translationally invariant lattice model. The DMFT selfconsistency condition Eq. ( i.e., the impurity self-energy matches the local self-energy of the Hubbard model in the infinite-dimensional Bethe lattice. In the general case, the DMFT self-consistency loop is iterated as follows (see also Ref. is the non-interacting density of states of a Bethe lattice. The constant t * emerges from the requirement that the Hubbard hopping needs to be scaled as t ∼ t * / √ z to avoid a diverging kinetic energy per lattice site in the limit of infinite coordination, z → ∞ Once self-consistent, the solution of the impurity problem then gives access to local single-particle properties of the original lattice model. For example, the local lattice spectral function is given by where η is a positive infinitesimal. In Hamiltonian-based impurity solvers, one parameterizes ∆(ω) by a set of bath sites (see Fig. In terms of the single-impurity Anderson model (SIAM), the smallest impurity problem involves one fermionic site corresponding to the impurity and only one fermionic site corresponding to the entire mean-field as described in the previous section. Since two qubits are needed to encode the local Hilbert space of a fermionic site, we only require four physical qubits to implement this representation in the lab. The SIAM Hamiltonian for only one bath site reads Here, U is the Hubbard interaction at the impurity site 1, and μ is the chemical potential that controls the electron filling in the grand canonical ensemble. Furthermore, c and V describe the on-site energy of the non-interacting bath site 2 and hybridization between the impurity and the bath site, respectively, and give the mean-field as See Fig. The first condition is that the electron filling n imp of the impurity site and the filling n = n j↓ + n j↑ of the lattice model match, i.e., The second self-consistency condition is given by where quasiparticle weight reads In Eq. ( is the second moment of the non-interacting density of states, and the final equality follows from the semicircular density of states of the Bethe lattice. The hybrid quantum-classical device implementing two-site DMFT consists of a fewqubit digital quantum simulator in which the impurity Green function is measured and of a classical feedback loop in which the parameters of the two-site SIAM are updated. The two-site DMFT protocol is summarized in Fig. 1. First fix U and μ to the desired values in the SIAM and set the unknown parameters c and V equal to an initial guess. 2. Measure the interacting Green function iG R imp (τ ). This can be done using, e.g., single-qubit interferometry (see details in the Appendix). Non-linear hybrid quantum-classical scheme. A digital quantum simulator works in conjunction with a classical feedback loop to perform a proof-of-principle demonstration of a two-site DMFT calculation. 3. After Fourier-transforming the impurity Green function, the impurity selfenergy is obtained classically from the Dyson equation Here, the non-interacting impurity Green function is given by From the derivative of the self-energy one obtains the quasiparticle weight Z which directly yields the updated hopping parameter V via Eq. ( and self-energy Σ imp (ω) thus obtained are used to calculate approximations to local single-particle properties of the Hubbard model. Here, we consider the quantum gates of the digital quantum simulator part in Fig. To implement the two-site SIAM with qubits, the fermionic creation and annihilation operators need to be mapped onto tensor products of spin operators which then act on the qubits via quantum gates. In order to obtain as simple quantum gates as possible in Section 4.3 and in the Appendix, we consider an ordering of the qubits where the first two qubits encode the spin ↓ for both fermionic sites while the last two correspond to spin ↑. This is achieved via the Jordan-Wigner transformation given explicitly as and ĉjσ = ĉ † jσ † . With this mapping the hybridization terms in the SIAM described in Eq. ( and The number operators become and thus the interaction term can be written as up to a constant. The total Hamiltonian then reads where we have dropped constant terms. We now consider how the Jordan-Wigner transformed SIAM in Eq. ( XY gates with resonators -The basic Hamiltonian coupling a set of qubits to the resonator has the form of a detuned Jaynes-Cummings model. By adiabatically eliminating the resonator one obtains, when the resonator is in the vacuum state, the well-known XY model for a pair of qubits l and m as Here, ∆ is the detuning between the qubit level-spacing and the resonator mode, g l is the coupling constant between qubit l and the resonator, and σx and σy are Pauli operators. The XY gate is universal for quantum computation and simulation in combination with single qubit gates, and is the natural interaction customarily employed in superconducting circuits. CZ-φ gates with capacitive couplings -To perform the CZ-φ gate, one qubit is kept at a fixed frequency while the other carries out an adiabatic trajectory near an appropriate resonance of the two-qubit states. By varying the amplitude of this trajectory one can tune the conditional phase φ. The unitary for the CZ φ is given by In order to use quantum gates for time-evolution, we utilize a Trotter decomposition of the time-evolution operator corresponding to ĤSIAM in Eq. Here, N is the number of Trotter (i.e., time) steps and τ N is the size of the time step. In what follows, we use the two alternative approaches for quantum gates outlined in Section 4.2 to implement Eq. XY gates -As shown in Section 4.2, the XY gate, given by the expression n , naturally appears when considering the use of a resonator quantum bus a. Method XY and quantum bus We consider a quantum algorithm based on the XY interaction or exchange gate, which naturally appears in cQED when considering the use of a quantum bus Here, XY is the exchange gate b. Method CZ-gate Moreover, it is also possible to describe the digital simulation in terms of Trotter steps involving the optimised gates (CZ-) where ) is the rotation along the ↵-axis of the ith qubit. The evolution operator of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The sequence of gates for one Trotter step in the digital simulation of the SIAM model with four qubits is The gates A and B are two qubit gates in terms of zz interactions, A = exp i V A single Trotter step contains 5 ZZ two-qubit gates between nearest-neighbour qubits, 2 SWAP gates, and 20 single-qubit rotations. We note that a SWAP-gate amounts to three CZ-gates, and a ZZ-gate amounts to two CZ-gates, in general. This number can optimised further if we consider different orderings for odd and even Trotter steps, in which subsequent gates may be suppressed. This reorganisation of interactions do not affect in principle the digital theoretical error. That way, an odd Trotter step reads and one even Trotter step is CZ-φ gates -To be able to utilize the CZ-φ gates, we write the time-evolution operator in Eq. ( and where is the rotation along the α-axis of the lth qubit. Note that in the computational basis, one can write, e.g., where we have neglected global phases. Thus, we have the decomposition x (π) CZ φ R (1) x (π)R (2) x (π) CZ φ R (2) x (π), and one even Trotter step is A single Trotter step contains 5 ZZ two-qubit gates between nearest-neighbour qubits, 2 SWAP gates, and 20 single-qubit rotations. We note that a SWAP-gate amounts to three CZ-gates, and a ZZ-gate amounts to two CZ-gates, in general. This number can optimised further if we consider different orderings for odd and even Trotter steps, in which subsequent gates may be suppressed. This reorganisation of interactions do not affect in principle the digital theoretical error. That way, an odd Trotter step reads and one even Trotter step is The time-evolution operator in Eq. ( where α (φ). The sequence of gates for one Trotter step is depicted in Fig. A single Trotter step contains 5 ZZ two-qubit gates (corresponding to the A and B gates in Fig. We focus on the half-filled case, i.e., μ = U 2 and c = 0, which requires the least amount of quantum gates, since the C and D gates in Section 4 vanish. Note that since the value of c is fixed in this case, it need not be updated in the self-consistency loop. We use t * , the Hubbard hopping in infinite dimensions, as our unit of energy, hence time τ is measured in units of 1/t * . Note that τ refers here to the time in the evolution operator Û (τ ), not to the actual time to run the experiment. We show in Fig. , where |Ψ(τ ) denotes the state obtained with exact time-evolution using the full, non-Trotterized operator Û (τ ) = exp(-iτ ĤSIAM ) corresponding to the two-site SIAM in Eq. ( where |GS is the ground-state of the two-site SIAM in Eq. ( As shown in Section 3, the main object of interest is the retarded impurity Green function. One possibility to measure iG R imp (τ ) is single-qubit interferometry (see the Appendix for details), which raises the total number of qubits in the experimental arrangement to five. In Fig. To obtain the impurity Green function in the frequency domain, we first consider some known and general analytic properties of the retarded Green function in Eq. ( where |j is an eigenstate of ĤSIAM with eigenenergy E j , and ω j = E j -E GS . In twosite DMFT, the interacting Green function is a four-pole function we need to extract the unknown residues α j and poles ω j by fitting an expression of the form in Eq. ( where ρ 0 is the non-interacting density of states of the Bethe lattice. Figure , which leads to Z in Eq. ( To study the transition between the two types of spectral functions in Fig. We have proposed a quantum algorithm for two-site DMFT to be run on a small digital quantum simulator with a classical feedback loop, allowing the qualitative description of the infinite-dimensional Hubbard model in the thermodynamic limit. We have considered two alternative quantum gate decompositions consistent with state-of-the-art technology in superconducting circuits for the time-evolution operator. We found that an increasing number of Trotter steps improves the fidelity of our digital scheme to qualitatively describe the Mott transition. Our work therefore provides an interesting application for small-scale quantum devices. It also paves the way for more accurate quantum simulations of strongly correlated fermions in various lattice geometries, which are relevant to novel quantum materials, when the general self-consistency condition and larger number of qubits are used. Each of the terms of the form Û † (τ )σ α 1 Û (τ )σ β 1 , where α, β ∈ {x, y}, can be measured in the interferometer. This can be seen as follows. We denote the state of the system qubits by ρsys = |GS GS|, where |GS is the ground-state of the system. We initialize the ancilla qubit in the state |0 , yielding the total density operator ρtot = |0 0| ⊗ ρsys . The total system then undergoes the following evolution: 1. At time t = 0, a Hadamard gate σH = 1 √ 2 (σ z + σx ) is applied on the ancilla qubit, creating the superposition |0 ancilla → (|0 ancilla + |1 ancilla ) / √ 2. 1 is applied on the impurity qubit 1 if the ancilla qubit has state |0 . 3. The system qubits undergo time evolution according to the unitary Û (τ ) which is decomposed into quantum gates. 1 is applied on the impurity qubit 1 if the ancilla qubit has state |1 . 5. Another Hadamard gate is applied on the ancilla qubit. Denoting the total unitary in steps 2-4 by T , the state of the ancilla qubit after this evolution is given by ρancilla = Tr sys σH T σH ρtot σH where F (τ ) = Tr sys T † 1 (τ ) T0 (τ )ρ sys . We have denoted the controlled unitaries as T1 (τ ) = σα 1 Û (τ ) and T0 (τ ) = Û (τ )σ β 1 . Note that since the same Û (τ ) appears in both unitaries, only the Pauli gates σα/β 1 need to be controlled, as described above. Note also that F (τ ) = Û † (τ )σ α 1 Û (τ )σ β 1 . We can rewrite the state of the ancilla qubit as