Despite rapid progress in understanding gapped topological states, much less is known about gapless topological phases of matter, especially in strongly correlated electrons. In this work we discuss a large class of robust gapless quantum spin liquids in frustrated magnets made of halfinteger spins, which are described by gapless fermionic spinons coupled to dynamical Z2 gauge fields. Requiring U (1) spin conservation, time reversal and certain space group symmetries, we show that certain spinon symmetry fractionalization class necessarily leads to a gapless spectrum. These gapless excitations are stable against any perturbations, as long as the required symmetries are preserved. Applying these gapless criteria to spin one-half systems on square, triangular and kagome lattices, we show that all gapped symmetric Z2 spin liquids in Abrikosov-fermion representation can also be realized in Schwinger-boson representation. This leads to 64 gapped Z2 spin liquids on square lattice, and 8 gapped states on both kagome and triangular lattices. Tremendous progress has been made in understanding the interplay of symmetry and topology in gapped quantum many-body phases In this work we discuss a class of gapless and highly entangled quantum paramagnets in half-integer-spin systems, namely gapless Z 2 spin liquids Between these spinon superconductors (Z 2 spin liquids) and usual electronic superconductors, there is a crucial difference on how space group symmetries can be implemented on spinons and on electrons. Since spinons are "fractionalized" collective excitations of the spin system, they can carry a fractional quantum number of spatial (and global) symmetries, a phenomena known as "symmetry fractionalization" Previous studies on nodal superconductors After establishing three symmetry criteria for gapless Z 2 spin liquids, we apply them to identify gapless Z 2 spin liquid s on square, triangular and kagome lattices. They also enable us to identify the gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquids on these lattices, where the kagome lattice case is experimentally relevant to the possibly gapped paramagnetic ground state of Herbertsmithite This work is organized as follows. In section II we setup a generalized parton construction (1) for a half-integer spin system, using which the Z 2 spin liquids will be constructed and investigated in this paper. This representation reduces to the Schwinger-boson A. A general parton construction for half-integer spins In this section we setup a general parton construction for half-integer spins, which allows us to construct an arbitrary ground state in a half-integer-spin system. In particular in the case of spin- In this construction, each spin-S (2S ∈ Z) operator S r is represented by 2S pairs of spin- and σ represent the three Pauli matrices. a is the flavor index and α, β are spin indices. These partons physically correspond to spinon excitations in a quantum spin liquid, each of which carries spin-1/2 and can be viewed as half of a magnon. Following the rule for addition of angular momentum, to ensure that S r represents a half-integer spin we require that 2S to be an odd integer and Note that we have not specify the statistics of spinons {φ r,a,α }. Bose versus Fermi statistics of partons will lead to two different parton constructions for the same spin-S system, such as Schwinger-boson versus Abrikosovfermion representation for the S = 1 2 case. Once the parton Hamiltonian Ĥparton for {φ r,a,α } is constructed and its ground state |Φ parton obtained, the many-spin state |Ψ spin is achieved by implementing certain projection operators ( Pr on site r) on the parton ground state This is because the Hilbert space of partons {φ r,a,α |1 ≤ a ≤ 2S, α =↑, ↓} per site is larger than the (2S + 1)dimensional spin-S Hilbert space, and hence we need to impose certain constraints on the parton Hilbert space to reduce it to the physical spin-S Hilbert space. For example, condition (2) is one necessary constraint for a general parton construction (1) of spin-S systems. All the constraints are enforced by a projection operator { Pr } in (3) to produce a physical spin-S wavefunction. In the S = 1/2 case, the generalized parton construction (1) reduces to the widely-adopted Abrikosovfermion and the associated projection operator is nothing but the well-known Gutzwiller projector In the 2S > 1 case, the onsite constraints are typically more complicated Now that the physical many-spin wavefunction |Ψ spin is related to the many-body state |Φ parton of partons {φ r,a,α } by the projection (3), how different are these two wavefunctions? Do they share the same symmetry properties? Take Z 2 spin liquids for example, in order to obtain a spin wavefunction |Ψ spin for a Z 2 spin liquid that preserves a symmetry group G s , what are the symmetries required for the corresponding parton Hamiltonian Ĥparton and associated parton state |Φ parton ? In the general parton construction (1), it is easy to notice that both the physical spin operators (1) and the onsite constraints (2) are invariant under certain gauge transformations on partons {φ r,a,α }. Two wellknown examples are the SU (2) gauge transformations and the U (1) gauge transformations For a given parton construction, these gauge transformations are featured by a gauge group G (0) g , which e.g. is SU (2) for spin-1/2 Abrikosov-fermion case and U (1) for spin-1/2 Schwinger-boson case. As a consequence of these gauge redundancies, the parton state |Φ parton may not faithfully preserve the symmetry group G s of the physical spin wavefunction |Ψ spin . Most generally, the symmetry implementations on partons form a projective representation And the different projective representations of the symmetry group G s is mathematically classified by the 2nd group cohomology H 2 (G s , IGG = Z 2 ). More concretely, we demonstrate the projective implementation of a physical symmetry g ∈ G s in the general parton construction (1). The symmetry action U g on partons {φ r,a,α } is generally a combination of physical symmetry g and its associated gauge rotation {W g (r) ∈ G g }: While physical symmetries g, h and their product gh ≡ g • h, their associated implementations on partons satisfy the following condition The symmetry implementations { Ûg |g ∈ G s } on partons {φ r,a,α } form a so-called "projective symmetry group" or PSG In the case of Z 2 spin liquids, the Invariant Gauge Group takes a particularly simple form ( Nφ is the total number of partons/spinons) and therefore Clearly operations within IGG commute with all symmetry implementations { Ûg |g ∈ G s } on partons In this case, the projective symmetry implementations { Ûg |g ∈ G s } on partons {φ r,a,α } form a central extension of symmetry group G s . Different symmetric Z 2 spin liquids preserving the same symmetry group G s are hence classified by different ±1-valued phase factor sets {ω(g, h) = ±1|g, h ∈ G s }, which mathematically corresponds to the classification of 2nd group cohomology H 2 (G s , Z 2 ) as in (12). These phase factors are also subject to associativity They are well-defined only up gauge transformations Two sets of phase factors related by a gauge transformation belong to the same fractionalization class and describe the same Z 2 spin liquid. Therefore gaugeinequivalent phase factor sets {ω(g, h) = ±1|g, h ∈ G s } correspond to different fractionalization classes, and hence distinct symmetric Z 2 spin liquids. If all phase factors can be chosen to be trivial i.e. ω(g, h) ≡ 1, then the physical symmetry group G s is implemented faithfully on partons. On other other hand, if it is impossible to trivialize all phase factors by any gauge transformation, there exists at least two elements g, h ∈ G s such that U g • U h = (-1) Nφ • U gh . These symmetries g, h act projectively on spinons/partons {φ r,a,α }, and this phenomenon is coined "symmetry fractionalization" Below we list a few gauge-invariant phases, whose different values will correspond to distinct symmetric Z 2 spin liquids. Each gauge-invariant phase is typically associated with a series of symmetry operations which yields the identity operation e in the symmetry group G s , as shown in the left column of TABLE I-III. For time reversal symmetry T we have since partons/spinons are all Kramers doublets. e is the identity element of symmetry group G s . For mirror reflection symmetry σ we have For n-fold rotational symmetry C n we have With both time reversal and mirror reflection, we have These gauge invariant phase factors will be used in following discussions on the gapless criteria and applications to Z 2 spin liquids on various lattices. In the following, we setup the most generic parton Hamiltonian Ĥparton for a symmetric Z 2 spin liquid, in the framework of parton construction (1). The symmetry group G s considered here includes at least U (1) spin rotational symmetry (say, along ẑ-axis), time-reversal symmetry T , and certain space group symmetries: We do not consider spin-orbit couplings in the system, so the space group symmetries considered here are pure spatial operations involving no spin rotations. Under time reversal operation T = U T •K where K represents complex conjugation, the partons/spinons transform as spin-1/2 Kramers doublets by construction in (1): Under U (1) S z spin rotation they transform as The conservation of ẑ-component of total spins makes the Nambus basis ψ r ≡ (φ r,a,↑ φ † r,a,↓ ) T a convenient choice to diagonalize the parton Hamiltonian. Most generally, the symmetry-allowed parton Hamiltonian of a spin-S system can be written in the Nambu basis as where ĤMF represents the quadratic part at mean-field level and Ĥint for generic symmetry-preserving interactions between partons. The (4S) × (4S) matrices r|r = r |r † are mean-field amplitudes for spinons. The spin rotational symmetry ( while time reversal symmetry (TRS) plays the role of an anti-unitary particle-hole symmetry on the Nambu spinor: where τ are Pauli matrices for the Nambu index, and N is the total number of lattice sites. For a symmetric Z 2 spin liquid, the time-reversalsymmetric pair superfluid Hamiltonian in the partons/spinon {φ r } basis is mapped to a Bloch Hamiltonian of particle-hole-symmetric insulator in the Nambu basis {ψ r }. Due to U (1) S z spin conservation, the Nambu particles {ψ r } have a conserved particle number F as defined in (25). Although usually (-1) F is used to denote fermion parity, here we use it for both (hard-core) Bose and Fermi statistics of partons {φ r,a,α }. It is instructive to compare the vacua and ground states in these two different basis. Denoting the Fock vacuum of partons {φ r } as |0 with φ r,a,α |0 = 0, ∀ r, a, α. ( the vacuum |empty in the Nambu basis is given by This is nothing but the fully polarized state where all spins point to negative ẑ-direction. Now that partons {ψ r } (or {φ r }) are either hard-core bosons or fermions, there is also a fully filled state in the Nambu basis It is the other polarized state where all spins point to the positive ẑ-direction, and the time reversal partner of the Nambu vacuum It's straightforward to show that no matter partons {ψ r } are either hard-core bosons or fermions, the Nambu particle number F in ( Consequently, TRS (25) enforces the Nambu particle number F to be at "half filling": Hereafter we'll stick to the Nambu basis which allows us to make the best of U (1) S z symmetry. A generic time-reversal-symmetric Z 2 spin liquid can be obtained by projecting the following parton state which satisfies apart from one exception described below. In a system with N = odd half-integer spins, Kramers theorem dictates at least two-fold degeneracy for all eigenstates. Indeed the parton state (32) will not be well-defined since N S is a half integer. In this case, the parton ground states typically create N S ± 1 2 pairs of Nambu particles on top of Nambu vacuum |empty , with a total spin S z = ± 1 2 . Next we analyze the symmetry implementations on the Nambu vacuum |empty and parton state |Ψ parton . Since the Nambu vacuum |empty in ( with the only exception that associated with Kramers degeneracy if 2N S = odd. In other words, the series of combined symmetry operations on the left column of TABLE On an arbitrary parton state |Ψ parton in (32), symmetry operations act in the following way or equivalently This projective symmetry operation is crucial for the gapless criteria for Z 2 spin liquids as we will show below. Previously we have setup the parton Hamiltonian of a generic symmetric pair superfluid, which describes a symmetric Z 2 spin liquid in the parton construction (1), irrespective of the (hard-core)Bose or Fermi statistics of partons. An important property of a Z 2 spin liquid is whether there is a finite energy gap in the excitation spectrum or not. Usually the existence of an excitation gap depends on the specified Hamiltonian of the system. However in certain quantum spin liquids, one can sometimes rule out the possibility of an energy gap once the physical Hilbert space and symmetry implementations on spinons are specified Here we will address the following question in the context of symmetric Z 2 spin liquids: given a lattice system of half-integer spins with certain space group symmetries, for a specific symmetry fractionalization class of spinons, is it possible to construct a gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquid? Always assuming time reversal symmetry (21) and U (1) spin rotational symmetry (22), we consider all possible fractionalization classes of crystal symmetry on spinons in a Z 2 spin liquid (see e.g. TABLE I-III). We do not specify the statistics of spinons {φ r,a,α }, i.e. they can be either hard-core bosons or fermions. If the generic parton/spinon Hamiltonian (23) cannot support a unique gapped ground state, our parton construction will lead to a gapless Z 2 spin liquid, whose low-energy physics are described by gapless spinons coupled to dynamical Z 2 gauge fields. Previously, gapless Z 2 spin liquids were mostly discussed at the mean-field level In the following we establish three criteria on the symmetry fractionalization class of spinons, which lead to a gapless spectrum of the interacting parton/spinon Hamiltonian (23). These criteria dictate the stability of gapless Z 2 spin liquids associated with certain spinon frac- Independent of whether partons/spinons are hard-core bosons or fermions, we take the following strategy to establish the gapless criteria. Given certain spinon symmetry fractionalization class {ω(g, h)|g, h ∈ G s }, we first prove symmetry-enforced zero-energy degeneracy, at the level of bilinear mean-field Ansatz ĤMF of partons/spinons. Next we go beyond mean-field Ansatz, and argue the impossibility of a unique gapped many-body ground state for the interacting parton/spinon Hamiltonian (23), using the Schmidt decomposition of a shortrange-entangled (gapped) state The first criterion comes from two perpendicular mirror reflection planes, which intersect at one lattice site with a half-integer spin on it. Take square lattice for example, we consider two perpendicular mirror planes σ and R x in FIG. where F = r ψ † r ψ r is the parton number in the Nambu basis. Since the combination of the two mirror reflections is nothing but the two-fold rotation C 2 = σR x around First it's straightforward to show that in mean-field Ansatz, each single-particle level of partons/spinons must be at least 2-fold degenerate. The 4N S ×4N S mean-field Ansatz Hamiltonian can be diagonalized as where E represents the single-particle eigen-energy, and γ E is the annihilation operator of the associated eigenstate. TRS in (25) as an anti-unitary particle-hole symmetry indicates that single-spinon levels always show up in pairs with opposite energies: As a result, the number of positive and negative singlespinon energy levels must both equal 2N S. In the presence of mirror reflection symmetry σ, each eigenmode can be labeled by their σ eigenvalue q E (σ): On the other hand, mirror reflection R x satisfying (38) leads to another degenerate single-spinon level ÛRx γ E Û -1 Rx with an opposite σ eigenvalue -q E (σ) since Therefore each single-spinon level must be at least 2-fold degenerate, due to anti-commuting mirror operations Ûσ and ÛRx on spinons as shown in (38). Now consider a lattice with N = odd number of lattice sites with one half-integer spin-S on each site, such as a odd by odd square lattice on FIG. The above argument can be easily generalized to interacting parton/spinon Hamiltonian (23) on an N = odd lattice. Since in the Nambu basis, the many-body ground state |Ψ parton has a conserved particle number F = 2N S= odd, two mirror reflections Ûσ and ÛRx anticommute on the many-body ground state as shown in (37), leading to at least 2-fold degeneracy. However, there are some subtlety in defining a Z 2 spin liquid with N =odd half-integer spins, where the physical many-spin ground state contains an odd number of spinons and must be at least 2-fold degenerate due to Kramers theorem. Below we put previous intuitive arguments on a firmer ground, by using Schmidt decomposition of the manyspinon ground state on an infinite cylinder Consider interacting spinon Hamiltonian ( where w ν are Schmidt weights. {|ν L } and {|ν L} denote a set of orthonormal basis for the Hilbert space of region L and L. The Schmidt spectrum {w ν } is discrete for SRE state |Ψ parton . Since the bipartition (red line) of the lattice preserves mirror σ, the orthonormal basis can be labeled by their reflection quantum number q(σ): which must satisfy so that parton/spinon ground state |Ψ parton preserves mirror σ with eigenvalue q σ . Now let's consider another entanglement cut related to the previous one by mirror reflection R x , depicted by the green dotted-dash line in FIG. where by mirror reflection we can choose Note that on an infinite cylinder, the total particle number FL = r∈L ψ † r ψ r on the l.h.s. of an entanglement cut is ill-defined in the thermodynamic limit is still well-defined. Hence we have where Φ is an ambiguous but ν-independent phase Making use of symmetry action (38), it's straightforward to work out the mirror σ-eigenvalues of Schmidt components as Applying mirror reflection σ twice and requiring q ν,L (σ 2 ) = q ν,R (σ 2 ) = 1, we obtain that 25 On the other hand notice that region L = M R (see FIG. where {|ρ M } is a set of orthonormal basis for Hilbert space in region M , with particle number satisfying Now let's perform a series of symmetry operations Rx on both sides of state (54), and we reach a contradiction to (53) for a L y = odd cylinder. Therefore we've shown that symmetry implementation ( The 2nd criterion for gapless Z 2 spin liquids is the following implementation of time reversal T and a mirror reflection (say, R x in FIG. This gauge-invariant phase factor of symmetry fractionalization can also be written as First at single-particle level i.e. for the parton meanfield Ansatz (40), we can label single-spinon modes by their mirror eigenvalues q E (R x ) as defined in (42). Performing time reversal operation on each mode will lead to another mode with the opposite energy Let's first assume there is a finite energy gap in the singlespinon spectrum, separating positive energy states from those with negative energies. Now that each positive energy level γ E always shows up in pairs with its timereversal partner γ -E , the total mirror eigenvalue of all energy levels is given by This leads to a total mirror eigenvalue -1 of all energy levels on a lattice with N = odd sites, which is impossible in any physical parton/spinon Hamiltonian. This contradiction can only be resolved by the existence of zero-energy single-spinon modes, i.e. a gapless spinon spectrum. Below we prove that a unique SRE symmetric ground state of interacting spinon/parton Hamiltonian ( Time reversal operation (25) in the Nambu basis indicates that where Q ν,L are particle number fluctuation in region L, defined in ( for ambiguous phase Φ in (50) for the Nambu particle parity of Schmidt eigenstates. Due to mirror reflection symmetry R x we have Following the same strategy ( L = M R) we used in proving the 1st criterion, by acting T ÛRx T -1 ÛRx on both sides of (54) we end up with the following contradiction on a cylinder with circumference L y =odd. Therefore we've proved that symmetry fractionalization class (58) of spinons is incompatible with a symmetric SRE ground state for the generic interacting parton/spinon Hamiltonian (23). This therefore leads to stable gapless Z 2 spin liquids protected by mirror and time reversal symmetries, characterized by spinon symmetry fractionalization (58). The 3rd criterion is provided by the interplay of 2n-fold site-centered rotation C 2n and time reversal operation T . In particular, a C 2n rotation necessarily imply a two-fold rotation Ĉ2 = ( Ĉ2n ) n ≡ Î. (66) around the same site with an half-integer spin on it. This 2-fold rotation can also be viewed as the inversion operation Î for the 2d plane. Our 3rd criterion for gapless Z 2 spin liquids is guaranteed by the following spinon symmetry fractionalization class The above symmetry fractionalization class is quite analogous to previous criterion (58) for reflection Rx and time reversal T , where the only difference is to replace mirror Rx by inversion Ĉ2 = Î. It's straightforward to show that our previous arguments on criterion (58) can be applied completely in parallel to prove the above criterion (67). The above criterion can be further refined for 2n-fold rotation C 2n , depending on whether n is an even or odd integer 55 . It will lead to two different criteria for gapless Z 2 spin liquids protected by C 2n rotations, as we elaborate below. First of all, due to algebraic equality (66), it's straightforward to verify the following relations for gaugeinvariant phase factors of spinon symmetry fractionalization: Meanwhile criterion (67) is the same as Note that ω(g, h) = ±1 as elements of 2nd group cohomology H 2 (G s , Z 2 ), and therefore criterion (67) can be rewritten as follows: if n = odd : and In summary, in the presence of a 2-fold rotational symmetry C 2 centered at a half-integer spin, the 3rd criterion dictates that spinon symmetry fractionalization (67) is incompatible with any gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquid. It also establishes the stability of gapless Z 2 spin liquids protected by such a C 2 rotational symmetry. Now that a 2n-fold crystalline rotation C 2n necessarily leads to a 2-fold rotation as shown in (66), our 3rd criterion (67) further leads to two criteria (71)-(72) for stable gapless Z 2 spin liquids, protected by a 2n-fold rotation C 2n centered at a half-integer spin. Specifically criterion (71) applies to n = odd case, while criterion (72) applies to n = even case. In the following we apply the above three criteria ( The space group of square lattice is P 4gm, generated by two translations T Table In spin-1/2 case (2S = 1), Schwinger-boson (SB) and Abrikosov-fermion (AF) representations provide two concrete constructions for symmetric Z 2 spin liquids associated with the 2 9 = 512 symmetry fractionalization classes. In the SB representation 2 T -1 1 T 2 T 1 = e is equal to (-1) p1 when acting on Schwinger bosons, or η xy = ±1 when acting on Abrikosov fermions. These symmetry implementations on bosonic/fermionic spinons b α /f α in the SB/AF representation, as well as their correspondence to the algebraic spinon symmetry fractionalization class are all listed in TABLE I. Based on our previous analysis, in the general parton construction (1) of half-integer-spin systems, the spinon symmetry fractionalization class satisfying criteria (38), (58), ( The combination of the two mirror is nothing but the 2-fold rotation (or inversion) around a lattice site: and we have Therefore the 1st gapless criterion (38) can be written as on square lattice. For 2nd gapless criterion (58), its application to mirror plane σ leads to Meanwhile, applying the same criterion (58) to another mirror plane R xy = C 4 σ leads to Finally for 4-fold rotational symmetry C 4 , applying the 3rd gapless criterion (72) also leads to condition (76). To summarize, if any of the above 3 conditions (76)-(78) are satisfied for the spinon fractionalization class, we will end up with a symmetry protected gapless Z 2 spin liquid robust against any symmetry-preserving perturbations. As a result, any gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquid on square lattice must obey the following rules of spinon symmetry fractionalization: This "gap condition" applies to both bosonic and fermionic spinons. From the 2nd column of TABLE I, it's straightforward to see that the above condition (79) is automatically satisfied for all Schwinger boson mean-field states of Z 2 spin liquids on square lattice, since for the symmetry fractionalization class of bosonic spinons {b r,α } in the Schwinger-boson (SB) representation. This means all 64 Schwinger boson mean-field states are generically gapped Z 2 spin liquids since the symmetry fractionalization class of fermionic spinons {f r,α } are given by in the Abrikosov-fermion (AF) representation Consequently, the phase factors {ω a (g, h)|g, h ∈ G s ; a = b, f, v} characterizing the symmetry fractionalization class of anyons must satisfy the following relation: where λ(g, h) = ±1 are extra twisting factors All 64 = 4 × 2 4 gapped Z 2 spin liquids can be realized by mean-field Ansatz in both SB and AF representations. More concretely in the AF representation, the fermionic partons in all 64 = 2 4 × 4 gapped Z 2 spin liquids have the following space group symmetry implementations η xy , η xpx , η xpy , η t = ±1, (g Pxy , g Px , g Py , g T ) = (τ 0 , τ 0 , τ 0 , iτ 3 ), (g Pxy , g Px , g Py , g T ) = (τ 0 , i τ 1 , i τ 1 , i τ 3 ), (g Pxy , g Px , g Py , g T ) = ( i τ 1 , τ 0 , τ 0 , i τ 3 ), (g Pxy , g Px , g Py , g T ) = ( iτ in the notation of Ref. 19. While all SB mean-field states are gapped Z 2 spin liquids, many states in the AF representation x = (C6Ry) 2 (-1) p 2 +p 3 ησ ωR x (Ry) Table As shown in FIG. Next, applying criterion (58) to mirror plane σ and R leads to two gapless conditions on the fractionalization class in TABLE Finally, criterion (71) for site-centered C 6 rotation also leads to another gapless condition This condition, however, is not independent of the above gapless conditions (86)-(88). Any spinon symmetry fractionalization class {ω(g, h)} that satisfies at least one of conditions (86)-(88) will inevitably lead to a gapless spectrum in the Z 2 spin liquid. This means any gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquid on the triangular lattice must satisfy following "gap condition" on the fractionalizaton class of either fermionic or bosonic spinons. For all 8 Schwinger-boson states 31 listed in 2nd column of TABLE II, it's straightforward to see that "gap conditions" (89) are automatically fulfilled, since the fractionalization class {ω b (g, h)} of bosonic spinons {b r,α } is given by in the SB representation. On the other hand, for the 20 AF states 45 listed in the 3rd column of TABLE II, the gap condition (89) leads to The symmetry fractionalization class {ω f (g, h)} of fermionic spinons {f r,α } is given by in the AF representation. Only 8 states among all 20 satisfy the above gap conditions (91), and lead to gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquids on triangular lattice. Similar to the square lattice case, these 8 AF states have a one-to-one correspondence with the 8 SB states on triangular lattice. As shown in Ref. 45, the duality between SB and AF states are established in terms of their bosonic/fermionic fractionalization classes: Therefore they both describe the 8 distinct gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquids on the triangular lattice. In addition to the 8 gapped Z 2 spin liquids, there are 12 other mean-field states in the AF representation of a spin- Kagome lattice share the same space group P 6mm with triangular lattice, generated by translations T 1,2 , mirror reflection R y and hexagon-centered rotation C 6 , as shown in FIG. According to the 1st criterion (38), two perpendicular mirror planes M x = T 1 R x and R y in FIG. Next, applying 2nd criterion (58) to mirror reflections R x and R y separately leads to two gapless conditions: Finally, applying 3rd criterion (71) to site-centered 2-fold rotation or inversion Again, it's straightforward to show this condition is not independent of the above 3 gapless conditions (94)-(96). Satisfying one or more of these 3 gapless conditions necessarily result in a stable gapless Z 2 spin liquid. In order to achieve a gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquid on the kagome lattice, the symmetry fractionalization class of both bosonic and fermionic spinons hence must obey the following gap condition ω T1T2 ω Rx ω Ry ω C6 = ω Rx ω RxT = ω Ry ω RyT = 1. (97) Similar to square and triangular lattices, as shown in 2nd column in TABLE III, all 8 spin-1 2 Schwinger-boson Z 2 spin liquid states on kagome lattice 31 automatically satisfy the above gap conditions (97). In particular, the fractionalization class of bosonic spinons {b r,α } is given by (100) Among all 20 AF states 50 , only 8 fulfill this constraint and lead to gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquids. Analogous to the case of square and triangular lattices, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the 8 SB states and 8 gapped AF states, established by the unique vision fractionalization class in a symmetric Z 2 spin liquid on the square lattice. As shown in Ref. 48, the duality between 8 SB and 8 AF states is given by η 12 = (-1) p1+1 , η σ = η σT = (-1) p2+p3+1 , η C6T = η σC6 = (-1) p2 , η C6 = (-1) p1+p3+1 . (101) Hence there are 8 gapped symmetric Z 2 spin liquids on the kagome lattice, realizable in both SB and AF constructions. In addition to the 8 gapped states, the other 12 states in AF representation all satisfy at least one of gapless conditions (94)-(96). They realize 12 different gapless Z 2 spin liquids on the kagome lattice, stable against any symmetry-preserving perturbations. In this work we establish a class of gapless topological phases in half-integer spin systems, which hosts symmetry-protected low-energy bulk excitations stable against any symmetric perturbations. These phases require time reversal, certain space group and at least U (1) spin rotational symmetries. The low-energy dynamics of these phases are described by a (gapped) dynamical Z 2 gauge field coupled to gapless mater fields, halfinteger "spinons" that transform as a Kramers doublet under time reversal symmetry. Therefore these phases are dubbed "gapless Z 2 spin liquids". In the framework of parton constructions for halfinteger spin systems, these gapless Z 2 spin liquids are constructed as spin-conserving pair superfluids of spinons (or partons). We establish three criteria (38), (58), (71)-(72) regarding the spatial (and time reversal) symmetry implementations on spinons. These criteria forbid a gapped spinon pair superfluid for arbitrary interactions between spinons. The non-perturbative proof for gapless pair superfluids of interacting spinons is achieved by using properties of Schmidt decomposition of a generic SRE state We apply these gapless criteria to symmetric Z 2 spin liquids on square, triangular and kagome lattices, and found that the only gapped Z 2 spin liquids that can be realized on these lattices are the Schwinger-boson states One thing worth mentioning is that these nonperturbative gapless criteria for a pair superfluid of interacting hard-core bosons/fermions hold quite generally, regardless of the topology of the ground state. In other words, they can be applied to a trivial pair superfluid or a topological pair superfluid with protected edge states Note added: Upon completion of this work we became aware of Qi and Cheng's work 