Since the discovery of the cuprate high-temperature superconductivity in 1986, a universal phase diagram has been constructed experimentally and numerous theoretical models have been proposed. However, there remains no consensus on the underlying physics thus far. Here, we theoretically investigate the phase diagram of hole-doped cuprates based on an itinerant-localized dual fermion model, with the charge carriers doped on the oxygen sites and localized holes on the copper d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. We analytically demonstrate that the puzzling anomalous normal state or the strange metal could simply stem from a free Fermi gas of carriers bathing in copper antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations. The short-range high-energy spin excitations also act as the 'magnetic glue' of carrier Cooper pairs and induce d-wave superconductivity from the underdoped to overdoped regime, distinctly diffrent from the conventional low-frequency magnetic fluctuation mechanism. We further sketch out the characteristic dome-shaped critical temperature Tc versus doping level. The emergence of the pseudogap is ascribed to the localization of partial carriers coupled to the local copper moments or a crossover from the strange metal to a nodal Kondo-like insulator. Our work provides a consistent theoretical framework to understand the typical phase diagram of holedoped cuprates and paves a distinct way to the studies of both non-Fermi liquid and unconventional superconductivity in strongly correlated systems. The Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory reveals the phase transition from a Landau Fermi liquid into superconductivity in conventional superconductors In these unconventional superconductors, one striking feature is the coexistence of localized and itinerant electrons Here, we take advantage of a dual fermion model or Kondo-Heisenberg-like model to explore the generic cuprate phase diagram. Markedly different from the onecomponent spin-fluctuation models proposed before where t ij is the hopping integral of the hole carrier quasiparticles on O sites. c i = (c i↑ , c i↓ ) T is the annihilation operator of carriers in unit cell i, and d i = (d i↑ , d i↓ ) T is the annihilation operator of localized holes on the Cu d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. s i = c † i σc i /2 and S i = d † i σd i /2 with the Pauli vector σ. J K is the Kondo-like coupling between the carriers and localized holes, and J H is the Heisenberg interaction between the holes on the Cu square lattice ( for details, see Appendices A ). Remarkably, different from the conventional Kondo-Heisenberg model, the much larger J K splits the carrier energy dispersion into two bands, possibly with overlaps, e.g. the Zhang-Rice singlet and triplet channels in the atomic limit. Considering the hole doping concentration δ 1, we only focus on the lower-energy band where the carrier and the Cu hole have opposite spin orientation in the same unit cell. Nevertheless, contrary to the conventional t -J model In the following, we will show that the typical cuprate phase diagram can be understood solely from the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1). Based on this model, the characteristic interaction Feynman diagrams are plotted in each region of the phase diagram for hole-doped cuprates, as shown in Fig. Getting inspiration from the conventional superconductivity rooted in the Fermi-liquid theory, we start from the normal state of cuprates, namely, the strange metal. Previously, although the celebrated phenomenological model of MFL can account for the universal anomalies of the strange metal Here, we provide a distinct physical picture for the strange metal, in which the universal anomalies result from the strong AF fluctuations. The carriers on O sites with not heavy effective masses are assumed to com-pose a Fermi gas, with the retarded Green's function G 0 c (k, ω) since the high order interaction between the dilute carriers are ignored except in the superconductivity and Fermi-liquid phases. The Fermi gas baths in the Cu Heisenberg antiferromagnets. Most of the properties in the normal state are supposed to be determined by the retarded one-particle self-energy of the carriers due to the interaction with the Cu-spin fluctuation χ d (q, ω). We have omitted the first order self-energy correction, since it can be absorbed into the renormalized chemical potential. Within the Born approximation, the imaginary part of the self-energy by the spin correlation scattering reads (see Appendices B): where n B and n F are the Bose and Fermi functions, ω c is the upper cutoff frequency of magnetic fluctuations and where the momentum integration is over the Brillouin zone. Given that Imχ d and ImG c , corresponding to spectra functions, are continuous, integrable and do not change sign in the Brillouin zone, the second mean value theorem for integrals implies the existence of a wave vector q * as a function of k, v and ω such that where ρ 0 c is the density of states, a constant value for an ideal two-dimentional Fermi gas with quadratic dispersion. Experiments have confirmed that the magnetic susceptibility in momentum space becomes sharply peaked around AF wave vector Q in cuprates For AF dynamical correlations, there is no welldeveloped theory or any fundamentally perturbative approach. Therefore, it is reasonable to take the imaginary part of the renormalized susceptibility from the experimentally measured spin-fluctuation spectra instead where Q * is close to the AF wave vector Q, the constant a 1 ∼ 1/2 and Imχ d (ω) becomes flat up to a cutoff energy, around 0.3 eV, according to the optical and element-specific X-ray measurements Substituting the experimental spin-fluctuation spectra into Eq. ( More generally, integrating over the momentum k, one finds the momentum-average imaginary part of the Fermi gas self-energy better follows the right-hand side of the Eq. ( For example, the momentum k integration of Σ c (k, ω = 0, T ) is actually the average over the Fermi surface with |k| = k F . Clearly, a MFL-like self-energy is achieved. Therefore, the anomalies in electrical resistivity, tunneling conductance, specific heat, thermal conductivity, photoemission and the Drude contribution σ 1 in optical conductivity could be justified as in the MFL model for O basically follows a Korringa rate, as in a conventional metal Emerging from the strange metal, a partial energy gap or pseudogap opens at the Fermi level Deriving from the Kondo-like interaction in Hamiltonian Eq. ( The creation of a composite fermion breaks the magnetic bonds with its four surrounding Cu spins and is effectively equivalent to a soliton on the spin-1/2 square lattice. In addition, the assumption of a singly occupied Cu hole results in the conclusion that no more than one composite fermion resides in any unit cells. In this phase, the carriers and the composite fermions coexist and transform each other with the same chemical potential, and the Kondo-like interaction in Eq. ( in the singlet channel, where σ = ±1 corresponding to spin up and down, respectively. It is straightforward that a gap opens in the system due to the hybridization between the carriers and the dispersionless composite quasiparticles in Eq. ( , where D is the half-width of the conduction band The presence of an energy gap often induces the increase of the resistance but the formation of localized Zhang-Rice singlets reduces the AF fluctuation scattering rate on the Cu-O planes. This competition potentially leads to the drop of planar resistivity in contrast with the upturn of the c-axis resistance for temperatures below T * (refs. To get insight into the origin of superconductivity emerging from the pseudogap and/or strange metal, we propose that the carrier pairing is mediated by the highenergy short-range Cu-spin fluctuations, persisting into the superconducting phase from the normal state. This mechanism is analogous to the magnetic-exciton pairing mechanism Combining with H c in Eq. ( g is approximately assumed to be a constant within the spin fluctuation cutoff energy hω c , otherwise, 0. Consequently, in momentum space, a weak coupling BCS interaction can be written in d-wave pairing channel where γ k = (cos k x -cos k y ) is the d x 2 -y 2 -wave gap function. The superconductivity order parameter γ k ∆ sc is introduced in the mean field method with the BCS gap equation where c † k↑ c † -k↓ is the Cooper pair operator denoting a bond state of two carriers with opposite momentum and spin. Intuitively, the superconductivity gap should depend on the density of superconducting carriers. However, this dependence is concealed in the formula of the zero temperature energy gap ∆ sc and the critical temperature T c in the BCS theory. The concealment results from the implicit BCS assumption that the pairing cutoff energy or Debye energy is far less than the electron Fermi energy or chemical potential E F , namely, the Migdal's theorem, being perfect for metals. However, in lightly doped cuprates, the doped hole Fermi energy E F ≈ 2Dδ could be less than the relatively high spin fluctuation cutoff energy hω c . Despite the violation of the Migdal's limits, it is generally believed that the cuprate superconductivity is basically BCS-like Finally, it is noteworthy that in our model, the Cu-spin-fluctuation frequency for pairing is much higher than the characteristic frequency in onecomponent models Despite using a hole representation in the model Hamiltonian, our results are independent of the hole or electron notation. The concentration of the spin unpaired holes and electrons on O sites are always the same, corresponding to the hole doping level δ. Only a singly occupied hole or electron on an O site couples to a localized Cu hole composing a Zhang-Rice singlet in our model. Similarly, only the spin unpaired holes or electrons on the O sites are mediated by the Cu-spin fluctuations via the Kondo-like interactions. The Fermi surface is crucial in hole-doped cuprates although their normal states are non-Fermi liquids. As in the Kondo lattice model, Luttingers theorem survives Markedly, it is desired to understand the AF dynamical correlations and justify the neglect of vertex corrections in both self-energy and the pairing interaction in this work beyond the arguments In conclusion, the itinerant-localized dual Fermi model can unify the main universal features of the hole-doped cuprates. Our work paves a novel way to the studies of both non-Fermi liquid and unconventional superconductivity in strongly correlated systems. We are thankful to S. J. Qin, T. Xiang and J. Y. Gan for fruitful discussions. In this Supplemental Material we present the details on the deduction of the dual fermion model, self-energy in strange metal phase, the pseudogap formation and the d-wave superconductivity mechanism. The parent compound of cuprate superconductivity is a Mott insulator. Each Cu ion has one hole and all the O sites are empty. Virtual hopping processes lead to antiferromagnetic superexchange between the Cu spins. Upon doping, additional holes are introduced on the Cu-O planes, dominantly on O sites. Emery proposed a three-band model to describe a single layer of Cu-O plane in the hole representation where n di and n pl are the particle number operators of Cu holes at site i and O holes at site l, respecitvely. ε 0 d and ε 0 p denote the energy levels occupied by holes on the Cu sites and O sites. U dd and U pp are the onsite Coulomb interaction of Cu and O holes, respectively. The hybridization between Cu and O holes is given by where t il = (-1) M il t pd are the overlaps of the corresponding orbitals with the amplitude of the hybridization , where R i represents the position vector of the ith Cu atom and R l is the position vector of its nearest-neighbouring O atoms, and x and y denote the unit vectors along the x and y directions, respectively. It is customary to further simplify this model. We shall consider the case U pp = 0, t pd U dd and t pd ∆, with the charge transfer energy ∆ = ε p -ε d . A common way is to use the limit U dd → ∞ to forbid double occupancy in the 3d orbitals, i.e. n di = 1. We define a projection operator Pg , which projects on the subspace with only one hole locating on each Cu site, and another projector Pe = Î -Pg with the unit operator Î. We regard the H pd term as the perturbation to derive a effective Hamiltonian. For more technical details we refer to refs. and The second-order contribution reads The detail result is written as To combine the four oxygen-hole states around a Cu ion, operators P iσ and P A iσ are introduced 35 <i,l> (-1) M il p lσ (A7) and where the sum runs over the four O sites l around a given Cu site i. Accordingly, we introduce the momentumspace operators P kσ and P A kσ and with β k = 1 -(cos k x + cos k y )/2, and the momentum integration is over the Brillouin zone. Then the H with J dP = 4t where the operators c i and b i are orthogonalized and complete in the O-hole space, and Only c i couples to the local moments, so that the b i states are nonbonding states. Considering terms up to the nearest-neighboring hopping process in the Wannier representation, and only keeping the Cu-O interaction terms in the same unit cells, then H where t 1 = t 2 pd /∆, and the coupling between the carriers and local moments is One finds u(i, i) ≈ 0.96 and u(i, i + 1) ≈ -0.14. The fourth-order perturbation is written as Out of many fourth order terms, the Cu-Cu Heisenberg superexchange plays an important role on the square lattice with dd , and we have ignored the hopping terms. Finally, casting off constants and the nonbonding states b † i b i , an effective Hamiltonian up to the fourthorder perturbation is reached where t ij describe hoping terms, d = 0 d -4t 1 and p = 0 p +4t 1 u 2 (0)-J K /4. The projection operators have been omitted. Moreover, the O-O hopping between unit cells could be included in t ij . In the atomic limit, the AF coupling between an O hole and a localized Cu hole forms the singlet and triplet energy levels. The gap between the two energy levels is proportional to J K . In the lattice system, the two levels are broadened into two bands, potentially with overlaps. If we further project the Hamiltonian to the Zhang-Rice singlet subspace, then we obtain the celebrated t-J model From the real space point of view, for a carrier hopping on a spin-1/2 square lattice, its spin orientation is opposite to that of the Cu hole in the same unit cell with the carrier. Performing analytic continuation and ignoring the spin index, we obtain with the spin-fluctuation cutoff frequency ω c and Given that Imχ d and ImG c , corresponding to spectra functions, are continuous, integrable and do not change sign in the Brillouin zone, the second mean value theorem for integrals implies the existence of a wave vector q * as a function of k, v and ω such that where ρ 0 c is the density of states, a constant value for an ideal two-dimentional Fermi gas with quadratic dispersion. Since the magnetic susceptibility in momentum space becomes sharply peaked around AF wave vector Q in cuprates, which indicates q * -k ≈ Q. We take the imaginary part of the renormalized susceptibility from the experimentally measured spinfluctuation spectra instead where Q * is close to the AF wave vector Q, the constant a 1 ∼ 1/2 and σ is the wave vector width. Substituting the experimental spin-fluctuation spectra into Eq. (B5) and using Eq. (B3), we get the imaginary part of the Fermi gas self-energy where we have ignored the frequency dependence of σ and q * . Since q * -k is close to the AF wave vector Q, q * must be insensitive to v. Since the absolute value of n B (v)+n F (ω +v) exponentially decreases to zero with increasing |v|, the range of integration can be extended from the cutoff ω c to infinity. Using the similar hyperbolic tangent function tanh(x) to replace the arc tangent function arctan(x), then the frequency integral can be calculated analytically similar to the calculation in ref. A marginal Fermi liquid (MFL)-like self-energy is reached On the other hand, without applying the approximation of weak frequency dependence of σ and q * , we obtain the momentum-average imaginary part of the Fermi gas self-energy, with where the definition Imχ d (v) ≡ d 2 qImχ d (q, v)/4π 2 and ρ 0 c (ω + v) is the density of states of the Fermi gas, a constant value. Substituting the imaginary part of the renormalized Cu-spin susceptibility with the experimental spinfluctuation spectra, i.e. Imχ d (v) ∼ tanh v 2T , we rewrite the momentum-average imaginary part of the self-enegy as Thus, the universal anomalies in the strange metal originate simply from the Fermi gas renormalized by strong Cu-spin fluctuations. Actually, early in 2006, the power-law optical conductivity was attributed to a consequence of the carriers interacting with a broad spectrum of bosons The origin of the pseudogap is unclear so far. For example, it is still controversial whether the gap results from the formation of spin singlets, nematic order, spin, charge or d-wave of density wave and so on. Moreover, a d-wave versus s-wave symmetry of the gap is still debating Using the fermionic representation of the carrier's s and Cu's S operators, the Kondo-like term in dual fermion model is rewritten as Since the energy level of the singlet is located about J K (at eV energy scale) below that of the triplet, we ignored the triplet channel at low temperature. Using the triplet and singlet decomposition of the Pauli matrix production in the Eq. (B2), in the singlet channel, the Kondo-like interaction reads We further introduce a composite fermionic operator to describe the annihilation of a localized Zhang-Rice singlet accompanying a creation of a Cu d hole or vice versa Thus, in the singlet channel, the Kondo-like interaction describes the transform process between the carriers and the composite fermions, Clearly, the number of the composite fermions is equal to that of the localized Zhang-Rice singlets. The creation of a composite quasiparticle locally breaks its surrounding magnetic bonds and is equivalent to a soliton on the spin-1/2 square lattice. Therefore, the composite quasiparticle forms a dispersionless energy level just at the Fermi level, the hybridization between the carriers and composite fermions induces an indirect gap as in Kondoinsulators 38 Considering the doping dependence of the J H , T * ∼ ∆ ind ∼ J H (1 -aδ) (in ref. Actually, in the strange metal phase, a temporal Zhang-Rice singlet could form from an itinerant O hole and a localized d hole, and decomposes into two holes repeatedly as the O hole hops from one site to another. This by no means deviates away from our previous picture that the carrier Fermi gas baths in the scattering of the localized Cu holes. To understand the cuprate superconductivity, the key is to unveil the interaction mediating the formation of Cooper pairs. As the doped holes couple to the local moments and form localized Zhang-Rice singlets, then the correlation between those doped holes and others are broken off. However, an itinerant doped hole could not always completely screen a local moment one-on-one. Thus, the doped holes could interact with both localized and other itinerant holes. In dual fermion model, as long as the carriers fail to completely screen the magnetic moments locally, the carriers on unit cell i and j could interact with each other by exchange of the Cu-spin fluctuation in terms of a four point vertex, written in real space as The interaction Hamiltonian is written in real space as It is also denoted by the Feynman diagram in the SC region of the phase diagram. When we only consider the nearest-neighbour coupling, the interaction can be reduced to where the nearest neighbour χ d ( i, j , ω) is assumed to be space independent. For a local pair, the energy of a spin-triplet is about J 2 K χ d ( i, j , ω) higher than that of a spin-singlet and thus the antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations favors spin-singlet pairing. Applying the triplet and singlet decomposition in Eq. (B2), in the singlet channel, the Hamiltonian in Eq. (D3) is written as After transforming to momentum space, the interaction becomes on a square lattice. The Cooper pairing potentials are symmetrized with J(k -k ) and J(k + k ) in the singlet channel as 38 i.e. The pairing interaction can be further decoupled into d-wave and s-wave components, Various experimental studies as well as the spinfluctuation theories have demonstrated the d-wave symmetry pairing in cuprates. In dual fermion model, the d-wave symmetry pairing is favored due to the Cu-spin fluctuaiton pairing interaction. In the d x 2 -y 2 channel, the Eq. (D5) is rewritten in a symmetric form as Applying mean field method, a gap parameter is defined Thus, a d-wave BCS mean field Hamiltonian is reached Remarkably, as the four point vertex (D1) acts on the same carrier in the normal state then the MFL-like selfenergy is obtained in the strange metal phase. Therefore, the strange metal is caused by the same underlying physics that causes high-T c superconductivity. Appendix E: Revised BCS gap equation Although the normal state of cuprates is universally anomalous, the superconductivity is quite 'normal', i.e. BCS-like. Kogan further demonstrated that the Homes scaling, as a matter of fact, indicates another universal property of BCS superconductors including cuprates The BCS gap equation is written as 85 : - Clearly, for s-wave superconductivity, the pairing interaction is expected to be negative and nearly isotropic. However, the AF spin fluctuation is strongly momentum dependent, i.e. sharply peaked at or near the AF wave vector Q. Quantitatively, according to equation E1, one finds no solution for an s-wave gap parameter since the dominant interaction V k,k is positive at kk ∼ Q. To further simplify the gap equation, we assume that the d-wave gap function γ k ≈ 2γ φ = 2 cos 2φ with φ = arctan(k y /k x ). The gap equation becomes where the bare particle ρ c (ξ) is a constant value ρ 0 c for an ideal two-dimensional Fermi gas with quadratic dispersion. The hω 0 is the integral cutoff energy. In the limit ∆ sc (T → T c ) → 0, the critical temperature is given by with λ = gρ 0 c /2 for the weak coupling d-wave superconductivity. Different from the conventional BCS method, we show that the integral cutoff energy should be hω 0 = min(E F , hω c ), (E4) because 0 ≤ ξ ≤ E F in gap equation at low temperature, and the cutoff energy of non-zero g is hω c . As hω c is far less than the Fermi energy E F , the integral upper limit hω 0 is equal to hω c . Thus, the BCS gap equation is restored. However, in the superconductors with small superfluid density, for example, the lightly hole-doped cuprates, hω c ≥ E F ≈ 2Dδ, the T c is given by Thus, the critical temperature is proportional to the doping level, agreeing with the experimental Uemura law 