We study the spatial distribution of the density of states (DOS) at zero bias N (r) in the mixed state of single and multigap superconductors. We provide an analytic expression for N (r) based on deGennes' relation between DOS and the order parameter that reproduces well Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) data in several superconducting materials. In the single gap superconductor β-Bi2Pd, we find that N (r) is governed by a length scale ξH = φ0/2πH, which decreases in rising fields. The vortex core size C, defined via the slope of the order parameter at the vortex center, C ∝ (d∆/dr|r→0) -1 , differs from ξH by a material dependent numerical factor. For two gap superconductors 2H-NbSe1.8S0.2 and 2H-NbS2, we find that C is field independent and has the same value for both bands. We conclude that, independently of the magnetic field induced variation of the order parameter values in both bands, the spatial variation of the order parameter close to the vortex core is the same for all bands. The spatial distribution of the quasiparticles density of states (DOS) within the vortex lattice (VL) is intimately related to the spatial distribution of the order parameter. The latter is governed by the coherence length ξ which sets the size of the vortex core and by the applied magnetic field which fixes the intervortex spacing. There are a few definitions of ξ used in literature, adjusted to a particular problem at hand, see e.g. Ref. The Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) has the advantage of directly probing the spatial distribution of the quasiparticles DOS within the vortex lattice. The DOS depends on the value of the order parameter ∆(r) and can be used, in principle, to map |∆(r)| within VL. This was done within the microscopic quasi-classical formalism by U. Klein Perhaps the most compact and simple result for the DOS distribution in the mixed state was given by P.G. deGennes in the work on dirty superconductors We have chosen β-Bi 2 Pd for a single gap superconductor, and 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 and 2H-NbS 2 which are isotropic multigap superconductors. The tunneling conductance and VL in 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 is first reported here whereas the data for β-Bi 2 Pd and 2H-NbS 2 are taken from our previous work To obtain tunneling conductance vs distance from the vortex center, we select single vortices out of zero bias conductance images and evaluate angular averages of the normalized conductance σ 0 for each r. We define σ as: Compound Tc (K) Hc2 (T) ξc2 (nm) ∆ (meV) where r * is the distance from the vortex center to the point where the tunneling conductance is minimum (in the hexagonal lattice, the center of an equilateral vortex triangle). The zero-bias DOS N (r) in large fields of the mixed state at low temperatures and in the dirty limit was given by P.G. deGennes N n is DOS in the normal phase. When ∆ → 0, as e.g. at H c2 or at vortex centers, N → N n , as it should. This remarkable relation expresses the local DOS in terms of the order parameter at the same point. Precise value of the constant ∆ 0 (on the order of zero-T BCS gap) will not affect our analysis. Note that this relation does not account for possible core states One can argue that N (r) depends only on even powers of ∆. Within the Eilenberger version of the BCS theory In large fields of the mixed state the order parameter is suppressed relative to the zero-field value ∆ 0 . The ratio ∆ 2 (r)/∆ 2 0 is small and terms correcting Eq. ( The order parameter for a single vortex in isotropic superconductors can be approximated by where the core size C is of the order of ξ. This function reproduces the expected behavior for r → 0, where d∆/dr| r→0 = ∆ 0 /C, for r C, ∆ → ∆ 0 , the order parameter of uniform zero-field state. Minimizing the Ginzburg-Landau energy functional, Z. Hao and J. Clem deduced C = ξ √ 2 to fit magnetization data in large fields For the hexagonal VL we use Wigner-Zeitz approximation and consider the unit cell as a circle of a radius a such that πa 2 = φ 0 /B, φ 0 is the flux quantum and B is the magnetic induction. The cell radius a is close to the half of intervortex distance L: 2a/L = 2 √ 3/π ≈ 1.05. The derivative d∆/dr should vanish at the cell boundary r = a. The function which satisfies d∆/dr = 0 at r = a and for a C approaches the maximum at the cell boundary exponentially slow. Expressions ( Next, we observe that the normalizing constant ∆ 0 (B, T ) drops off the measured quantity since ∆(0) = 0 and ∆(a) = ∆ 0 (B). We now take a as a unit length to obtain: Let us first focus on β-Bi 2 Pd (Fig. Hence, the core size C varies with applied field as 1/ √ H, the dependence deduced from the μSR data on many materials The theory of Ref. 1 suggests that in large fields the coherence length as a function of field should behave as ξ ≈ A/ √ H (except in the extreme dirty limit or at high temperatures). In particular, this relation should hold at the upper critical field H c2 . This gives the constant A = φ 0 /2π so that we have The core size, therefore, is Using η ≈ 0.5 obtained by the fits, we find C ≈ 0.7 ξ H . Eq. ( where n 1,2 are partial DOS in the normal state, n 1 +n 2 = 1. Each ∆ ν (ν = 1, 2) satisfies the boundary condition d∆ ν /dr = 0 at the cell boundary r = a because each one should be periodic in the vortex lattice: Substituting this in Eq. ( Note that δ ν are normalized to corresponding ∆ 0ν . Fitting the data for σ(r) we extract η 1 and η 2 . Fig. In 2H-NbS 2 , the residual resistivity shows the lowest values among the compounds discussed here (see On the other hand, our model applied to STM data on two-gap 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 and 2H-NbS 2 shows that the length scales on which the order parameter changes in the two bands are, in fact, the same. This outcome is unexpected, one would think that at low temperatures the length scales at which order parameters change should be close to the BCS coherence lengths of the two bands, ξ 0ν ∝ v ν /T c . However, it has been shown time ago by B. Geilikman, R. Zaitsev, and V. Kresin To summarize, we argue that deGennes formula for the zero-bias DOS N (r) in the mixed state The experiment consists of home built low-noise dilution refrigerator STM system as described in Refs. 30, 31. The tunneling conductance curves are taken with an energy resolution of about 15 μeV To make the fits shown in the publication (red lines of Fig. Compound ∆1,2(meV ) δ1,2 (meV) β-Bi2Pd 0.76, --,-2H-NbSe1.8S0.2 0.78, 1 0.12, 0.12 2H-NbS2 0.5, 1 0.16, 0.22 TABLE II. Superconducting parameters of the compounds studied used to obtain the red lines in Fig. A few images of isolated vortices and of the vortex lattice are shown in left panels of Fig. We have also measured spatial distributions N (r, ) at finite bias energies . In Fig. The tunneling conductance within the vortex core shows zero bias peaks in 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 and in 2H-NbS 2 due to Caroli-deGennes-Matricon core states. We do not take these peaks into account in our model. These provide a zero bias conductance slightly above one (see Fig. Thus, the magnetic field dependence of σ 0 (0) and of σ 0 (r * ) do not influence σ. On the other hand, note that in previous work we have demonstrated that the absence of the core shape anisotropy in 2H-NbS 2 is due to the absence of a charge density wave (CDW) in this compound. Thus, CDW originates the in-plane anisotropy of the vortex core in 2H-NbSe 2 Here, we observe the CDW in 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 (Fig. Sample growth of 2H-NbSe1.8S0.2 The synthesis of 2H-NbSe 1.8 S 0.2 was performed in a typical solid state reaction. The elements were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio, sealed inside the evacuated quartz ampoule and heated from room temperature up to 900 • C at 1.5 • C/min. The sample was kept at constant temperature during 14 days and then was slowly cooled down (0.07 • C/min). To obtain large single crystals, we mixed four mmol with I 2 as a transport agent ([I 2 ] ≈ 5 mg/cm 3 ) in evacuated quartz tube, which was placed inside a three-zone furnace. We placed the material in the leftmost zone and heated the other two zones for three hours up to 700 • C and kept them at this temperature for one day. After that, the leftmost zone was heated to 750 • C within three hours and we established temperature gradients as 750 • C / 700 • C / 725 • C. These temperatures were kept for 22 days and then the oven was switched off for cooling. The crystals so formed were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma spectrometry and by powder X-ray diffraction (Fig. 