Proposals for superconductivity emerging from correlated electrons in the doped Hubbard model on the honeycomb lattice range from chiral d + id singlet to p + ip triplet pairing, depending on the considered range of doping and interaction strength, as well as the approach used to analyze the pairing instabilities. Here, we consider these scenarios using large-scale dynamic cluster approximation (DCA) calculations to examine the evolution in the leading pairing symmetry from weak to intermediate coupling strength. These calculations focus on doping levels around the van Hove singularity (VHS) and are performed using DCA simulations with an interaction-expansion continuous-time quantum Monte Carlo cluster solver. We calculated explicitly the temperature dependence of different uniform superconducting pairing susceptibilities and found a consistent picture emerging upon gradually increasing the cluster size: while at weak coupling the d + id singlet pairing dominates close to the VHS filling, an enhanced tendency towards p-wave triplet pairing upon further increasing the interaction strength is observed. The relevance of these systematic results for existing proposals and ongoing pursuits of odd-parity topological superconductivity are also discussed. Many aspects of the fascinating physics of the low-energy Dirac electrons in graphene can be explored based on noninteracting tight-binding models on the honeycomb lattice, in particular close to charge neutrality, where the effects of the electronic interactions are delayed to the strong-coupling regime due to a vanishing density of states (DOS) at low energies. At finite doping, however, the presence of even weak interactions among the electrons is predicted by several studies to lead to new collective behavior. Of particular recent interest are interaction-driven instabilities towards unconventional superconductivity in doped honeycomb systems On the other hand, a recent study using the variational cluster approximation (VCA) and cellular dynamical mean field theory (CDMFT) performed for larger values of the local re-pulsion, found a stable p-wave triplet pairing state for a weak nearest-neighbor repulsion Here, we employ such an approach by providing results from large-scale dynamic cluster approximation (DCA) The Hubbard model on honeycomb lattice has the Hamiltonian where t denotes the hopping amplitude between nearest neighbor sites i, j , μ is the chemical potential that controls the electronic density, and niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ is the number operator for spin flavor σ on the i-th lattice sites. Furthermore, U denotes the onsite Coulomb repulsion. Longer-ranged interaction will not be considered here, and at finite doping, especially close to the VHS, screening plays an important role and cuts off the long-ranged tail of the Coulomb potential The DCA maps this original lattice model onto a periodic cluster, embedded into a self-consistently determined bath. Spatial correlations within the cluster are treated explicitly, while those at longer length scales are described at the dynamical mean-field level In order to probe for superconductivity with respect to different pairing channels, we consider appropriate pairing order parameters in real space, where η denotes the different pairing channels: s, p, d, f , p ± ip and d ± id. Here, f η (δ δ δ l ) are form factors that correspond to the pairing symmetry η and are provided explicitly in Fig. Transforming to momentum and frequency space and normalizing by the form factors, we obtain which contains the form factor, written in vector form as Here, p = (k, iω n ), p = (k , iω n ) and q = (q, iν m ) are fourmomenta containing both momentum and frequency. In the following, we restrict ourselves to uniform pairing states, corresponding to q = 0 and ν = 0; that is, we focus here on the pairing channel with respect to only the point group symmetry. Directly comparing pairing susceptibilities χ η (T ) of different channels is not a practical way to numerically identify the leading pairing channel because, usually, the noninteracting pairing susceptibility masks the interaction effects in the pairing susceptibility within the temperature range where the CT-INT simulation can be performed. Two routes can be taken to overcome this issue. One possibility is to perform an eigenvalue analysis of the pairing vertex secular equation . (6) Further details on the calculation of the vertex function and the effective pairing susceptibilities within the DCA framework are provided in Appendixes D and E. The later also discusses the relation to the eigenvalue analysis of the pairing vertex. Before discussing interaction effects, it is useful to examine the bare (U = 0) pairing susceptibilities, which are shown in Fig. Turning then to the interacting case, we calculated both the temperature and the filling dependence of χ eff for different values of U and cluster sizes N c . In the following, we present explicitly our results for dand p-wave pairing, which we observe to be the most dominant channels. In Fig. The N c = 4 cluster results, shown in Fig. In Fig. The observed trends suggest that only upon further increasing the interaction strength might the p y channel possibly diverge more rapidly than the d + id channel. We note, that the breaking of the degeneracy among the different p-wave channels is due to finite-size effect; that is, the corresponding form factors have different gap sizes on the finite cluster momenta. Within the DCA approach, one must study the systematic behavior upon increasing N c in order to draw conclusions about the thermodynamic limit. As demonstrated by comparing the N c = 3 and N c = 4 results, it is also important to consider clusters that capture the low-energy fluctuations. We thus also employed the N c = 12 cluster within the DCA/CT-INT framework, which has cluster momenta that include the Γ point, the two K points, the three M points and six other momenta [ see Fig. Our DCA/CT-INT results are consistent with previous reports that in the weak coupling limit the dominant pairing is the chiral d + id singlet channel. However, we find upon increasing the interaction strength (e.g., for N c = 12, U = 2t) a clear tendency towards a competing p-wave triplet pairing. This finding is consistent with several recent findings. For example, it has been reported For the future, it would be interesting, to allow also for inhomogeneous pairing states within the DCA calculations, in light of several recent proposals of superconductivity coexisting with Kekulé patterns In step 2, which leads from g 0 (K, τ) to g 0 i,α; j,β (τ), we need to perform a modified Fourier transformation g 0 i,α; j,β (τ) = 1 N c ∑ K g 0 α,β (K, τ)e iK•r i e -iK•r j , (B8) using inner cell coordinates in the phase, i.e., r i = R i + t α(β ) , where R i is the unit cell coordinate and t α(β ) is the inner cell coordinate: t α = (0, 0) and t β = (0, 1/ √ 3), for the two sublattices. In step 3, leading from g 0 i,α; j,β (τ) to g 0 α,β (R, τ), we make use of translational symmetry and perform a constrained summation g 0 i,α; j,β (τ). (B9) When the largest eigenvalue of the pairing vertex secular equation approaches 1, both the pairing susceptibility and the effective pairing susceptibility diverge. Usually, a positive effective pairing susceptibility indicates an enhancement of the pairing correlations due to the interaction vertex 