The structural and electronic properties of FeSe ultra-thin layers on Bi2Se3 have been investigated with a combination of scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. The FeSe multi-layers, which are predominantly 3-5 monolayers (ML) thick, exhibit a hole pocket-like electron band at Γ and a dumbbell-like feature at M , similar to multilayers of FeSe on SrTiO3. Moreover, the topological state of the Bi2Se3 is preserved beneath the FeSe layer, as indicated by a heavily n-doped Dirac cone. Low temperature STS does not exhibit a superconducting gap for any investigated thickness down to a temperature of 5 K. Iron-based superconductors show some types of unusual high TC behavior, as well as a competition between spin-density wave (SDW) and antiferromagnetic order An extensive number of studies has probed the role of the interface, film thickness, and doping on the phase of FeSe thin films In addition to high temperature superconductivity, superconductivity in ultra-thin films is a route toward topological superconductivity We present a detailed study of the structural and electronic properties of FeSe ultra-thin films synthesized on Bi2Se3. We use scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) to characterize the electronic properties of these FeSe layers, and compare these results to those obtained by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). We see no evidence of a superconducting gap at a temperature of 5 K. The topological state remains intact at the interface between the FeSe and the Bi2Se3, but shifts down in energy 200 meV relative to pristine Bi2Se3. We corroborate the quenching of superconductivity with the absence of the characteristic ring-like electron pocket at the M -point that is seen for thin superconducting layers of FeSe on SrTiO3. All experiments were carried out in ultra-high vacuum conditions. Bi2Se3 crystals were synthesized in the manner that has been described previously Fig. The apparent height difference between FeSe islands of the minimal observed height and Bi2Se3 is roughly 0.3 nm. It is important to note that this measured difference does not vary strongly with the applied bias voltage (Fig Two types of defects are found on the FeSe films, referred to as types A and B. Type A defects appear as two bright spots on neighboring atom sites, and have been previously identified as a Se atom on or close to an Fe site The Bi2Se3 regions exhibit large-scale quasi-hexagonal regions between 20-40 nm in length, separated by darker regions characterized by variation in apparent height between the quasihexagonal regions (Fig. The locally measured atomic and moiré lattices of the FeSe are corroborated by LEED measurements: see Fig. ARPES spectra are shown in Figs. Fig. Previous photoemission studies of FeSe films on SrTiO3 shed light on these findings. Here, the superconducting state is associated with a circularly shaped feature around M FeSe For comparison with the ARPES characterization, we performed STS over a larger energy range. Fig. While we do not observe a superconducting gap with STS, we do see the appearance of resonance states at low energy which are localized near defects of the FeSe films (Fig. In summary, we have grown ultra-thin layers of FeSe on Bi2Se3, and have characterized their structure and electronic properties. On the basis of structural characterization, we rule out the existence of single-layer FeSe films prepared by our method. Surprisingly, STS does not reveal a superconducting gap at T = 5 K. To this finding, ARPES measurements contribute additional insights into the reasons for this absence of superconductivity. A hole pocket at Γ and a dumbbell-like feature at M FeSe at the Fermi surface are similar to the electronic structure of 3 ML undoped FeSe grown on SrTiO3, which likewise does not exhibit superconductivity. 