Measuring with high precision the electrical resistance of highly ordered natural graphite samples from a Brazil mine, we have identified a transition at ∼350 K with ∼40 K transition width. The steplike change in temperature of the resistance, its magnetic irreversibility and time dependence after a field change, consistent with trapped flux and flux creep, and the partial magnetic flux expulsion obtained by magnetization measurements, suggest the existence of granular superconductivity below 350 K. The zero-field virgin state can only be reached again after zero field cooling the sample from above the transition. Paradoxically, the extraordinarily high transition temperature we found for this and several other graphite samples is the reason why this transition remained undetected so far. The existence of well ordered rhombohedral graphite phase in all measured samples has been proved by x-rays diffraction measurements, suggesting its interfaces with the Bernal phase as a possible origin for the high-temperature superconductivity, as theoretical studies predicted. The localization of the granular superconductivity at these two dimensional interfaces prevents the observation of a zero resistance state or of a full Meissner state. The recently reported record temperature for superconductivity at 203 K in the sulfur hydride system at high pressures The recently observed superconductivity at T c ∼ 5 K in intercalated Ca and Li-doped graphene The images of the internal structure of the natural graphite samples were obtained using the scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) of a Nova NanoLab 200 dual beam microscope from the FEI company (Eindhoven). The lamellae were prepared with STEM using the in-situ lift out method of the microscope cutting them normal to the graphene layers. The STEM pictures were done with a voltage applied to the electron column of 20 kV and the currents used were between 38 to 140 pA. The impurity content of the samples was determined by RBS/PIXE using a 2 MeV proton beam of 0.8 mm diameter. From the surface of the samples we removed the first hundreds of nanometers that usually have some contamination. The PIXE measurements of the clear surface and with a penetration depth of ∼ 35 μm indicate a concentration of 6.4 ppm of Fe and 5.9 ppm of Ti; most of the other elements being below the detection limit. Here "ppm" means μg element per gram sample. A thorough study of the impurity concentration of the HOPG sample used in this study (Advanced Ceramics, grade A) has been recently published The electrical resistance measurements were done in a He-flow cryostat from Quantum Design with a superconducting solenoid. The field provided by the solenoid in the low field region as well as the rest field, at nominal zero field, was measured with a Hall sensor especially designed to measure low fields. After applying fields below 100 mT the rest field trapped by the solenoid at the sample position and at nominally zero field, was below 0.1 mT. We used the usual four-contacts method for the resistance measurements, two for the current across the whole sample width and flowing parallel to the graphene layers and interfaces, and two for the voltage. The voltage electrodes were placed always on the top graphene layer of the samples. To check for the reproducibility of the observed behavior, the voltage electrodes were placed contacting half of the sample width as well as the whole width. The high-resolution resistance measurements were done using an AC bridge (16 Hz) LR-700 with 10 -5 relative resolution. Due to the low resistance (mΩ) value of some of the bulk samples, the input currents ranged from 0.1 to 30 mA. The shown results did not depend on the current value within experimental error. The temperature dependence of the resistance has been measured in equilibrium avoiding any sweeping measuring mode, commonly used for measurements in a broad temperature range. It means that after reaching and regulating the selected temperature, we waited 5 minutes before the measurement started. This measuring mode is time consuming but mandatory, especially to measure the tiny transition at T > 320 K we describe below. The maximum temperature available in the used equipment was 390 K. The magnetization was measured using a superconducting quantum interferometer device (SQUID) from Quantum Design. The used RSO option allows us to measure the magnetic moments of our bulk samples with a resolution 10 -8 emu at low applied fields. Ordered graphite samples can exhibit a regular pattern of alternating Bernal (ABAB...) (2H) and rhombohedral (ABCABC...) (3R) stacking with areas as small as (200 nm) 2 The internal structure of the natural graphite flakes, revealed by the STEM measurements, see Fig. XRD studies were carried out in order to show the coexistence of well ordered hexagonal and rhombohedral graphite in the investigated samples. The XRD measurements of the natural graphite samples and highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) were performed with a D8 Discover (Bruker AXS) operated at 40 mA and 40 kV (Cu-K α ) and equipped with a Goebel mirror. The measuring area on the samples was limited to 2 mm 2 using a pinhole and a snout. The XRD measurements of ultrapure graphite powder RWA-T were done with a Phillips Xpert diffractometer. Table I lists the expected Bragg angles for the Bernal (2H) and rhombohedral (3R) stacking order phases. The diffraction pattern of an ultra pure polycrystalline powder RWA-T, see Fig. in the magnetization For the HOPG sample (grade A), see Fig. We note that the overall x-ray diffraction characterization presented in this study is rather unique because of the identification of the existence of well ordered 3R phase in all graphite samples that show hints for the existence of high-temperature superconductivity. Because interfaces between the 2H and 3R phases are embedded inside the samples, there is no simple method to make electrical contacts directly on the interfaces. In principle, TEM lamellae (typical size ∼ 10 μm 2 area and ∼ 500 nm thick) from natural graphite samples would enable us to contact the interfaces edges directly, as done for HOPG samples The temperature dependence of the resistance at different magnetic fields applied normal to the interfaces and graphene planes (the field component Figure Figure A. High magnetic field influence on the high temperature transition Under a magnetic field and for usual bulk superconductors we expect a shift of the superconducting transition T c to lower temperatures, given by the upper critical field B c2 (T ). However, in case of (granular) superconductivity in low dimensional systems, as in an interface, B c2 (T ) can be much larger than its value in bulk and, moreover, T c can even increase with field In order to obtain some hint of the upper critical field we have measured the temperature dependence of the resistance at different magnetic fields. Figure We show results of a thin flake obtained from a bulk natural graphite sample from Brazil. The thickness of the flake was ∼ 200 nm and several micrometers length and width. The Pd/Au electrical contacts were made using electron lithography, see e.g. Ref. We may conclude that the large magnetoresistance makes difficult a clear determination of B c2 (T ), in case it exists, at this stage and for the usual electrode configuration. Nevertheless and within the obtained data it appears that the B c2 (T ) is significantly larger than the one measured in the CuO 2 -based high-temperature superconductors. The magnetization measurements shown below support this conclusion. Taking into account the two-dimensionality of the superconducting regions localized at the interfaces, a high bulk critical field is in principle expected, see Section VII. FIG. Taking into account the low-field sensitivity of earlier transport measurements in annealed graphite powder samples We note that graphite flakes shows an anomalous field hysteresis but at T < 25 K compatible with the existence of Josephson coupled superconducting regions Figure Figure after cooling the sample from 390 K. Note the absence of remanence at 350 K within experimental error. This result is a further proof for the existence of a transition at ∼ 350 K, as shown in Fig. To quantify the temperature dependence of the remanence we used a three-points method that consists in: 1) cooling the sample at zero field from 390 K to the preselected temperature, 2) measuring the resistance at zero field R 0 (0), 3) applying a certain magnetic field, 4) returning to zero field and measure the resistance again. The remanence is then defined as the difference between these two resistances at zero field ∆R(0). Figure Figure 14. Remanence defined as ∆R(0) = R10(0) -R0(0), where R10(0) is the resistance measured at zero field after applying a field of 10 mT, and R0(0) means the resistance at zero field in the virgin state after ZFC from 390 K. The sample was a natural graphite bulk sample (Brazil) different from the sample shown in Figs. natural graphite sample obtained using the three-points method. The two curves shown in the figure were obtained in the same way but after waiting for a couple of days between the two measurements. Note that each point was obtained starting with the sample in the virgin state, as the results of Fig. Figure Figure Similar measurements were done for a thin (∼ 50 nm) HOPG flake that has interfaces according to STEM studies, see The observed behavior for the temperature dependence of the remanence is general for all samples we measured but the details are sample dependent. It is interesting to note that the irreversibility of the magnetization (difference between FC and ZFC curves) of graphite bulk HOPG samples (with interfaces) shows local maxima at 305 K, 200 K and ∼ 100 . . . 130 K, which remain independent of the applied field to 7 T, FIG. If superconductivity is localized at the interfaces and the field is applied normal to them, the large demagnetization factor would prevent a full flux expulsion (the Meissner effect). However, partial flux expulsion is always possible to observe if vortex (or fluxon) pinning exists in the superconducting sample. In this case a positive difference between the FC and ZFC magnetic moment is expected below T c and after applying the field at the lowest temperature of the temperature loop cycle with the sample in the ZFC state. Figure Figure At such high temperatures one expects that the strength and temperature dependence of the measured irreversibility in the magnetization is mainly due the pinning of the involved magnetic entities (vortices and/or fluxons, see Sec. VII). The shift to low temperatures with applied field of the onset in the magnetic moment difference would be given by the depinning or irreversibility line, as in the oxides high-temperature superconductors. The apparently small, if at all, shift of the onset with field in the measured field region indicate therefore a large pinning strength. Figure shows the between FC and ZFC magnetic moment vs. temperature at an applied field of 7T of a bulk HOPG sample, to those shown in Ref. Usually, due to the finite pinning strength of the magnetic entities, one expects to measure a time relaxation in certain properties like the magnetization or magnetoresistance. The time dependence of the magnetization of water treated graphite powder From the fits to the time dependence shown in Fig. The main reasons to identify the small step in the resistance with temperature, see Figs. In general, we can imagine two possibilities that a material shows a magnetic field irreversibility and finite remanence, namely: a) due to vortex pinning or flux trapping, requiring the existence of superconducting currents, or b) magnetic order, due to the pinning of magnetic domains or magnetic field anisotropy, that appear below the corresponding Curie temperature and without applying any external field. We do not expect to have magnetic order due to impurities or defects in all graphite samples we measured because the measured concentration of magnetic impurities is far too small (see Sec. II). Moreover, the observed behavior does not seem to be compatible to phenomena related to magnetic order in graphite, namely: -we observe a positive instead of a negative magnetoresistance measured for magnetic graphite Note also that the transition does not change basically after applying a magnetic field below 1 T, see Fig. The overall behavior shown in Fig. Assuming that the superconductivity has a 2D character and it is localized at the interfaces, one should first clarify to what extent this would be at all possible. Following early theoretical work on this issue (see chap. 7 in Ref. The data presented in this study took more than one and a half years of systematic measurements in several samples. During the measurements and after temperature cycling to 390 K some of the samples several times, we recognized that the strength of the remanence decreased systematically, although the transition temperature did not change within experimental error. Note, for example, that the maximum remanence shown in Fig. The existence of a superconducting transition in graphite samples at such high temperatures clarifies to some extent the origin of the superconducting-like behavior of different graphite samples reported in the last 40 years 