We present a broadband optical-conductivity study of superconducting single-crystalline EuFe2(As1-xPx)2 with three different substitutional levels. We analyze the normal-state electrodynamics by decomposing the conductivity spectra using a Drude-Lorentz model with two Drude terms representing two groups of carriers with different scattering rates. The analysis reveals that the scattering rate of at least one of the Drude components develops linearly with temperature for each doping level. This points towards strong electron-electron correlations and a non-Fermi-liquid behavior in the P-substituted superconducting Eu-122 pnictides. We also detect a transfer of the spectral weight from mid-infrared to higher frequencies and assign it to the Hund's-rule coupling between itinerant and localized carriers. The conductivity spectra below the superconducting transition show no sharp features to be associated with the dirty-limit superconducting BCS gaps. We interpret these results in terms of clean-limit superconductivity in EuFe2(As1-xPx)2. The best parametrization fit can be achieved using a two-gap model. We find that the larger gap at the hole pockets of the Fermi surface is likely to be isotropic, while the smaller gap at the electron pockets is anisotropic or even nodal. Among the superconducting iron pnictides, the socalled 122-family (AFe 2 As 2 with A=Ba, Sr, Ca, Eu) is the most studied composition. The superconductivity in this family can be achieved not only by doping the antiferromagnetic parent compounds with charge carriers, but also by pressure, either external or chemical Among the 122-family, the Eu-based systems are of particular interest because of their unique properties originating from the strong local-moment magnetism of the Eu 2+ ions We investigated EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 single crystals with three different levels of phosphorus content (x = 0.15, 0.165, and 0.21). The samples with x = 0.15 and 0.21 (P015, P021) were grown at Zhejiang University in Hangzhou, China, via spontaneous nucleations, similar to the previous report The dc resistivity measurements were made in a standard four-probe geometry using a home-built cryogenic setup. The magnetization measurements were performed in a Quantum Design MPMS 7 T system in the static mode. All measurements presented in this article, including resistivity, magnetization, and optical reflectivity, were performed for the ab plane of EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 crystals (the "in-plane" geometry). The optical reflectivity, R(ω), was investigated for temperatures between 3.5 and 300 K over a wide frequency range from 12 to 12 000 cm -1 . Additionally, reflectivity measurements up to 22 000 cm -1 were performed on sample P015 at room-temperature. Measurements at far-infrared frequencies (FIR, 12 -1000 cm -1 ) were carried out with a Bruker IFS 113v Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer utilizing several beam-splitters and bolometric detectors operating at 4.2 and 1.3 K. For referencing, in situ gold coating of the samples was performed in this frequency range. At higher frequencies (i.e. in the mid-and near-infrared as well as in the visible ranges; MIR, NIR, VIS; 800 -22 000 cm -1 ) the measurements were conducted using a Bruker Hyperion infrared microscope attached to a Bruker Vertex 80v FTIR spectrometer. Freshly evaporated gold mirrors acted as references in MIR and NIR, protected silver mirrors were used in the VIS range. The Kramers-Kronig analysis of the reflectivity spectra was performed in two stages. For the initial transformation, the measured R(ω) spectra were extrapolated to infinite frequency using first the room-temperature measurements on P015 up to 22 000 cm -1 and then the standard free-electron behavior, R(ω) ∝ ω -4 . Using the room-temperature data from one of the samples at these high frequencies is justified by the fact that R(ω) has neither temperature nor doping-level dependence at ω ≥ 10 000 cm -1 , see Fig. Fig. As one can see from the panels (a-c) of Fig. Both specimens, P015 and P0165, have a rather broad superconducting transition affected by a pronounced resistivity re-entrance around 19 K. This re-entrant resistivity is a well-known phenomenon for Eu-based 122 iron pnictides; it stems from ordering of the Eu 2+ moments at T re ≈ 19 K, which has no significant doping dependence for underdoped and superconducting samples Panels (d-f) of Fig. Although according to Figs. pounds demonstrate a qualitatively similar temperature evolution of R(ω). The reflectivity in the FIR range increases with lowering temperature, indicating the metallic nature of our samples. Oppositely, the reflectivity at MIR frequencies (∼ 2 000 -10 000 cm -1 ) decreases as temperature goes down. This behavior is usually ascribed to electron correlations arising from the Hund'srule coupling of electrons The real part of the optical conductivity, σ 1 (ω), obtained via the Kramers-Kronig transformation, is shown in the bottom panels of Fig. Typical metallic behavior of the optical conductivity, i.e. a monotonic narrowing of the zero-frequencycentered Drude-like mode with decreasing temperature, is clearly visible only for sample P021. In P0165 and P015, the temperature development of the Drude response is perturbed by the localization modes. Nevertheless, the zero-frequency limit of the optical conductivity, σ 1 (ω → 0), nicely follows the dc data for all the samples at any temperature, as it can be seen from the inserts of Figs. We now calculate the frequency-dependent spectral weight defined as: For temperatures in the normal state, the spectral weight normalized to the spectral weight at T = 300 K is displayed in the insets of Figs. In the MIR range, the temperature-dependent spectral weight is below its room-temperature values; the lower the temperature, the more pronounced the losses are. After passing a minimum at 3 000 -4 000 cm -1 , the normalized spectral weight increases again. Only at frequencies above 20 000 cm -1 the spectral weight becomes eventually conserved (within an uncertainty of < 1%) for all the samples. The presence of the spectral-weight transfer up to such high energies is an important feature of iron pnictides and is ascribed to correlation effects, e.g. to the Hund's rule correlations mentioned above In order to get insight in the mechanisms contributing to the frequency-dependent optical response, one needs to decompose the measured spectra into a number of simple terms. We fitted our experimental spectra in a standard way -by a sum of Drude and Lorentz terms. For the complex optical conductivity, the model reads as (2) Here ω p is the plasma frequency of each term, ω 0 is the resonance frequency of each Lorentz term, and 1/τ denotes the scattering rates of free carriers in the case of Drude terms and introduces a damping for each Lorentz oscillator. Because of the multiband nature of iron pnictides, there are many ways to decompose their optical spectra, as it has been already discussed e.g. in Ref. In addition to the two Drude terms, a number of Lorentzians are necessary to fit the experimental spectra properly. We use a broad Lorentzian (MIRL) to describe the flat MIR background, which was previously reported in a number of 122 compounds and which is believed to be due to an interband-transition band located at around 1 000 cm -1 Frequency ( a few temperature-independent modes at higher frequencies. Let us note, that the optical conductivity was fitted together with the measured reflectivity in order to provide the most consistent description of the experimental spectra. For sample P021, the described model is sufficient for an adequate description of the experiment [see Fig. We now discuss the temperature changes in the single terms of Eqn. 2. First, we discuss the scattering rates 1/τ of the Drude terms shown in the middle panels of Fig. In sample P015, the T -linear scattering rate at 10-300 K is only observed for the BD component, while 1/τ of the ND component is not linear at T ≤ 100 K. At 100 K, the localization mode (LOC) appears in the conductivity spectra and obviously affects the temperature behavior of the ND scattering rate: 1/τ of the ND term collapses, implying that the carriers scatter less. The resistivity of this sample shows a flattening at low temperatures, as seen in the inset of Fig. It is likely that the remaining free carriers of the ND term scatter less because the contribution of the electronelectron interactions to the scattering processes becomes reduced with decreasing the number of free carriers. Alternatively, the reduction of the ND scattering rate below 100 K can be explained as if the localization mode and the ND term stem from two different electron bands, which can not be distinguished at elevated temperatures. In sample P0165, the spectral weight developments in the FIR region (Fig. In the MIR and NIR spectral ranges, all three samples display a spectral-weight transfer from the MIRL interband transition to the HUND mode upon cooling (Fig. In Fig. For homogenous single-phase superconductors, there are two reasons why no clear signatures of a superconducting gap are observed. The first option is a strong gap anisotropy, preferably with nodes: optical transitions of the nodal quasiparticles do not allow the gap features to manifest themselves in the optical conductivity Although a full multiband Eliashberg analysis is the most adequate approach for fitting the optical conductivity of iron pnictides in the superconducting state Even though we do not observe any clear gap features we can use this model to fit the spectrum of sample P021 in the superconducting state with the constraint, that ) Frequency ( ) FIG. the plasma frequencies and scattering rates of the BCS terms, as well as all parameters of the Lorentz contributions, stay roughly the same as in the normal state just above the superconducting transition. In this sample, the optical response of free carriers is not masked by the appearance of localization modes, thus the analysis is relatively straightforward. Two BCS terms, each replacing a normal-state Drude term, were utilized in this fit, as displayed Fig. For the larger gap, we obtain 2∆/k B T c ≈ 3.5, which is close to the BCS value. For the small gap, this ratio is below 1. This indicates that the isotropic gap is likely not a relevant approach and points towards anisotropy of the smaller gap (a moderate anisotropy of the larger gap is also possible). Since the BCS term with the large / small gap in the superconducting state corresponds to the broad / narrow Drude term in the normal state, we can interpret our data in terms of an (almost) isotropic gap on the hole pockets and a highly anisotropic (or nodal) gap on the electron pockets of the Fermi surface. This is in agreement with multiple reports on the sister system BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 To examine whether our samples are in the clean or dirty limit, it is useful to calculate the frequencydependent penetration depth, λ(ω) = c/[4πωσ 2 (ω)] 1/2 . The penetration depth for sample P021 at 3.5 K is shown in Fig. Alternatively, one can obtain the penetration depth from the temperature evolution of the σ 1 (ω) spectra. The occurrence of the superfluid condensate implies a transfer of the spectral weight from finite frequencies to a δ(ω = 0) function in σ 1 (ω), representative of the infinite dc conductivity in the superconducting state. As the measured optical σ 1 (ω) has no access to zero frequency, the value of its integral drops when the superfluid forms. The difference between the spectral weights in the normal and superconducting states is directly related to the superfluid density ρ s (the Ferell-Glover-Tinkham (FGT) sum rule and allows calculation of the penetration depth via λ = c/(ρ s ) 1/2 . The cutoff frequency ω c needs to be chosen such, that all the spectral weight transferred to the δ(ω = 0) peak is captured. We find ω c = 500 cm -1 to be a reasonable value for this purpose. Calculations using Eqn. 3 provide a penetration depth of 345 nm, which agrees very well with the value obtained from σ 2 (ω), see Fig. Let us now turn to samples P015 and P0165. In these specimens, the behavior of the reflectivity [Fig. In order to perform a meaningful analysis of the penetration depth in P015, it is necessary to subtract the contribution of the localization mode from σ 2 (ω) before calculating λ(ω). When we do so, we obtain the lowfrequency λ(ω) of P015 to be rather similar to λ(ω) of P021, as one can see from Fig. For P015, the fit with the BCS terms in the superconducting state requires a spectral-weight transfer from the LOC mode to the ND component as temperature decreases and provides 2∆ = 56(±5) cm -1 and 2∆ = 12(±5) cm -1 , which is very similar to gap values in P021 (see Fig. Thus, we can conclude that the optical responses of itinerant carriers in samples P015 and P021 are very similar to each other; the differences in the doping level do not affect significantly the values of the superconducting gaps. The only major difference between these two samples, seen in the optical response, is the localization mode, which is present in P015 and absent in P021. In the sample with an intermediate doping level, P0165, the absorption due to localization effects is even stronger than in P015. This absorption (modeled above with two Lorentzian terms) completely prevents the observation of any superconductivity-induced changes in the optical spectra of P0165, even though bulk superconductivity was confirmed in this sample by different magnetization measurements, as discussed in Sec. 3. We pointed out above, the non-systematic behavior of the FIR bands in our EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 samples as a function x is evident for extrinsic character of the FIR absorption bands. If the density of localized carriers is not very large (the case of sample P015), the optical response remains to be primarily dominated by itinerant carriers. In the case of very impure/disordered samples (sample P0165), the optical response becomes fully determined by localized carriers. Looking on the entire set of our experimental data, we can not exclude that sample P0165 has at least two phases, only one of which is superconducting. The same might be true for sample P015, but the fraction of the superconducting phase is surely much larger in this sample. We performed a detailed study of broadband optical response of single-crystalline superconducting EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 with x = 15%, 16.5%, and 21%. The former two samples show moderate (x = 15%) to strong (x = 16.5%) impurity-localization effects, while the later (x = 21%) appears to be very pure. All of the samples exhibit superconductivity with onsets at comparable temperatures, basically independent of the doping level and appearance of the localization effects. The response of the itinerant carriers in the normal state can be generally best described by two Drude components, which might be related to the hole and electron pockets of the Fermi surface, similarly to other pnictides Analysis of the frequency-dependent optical spectra in the superconducting state allows us to conclude that EuFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 is likely a clean-limit superconductor with two gaps: a smaller anisotropic (or nodal) gap on the electron portion of the Fermi surface and a larger isotopic (or slightly anisotropic) gap on the hole pockets. This is in agreement with theoretical predictions as well as with experimental observations made in other P-substituted 122 iron pnictides.