We report on a comparative study of the electronic structure, phonon spectra, and superconducting properties for recently discovered superconducting hydrides, H3S and H3P. While the electronic structures of these two materials are similar, there are notable changes in the phonon spectra and electron-phonon coupling. The low-frequency bond-bending modes are softened in H3P and their coupling to the electrons at the Fermi surface is enhanced relative to H3S. Nevertheless, coupling to the high-frequency modes is reduced so the resulting calculated superconducting transition temperature is reduced from ∼166 K in H3S to ∼76 K in H3P. Many materials have been proposed theoretically as conventional phonon-mediated superconductors having a high superconducting transition temperature (T c ). Based on the BCS theory To find out the crystal structure of the high-T c sulfur hydride, many ab-initio studies have been done and most of these studies have concluded that cubic H 3 S will form with a H-rich decomposition environment under high pressure Here we study two types of hydrides, H 3 S and H 3 P. Following the discovery of high-T c conventional superconductivity in sulfur hydride, a hydride phosphine (H 3 P) was also reported to be a possible high-T c (T c > 100 K at pressure P> 200 GPa) superconductor via four-probe electrical measurements The following methods are used to perform the calculations of the electronic structures, phonon properties, and superconducting properties. For the electronic structures, our calculations are based on ab-initio normconserving pseudopotentials and the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof 18 functional as implemented in the SIESTA For the calculation using SIESTA, electronic wavefunctions are expanded with pseudoatomic orbitals (doubleζ polarization) and a charge density cutoff of 800 Ry is used. We sample the Brillouin zone on a uniform 16×16×16 k-point mesh. For the calculation with Quantum-ESPRESSO, a plane-wave basis up to 160 Ry and a 32×32×32 k mesh size are employed. Phonon frequencies ω qν and EPC parameters λ qν are computed on a coarse mesh (8×8×8) of reciprocal space. Next, interpolation techniques 24 based on maximally localized Wannier functions The Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω) is computed by integrating the interpolated phonon frequencies ω qν and the EPC λ qν over the Brillouin zone, Here the w q is the Brillouin zone weight associated with the phonon wavevectors q. The total EPC λ is calculated as the Brillouin zone average of the mode-resolved coupling strengths λ qν : FIG. Here we discuss the electronic structure of H 3 S and H 3 P. In all of our calculations we set the conventional lattice parameter as 3 Å. With this lattice parameter, the calculated pressures of both materials are 220 GPa. The overall shapes of the band structures are similar for both materials [Figs. Figure In this section we discuss the differences of the phonon properties between H 3 S and H 3 P. When the sulfur is changed to phosphorus, the characteristics of the phonon spectra differ significantly along Γ -H and H-N highsymmetry lines [Fig. Next we discuss the strength of the EPC for the two cases. In H 3 S, phonon modes of 150∼200 meV frequencies (which are H-S bond-stretching modes) are strongly coupled to electrons at the Fermi surface. In H 3 P, however, low-frequency modes (< 50 meV) are more relevant. These modes originate from softened H-P bond-bending motion. To give a more quantitative discussion about the relevant energy scales of the phonons, we calculate the EPCweighted average of the phonon frequencies, The value of ω ln is 1580 K (136 meV) for the H 3 S and 610 K (53 meV) for the H 3 P. Therefore ω ln is more than twice as large in H 3 S relative to H 3 P. The total EPC λ equals 1.38 in H 3 S, whereas it reaches 1.66 in H 3 P. The Eliashberg phonon spectral functions of H 3 S and H 3 P are quite different. The EPC in H 3 S is dominated by the phonon modes at the zone center Γ point. In H 3 P, however, we observed an overall contribution of different modes to λ along Γ -H-N directions as shown in Fig. Here we discuss why there is a large difference in the EPC between H 3 S and H 3 P. First, we consider the difference in DOS. Since λ is roughly proportional to the DOS at E F , the EPC could be enhanced by the large DOS. However, in our case, there is no sufficient change in DOS to reproduce the large enhancement in EPC for H 3 P. Another point is the coupling strength between the electrons and the low-frequency hydrogen vibration. There is no significant enhancement in the electron-phonon matrix elements which is proportional to ω qν λ qν [Fig. Finally, we estimate the superconducting transition Here μ * is the Coulomb repulsion parameter. For commonly used μ * = 0.1 we estimate T c = 166 K for H 3 S and 76 K for H 3 P. The exact value of μ * here is not that important since even with μ * = 0 we get very similar T c (219 and 96 K). The value of λ we obtained for H 3 S and H 3 P is near the limit of applicability of the McMillan equation. However, we find that the Kresin-Barbee-Cohen model Although H 3 P has a higher λ value than H 3 S, the estimated T c is about half of that in H 3 S. This agrees well with the experimentally obtained T c of ∼ 200 K in H 3 S and ∼ 100 K in H 3 P. We expect that the deviation here from experiment might occur because we ignored unstable phonon modes in our calculation, so softening might be overestimated for H 3 P in the low-frequency regime. With the assumption of the same body-centered cubic structure and lattice parameter, we compare the electronic, phonon, and superconducting properties of H 3 S and H 3 P. The results of electronic structures show no significant difference, except for a slight change in the Fermi level due to the different number of valence electrons. However, there are notable changes in phonon spectrum and electron-phonon coupling properties. First, there exists phonon softening in low-frequency bond-bending modes, and the coupling of these modes to electrons near the Fermi surface is enhanced. As the dominant frequency regime changes from high to low frequency, the superconducting transition temperature is reduced from ∼166 K in H 3 S to ∼76 K in H 3 P.