We investigate the relaxation dynamics of magnetic vortex lines in type-II superconductors following rapid changes of the external driving current by means of an elastic line model simulated with Langevin molecular dynamics. A system of flux vortices in a sample with randomly distributed point-like defects is subjected to an external current of appropriate strength for a sufficient period of time so as to be in a moving non-equilibrium steady state. The current is then instantaneously lowered to a value that pertains to either the moving or pinned regime. The ensuing relaxation of the flux lines is studied via one-time observables such as their mean velocity and radius of gyration. We have in addition measured the two-time flux line height autocorrelation function to investigate dynamical scaling and aging behavior in the system, which in particular emerge after quenches into the glassy pinned state. Driven vortex lines in type-II superconductors, in the presence of randomly distributed point-like quenched disorder, constitute a rich, highly complex system far from equilibrium, with a number of competing energy, time and length scales. This system displays a variety of thermodynamic phases and intriguing transport properties Uncorrelated point-like disorder can be naturally occurring (e.g. oxygen vacancies) or artificially introduced (e.g. by electron irradiation An applied external electric current exerts a transverse Lorentz force on the flux lines. At ambient temperatures much lower than the temperature at which the vortex glass melts into a flux liquid in the absence of an external current, the introduction of external current transforms the disorder-dominated equilibrium phase into a creeping Bragg glass state. As the current is increased beyond the critical depinning transition value, the stresses in the flux line lattice increase sufficiently enough to result in the breaking of the lattice into a moving liquid. At even larger drive, transverse order develops in the liquid to result in the formation of a moving smectic which when subjected to even higher drive dynamically freezes into a moving Abrikosov flux lattice A material shows physical 'aging' when it undergoes slow relaxation from a state away from equilibrium to reach thermal equilibrium and displays breaking of timetranslation invariance in this non-stationary regime In the present work, we employ Langevin molecular dynamics to study the aging relaxation dynamics of flux lines in type-II superconductors when subjected to sudden changes in the externally applied current. We accomplish this by subjecting our coarsegrained elastic lines representing vortex matter to an instantaneous change in driving force after letting the lines relax under the influence of the initial drive sufficiently long for them to have reached a moving, non-equilibrium steady state. We either quench the current within the moving regime or from the moving into the pinned regime. We perform these simulations first with repulsive vortex interactions turned off, and subsequently switched on, in order to identify the physical mechanisms behind the complex features seen in the vortex relaxation dynamics. We investigate this rich non-equilibrium relaxation behavior by the measurement of various one-and two-time observables. The organization of this paper is as follows. The next section explains the elastic line model, defines the LMD algorithm we employ to implement its stochastic dynamics, and specifies the material parameters we use for the implementation. We then describe the simulation protocol for the drive quenches and define the one-and two-time observables we measure in order to quantify the relaxation behavior of the system post-quench. We end the section by quantifying the pinned and moving regimes, based on steady-state results for the one-time quantities measured in the system. Section 3 is devoted to results obtained from studying the relaxation properties of systems of flux lines undergoing sudden current changes. We compare the effects of instantaneously decreasing or downquenching the drive between values in the moving regime to results for quenches from the moving to the pinned regime, which yield markedly different behavior. We also isolate the effect of inter-vortex interactions on the relaxation phenomena by alternately running the simulations with interactions switched off and on. We conclude the paper by summarizing our results in Section 4. We model magnetic flux lines dynamically in the extreme London limit (where the London penetration depth is much larger than the coherence length) as mutually repulsive elastic lines r i,z (t) is the position vector in the xy-plane at time t, of the line element of the ith flux line (one of N), at height z in the vertical direction, which is also the direction of the applied external magnetic field. The elastic line stiffness or local tilt modulus is given by ǫ1 ≈ Γ -2 ǫ 0 ln(λ ab /ξ ab ) where Γ -1 = M ab /M c is the effective mass ratio or anisotropy parameter. λ ab is the London penetration depth and ξ ab is the coherence length, in the ab crystallographic plane. The in-plane repulsive interaction between any two flux lines is given by V (r) = 2ǫ 0 K 0 (r/λ ab ), where K 0 denotes the zeroth-order modified Bessel function. It effectively serves as a logarithmic repulsion that is exponentially screened at the scale λ ab . The pinning sites are modeled as randomly distributed smooth potential wells, given by where N D is the number of pinning sites, p ≥ 0 is the pinning potential strength, and r α and z α respectively represent the in-plane and vertical position of pinning site α. In the following, all lengths are measured in units of the pinning potential width b 0 . Energies are measured in units of ǫ 0 b 0 , where ǫ 0 = (φ 0 /4πλ ab ) 2 is the elastic line energy per unit length, and φ 0 = hc/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. In order to simulate the dynamics of the model, we discretize the system along the z axis, i.e., the direction of the external magnetic field, into layers, with the layer spacing corresponding to the crystal unit cell size c 0 along the crystallographic c direction Here, η = φ 2 0 /2πρ n c 2 ξ 2 ab is the Bardeen-Stephen viscous drag parameter, where ρ n represents the normal-state resistivity of YBCO near T C which ensures that the system relaxes to thermal equilibrium with a canonical probability distribution P [r i,z ] ∝ e -H[r i,z ]/k B T in the absence of external current. We have selected our model parameters to closely match the material properties of the ceramic high-T C type-II superconductor YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 (YBCO). The pinning center radius is set to b 0 = 35 Å; all simulation distances are measured in units of this quantity. The inter-layer spacing in the crystallographic c direction is set to this microscopic scale, c 0 = b 0 . The in-plane London penetration depth and superconducting coherence length are chosen to be λ ab = 34b 0 ≈ 1200 Å and ξ ab = 0.3b 0 ≈ 10.5 Å respectively, in order to model the high anisotropy of YBCO, which has an effective mass anisotropy ratio Γ -1 = 1/5. The line energy per unit length is ǫ 0 ≈ 1.92 • 10 -6 erg/cm; all simulation energies are measured in units of ǫ 0 b 0 . This effectively renders the vortex line tension energy scale to be ǫ1 /ǫ 0 ≈ 0.189. The pinning potential well depth is set to p/ǫ 0 = 0.05. The temperature in our simulations is set to 10 K (k B T /ǫ 0 b 0 = 0.002 in our simulation units). The Bardeen-Stephen viscous drag coefficient η = φ 2 0 /2πρ n c 2 ξ 2 ab ≈ 10 -10 erg • s/cm 2 is set to one, where ρ n ≈ 500 μΩm is the normal-state resistivity of YBCO near T C Our system consists of N = 16 flux lines, moving in a three-dimensional space with periodic boundary conditions in the xy directions and free boundary conditions along the z direction. The system is discretized into L = 100 layers along the z direction. We simulate point-like disorder by randomly distributing 1116 pinning sites per layer, using a different random distribution for each layer. We set the horizontal system size to (16/ √ 3λ ab × 8λ ab ). This ratio of horizontal boundary lengths is necessary to ensure that the system, in the absence of disorder or drive, equilibrates to a state where the flux lines arrange themselves into a periodic hexagonal Abrikosov lattice. Each simulation run starts with perfectly straight flux lines, distributed randomly in the computational space. The Lorentz force exerted on the flux lines by an external current is modeled in the system as a tunable, spatially uniform drive F d in the x direction, the introduction of which requires the addition of a work term -F d • r i,z (t) to the Hamiltonian (1) and hence F d to the right-hand side of the Langevin equations In the course of a simulation, we measure one-and two-time physical quantities, all of which are averaged over many disorder realizations and noise histories. A one-time quantity of interest is the mean velocity of the lines, measured by averaging the velocity of all line elements at time t: . . . z represents an average over the z axis, i.e., over all vertical layers, while . . . i represents an average over all the lines. Another one-time quantity we measure is the mean radius of gyration The radius of gyration is defined as the standard deviation of the lateral positions r i,z (t) of the points constituting the ith flux line, averaged over all the lines. r g (t) is a measure of the roughness of the lines in the system, which is produced by thermal spatial fluctuations and line distortion due to pinning of line elements by pinning centers distributed in the sample. The third one-time quantity we measure is the fraction of pinned line elements, i.e., It is defined as the fraction of line elements in the system that are located within distance b 0 (pinning center radius) of a pinning center. The two-time quantity we measure in this study is the normalized height autocorrelation function It quantifies how the lateral positions r i,z of the elements of a line relative to the mean lateral line position r i,z z at the present time t are correlated to those relative positions at a past time s and contains information about local transverse thermal fluctuations of vortex line elements. This quantity is averaged over all lines as well as over several thousand noise histories and disorder realizations. It is worth noting that the term 'height' autocorrelation originates from viewing the flux lines as fluctuating one-dimensional interfaces, the local height of which corresponds to the deviation of r i,z from the respective line's mean position. We use the height autocorrelations as a tool to investigate the existence and nature of physical aging in our system. A system shows aging when a dynamical two-time quantitiy displays slow relaxation and the breaking of time translation invariance where f C is a scaling function that follows the asymptotic power law as t → ∞; b is the aging scaling exponent, λ C is the autocorrelation exponent, and z is the dynamical scaling exponent. In order to identify the drive ranges that correspond to states when the system of flux lines is respectively in the pinned or moving regime, we have investigated steady-state features of the system as a function of drive, in the following manner: For a system of interacting flux lines, we set the drive to a certain value and allowed the system to evolve for 60, 000t 0 to let the system arrive to a non-equilibrium steady state. At this point, we started measuring the one-time physical quantities of the system viz. the radius of gyration r g and velocity v at intervals of t 0 for 250, 000t 0 . We performed this operation for 50 evenly spaced drive values between F d = 0 and 0.025ǫ 0 . We averaged our results over the final 250, 000 time-steps and over 100 independent realizations, effectively averaging over 25 million values per F d value. Error bars, representing the statistical error or standard deviation of the mean obtained via the aforementioned averaging process, are smaller than the symbol sizes in Fig. For zero drive, about 20% (see f p in Fig. We have repeated these numerical operations for non-interacting flux lines and found the results to be very similar: r g once again peaked around F d ≈ 0.006ǫ 0 which is also the value at which v started assuming non-zero values, and f p began decaying from its steady initial value, indicating that for our purposes, the ranges for the pinned and moving regimes remain essentially unchanged for the non-interacting case. ), and (c) fraction of pinned line elements f p with time (units of t 0 ) for a system of interacting flux lines in the presence of point-like disorder, following a drive down-quench from F d = 0.035ǫ 0 to 0.025ǫ 0 (moving to moving regime), with relaxation times τ v = 0, τ rg = 1250t 0 , and τ fp = 155t 0 , respectively. Data are averaged over 1000 independent realizations. In a first set of numerical experiments, we quench the drive in a moving (F d = 0.035ǫ 0 ) steady-state system of vortex lines, in the presence of point-like disorder, to F d = 0.025ǫ 0 , a drive value also in the moving regime. For interacting lines, upon quenching, the mean velocity v of the lines drops suddenly (Fig. The time evolution of one-time physical properties v, r g , and f p for non-interacting lines was found to be very similar to that for the interacting case discussed above, with comparable exponential relaxation times (τ v = 0, τ rg = 1120t 0 , and τ fp = 149t 0 ). The effect of interactions on flux line dynamics only becomes evident when we study two-time height autocorrelations C(t, s). We have measured C(t, s) for waiting times s = 2 7 t 0 , 2 9 t 0 , 2 13 t 0 , 2 14 t 0 , and 2 15 t 0 as a function of time elapsed post-quench t -s (Fig. For our next set of numerical experiments, we quench the drive of a system of flux lines in the moving regime (F d = 0.025ǫ 0 ) to F d = 0 in the pinned regime. For the interacting lines, at the moment of quench, the velocity v, once again as in the case of quenches within the moving regime, drops instantaneously to zero (Fig. induced caging effect will also affect the behavior of the two-time height autocorrelation functions at very long times. Another one-time quantity that displays slow logarithmic growth post quench as the system enters the glassy pinned state is the fraction of pinned line elements f p (Fig. For the relaxation of one-time quantities v (τ = 0), r g (a r = 0.06b 0 ), and f p (a f = 0.01) in the interaction-free situation, as in the case of moving-to-moving quenches, we did not find remarkable qualitative differences compared to the system with interacting lines. The two-time height autocorrelations C(t, s) for quenches into the pinned regime display slow temporal relaxation accompanied by the breaking of time translation invariance for both non-interacting (Fig. For interacting lines, the aging scaling regime will be cut short at very long times by the caging effect of the repulsive vortex interactions (also responsible for limiting the growth of r g ) In this paper, we have investigated the long-time relaxation features of driven magnetic flux vortices in type-II superconductors following sudden quenches of external current. In order to study the post-quench dynamics of these vortices in the presence of uncorrelated point-like disorder, we modeled them as directed elastic lines in the presence of localized pinning centers, and solved the associated Langevin molecular dynamics equations numerically. In the simulations we maintained a constant ambient temperature. The external current quenches were realized in the form of instantaneous changes in the drive, a quantity in the elastic line model that mimics the Lorentz force exerted by external current on the flux vortices. In this study, we focused on two types of drive quenches, those within the moving regime and those from the moving regime into the pinned regime. For quenches within the moving regime, we have studied the effects of the vortexvortex repulsive interactions on the relaxation kinetics of the vortices by performing drive quenches in the system with the interactions initially absent or in effect. In both cases, drive quenches within the moving phase result in fast exponential relaxation of the system from one non-equilibrium steady state to another, as evidenced by the rapid temporal evolution of one-time observables such as the mean radius of gyration of the lines and the fraction of pinned line elements. The two-time height autocorrelation functions for different waiting times display similar fast exponential relaxation as the one-time quantities, along with time translation invariance, firmly eliminating the possibility of physical aging in the case of quenches within the moving regime. When turned on, the screened logarithmic repulsive interactions between the flux lines significantly speed up the exponential relaxation of the height autocorrelations with the associated relaxation time being around half that for quenches with no interactions present. For our study on drive quenches from the moving to the pinned regime, in stark contrast to quenches within the moving regime, the relaxation of the system after the quench is much slower, which is seen in the non-exponential, logarithmic time evolution of the radius of gyration and fraction of pinned line elements. This indicates that the system fails to reach a steady state when quenched into the pinned regime on time scales that are on the order of the simulation duration. The two-time height autocorrelations show breaking of time translation invariance, accompanied by dynamical scaling with t/s, evidence for aging in the system, as we quench it from a moving non-equilibrium steady state into a pinned, glassy one. The t/s range for which simple aging is applicable for interacting lines is bound by the limiting of the algebraic growth of the characteristic time-dependent correlation length L(t), a consequence of the caging of the flux lines by the repulsive vortex interactions. Correlated initial conditions as with the moving lattice seen in the initial state in our study yield markedly smaller aging scaling exponents compared to uncorrelated initial conditions such as those obtained in previous investigations where the flux lines were initially randomly distributed.