Theoretically it has been known that breaking spin-degeneracy and effectively realizing spinless fermions is a promising path to topological superconductors. Yet, topological superconductors are rare to date. Here, we propose to realize spinless fermions by splitting the spin-degeneracy in momentum space. Specifically, we identify monolayer hole-doped transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD)s as candidates for topological superconductors out of such momentum-space-split spinless fermions. Although electron-doped TMDs have recently been found superconducting, the observed superconductivity is unlikely topological due to the near spin-degeneracy. Meanwhile, hole-doped TMDs with momentum-spacesplit spinless fermions remain unexplored. Employing a renormalization group analysis, we propose that the unusual spin-valley locking in hole-doped TMDs together with repulsive interactions selectively favors two topological superconducting states: inter-pocket paired state with Chern number 2 and intra-pocket paired state with finite pair-momentum. A confirmation of our predictions will open up possibilities for manipulating topological superconductors on the device friendly platform of monolayer TMDs. The quest for material realizations of topological chiral superconductors with nontrivial Chern numbers Another type of exotic paired states that desires material realization is the finite-momentum-paired states, which has long been pursued since the first proposals by Fulde and Ferrell We note an alternative strategy that could lead to pairing possibilities for both topological and modulated superconductivity: to split the spin-degeneracy of fermions in momentumspace (k-space). This approach is essentially dual to the proposal of Fu and Kane and it can be realized in a time-reversal-invariant non-centrosymmetric system when a pair of Fermi surfaces centered at opposite momenta ±k 0 consist of oppositely spin-polarized electrons [see Fig. What is critical to the success of this strategy is the materialization of such k-space-split spinless fermions. A new opportunity has arisen with the discovery of a family of superconducting two-dimensional (2D) materials, monolayer group-VI transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) M X 2 (M = Mo, W, X = S, Se). The generic electronic structure of group IV monolayer TMDs is shown in Fig. where μ is the chemical potential, m is the effective mass of the valence band, and c q,↑ ≡ ψ K+q,↑ and c q,↓ ≡ ψ -K+q,↓ each annihilates a spin-up electron with momentum q relative to the valley center K or a spin-down electron with momentum q relative to the valley center -K [see Fig. To discuss the pairing symmetries of the two pairing possibilities, it is convenient to define the partial-wave channels l with respect to the two valley centers ±K. Since a total spin τ z = ±1 intra-pocket pair consists two electrons with equal spin, Pauli principle dictates such pairing to be in a state with odd partial wave l. Stepping back to microscopics, such pairs carry finite center-of-mass momentum ±2K and form two copies of phase-modulated superconductor. To investigate the effects of the repulsive interactions between transition metal d-orbitals, we take the microscopic interaction to be the Hubbard interaction, which is the most widely studied pardignamtic model of strongly correlated electronic systems where W is the ultra-violet energy scale, U > 0, and n i,s is the density of electrons with spin s on site i. By now it is well-established that the interaction that is purely repulsive at the microscopic level can be attractive in anisotropic channels for low energy degrees of freedom, i.e., fermions near Fermi surface. The perturbative RG approach has been widely used to demonstrate this principle on various correlated superconductors. For the model of p-doped TMDs defined by Eqs. ( τ,τ (q, q )c † q ,τ c † -q ,τ c -q,τ c q,τ , where q and q are the incoming and outgoing momenta. Now, the remaining task is to derive the effective inter-and intra-pocket interactions g ↑,↓ (q, q ) and g ↑,↑ (q, q ) perturbatively in the microscopic repulsion U and check to see if attraction occur in the | l| = 1 channel (see Methods and Supplementary Note 2). Before going into the details of calculation, it is important to note that isotropic pairing with l = 0 is forbidden by Pauli principle in the total τ z = ±1 channel and blocked by the bare repulsive interaction in the total τ z = 0 channel. Hence we need to look for attraction in the anisotropic l = 0 channel, which is given by the momentum-dependent part of g (0) τ τ . With our assumption of isotropic dispersion at low-doping, one needs to go to the two-loop order to find momentum dependence in the effective interaction. Fortunately, it has been known for the model of Eqs. (1) and (2) that effective attraction is indeed found in anisotropic channels at the two-loop order. for τ, τ =↑, ↓, where θ ≡ 2 sin -1 ( |q±q | 2q F ) is the angle associated with the momentum transfer, and Φ 1 (θ) = √ 2 cos(θ) is the normalized angular-momentum-one eigenstate in 2D. In the low energy limit, the effective attractions in the | l| = 1 channel at the intermediate energy scale Λ 0 in Eq. ( There are two ways this degeneracy can be lifted. Firstly, the trigonal warping will suppress intra-pocket pairing as the two points on the same pocket with opposing momenta will not be both on the Fermi surface any more [see Fig. The distinct topological properties of the two predicted exotic superconducting states lead to unusual signatures. The inter-pocket | l| = 1 paired state [see Fig. Chern number |C| = 2 due to the two pockets (see Methods). The Chern number dictates for two chiral edge modes, which in this case are Majorana chiral edge modes each carrying central charge 1 2 . at temperature T , where c = 1 is the total central charge. Additionally, signatures of the chiral nature of such state could be revealed by a detection of time-reversal symmetry breaking in polar Kerr effect and muon spin relaxation measurements. Finally, a sharp signature of anisotropy of the pairing will be the maximization of the critical current in a direct current superconducting quantum interference device (dc SQUID) interferometry setup of Fig. The intra-pocket | l| = 1 paired state [see Fig. For the RG calculation, we follow the perturbative two-step RG procedure in Ref. 49, which has been used to study superconductivity in systems such as Sr 2 RuO 4 as the microscopic interaction, the first step is to integrate out higher energy modes and obtain g (0) τ,τ in Eq. ( In the first step, we calculate the inter-and intra-pocket effective interactions inter (q, q ) ≡ g τ,τ (q, q ) and g (0) intra (q, q ) ≡ g τ,τ (q, q ) in terms of the incoming and outgoing momenta q and q order by order in U until we obtain attraction in one of them in certain partial-wave channel l. Following Ref. 46, we find the effective interactions to be (see Supplementary Note 2) intra (q, q ) ∼ C - where p = q ± q is the momentum transfer, C > 0 and C < 0 are momentum-independent constants coming from tree level and one-loop order, and the momentum-dependent terms come solely from two-loop order. Each partial-wave l component is given by the projection of g (0) inter/intra (q, q ) on to the normalized angular momentum l eigenstate in 2D, Φ l(θ) = √ 2 cos lθ, where θ ≡ 2 sin -1 ( p 2q F ) is the angle associated with the momentum transfer p. We find where H n is the n th harmonic number, and α ≡ U 3 m 2 2π 3 and β ≡ U 3 m 2 64π 3 are postive constants related to density of states and interaction strength. Here, terms with α and β come from contributions with one particle-particle and one particle-hole bubble, and two particle-hole bubbles, respectively (see Supplementary Note 2). The α term in λ (0), l intra acquires an extra minus sign on top of (-1) l from the closed fermion loops in Supplementary Fig. Note that λ (0), l intra with even ls are forbidden since intra-pocket pairs have equal spin, and that λ (0), l inter = λ (0), l intra for odd ls since they correspond to the spin-triplet states with τ z = 0 and ±1 respectively. While λ (0),0 inter > 0 as expected from the bare repulsion, the most negative values are λ inter ∼ -0.3α -0.04β < 0. In the second step, we derive and solve the RG equations to study the evolutions of the effective interactions λ l inter/intra (E) as the energy E lowers from Λ 0 to 0. Using λ (0), l inter/intra in Eq. ( and where the inverse energy scale y ≡ Π ss pp (0 . Here, Π ss pp/ph (k) is the non-interacting static susceptibility at momentum k in the particle-particle or particle-hole channel defined in Supplementary Note 1. Since the low-energy band structure is well-nested at ±2K in the particle-particle channel, the Cooper logarithmic divergence appears not only at k = 0 but also ±2K (see Supplementary Note 1). Thus, d 1 (y) = 1. On the other hand, since the low-energy band structure is poorly-nested at any k in the particle-hole channel and is far from van Hove singularity, the particle-hole susceptibilities do not diverge in the low-energy limit (see Supplementary Note 1). Thus, d 2 (y), d 3 (y) 1 in the low-energy limit y → ∞. Therefore with logarithmic accuracy, the inter-and intra-pocket interactions renormalize independently with the well-known RG equation in the Cooper channel with i = inter, intra. The RG flow λ l i (y) = The inter-pocket chiral | l| = 1 paired state becomes just a spinful p+ip paired state with total spin τ z = 0 when we map the spin-valley-locked two-pocket problem to a spin-degenerate singlet-pocket problem. The spinful p + ip pairing comprises two copies of 'spinless' p + ip pairings as the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian of the former can be written as where the low-energy dispersion q = -q 2 2mμ, the gap function ∆ q ∼ q x ± iq y , and c q,± ≡ (c q,↑ ± c q,↓ )/ √ 2. Since a spinless p + ip paired state has Chern number C = 1, where , the τ z = 0 spinful p + ip paired state in the single-pocket system has C = 2. Hence, the inter-pocket chiral | l| = 1 pairing in the two-pocket system has C = 2 as well. K K q x + iq y q x + iq y q K K q x + iq y q x + iq y q (a) (b) Intra-pocket pairing Triangular Model Pockets q c q," K K' μ c q," c q,# q Inter-pocket pairing K K q x + iq y q x + iq y q K K q x + iq y q x + iq y q (a) (b) Intra-pocket pairing Triangular Model Pockets Triangular Model Pockets warping is expected to suppress the pairing as an electron at q has no pairing partner on the same pocket at -q. (d) The schematic low-energy dispersion near the two valleys for a monolayer TMD grown on ferromagnetic substrate. As the chemical potential μ (represented by the dashed line) intersects only one band near valley, the intra-pocket pairing is expected to be promoted. The TMD is oriented in the direction such that the phase of the pairing wavefunction is spatially modulated along the junction. The period in flux Φ of the modulated voltage V across the SQUID loop is expected to be halved into hc 4e since the difference between the pair-momenta on the two sides of a junction requires simultaneous tunneling of a spin-up and a spin-down intra-pocket pair, each carrying pair-momentum 2K and -2K, into the uniform superconductor. ↓ (p) = ↑ (p + 2K), the particle-hole susceptibility has the relation for s =↑ and s = -s. Thus, is not diverging in the low energy limit as long as the density of states on the Fermi surface ν 0 is finite. Therefore, we do not consider particle-hole susceptibilities in this work. On the other hand, since the Fermi surface is perfectly nested at 2K in the particleparticle channel, the particle-particle susceptibility diverges logarithmically as approaching the low-energy limit E → 0 with Λ being the UV cutoff scale. Note that the Cooper logarithmic divergence does not occur only at the usual p = 0, but also at p = 2K. This indicates that the superconductivity with pair momentum 0 (spatially uniform) and 2K (spatially modulated at 2K) could be equally dominant in the low energy. To determine which is truly more dominant, we need to study their pairing interactions using the RG analysis in the following section. Supplementary Note 2: Inter-and intra-pocket effecitve interactions We will calculate the inter-and intra-valley effective interactions g (0) inter (q, q ) ≡ g (0) τ,τ (q, q ) and g (0) intra (q, q ) ≡ g (0) τ,τ (q, q ) at energy Λ 0 in terms of the incoming and outgoing momenta q and q order by order in U until we obtain attraction in one of them in certain partial-wave channel l. Before we start, notice that by omitting the valley index, which is inter-locked with the spin index τ for the low-energy fermions, the inter-and intra-valley interactions in the spin-valley locked two-pocket picture are just the opposite-and equal-spin interactions in a spin-degenerate single-pocket picture. Fortunately, Ref. 46 has already studied the pairing problem in a spin-degenerate single-pocket system under repulsive Hubbard interaction described by Eq. ( inter (q, q0 ) = . . . FIG. K + q K + q 0 K q 0 K q g (0) intra (q, q 0 ) g (0) inter (q, q 0 ) K + q K + q 0 K q K q 0 FIG. inter/intra (q, q ) at the intermediate energy scale E = Λ 0 . The solid and dotted lines represent fermions and repulsive Hubbard interaction U respectively. different physical meaning when mapping back to the spin-valley locked two-pocket picture. To make the mapping between the two pictures explicit, we will follow Ref. 46 to calculate g (0) inter (q, q ) and g (0) intra (q, q ) in the two-pocket picture and denote the spin s and valley ±K separately. At the tree level, the on-site repulsion U > 0 only contribute to the inter-pocket interaction because U acts between only electrons with opposite spins due to Pauli exclusive principle. Thus, g (0),1 inter (q, q ) = U (18) with the superscript 1 denoting the tree-level contribution [see Supplementary Fig. This bare repulsion contributes to only the l = 0 component of g inter because U is independent of the incoming and outgoing momenta q and q . Since this is a perturbative analysis, the inter-pocket l = 0 pairing is suppressed regardless what the higher order contributions to l = 0 channel are. To have any finite contribution to aisotropic channels ( l = 0) requires momentum-dependence from loop corrections. The U 2 (one-loop) order contributions to inter-and intra-pocket interactions are and respectively for s =↑ / ↓, where the superscript 2 denotes corrections from the second order [see Supplementary Fig. where . Thus, the one-loop corrections are still momentumindependent and contribute to only the l = 0 channel. This is a consequence of isotropic parabolic dispersion in 2D. The U 3 (two-loop) contribution of short-range repulsion for a spin-degenerate rotationalinvariant 2D system with a single pocket and parabolic dispersion has been proven to facilitate p-wave (angular momentum 1) pairing. where ω n(ñ) is the fermionic Matsubara frequency, G s (iω n , l) = 1 iωn-s (l) is the non-interacting Green's function, t ± ≡ l ± q+q 2 , p ≡ qq, and q and q are the external incoming and outgoing momenta relative to the valley center K. As the electrons have energy E = Λ 0 0, |q| = |q | ∼ q F with q F being the Fermi momentum of a single pocket. The over-all minus sign results from the closed fermion loop. The particle-particle loop integral can be calculated assuming t ± 2q F , which is the regime where the main momentum-dependence comes from. sin 2 φ, and c 0 contains terms independent of t ± . We will drop c 0 in the following since our purpose is to obtain the momentum-dependent part. Plugging Supplementary Eq. ( where φ is the angle between p and l, 2 ≡ 4q 2 F -p 2 p 2 , l ≡ 2l p , and l1/2 ≡ ± cos φ + 2 + cos 2 φ. Here, 1 is a small parameter as we assumed t + /q F 1 in the first loop, which corresponds to the regime where the external momenta statisfy p ∼ 2q F and the loop momentum l/q F ∼ l 1. Notice that the integral is dominated by the regime of φ where cos φ = O( ) is another small parameter besides . Since we are interested in the portion of scattering amplitude which depends on the external momenta, we will calculate g pp intra (q, q )g pp intra (p = 2q F ) up to the leading order in the small parameters and cos φ. By keeping the small parameters in the upper and lower limits l1/2 while dropping those in the slowly varying logarithmic integrand, we obtain g pp intra (q, q )g pp intra (p = 2q F ) ∼ - for the regime of external momenta satisfying 1. The two-loop contributions to intra-pocket interaction involving only particle-hole bubbles, i.e. diagram (3i) and (3j), can be calculated in a similar way. In the same regime where the external momenta satisfy 1, we obtain g ph intra (q, q ) = g 3i (q, q ) + g 3j (q, q ) ∝ -U 3 m 2 64π 3 (1 - where the minus sign is due to the closed fermion loop. We then turn to the inter-pocket interaction. Among all the third-order contributions to g (0) inter , diagram (3e) and (3f) in Supplementary Fig. g pp inter (q, q )g pp inter (p = 2q F ) ∼ where p ≡ q + q. On the other hand, diagram (3c) and (3d) have the same amplitudes as diagram (3i) and (3j) such that g ph inter (q, q ) = g 3c (q, q ) + g 3d (q, q ) ∝ - in the regime where is small. After collecting all the contributions, the U 3 corrections to the effective inter-and intra-pocket interactions at E = Λ 0 read g (0),3 inter (q, q ) = g pp inter (q, q ) + g ph inter (q, q ) and g (0),3 intra (q, q ) = g pp intra (q, q ) + g ph intra (q, q ) ∼ - In summary, we have derived the effective inter-and intra-pocket interactions at E = Λ 0 from the bare repulsion U > 0 up to two-loop order: inter (q, q ) = g (0),1 inter (q, q ) + g (0),2 inter (q, q ) + g (0),3 inter (q, q ) intra (q, q ) = g (0),1 intra (q, q ) + g (0),2 intra (q, q ) + g (0),3 intra (q, q )