Long Josephson tunnel junction are non-linear transmission lines that allow propagation of current vortices (fluxons) and electromagnetic waves and are used in various applications within superconductive electronics. Recently, the Josephson vortex has been proposed as a new superconducting qubit. We describe a simple method to create a double-well potential for an individual fluxon trapped in a long elliptic annular Josephson tunnel junction characterized by an intrinsic non-uniform width. The distance between the potential wells and the height of the inter-well potential barrier are controlled by the strength of an in-plane magnetic field. The manipulation of the vortex states can be achieved by applying a proper current ramp across the junction. The read-out of the state is accomplished by measuring the vortex depinning current in a small magnetic field. An accurate one-dimensional sine-Gordon model for this strongly non-linear system is presented, from which we calculate the position-dependent fluxon rest-mass, its Hamiltonian density and the corresponding trajectories in the phase space. We examine the dependence of the potential properties on the annulus eccentricity and its electrical parameters and address the requirements for observing quantum-mechanical effects, as discrete energy levels and tunneling, in this two-state system. (Color online) The three fluxon potentials in Eq.( The quantum tunneling in a double-well potential, in spite of being almost as old as quantum mechanics It has been addressed long ago 25 that the energy of a fluxon traveling with constant speed on a lossless infinite JTL is Ê = 8/ √ 1 -û2 , where û is the fluxon speed normalized to the Swihart velocity 26 , c, which is the characteristic velocity of electromagnetic waves in JTJs. For non-relativistic speeds the fluxon energy becomes Ê = 8(1+ û2 /2). Throughout the paper we use circumflex accents to denote both normalized quantities and unit vectors. Ê is normalized to the characteristic energy, E = Φ 0 J c λ J W/2π, where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum, J c is the maximum Josephson current density and λ J , called the Josephson penetration length of the junction, gives a measure of the distance over which significant spatial variations of the Josephson phase occur, typically, of the order of several micrometers. Therefore, the fluxon rest mass is m = 8E/c 2 ∝ W . W << λ J is the JTL width that is assumed to be constant; typically, for submicrometer-width JTLs, m is about thousand times smaller than the electron rest mass 15 . Then 8E is the energy of a JTL containing one individual static fluxon. In a consistent manner, Nappi and Pagano 27 demonstrated that the potential energy of a (non-relativistic) fluxon on a variable-width JTL is proportional to the local width, Û (s) = 8 ŵ(s), where ŵ is some normalized width and s is a curvilinear coordinate, allowing the JTL to be curved. It follows that a large variety of intrinsic spatially dependent fluxon potentials can be engineered by means of JTLs having a non-uniform width, even in the absence of an external magnetic field. An example is sketched in Figure Very recently, the static and dynamic properties were investigated for constant We first introduce the (planar) confocal elliptic coordinates (ν, τ ), with ν ≥ 0 and τ ∈ [-π, π], such that, any point (x, y) in the X-Y plane is uniquely expressed as (c cosh ν sin τ, c sinh ν cos τ ) with ν ≥ 0 and τ ∈ [-π, π] for a positive c value. In the limit c → 0, the elliptic coordinates (ν, τ ) reduce to polar coordinates (r, θ); the correspondence is given by τ → θ and c cosh ν → r (note that ν itself becomes infinite as c → 0). In elliptic coordinates the elementary distance is ds = dx 2 + dy 2 = f (ν, τ ) √ dν 2 + dτ 2 , where f (ν, τ ) = c q(ν, τ ) is the so-called scale factor with q 2 (ν, τ ) ≡ sinh 2 ν sin 2 τ + cosh 2 ν cos 2 τ = sinh 2 ν + cos 2 τ = cosh 2 ν -sin 2 τ = (cosh 2ν + cos 2τ )/2. Furthermore, the elementary surface element is dS = dxdy = f 2 dνdτ . Any vector H applied at a point (ν, τ ) can be decomposed in its normal and tangential components, respectively, H ν = H • N and H τ = H • T, were: T ≡ [ cosh ν cos τ q(ν,τ ) , -sinh ν sin τ q(ν,τ ) ], (1b) are, respectively, the (outward) normal and (clockwise) tangent unit vectors to the ellipse passing at the point (ν, τ ). Let us now consider two ellipses centered in the origin of a Cartesian coordinate system X-Y and whose principal diameters are parallel to the X and Y axes. If the ellipses are confocal and the foci (±c, 0) lie on the X-axis, the parametric equations of the inner and outer ellipses are, respectively,: (2) and where ν o > ν i ; 2a i,o and 2b i,o are, respectively, the mayor and minor ellipses diameters and τ is a parameter measured clockwise from the positive Y -axis. By definition, the area of a CAJTJ is the annulus delimited by the ellipses in Eqs.( If ∆ν ≡ ν o -ν i << 1, the expression of the width reduces to: where The maximum width value is ∆w max = c cosh ν∆ν at the ellipse poles, τ = mπ (m integer), while ∆w min = c sinh ν∆ν is the minimum value achieved at the equatorial points, τ = mπ ±π/2. The width relative variation, (∆w max -∆w min )/∆w min = coth ν -1, diverges as ν → 0. We define the axes (mean) ratio as ρ ≡ tanh ν and the annulus (mean) eccentricity as e 2 ≡ 1 -ρ 2 = sech 2 ν. When the eccentricity vanishes, the CAJTJ reduces to the well-known circular annular Josephson tunnel junction ideal for experimental tests of the perturbation models developed to take into account the dissipative effects in the propagation with no collisions of sine-Gordon kinks In the small width approximation, ∆w max << λ J , the Josephson phase does not depends on ν and the system becomes one-dimensional. Furthermore, the scale factor becomes f (ν, τ ) = c Q(τ ) and the length of an elementary annulus arc is ds = cQ(τ )dτ . Therefore, we introduce the non-linear curvilinear coordinate s(τ , where E(τ, e 2 ) is the incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind of modulus e 2 ≤ 1. Accordingly, s(τ ) increases by one (mean) perimeter, L = ds = 4c cosh ν E(e 2 ), as τ changes by 2π (for a thin circular ring with mean radius r, it would be s(τ ) = s(θ) = rθ). E(e 2 ) ≡ E(π/2, e 2 ) is the complete elliptic integrals of the second kind of argument e 2 . Unfortunately, the elliptic integrals of the second kind are not invertible in terms of single-valued functions (at variance with the elliptic integrals of the first kind). In passing, we note that the elementary surface of the confocal annulus is dS = c 2 Q 2 ∆νdτ , so that its area is ∆S = πc 2 cosh 2ν∆ν; furthermore, its perimeter can also be expressed as L = 2π∆w/∆ν, where ∆w is the average width. It has been recently derived that the radially independent Josephson phase, φ(τ, t), of a CAJTJ in the presence of a spatially homogeneous in-plane magnetic field H of arbitrary orientation, θ, relative to the Y -axis, obeys a modified and perturbed sine-Gordon equation with a space dependent effective Josephson penetration length inversely proportional to the local junction width 34 : where t is the time normalized to the inverse of the so-called (maximum) plasma frequency, ω -1 p = Φ 0 c s /2πJ c (with c s the specific junction capacitance) and the critical current density, J c , was assumed to be constant. Here and in the following, the subscripts on φ are a shorthand for derivative with respect to the corresponding variable. Furthermore, γ(τ ) = J Z (τ )/J c is the normalized bias current density and is an additional forcing term proportional to the applied magnetic field; h ≡ H/J c c is the normalized field strength for treating long CAJTJs and ∆ is a geometrical factor which sometimes has been referred to as the coupling between the external field and the flux density of the junction 29 . As usual, the α and β terms in Eq.( where n is an integer number, called the winding number, corresponding to the algebraic sum of Josephson vortices (or fluxons) trapped in the junction due to flux quantization in one of the superconducting electrodes. Eqs.( An alternative derivation of the equation of motion for the Josephson phase of a CAJTJ arises from the theory developed by Goldobin et al 42 for one-dimensional curved variable-width JTLs. According to this theory, although adopting our notations, φ(ŝ, t) satisfies the following non-linear PDE: where ŝ = s/λ J . H ν is the component of the applied magnetic field normal to the junction perimeter. ∆w s is the directional derivative of the local junction width (for the sake of simplicity, the surface losses were neglected in Ref. Eq.( In force of Eq.(1a), we have: sin θ sinh ν sin τ + cos θ cosh ν cos τ . We stress that, for CAJTJs in a uniform field, the field radial component is very smooth, at variance with the other proposed geometries in which the δ-like behavior of H ν makes the modeling only qualitative after some algebra, one finds that: Furthermore, along the perimeter of a CAJTJ, it is: in passing,we observe that in elliptic coordinates the term proportional to the first spatial derivative has disappeared because ∆ν is by definition constant for the confocal elliptic annulus. Inserting the Eqs.( In the absence of dissipation (α = β = 0) and assuming a uniform current distribution, that is, γ(τ ) = γ 0 , Eq.( were we have introduced the functions: and proportional, respectively, to the magnetic field, h, and the bias current, γ 0 ; their physical meaning will be given later on. For the time being, we just recognize that du h /dτ = F (τ )Q 2 (τ ) and du γ /dτ = γ 0 Q 2 (τ ). Eq.( into the Euler-Lagrange equation: Then, the Hamiltonian density is 43 : and, the system total energy, i.e., the Hamiltonian is: Ê is an integral of motion in the absence of bias current; in fact, using Eq.( C. The approximate solitonic solution In the absence of the right-hand side, the simplest solitonic solution of Eq.( satisfies the left-hand side of Eq.( Here we used the convolution integral identity , and the fact that the width of a long CAJTJ does not change much over a distance compared to the fluxon size. Therefore, according to the expression of the energy density in Eq.( As anticipated in the Introduction, the existence of a fluxon repelling (attracting) barrier is induced by a widening (narrowing) JTL, as first first reported by Nappi and Pagano 27 and later on by other authors This equation replaces the expression for the fluxon normalized energy given in the Introduction for a constant-width JTL provided that c∆ν is put in place of W in the characteristic energy E. We might extrapolate Eq.( Therefore, can be used to parametrize the fluxon trajectories in the phase plane, as shown in Figure According to quantum mechanics, a massive particle subjected to potential confinement has its energy quantized and a discrete energy spectrum would be expected in the classical region of positive kinetic energy. Recently, macroscopically distinct quantum states of a vortex trapped in a magnetic field controlled double-well potential inside a narrow long heart-shaped junction 20 and in a linear JTL with local field injectors 21 have been used for designing qubits. In this paragraph we investigate the conditions under which the quantum-mechanical regime arises in CAJTJs. To calculated the allowed energy levels E n of a non-relativistic particle moving in a field of potential energy given in Eq.( where u is the particle velocity, q 1 and q 2 are the turning points where the kinetic energy vanishes, namely, U (q 1 ) = U (q 2 ) = E and the factor 2 takes into account the back and forth motion. Making use of the expression for the velocity in Eq.( where τ ± ( , ν) = π/2 ± arcsin( √ 2 -1 sinh ν). The definite integral in Eq.( where E = Φ 0 J c λ J c∆ν/2π. Numerical analysis shows that the integral in Eq.( and, more generally, As the annulus width is reduced, the fluxon rest mass decreases and, in turn, the relative separation between the discrete energy levels increases so that the quantum regime persists to higher temperature. It is worth to mention that, as the JTL width becomes comparable to the electrodes London penetration depth, a significant fraction of the fluxon energy lies outside the junction which makes the specific characteristic energy, E/W (or, in our case E/c∆ν), to decrease with decreasing junction width 49 . All the above considerations suggest that quantum effects become more pronounced as ν decreases which corresponds to an increase of the CAJTJ eccentricity. A. The perturbed potential The right-hand side of Eq.( Resuming, the total potential energy experienced by the vortex along the length of a long CAJTJ is: The three potentials in Eq.( The tilted potential, also called washboard potential, is plotted in Figure C. The double-well potential with γ = θ = 0 In the absence of bias current, as soon as we apply a magnetic field, the fluxon unperturbed potential looses the π-periodicity and becomes 2π-periodic. When the field h ⊥ is applied perpendicular to the longer annulus diameter, i.e., with θ = 0 as shown in Figure where a new additive constant has been chosen such that the double-well potential zeroes occur at its minima ±τ m for any values of the parameters, that is, ÛDW (τ m ) = 0 with τ m ≡ ArcCos -πh ⊥ λ J cosh ν√ cosh 2ν/4 √ 2c . Strictly, Eq.( In the quantum regime vortex tunneling is expected between the |L and |R energy levels. Since the tunneling in a double-well potential is governed by just the form of the potential in between the minima 3 , we are allowed to replace the profile in Eq.( which exhibits the two degenerate symmetric minima at τ 0 = ±τ m . Near the minima, the potential looks approximately like a shifted harmonic oscillator potential, ωm 2 (τ 0 ± τ m ) 2 /2. The height of the potential barrier at the center is VDW (0) = ωm 2 τ 2 m /8; therefore, it must be ωm 2 = 8 ÛDW (0)/τ 2 m . The infinite-wall potential VDW (τ 0 ) is plotted in Figure √ 2 with equal probability to find the fluxon in the left or right well. Putting the two wells into "communication" the degeneracy is lifted 28 : in fact, the symmetric states (Ψ + n ) will have a slightly lower energy than the corresponding antisymmetric states (Ψ - n ). This shows that for each level of the one minimum problem there is a pair of levels for the double minimum case. The difference in the energy level, ∆ n , between the even and odd states, makes the probability P(τ, t) of finding the vortex at any position τ at time t, to oscillate with a period h/∆ n ; then, the time it takes the fluxon to tunnel from one of the wells to the other is h/2∆ n . The magnitude of the splitting of the levels depends only upon the potential curve between the two minima and increases exponentially with decreasing barrier height (that is increasing magnetic field); therefore the tunneling occurs faster when the intra-well coupling is strengthened. It is also ∆ n << E n+1 -E n = ω m /π, indicating that the tunneling time between two wells is much greater that π 2 (c/c) sinh 2 ν, typically of the order of tens of picoseconds (information cannot be transmitted faster than the speed of light). The tunneling probability depends only upon the potential curve in tunneling region near the origin delimited by the two classical inversion points, τ + < τ m and τ -= -τ + , where the kinetic energy, E -V DW (τ ± ), vanishes. The potential in Eq.( ). For such quadratic potential hill the transmission coefficient is 28 A generic linear superposition of the basis states, Ψ n = λψ |L n + μψ |R n , where λ and μ are complex probability amplitudes, is called pure qubit state (provided that λ 2 + μ 2 = 1). The potentials ÛDW or VDW addressed so far are symmetric, i.e, spatially degenerate, meaning that λ 2 = μ 2 = 1/2. The degeneracy can be removed by means of a small bias current or a small additional magnetic field parallel to major CAJTJ axis. In such a way it is possible to control the probability amplitudes and to realize all possible quibit operation. An advantage of qubit basis states being localized in separate wells several Josephson penetration lengths away is a very long intra-well energy relaxation time between the macroscopic quantum levels The potential in Eq.( A goal of quantum information technology is to control the quantum state of a system, including its preparation, manipulation, and measurement. In this section we will investigate the state read-out and preparation processes in the presence of an in-plane field, h ⊥ , applied perpendicular to the longest annulus diameter, i.e., in the direction with θ = 0. We remind that the field orientation only enters in the magnetic potential u h defined in Eq.( ). This occurs because under the action of a tilting current the fluxon escaping from one (shallow) well is trapped by the other (deep) well. Therefore, one possible procedures that can be adopted to deterministically prepare the fluxon in a given state from an arbitrary unknown initial state consists in the following four steps: i) set the amplitude of the perpendicular magnetic field (that initially was h op ⊥ ) approximately equal to h min ⊥ , ii) ramp the bias current (that initially was absent) up to a value γ * that will be specified below; iii) restore the magnetic field to h op ⊥ ; and iv) ramp the bias current down to zero. The polarity of γ * is positive (negative) for the preparation of the fluxon in the left (right) state; its amplitude has to be such that the energy acquired by the fluxon in the current-tilted potential is lower that the zero-current barrier height corresponding to the selected operating field. In such a way the fluxon remains localized in the selected state. In our simulations, with h op ⊥ = -0.25, we found that a preparing current 0.05 |γ * | 0.1 reliably performed the required state operation. Another possible preparing protocol involves the application of an additional magnetic field, h || , parallel to the longest annulus diameter, i.e., with θ = ±π/2 in Eq.( In conclusion, this paper indicates that a wide range of vortex potentials can be designed by tailoring the width of a JTL. We considered an annular JTL delimited by two closely spaced confocal ellipses that is characterized by a periodically modulated width. This configuration is faithfully modeled by a modified and perturbed one-dimensional sine-Gordon equation that, although not integrable, admits (numerically computed) solitonic solutions. The key ingredient of this partial differential equation is an effective Josephson penetration length inversely proportional to the local junction width. This spatial dependence, in turn, generates a periodic potential that alternately attracts and repels the fluxons (or antifluxons). The potential energy minima occur at two diametrically opposite locations where the annulus is narrowest and the intra-well potential heights is uniquely determined by the CAJTJ eccentricity. When an in-plane magnetic field is applied parallel to the minor ellipse axis, a symmetric double-well potential develops with two degenerate stable states. The inter-well barrier potential height and the distance between the minima can be tuned by the field amplitude. As long as the force exerted on the vortex by the bias current is smaller than the pinning force, a pinned vortex remains confined to one of the potential minima. If the pinning force is exceeded by the driving force, the vortex starts to move. The vortex depinning current depends on the magnitude and direction of the applied field. We report on the escape of a Josephson vortex from a magnetically-tuned double-well potential. A characterization in the thermal (or classic) regime is presented here, with attention to the preparation and readout of the vortex state. We have found that when the double well potential is suitably shaped, we can prepare the vortex in a specific state by means of a particular waveform of bias current and the final state of the vortex can be read out by performing an escape measurement from one of the potential wells. Provided that the temperature and dissipation in the junction are low enough, the superposition of the macroscopically distinct states |L and |R can be employed to implement a reliable Josephson vortex qubit. Under sufficient decoupling from the environment, as with other superconducting qubits, the mixing between the two states, not yet observed for Josephson vortex qubits, could be identified by means of the analysis of the switching current probability distribution.