The discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in Fe-based compounds [1,2] has triggered numerous investigations on the interplay between superconductivity and magnetism [3] and, more recently, on the enhancement of transition temperatures through interface effects [4]. It is widely believed that the emergence of optimal superconductivity is intimately linked to the suppression of long-range antiferromagnetic (AFM) order, although the exact microscopic picture of this relationship remains elusive [1] due to the lack of data with atomic spatial resolution [5-7]. Here, we present a spin-polarized scanning tunneling spectroscopy (SP-STS) study of ultrathin FeTe 1-x Se x (x = 0, 0.5) films grown on prototypical Bi-based bulk topological insulators. Surprisingly, we find an energy gap at the Fermi level indicating superconducting correlations up to T c ~ 6 K for one unit cell thin FeTe layers grown on Bi 2 Te 3 substrates, in contrast to the non-superconducting FeTe bulk compound [8]. Moreover, SP-STS reveals that the energy gap spatially coexists with bicollinear AFM order. This finding opens novel perspectives for theoretical studies of competing orders in Fe-based superconductors as well as for experimental investigations of exotic phases in heterostructures of topological insulators and superconducting layers. Topological insulators (TI) and interfacial superconductors (SC) are both topics of intense current interest in modern condensed matter physics Alternatively, SC/TI heterostructures could be realized by growing superconducting films on top of pristine bulk TIs. The recent finding that the superconducting transition temperature T c can be pushed above 100 K in an FeSe unit cell (UC) thin film grown epitaxially on SrTiO 3 The latter studies We have prepared ultrathin epitaxial FeTe films on Bi 2 Te 3 single-crystals by in-situ deposition of Fe on the TI substrates under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions, followed by an in-situ annealing treatment (see Methods section). Figure However, there is no overall periodic height modulation of the UC FeTe layers, and only in some areas of the thinnest islands irregular wrinkles are observed. This indicates a rather weak interaction of the FeTe layer with the substrate, in contrast to what has been observed for FeSe grown on Bi 2 Se 3 High-quality, one UC thin FeTe 0.5 Se 0.5 films (Supplementary Fig. To characterize the electronic structure of these films, STS measurements of the differential tunneling conductance (dI/dU) as a function of the applied bias voltage were performed, reflecting the sample's local density of states (LDOS). meV, defined by half the distance between the two sharp coherence peaks in Fig. , with the density of states in the normal state at the Fermi energy and the real part , where the parameter Γ accounts for the lifetime broadening of the quasiparticles Now we turn to the investigation of the electronic and magnetic structure of ultrathin FeTe films grown on Bi 2 Te 3 . Figure has not been observed at the surface of bulk FeTe Figure We do not observe any significant effect on the energy gap in a magnetic field up to B = 2.8 T applied perpendicular to the sample plane (Supplementary Fig. Having established clear evidence for superconducting correlations in single UC FeTe layers grown on Bi 2 Te 3 below 6 K, we now focus in more detail on the spatial behavior of these correlations at the lateral interface of the FeTe layer and the Bi 2 Te 3 substrate. In particular, we measured the spatial variation of tunneling spectra across a step edge from the embedded UC FeTe layer to the Bi 2 Te 3 substrate (Fig. Our results on epitaxially grown FeTe layers on Bi 2 Te 3 confirm that the previously reported 2D superconductivity in FeTe/Bi 2 Te 3 heterostructures In order to check this assumption we simultaneously characterized the local superconducting correlations and the atomic-scale spin structure of the ultrathin FeTe films grown on Bi 2 Te 3 by SP-STS In summary, we have explored the electronic and magnetic structure in a new class of systems, i.e. heterostructures consisting of ultrathin Fe-chalcogenide layers of the type FeTe 1-x Se x (x=0, 0.5) on Bi-based TI substrates. For FeTe/Bi 2 Te 3 heterostructures, our atomic-scale spin-resolved tunneling spectroscopy measurements provide evidence for the coexistence of superconducting correlations with a T c ~ 6.5 K and bi-collinear AFM order in the one UC FeTe films. We finally compare the wavelength of the AFM order of λ = 2a = 7.5 Å with the size of the Cooper pairs, inferred from the coherence length, of  = 8.9 Å, giving λ ~1.2. The electron distance in the pairs is rather small, which is typical for Fe-based SCs, and apparently just large enough such that the effective Zeeman field induced by the AFM order cancels out along the length of the Cooper pair. The relative sizes of λ and  therefore might be crucial for the coexistence of pairing and long range AFM order in this material. Our surprising findings may stimulate further theoretical studies on the relationship between superconductivity and AFM order in Fe based SCs. Bulk topological insulator (TI) single crystals of Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Te 1.8 Se 1.2 used in this study as substrates were synthesized using a Stockbarger method and have been well characterized using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, powder X-ray diffraction, inductively coupled plasma atomic-emission spectroscopy, and potential Seebeck microprobe measurements Fe-chalcogenide film preparation and characterization were carried out in a UHV system with a base pressure below 1x10 -10 mbar. The TI crystals were cleaved in-situ under UHV conditions and high quality FeTe 1-x Se x (x = 0, 0.5) thin films were prepared by depositing 0.5-1 ML Fe at 300 K on-top of Bi 2 Te 3 and Bi 2 Te 1.8 Se 1.2 substrates, respectively, using molecular beam epitaxy, followed by annealing up to a maximum temperature of 315 °C for 15 minutes. Fe deposited on Bi 2 Te 3 reacts with the substrate upon annealing, most likely via a substitutional process of Bi by Fe All scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) experiments were performed with an STM in UHV at temperatures between 1.1 K and 14 K . (A) The ck islands. wn in (B).