The Fourier transform of the observed magnetic quantum oscillations (MQO) in YBa2Cu3O 6+δ high-temperature superconductors has a prominent low-frequency peak with two smaller neighbouring peaks. The separation and positions of these three peaks are almost independent of doping. This pattern has been explained previously by rather special, exquisitely detailed, Fermi-surface reconstruction. We propose that these MQO have a different origin, and their frequencies are related to the bilayer and inter-bilayer electron hopping rather than directly to the areas of tiny Fermi-surface pockets. Such so-called "slow oscillations" explain more naturally many features of the observed oscillations and allow us to estimate the inter-layer transfer integrals and in-plane Fermi momentum. Magnetic quantum oscillations (MQO) provide a traditional and powerful tool to study the Fermi surface and other electronic structure parameters of various metals. The unreconstructed FS of YBCO consists of one large pocket, almost a square with smoothed corners, that fills about one half of the Brillouin zone and would correspond to a large frequency ∼ 10 4 tesla. The Fermi-surface reconstruction, possibly caused by the pseudogap, AFM or CDW order, takes place for doping level p < 10 -15%, as suggested by ARPES (1) For t z ≪ t ⊥ this spectrum contains bonding and antibonding states separated by ∼ 2t ⊥ k , each with weak k z dispersion: (2) The corresponding Fermi surface pocket is shown schematically in Fig. At finite temperature the metallic conductivity along i-th axis σ i = σ ii is given by the sum of contributions from all ungapped FS pockets β: Each pocket β contributes to the total metallic conductivity along axis i at low temperature via the product of a density of electron states (DoS) g F,β = g β (ε = E F ) and an electron diffusion coefficient D i,β . Both contribute to oscillations, since they vary with the magnetic field B z perpendicular to the conducting x-y layers as: with g 0β = m * β /π 2 d the average DoS at the Fermi level and m * β the effective mass for the pocket β, and where the non-oscillating part D 0i,β of the diffusion coefficient in metals is proportional to the mean-square electron velocity v i at the Fermi level. The harmonic amplitudes , where the electron level broadening Γ = Γ (B, T ) comes from various types of interaction of the conducting electrons. i,β = e 2 g 0β D 0i,β does not oscillate. The second term in Eq. ( where c ⋆ (= 11.65 Å for YBCO) is the lattice constant in the interlayer z-direction, and k F is the Fermi momentum. This angular dependence is as for the beat frequency of MQO typical of quasi-2D metals. Eq. ( The amplitude of the central frequency 2∆F ⊥ in Eq. ( (1) Experimentally, the multiple extra MQO frequencies predicted from FS reconstruction are missing (2) The observed F α ≈ 530T depends weakly on the degree of doping (3) The bilayer splitting t ⊥ expected from bandstructure calculations Note that the maximum value t ⊥ k of bilayer transfer may considerably exceed this average value t ⊥ . Similarly the observed t z -induced splitting 2∆F c ≈ 90T ∼ 4t z B/ ω c , gives a reasonable average value 2t z ≈ 1.4meV . (4) Long-range spatial inhomogeneities, common in cuprates, should strongly damp oscillations from FS pockets due to smearing of the Fermi level. They should affect the proposed SlO much less, similar to slow oscillations in Ref. (5) The angular dependence of the observed frequencies (6) An underlying CDW is not a necessary prerequisite for observation of SlO. There are no issues to be resolved as to how a weak and fluctuating CDW ordering could overcome magnetic breakdown, which should be strong for fields up to 100 tesla. We note possible counter-arguments: (1) The observed magnetoresistance oscillations are quite strongly damped by temperature, with effective mass m ⋆ ≈ 1.6m e , (2) A component at F α is also observed in the dHvA effect. This can be due to the electron-electron interaction, roughly proportional to the product of the density of states, giving a nonlinearity in the magnetization as a functional of the oscillating density of states. (3) Oscillations with a frequency ≈ 840T (but without side-frequency splitting), corresponding to 3% of the Brillouin zone, have been observed in HgBa 2 CuO 4+δ , where there is no bilayer splitting, but a much larger t z is expected from the shorter interlayer distance. In fact this is consistent with SlO, but as the spectrum is simpler the evidence is not as compelling. To summarize, we propose an alternative interpretation of the observed magnetic oscillations in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+δ high-Tc superconductors, with frequencies F α ≈ 530T and F α ± ∆F α related to the bilayer splitting and corrugation rather than to tiny FS pockets. This is based on the new result The authors thank Ted Forgan for raising this issue and communication of unpublished results. The work is supported by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation in the framework of Increase Competitiveness Program of MISiS. P.G. acknowledges the Russian Science Foundation grant # 16-42-01100.