Nodal superconductivity is observed in LiFeP while its counterpart LiFeAs with similar topology and orbital content of the Fermi surfaces is a nodeless superconductor. We explain this difference by solving, in the two-Fe Brillouin zone, the frequency-dependent Eliashberg equations with spin-fluctuation mediated pairing interaction. Because of Fermi surface topology details, in LiFeAs all the Fe-t2g orbitals favor a common pairing symmetry. By contrast, in LiFeP the dxy orbital favors a pairing symmetry different from d xz/yz and their competition determines the pairing symmetry and the strength of the superconducting instability: dxy orbital strongly overcomes the others and imposes the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter. The leading pairing channel is a dxy-type state with nodes on both hole and electron Fermi surfaces. As a consequence, the d xz/yz electrons weakly pair leading to a reduced transition temperature in LiFeP. Identification of the characteristics of the electronic structure that cause nodal or nodeless superconducting gap symmetry has been one of the outstanding problems in the field of iron-based superconductors (FeSCs). xy,xy /t (2) xy,xy , controls the spin excitation spectra and hence is a possible switch between nodeless high-T c and nodal low-T c pairings. The spin-fluctuation mediated pairing interaction is repulsive, requiring a sign changing gap function. Once the interpocket interaction dominates, pairing is driven by scattering between hole and electron pockets, with a sign change of the superconducting (SC) gap between pockets. Otherwise, pairing is due to a direct interaction within hole or within electron pockets with a sign change of the SC gap, leading to nodes on each pocket. Structural factors, such as Fe-Fe distance and pnictogen (PN) height, or PN-Fe-PN bond angle, have been used as proxy for the hopping ratio. Here we focus on LiFeP and LiFeAs of the 111-family. We employ spin-fluctuation mediated pairing by considering both the Fe-3d and P-3p or As-4p orbitals in the two-Fe unit cell. We solve the linearized Eliashberg equations to investigate SC pairing and gap symmetry. We find that the important factor is whether different orbitals collaborate or compete in imposing a SC gap symmetry. As we will see, spin fluctuations in LiFeP come from better nested FSs for the d xy orbital relative to the d xz/yz orbitals. Hence, the d xy orbital imposes its preferred pairing symmetry. Consequently, LiFeP exhibits strong d xy and very weak d xz/yz Cooper pairing. Electronic structure It is important to discuss first the electronic structure before moving to the charge and spin fluctuations that are at the origin of pairing. Theoretical studies of FeSCs have shown that the correlation strength depends on the Fe-PN-Fe bond angle and is strongly enhanced when this angle is decreased. [16] The LDA electronic structure calculation shows that the spectral weight at the Fermi energy arises from Fe t 2g or- They intersect at small k z and their order flips, i.e., the inner pocket at k z = 0 is the outer pocket at k z = π/c. In comparison with LiFeAs, the α 1 pocket is bigger and extends further away from the Γ point in LiFeP. The two inner hole bands are deeper than the corresponding bands in LiFeAs, while the outer hole band is slightly shallower. This brings middle and outer hole pockets of LiFeP in close vicinity of each other for all k z . Moreover, bands are also wider in LiFeP consistent with weaker correlation effects. Wider bands lead to different Fermi velocity and more itinerant electrons and holes in LiFeP. Spin/charge and pairing susceptibilities Single-particle excitations in the vicinity of the FSs influence the particlehole (p-h) and particle-particle (p-p) susceptibilities involved in pairing. Let us begin with bare susceptibilities in the p-h channel defined as , where G denotes the propagator ), with commensurate (incommensurate) peaks around the M and A points for LiFeP (LiFeAs). These peaks are coming from nesting between the hole and electron pockets. Despite their resemblance, the nesting conditions for different orbitals change between the two compounds. In order to quantify this, we introduce the ratio r as a measure of nesting between portions of the hole and electron pockets with the same orbital content. M -δ denotes the momentum of the commensurate or incommensurate peak at the center of the BZ (δ is zero for LiFeP while it is finite for LiFeAs). This ratio for different orbitals in LiFeP are r dxy 0.48 and r d xz/yz 0.35 while they are r dxy 0.29 and r d xz/yz 0.37 for LiFeAs. Thus, nesting is better for d xy in LiFeP, while it is better for d xz/yz in LiFeAs. The generalized bare susceptibility in the pp channel is given by [19] Fig. SC instability and pairing interaction A SC instability occurs when the pairing susceptibility diverges as one lowers temperature. The condition for an instability yields the linearized Eliashberg equation, defined as (for zero center of mass momentum of Cooper pairs) [19, 21] where Γ irr,s is the effective pairing interaction in singlet channel and ∆ l1,l2 (k, iω m ) is the gap function. In the random phase approximation (RPA), Γ irr,s , is given by [Γ irr,s (0)] , where the vertex Λ irr,s (0) is irreducible in all channels. ph Γ irr,m accounts for the density/magnetic fluctuations contribution in the pairing interaction. Here, χ ] and Γ irr,d(m) = Γ irr,↑↓ + (-)Γ irr,↑↑ denote respectively the dressed susceptibility and the irreducible vertex function in the magnetic (density) channel. In RPA, Γ irr,σσ is replaced by a static effective vertex which is parametrized by the screened intra-orbital Hubbard interaction, U s , and the Hund's coupling J s (see SM). Since the gap equations for different orbitals are coupled by the inter-orbital components of both the pairing interaction and of the bare susceptibility in p-p channel, the competition between the contribution of different orbitals determines the symmetry of the leading gap function. To gain further insight into this competition, we solved the Eliashberg equations for only the d xy orbital and for only the coupled (d xz , d yz ) orbitals. In both compounds, the leading and sub-leading chan-nels for (d xz , d yz ) orbitals are conventional s +-and d x 2 -y 2 , respectively. This is mainly a consequence of the orbital contents of the FSs illustrated in Fig. The reasons for this switch of leading and sub-leading channels between the two compounds are related to both nesting and strength of pairing interaction, namely: (i) in LiFeAs the portions of the γ pocket around θ = 0, π/2 are better nested with the portion of the electron pockets that is around the intersection of the two electron pockets, again around θ = 0, π/2, where θ is measured at the Γ and M points with respect to the k x axis. This is due to the flatness of the FS on these segments (see SM, Fig. ( Conclusion We solved the full linearized Eliashberg gap equation for decoupled d xy and (d xz , d yz ) orbitals and compared the solutions with that of the fully coupled equations in order to distinguish what causes the nodal and nodeless SC gap symmetry observed in LiFeP and LiFeAs respectively. Supplementary Material: Nodal versus nodeless superconductivity in iso-electronic LiFeP and LiFeAs Here we first present some details about the irreducible vertex in RPA. We also present some details about LDA electronic structure and susceptibility calculations. Then we compare the d xy partial spectral weights of LiFeP and LiFeAs. Finally, we present some dominant components of the LiFeP gap function in the orbital basis. Irreducible vertex The irreducible vertex function in density/magnetic channels are defined as: Γ irr,d(m) = Γ irr,↑↓ + (-)Γ irr,↑↑ . In RPA, the irreducible vertex function is replaced by the antisymmetrized static Coulomb vertex, Γ 0,σσ which, in terms of the interacting part of Hamiltonian (1/2) i l1...l4 σσ I σσ l1l2,l3l4 c † il1σ c † il2σ c il3σ c il4σ is defined by Γ 0,σσ l1l2;l3l4 = I σσ l1l4,l3l2 -I σσ l1l4,l2l3 and Γ 0,σ σ l1l2;l3l4 = I σ σ l1l4,l3l2 , where σ ≡ -σ. For a local interaction the following forms for density/magnetic irreducible vertex functions are obtained where U s and U s denote the screened static local intra-and inter-orbital density-density interactions while J s and J s are Hund's coupling and pair-hopping interactions. Due to locality of the interaction the four orbital indices belong to same ion. We also assume spin rotational invariance so the equalities U s = U s -5 2 J s [S1] and J s = J s are satisfied. Finally, the fully irreducible vertex [Λ irr,s (Q)] Kl1l2;K l3l4 is replaced by 1 2 Γ irr,d + Γ irr,m transformed to the particle-particle channel. In our study we used two sets of screened interaction parameters yielding the same magnetic Stoner factor. The values for U s and J s are relatively standard in the literature that uses the RPA approach for the pairing vertex. We found that for a given J s /U s ratio changing them within a limited range does not change the qualitative aspects of our results for the superconducting state. Calculation details Both LiFeP and LiFeAs crystallize in a tetragonal structure with a space group P 4/nmm. In our study the crystal structures are fixed to the experimental structures. We performed DFT calculations in the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) scheme using WIEN2k. [S2] A very dense k-point mesh is used in the calculation and the convergence on both charge and energy has reached. An atomic-like basis set is constructed from the Kohn-Sham bands contained within a suitable energy window around the Fermi level for the d shell of Fe, and the p shell of As or P. Partial spectral weight Fig. SC gap function of LiFeP in orbital basis Finally, Fig. The d xy intra-orbital intra-sublattice and intersublattice components are dominant and sub-dominant components of the gap function. The d xz/yz intra-orbital intra-sublattice components are relatively small leading to a small superconducting gap on the two inner hole pockets (not shown). The gap function components satisfy the relation ∆ FSs. The SC gap magnitudes on the α 1,2 pockets are relatively small (not shown). Due to interchange of electron pockets as a function of k z , the gap on the inner pocket becomes larger than that on the outer pocket at a finite k z . Hence, for these pockets, a direct comparison with ARPES data has to take averaging over a range of k z into account.