The electronic and magnetic properties of the new hydride superconductor CaFeAsH, which superconducts up to 47 K when electron-doped with La, and the isovalent alloy system CaFeAsH1-xFx are investigated using density functional based methods. The Q = (π, π, 0) peak of the nesting function ξ( q) is found to be extremely strong and sharp, and additional structure in ξ( q) associated with the near-circular Fermi surfaces (FSs) that may impact low energy excitations is quantified. The unusual band introduced by H, which shows strong dispersion perpendicular to the FeAs layers, is shown to be connected to a peculiar van Hove singularity just below the Fermi level. This band provides a three dimensional electron ellipsoid Fermi surface not present in other Fe-based superconducting materials nor in CaFeAsF. Electron doping by 25% La or Co has minor affect on this ellipsoid Fermi surface, but suppresses FS nesting strongly, consistent with the viewpoint that eliminating strong nesting and the associated magnetic order allows high Tc superconductivity to emerge. Various aspects of the isovalent alloy system CaFeAsH1-xFx and means of electron doping are discussed in terms of influence of incipient bands. Identifying and studying similar materials that display very different behavior has been an active approach to understanding the origin of high temperature (T c ) superconducting Fe-based pnictides and chalcogenides, and is expected to promote the quest for new and possibly higher T c superconductors. In this class of materials, elemental substitution can be done in an isovalent manner to provide (seemingly) minor changes, while aliovalent substitution supplies either electron or hole carriers to the Fe 3d bands. While there are now several classes of Fe-based superconductors, and most are well studied, the recently synthesized CaFeAsH There are strong parallels to another two dimensional (2D) electron-doped system A x M NCl, where M = Zr (respectively Hf), A is an alkali metal, with a T c of 15 K (respectively 26 K). In these two compounds T c is independent of doping level Incorporation of H as an anion in the blocking layer and the realization of the superconductivity as high as 47 K invites certain questions. First, within the same 1111 phase, why does T c increase so much with La doping after (LaO) + layers are replaced by isovalent (CaH) + layers? Second, in comparison with CaFeAsF, what is the role of H in stabilizing such a high T c ? A third question is why the maximal superconducting critical temperatures in La-doped and Co-doped CaFeAsH samples (both electron doped) are so different. These are the sort of issues we try to shed light on. Using methods similar to those we use (see below), Muraba et al. These differences, and the electronic structure to be analyzed here, call to mind the recent discussion on the possible influence of incipient bands in Fe-based superconductors. Incipient bands are those that do not actually cross the Fermi energy (E F ) and thus do not have an associated Fermi surface, but are near enough to the Fermi level (within a pairing cutoff energy) to contribute to pairing and superconductivity. Chen et al., In this paper first principles methods, described in Sec. II, are applied to study the electronic structures and magnetic ground states of CaFeAsH and CaFeAsF, and the non-magnetic and superconducting electron-doped phases Ca 0.75 La 0.25 FeAsH and CaFe 0.75 Co 0.25 AsH. Sec. III contains the main results. It is confirmed that CaFeAsH has, in addition to the nearly circular, 2D electron and hole cylinders expected of an Fe 1111 compound, a strongly k z -dispersive band crossing the Fermi level (E F ) that leads to a three dimensional (3D) ellipsoidal Fermi pocket, whose implications we explore. A specific feature that we quantify is extremely sharp Q = (π, π, 0) nesting (as usual, in units of in-plane lattice constant a=1). Several other differences between the Hand F-compounds are analyzed, including nesting away from the nesting peak at Q that may impact low energy properties. A short summary is provided in Sec. IV. synthesis of all solid solutions. The experimental lattice parameters are used in the calculations. In the P 4/nmm phase above the magnetic ordering temperature, for CaFeAsH 7 a t =3.879 Å, c t =8.26 Å. For CaFeAsF 24 the lattice parameter a=3.878 Å is nearly identical, while c=8.593 Å. Thus the larger F ion, confirmed by charge density plots (not shown), enlarges the structure only along the c axis. For CaFeAsH in the magnetically ordered Cmma phase, a=5.457 Å= 1.407a t , b=5.492 Å= 1.416a t , and c=8.21 Å= 0.994c t . For Ca 0.75 La 0.25 FeAsH and CaFe 0.75 Co 0.25 AsH in the tetragonal phase, the unit cell size is 2a × b × c, a=3.883 Å= 1.001a t , c=8.20 Å= 0.993c t . The full-potential linearized augmented plane wave Wien2K package The magnetic order commonly observed in these Febased two dimensional (2D) materials leads us to study the relative energetics of ordered phases. The primitive tetragonal cell contains two Fe sites, due to the tetrahedral coordination with As ions. The Fe sublattice is square, oriented at 45 • with respect to the conven-tional cell. One possible magnetic order is the Néel type, in which each Fe on its square sublattice is antialigned with its four neighbors; this is q=0 AFM order (NAFM). Stripe AFM (SAFM) order corresponds to each Fe atom being antiparallel to its neighbors along the a and b axes, which are second Fe neighbors. SAFM corresponds to Q = (π, π, 0) order, and typically destroys much of the Fermi surface. The SAFM unit cell size is doubled to A. Nonmagnetic phase: a new band The distinctive feature of these bands is the existence of one band along the Γ-Z direction that shows not only k z dispersion but a surprisingly large velocity along k z . This band gives rise to an additional, ellipsoidal in shape, hole Fermi surface surrounding the Z point of the zone. Bands near E F , including the unusual one, have strongly Fe d xy and d xz , d yz character, with small As 4p character. This new Fermi surface has similarities to one in a magnetically ordered phase of LaFePO that is different from the corresponding Fermi surface of LaFeAsO in the same magnetic structure. B. Electronic structure: H versus F Muraba et al. The Fermi surface differences noted in Sec. III.A do not convey the extent of the differences in electronic In CaFeAsF, there are three hole-like bands centered around the Γ-Z line, and the bands display no k z dispersion. For CaFeAsH, however, two hole-like bands cross E F along the M-Γ-X path while three hole-like bands crosses the E F along the A-Z-R path. The difference is that in the H compound, a band at Γ 0.2 eV below E F in CaFeAsF lies 0.2 eV above E F at Z. Figure A plot through the zone Z-Γ-Z would indicate this dispersive band in CaFeAsH to be Dirac-like at -0.2 eV, except that it (necessarily, by symmetry) becomes quadratic extremely close to Γ. However, this band disperses downward in both directions in plane, so the point at Γ is a van Hove singularity (vHs) with two normal negative masses m x = m y and an extremely small positive mass along the k z direction, whereupon the band quickly becomes linear (massless). Lying 0.2 eV below E F this vHs has no influence on low energy properties (including, we expect, superconductivity) but it reflects a highly unusual influence of H in this structure. A very similar linear valence band has been found in the CoAs 3 class of skutterudites where it has been analyzed in detail There is an additional H versus F difference evident in Fig. Due to the focus of attention in Fe-based pnictides and chalcogenides on Fe orbital occupations and how they relate to properties, we have calculated the difference density ρ(CaFeAsH)-ρ(CaFeAsF), with both calculated at the lattice constant of the former compound. there is a slight decrease in density in the interstitial region in both planes. In the Fe-As chain direction, Fig. These differences can be quantified by subtracting the orbital occupations, CaFeAsH minus CaFeAsF, within the atomic spheres. In units of 10 -3 , the differences for Fe are: d z 2 , 2.5; d xy , 7.6; d x 2 -y 2 , 3.5; d xz = d yz , -0.6. The net change for Fe is +12.4×10 -3 electrons. For As, the analogous changes are: p x , p y , 5.9; p z , -9.9, for a small net change of +1.9×10 -3 electrons. Thus H induces ∼0.015 electrons into the Fe+As spheres compared to F, with the decrease occurring in the interstitial region or in the Ca(H,F) region. To determine whether the Fermi surface differences (and band structure differences) are affected by the different lattice parameters we have replaced H by F in CaFeAsH and replaced F by H in CaFeAsF, each with its own value of the c lattice parameter. Fermi surface nesting has played a central role in theories of the Fe-based superconductors, on the one hand accounting for the observed AFM phases in several undoped compounds and on the other as promoting short-range AFM fluctuations that may provide the superconducting pairing mechanism. Both of these aspects focus on the susceptibility peak near Q = (π, π, 0), as discussed for Fe pnictides earlier. With an eye first toward the magnetic instability in CaFeAsH and CaFeAsF and the wavevector dependence of magnetic fluctuations in the (high temperature) tetragonal structure, we analyze the Fermi surface topology in the nonmagnetic phase. The top view of Fermi surface sheets is shown in Fig. A quantitative measure of nesting is provided by the Fermi surface nesting function ξ( q), which measures the phase space for scattering through wavevector q from k on the FS to k + q also on the FS. This function is given by here Ω c is the cell volume and v k = ∇ k ε k is the electron velocity ( =1). The latter expression, after the volume integral with two δ-function restrictions, gives a geometrical interpretation: it is the integral over the line of intersection L k (ε F ) of the undisplaced FS and a copy of the FS displaced by q, weighted by the inverse of the cross product of the two velocities. Large contributions arise from regions of parallel or antiparallel velocities, i.e. FS nesting where the velocity cross product becomes small. Contributions are enhanced by small velocities, although that is not an issue with these cylindrical FSs that arise in these compounds, with near constant Fermi velocities around the FSs. ξ( q) has a trivial q -1 divergence at q →0 that is countered by vanishing matrix elements in physical properties involving such long wavelength momentum transfers. Fermi surface instabilities are more often analyzed in terms of the electronic susceptibility, which is the relevant response function, ( where M km,k n is a matrix element of exp(i q • r) between Bloch functions. Though matrix elements often are important, evaluations without matrix elements, corresponding to the "generalized susceptibility," are much more common. Peaks in the real part of χ 0 ( q) provide the positions of potential wavevector q instabilities. Structure in χ 0 ( q) arises from Fermi surface nesting as well as from other near-E F structure in the band structure, viz. the virtual bands that will be discussed below. Instabilities in the metallic phase, often phrased as instabilities of the Fermi surface, are characterized in terms of peaks in the real part of the electronic susceptibility. The nesting function defined above has its own separate importance. To first (linear) order in small ω the connection to the imaginary part χ 0 of the dynamical susceptibility (here matrix elements are set to unity) is χ 0 ( q, ω) = πωξ( q) + O(ω 2 ). ( Thus low energy dissipative processes occur where there is strong weight in ξ( q), in addition to the Drude interband absorption at small | q|. The behavior of ξ( q) in both compounds is dominated by the very strong peak precisely at Q. In several Febased pnictides a maximum at this wave vector also shows up in χ( q, ω = 0) but probably not with nesting as perfect as in this F compound, where Fig. Additional structure can be seen in ξ( q) that is difficult to see in the susceptibility. In 2D, a circular FS of radius k F gives rise to a characteristic divergence Figure Here we discuss magnetic energies and the basic features of the electronic structure of the SAFM phase in undoped CaFeAsH, and draw some parallels with related pnictides. The types of AFM order that are studied are described in Sec. II.B, some of which require a √ 2× √ 2×1 supercell (there are two Fe sites within the primitive cell). The energies of four of the simplest magnetic configurations relative to the nonmagnetic phase are presented in Table For FM alignment the moment is much smaller and the energy less favorable than for the AFM alignments. The smaller moments account qualitatively for the FM phase being less favorable. The SAFM state is most favorable by a large margin, 120 meV/Fe lower than the BSAFM phase. This lowest energy holds in spite of the SAFM phase having the same Fe spin moment of 1.92 μ B as does the NAFM case. The differences in Fe moments in the various phases is evidence that the magnetism has substantial itinerant character. For itinerant magnets the energy gain for magnetism is Im 2 /4, where I is the Hund's exchange coupling (also called Stoner I) and m is the moment. This behavior is not observed, arising TABLE I. Total energy difference, for CaFeAsH, of five magnetic phases including nonmagnetic (NM), ferromagnetic (FM), Néel AFM (NAFM), striped AFM (SAFM) and bi-striped AFM (BSAFM). The reference is the energy of the NM phase (∆E=E (A)F M -ENM ). The corresponding magnetic moment in the Fe sphere is given. possibly from non-linear effects but also that the moment may not be of the simplest itinerant type. For comparison, the SAFM moment of Fe is 2.18 μ B in CaFeAsF, 13% higher than in CaFeAsH. Thus the differences in electronic structure discussed above significantly affect the magnetic predictions in these compounds. In CaFeAsF, the reported experimental moment is 0.49 μ B , 23 less than 25% of the calculated value. This discrepancy follows the known substantial overestimate of the moment in these Fe-based materials by DFT calculations. To our knowledge, no experimental moment has been reported for CaFeAsH, so it is unclear whether the differences in band structure between the H and F compounds shows up experimentally. Figure The resulting electronic structure has noteworthy aspects. The majority states are filled (d 5 ). The minority states seem at first sight to have an expected e g -t 2g splitting, however it is more complex than that. Evidently the SAFM order affects substantially the Fe configuration, based on the loss of tetrahedral symmetry due to magnetic reconstruction of the electronic bonding. There are substantial peaks of minority d x 2 -y 2 states both at -2 eV and +1.5 eV. The main d xy peak is above E F but a noticeable fraction lies below E F . d xz is mostly above E F ; d yz is entirely below E F . The magnetic order thus has a considerable effect on the orbital occupations and thereby the electronic structure. Both La and Co provide electronic doping, however Co introduces changes directly into the Fe layer while La simply donates electrons. Here we analyze the differences in electronic structure between indirect (La doping) and direct (Co doping), The projected DOS curves of Fig. The 3D ellipsoid pocket remains in each of these cases. Because the velocity along k z is large, the extent of the ellipsoid along k z does not increase much, being larger around the waist and larger in the Co doping case. The nesting of electron and hole FSs is severely degraded by 25% doping, a change that is conventionally associated with the destruction of spin density wave order that enables superconductivity to emerge. Although Cooper pairing due to short-range AFM fluctuations that are encouraged by nesting provides the most common explanation for superconductivity in Fe pnictides, there is no longer great interest in details of degraded nesting and we do not provide ξ( q) for the doped materials. Fig. Density functional based methods have been applied to assess various aspects of the effect of Ca and H, versus La and O, on the underlying electronic structures of these 1111 compounds. Secondarily, the differences in electron doping, by La for Ca or by Co for Fe, have been modeled and analyzed. The isovalent system CaFeAs(H,F) has also been studied. The key feature introduced by H is an unusual band dispersing along k z , as pointed out previously, due to a Fe-As(p z )-H-As(p z )-Fe hopping path enabled by the hydrogen 1s orbital that is much less strongly bound than the corresponding 2p orbitals in the F compound. This peculiar band introduces an additional Fermi surface of three dimension character and ellipsoidal shape, something not appearing in other 1111 compounds including the isovalent F compound. Both compounds show very strong Fermi surface nesting at the expected (π, π, 0) wavevector. The cylindrical Fermi surfaces are different for the two compounds: circular for the F compound but two surfaces with different radii; not so circular for the H compound but nearly identical surfaces. The unusual band and extra Fermi surface has been discussed, briefly, in terms of the effect of an incipient band that could help to resolve the differences observed between these two compounds. The differences in orbital occupations in both the Fe and As atomic spheres in the H and F compounds has been quantified. It may be helpful in future to compare these isovalent substations with the results on H-doping of the 1111 class, as in LaFeAsO 1-x H x We expect that these several findings will contribute to investigations into the determination of what aspects of these differences are relevant to understand their superconducting distinctions. The observation of a lack of superconducting dome in the phase diagrams of both types of doping, taken at face value, indicates an indifference of superconductivity to details of the electronic structure that is difficult to comprehend, since many studies in Febased superconductors point to important effects due to small differences. We acknowledge useful discussions with X. H. Chen on their experimental data, and helpful comments from X. L. Yu, W. C. Bao, A. S. Botana, and S. Gangopad- The crystal symmetry across the CaFeAsF 1-x H x system is tetragonal P 4/nmm, comprised of alternating Ca 2 H 2 and Fe 2 As 2 layers as in Fe-based 1111 compounds.