We study the critical Josephson current flowing through a double quantum dot weakly coupled to two superconducting leads. We use analytical as well as numerical methods to investigate this setup in the limit of small and large bandwidth leads in all possible charging states, where we account for on-site interactions exactly. Our results provide clear signatures of nonlocal spin-entangled pairs, which support interpretations of recent experiments [Deacon, R. S. et al., Nat. Commun. 6, 7446 (2015)]. In addition, we find that the ground state with one electron on each quantum dot can undergo a tunable singlet-triplet phase transition in the regime where the superconducting gap in the leads is not too large, which gives rise to an additional new signature of nonlocal Cooper pair transport. Creating mobile spin-entangled electron pairs in solid state transport setups has been the subject of intensive research in recent years. Here, we analyze in detail the setup of Ref. 31 using both analytical and numerical tools. We thereby go beyond existing theoretical work on the proposed setup We further study a multilevel model numerically in which one of the QDs has an additional single-particle level, and show that this configuration gives a qualitatively good description of the experimental results of Ref. 31, assuming different parities for the tunneling matrix elements for the two levels on one QD. Finally, we present the analytical case of large superconducting gaps, where we can integrate out the superconducting leads obtaining an effective model for the DQD system only. This parameter regime corresponds to the limit where the nonlocal processes can be maximized by having, in addition, a charging energy much larger than the induced superconducting gap. Here, as expected, we obtain only a singlet ground state in the (1, 1) sector. We consider the geometry depicted in Fig. with the QD contributions the superconducting lead contributions and their tunnel coupling where the d iσ operators annihilate electrons localized on the QDs and where the c kνσ and the ψ νσ (x) operators annihilate spin-σ electrons in lead ν with momentum k or at position x, respectively. The normal-state dispersion in the leads is ε kν . We assume the two superconducting leads to be of the same material with the same superconducting energy gap ∆. Their superconducting phases φ ν are not equal if a finite supercurrent flows across the DQD structure but only the difference between the superconducting phases, ∆φ = φ L -φ R , is a gauge-invariant quantity, which enters the physical observables, and is conveniently absorbed into the tunnel couplings to the right lead, whereas the couplings to the left lead are strictly real. Furthermore, the behavior of the Hamiltonian, Eq. ( We will discuss the case in which both QDs are in the single-level and Coulomb-blockade regime where the level broadening due to the tunnel couplings to the leads, Γ νi = 2πN (ε F )|t νi | 2 with N (ε F ) the normal-state density of states at the Fermi level, is much smaller than the level spacing and than the Coulomb repulsion, Γ νi δε i , U i . Then the QDs have a well-defined charge (N 1 , N 2 ) except close to transport resonances [Fig. In the presence of interactions, there are several approaches that have been used to study transport through a DQD Josephson junction, including mean field, supported by the ground state of the system. We follow Ref. 45 and integrate out the superconducting leads, yielding the effective lead Hamiltonian and renormalized tunnel parameters t νi → tb νi . Thus, the Josephson junction is represented by a four-site superconducting molecule, which can be exactly diagonalized. Former studies using the zero-bandwidth approach in interacting Josephson junctions have proven to show qualitatively good agreement with mean-field calculations. This approach retains the essential features of the competition between pairing correlations and Kondo correlations occurring in the single-QD case. The numerical treatment by exact diagonalization has to be accompanied by a perturbative treatment to identify the physical processes giving rise to the critical current, in particular, to understand which features are attributable to nonlocal Cooper-pair transport. Furthermore perturbation theory is not restricted to the zerobandwidth approximation. We calculate the corrections to the ground-state energy of the isolated QDs due to their coupling to the superconducting leads in fourth order of t iν , which is the leading order of Cooper-pair transfer between the leads. To handle the large amount of processes available in fourth order we develop a diagrammatic scheme, the details of which are given in App. A. In the unperturbed ground state, there are no excitations in the leads and the QDs have a well-defined charging state (N 1 , N 2 ), where N i is the number of electrons on QD i. Each charging state is spin degenerate and can be realized by different quantum states, |α, β := |α QD1 |β QD2 , all of which are completely decoupled because the model conserves the z projection of the total spin, S z . The only exception are the states in the (1, 1) sector with S z = 0, where degenerate perturbation theory in the space spanned by the states |↑, ↓ and |↓, ↑ is required. Since the total spin is conserved, the degenerate subspace is diagonal in the basis of the nonlocal singlet and the nonlocal triplet, Spin-exchange processes, i.e., processes which swap the spins of the QDs, split the singlet and the triplet. Note that the spin triplets with S z = ±1 behave equivalently to |T by spin-rotation invariance. The terms in the perturbative expansion are local or nonlocal, where local processes involve only one of the QDs whereas nonlocal processes involve both QDs. Furthermore, we call all processes Josephson processes, in which entire Cooper pairs are removed from or added to the superconducting leads due to two single-particle tunnel events. In processes which are not Josephson processes as many carriers are added to each lead as are removed, so we call them cotunneling processes. where the superscript denotes whether the correction is due to local (loc) or nonlocal (nl) processes and the subscripts denote whether the correction comes from a cotunneling (CT) or from a Josephson (J) process. For local processes, the second subscript denotes the QD which is involved in the process whereas for nonlocal processes, the second subscript denotes whether the process is a spin-exchanging (se) or spin-conserving (sc) process. The spin-exchange contributions are nonzero only in the (1, 1) sector. In the (1, 1) sector, Eq. ( In the charge sectors with a unique ground state, the critical current is given directly by the amplitude of the phase-dependent corrections of the ground-state energy, which, in perturbation theory, are proportional to cos(∆φ). The amplitude is commonly referred to as the (phase-independent) Josephson energy E J and the critical current is proportional to the Josephson energy, I c ∝ E J . Since E J decomposes into local and nonlocal contributions, so does I c . The critical phase is always at ∆φ = ±π/2, where ∂ ∆φ cos(∆φ) is maximized. In the (1, 1)-charge sector, the situation is more complicated. Both the energy of the singlet state and the energy of the triplet state, cf. Eq. ( In Fig. Intuitively, one could expect a singlet ground state in the (1, 1)-charge sector, which could be justified by noting that only the nonlocal singlet can tunnel into the leads to hybridize with the Cooper pairs in the s-wave superconductors and lower its energy. However, in addition to this second-order Cooper-pair tunneling process, there are genuine fourth-order terms with additional intermediate single-particle excitations in the superconducting leads. They cannot be decomposed into two Cooper-pair tunnel events and may favor the triplet ground state. The splitting of the nonlocal singlet and the nonlocal triplet is given by E nl CT,se + E nl J,se (∆φ). Since the superconductors are identical, the energy corrections can be split into a matrix element M nl/loc CT/J,se/sc and the tunnel couplings to the leads. Since we associate the parity P and the phase difference ∆φ to the tunnel couplings t νi , FIG. the matrix element is then independent of either. Each nonlocal process contributing to E nl J,se (∆φ) can involve the same superconducting lead twice or both leads once. Summing all combinations we obtain where we find M nl J,se > 0, such that E nl J,se is strictly positive and favors the singlet ground state. The details of the calculation of the matrix elements are given in App. A. With the same arguments, we find so the sign of E nl CT,se is determined solely by M nl CT,se . This time, however, the perturbative analysis of M nl CT,se reveals that processes of both signs exist. Processes in which the electrons are exchanged via electronlike excitations in the leads [Fig. For the existence of a triplet ground state the Josephson processes play a minor role as they are suppressed if ∆φ is chosen such that P cos ∆φ = -1. The nonlocal triplet is thus driven by the sign of E nl CT,se , which is ultimately determined by the microscopic parameters. The influence of ∆ on the parameter space in which there may be a triplet ground state can be estimated. The matrix element of each process in the perturbative expansion is weighted by the product of the reciprocal virtual excitation energies (cf. App. A). In electronlike processes, which favor the singlet ground state, all virtual states involve excitations on the QDs. They can be estimated by where ε DQD is a typical DQD-excitation energy. By using electronlike and holelike excitations, however, it is possible to restore the initial DQD state at the expense of two virtual excitations in the leads. These processes, which favor the triplet ground state, are hence weighted by If ∆ is comparable or smaller than ε DQD , the between triplet-favoring and singlet-favoring processes, 1 + ε DQD /∆, becomes large and a triplet ground state may emerge. In general, second-order Cooper-pair tunneling restores the ground state of the superconducting leads in one intermediate virtual state, whereas the leads are excited in all three intermediate states of genuine fourthorder processes. So, genuine fourth-order processes have an additional suppression by ∆ -1 compared to secondorder Cooper-pair processes. Fig. Both the singlet ground state and the triplet ground state can support a finite supercurrent. In the singlet phase, the supercurrent tends to be higher because there is an additional transport channel where the two electrons of a Cooper pair are simultaneously added to or removed from the DQD. In the triplet ground state, this channel is blocked by the Pauli exclusion principle. At the resonance near ε 1 = 0 in Fig. We emphasize that the singlet-triplet transition of the ground state in the (1, 1) sector, realized in a large parameter window, leads to a kink in the critical current as a function of ε 2 . This kink appears because, in the singlet phase, different processes contribute to the critical current than in the triplet phase and, hence, the dependency on the on-site energies changes across the singlettriplet transition. Since the distinction between triplet and phases results from phase coherent and nonlocal exchange, its observation in the critical current is a clear sign of nonlocal Cooper-pair transport. At odd tunnel parity, P = -1, there is no singlettriplet transition and hence no signature of nonlocal transport in the critical current. The other way around, if two neighboring resonance peaks belonging to the same level of a QD decay symmetrically in the offresonant regime between them, the level has odd parity. An asymmetric decay may be caused by a singlet-triplet transition and indicates even parity. In order to make contact to the experiments presented in Ref. 31, where multiple QD levels were probed, we include one extra level in the model, e.g., on QD 2. In this way, we can study the evolution of the critical current along four consecutive resonances by continuously tuning ε 2 . This scenario requires the substitution of H 2 in Eq. ( where δ is the energy separation between the QD levels, and U ij the Coulomb energy coming from the interaction of the occupation of the levels i and j on the second In the absence of nonlocal transport, the three curves are expected to differ only by a constant. Instead, when approaching the resonance, ε1 → 0, the critical current grows more strongly at the peaks and less strongly between the peaks. Within our model this behavior is clearly attributable to nonlocal coherent transport and it was already observed experimentally. Choosing the measurement presented in Fig. Nevertheless, the model is clearly capable of reproducing the qualitative features observed in the experiment when choosing the appropriate parameters. In Fig. Finally, we comment shortly on the regime in which nonlocal transport is dominant, similar to the Cooperpair-splitter regime of superconductor-normal junctions proposed in Ref. 1. In this regime, the superconducting gap is significantly larger than the on-site energies and than the tunnel couplings, ∆ ν ε j , t μj and excitations in the superconducting leads are highly unfavorable. This suppresses both the cotunneling contributions which allow for a triplet ground state and the sequential Josephson processes which enable a supercurrent to flow in the triplet ground state. As a consequence, there is never a triplet ground state in the limit of large ∆ ν . When the QDs are brought close to the (0, 0)-(1, 1) point or to the (1, 1)-(2, 2) point in the stability diagram, the only remaining transport channel is nonlocal, i.e., the Cooper pairs have to be split: simultaneous transport of FIG. a pair through a single QD is suppressed by the Coulomb repulsion U i and sequential transport of single electrons originating from the same Cooper pair through the QDs is suppressed by the superconducting gap ∆ ν . In this situation, the model can be simplified further by completely integrating out the superconducting leads where ∆ij is the effective amplitude to inject a local (i = j) or a nonlocal (i = j) Cooper pair and t describes cotunneling. The parity enters via P ν = 1 if ν = L and P ν = P if ν = R. Because there are no sequential Cooper-pair transport processes as shown in Fig. The ground state, however, is (1, 1) only if ε i < 0 and ε i < 2ε i + U i . This rules out all configurations except ε 1 = ε 2 = 0 and ε i = -U i . Two more nonlocal resonances are found similarly in the sector of odd total occupation when ε 1,2 = 0 and simultaneously ε 2,1 = -U In this work, we have considered the setup of a doublequantum-dot Josephson junction. We have used exact diagonalization and perturbation theory in the tunneling from the quantum dots to the superconducting leads in order to calculate the critical current of the junction. We included all possible occupations of the quantum-dot levels for various values of the quantum-dot level energies including finite on-site Coulomb repulsion. Depending on the parity of the quantum-dot levels, we discovered a nonlocal (one electron per quantum dot) singlettriplet ground-state transition (at total even parity) as a function of the quantum-dot level energies for a large parameter window when the superconducting gaps are smaller than or comparable to the quantum-dot energy scale. This transition becomes visible as a kink in the critical current with an associated asymmetric line shape between resonances, which could serve as a new sign of coherent Cooper-pair splitting. We consistently find this physics in zero-bandwidth approximation, where each superconducting lead is modeled as a single site with pairing interaction, as well as in the wide-band limit of continuous open leads. Regarding recent experiments where E η is the energy of the unperturbed state η and H ij is the matrix element for transitions between states i and j. If the unperturbed ground state is unique, H If the spin of the electron on a QD is changed in a spinexchange process, another sign may occur. Changing the spin of a QD can be done either by removing the electron and filling the QD with an electron of opposite spin (intermediate occupation number 0) or by adding another electron and removing the first electron afterwards (intermediate occupation number 2). In the second case, an additional exchange of fermions is necessary when re- To determine the sign of the processes on the DQD, we can thus summarize the following rules: • Draw the diagram. • Count the number of permutations which would be required to arrange all vertices of QD 1 to the left of all vertices of QD 2. If it is odd, add a sign. • Count the spin flips via a local singlet (intermediate occupation number 2). Each contributes a fermionexchange sign. To determine the contributions due to the lead process, we construct an auxiliary diagram by collapsing the two lines of the QDs onto one. These auxiliary diagrams are the third horizontal line in Figs. where ε is the normal-state energy of the lead electron measured from the Fermi level. With dispersionful leads such as in the wide-band limit, ε depends on an internal quantum number, e.g., ε k , which is summed over. Note that the order of the spins in the superconducting correlation functions is important since the order in which the electrons are put into the Cooper pair condensate matters. The lead part of the matrix element can thus be obtained by following these rules: • Collapse the two-line diagram to the auxiliary diagram. • Count the number of line crossings. Each crossing contributes a fermion-exchange sign. • Write down the lead correlations following Eq. (A2). Take care of fermion-exchange signs that might occur due to the spin-order of Cooper pairs. Use ε for one lead line and ε for the other line. Finally, we need to determine the energies of the virtual states. The corresponding energies of the DQD can be read off from the two-line diagram. The energies of the three virtual states can be found by looking at the states in the three spaces between the dashed lines in the two line diagrams. Each lead line contributes an additional energy √ ε 2 + ∆ 2 and ε 2 + ∆ 2 , for the two pairs of tunneling events respectively. By drawing all diagrams and inserting the corresponding matrix elements and the energies into Eq. (A1), the fourth-order corrections of the ground state energy can be constructed explicitly. All of the diagrams of the spinexchange contributions M nl CT/J,se are shown in Fig. 