We use neutron scattering to study spin excitations in single crystals of LiFe0.88Co0.12As, which is located near the boundary of the superconducting phase of LiFe1-xCoxAs and exhibits non-Fermi-liquid behavior indicative of a quantum critical point. By comparing spin excitations of LiFe0.88Co0.12As with a combined density functional theory (DFT) and dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) calculation, we conclude that wave-vector correlated low energy spin excitations are mostly from the dxy orbitals, while high-energy spin excitations arise from the dyz and dxz orbitals. Unlike most iron pnictides, the strong orbital selective spin excitations in LiFeAs family cannot be described by anisotropic Heisenberg Hamiltonian. While the evolution of low-energy spin excitations of LiFe1-xCoxAs are consistent with electron-hole Fermi surface nesting condition for the dxy orbital, the reduced superconductivity in LiFe0.88Co0.12As suggests that Fermi surface nesting conditions for the dyz and dxz orbitals are also important for superconductivity in iron pnictides. Superconductivity in iron pnictides occurs near the vicinity of an antiferromagnetic (AF) instability In most iron pnictides, Fe ions are in a d 6 configuration with five same-spin electrons in the e g and t 2g orbitals, and one remaining opposite-spin electron fluctuating among all the d orbitals, due to the large Hund's rule coupling, although there is a considerable (but smaller) crystal-field splitting between the e g and t 2g orbitals In this Letter, we present inelastic neutron scattering study and a combined density functional theory (DFT) and dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) calculation of spin excitations in LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As. While low-energy spin excitations in LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As indeed become commensurate consistent with improved electron-hole Fermi surface nesting condition for the d xy orbitals [Fig. Our inelastic neutron scattering measurements on LiFeAs and LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As were carried out at the wide Angular-Range Chopper Spectrometer (ARCS) and Cold Neutron Chopper Spectrometer (CNCS) at Spallation Neutron Source, Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Single crystals of LiFeAs (3.95-g) and LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As (7.58-g) are grown using flux method with 7 Li isotope. We define the momentum transfer Q in three-dimensional reciprocal space in Å-1 as We first compare low energy spin excitations in pure LiFeAs (T c ≈ 18 K) and LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As (T c ≈ 4 K). Figure To determine the spin excitation dispersions of LiFe 0.88 Co 0.12 As, we made a series of cuts on images of spin excitations in Fig. In iron pnictide such as BaFe 2 As 2 , spin wave dispersions can be well described by an anisotropic Heisenberg Hamiltonian It is well known that electronic correlations in iron pnictides depend sensitively on the Fe pnictogen distance owing to the kinetic frustration mechanism of the Fe 3d electrons, and are strongly enhanced with increasing Fepnictogen distance -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 Im χ(q, ω=200 meV) 88 Co 0.12 As, the observed commensurate spin excitations are consistent with this picture, and suggest that low-energy spin excitations are mostly driven from the d xy orbitals. This is consistent with the random phase approximation (RPA) calculations using ARPES deter-