The exotic normal state of iron chalcogenide superconductor FeSe, which exhibits vanishing magnetic order and possesses an electronic nematic order, triggered extensive explorations of its magnetic ground state. To understand its novel properties, we study the ground state of a highly frustrated spin-1 system with bilinearbiquadratic interactions using unbiased large-scale density matrix renormalization group. Remarkably, with increasing biquadratic interactions, we find a paramagnetic phase between Néel and stripe magnetic ordered phases. We identify this phase as a candidate of nematic quantum spin liquid by the compelling evidences, including vanished spin and quadrupolar orders, absence of lattice translational symmetry breaking, and a persistent non-zero lattice nematic order in the thermodynamic limit. The established quantum phase diagram natually explains the observations of enhanced spin fluctuations of FeSe in neutron scattering measurement and the phase transition with increasing pressure. This identified paramagnetic phase provides a new possibility to understand the novel properties of FeSe. In spin-1/2 antiferromagnets, the interplay between quantum fluctuations and geometric frustration may generate exotic paramagnetic states such as quantum spin liquid In recent studies on iron-based superconductors which contains further-neighbor interactions and is also considered to be relevant to other iron superconductors Semiclassical calculations for this model find various magnetic ordered phases to interpret the observed magnetic orders in iron pnictides and FeTe To accurately determine the phase diagram of such a strongly frustrated system and uncover new quantum phases, unbiased studies are highly desired. In this article, we study the ground state of the frustrated spin-1 model (1) on the square lattice with first-(J 1 , K 1 ) and second-neighbor (J 2 , K 2 ) interactions using unbiased density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) liquid by observing vanished spin and quadrupolar orders, no lattice translational symmetry breaking, and non-zero lattice nematic order in the thermodynamic limit. The neighboring stripe phase can naturally explain the enhanced stripe spin fluctuations in neutron scattering measurement of FeSe In our DMRG calculations, we study the rectangular cylinder (RC) system with periodic boundary in the y direction and open boundaries in the x direction. We denote the cylinder as RCL y -L x , where L y and L x are the number of sites in the y and x directions; the width of the cylinder is L = L y (see the inset of the RC4-4 cylinder in Fig. First of all, we show the biquadratic coupling dependence of magnetic order parameters on the RC6-12 cylinder in Fig. To further study magnetic order, we calculate spin struc- ture factor m 2 ( q) = 1 i,j S i • S j e i q•( ri-rj ) (N is the total numer of sites) from the spin correlations S i • S j of the L × L sites in the middle of the RCL-2L cylinder, which efficiently reduces edge effects of open cylinder Since biquadratic interaction is present in the system, we investigate the quadrupolar order Q i In Fig. ri-rj ) defined in a way similar to m 2 ( q). In Fig. Next, we study lattice symmetry breaking by measuring the nearest-neighbor J 1 bond energy S i • S j . In Fig. Importantly, one can see a strong nematicity between horizontal and vertical bond energy. We define a bond nematic order as σ 1 ≡ S i • S i+x -S i • S i+ŷ with the bond energy in the bulk of cylinder. Note that here the bond energy is not translationally invariant only for few columns on the edge. σ 1 versus 1/L is presented in Fig. We remark that the finite nematic order observed in the intermediate phase is not induced by cylinder geometry but intrinsic. For the geometry induced nematic order such as the order in the neighboring Néel phase without a C 4 symmetry breaking, one can see that the order decays very fast to vanish with growing cylinder width, in contrast to the scaling behavior in the intermediate phase. As a numerical method, we would like to point out that for detecting lattice symmetry breaking, edge bond pinning has been shown effective in quantum Monte Carlo The vanishing magnetic order and spontaneous lattice rotational symmetry breaking suggest the intermediate phase as a possible AKLT state As a supplementary of our finite-size calculations, we also test the tilted cylinder (TC) that is obtained by a π/4 rotation of the rectangular lattice. A schematic figure of the TC cylinder is shown in Fig. First of all, we calculate the spin order on the TC cylinder. We find the consistent (0, π) and (π, π) magnetic orders in the small K 2 and large K 2 regimes, respectively. However, in the intermediate K 2 regime where we find a non-magnetic TC4-12 cylinder FIG. To understand the different results on the two geometries, we compare the bulk energy on both systems. As shown in Fig. Motivated by the exotic nematic paramagnetic normal state of iron chalcogenide superconductor FeSe, we study a spin-1 J 1 -J 2 -K 1 -K 2 system on the square lattice using density matrix renormalization group. By implementing spin rotational SU (2) symmetry, we study cylinder geometry with system width up to 10 legs, which significantly reduces finite-size effects of order parameter scaling. With increased biquadratic interactions K 1 , K 2 , we find a paramagnetic phase between stripe and Néel magnetic ordered phases, which preserves all spin rotational and lattice translational symmetries but breaks lattice rotational symmetry. The nematic paramagnetic state in this J 1 -J 2 -K 1 -K 2 system provides a new possibility to understand the magnetic ground state of FeSe. The current findings naturally match the observations of FeSe in neutron scattering To demonstrate the stability of the intermediate phase, we also extend the studied parameter regime to J 2 = 0.75 and 0.8. Following the setup for J 2 = 0.7, we fix K 1 = 0.0 and tune K 2 . In Figs. Fig. We briefly discuss the origin of biquadratic coupling in our model. Generally speaking, there are two different mechanisms to generate biquadratic interaction. One is spin-phonon coupling or lattice distortion effect. The other one is microscopic description of the isotropic non-Heisenberg Hamiltonian extracted at the fourth order of perturbation from a Hubbard Hamiltonian. As a phenomenological origin, one might think of the coupling between spin and lattice degrees of freedom that results from the exchange integrals on the atomic positions in a crystal. Since the exchange integrals are linear functions of the displacement coordinates, while the elastic energy of the deformation shows quadratic behaviour, a frustrated system may gain energy by distorting the lattice. Alternatively, the competition between the lattice distortion and the associated energy gain may lead to a quadratic coupling. This effect is discussed in detail for the case of a single tetrahedral molecule with four spins where α is the spin-lattice coupling constant. Considering δr ij as independent parameters, we may integrate them out and find an effective spin Hamiltonian: where K = -Jα/2κ is a dimensionless constant. Here, based on the bond-phonon model, we get a quadratic interaction in addition to the original Heisenberg spin exchange coupling, despite that this derivation is a semi-classic description and the Hund's rule coupling as where the Hund coupling ensures that two electrons forming a spin triplet if they occupying different orbitals on the same site. To derive an effective Hamilitonan, let us first consider the limit of strong interaction defined by U = 0, J H = 0 and t = 0. For one-site, the ground-state manifold is spanned by configurations with two electrons on each site, one in each orbital, and the two electrons of a given site forming a triplet. Thus, the spin-1 model is likely suitable to describe the ironbased superconductor, which also matches the very recent neutral scattering measurements on FeSe samples where S i is spin-1 operator and P S=0 projects to the spin single state: Finally, we get the bilinear-biquadratic exchange Hamiltonian as For an isolated Fe atom, the intraband interaction U and inter-band interaction V are similar in magnitude, while Hund coupling J H is an order smaller. Thus, a reasonable estimate is J > 0 and K < 0 for iron-based superconductor. This model can be also extended to the next-nearest-neighbors, thus we have the J 1 -J 2 -K 1 -K 2 model as the start point, (S i • S j ) 2 .(C11)