Electrons embedded in liquid 3 He form mesoscopic bubbles with radii large compared to the interatomic distance between 3 He atoms, voids of N bubble ≈ 200 3 He atoms, generating a negative ion with a large effective mass that scatters thermal excitations. Electron bubbles in chiral superfluid 3 He-A also provide a local probe of the ground state. We develop scattering theory of Bogoliubov quasiparticles by negative ions embedded in 3 He-A that incorporates the broken symmetries of 3 He-A, particularly broken symmetries under time-reversal and mirror symmetry in a plane containing the chiral axis l. Multiple scattering by the ion potential, combined with branch conversion scattering by the chiral order parameter, leads to a spectrum of Weyl Fermions bound to the ion that support a mass current circulating the electron bubble -the mesoscopic realization of chiral edge currents in superfluid 3 He-A films. A consequence is that electron bubbles embedded in 3 He-A acquire angular momentum, L ≈ -(N bubble /2)h l, inherited from the chiral ground state. We extend the scattering theory to calculate the forces on a moving electron bubble, both the Stokes drag and a transverse force, F W = e c v × B W , defined by an effective magnetic field, B W ∝ l, generated by the scattering of thermal quasiparticles off the spectrum of Weyl Fermions bound to the moving ion. The transverse force is responsible for the anomalous Hall effect for electron bubbles driven by an electric field reported by the RIKEN group. Our results for the scattering cross section, drag and transverse forces on moving ions are compared with experiments, and shown to provide a quantitative understanding of the temperature dependence of the mobility and anomalous Hall angle for electron bubbles in normal and superfluid 3 He-A. We also discuss our results in relation to earlier work on the theory of negative ions in superfluid 3 He. A unique feature of the chiral phase of superfluid The angular momentum of bulk to the boundary on the scale of ξ ∆ = hv f /2∆ ≈ 100 nm. The angular momentum resulting from the edge current circulating the hole is, L z = -(N hole /2) h, which is opposite to the chirality of the ground state Cooper pairs, and with magnitude given by N hole = n π R 2 w, the number of We begin with the structure of the electron bubble in the normal Fermi liquid phase of We point out that previous theories for the mobility of ions in superfluid Our formulation of the transport theory correctly accounts for the chiral symmetry of superfluid 3 He-A, which is at the root of the anomalous Hall effect for electrons in Electrons experience a repulsive barrier ≈ 1 eV at the surface of liquid Helium. where γ = 0.15 erg/cm 2 is the surface tension of 3 He, The bubble radius is large compared to the Fermi wavelength of It is useful to refer to the dimensionless ratio, k f R, which for the infinte barrier limit is k f R = 18.67 at P = 0. Models for the confining potential with a finite pressure-dependent U 0 ∼ 1 eV yield a slightly smaller radius of k f R ≈ 16.74. A different measure of the size of the electron bubble may be obtained from the scattering of where σ tr N is the transport cross section for elastic scattering of quasiparticles off an electron bubble, and is the differential cross-section defined by the on-shell tmatrix for normal-state quasiparticles with effective mass m * scattering off a static electron bubble. The full t-matrix obeys the Lippmann-Schwinger equation, where G R N is the retarded propagator for Fermions in the normal Fermi liquid. At temperatures k B T E f the properties of is the lowenergy quasiparticle propagator with residue a, and G R,high N is the high-energy, incoherent propagator. The latter renormalizes the bare , for elastic scattering of low-energy quasiparticles with energy E, and momenta where For a spherically symmetric electron bubble the quasiparticle-ion interaction and the t-matrix can be expanded as, u( k , k) = ∑ l≥0 (2l + 1) u l P l ( k • k), and similarly for t R N ( k , k), where {P l (x) | l = 0, 1, 2, . . .} is the complete set of Legendre polynomials. Using the convolution integral, The structure of the t-matrix can be encoded in the scattering phases shifts, δ l , defined in terms of the strength of the quasiparticle-ion potential in each angular momentum channel, u l , and the density of states, N f ; tan δ l = -πN f u l , with the t-matrix expressed as, FIG. Integrating Eq. ( Similarly, the transport cross section is determined by the set of scattering phase shifts that parametrize the quasiparticleion potential, B. Hard-Sphere Scattering of Quasiparticles The structure of the electron bubble as a spherical void of displaced where j l (x) and n l (x) are order l spherical Bessel functions of the first and second kind, respectively. Figure (2) shows the set of phase shifts for a hard sphere with a ratio of radius to Fermi wavelength of k f R = 11.17. Note that for channels with l k f R, the phase shift decreases rapidly to zero. The radius is determined by requiring the transport cross-section computed for the hard-sphere potential reproduce the measured normal-state ion mobility according to Eqs. ( The structure of an electron bubble in Fermionic excitations of superfluid where ∆(p) is the mean-field pairing potential (order parameter) responsible for particle-hole coherence of the Fermionic excitations, and for branch conversion scattering between particle-like and hole-like Bogoliubov quasiparticles. Note that p = -ih∇, 1 is the unit matrix in spin space, and σ x is the Pauli matrix describing equal-spin pairing state (ESP) of Cooper pairs with spin projections S x = ±1; equivalently, the Cooper pairs have zero spin projection along ẑ. The chiral axis l for A-phase Cooper pairs is also along ẑ. Thus, the 4 × 4 equation splits into a pair of two-component equations for Ψ ↑ = (u ↑ , 0, 0, v ↑ ) T and Ψ ↓ = (0, u ↓ , v ↓ , 0) T . The scattering states are Bogoliubov quasiparticles in homogeneous where the particle and hole amplitudes are given by where is the excitation energy for Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The spinors, |Ψ 1,kσ , are the particlelike states with ξ k > 0 and group velocity ∇ k E k > 0, while |Ψ 2,kσ are the hole-like states with ξ k < 0 and ∇ k E k < 0. Note that the winding number of the Cooper pairs is imprinted as a relative phase between the particle-and hole like amplitudes in Eq. (14). The causal propagator is the retarded Green's function of Bogoliubov's equations, ε 1 -H S G R S = 1, with ε = E + iη (η → 0 + ), which for the bulk excitations in the homogeneous A-phase is given by Note that G R S (k, E) is restricted to the low energy region of the Fermi surface where the normal-state is well described by long-lived quasiparticles. The corresponding Nambu matrix for the normal-state propagator, includes both the particle-and hole propagators. The electron bubble introduces a strong, short-range potential that scatters Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The t-matrix is given by the Lippmann-Schwinger equation, which becomes a 4 × 4 Nambu matrix whose elements define the transition amplitudes for scattering of Bogoliubov particles and holes, including branch conversion, i.e. Andreev scatteirng, is the Nambu matrix for the ion potential, and G R S is the exact propagator in the presence of the local potential of the ion. For an ion with small cross-section on the scale of the size of Cooper pairs, we are justified in replacing G R S → G R S , i.e. the bulk propagator in the absence of the ion given by Eq. ( The normal state t-matrix can be expressed in terms of the quasiparticle t-matrix, and has the diagonal form in Nambu space, The ground state of where (θ , φ ) [(θ , φ )] are spherical coordinates of k [ k ] in momentum space, with u ≡ cos θ and u ≡ cos θ . The func-tions Θ m l (cos θ ) are spherical harmonics with the phase winding removed, i.e. Y m l (θ , φ ) = Θ m l (cos θ ) e imφ . For elastic scattering of Bogoliubov quasiparticles we can reduce Eq. ( where the propagators in Eq. ( The corresponding normal-state quasiclassical propagator is g R N (k, E) = -iπ 1. For scattering off an electron bubble in 3 He-A the quasiclassical t-matrix reduces to a set of 4 × 4 matrix equations for scattering amplitudes, t m a for Nambu components, a = 1, 2, 3, 4, for each angular momentum quantum number, m ∈ {0 ± 1, ±2, . . .}. In particular, we parametrize T R S as The prefactors (-1) m in Eq. ( The factors of exp(±iφ ) in the off-diagonal terms reflect the phase winding of the order parameter. This parametrization reduces the matrix integral equation to a set of coupled one-dimensional integral equations for t m a (u , u), where Note that t m 1 (u , u) is the scattering amplitude for quasiparticle excitations with angular momentum projection m, while t m 4 (u , u) is the corresponding quasi-hole amplitude. Branch conversion scattering, generated by the anomalous propagator, F R ( k, ε), is given by the amplitudes t m 2 (u , -u) (hole → particle) and t m 3 (-u , u) (particle → hole). Multiple scattering couples these amplitudes in pairs, {t m 1 ,t m 3 } and {t m 2 ,t m 4 } as indicated in Eqs. (25-26) and Eqs. (27-28). The sets of equations are solved numerically. In Sec. (IV) the solution to the t-matrix is used to calculate the differential cross-section for the scattering of Bogoliubov quasiparticles off the electron bubble, and from that the forces on electron bubbles moving in response to an external electric field. We first use the t-matrix to calculate the spectrum of chiral Fermions bound to the electron bubble. The asymmetry in the spectrum with respect to the orbital quantum number is responsible for the ground state current and angular momentum bound to the electron bubble. The Nambu Green's function determines the local density of states, where the trace is over both particle-hole and spin space, and G R S (r , r; E) is the retarded Green's function in the presence of an electron bubble. The low-energy Nambu Green's function for quasiparticles and pairs in the presence of the ion potential can be expressed in terms of the bulk propagator and the quasiparticle-ion tmatrix, For energies |E| E f we can evaluate the t-matrix and propagators in the quasiclassical approximation and obtain an explicit expression for the local density of states (LDOS). More detailed spectral information is obtained by resolving the LDOS in angular momentum channels. The reduction of the t-matrix as a sum over amplitudes with well defined angular momentum projection implies a similar chiral decomposition of the LDOS, where N 0 (E) is the bulk density of states in superfluid and δ N m (r, E), obtained from Eqs. ( where u = cos θ and u = cos θ in momentum space, r = (r, θ , φ) is the spatial coordiate in spherical coordinates with v = cos θ , and the matrix elements, K m ll , are given in terms of spherical Bessel functions, the intermediate propagator and the elements of the t-matrix (see App. B for details leading to Eq. 37), The BTRP symmetry of the order parameter ∆( k) implies that Andreev scattering involves transitions between states with m and m ± 1. This mixing of channels is clarified by resolving the LDOS in the orbital angular momentum index m. Here it is worth noting that the sum over m in Eq. ( Equation ( (3) and ( The spectrum of chiral Fermions bound to the electron bubble in The current circulating the electron bubble comes from the tmatrix term in Eq. ( where ε n = (2n + 1)πk B T are Matsubara frequencies, and the Matsubara Green's function is related to the retarded and advanced Green's functions by analytic continuation, 45 After Fourier-transforming Eq. ( We calculate the current from the propagator, G M S (k , k; ε n ), by analityic contiuation of the t-matrix, T M S (r , r; ε n ), which satisfies the system of Eqs. ( which also allows us to express the result for the current as a sum over ε n > 0. The current is purely azimuthal, j(r, θ , φ ) = j φ (r, θ )e φ (see App. (C)), with j φ (r, θ ) given by where the functions κ m l l (u , u, iε n ) are analytically continued to the Matsubara energies, ε → iε n . The current circulating the electron bubble is shown in Fig. (5) for angular positions on a sphere of radius r = 30 k -1 f ≈ 3.82 nm, i.e. in the near vicinity of the electron bubble with hard sphere radius R = 11.17 k -1 f ≈ 1.42 nm. Note that the axial current flow is opposite to the chiralty of the ground state Cooper pairs for all polar angles, and the current vanishes in the direction of the chiral axis, i.e. along the nodal points of the order parameter. The direction of the current flow about the bubble agrees with our expectation based on the direction of the edge current for a macroscopic hole, i.e. for a locally translational invariant boundary, as illustrated in Fig. (1). , calculated for the electron bubble with hard sphere radius of k f R = 11.17 and temperature T = 0.5T c . The current develops sharply from the bubble radius, then decays rapidly for r > R. Quantum oscillations on the Fermi wavelength scale are evident at short distances. Inset: The current decays exponentially, j φ ,av ∼ -e -r/ξ 0 /(k f r) 2 , at distances greater than the coherence length, ξ 0 = 608.7 k -1 f ; j φ ,av is the quasiclassical envelope obtained by averaging j φ (r) over a Fermi wavelength as in Eq. 40. The current density varies with radial distance from the edge of the electron bubble as shown in Fig. (6). Note that the current is large on mesoscopic length scales, R < r ξ 0 , and decays very rapidly for k f r 15. Quantum oscillations on the scale of the Fermi wavelength are evident at short distances. For r ξ 0 the current density is small and continues to decay exponentially on the scale of the coherence length as shown in the inset of Fig. (6). The confinement of the current near the edge of the bubble endows the electron bubble with an angular momentum obtained by integrating the angular momentum density from the circulating edge current, where the lower limit is set by the vanishing of j φ for r ≤ R. Recalling our result for the angular momentum generated by edge currents circulating a macroscopic hole of radius R ξ 0 in a thin where N bubble is the number of 1. Already at k f R = 25, which corresponds to R/ξ 0 ≈ 0.04, the deviation from the macroscopic scaling result is only ≈ 7%. The inset of Fig. (7) shows the temperature dependence of L z for the electron bubble, scaling as |∆(T )| 2 ∼ |T -T c | in the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) limit. Application of a d.c. electric field accelerates the electron bubble to a terminal velocity v = ↔ μ • E, where the mobility, ↔ μ, is determined by forces acting on the moving electron bubble. At finite temperature the mobility is limited by the "wind" of thermal quasiparticles scattering off the moving electron bubble. In the normal phase of The chiral axis is a reflection of broken time-reversal symmetry (T) and broken mirror symmetry (Π) in a plane containing the chiral axis l. The generalization of the mobility for the isotropic B-phase to The off-diagonal component, μ xy , is allowed by axial rotation symmetry and chiral symmetry, C = T × Π, but vanishes if the ground state is separately invariant under mirror symmetry, Π, in a plane containing the chiral axis l. This would be the case for a Planar phase of More generally, for any field orientation, the steady state ion velocity is given by This steady state result for the velocity arises from the balance between the Coulomb force, F E = eE, and the quasiparticle force, , and has the same structure as the mobility tensor, η i j = η ⊥ (δ i j -li l j ) + η || li l j + η xy ε i jk lk . Theoretically, we determine the force on a moving ion, i.e. the Stokes tensor. The components of the mobility are then given by the inversion formulas, A. Quasiparticles Forces on an Electron Bubble We formulate the microscopic theory for the forces acting on a moving electron bubble due to scattering by thermal quasiparticles in the chiral A phase of Our analysis is close to that of Baym et al. for the ion mobility in In what follows we derive results for the scattering cross section and forces on a negative ion moving in superfluid where h(kk ) is the momentum transferred to the ion by scattering of a quasiparticle from k → k , f k is the probability that the incident state k is occupied, (1f k ) is the probability that the final state k is unoccupied, and Γ v (k , k) is the transition rate of scattering of quasiparticles by the ion moving with velocity v. In the low velocity limit the forces are linear in v. Generalization of the theory presented here to higher velocities when inelastic scattering and non-linear velocity dependence becomes important is outside the scope of this report, but can be formulated as a generalization of the theory of Josephson and Lekner for the dynamics of electrons in normal To linearize Eq. (55) in the ion velocity we follow Baym et al. In this case the net momentum transfer is zero. We then subtract zero from Eq. ( The momentum transfer to the ion is a sum over all incident and final state momenta. For every transition, k → k , there is a mirror scattering event, k → k, that contributes to the net transfer of momentum to the ion. In order to isolate the scattering events responsibile for the anomalous Hall mobility it is convenient to symmetrize the right-hand side of Eq. ( A key point is that the phase space factors for allowed transitions -the terms in square brackets -are already linear in the ion velocity v. Thus, we evaluate the transition rate, Γ v , in the static limit, Γ v (k , k) → Γ(k , k), with the latter given by Fermi's golden rule, where W (k , k) is the transition rate for Bogoliubov quasiparticles, defined by the Bogoliubov-Nambu spinors in Eqs. ( The result for the scattering rate for Bogoliubov quasiparticles is a sum over the possible elastic scattering events between Bogoliubov particle-like (1) and hole-like (2) branches of the excitation spectrum: 1 → 1, 2 → 1, 1 → 2, and 2 → 2. Expanding the Doppler-shifted Fermi functions in Eq. ( where f = [exp(E/k B T ) + 1] -1 and we used the fact that the momenta are restricted to, |kk f | k f , and energies are confined to a shell near the Fermi surface, We changed energy integration variables from , where ξ k > 0 and ξ k < 0 correspond to particle-like and hole-like excitations, respectively. In Eq. ( If the ground state in which the ion is embedded were timereversal and mirror symmetric we could use the "microscopic reversibility" condition, W (k , k) = W (k, k ). This is the case for the B-phase of where the energy resolved transport cross-section is in agreement with the result for the mobility obtained for 3 He-B by Baym et al. The resulting momentum transfer to the ion by quasiparticle scattering is then given by a symmetric Stokes tensor, and thus there is no transverse force on the moving ion. Indeed in Ref. [22] the uniaxial anisotropy of the mobility tensor was calculated, but no anomalous Hall term was reported. Existence of a transverse force acting on an electron bubble moving in Although the basic picture motivating the existence of a transverse force on electron bubbles moving through a chiral superfluid is sound, the microscopic theory outlined in Ref. [23], and published in detail by Salmelin and Salomaa in Ref. [24], is fundamentally flawed. These authors impose mirror symmetry in their calculation of the scattering amplitude for momentum transfer from the distribution of quasiparticles to the moving ion by adopting the microscopic reversibility condition W (k , k) = W (k, k ). This equality gaurantees, within scattering theory, that there is no transverse force on the electron bubble. As a consequence the theoretical results and prediction for the transverse Hall mobility in Refs. [23 and 24] are spurious. We include a more detailed critique of this work in App. (A). In the following section we show that it is precisely the asymmetry in scattering rates for k → k and its mirror symmetric partner, k → k, that is the origin of the transverse force acting on a moving electron bubble. A central feature of Eq. ( with where is the energy-resolved transport cross-section separated into symmetric (+) and antisymmetric (-) tensor components, σ (±) i j (E), which are given by Fermi surface averages over the differential cross-section, Equations ( Lastly, for |∆( k)| = 0 Eqs. ( where σ (-) i j (E) vanishes because the gauge and mirror symmetries are unbroken in the normal Fermi liquid. Integration over energy in Eq. ( Our formulation of the scattering theory was motivated in part by the reports of the RIKEN group of an anomalous Hall effect in their measurements of electron transport in superfluid The calculations presented here for the transport cross sections and resultant components of the Stokes tensor are obtained by first solving the linear integral Eqs. ( In Fig. (8) we show results for the differential cross section defined in Eqs. ( , and the asymmetry in the angular distribution, dσ (-) /dΩ k , of the scattered excitations is shown in panel (b) as a function of the azimuthal scattering angle ∆φ = φφ . Note that dσ (-) /dΩ k changes sign across the lines ∆φ = 0 and ∆φ = π, and determines the anti-symmetric, transverse cross section, σ (-) i j (E). The total differential cross-section is shown in Fig. The transport cross sections, σ (+) i j (E) and σ (-) i j (E) calculated for the hard sphere potential, are used to calculate the FIG. 1, the drag force decreases as η xx /η N -1 ∝ -∆(T ), while the transverse force scales as η xy /η N ∝ ∆(T ) 2 ∼ (1 -T /T c ), reflecting the onset of branch conversion scattering of Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The scaling near T c follows from the GL expansion of the cross-sections given in App. (D). The scaling of η xy ∼ ∆(T ) 2 agrees with that inferred from the estimate given in Eq. [1] of Ref. (23); however, these authors include an additional small factor, k B T c /E f ∼ 10 -3 , typically associated with normal-state particle-hole asymmetry. In our theory, particlehole asymmetry is generated by branch conversion scattering and particle-hole coherence that onsets at T c , and is reflected in the asymmetric chiral spectrum for dσ , and the ratio 58 The factor 1/k f R accounts for the relative size of the transverse and longitudinal transport cross-sections at E ≈ ∆ shown in Fig. (9), and also accounts for the order of magnitude reduction in the ratio η xy /η xx shown in Fig. (10) at T /T c ≈ 0.8. Note that the transport cross sections, σ xx (E) and σ xy (E), were both defined by scaling out the dimensional factors of p f in the kinematics. Thus, σ xy (E) The spectral average, σ xy (E) near T c generates the additional factor of (∆/k B T c ) 2 . Although the transverse force is roughly an order of magnitude smaller than the drag force, it leads to a dramatic effect on the dynamics of the negative ion. The equation of motion for an electron bubble under the action of an in-plane electric field is where M is the effective mass of the electron bubble. The first term on the right side of Eq. ( where Φ 0 = hc/2|e| is the flux quantum and we have approximated the normal state transport cross section by σ tr N ≈ πR 2 . Note that the temperature dependence of B W is shown in Fig. (10), and thus the order of magnitude of the Weyl field ranges from B W = 10 4 T at T /T c = 0.8 to B W = 10 3 T at T /T c = 0.3, orders of magnitude larger that any laboratory magnetic field. The transverse component is the anomalous Hall current, and the ratio with the longitudinal current gives the Hall angle, Note that in spite of the enormous effective magnetic field, the Hall angle is relatively small because the relaxation time τ is so short compared to the cyclotron period, i.e. the drag force dominates the transverse force. At T /T c = 0.8, where the Weyl field is maximum, the Hall angle is of order tan α = η xy /η ⊥ ≈ 0.1. The detailed temperature dependences of the Stokes parameters show that the maximum Hall angle is tan α max ≈ 0.25 at T /T c ≈ 0.4, as shown in Fig. (12), and discussed in more detail in comparison with the experimental measurements below. The experimental results for the transport of electron bubbles in .99 and R/R = 0.36, all constrained by the experimental value of μ N . calculated from the Stokes parameters using Eqs. (54). In Fig. (11) we compare our theoretical result for the longitudinal mobility based on numerical calculations, using the machinery presented in the previous sections, with the experimental data reported in Refs. [8 and 9]. The hard sphere potential works remarkably well, reproducing the longitudinal mobility data for We note that Ikegami et al. It seems worth re-emphasizing that in all our calculations reported here the only parameter is hard sphere radius for the quasiparticle-ion potential which is fixed at the outset as k f R = 11.17 by the normal-state mobility. Thus, we view the overall agreement between theory and experiment as strong confirmation of the scattering theory, particularly the origin of the anomalous Hall effect resulting from resonant scattering of thermal quasiparticles by the spectrum of Weyl fermions bound to the electron bubble embedded in 3 He-A. The theoretical prediction shown in Fig. (12) shows structure in the Hall ratio -a dip-peak structure -below T ≈ 0.25 T c . An important test of this theory would be measurements of the Hall mobility extended below 0.2 mK. Although the hard sphere model for the quasiparticle-ion potential provides very good agreement with the observed forces acting on the moving ion, it is a only rough approximation to expectations of the microscopic interaction between The normal-state scattering phase shifts for this piece-wise constant potential are expressed in terms of regular and modified spherical Bessel functions; the analytical formulas are given in Eqs. (E1)-(E3) of App. E. We discuss two cases both with V 0 > E f : (i) for V 1 = 0 the potential is a two-parameter, repulsive "soft-core" potential, and (ii) for V 1 > 0 and R > R we include in addition to the short-range repulsion, an intermediate range attraction. The latter case allows for a shallow bound state, and corresponding scattering resonance, in one or more angular momentum channels, l ≤ l max . Figures A softer core potential with intermediate range attraction may be relevant to understanding the mobility of positive ions in The comparison between theory and experiment for the Hall ratio shows a maximum deviation of ≈ 15% at T ≈ 0.8T c , which is the temperature at which the transverse force, η xy , is a maximum. This suggests that there may be an additional contribution to the transverse force on the moving ion. Within the theory of thermal quasiparticles scattering off the moving ion, the larger experimental value for η xy suggests an additional weak scattering mechanism contributing to the transport cross section, σ xy (E), at energies close to the gap edge, or perhaps deviations from the hard sphere potential. These possibilities for an additional contribution to the transverse force on the moving ion are addressed in a separate report. It is also likely that in the low temperature limit, T < 0.25T c , new physics appears in the transport of electron bubbles in 3 He-A. In particular, the theoretical prediction of the sub-gap spectrum shown in Fig. (11) leads to the sharp increase in the longitudinal mobility at low temperatures. Thus, at constant electric field we expect the linear theory for the Stokes force tensor to fail at sufficiently low temperatures as there is insufficient drag force from thermal quasiparticles to limit the ion velocity below the Landau critical velocity, v c = ∆/p f . At high velocity the ion will dissipate energy by Cherenkov radiation of quasiparticles. one finds that the current density is purely azimuthal, j(r, θ , φ) = j φ (r, θ ) e φ , with e φ =sin φe x + cos φe y , We summarize our results for the transport cross sections in terms of the solutions to the coupled Eqs. ( a l = l n l+1 (x) j l (x )n l (x ) j l+1 (x) + x n l+1 (x ) j l+1 (x)n l+1 (x) j l+1 (x ) + l p l x n l (x) j l (x )n l (x ) j l (x) + p l n l+1 (x ) j l (x)n l (x) j l+1 (x ) , (E2) b l = x n l+1 (x) j l (x )n l (x ) j l+1 (x) + p l n l (x) j l (x )n l (x ) j l (x) , (E3) and p l = z i l+1 (z)/i l (z) E f , where i l (x) is the modified spherical Bessel function of the first kind.