Measurements of the London penetration depth, ∆λ(T ), and tunneling conductance in single crystals of the recently discovered stoicheometric, iron -based superconductor, CaKFe4As4 (CaK1144) show nodeless, two effective gap superconductivity with a larger gap of about 6-9 meV and a smaller gap of about 1-4 meV. Having a critical temperature, Tc,onset ≈ 35.8 K, this material behaves similar to slightly overdoped (Ba1-xKx)Fe2As2 (e.g. x =0.54, Tc ≈ 34 K)-a known multigap s± superconductor. We conclude that the superconducting behavior of stoichiometric CaK1144 demonstrates that two-gap s± superconductivity is an essential property of high temperature superconductivity in iron -based superconductors, independent of the degree of substitutional disorder. Iron-based superconductors (IBS) are represented by a diverse group of different structural families all containing iron layers, which are believed to play the key -role in superconductivity with the superconducting transition temperature, T c , ranging from 2 to 56 K In this paper, the superconducting gap structure of CaKFe 4 As 4 (CaK1144) was studied by measuring the temperature induced variation of the London penetration depth, ∆λ(T ), and the tunneling conductance at low temperatures, both of which probe the density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level, E F . The penetration depth shows saturation at low temperatures and the tunneling spectra exhibit a clear gap in DOS around E F . In-depth data analysis leads to conclusion that CaK1144 has two effective superconducting gaps. The smaller gap is in the range of 1 -4 meV and the larger gap is between 6-9 meV. The sizeable spread is characteristic of superconductors showing different magnitudes of the superconducting order parameter over the Fermi surface. The larger ratio of the maximum to minimum gap values leads to the overall behavior quite similar to the overdoped (Ba 1-x K x )Fe 2 As 2 with x = 0.54, but different from the optimally -doped (Ba 1-x K x )Fe 2 As 2 with x = 0.35 -0.4 where this ratio is about 2 Single crystals of CaKFe 4 As 4 were synthesized by high temperature solution growth out of FeAs flux, see Ref. The in-plane London penetration depth ∆λ(T ) was measured using a self-oscillating tunnel-diode resonator (TDR) where the sample is subject to a small, 20 mOe, AC magnetic field and the recorded resonant frequency shift from the value of the empty resonator is proportional to sample's magnetic susceptibility, determined by λ and sample shape. Detailed description of this technique can be found elsewhere Ref. For the STM experiment, the sample was mounted onto a sample holder and a piece of brass was glued on top of it. At liquid helium temperature, the sample holder was moved towards a copper beam, lifting off the glued brass piece x = 0 . 3 5 ), which exhibits a nodal gap (from our earlier work, Ref. To probe the spectroscopic gap in the density of states (which is generally different from the magnitude of the order parameter due to scattering The superfluid density ρ s ≡ (λ(0)/λ(T )) 2 can be obtained from λ(T ), provided we can estimate the absolute value of λ(0). The TDR technique is suitable for the precision measurements of the changes in the penetration depth where the jump of the specific heat, ∆C =9.6 J/mol K = 8.32×10 5 erg/cm 3 /K (using molar volume of 115.4 cm 3 /mol) the slope of the upper critical field (measured parallel to the c-axis) at T c , dH c2,c /dT =-4.4×10 4 Oe/K In the case of γ-model fitting, the main uncertainty comes from insufficient information on the real electronic band structure. Calculations show three hole-like bands and two electron-like bands with distinct 3D character of the outer hole-like sheet In conclusion, precision measurements of the London penetration depth and low temperature STM spectroscopy show unambiguously a fully gapped multiband superconductivity in single crystals of CaKFe 4 As 4 . Analysis with two effective gaps gives small gap in the range of 1-4 meV and the large gap is between 6-9 meV. The overall behavior is quite similar to optimally doped (Ba 1-x K x )Fe 2 As 2 with x = 0.54. Notably, while the overall spread of gap values (mostly given by the difference between the averages of the two ranges of gap sizes) is lower in the presence of substitutional disorder (i.e., in BaK122), the s ± physics with two effective gaps is clearly present in stoichiometric and substituted systems with high T c 's. European Research Council (grant agreement 679080). Madrid's group also acknowledges SEGAINVEX workshop of UAM.