We present numerical evidences using overlap fermions for a scale-invariant behavior of parityinvariant three-dimensional QED with two flavors of massless two-component fermions. Using finitesize scaling of the low-lying eigenvalues of the massless anti-Hermitian overlap Dirac operator, we rule out the presence of bilinear condensate and estimate the mass anomalous dimension. The eigenvectors associated with these low-lying eigenvalues suggest critical behavior in the sense of a metal-insulator transition. We show that there is no mass gap in the scalar and vector correlators in the infinite volume theory. The vector correlator does not acquire an anomalous dimension. The anomalous dimension associated with the long-distance behavior of the scalar correlator is consistent with the mass anomalous dimension. Two-component massless fermions coupled to a three-dimensional Euclidean abelian gauge field has been a topic of study in the past three decades for several field-theoretic reasons. The presence of parity anomaly A simple analysis of the associated gap equation Computations Earlier numerical work that studied the behavior of the fermion bilinear as a function of the fermion mass using staggered fermions Of particular relevance is the U(2N f ) global symmetry formally present in the continuum fermion action where χ i are the two-component fermion fields. The U(2N f ) symmetry is broken to Wilson fermions as a regulator on the lattice, and it is only recovered in the continuum limit for massless fermions. Indeed, the numerical computations in symmetry is present at the lattice level if one uses overlap fermions. This is also the case if one regulates using domain wall fermions Since the overlap formalism in odd dimensions 1. If the low-lying eigenvalues λ of the massless anti-Hermitian overlap operator depend on the finite physical size l as with γ m < 2, then there is no bilinear condensate in the infinite volume theory and the 1 We think that one can use the data presented in Table-II of exponent γ m is the mass anomalous dimension. We will show that γ m = 1.0 ± 0.2 in Section IV. This is at the edge of the maximum allowed value for γ m in a theory which is also conformally invariant 2. In the sense of a metal-insulator transition In the critical regime, the IPR would exhibit a scaling with the physical size l as This scaling is related to the behavior of the number variance Σ 2 (n), the variance of the number of eigenvalues, n, below a given value, λ. In the critical regime, Σ 2 (n) would exhibit an asymptotic linear behavior with a slope η/6: We will demonstrate in Section V that the low-lying eigensystem of the N f = 1 theory satisfy such a critical behavior with η = 0.38(1). 3. We study the correlators of parity-even vector bilinear, and the scalar bilinear in Section VI. In both the cases, we will show there is no mass gap in their spectrum, and that the long-distance behavior of the correlators at zero spatial momentum exhibits a power-law. The power-law associated with the vector correlator does not acquire any anomalous dimension consistent with the vector bilinear being a conserved current. The scalar correlator does not show a simple power-law behavior as a function of Euclidean time, leading us to estimate the expected power-law at even longer distances inaccessible to our numerical simulation. The resulting value for the mass anomalous dimension is γ m = 0.8(1) which is consistent with the result from the low lying eigenvalues and consistent with a vanishing correlator in the long distance limit. The overlap formalism for two-component fermions in three dimensions were originally discussed in A. Gauge-invariant but parity-breaking overlap operator for a single flavor of twocomponent massless fermion The overlap formula where |0± are the lowest states of the many body operators, with (a † , b † ) and (a, b) being two-component fermion creation and annihilation operators that obey canonical anti-commutation relations. The two single particle Hamiltonians are The naïve massless Dirac operator in three dimensions is with σ k ; k = 1, 2, 3 being the two-component Pauli matrices. The standard Wilson term is with a Wilson mass parameter in the range 0 < m w < 2. The naïve massless Dirac operator in three dimensions is anti-Hermitian; D † = -D. Due to this special structure of H + in Eq. we can set up the following eigenvalue problems: It follows that The basis of positive and negative eigenstates of respectively. On the one hand, the basis of positive and negative eigenstates of H -can be chosen to be respectively and the fermion determinant for a single two-component fermion becomes On the other hand, the basis of positive and negative eigenstates of H -can be chosen to be respectively and the fermion determinant for a single two-component fermion becomes In both cases, the fermion determinant is gauge invariant In order to realize a parity-invariant theory, we consider theories with even number of fermion flavors, 2N f . As shown in Appendix B, the result for the generating function for a N f = 1 theory, including parity invariant fermion masses and using flavor diagonal sources η + and η -, is where and If we set m = 0, we observe that Therefore, one has the full U(2N f ) symmetry in the fermionic sources. The fermion determinant in the absence of sources for the This also shows a U(2N f ) symmetry, but we have an additional factor of det V † for each N f in the measure for the gauge fields, which is required to keep the theory parity invariant. The bilinear scalar condensate in a fixed gauge field background is given by where iΛ are the eigenvalues of A -1 and ρ(Λ) is the density of eigenvalues obeying ρ(Λ) = ρ(-Λ). Therefore, we are led to an analysis of the low-lying eigenvalues of A -1 in order to extract the mass anomalous dimension. Given an eigenvalue e iΦ i of V , the corresponding eigenvalue of A -1 is Therefore, the low-lying eigenvalues come from values of Φ i close to π. In order to obtain these numerically using the Ritz algorithm The corresponding eigenvalue of this operator is cos 2 Φ i 2 . Due to parity invariance, we only need The numerical details essentially parallel the one used in our previous work We would like to draw attention to the advantage of using two-flavors of two component fermions instead of using an equivalent single four-component fermion formalism; the fermion determinant is a determinant of a positive-definite operator enabling the Monte Carlo simulation for any value of 2N f . We worked on a 3d torus of fixed physical extent l and regulated using a Since it is a bit different from the standard procedure, we note that L is used to tune the lattice spacing at a fixed physical size, l. We used L = 12, 14, 16, 20 and 24 to extract the continuum limit of observables. It is worth noting that unlike in four dimensions, there could be O(1/L) corrections due to the presence of parity-even, dimension-four, four-fermion operators which preserve the U(2N f ) flavor symmetry. We used several different values of l to understand the behavior of the theory as a function of l, and then properly obtain the behavior as l → ∞. We list our simulation points in the Appendix C. In order to take the continuum limit, one has to take into account a factor arising from the Wilson mass parameter to realize the correct dispersion relation for free fermions where m w is the mass used in the Wilson-Dirac kernel, and m t is the Wilson mass at which the smallest eigenvalue is minimum. We use m w = 1 at all simulation points. The values of m t are listed in the Appendix C. We compute the correlators of scalar and vector bilinears at zero spatial momentum defined in the continuum by respectively. On the lattice, after Wick contractions, the correlators using massless fermions become tr A(0, 0, 0; X, Y, T )A(X, Y, T ; 0, 0, 0) and where "tr " denotes the trace over the spin index. One of the fermion bilinear is placed at (0,0,0) and the other at (integer) lattice coordinates (X, Y, T ) i.e., T = tL/l and so on. The factor Z m in the scalar propagator takes care of the renormalized scalar operator Z -1 m Σ. Note that since Σ and V are bosonic, their correlators are periodic functions of T with period L. Therefore, we only show the correlators from T = 0 to T = L/2 in all the plots in this paper. Our previous analysis -1 -0.5 Open: Wilson and find γ m < 2, it follows that the γ m is the mass anomalous dimension since λ i has the dimensions of mass. In this section, we show that our current simulations with overlap fermions produces results that are quite consistent with our previous studies using massless Wilson fermions for the case of N f = 1. We show the approach to the continuum limit for the improved first and sixth positive eigenvalues, λ 1 and λ 6 , at different fixed l in Figure We do not find a simple power-law scaling in the region of l where we simulated. We only know the asymptotic dependence of λ on l; we expect the eigenvalues to behave proportional to 1 l for small l since the theory is asymptotically free, and as 1 l 1+γm for large l. In order to fit the data over the entire range of l, we found it convenient to parametrize the dependence on l in terms of τ = tanh(1/l). Since we do not know the functional dependence of λ on l at any intermediary l, we approximate this functional dependence through a rational [1/1] Padé approximant: where the a's are fit parameters. The χ 2 /DOF as a function of γ m is shown in Figure In the absence of a bilinear condensate, there is no ergodic regime in the eigenvalue spectrum of the massless overlap Dirac operator similar to the observations made about the massless FIG. Wilson Dirac operator in A complete localization of the eigenvectors will correspond to a value equal to I 2 = 1. Instead, we observe a power law behavior with l that is consistent with critical behavior with η = 0.38(1) in the continuum limit as shown in Figure it shows a leading O(1/L) lattice correction. The continuum extrapolated value corresponds to the one we quoted: η = 0.38 As we noted in In this section, we study the behavior of the scalar and vector correlators with the aim of lending further support to the scale-invariant nature of the N f = 1 theory. As a start, we attempt to extract a mass using the standard lattice technique If the solution, M(t), to the above equation becomes essentially independent of t for 0 << t ≤ l 2 , then this t-independent value, M, can be used as an upper bound to the lowest state that Since the position of plateau seems to be independent of l, M ∼ 1/l. contributes to the correlator, G(t). The results for the scalar and vector effective masses are shown in Figure A striking observation is that Ml is essentially independent of the box size l. This indicates that the upper bound on the mass M in physical units approaches zero in the infinite volume limit for both the scalar and vector correlators Next, we look at the correlators themselves to see evidence for a power-law behavior. First, we show that the lattice spacing effects in the scalar and vector correlators are under control in Figure The brute force way to obtain the correlators at infinite volume is to take the L → ∞ limit of the correlators at each l, and then take l → ∞ at each physical t. Such a procedure is not numerically feasible. Since the lattice artifacts in the correlators are under control, we can use the correlators determined at different l on the same L 3 lattice to scan a wide range of physical t. This is possible provided the l dependence of the correlators at fixed t are small. Such a reconstruction of infinite volume correlators for the scalar and vector over a range of t covering three orders of magnitude are shown in Figure corresponding to a primary operator of conformal dimension ∆ in a CFT. Its zero momentum correlation function will behave as Both the scalar and vector bilinears have an engineering mass dimension equal to 2. Since the vector bilinear is associated with a conserved current, it will not acquire any anomalous shown by the red solid line, we estimate the infinite t limit of k to be 0.4 dimension. Therefore, ∆ V = 2, and we should find Since mass acquires an anomalous dimension 1 + γ m , the scalar bilinear will also acquire an anomalous dimension such that the sum of the dimensions is equal to 3. Therefore We have shown in the previous section that γ m = 1.0 ± 0.2, which along with Eq. ( Since the correlator has to vanish as t → ∞, we see that γ m = 1.0 is marginal for power law behavior which also follows from unitarity constraints in CFTs The vector correlator is shown on the left panel of Figure describes the data well. Thus the vector indeed does not get an anomalous dimension. This might be non-trivial in light of Ref The scalar correlator is shown on the the right panel of Figure We have already shown that the L = 24 data can be assumed to be the continuum result to a good accuracy. In any region of t in Figure and fit a straight line to the data at a fixed l and call that as the tangent, k(t 0 ). These are the various colored lines in Figure In Figure We have performed a numerical investigation of three dimensional QED coupled to two flavors of two-component massless fermions while preserving parity. We used overlap fermion which preserves the full U(2) symmetry away from the continuum limit. We extracted physical quantities on a three-dimensional continuum torus of size l 3 by studying the continuum limit at a fixed l. By studying the finite-size scaling of the low-lying eigenvalues of the massless anti-Hermitian overlap Dirac operator, we confirmed the absence of a bilinear condensate that was previously established using Wilson-Dirac fermions The analysis performed in this paper along with the results in We also plan to perform numerical studies in this direction. Parity invariance is ensured by Z 2 → Z * 2 and 1 ↔ 2. The generating functional for N f = 1 theory with parity invariant mass terms is Using standard manipulations of converting the mass terms bilinear in creation-annihilation operators by introducing auxiliary Grassmann fields, and then using the result from Appendix A, the final result is We proceed to go to a flavor diagonal basis by diagonalizing the mass matrix using where The matrix, W , is invertible as long as m 2 1 = m 2 m 3 and m 1 = -1. Defining flavor diagonal sources as and noting that we arrive at Eq. ( We tuned the step-size for the leap-frog evolution at run-time such that acceptance was at least 80%. As for the statistics, we generated 13, 000 to 14, 000 trajectories at each simulation point. Then we used only configurations separated by an auto-correlation time, as determined from the smallest eigenvalue Λ 1 . This amounted to 500 to 1000 independent configurations at all the simulation points. As is well known, there are two kinds of inversions that enter the dynamical overlap simulation -the ones that require the multiple shifted inversion of X † X which we refer to as "inner CG", and the inversion of C † o C o which we call the "outer CG", and it again involves a nested inner CG. We use a stopping criterion that the ratio of the norm of the residue to the norm of the solution vector to be less than ǫ. For the inversions required along the molecular dynamics trajectory, we used a stopping criterion ǫ in = 10 -6 for the inner CG, and a stopping criterion ǫ out = 10 -4 for the outer CG. We used a more stringent stopping criterion of ǫ in = 10 -8 and ǫ out = 10 -6 for the inversions required in the computation of fermion action used in the acceptreject step. In Figure We find that it is sufficient to use the less stringent stopping criterion. A fit to both the scalar and vector correlators with two massive states resulted in both of the masses approaching zero in the infinite volume.