We propose the realization of photonic circuits whose dynamics is governed by advanced-retarded differential equations. Beyond their mathematical interest, these photonic configurations enable the implementation of quantum feedback and feedforward without requiring any intermediate measurement. We show how this protocol can be applied to implement interesting delay effects in the quantum regime, as well as in the classical limit. Our results elucidate the potential of the protocol as a promising route towards integrated quantum control systems on a chip. In advanced-retarded (A-R) differential equations, or mixed functional differential equations, the derivative of the associated function explicitly depends on itself evaluated at different advanced-retarded values of the variable. In this article we show that photonic lattices can be used to effectively tailor the dynamics of classical and quantum light fields in an advanced-retarded fashion. Our strategy is to exploit the duality between light propagation in space and time evolution. In order to introduce our protocol, we start by considering the following first order linear and non-autonomous A-R differential equation with κ + (t) = κ -(t + τ), and boundary conditions κ -(0 < t < τ) = κ + ((N -1)τ < t < Nτ) = 0. Associating the functions x(t), x(t ± τ) with the mode amplitude of monochromatic waves traversing the j-th and j ± 1-th waveguides, a j (z) and a j±1 (z), of an array of N evanescently coupled waveguides, each supporting a single mode and having a "time" dependent propagation constant β (z), we obtain a system governed by a set of N differential equations with j ∈ [1, N]. In the quantum optics regime, the dynamics of single photons traversing this type of devices is governed by a set of Heisenberg equations that are isomorphic to Eq. ( The analogy we present here can be exploited with classical electromagnetic fields or single photons. The motivation for doing a quantum simulation is the possibility to embed the advanced-retarded dynamics in more general quantum protocols allowing the implementation of quantum feedback and feedforward. In the classical case, the initial condition a 1 (0) is implemented by continuously injecting light into the system. This condition is crucial to establish the isomorphism between the light dynamics in the waveguide array and the solution of Eq. ( An interesting point to highlight here is the existence of a z reversal symmetry in the simulation with respect to the central point of the evolution, z c = Nτ/2, for constant lattice parameters. This relation holds for the modulus square of the solution, aa * (z c + z) = aa * (z cz). Consequently, after the system reaches the steady state, it simultaneously fulfills the periodic boundary condition, a(0) = a(Nτ), where we have neglected a global phase factor. This property combined with the space-time analogy opens a possible framework for the study and implementation of Closed and Open Timelike Curve gates. We now turn our attention to demonstrate how our protocol can be extended to provide solutions of systems of A-R equations. To this end, we encode every unknown function in a waveguide array, and place all the involved arrays close to each other in such a way that light fields traversing the system can tunnel from array to array. In this manner, all functions are self-coupled and coupled to others, enriching the dynamics of the systems. In order to explain the operating principle of the protocol, we focus on the simplest case of two variables. Note that in this case, we can relate each array to a component of a qubit to be implemented in the dual-rail encoding with a single photon. As a first possibility, we can put together two lattices in which the feedback takes place as depicted in Fig. A second configuration arises by mixing the connectors as shown in Fig. In Supplementary Fig. We next consider a variant of Eq. ( Experimentally, the arrangement can be engineered by fabricating the waveguides in a zig-zag configuration. The resulting equation shares the structure of an A-R differential equation with additional feedback and feedforward terms. For this particular system the coupling coefficients are related as with the appropriate boundary conditions. See Supplementary Fig. Higher Order Equations One last generalization of the A-R simulator consists in introducing complex dynamical parameters. This can be achieved by combining our feedback technique with Bloch oscillator lattices. Even though the toolbox introduced here is valid for simulating diverse physical configurations, it can be generalized by an appropriate mathematical treatment. Let M(t) be the matrix containing the information about the propagation constant and couplings among the waveguides defined by i ȧ(t) = M(t)a(t), F the matrix encoding the input-output connections, and α the initial state independent of the feedback and feedforward mechanism, such that a(0) = Fa(τ) + α. Consider now that the dynamical equation is solvable in terms of the evolution operator U(t), a(t) = U(t)a(0). Our goal is to determine the complete Figure Notice that this relation holds for any α, allowing the input of quantum states superposed in more than one waveguide, and is also valid for different configurations of couplings U and connections F, limited by the existence of the inverse of (1 -FU(τ)). Moreover, we can think of different experimental conditions, in which the connections happen at distinct evolution times τ i , a(0) = ∑ F i a(τ i ) + α, resulting in a(t) = U(t)(1 -∑ F i U(τ i )) -1 α. We analyze now the main limitations of the protocol regarding its interpretation and experimental realization. Regarding the quantum equation, although the probability is not normalized during the dynamics, it is normalized in the input and output points. Therefore, initialization and measurements retrieve the correct interpretation, even if the particle undergoes forward and backward jumps on time, an effect that could be useful for the simulation of absorbing potentials. We have to take into account that the losses introduced by the fiber connections will break the continuity condition allowing us to simulate Eq. ( Consider the oscillatory time dependence of the propagation constant, β , for the single variable A-R equation, Eq. (1) in the manuscript. We numerically simulate this system for a lattice of N = 6 waveguides, β = 1, κ = √ 7, ε = 1 and ω = 2, see Fig. 