The in-place growth of suspended carbon nanotubes facilitates the observation of both unperturbed electronic transport spectra and high-Q vibrational modes. For complex structures integrating, e.g., superconducting rf elements on-chip, selection of a chemically and physically resistant material that survives the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process provides a challenge. We demonstrate the implementation of molybdenum-rhenium coplanar waveguide resonators that exhibit clear resonant behaviour at cryogenic temperatures even after having been exposed to nanotube growth conditions. The properties of the MoRe devices before and after CVD are compared to a reference niobium device. The integration of different types of mesoscopic systems into hybrid device geometries has led to a multitude of experimental insights. One recent development is the application of coplanar waveguide resonator technology in hybrid quantum systems, see e.g. On their own, clean carbon nanotubes, as quasi-one dimensional carbon macromolecules, excel in their electronic This has recently led to the development of alternative strategies. Typically the nanotubes are grown on a separate substrate and then transferred onto the readily structured device at last instance Here, in preparation for the first, "overgrowth" approach, we use the CVD process environment to simulate nanotube growth across pre-defined electrodes and investigate metal films with/without having undergone CVD. In particular with regard to high-frequency experiments, where a suspended carbon nanotube is to be coupled to, e.g., a coplanar microwave resonator, a physically and chemically stable metal is required that remains superconducting even after incorporation of carbon and possible segregation processes during the high-temperature step. We characterize coplanar waveguide resonators fabricated from the co-sputtered molybdenum-rhenium alloy Mo 20 Re 80 Our carbon nanotube growth via CVD follows a wellestablished process A catalyst suspension consisting of iron(III) nitrate nonahydrate Fe(NO 3 ) 3 • 9H 2 O, molybdenum dioxydiacetylacetonate MoO 2 (acac) 2 , and Al 2 O 3 nanoparticles in methanol is used. The catalyst deposition area is defined lithographically. Following development of the electron-beam resist, the catalyst suspension is drop-cast onto the chip, and the solvent is evaporated on a hot plate at 150 • C. After a lift-off step, only the catalyst in the growth area remains on the chip. The devices are then placed into a 1 quartz tube, where they are heated up in an argon and hydrogen gas flow to a temperature of 850 • C. As soon as the temperature is reached, the argon flow is stopped and the devices are exposed to a hydrogen (20 sccm) / methane (10 sccm) atmosphere for ten minutes. During this time, the growth of the carbon nanotubes takes place. Afterwards, the devices are cooled down again under argon and hydrogen flow. Nanotube devices can now be electronically tested and precharacterized. For the thin-film material tests presented here, focussing on the effect of the high-temperature process on the metal films of the devices, both lithography and catalyst deposition steps are omitted for simplicity. The hightemperature process is performed in an identical way as actual nanotube CVD growth. Two types of substrate form the starting point of device fabrication, either crystalline Al 2 O 3 or compensation-doped Si with a 500 nm thermally grown oxide. A metal layer is sputter-deposited and structured via optical lithography and reactive ion etching. The required resonator lengths for intended design fre-quencies can be calculated following where α is the kinetic inductance fraction of the superconductor, discussed below in more detail, l is the length of the resonator, and eff is an effective relative permittivity resulting from the substrate below and the vacuum (or helium, depending on the measurement; both with r 1) above the substrate. In the simple case of a uniform substrate with permittivity r , eff can be approximated as eff = ( r + 1)/2. Fig. Aside from the center frequency f r , the resonance is characterized by the intrinsic quality factor Q i , describing energy loss within the resonator, and the coupling quality factor Q c , describing energy transfer from and to the feed line. The so-called loaded quality factor The solid line in Fig. Here, Q e = |Q e |e -iθ has been additionally introduced, a complex-valued parameter related to the coupling quality factor e , while Im Q e represents resonance asymmetries. For the reference device of Fig. While niobium is a well-established material for superconducting coplanar radiofrequency circuit elements, its thin films unfortunately do not survive the conditions of CVD carbon nanotube growth. Rhenium thin films are stable under CVD conditions Fig. The difference in resonance frequency predominantly stems from a difference in the so-called kinetic inductance of the waveguide: the inertia-delayed response of charge carriers to a high-frequency field is mathematically equivalent to an increased inductance and can be described as such. It leads to an additional contribution L k to the inductance per length of the coplanar waveguide. Given the geometric, temperature-independent inductance per length L g of a waveguide, the so-called kinetic inductance fraction is then defined as α = L k /(L g + L k ). From the data of Fig. Via fitting to Eq. 2 we obtain the quality factors Q i and Q c of the resonator structures. The coupling quality factor Q c is similar (Q c ∼ 10 4 ) for all three devices, consistent with the identical geometry and thereby coupling capacitance. For the intrinsic quality factor we here obtain Q i = 234000 for Nb, Q i = 20800 for MoRe without CVD exposure, and Q i = 2700 for MoRe after 30min CVD exposure. The intrinsic quality factor differs strongly, due to the presence of quasiparticle excitations and corresponding dissipation (see following section). Fig. with f 0 and α 0 as the zero-temperature limit of resonance frequency and kinetic inductance fraction. σ 1 and σ 2 are the real and imaginary part of the complex conductivity σ of the device. We use analytical approximations for both parts of the complex conductivity in the low temperature limit Figure In the same manner, we obtain α 0 = 0.176 for the pristine MoRe device, and α 0 = 0.029 for the niobium device. The value of α 0 for the MoRe device is comparable to the one of Sec. IV, while the value for the niobium device confirms that α ≈ 0 was a good approximation. Generally, we find small kinetic inductance fractions for niobium and intermediate ones for MoRe, with increasing values for increasing CVD exposure time, corresponding to deterioration of the superconducting properties. Regarding the intrinsic quality factor Q i in Fig. Two different substrate materials have been tested, on one hand crystalline Al 2 O 3 (Fig. As a consistency check, we can compare the resonance positions, deduce the effective permittivity of the Si/SiO 2 bilayer, and compare it with a calculation. Using Eq. 1 it is easy to show that the effective dielectric constants of the two devices relate to the resonance frequencies as Si/SiO2 r = 8.72. Using the geometrical device dimensions and following For integrating carbon nanotube quantum dot structures with coplanar resonators, additional gate isolation layers are desirable. With this in mind we have tested additionally inserted oxide layers below the superconducting coplanar waveguide. A sketch of this is shown in Fig. Table We demonstrate that λ/4 coplanar waveguide resonators fabricated from a molybdenum-rhenium alloy display resonant behaviour at millikelvin temperatures even after being exposed to the chemical vapor deposition conditions required for carbon nanotube growth. Compared to a reference niobium device, the resonance frequency of lithographically identical molybdenumrhenium devices is lower due to a larger kinetic inductance fraction of the material. The temperature depen-dence of resonance frequency and internal quality factor can be well described by Mattis-Bardeen theory in the analyzed temperature range. Both Si/SiO 2 and Al 2 O 3 substrates can be used, with the expected impact of the permittivities on the resonance frequency. An additional Al 2 O 3 layer deposited on a Si/SiO 2 substrate via atomic layer deposition, which could, e.g., be used for nanotube top gate isolation, does not lead to any change in quality factor detectable at T = 4.2 K. While our thin film deposition via co-sputtering from two sources has the advantage of adjustable alloy composition 