The Raman response in a superconductor is a powerful probe to investigate the symmetry of the superconducting gap. Here we show that in a multiband superconductor it also offers the unique opportunity to establish if the driving pairing interaction has an intraband or interband character. In the model with one hole and one electron band the full gauge-invariant Raman response, obtained by accounting for the fluctuations of both the density and superconducting phase degrees of freedom, is always dominated by the Leggett mode, regardless its nature. However, while in the case of intraband dominated pairing the Josephson-like phase fluctuations of the two condensates identify a well-defined peak, as observed in MgB2, for dominant interband pairing the Leggett resonance is pushed at twice the largest gap, resembling apparently a pair-breaking peak. The latter case is in very good agreement with experimental data in iron-based superconductors, suggesting that an interband pairing mechanism should be at play in these systems. These results have also interesting implications for the non-linear optical response probed by means of intense THz fields. The inelastic scattering of light represents one of the most powerful spectroscopic probes for the investigation of the superconducting (SC) state of a system. In a Raman experiment the net effect of the photon in/photon out process can be modelled as a perturbation that couples to the electron density at long-wavelength 1,2 . More specifically, the particle-hole excitations are modulated in the momentum space by a form factor γ k dictated by the polarization of the incoming/outgoing light and by the symmetry of the band structure, with γ k roughly scaling as the inverse effective mass 1/m * of the carriers. In the SC state BCS theory predicts that the Raman charge response displays a threshold and a square-root singularity at twice the gap ∆ edge, simply reflecting the two-particle density of states 1,2 . This result, along with the polarization dependence of the γ k prefactor, allows one to probe the SC gap at different momenta, For a multiband superconductor with bands having opposite hole/electron character the phenomenology can be even richer. Considering for example a two-band case, the form factor γ i k will turn out to be positive/negative on the electron/hole bands, so that labelling the respective densities as ρ 1 and ρ 2 the Raman response in the A 1g channel can access the relative density fluctuations ρ 1 -ρ 2 instead of the total ones ρ 1 +ρ 2 . The consequences of this effect have been discussed so far both in the context of the MgB 2 superconductor Also in the case of FeSC the band structure is made by hole-like pockets and electron-like ones, located at the Γ and X/Y points of the 1Fe Brillouin zone, respectively. Even though specific features of the band structure of different materials can be quantitatively relevant, the previous theoretical and experimental results seem to be in contradiction with each other. Indeed, starting from the same general model of a two-band superconductor with one hole and one electron band, in one case (MgB 2 ) the A 1g response is claimed to measure only the Leggett mode, in the other case (FeSC) it is claimed to measure only the unscreened quasiparticle response, leading to the usual pair-breaking peak. In the present paper we show that this apparent contradiction arises when charge and phase fluctuations are not treated on the same footing. While this does not appear to explicitly violate the total charge conservation, in the multiband case it does not describe properly the relative charge fluctuations between the two bands. By computing the Raman response within a full gauge-invariant effective-action formalism we show that the A 1g Raman response of a multiband superconductor with bands having opposite character is always dominated by relative phase fluctuations θ L = θ 1 -θ 2 of the SC phases of the two order parameters. However, the resulting Raman susceptibility is drastically different depending on the nature of the pairing interaction. Indeed, while in the case of intra-band dominated pairing, as appropriate for MgB 2 , 17 θ L identifies a true collective mode, in the sense that it lies below the largest of the two gaps, when the pairing has dominant interband character θ L identifies a resonance that occurs around twice the largest of the two gaps, with a typical profiles that can be accidentally similar to a standard pair-breaking peak. Besides solving the paradox of existing theoretical results, the comparison between our findings and available experimental data in FeSC provides us with an indirect evidence of a dominant interband pairing glue in these systems, whose most plausible candidates To clarify the role of charge and SC phase fluctuations for the screening of the A 1g Raman response we first outline the derivation of the Raman response for a single-band superconductor by means of the effectiveaction formalism. By introducing the Raman density operator Φ R (q) ≡ kσ γ(k)c † k-q/2,σ c k+q/2,σ , where γ k is the Raman vertex, the Raman response is S R = -1 π [1 + n(ω)]χ RR (q = 0, ω), where n(ω) is the Bose-Einstein distribution and χ RR (q) (with q = (iω n , q)) is the Raman susceptibility after analytical continuation iω n → ω + iδ. To derive χ RR we will take advantage of the effective-action formalism, as detailed in Appendix A. We start from a microscopic fermionic model including the pairing U and the Coulomb interaction V (q), plus an external source field ρ R that is coupled to the fermionic Raman operator. As usual, one can decouple the interacting terms by means of the Hubbard-Stratonvich bosonic fields representing the collective fermionic degrees of freedom. ( where D s denotes the superfluid stiffness, and we introduced the (bare) Raman-Raman (χ 0 RR ), the Ramandensity (χ Rρ ) and the density-density (χ ρρ ) correlation functions, given at q = 0 by: where and E k = ξ 2 k + ∆ 2 , ∆ being the SC gap. Finally, the full Raman susceptibility χ RR can be computed from Eq. (1) by functional derivative with respect to the ρ R field, i.e.: As one immediately sees from Eq. (3) for a nonsymmetric Raman channel, such that k γ k = 0, the coupling χ Rρ to the density and phase fluctuations vanishes, and the Raman response coincides with the bare one, Eq. (2). On the other hand, in the A 1g channel χ Rρ = 0 and one must add the effect of charge/density modes, described by the third and fourth line of Eq. (1). making explicit the dependence only on the gaugeinvariant combination ρ + iω n θ/2. Since 1/V q → 0 as q → 0 one can then shift ρ + iω n θ/2 → ρ so that only the coupling of the Raman density to the density fluctuations appears explicitly. Then the integration of ρ is straightforward and leads to the well-known result 2-4 For almost parabolic bands, where γ k 1/m, one sees from Eq.s (2)-(3) that b0 th χ 0 RR and χ Rρ are proportional to χ ρρ . In this condition Eq. (8) guarantees that χ RR = 0, as expected since the Raman response becomes proportional to the dynamical charge susceptibility, that must vanish at long wavelength. It is worth stressing that the vanishing of the dynamical charge susceptibility at q = 0 is not a consequence itself of the presence of Coulomb interactions, but it is generally expected as a consequence of charge conservation. According to the above discussion, the result (8) must be independent on the presence of long-range Coulomb forces, and it must hold also when the interaction in the charge sector is short-ranged. This can be understood again from Eq. (1) by replacing 1/V q with a generic short-range interaction 1/V (with V ≷ 0 for repulsive/attractive interaction). In this case the |ρ| 2 term in Eq. ( being finite also when γ k = const. On the other hand, by adding also the contribution of phase modes one immediately finds back the gauge-invariant result (8). This example clarifies that in the computation of the Raman response in the symmetric A 1g channel the coupling to density and phase fluctuations must be treated on the same footing. On this respect, the approach used in the present work, based on the construction of the effective action including all the collective fluctuations coupled to the Raman response, is completely equivalent to the diagrammatic derivation of the vertex corrections discussed e.g. in Ref. [1,2], but with one additional advantage. Indeed, it allows one to recognize immediately that the vertex corrections in the particle-particle channel account for the fluctuations of the SC phase. Since the phase is conjugate to the density, their effect must be always included along with RPA-like corrections in the particle-hole channel, which account for density fluctuations. While for the single-band case the presence of long-range Coulomb forces allows one to gauge away the phase mode, 4 making apparently its presence irrelevant, for a multiband system additional care should be used, since several phase modes appear. As we shall see in the next section, this crucial fact explains the difference between the results discussed so far in the literature within the context of MgB2 The procedure discussed in the previous Section can be easily extended to a generic SC two-band model, as detailed in the Appendix B. The microscopic starting point is the Hamiltonian: where i, j are the band indexes, are the pairing and density operators, respectively, V (q) is the Coulomb potential and Û ≡ U ij is the matrix of the SC couplings. Notice that the interaction (11) always assumes pairing of carriers within the same band, with opposite momenta at q = 0. In addition, the pairing mechanism is intra-band dominated when det Û = U 11 U 22 -U 2 12 > 0, while it is inter-band dominated when det Û < 0. The derivation of the Raman response follows the same strategy outlined for the single-band case. In particular by adding to the Hamiltonian (10) a source field ρ R coupled to the total Raman density operator Φ R (q) = i,kσ γ i k c i, † k-q/2,σ c i k+q/2,σ one can derive the effective action in terms of all the relevant collective modes coupled to the Raman density, equivalent to Eq. (1) above. As it has been discussed in Ref. A1g spectrum for FeSC, as taken from Ref. For the multiband case the various susceptibilities (2)-( This result, and its extension to more bands, has been used so far to interpret the experimental data in pnictides where N i is the density of states (DOS) in each band and F i is the function obtained by integration over momenta in Eq. ( where E i (ξ) = ξ 2 + ∆ 2 i and ω D is a typical cut-off for the SC interactions. In the limit where ω D ∆ i Eq. ( The real and imaginary parts of the function F i (ω) are shown in Fig. as it is evident also from Eq. ( Despite its apparent agreement with experimental data in FeSC, the result (13) turns out to be in general incorrect. As we explained above, in the single-band case the coupling to the phase and density modes appears only via the gauge-invariant combination ρ + iω n θ. However, in the multiband case two different phase/density modes appear, where is a positive or negative constant depending on the nature of the pairing. The quantity on the numerator, ∆ 1 ∆ 2 U 12 , is always positive irrespectively on the sign of U 12 . Indeed, for inter-band attraction (U 12 > 0) the gaps have the same sign, while for inter-band repulsion (U 12 < 0) the gaps must have opposite sign. On the other hand the quantity on the denominator, i.e. det Û = U 11 U 22 -U 2 12 , depends on the nature of the pairing, being positive for intra-band dominated pairing, where det Û > 0 and κ > 0, and negative in the opposite case of interband dominated pairing, where det Û < 0 and κ < 0. Once more, in the case of parabolic bands the expression (19) simplifies leading to: where we introduced the function F L : Eq. ( When the interband coupling U 12 is small the solution of Eq. ( in agreement with the result found by Leggett For a system with inter-band dominated pairing is κ < 0, so that the expression (24) does not admit a solution, intended as a sharp resonance below the quasiparticle threshold. Even though this condition rules out the existence of a true Leggett mode that has to be contrasted to the result (18). From Eq. ( To analyze the general evolution of the Leggett-mode resonance from intra-band dominated to inter-band dominated coupling we study the case of two parabolic bands with opposite character, where the expression (21) holds. In the limit where only U 12 = 0, i.e. when pairing is provided uniquely by interband interactions, one can easily sees that the gaps must satisfy ∆ 1 /∆ 2 = sign(U 12 )N 2 /N 1 at T = 0 37 . To mimic the case of FeSC, where an interband repulsion is expected, we then take U 12 < 0. By fixing the value of N 1 /N 2 we can then vary the SC coupling U ij from det Û > 0 to det Û < 0, by retaining the same values of ∆ 1 > ∆ 2 . If we define the dimensionless quantity: one immediately sees that η goes from -1 to +1 as the interband coupling increases, so that η = -1 is the case where U 12 = 0 while η = 1 is the case where U 11 = U 22 = 0. The full Raman response obtained from the expression ( This result is again consistent with the fact that when the bands are decoupled the Raman response in the A 1g channel can only probe the total density fluctuations, that must vanish by gauge invariance in the longwavelength limit. In the regime of interband-dominated coupling, i.e. η > 0, Eq. ( In Fig. On the other hand, when the system has dominant interband coupling (η = 0.5) the Raman response is always peaked at the largest gap, with a tail starting already at the smallest one, see Fig. these systems, supporting the proposal The model ( Finally, we would like to briefly discuss the connection between the present results, derived in the context of the Raman response, and the non-linear optical response in the THz frequency range of a two-band superconductor. In the last few years the advances in the generation of intense multycicleTHz fields has shown that non-linear optical effects become experimentally accessible. This has been clearly demonstrated in Ref. [30] by the observation, in a BCS superconductor, of a component of the electromagnetic field oscillating three time faster than the incoming light. As it has been recently discussed in Ref. where A is the e.m. gauge field, α, β = x, y denote the spatial components and the response function K αβ is given by with the operator ρ α defined as: As a consequence, the non-linear response kernel K αβ in Eq. ( accounting for the relative direction of the incoming e.m. field A with respect to the main crystallographic axes, in full analogy with the Raman response where the γ k vertex accounts for the polarization of the incoming and outgoing light. In the limit of parabolic hole/electron bands with mass m, that is the case considered here, In this case it is easy to see that the multiband non-linear kernel K αβ = K is independent on the spatial indexes αβ and it coincides exactly with the multiband Raman response in the A 1g channel computed so far. By considering e.g. an incident monocromatic field A = A 0 cos(ωt)x it is easy to show 29 from Eq. ( with I 0 an overall scale factor, and χ RR given by Eq. ( density fluctuations can give a resonant contribution at 2ω = 2∆ 1,2 , corresponding to the first two terms of Eq. ( In the present work we used an effective-action formalism to derive the general expression for the Raman response of a two-band superconductor. We have explicitly shown that even though in the usual diagrammatic approach the contribution of density and SC phase modes originate from different (RPA-like or vertex-corrections like) subset of diagrams, their contributions must be always treated on the same footing, in order to obtain the correct results. As an example, we discussed how in the single-band case the so-called notion of "Coulomb screening" in the symmetric A 1g Raman channel is somehow misleading. Indeed, the vanishing of the Raman response when the Raman density is proportional to the full density is a general consequence of charge conservation and gauge invariance, that can only be restored by adding the contribution of both charge and SC phase fluctuations. Nonetheless, it is also true that in the single-band case the presence of long-range Coulomb forces allows one to gauge away the phase mode, recovering the gaugeinvariant Raman response in the A 1g channel by adding only the RPA-like resummation of density fluctuations. In the multiband case the same procedure allows one to eliminate the SC Goldstone phase mode, but not the Leggett mode, that turns out to dominate the response of the A 1g channel in the case of two bands having opposite (hole and electron) character. Interestingly, this result has been correctly pointed out in the context of MgB 2 superconductors, As we summarize in Fig. As we discussed in this manuscript, an interesting outcome of our results is the possibility to use Raman measurements to establish the nature (intra-vs inter-band) of the pairing mechanism in FeSC. So far, Raman results have been provided mainly for 122 systems, where quite a wide consensus already exists that spin fluctuations can provide an efficient mechanism for interband pairing between hole and electron pockets, leading in turn to a s ± symmetry of the order parameter. where ν n = πT (2n + 1) are fermionic Matsubara frequencies, the σ a are the Pauli matrices, E k = ξ 2 k + ∆ 2 and ∆ is the SC gap, determined as solution of the selfconsistent mean-field equation: with N the density of states evaluated at the Fermi level and Π = Here ω D represents the Debye frequency for the standard phononmediated superconductivity, but more generally provides an upper cut-off for the SC interaction for any pairing mechanism, as e.g. the one provided by the exchange of spin fluctuations in FeSC. To introduce the dynamics in the model (A1) we use the path integral formulation, by defining the imaginarytime action for the fermions: from which the partition function is given as the functional integral: In order to perform the integration over the fermions we use the standard Hubbard-Stratonovich (HS) technique, 8-10,31 which requires the introduction of bosonic fields to decouple the fermionic interaction terms. In this case, the presence of the two-particle interaction terms H P and H C requires to introduce a complex field h, which couples to the pairing operator Φ ∆ and represents the fluctuations of the SC order parameter around ∆, and a real field, ρ, which couples to the density operator Φ ρ and represents the density fluctuations. It is worth noting that the choice of the HS decoupling of an interacting model as in Eq. (A1) is not unique, as it has been often discussed in the literature. 8,9,42 However, since we are interested here in deriving the Raman in the SC state, a natural choice for the pairing term (A2) is a decoupling in the SC sector, in order to describe both the SC ground state and the SC fluctuations above it. In addition, as explained in Sec. II, the divergence of the long-range potential V (q) plays a crucial role in determining the screening of the Raman response, so we added explicitly the term (A3) where the momentum dependence of the density-density interaction, absent in Eq. (A2), is taken into account. Once performed the HS decoupling the action is Gaussian in the fermionic fields, that can be explicitly integrated out. We are then left with the effective action for the HS fields only: where is the mean-field action, that is stationary for ∆ satisfying the BCS equation (A5), and S F L is the flucuating action of the HS fields: where q = (iω n , q), ω n = 2πT n are bosonic frequencies and Σ is the self-energy of the HS fields. Below the SC critical temperature T C 1.13ω D e -1/N U one is always allowed to represent the h field in polar coordinates: h = |h|e iθ . Since we are ultimately interested in the Raman response at q → 0, we can neglect from the beginning the fluctuations of the amplitude of h, since they do not couple to the phase/density ones in the dynamic limit due to the particle-hole symmetry. q1,q2,l θ(q 1 )θ(q 2 ) ∂ 2 ξ k ∂k 2 l sin (q 1 /2) sin (q 2 /2) δ(q 1 + q 2 -k + k ) + O θ 3 , with d = 2 the spatial dimension. By retaining only the harmonic terms we finally obtain the case of a two-band system, with the foresight of introducing two complex HS fields, h 1 and h 2 , representing the fluctuations of the SC order parameters in each band. Defining θ i the phase of the field h i , the effective action of the phase and density fluctuations reads: where: and with κ ≡ 8∆ 1 ∆ 2 U 12 /detU . Here we defined the fermionic susceptibilities as a multiband analogous of Eq.s (2)-( where As it has been discussed in Ref. In the limit q = 0 one can notice that M (iω n ) is always singular, having (1, 1, -1) as eigenvector corresponding to the zero eigenvalue, as one can immediately check by summing the lines of the matrix (B8). This means that the description in terms of three degrees of freedom θ 1 , θ 2 , ρ is redundant and we can invoke the gauge invariance to remove one of them. To show this formally, it turns useful to introduce the new variables: where the subscripts G and L denote the Goldstone and Leggett phase mode, respectively, while ρ defines a gauge transformation of the field ρ. One can easily check that in the new frame the matrix M becomes: Then the field associated to the Goldstone mode θ G does not couple to any other field and S F L reduces to a func-tional of the fields θ L and ρ only: where M is the 2 × 2 matrix: -χ ρ1ρ1 -χ ρ2ρ2 , (B18) which becomes singular at iω n = ω L , where ω L is the Leggett frequency, given by the solution of: that coincides with Eq. ( To obtain the full Raman response function one should then integrate both the fields θ L and ρ, obtaining the effective action of ρ R only: with: that gives back Eq. ( 1 M. V. Klein 