After the recognition of the possibility to implement Majorana fermions using the building blocks of solid-state matters, the detection of this peculiar particle has been an intense focus of research. Here we experimentally demonstrate a collection of Majorana fermions living in a one-dimensional transport channel at the boundary of a superconducting quantum anomalous Hall insulator thin film. A series of topological phase changes are controlled by the reversal of the magnetization, where a half-integer quantized conductance plateau (0.5e 2 /h) is observed as a clear signature of the Majorana phase. This transport signature can be well repeated during many magnetic reversal sweeps, and can be tracked at different temperatures, providing a promising evidence of the chiral Majorana edge modes in the system. Viewed as a superconducting analog of the quantum Hall state The mediator of such edge modes, Majorana fermion, is a putative elementary spin-1/2 quasiparticle with the fascinating character of being its own antiparticle surmised by Ettore Majorana in 1937 The fundamental aspects of Majoranas and its non-Abelian braiding properties can be potentially utilized to implement topological qubits in fault-tolerant quantum computations TSC can be constructed using the building blocks of topological matters. A typical example is a quantum Hall system with Chern number C proximately coupled to a superconducting reservoir. However, a strong external magnetic field is usually required to achieve conventional quantum Hall states, which significantly suppresses the superconducting phase When a superconductor is coupled to a QAHI thin film, i.e., a magnetic topological insulator (TI) thin film, a reversal of the magnetization can induce a series of topological phase transitions. The proposed scheme is demonstrated in Fig. In the middle of the QAHI bar, the proximity to an s-wave superconductor drives the QAHI into a superconducting regime, where a finite superconducting pairing amplitude is induced to the surface of the QAHI, and in this case the system can be described by the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian , where , and , . Here, μ is the chemical potential and ∆1, 2 is the pairing gap function of the top and bottom surface states, respectively The key point to achieve a single CMEM is to induce a topological phase with an odd Chern number such that the two copies of CMEMs can be separated In order to experimentally identify the CMEM, we fabricate a QAHI-TSC device as illustrated in Fig. Since the hybridization gap, m0, is important to control the proposed topological phase change, the QAHI film thickness is precisely controlled to be 6 quintuple layers, i.e. around 6 nm The single CMEM corresponding to N = ± 1 can be identified experimentally by a unique transport signature of a half-integer longitudinal conductance plateau (0.5e 2 /h) during the reversal of the magnetization The transport channel formed by the CMEM of N = ± 1 is experimentally demonstrated by the longitudinal conductance signal of the TSC -QAHI device. Figure Despite the fact that Majorana fermions are charge neutral, the two CMEMs on the two edges of the TSCN=±1 constitute a coherent charged basis that transmits exactly one half of the incoming charges. As shown in Fig. In order to further confirm the transport signature of the CMEMs in the N = ± 1 phase, measurements at higher temperatures are carried out, and the results are shown in Fig. Other than the topological phase change in the TSC region, other effects that might lead to the observed transport signatures are required to be ruled out. Among them, Barkhausen effect Another important feature is that Barkhausen effect will not be present in the high-field shoulder of the σ12 valley as the QAHI enters the single domain regime, which is distinct with the narrow plateau/kink observed within this field range in the TSC device. Thus, we claim that the halfplateau conductance is not due to Barkhausen effect. Here we would emphasize that only when backscattering is owing to the TSCN=±1 phase does it involve such a half-quantized conductance. Any backscattering processes from the TSCN=±2 or the NSCN=0 phase would only involve a considerably small Andreev scattering, which cannot explain the half-integer conductance observed in this experiment. To summarize, we have demonstrated, for the first time, the observation of conductance quantization originated from the single CMEMs, which provides concrete evidence to the Majoranas-associated edge state transport. These observations are very distinct from the widely explored "zero-bias conductance anomalies" in various superconducting systems and can clearly reveal the physical picture of Majorana scattering. The demonstrated QAHI -superconductor system could act as a prototype of a chiral TSC in two-dimensions, which paves the road to construct more complex layouts to engineer and manipulate Majorana fermions in solid states. The four-terminal longitudinal conductance ( ) of the TSC device was obtained by passing a current (I12) and measuring the potential drop across points 1 and 2. To characterized the upper critical field ( ) of the Nb bar, its temperature-dependent resistance was measured using an independent four-probe method by passing a current ISC and measuring the voltage VSC under different perpendicular magnetic field (results also see the inset of Fig. ) was also independently measured in order to calculate its total longitudinal conductance ( ). 