To elucidate the mechanisms behind the enhanced Tc in monolayer (1ML) FeSe on SrTiO3 (STO), we grew highly strained 1ML FeSe on the rectangular (100) face of rutile TiO2, and observed the coexistence of replica bands and superconductivity with a Tc of 63 K. From the similar Tc between this system and 1ML FeSe on STO (001), we conclude that strain and dielectric constant are likely unimportant to the enhanced Tc in these systems. A systematic comparison of 1ML FeSe on TiO2 with other systems in the FeSe family shows that while charge transfer alone can enhance Tc, it is only with the addition of interfacial electron-phonon coupling that Tc can be increased to the level seen in 1ML FeSe on STO. Bulk FeSe superconducts at 8 K An ideal substrate to help determine which of the many proposed properties of STO (001) enhance T c in the 1ML FeSe system is rutile TiO 2 (100). Rutile TiO 2 is composed of corner-sharing octahedra of oxygen enclosed titanium atoms, while anatase has edge-sharing octahedra. Rutile TiO 2 is different from STO in two key ways: dielectric constant and lattice spacing. The low temperature dielectric constant of rutile TiO 2 is ≤ 260 In this work, we systematically compare several previously studied FeSe-based materials, 60ML FeSe/STO (001) , K-doped 3ML FeSe/STO (001) , 1ML FeSe/STO (001) with a new system, 1ML FeSe on rutile TiO 2 (100) (1ML FeSe/TiO (100) 2 ), to determine which substrate effects are central to superconductivity. All the films were grown via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and measured with in-situ ARPES. Our results indicate that electron-phonon coupling is necessary and sufficient for enhancing the T c in ML FeSe on STO, beyond charge transfer. The 1ML FeSe and the K-doped FeSe systems share similar band structures, which are distinct from that of multilayer FeSe, as are shown in the Fermi surface maps (Fig. . Multilayer FeSe has hole pockets around Γ point and 'dumbbell' shaped spectral weight near M point (Fig. Despite the similarities in the band structures of the K-doped and the 1ML films, strong interfacial mode coupling as evidenced by the replica bands, are only observed in the 1ML films grown on STO or TiO 2 (Fig. The symmetrized energy distribution curve (EDC) (Fig. 1ML FeSe/TiO (100) 2 and 1ML FeSe/STO (001) have very similar electronic structure, superconducting gap size, and T c . The similarities between these two systems, suggests that dielectric constant, strain and C4 symmetry likely do not play important roles in the enhancement of superconductivity of the 1ML FeSe on the STO and related substrates. These results are supported by other recent works of 1ML FeSe on other substrates In Fig. The bulk/multilayer films FeSe The third group contains all 1ML FeSe films on titanate substrates. Despite substantial variations in strain, substrate dielectric constant and C4 symmetry, these 1ML FeSe films all have T c close to the temperature of liquid nitrogen and share similar electronic structure and doping levels In conclusion, we used ARPES to compare the band structures of multilayer FeSe, K-doped multilayer FeSe, 1ML FeSe/STO (001) and 1ML FeSe/TiO 2 (100) . Electron doping can enhance the T c of multilayer to between 30 K and 50 K, but only with interfacial e-ph coupling in 1ML FeSe can T c reach to about 70 K. FIG. The comparison between 1ML FeSe/STO (001) and 1ML FeSe/TiO 2 (100) indicates that among all substrate effects, the high electric constant, strain and lattice mismatch on superconductivity is limited, while interfacial e-ph coupling is the key reason for 1ML FeSe/STO (001) system to have a boosted T c .