We report on magneto-optical imaging, magnetization, Hall effect and magnetoresistance experiments in Nb/Al 2 O 3 /Co thin film heterostructures. The magnetic field is applied perpendicularly to the plane of the film and gives rise to abrupt flux penetration of dendritic form. A magnetization texture is imprinted in the Co layer in perfect coincidence with these ramifications. The spin domains that mimic the vortex dendrites are stable upon the field removal. Moreover, the imprinted spin structure remains visible up to room temperature. Complementary magnetization, Hall effect and magneto-resistance experiments were performed in a similar sample where electrical contacts were placed on the Co layer. In the region of the field -temperature diagram where flux instabilities are known to occur in Nb films, irregular jumps are observed in the magnetic hysteresis and large amplitude noise is detected in the magneto-resistance and Hall resistivity data when measured as a function of the field. The study of non-collinear spin configurations structured at meso and microscopic scales have been a subject of great interest for fundamental and applied research. Previously, investigations were devoted to understand the microscopic mechanisms leading to non-trivial spin arrangements Domain walls Recently, novel spin textures have been put forward. Among them are vortexand chiral-type magnetic arrangements. Spin configurations in form of vortices structured at nanometric scale are usually associated to very small samples with circular geometries A remarkable nanoscale chiral spin structure is the magnetic skyrmion, discovered a few years ago Heterostructures formed by bilayers and multilayers including ferromagnetic and superconducting thin films are also potentially interesting systems to produce unusual spin textures. However, most of the works on these hybrids are dedicated to the study of the effects of the magnetic layers on the superconducting films In this article we report on spin texture generated by vortices in a Nb/Al 2 O 3 /Co thin film hybrid. The magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the superconducting layer gives rise to abrupt flux penetration in the form of dendrites. A magnetization texture is imprinted in the Co layer in perfect coincidence with these ramifications. Magneto-optical imaging (MOI) experiments were carried out to observe the flux avalanches and the imprinted spin texture. It is remarkable that the spin domains that mimic the vortex dendrites are stable upon the field removal. Moreover, the imprinted spin structure remains visible up to room temperature. Complementary magnetization, magneto-resistance and Hall effect experiments were performed in a similar sample were electrical contacts were placed on the Co film. In the region of the H-T diagram where flux instabilities are known to occur in the Nb film Several samples of the thin film heterostructure Nb/Al 2 O 3 /Co were made by UHV magnetron sputtering using the system Orion 8 @ manufactured by AJA International Inc. The films thicknesses for all samples are 200 nm, 22 nm and 24 nm for Nb, Al 2 O 3 and Co, respectively. The thicknesses were determined by x-ray reflectomety for each film individually. Base pressure was better than 5 10 -8 Torr. Growth was done under the Ar working pressure of 2 mTorr. The surface of the metallic films is homogeneous when observed using optical microscopy. The structure of the prepared heterostructures is show in the schematic picture of Fig. It is well known that Nb films exhibit flux avalanches when submitted to magnetic fields within a certain range and for temperatures below 5 K approximately In this section, magneto-transport measurements in the Nb/Al 2 O 3 /Co hybrid are presented and discussed. The results shown are those obtained when the electrical contacts were placed on the ferromagnetic film. We notice that the longitudinal resistivity (results not show) exhibit a metallic behavior, as usually observed in cobalt thin films Figure As for the Hall resistivity, the anomalous fluctuations in ρ xx cease suddenly at the threshold field μ 0 H t (T). The values for this characteristic field obtained from the MR measurements are also plotted in Fig. It is worthwhile to note that a simple device as our trilayer heterostructure allows the detection of vortex avalanches using a conventional electrical transport measurement technique. Clearly, in the present stage, the signal detection method employed in our measurements does not allow detailed studies of the noise spectrum as done in the more complex experiments reported in references As a final remark, we mention that the imprinting of vortex avalanches in a ferromagnetic thin film might represent a step forward to the development of an alternative technique for achieving vortex decoration in a medium useful for data recording and processing. After the completion of this manuscript we become aware of a recent work by J. Brisbois et al. 