A gas of interacting ultracold fermions can be tuned into a strongly interacting regime using a Feshbach resonance. Here we theoretically study quasiparticle transport in a system of two reservoirs of interacting ultracold fermions on the BCS side of the BCS-BEC crossover coupled weakly via a tunnel junction. Using the generalized BCS theory we calculate the time evolution of the system that is assumed to be initially prepared in a non-equilibrium state characterized by a particle number imbalance or a temperature imbalance. A number of characteristic features like sharp peaks in quasiparticle currents, or transitions between the normal and superconducting states are found. We discuss signatures of the Seebeck and the Peltier effect and the resulting temperature difference of the two reservoirs as a function of the interaction parameter (kF a) -1 . The Peltier effect may lead to an additional cooling mechanism for ultracold fermionic atoms. Thermal transport is an important tool to investigate many-body systems. There is a variety of transport coefficients describing the heat carried by thermal currents as well as the voltages (in the case of charged particles) or chemical potential differences (in the case of neutral particles) induced by a thermal gradient (Seebeck effect). The inverse effect, the build-up of a thermal gradient by a particle current is of great practical importance (Peltier effect). These thermoelectric effects depend in sensitive ways on the excitation spectrum of the system close to the Fermi surface 1,2 . If the spectrum is particle-hole symmetric (as it is to a good approximation in the bulk of a metallic superconductor), the Seebeck effect vanishes. Breaking this symmetry in superconducting tunnel junctions allows for refrigeration In recent years, transport in ultracold atomic gases has been investigated both theoretically In this paper, we investigate the coupling of thermal and particle currents in a junction of two superfluids. The goal is to explore the possibility to realize dynamical heating and refrigeration phenomena around the phase transition. To this end, we consider two reservoirs of interacting ultracold atoms connected by a weak link that we model as a tunnel junction. The generalized BCS theory The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II we introduce a model Hamiltonian for the system consisting of two tunnel-coupled reservoirs as well as the selfconsistency equations for the superconducting gap and the chemical potential in the generalized BCS theory. We also give expressions for the particle and the heat current. In Sec. III we calculate the time evolution of the system with a fixed total number of particles initially prepared with an imbalance in particle number and/or temperature. Finally, we conclude in Sec. IV. Our system, depicted in Fig. The Hamiltonian describing this system is assumed to be where H L and H R are the BCS Hamiltonians for the two reservoirs (2) Here, c pσ and c † pσ (a pσ and a † pσ ) are the annihilation (creation) operators of a fermion with momentum p and spin σ in the left (right) reservoir, ξ p = ε p -μ is the singleparticle energy with respect to the chemical potential, and V pp is the (singlet) pairing interaction. In the context of neutral fermionic atoms the spin degree of freedom is represented by the two hyperfine states of the atom in consideration. The tunneling Hamiltonian is where η kp is the tunneling matrix element, which in the following we assume to be energy independent, In the next step, we restrict ourselves to the mean-field approximation for the Hamiltonians in Eq. (2) introducing the mean-field parameter ∆ L for the left reservoir and analogously for the right reservoir. In a dilute gas of neutral fermionic atoms it is a good approximation to describe the interaction V pp between two atoms using a single parameter, the s-wave scattering length a. Consequently, the dimensionless interaction parameter (k F a) -1 can be included in the BCS gap equation using a standard renormalization procedure (see, e.g. Appendix 8A of Ref. 20). The gap equation then takes the form where E = (ε -μ) 2 + |∆| 2 and ε F is the Fermi energy. In Eq. ( To solve it, the second equation is obtained by fixing the number of particles For the density of states (DOS) of a 3D Fermi gas in the normal state N 0 (ε) ∝ √ ε (neglecting the confining potential) which we used above, the integrals in Eqs. ( Note that this mean-field critical temperature T c is in fact the pairing temperature below which a significant number of fermions are bound in pairs. In the BCS limit the real critical temperature and mean-field T c coincide, however, closer to the unitary regime, this approximation starts to fail. An initial state with particle number imbalance or temperature imbalance between the left and right reservoirs will give rise to particle and heat transport. The particle current I and energy current I E are defined as where the angular brackets represent the thermodynamic average in the grandcanonical ensemble and NL = pσ c † pσ c pσ is the fermion number operator in the left reservoir. All the operators are in the Heisenberg picture. If we restrict ourselves to quasiparticle transport (ignoring Cooper pairs and interference terms between Cooper pairs and quasiparticles), the expressions for the particle and heat current in the tunneling limit read and Here, V L(R) is the volume and f L(R) (E) the Fermi function describing the left (right) reservoir. The superconducting density of states } contains the energy-dependent density of states N 0 L(R) of a normal 3-dimensional Fermi gas that can be expressed as For finite reservoirs, which is the case we are studying here, a non-equilibrium initial state (like a temperature or particle number imbalance between the left and right reservoir) will induce time-dependent transport Here, we used the relation between the energy of the left (right) reservoir and temperature change of the system at constant volume C V = ∂E/∂T . The heat capacity in the BCS theory is given by (11) In writing Eqs. (10) and (11), we have neglected number and energy fluctuations in the reservoirs which were shown to be small in the regime considered here To calculate the time evolution of the system, we proceed as follows: starting with N L(R) (t) = N ± δN/2 and T L(R) (t) = T ± δT /2 at time t, we calculate the corresponding values of μ L(R) (t) and ∆ L(R) (t) using Eqs. ( Typically, starting with an initial particle number (temperature) imbalance δN 0 (δT 0 ) will lead to a timedependent temperature (particle number) imbalance due to the coupling between particle and heat transport. As a consequence, the chemical potential imbalance δμ = μ L -μ R and δ∆ = ∆ L -∆ R will also depend on time. Eventually, as t → ∞, the system reaches an equilibrium state. In the following we show and discuss three examples of such a time evolution displaying various quantities characterizing the system as a function of time. The time scale in Figs. 3-5 is fixed as follows: time can be expressed in units of ε b /|η| 2 , where ε b = 2 /(2ma 2 ) and |η| 2 = |η kp | 2 is the modulus squared of the tunneling matrix element introduced after Eq. ( The time scale τ 0 represents a characteristic particle transport time scale and is analogous to the RC-time of a capacitor circuit. Figure Figure To summarize, we have investigated particle and heat transport on the BCS side of the BCS-BEC crossover in a two-terminal setup with two reservoirs of interacting ultracold atoms. We have shown that a system initially out of equilibrium will show particle and/or thermal currents whose existence leads to characteristic time-dependent signatures, such as transitions between normal and superconducting states and resonant features in the currents as a function of time. An initial temperature imbalance can lead to a difference in chemical potentials at intermediate times. This is a signature of the Seebeck effect. Conversely, an initial particle number imbalance for two reservoirs at equal temperatures can lead to the build-up of a temperature difference at intermediate times, which is a signature of the Peltier effect. The maximal induced imbalance increases if (k F a) -1 moves closer to the unitarity limit. In conclusion, our paper points out a variety of dynam-ical features visible in the equilibration process that can be used to pin-point the parameters of the system. An experimental confirmation of the Peltier effect discussed here is important since an additional cooling mechanism for ultracold fermionic atoms will be a valuable resource. Furthermore, transport experiments in systems of ultracold atoms provide a fascinating laboratory in which the combination of particle and thermal currents can be explored in a regime that is not accessible to experiments with metallic superconductors.