We show that disruption of charge-density-wave (stripe) order by charge transfer excitation, enhances the superconducting phase rigidity in La1.885Ba0.115CuO4 (LBCO). Time-Resolved Resonant Soft X-Ray Diffraction demonstrates that charge order melting is prompt following near-infrared photoexcitation whereas the crystal structure remains intact for moderate fluences. THz timedomain spectroscopy reveals that, for the first 2ps following photoexcitation, a new Josephson Plasma Resonance edge, at higher frequency with respect to the equilibrium edge, is induced indicating enhanced superconducting interlayer coupling. The fluence dependence of the charge-order melting and the enhanced superconducting interlayer coupling are correlated with a saturation limit of ∼0.5mJ/cm 2 . Using a combination of x-ray and optical spectroscopies we establish a hierarchy of timescales between enhanced superconductivity, melting of charge order and rearrangement of the crystal structure. The interplay between superconductivity and broken electronic symmetries has emerged as a central theme in cuprate physics with increasing reports of charge order in several materials Here, we reveal how puncturing stripe order, with charge transfer defects introduced by near-infrared optical pulses, can dynamically enhance the superconducting order at the expense of stripe order. Specifically, we combine photoexcitation, Time-Resolved Resonant Soft X-ray Diffraction (TR-RSXD) and THz time-domain spectroscopy to demonstrate that ultrafast disruption of the stripe ordered phase promptly enhances interlayer Josephson coupling in La 1.885 Ba 0.115 CuO 4 (LBCO). Furthermore, we show that the fluence dependence of the enhanced interlayer Josephson coupling follows closely that of the stripe order melting and not that of lattice rearrangement. We studied LBCO, for which bulk superconductivity develops at T C 13K, spin-ordering at T SO 42K and charge ordering along with the LTT distortion at T CO T LT T 53K Single crystals of LBCO were grown using the traveling- solvent-floating zone method Figure For the same excitation fluence, both the (0.23 0 0.65) and (0 0 1) peaks are reduced in intensity by ∼40%. However, the temporal response after photoexcitation is different. A fit to the stripe peak data (Fig. The results show that charge transfer destruction of stripe order enhances interlayer superconducting coupling in La 1.885 Ba 0.115 CuO 4 . The fluence dependence of the charge transfer collapse of stripe order along with the concomitant emergence of an improved superconducting phase should encourage further work to reveal the nature of the charge transfer process 