We perform an experiment to test between two theories of the electrodynamics of superconductors: the standard London theory and an alternative proposed by J. E. Hirsch [Phys. Rev. B 69, 214515 (2004)]. The two alternatives give different predictions with respect to the screening of an electric field by a superconductor, and we try to detect this effect using atomic force microscopy on a niobium sample. We also perform the reverse experiment, where we demonstrate a superconductive tip mounted on a qPlus force sensor. Due to limited accuracy, we are able neither to prove nor to disprove Hirsch's hypothesis. Within our accuracy of 0.17 N/m, the superconductive transition does not alter the atomic-scale interaction between tip and sample. The first phenomenological description of superconductivity was provided by the brothers Fritz and Heinz London in 1935, expresses the free, collisionless acceleration of the superconducting charge carriers under the action of an electric field. Here n s , j s , and m are the number density, current density and mass of the superconducting electrons, and SI units are used. The second equation, leads to the Meissner effect: the expulsion of the magnetic field from the interior of a superconductor. A proper microscopic theory of superconductivity appeared only in 1957 with Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer, As discussed by J. E. Hirsch, 5 the London equations present two difficulties. First, they predict that an accumulated space charge should persist for arbitrarily long times as the temperature approaches absolute zero or the critical temperature T c , To solve these difficulties Hirsch follows an early attempt of the London brothers, 1,2 and replaces Eq. ( where φ is the electric potential. To decide between these two theories, one can consider what happens when an electrostatic field is applied to a superconductor, as first proposed in Ref. 7. Figure In our experiment we combined atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to measure the interaction between a metal tip and a niobium surface. In particular, we looked for differences between measurements performed below and above the critical temperature T c = 9.25 K of the sample, We employed a combined STM/AFM (Omicron LT STM/AFM, Omicron Nanotechnology) cooled by an helium bath cryostat to 4.4 K and operated in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) at a base pressure of 3 × 10 -9 Pa. The Nb(110) sample (MaTecK GmbH, purity 99.99%) was prepared by repeated cycles of Ar + sputtering and annealing up to 1170 K, resulting in a reconstructed surface due to oxygen segregating from the bulk. For the STM measurements a bias voltage V was applied to the sample, and the tunneling current I was measured by a DLPCA-200 transimpedance amplifier (FEMTO Messtechnik GmbH) connected to the tip. How big is the signal that we expect to measure? For the normal metal of Fig. Here z is the tip-sample distance, and p is the dipole of the tip, estimated to be 0.5 D 23 or 0.9 D 24 for copper tips. is depicted in Fig. Figure From the latter data, we can estimate the overall accuracy of our measurements: the spectra at the two temperatures differ by 2.2 Hz at 180 pm from pointcontact, which corresponds to a force gradient error δk ts = 0.17 N/m. This value is the residual systematic error after having taken special care in order to characterize and account for possible instrumental effects, due in particular to the heating and cooling of the microscope. We considered specifically: Scanner calibration. The position of the tip is controlled by a piezoelectric tube, whose calibration is the ratio between the tip apex displacement and the applied voltage, expressed in m/V. This calibration depends on the temperature of the microscope, thus the z measurements have been rescaled by measuring the height of a monoatomic step on the copper surface. Scanner creep and hysteresis. The non-linearity of the piezo tube results in hysteresis in the tip displacement, and in creep -the change of the tip position over time with an unchanged applied voltage. To minimize the effects of the former, we acquired the ∆f (z) measurements by sweeping z always in the same direction, and we positioned the tip for a spectroscopy measurement by interpolating between images taken in the forward and in the backward scan directions. The creep decreases logarithmically over time after a tip displacement, so after having approached the tip we waited until there was no significant drift in the imaging over some minutes -the timescale of the spectroscopy measurements. The accuracy of the tip-sample distance is key to our experiments, so before each spectroscopy the z-creep was measured by recording the voltage change needed to keep the tunneling current constant, and then compensated by subtracting the measured drift speed from the voltage controlling the z position of the tip. qPlus calibration. The amplitude calibration of the qPlus sensor does not change appreciably between 4.4 K and 9.4 K, as presented in Appendix A. qPlus resonance frequency. The resonance frequency of a qPlus sensor drifts with temperature. Bias voltage. The frequency-shift measurements were acquired at a bias voltage giving zero tunneling current. In this way we avoid crosstalk effects between the AFM and the STM channels, Effectively, Fig. We attempted to test between two different theories describing the electrodynamics of superconductors: the traditional London theory and the theory proposed by J. E. Hirsch. By means of AFM spectroscopy, we tried to detect a change in the electrostatic interaction between a metal tip and a surface when one of the two becomes superconductive. We observed a small effect, which is however below the accuracy of our measurements, and thus not enough to support Hirsch's hypothesis. Since we are not able to provide a lower estimate of the magnitude of the effect predicted by Hirsch, our measurements are not sufficient to disprove his hypothesis either. We can generally conclude that the superconductive transition does not affect the tip-sample interaction within our experimental accuracy of δk ts = 0.17 N/m at 180 pm from point-contact. Since the effect we are looking for increases dramatically for T /T c 0.1, The applications of superconducting STM tips This function was fit to the I(z) curves measured at 4.4 K and at 9.4 K by varying I 0 and κ, whereas I ofs and A were measured directly. As shown in Fig. 