We study the Josephson effect in spin-singlet superconductor/helical p-wave superconductor junctions with a ferromagnetic barrier using the quasiclassical Green function method. It is found that both sin φ-type and cos φ-type current-phase relations always exist, irrespective of the gap symmetries in superconductors. The indispensable condition for the sin φ-type and cos φ-type current is that the magnetization must have a component parallel to the crystallographic a or b axis, which is distinct from the case of p-wave superconductor described by a d-vector with a uniform direction. The relation between the condition and the symmetries of the gap functions is analysed. We investigate in detail the symmetries and the sign reversal of the Josephson current when the magnetization is rotated. Introduction. -Since the discovery of the spin-triplet superconducting materials such as Sr 2 RuO 4 (a) E-mail: chengqiang07@mails.ucas.ac.cn (b) E-mail: biaojin@ucas.ac.cn As the aforementioned p-wave states, the helical ones, k x x ± k y ŷ and k y x ± k x ŷ, are also the candidate states for the spin-triplet superconducting material Sr 2 RuO 4 Motivated by these questions, we study in this paper the Josephson effect in SS/FI/helical p-wave TS junctions using the quasiclassical Green function method with the Riccati parameterization Formalism. -We consider the two-dimensional SS/FI/TS junctions which are assumed in clean limit as shown in fig. The interface barrier, located at x = 0 and along the y axis, is modeled by a delta function U (x) = (U 0 + M .σ)δ(x) with the non-magnetic potential U 0 and the ferromagnetic term M • σ. The magnetization M = M (sin θ m cos φ m , sin θ m sin φ m , cos θ m ) with θ m the polar angle and φ m the azimuthal angle. We first give the structure of the scattering matrix Š for the junctions in the normal state. The matrix is diagonal in the particle-hole space, i.e. Š = diag( Ŝ, Ŝ) with The 2×2 matrices S 11 (S 22 ) and S 21 (S 12 ) in spin space represent the electron reflection in the left (right) metal and the electron transition from the left (right) metal to the right (left) one, respectively. The hole reflection and transition are represented by the matrices S11 ( S22 ) and S21 ( S12 ). For the FI interface, we have S 22 = S 11 , S 12 = S 21 = 1 + S 11 , S11 = S22 = S * 11 and S12 = S21 = S * 12 . The matrices can be expressed with the x component of the wavevector of the incident electrons, the effective magnetization magnitude X = Mm h2 kF and the effective non-magnetic potential Z = Um h2 kF . The retard Green's function ĝ in superconductors, which satisfies the Eilenberger equation which is a 4 × 4 matrix in spin ⊗ particle-hole space. The quantities g, f, g and f can be parameterized as with the 2 × 2 coherence functions matrices γ and γ. The equations for γ and γ are given by where v F is the Fermi velocity, the Matsubara frenquency w n = 2πk B T (n + 1 2 ) and ∆(k) = [∆(-k)] * . For our model, the energy gap matrix in SS is ∆(k) = ∆ 0 i σy e iφ for s-wave symmetry and ∆(k) = ∆ 0 (k 2 xk 2 y )i σy e iφ (or ∆ 0 k x k y i σy e iφ ) for d x 2 -y 2 (or d xy )-wave symmetry, respectively. The gap matrix in TS is ∆(k) = (d(k) • σ)iσ y . The temperature dependence of the gap magnitude ∆ 0 is determined by the BCS-type equation with transition temperature T C . φ gives the difference of the external phases of SS and TS when the phase in TS is taken as zero. Ignoring the proximity effect, the incoming coherence functions γ 1(2) and γ1(2) for SS (TS), bulk solutions in equilibrium, can be obtained through solving the eq. ( with γα,β = Sα,ν γν S ν,β , (α, β = 1, 2). The retard Green's function ĝ in SS is obtained by substituting γ(γ) with γ 1 ( Γ1 ) in eq. ( where j(w n , θ) ≡ Tr[τ 3 ĝ], j S (w n , θ) ≡ Tr[diag(σ 3 , -σ 3 )ĝ], N (0) is the density of states at the Fermi level in the normal state and the Fermi surface average is only over positive directions. The dimensionless charge (spin) current denoted by I J (I S ) can be expressed as I J = eIRN kB TC (I S = e 2 IS RN hkB TC ), where I( S ) = J( S )A is the current for junctions with interface area A and R N is the resistance for junctions in the normal state. Results and discussions. -First, we present the results for the junctions without the non-magnetic potential, i.e., Z = 0. In this case, we have the general consequences of the charge current which are Eq. ( for any θ m . Magnetizations with opposite x component will create charge currents with opposite directions. We do not plot the CCPRs for π < φ m < 2π because we also have the equality The equalities in eq. ( From the CCPRs presented in fig. For the s-wave SS/HP 2± -wave TS junction, the condition for LOC in the charge current will turn into the indispensable presence of the y component of the magnetization, i.e. M • ŷ = 0. Magnetizations with opposite y component will bring charge currents with opposite directions, for any θ m . The extra symmetry will become The condition for the LOC in the spin current of the junction turns into M • x = 0. These differences between the CCPRs (or SCPRs) for HP 1± -wave and those for HP 2± -wave are a result of the π 2 difference between the x(y) component and the y(x) component. Although the selection rules for the cos φ-type LOC in CCPRs and for the sin φ-type LOC in SCPRs are obtained from the current of junctions without the non-magnetic potential, they also apply to the junctions with Z = 0. According to the rules, we can divide the junctions into two groups which are given in table. 1. For Z = 0, the CCPRs of junctions in the group with the rule M • x = 0 obey the sign reversal and symmetry presented in eq. ( We turn to the junctions with the finite non-magnetic potential, i.e., Z = 0. We take the d xy -wave SS/FI/ HP 1+ -wave TS junction as an example. Fig. From the above discussions, we can derive the selection rules for the sin φ-type LOC in the charge current and the cos φ-type LOC in the spin current which have been summarised in table The selection rules in table 1 reveal the interaction forms of the helical superconductivity and ferromagnetism which are involved in the free energy function F . We consider the product of the order parameter in SS and the d-vector in TS which can be written as The functions g 1 (k x , k y ) and g 2 (k x , k y ) have opposite parity for k x and k y . The selection rules indicate that M x sin φ and M y M z cos φ will contribute to the free energy if g 1 (k x , k y ) is odd for k x and g 2 (k x , k y ) is odd for k y ; M y sin φ and M x M z cos φ will contribute to the free energy if g 1 (k x , k y ) is odd for k y and g 2 (k x , k y ) is odd for k x . The non-zero conditions for the terms in ∂F ∂φ are just the LOC selection rules for the charge current; the non-zero conditions for the terms in the z component of M × ∂F ∂M x - Conclusion. -The in-plane d-vector in the superconductor with helical states and its wavevector-dependent direction can bring novel and rich physics due to the interplay between superconductivity and ferromagnetism, which can be displayed in the electronic transport properties and the Josephson effect. In this paper, we study the CCPRs and the SCPRs in SS/FI/TS Josephson junctions. The gap function in SS is assumed to be s, d 