The Andreev bound states and charge transport in a Josephson junction between two superconductors with intrinsic exchange fields are studied. We find that for a parallel configuration of the exchange fields in the superconductors the discrete spectrum consists of two pairs of spinsplit states. The Josephson current in this case is mainly carried by bound states. In contrast, for the antiparallel configuration we find that there is no spin-splitting of the bound states and that for phase differences smaller than certain critical value there are no bound states at all. Hence the supercurrent is only carried by states in the continuous part of the spectrum. Our predictions can be tested by performing a tunneling spectroscopy of a weak link between two spin-split superconductors. tic superconductor-normal metal-superconductor (S/N/S) junction with equal gaps and at low temperatures, tunneling through Andreev bound states (ABSs) is the dominant contribution to the Josephson current Introduction. -Superconductors with spin-split density of states have attracted particular interest since the pioneering works of Tedrow and Merservey, in which Zeeman splitting in superconductors was used to determine the spin-polarization of ferromagnetic metals There has been a resurgence of interest in SS because of several theoretical studies proposing them as absolute spin-valves One striking effect in such structures is the enhancement of the critical Josephson current in a FI-S/I/FI-S junction by increasing the amplitude of the spin-splitting field In order to understand the supercurrent in ballistic Josephson junctions it is important to analyze the spectral properties of these weak links Theory. -We consider a Josephson junction consisting of two bulk SSs connected by a ballistic weak link [see Fig. where Here, σi are the Pauli matrices describing the spin degree-of-freedom. The temperature-dependent gap is modeled by the interpolation formula ∆ = ∆(T ) ∼ = ∆ 0 tanh(1.74 (T C /T ) -1), where T C is the critical temperature for superconductivity. In Eq. (3), φ is the phase difference between the order parameters of the superconductors, Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function, and δ(x) is the Dirac delta function. We assume weak exchange fields so that the Clogston-Chandrasekhar criterion, |h L,R | < ∆ 0 / √ 2, is fulfilled, where ∆ 0 is the BCS gap at zero temperature and zero exchange field We solve Eq. ( Here we have introduced the coherence factors ). We use these piecewise solutions to construct the wave function ansatz for a spin-σ electron-like quasiparticle incident from the left SS with wavevector k e σ . In the following we consider a narrow wire constriction, and provide the corresponding single channel calculations. Therefore, the wave function ansatz reads: For x < 0, Eq. ( approximation by assuming that μ max (E, ∆, |h ν |), so that the electron and hole quasiparticle wavevectors can be regarded as approximately equal in magnitude, where k F is the Fermi momentum in the normal state. The probability amplitudes in Eq. ( and a h σσ (φ) = a e σσ (-φ) where we introduced the dimensionless strength of the scattering potential Z = 2mU/k F h2 The complete Green's function of the junction is built from the scattering solutions Eq. ( where . This Green's function carries the complete information about the system and allows the computation of the phase dependent local density of states (LDOS) and the Josephson current The LDOS at the tunneling barrier can be related to the (1, 1) component of the retarded Green's function Eq. ( In our case, the spinresolved LDOS reads where the atomic scale oscillations of ρ(E) are assumed to be averaged out In addition to the energy spectrum, we are also interested in the Josephson current through the junction where k B is the Boltzmann constant and Tr[. . .] is the trace in Nambu-spin space and G r/a is the retarded/advanced Green's function, using the real time representation of the Furusaki-Tsukada formula Results: Andreev bound states. -We start by analyzing the results for the discrete Andreev bound state (ABS) spectrum of a short junction with a perfect transmission coefficient (τ = 1), thereby recovering the wellknown phase dependence of the ABS energy in a short S/N/S junction without spin-splitting fields (Fig. By lowering the value of one of the exchange fields while keeping the other fixed, the ABSs disappear within finite intervals of the phase difference φ [Figs. One can provide a physical interpretation for the reduction of the gap and disappearance of ABS for some phase ranges: For illustration we consider a spin-up quasiparticle with positive energy coming from the left electrode [c.f. Fig. This quasi-particle encounters a reduced gap in the left SS of magnitude ∆ -h L and an enhanced gap of magnitude ∆ -h R in the right SS. If the quasi-particle energy is higher than the energy of the left gap and lower than the right one, it can be Andreev reflected only at the right SS and ABSs can not be formed. The process for a spin-down quasi-particle incoming from the right electrode is analogous. The same picture applies for quasi-particles with energies E < 0 and can be modified to any case of collinear orientation of the exchange fields. This scenario is very similar to the case of a junction between two superconductors with gaps different in magnitude with n ∈ Z. Note that the spin-splitting of the gaps (being a bulk property of the SS leads) is independent of the length L. In the short junction limit (L hv F /∆), one recovers the critical phase φ C = arccos(1 -|h L -h R |/∆) introduced earlier. From Eq. ( Results: local density of states. -Direct insight about states for all phases can also be obtained by calculating the LDOS of the junction using Eq. ( In the anti-parallel case and |φ| < φ C [see Fig. For imperfect transmission (τ < 1) and parallel configuration of the exchange fields (h R = h L = h) [Fig. Results: current-phase relation. -To understand how the absence of ABSs influence the Josephson current in the non-parallel case for |φ| < φ C , we numerically evaluate Eq. ( The total current is the sum of two contributions: one originating from the ABS (I ABS ) and the other from states in the continuous spectrum (I Cont ). These are shown in the lower panels of Figs. Conclusion. -We have presented a detailed study of the spectrum and current-phase relation of a Josephson junction consisting of a short weak link connecting two superconducting leads with a spin-split density of states. We have shown that for collinear orientations of the exchange fields, any deviation from the case of equal fields leads to finite intervals of phases without Andreev bound states. These intervals are independent of the transmission of the junction and are characterized by a critical phase-difference φ C = arccos(1 -|h L -h R |/∆) for which ABSs disappear by merging within the continuum. When the phase difference is in the range |φ| < φ C , the Josephson current is therefore completely carried by states in the continuous part of the spectrum. Outside this range the current is a superposition of the contributions from the ABS and the continuous spectrum. For perfect transmission the current is mainly due to tunneling through the ABSs [Fig. Our findings on the spectrum of SS/I/SS junctions can be tested by tunneling spectroscopy of the ABS spectrum as in Ref. 