We consider properties of a fully superconducting variant of the superconducting quantum interference proximity transistor, a magnetic flux sensor. We study the density of states in a finite-size superconducting metal wire in the diffusive limit, and how it depends on the phase gradient of the order parameter. We describe the dependence on the junction length and interface transparency, and discuss properties relevant for using the structure in magnetic flux detection applications. Superconductivity on the scale of the coherence length is sensitive to its surroundings. This can be used to modulate the density of states in a mesoscopic metal wire via magnetic flux, by imposing a phase gradient via embedding the wire as a weak link in a superconducting ring. Detecting the modulation with a tunnel junction probe attached to the weak link is the basis of the superconducting quantum interference proximity transistor (SQUIPT), which can be used as a magnetic field sensor. The current-phase relation in SS'S junctions has been extensively studied in the past, and is largely understood. Superconducting quantum interference proximity transistor, consisting of a superconducting (S') weak link of length L embedded in a superconducting (S) SQUID ring. The magnetic flux Φ induces a difference of φ in the phase of the order parameter across the junction, which in the weak link limit is φ = 2πΦ/Φ0. The density of states in the weak link can be probed with a normal or superconducting tunnel probe (T). transparency, and some practical consequences for the S-SQUIPT application. We consider the SQUIPT setup depicted in Fig. The superconducting properties in the diffusive limit at equilibrium are conveniently described by the nonlinear σ-model. , where the density reads (cf. Ref. (1) Here, ω n = 2πT (n+ 1 2 ) are Matsubara frequencies, ν F the DOS per spin at the Fermi level, and A the vector potential. D is the diffusion constant and ∆ = |∆|e iφ the order parameter. Moreover, λ is the superconducting interaction constant. The parameters χ and θ are real-valued, and at saddle points related to the quasiclassical anomalous Green function f (x, ω n ) = e iχ(x,ωn) sin θ(x, ω n ). The dependence on λ is now contained in T c , assumed to be of the BCS weak-coupling form. The connection of the wire to the superconducting ring is described via a tunneling boundary term, -cos(χ(x j ) -χ Sj ) sin θ(x j ) sin θSj ] , where r = 2R I ADν F is the ratio of interface resistance R I to the resistance per length of the wire, and θS∓ = arctan(∆ R /ω n ), χ S-= 0 and χ S+ = φ are the values inside the ring at the left (x -= 0) and right (x + = L) interfaces. Requiring variation of Eq. ( The self-consistency equation for the order parameter ∆ is obtained similarly, The boundary term generates the boundary conditions, at the left (-) and right (+) interfaces. In the cleaninterface limit r → 0 these reduce to continuity conditions χ(x ± ) = χ S± , θ(x ± ) = θ S± . Note also that in this case F b → 0 as r → 0. The reduced density of states N (E, x) = ν(E, x)/ν F = Re cosh θ(E, x) and current I(x) = -δF δA | A=0 = 4πT ADν F ωn>0 ∂ x χ sin 2 θ follow directly from the solutions of the equation set. It is well known that there are multiple classical solutions, corresponding to different windings of the superconducting phase along the superconducting wire. In the numerical solution of the equation set, to handle this and to obtain also the solutions along the unstable branches, we use the pseudo-arclength continuation method applied on the self-consistency equation. This method is useful for tracing a continuous solution branch (φ, ∆) without requiring the existence of a single-valued function ∆(φ) (see Appendix A for details). Within the approximations here, the configuration minimizing δF should be considered as the stable solution. Along a continuous solution branch, this can also be evaluated via a standard relation, based on the current evaluated at a stationary point This follows from Eqs. ( x 0 dx A(x ) and that δF/δX| X=X * = 0. Energy differences between disconnected branches however need to be determined from Eqs. ( The density of states in S-SQUIPT is sensitive to the phase point where the system is biased. To specify this, we need to comment on the supercurrent in the junction. The form of the current-phase relation (CPR) in superconducting strips is well studied under the approximations outlined above. After this, the solution transitions to a backward branch reaching to φ = π, I = 0, for k ∈ [0, 1/2], a = (k + 1)/3. The phase gradient becomes more non-uniform, corresponding to the formation of a phase slip center in the middle of the junction. In short junctions where the CPR is single-valued, the kinetic inductance of the wire decreases around φ = π, and can become small compared to that of the ring, inducing behavior similar to hysteretic rf-SQUIDs. For T ∆ R /2, we have As visible in Fig. Let us now consider the density of states (DOS) in the junction. Analytical solutions to Eq. ( × arcosh independent of the superconductivity of the wire itself. For long wires (L ξ w ), on the other hand, the result converges to the density of states of a bulk superconductor, affected by depairing from the supercurrent flow. For long junctions, the parameter can be estimated from GL solutions 2) 2 /(φ -π) 2 ]/4 on the backward branch close to φ = π. The approximation in Eq. ( The cross-over from the short-wire to the long-wire limit is illustrated in Fig. The physical mechanism giving rise to the finite-size effects in the DOS are the Andreev reflections at the ring interfaces, x = 0, x = L. In a normal metal wire, this effect decoheres on a certain decay length scale (E) ∝ D/E, which can be understood to originate from energy dependent phase shifts between electrons and the almost retroreflected holes (cf. e.g. Ref. 42 for review). The possibility of Andreev reflections also inside the superconducting wire itself however alters (E), e.g., inhibiting low-energy electrons from reaching the ring boundary. Moreover, in a superconductor the decay length diverges around the gap edge E g , where -2 0 = -2i|∆| csch θ 0 + g 2 sinh 2 θ 0 . The longest decay length is given by the eigenvalue with the smallest real part, -1 = min | Re λ|. They are solutions to The energy dependence of (E) is shown in Fig. 0 (E g ) = 0, so that also -2 (E g ) = 0. Around the gap edge, the length scale diverges as ∝ (E -E g ) -1/4 . As the decay length is larger than L in an energy range of width δE ∝ L -4 , the deviations from Eq. ( Imperfect interface transparency in SQUIPT influences both the CPR and the DOS. In particular, it enables additional stationary solutions, where phase drops across the barriers at the interfaces. With increasing interface resistance r, the current-phase relation crosses over to I(φ) ± I c sin(φ/2), that of two Josephson junctions in series. For r → 0 (E J (r) E J,wire ), lowest-energy solutions have φ 1 ≈ 2πn and I(φ) ≈ I wire (φ), whereas for r → ∞ (E J (r) E J,wire ), φ 1 ≈ φ/2 + πn and consequently I(φ) ≈ ± I J sin(φ/2). The cross-over is illustrated in Fig. The proximity effect from the ring diminishes with increasing barrier height r, and controlling the properties of the weak link via the superconducting ring becomes less effective. This is illustrated in Fig. For the S-SQUIPT device application, a relevant metric is how much the modulation of the superconducting gap is suppressed. In Fig. We can now discuss the performance of the SS'S devices in a magnetometric measurement. In this mode, the tunnel contact [(T) in Fig. and the variation of the observed voltage V (I bias , Φ) as a function of the flux Φ can be used to infer Φ. The sensitivity can be characterized by the flux-voltage transfer function The resolution is intrinsically limited by the voltage noise in the probe junction, which can be described by an equivalent flux noise where S V = ( dV dI ) 2 S I and S I = 2eI coth eV 2k B T is the tunneling shot noise. Preamplifier voltage noise will also give a similar contribution. The current-voltage characteristic I(V, Φ) is shown in Fig. The voltage response at different bias currents and the corresponding transfer function are shown in Fig. For weak links short compared to the coherence length, there is little difference between the normal and superconducting cases, on the level of the present description. As the junction length increases, the change in the current-phase relation starts to limit the maximum achievable modulation of the density of states. This is reflected in the decrease of the voltage modulation observed by the tunnel probe. Moreover, with increasing length of the junction, the gap edge singularities of the BCS DOS transform to smaller peaks, in a way that is sensitive to the finite size of the weak link. The long perturbation decay length at gap edges has an impact on how generic the results discussed here are in practice, even within the mean field approximations. In reality, even if the superconducting wire is well described by the quasi-1D equations used above, the boundary conditions at x = 0, L may not be as accurate. Namely, the contact region often has nontrivial 3D structure, and the phase gradient also extends to the terminals. In such cases, we expect that in the interior of the wire the results will follow Eq. ( In summary, we discussed the current-phase relation, density of states, and free energy of superconducting wires, focusing on points relevant for the S-SQUIPT application. The results point out that superconducting material is a viable choice, provided the junction length does not significantly exceed the coherence length, in order to retain sensitivity and avoid magnetic hysteresis. the corrections, substituting the leading term back in, and expanding in small |∆| yields the GL functional.