The field and temperature dependencies of the longitudinal and Hall resistivity have been measured for FeSe1-xSx (x=0.04, 0.09 and 0.19) single crystals. The sample FeSe0.81S0.19 does not show a transition to an orthorhombic phase and exhibits at low temperatures the transport properties quite different from those of orthorhombic samples. The behavior of FeSe0.81S0.19 is well described by the simple two band model with comparable values of hole and electron mobility. In particular, at low temperatures the transverse resistance shows a linear field dependence, the magnetoresistance follow a quadratic field dependence and obeys to Kohler's rule. In contrast, Kohler's rule is strongly violated for samples having an orthorhombic low temperature structure. However, the transport properties of the orthorhombic samples can be satisfactory described by the three band model with the pair of almost equivalent to the tetragonal sample hole and electron bands, supplemented with the highly mobile electron band which has two order smaller carrier number. Therefore, the peculiarity of the low temperature transport properties of the orthorhombic Fe(SeS) samples, as probably of many other orthorhombic iron superconductors, is due to the presence of a small number of highly mobile carriers which originate from the local regions of the Fermi surface, presumably, nearby the Van Hove singularity points. A complex behavior of the normal state transport properties in the copper high temperature superconductors (HTSC) have been studied for a long time. Nevertheless, up to now there is no consistent description for some basic transport properties of copper HTSC as, for example, for an unusual temperature dependence of the Hall and longitudinal resistivity. The study of the transport properties of copper HTSC is often complicated by a phase separation and other microstructure peculiarity of studied crystals. This has led to a significant evolution in the views of microscopic electronic properties through the continuous improvements in investigation methods and sample quality. (see for example recent review 1 and references therein). In particular, it is strongly influenced by the development of the angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) techniques 2 which brought invaluable information about the existence of some specific features of the Fermi surface (FS) structure. Now it is clear that some of the anomalous normal state properties can be due to local kinetics of excitations at some regions of FS The members of a new family of HTSC, the iron superconductors In general, the iron superconductors are multiband semimetals. The FS is formed by iron d-electrons Similar to copper HTSCs and many other superconducting families the sample microstructure or inhomogeneity often hinders the study of the transport properties of iron superconductors. For example, superconducting (Na,K)Fe 2 Se 2 crystals in normal state show phase separation a metal and semiconducting phases which leads to a formation of domains with a large variation of a local conductivity We have studied temperature and field dependence of the resistivity and Hall effect for the series FeSe The crystals of FeSe 1-x S x with x=0.04 and 0.09 were prepared using the KCl/AlCl 3 flux technique Electrical measurements were done on cleaved rectangular samples with lengths in the range of 0.5 -2 mm, widths about 0.5 mm and thicknesses in the range of 0.01 -0.05 mm. The crystal dimensions were measured using a Zeiss binocular microscope. Used method yields up to 30 -50% of systematic errors in absolute values of resistivity. This error is mainly due to a thickness determination and it does not increase during the transformation from resistivity to conductivity components. Electric contacts were made by sputtering of Au/Ti layers with a precisely machined mechanical mask. The current electrodes were 0.1 mm wide lines along small sides of the bar. Potential and Hall 0.1×0.1 mm 2 electrodes were connected to a sample holder with a 0.025 mm gold wire using H20E silver epoxy. The distance between Hall contacts was 0.5 mm. The distances between current electrodes were 1.5 mm for the sample with x= 0.9 and 1 mm for the samples with x=0.04 and 0.19. Therefore, the corresponding ratios of length to width were 3.0 and 2.0 which give 0.98 and 0.93 for the correction factor due to the Hall potential shortening by extended current electrodes DC magnetoresistance and Hall effect measurements were done using QD PPMS and EDX options of MPMS 7T with Keithley 2400 and Keithley 2192. Resistance measurements in pulsed magnetic fields were done up to 25 -30 T using 100 kHz AC modulation. The pulse rise time was about 8 msec. The studied samples show the superconducting transitions at temperatures 10.25, 10.45 and 8.45 K for x=0.04, 0.09 and 0.19 correspondingly. A detailed description of the superconducting properties for these compositions was published elsewhere The shapes of curves reflect qualitative changes in the substance properties under substitution. First of all, the curve corresponding to x=0.19 does not have a kink below 100 K which occurs at the transition to an orthorhombic structure. The absence of the transition in this sample is in agreement with the decrease of the corresponding transition temperature observed for other two samples from 82 K for x=0.04 to 69 K for x=0.09. The similar suppression of structural transition in Fe(SeS) series was also reported by other authors Another peculiarity of R(T ) curves is a crossover from a low temperature metal behavior to a saturation at room temperatures. Since the pure FeSe shows a similar saturation that turns into R(T ) decrease above 350 K, it can reflect the importance of activated carriers in transport properties of FeSe 1-x S x at high temperatures. Consequently, Gorkov's-Tetelbaum model that describe carriers activation in copper HTSC Both the high temperature metal to semiconductor crossover and the low temperature kink due to a struc-tural transition decrease the value of the residual resistance ratio (RRR) determined for R(T ) dependencies. Therefore, RRR underestimates the quality of the crystals. The resistance of FeSe 0.81 S 0.19 decreases from 300 to 10 K near 15 times reflecting a good quality of the crystal. Furthermore, following the idea of this ratio it is important to note that all R(T ) curves plotted in Fig. Our analysis was based on fitting the experimental data with the two or three band model. To extract parameters it is convenient first to calculate conductivity components from the measured resistivity components. For tetragonal crystals : ) where σ ij are conductivity tensor components and ρ ij are resistivity tensor components. As we described before, the Hall and potential electrodes of our samples were done with precise mask and the main systematic error in measured resistivity components are due to the sample cross-section measurements which equally rescale ρ xy and ρ xx component. Besides, measurements were done in a persistent mode at every B, with a current commutation to cancel effect of thermo, contact and other EMF. Mixing of components due to misalignment of potential electrodes and current direction was compensated by extracting of odd and even in magnetic field components for ρ xy and ρ xx correspondingly. Therefore, we do not expect any additional distortion or error multiplication in the analyzed data due to this transformation. The conductivities of bands are additive and within relaxation-time approximation for an arbitrary number of bands we can write where i is a band index, e is the charge of the electron, σ i is a conductivity at B = 0, μ i is a mobility, n i is a currier concentration and l is a number of bands. Fitting procedure determines μ i and n i by minimizing the sum: we used described fitting method for all samples and for both the two and the three band fitting. We limited our fitting to temperatures lower or equal to 100 K because at high temperatures the field dependence of ρ xx is too weak to be resolved in the used magnetic field range. For the same reason we used compensated (equal carrier concentration for the hole and electron bands) two band model at 100 K for all samples. The longitudinal and Hall resistances in a low temperature tetragonal phase behave distinctly different from corresponding resistances of orthorhombic samples. It is in good agreement with the recent report on a quantum critical point near x=0.17 in FeSe 1-x S x series Our analysis has shown that the measured transport properties of FeSe 0.81 S 0.19 can be comprehensively described in the framework of the simple two band model. This method allows extracting two band concentrations and mobilities without any additional restrictions on their values. We limited our fitting to temperatures lower or equal to 100 K because of at higher temperatures the field dependence of ρ xx is too weak to be resolved in the used magnetic field range. The Fig. To extract band parameters we fitted the experimental data for FeSe 0.96 S 0.04 with the three band model. All data obtained are listed in Table The inset of Fig. The data extracting procedure for this sample was the same as for the sample with x=0.04. Despite the data for FeSe 0.91 S 0.09 is more noisy than for other sample due to the crystal dimensional factor, the fit quality was good for all temperatures. The extracted are listed in Table The presence of electrons with considerably higher mobility than those of holes is well known phenomenon for iron-based superconductors. It is usually manifest itself as a low temperature anomaly in field dependence of a resistivity. For example, BaFe 2 As 2 family demonstrate anomalous low temperature field dependence for both a longitudinal and Hall resistance Some authors consider a large difference in mobility as a property relating to whole FS pockets. For example, the study of the Hall effect and resistivity in BaFe 2 As 2 family Our results for the main electron and hole bands of orthorhombic samples are close to the reported for FeSe in Ref. Our results for orthorhombic samples are in a good quantitative and qualitative agreement with the results obtained for a high quality FeSe single crystal in Ref. The FS reconstruction at a tetragonal to orthorhombic transition have been intensively studied by both theoretical and experimental methods since the discovery of the iron superconductors. The calculations for FeSe show that in a generic electronic structure consisting of hole pockets/cylinders in the middle of the Brulluen zone (BZ) and electron pockets/cylinders at the border of BZ, the main changes occur at the border of BZ and only minor in the center of BZ Another interesting peculiarity of obtained results is an evolution of the carrier density of the main bands at a tetragonal to an orthorhombic transition. Our analysis (Table In conclusion, our results demonstrate that a tetragonal to an orthorhombic transition cause an emergence of the highly mobile electrons originating to the local regions of the Fermi surface. 