We report scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) studies on one and two unit cell (UC) high FeSe thin films grown on Bi 2 Se 3 (0001). In our thin films, we find the tetragonal phase of FeSe and dumb-bell shaped defects oriented along Se-Se bond directions. In addition, we observe striped moiré patterns with a periodicity of (7.3±0.1) nm generated by the mismatch between the FeSe lattice and the Bi 2 Se 3 lattice. We could not find any signature of a superconducting gap in the tunneling spectra measured on the surface of one and two UC thick islands of FeSe down to 6.5 K. The spectra rather show an asymmetric behavior across and a finite density of states at the Fermi level (E F ) resembling those taken in the normal state of bulk FeSe. Several years after the discovery of iron-based superconductors, the iron-chalcogenide superconductors have been found to exhibit the simplest crystal and chemical structures while the superconducting transition temperature (T C ) can be as high as ~8.5 K for bulk FeSe 1,2 and ~14 K for FeSe x Te 1-x . In this work, we first present successful growth studies of one to two UC thick FeSe thin films on top of Bi 2 Se 3 (0001). We show that striped moiré patterns are generated in the films due to the difference between the FeSe and Bi 2 Se 3 lattice structures and that structural domains of FeSe islands are oriented in three different directions. We discuss STS results obtained on one and two UC thick FeSe islands down to 6.5 K. Our FeSe/Bi 2 Se 3 heterostructures were prepared in the following way: Bi 2 Se 3 single crystals Afterwards, we deposited a few monolayers (ML) of high-purity Fe (99.995%) (the calibration for the deposition was performed on W(110)) from an e-beam evaporator on Bi 2 Se 3 at room temperature, annealed the sample at ~315 °C for 30 minutes, and subsequently cooled it down to room temperature. STM measurements were conducted using two home-built ultra-high vacuum STM setups. One of them is a variable-temperature STM with a continuous-flow He cryostat (20K-300K) We present an STM topographic image of the bare substrate surface of Bi 2 Se 3 in Fig. and FeSe lattice constants. where we observe only one and two UC high FeSe islands on top of the Bi 2 Se 3 is different from that shown in the previous study In order to probe the electronic properties including a potential superconductivity of 1-2 UCs FeSe islands on Bi 2 Se 3 (0001), we performed tunneling spectroscopic measurements at low temperature (6.5 K) on a similar sample as the one of Fig. Furthermore, the spectrum shown in Fig. Finally, we discuss possible scenarios in order to explain the suppression or lowering of the FeSe superconducting phase transition below our measurement temperature (6.5 K) in the UC thickness limit observed here for the substrate of Bi 2 Se 3 . Superconductivity was recently shown to survive There can be a few possible reasons for the suppression of the superconducting phase: first, the FeSe thin film could be under tensile strain because of the lattice mismatch with the Bi 2 Se 3 lattice, which would induce a suppression of superconductivity. In conclusion, we demonstrated the successful growth of one and two UC thin FeSe films in tetragonal phase on the Bi 2 Se 3 (0001) topological insulator. We observe striped moiré patterns with a periodicity of ~7.3 nm due to the difference between the FeSe and Bi 2 Se 3 lattice constants. Our spectroscopic data show that there is no signature of a superconducting gap in dI/dV spectra measured over one and two UC thin FeSe islands down to 6.5 K, suggesting that superconductivity is suppressed in ultrathin FeSe films grown on Bi 2 Se 3 . 