In this work we study the effect of long range electron-electron correlations on the behavior of the normal state of metal-intercalated phenacene crystals. While the individual phenacene molecules are modeled by the Pariser-Parr-Pople Hamiltonian with long range Coulomb interactions, we derive a correlated minimal model for describing the phenacene ionic crystals. We find that long range electron correlations do not change the behavior of the phenacene ions with molecular valence -1 (monoanion) and -2 (dianion), compared to that observed for short range electron interactions. The monoanion crystal is a single-band 1 2 -filled antiferromagnetic Mott-Hubbard semiconductor while the dianion crystal is a two-band semiconductor with inter-molecular antiferromagnetic and intra-molecular ferromagnetic spin orderings. However, the trianion crystal is no longer a nearly degenerate 3 4 -filled two-band system. We show that this occurs because the kinetic stability of the 3 4 -filled two-band system with long range correlations is smaller compared to that with short range correlations, for the lattice sizes considered in this study. We argue that with large finite lattices, behavior of the trianion crystal with long range correlations will be same as that with short range correlations. We thus conclude that long range correlations fail to alter the normal states of metal-intercalated phenacene crystals. Strongly correlated multi-orbital systems lie at the forefront of modern day condensed matter physics. Interaction between the charge, spin and orbital degrees of freedom of the electrons in these systems leads to various novel phenomena like, giant magnetoresistance, itinerant ferromagnetism, charge-orbital ordering, and superconductivity (SC) 1-8 . Among the multi-orbital superconductors, many show SC at a fixed or very narrow region of carrier density. The ones which are of particular interest to us are the carbon(C)-based unconventional superconductors such as the charge-transfer solids (CTS) In order to understand the mechanism of SC in these multi-orbital C-based systems it is important to first understand the normal state at this particular carrier concentration. It is with this motivation that we began the investigation of the electronic structure of metaldoped phenacenes In addition to the work of Artioli et. al., we believe that a proper theoretical understanding of the normal state of metal-intercalated phenacenes (phenanthrene and picene) is of interest from another perspective, namely, understanding pressure-induced antiferromagnetic-to-SC transition in A15 Cs 3 C 60 In our previous study on phenancenes In our previous work Metal-intercalated phenacenes crystallize in the Herringbone motif which is shown in Fig. In the above c † μ,i,σ creates a π-electron of spin σ in the p z orbital of the i-th C-atom of the μ-th molecular ion, n μ,i,σ = c † μ,i,σ c μ,i,σ , and n μ,i = σ n μ,i,σ . The primed sum in the site-energy dependent term of Eq. 1 is restricted to C-atoms without C-H bonds, accounting for their higher electronegativity than those with C-H bonds (2) Here, R i,j (in Å) is the distance between C-atoms i and j of a phenacene molecule. The constant κ models the dielectric constant of the medium and determines the strength of V i,j as a function of distance The inter-molecular Hamiltonian can include hoppping of electrons between the molecules (H 1e inter ), e-e repulsion between the charged phenacene ions (H ee inter ), interactions between the metal ions and the molecules (H ion-mol inter ), and interactions between the metal ions (H ion-ion inter ). In this study we have neglected all the terms in H inter except H 1e inter , as they do not affect our generic qualitative theoretical model. These terms can be included later for deriving a quantitative theory. In what follows, Here, t μ,ν,i,j are the inter-molecular hopping integrals between C-atoms i and j of molecules μ and ν, respectively. Compared to the intra-molecular hopping term t = 2.4 eV, the inter-molecular hoppings are tiny and generally of the order of 0.1 -0.2 eV (cf. 22). Solving H in the complete space of 2p z atomic orbitals is computationally impossible due to its overwhelmingly large dimension. We therefore work within the standard approach of molecular exciton theory and first transform H from the 2p z atomic orbital basis to the MO basis; this unitary basis transform is exact. We then identify the FMOs for the problem and derive an effective Hamiltonian in the reduced subspace of the FMOs. In the case of phenacenes, the L and L+1 orbitals accommodate the doped electrons upon metal-intercalation and are well separated from the remaining low and high energy MOs. In Table Here, k indices refer to L and L+1 orbitals. In the Appendix we show the derivation of H P P P L,L+1 and discuss the various terms occuring in reduced Hamiltonian. We numerically study finite zig-zag 1D lattices [see Fig. = 0.025. We consider ∆ L,L+1 = 0.3 eV, 0 ≤ U ≤ 10 (in eV), and κ = 1.0, 3.0. We study 1D phenanthrene lattices with 10 ions (20 MOs) with charges -1 (10 electrons) and -3 (30 electrons), and 8 ions (16 MOs) with charge -2 (16 electrons). Studying 10 ions with molecular charge -2, i.e., 20 electrons on 20 MOs, is beyond current computational capacity. We compute the ratio of the average charge densities on the L and L+1 orbitals, i.e., n L+1 n L , and spin-spin correlation functions given by S z 1,k S z μ,k , respectively; k = L, L+1 and μ = molecule index. Apart from these observables, we also calculate the kinetic energies of the L and L+1 orbitals, Here, μ is the index of the molecule and p ∈ [L,L+1]; other symbols have already been defined. Previously In Sec-III we discussed the effect of short range e-e interactions on the normal state of metal-intercalated phenanthrenes. Here we present our results showing the effect of long range Coulomb correlations on the same. For simplicity's sake, we will be referring to the diagonal e-e repulsion terms between opposite spin electrons as representing e-e repulsion between same spin electrons will be denoted as Ũ ↑,↑ L,L+1 while the off-diagonal component Ũ (o),σ,-σ L,L+1 will be denoted as Ũ 2e L,L+1 . In Table II we have compared the magnitudes of the various e-e interaction terms present in H Hub L,L+1 and H P P P L,L+1 , at two different values of U and ∆ L,L+1 = 0.3 eV. We find that i) magnitudes of all e-e interaction terms in H P P P L,L+1 are larger than those in H Hub L,L+1 due to renormalization, ii) magnitude of Ũ ↑,↓ L,L+1 term in H P P P L,L+1 is either comparable to or larger than both Ũ ↑,↓ L,L and Ũ ↑,↓ L+1,L+1 depending on the screening constant, and iii) the repulsion term U ↑,↑ L,L+1 is found to be comparable to Ũ ↑,↓ L,L and Ũ ↑,↓ for smaller values of κ and larger values of U . We also find that when U > 6 eV and κ = 1, the e-e interaction parameters in H L,L+1 P P P acquire unphysical values. Consequently in Fig. L,L+1 and H P P P L,L+1 for κ = 1, 3, at U = 4.0 eV (columns 2-4) and 8.0 eV (columns 5-7) and ∆L,L+1 = 0.3 eV. Param the monoanion crystal is 0, indicating that the populations of the L-and L+1-derived MOs are respectively, and 0 refer to singly occupied and empty sites, respectively. Thus with long range interactions also, the electrons in the monoanion crystal are "confined" to the L-derived orbitals only. We therefore expect, as we had observed for H Hub L,L+1 , that the electrons will be antiferromagnetically coupled to each other as this is the most stable configuration. Plot of intermolecular L-L spin-spin correlations at U = 6.0 eV and ∆ L,L+1 = 0.3 eV confirms our expectation and indicate antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin ordering in the monoanion [Fig. here, 2 refers to doubly occupied sites. The tendency to form 2s and 0s will decrease with increase in U , which dictates all the e-e repulsion terms in H P P P L,L+1 . Therefore in Fig. By virtue of the band-width effect, crystals of phenanthrene trianions have n L+1 /n L > 0.5 at U = 0. From Figs. 3.613 6.140 6.430 3.902 4.188 6.720 FIG. Trianion (L-L sp-sp corr) Trianion (L+1-L+1 sp-sp corr) Trianion (L-L+1 sp-sp corr) FIG. , with U of the trianion crystal at ∆L,L+1 = 0.3 eV and U = 6.0 eV; μ is the molecule index. Solid black lines with circles indicate the H Hub L,L+1 model while dotted (dashed) red (blue) curves with squares (triangles) refer to H P P P L,L+1 with κ = 1 (κ = 3), respectively. K L+1 . This gain in kinetic energy overrides the increase in potential energy due to electron exchange between the L-and L+1-derived orbitals. Now, consider configurations (II) and (III) of Fig. With long range correlations however, configurations like (II) dominate the ground state wavefunction and therefore n L+1 /n L (at U > 0) → n L+1 /n L (at U = 0). This implies that the double occupancy conserving electron hops fail to provide configurations like (III) the kinetic stability needed to overcome the initial potential energy gain. If we look at the magnitudes of E(P.E) in Fig. We computed n L+1 /n L and K L and K L+1 for the trianion crystal with larger hopping parameters, i.e., larger band-width, at ∆ L,L+1 = 0. In this work we have addressed the effect of long range Coulomb correlations on the normal state of metalintercalated phenacene crystals, taking phenanthrene as example. The individual phenacene molecules have been modeled by the Pariser-Parr-Pople Hamiltonian. We derive an effective correlated model Hamiltonian H P P P L,L+1 to describe the phenacene ions in the solid state within a localized basis of the L and L+1 FMOs. We find that long range correlations not only renormalize the Coulomb terms occuring in H Hub L,L+1 but also introduce an additional intra-molecular repulsion term between same spin electrons; H Hub L,L+1 is the effective Hamiltonian obtained by describing the individual phenacene molecules by the Hubbard model with short range e-e interactions. It is found that the normal states of the monoanion and dianion molecular solids remain unaffected by the presence of long range interactions. The monoanion crystal continues to behave as a single-band 1 2 -filled Mott-Hubbard semiconductor with L-L antiferromagnetic spin order. The dianion crystal undergo population equalization with increase in the strength of e-e repulsion, i.e., U . Spin-spin correlations show that the inter-molecular L-L and L+1-L+1 spin couplings are antiferromagnetic while the intramolecular L-L+1 spin couplings are ferromagnetic. The trianion's behavior with short and long range interactions is however different. With short range correlations the trianion is a nearly 3 4 -filled two-band system without any spin order. However, in the presence of long range interactions, with increase in U , the tendency towards population equalization between the L-and L+1-derived MOs is suppressed and the ratio n L+1 /n L reaches its U = 0 magnitude. This occurs because the system sizes chosen in this study are not large enough to provide the kinetic stability necessary for n L+1 /n L 1. Thus the trianion crystal behaves as a two-band system with n L slightly less than 2 and n L+1 slightly greater than 1, and without any spin order. We believe that larger system sizes will allow population equalization in the trianion crystal even with long range correlations. We thus conclude that the behavior of the normal state of metal-intercalated phenanthrene crystals are not affected by long range Coulomb correlations. Occurance of SC under pressure and at a fixed carrier concentration is a signature of C-based superconductors. While SC occurs at carrier density ρ = 0.5 in the CTS, both fullerides and metal-intercalated phenacenes show SC at the molecular stoichimetry of -3. The CTS can be either electron or hole doped with one electron or hole per dimer resulting in ρ = 0.5. Examples of hole and electron doped CTS are κ-(BEDT) 2 X, where X = Cl, Br, I, (NCS) 2 , Cu 2 (CN) 3 , and, Z[Pd(dmit) 2 ] 2 salts, Z = P, As, Sb, respectively; here, BEDT = bisethylenedithio-tetrathiafulvalene and dmit = 1,3dithiol-2-thione-4,5-dithiolate. In metal-intercalated phenacenes, two MOs per molecule accommodate 3 electrons and thus ρ = 3 2 . Similar scenario is expected in the case of doped fullerides also: 3 electrons on two non-degenerate MOs separated by a gap equal to the Jahn-Teller distortion energy, thereby giving ρ = 3 2 . However as discussed in Sec-I, all available theoretical works on the fullerides are based on the idea that SC occurs from an effectively Y. Tokura and N. Nagaosa, Science 288, 462 (2000). 2 M. Imada, A. Fujimori, and Y. Tokura, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 1039 (1998). 3 A. P. Mackenzie and Y. Maeno, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 657