We investigate the structural modulations induced by optical excitation of a polar phonon mode in YBa2Cu3O7, using first-principles calculations based on density functional theory. We focus on the intense-excitation regime in which we expect that fourth-order phonon-phonon coupling terms dominate, and model the structural modulations induced by pulses of such intensity. Our calculations of the phonon-phonon anharmonicities confirm that the cubic coupling between modes, shown in earlier work to cause a quasi-static change in the apical O -Cu distance and a buckling of the CuO2 planes, is the leading contribution at moderate pump strengths. At higher pump strengths (∼10 MV/cm) the previously neglected quartic couplings become relevant and produce an additional shearing of the CuO2 planes. Finally, we analyze the changes in the electronic and magnetic properties associated with the induced structural changes. Ultrafast modulation of crystal structures using THz radiation is an emerging technique in condensed matter physics to study the interplay of structural and electronic properties An important breakthrough in understanding this observation followed with the determination, through a combined ultra-fast x-ray diffraction (XRD) and ab-initio density functional theory (DFT) study, of the transient crystal structure during the optical pumping process The basic physics of THz-radiation-induced structural distortion, often referred to as non-linear phononics The atomic displacements are determined by the normal coordinate of the mode, Q, which in turn is the eigenvector of the dynamical matrix, and the corresponding eigenvalue, ω, gives the mode frequency. Phonons of different energy are orthogonal and do not interact in the harmonic approximation, and importantly there is no change in the time-averaged structure with phonon excitation ( Q T = 0). At higher field strengths and larger amplitudes, however, anharmonic phonon-phonon interactions become noticeable. Using the notation of Ref. 8, the anharmonic terms in the Hamiltonian can be written as considering terms only up to quartic order. Here Q IR labels an infra-red active mode that can be excited by an optical phonon, and Q G is a general polar or non-polar mode. We note that the term containing a 3 is only allowed if the symmetry of Q G is given by an A 1 irreducible representation of the crystal structure point group. In the case of the high-T c superconducting cuprates, which are centrosymmetric, the third-order coupling is sizable for several modes Q G of A g symmetry. As mentioned above, this cubic coupling to A g modes was shown to be responsible for the shift of the mean atomic displacements measured using femtosecond x-ray diffraction in Ref. 8. Note that, in the experiments of Ref. 8, the system was excited using mid-infrared optical pulses of ∼300 fs duration with a maximum fluence of 4 mJ/cm 2 , which corresponds to a peak electric field of ∼3 MV/cm. This field strength suggests a peak amplitude of the B 1u mode corresponding to a 2.2 pm increase in the apical oxygen-Cu distance. The product of Q 2 IR Q 2 G is totally symmetric and hence fourth-order coupling of any IR pumped mode to all other phonons is always allowed by symmetry. As mentioned in Ref. 10, analysis of the equation of motion shows that, for small amplitude excitations, the effect of this coupling is renormalization of the frequency of the Q G mode by Eqn. (3) also reveals that this quartic interaction can induce a softening of the Q G mode and an associated lattice instability, in the case of large Q IR amplitude, strong coupling and low frequency of the mode Q G . For the excitation strengths of Ref. 10, fourth-order coupling effects were not observed. The aim of this paper is to extend the investigation of Ref. 10 to evaluate the effect of the third-and fourthorder anharmonic couplings on the structure, electronic and magnetic properties when a phonon is excited by an intense optical pulse. We first use first-principles electronic structure calculations to compute the anharmonic coupling constants between the 17 THz polar B 1u phonon mode of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 with all other phonon modes of the material. We then solve the equations of motion using the first-principles coupling constants, to calculate the structural modulations induced by excitation with an optical pulse. We focus particularly on the case of large amplitude oscillations of the B 1u mode, for which we predict additional structural modulations due to the quartic coupling. Finally, we discuss the requirements for entering the regime in which such interactions dominate, offering a motivation for the provision of THz sources at freeelectron lasers. We begin by using density functional theory to calculate the third-and fourth-order phonon-phonon coupling constants for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 . We choose YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 since it captures all the characteristics, such as the dopant oxygen atom and the P mmm orthorhombic symmetry, of the YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.5+x family, and is computationally convenient because of its small total number of atoms per unit cell. Note that the values for the coupling constants that we obtain differ quantitatively but not qualitatively from those of Ref. 10 in which YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.5 was studied. First, we calculate the lowest energy atomic positions using the experimental lattice constants of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 taken from Ref. 11 (a =3.82 Å, b =3.88 Å and c =11.67 Å). We use the local density approximation (LDA) to density functional theory as implemented within the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) Finally, we calculate the anharmonic coupling constants. The effective potential describing a polar IR mode (which will be resonantly excited by the pump pulse) and a general phonon mode, G, is to fourth order where w IR and w G are the frequencies of the IR and G modes respectively, and a 3 , a 4 , g IR and g G are anharmonic coupling constants (the fourth-order single-mode terms are always real and positive and so by convention their constants are written as g 2 ). As discussed above, the symmetry of the driven mode determines which of the anharmonic coupling constants are non-zero. For the We take the B 1u mode at f =16.9 THz, in which the in-plane oxygen atoms displace relative to the Cu atoms along the c axis (Fig. In Tab. III we list the cubic coupling constants between B 1u (17) and all five A g modes, as well as the quartic couplings for the six B symmetry modes that have a quartic coupling magnitude greater than 0.01 eV/ Å3 with the B 1u (17) mode. To allow for a direct comparison between couplings to modes of different frequencies, and between the cubic and quartic anharmonicities, we make a coordinate transformation Q = ω Q and list also the corresponding renormalized coupling constants ã3 = a3 ωGω 2 IR and ã4 = a4 We see that the A g (14) mode exhibits the largest nominal and renormalized cubic coupling constants and in addition the strongest quartic coupling to B 1u (17). One can understand this qualitatively based on two factors: First its pattern of atomic displacements, shown in Fig. To illustrate the changes in the potential landscape caused by the cubic and quartic anharmonicities, we show in Fig. We now turn to the main task of the paper, the determination of the response of the structure following pulsed excitation of the B 1u (17) mode resulting from phononphonon coupling. To model this situation we treat each pair of anharmonically coupled phonon modes as coupled classical oscillators Here the vector Q contains the eigenvectors of both phonon modes, the dots denote time derivatives and ∇ Q is the gradient operator acting on the mode amplitude (∇ Q =(∂/∂Q IR , ∂/∂Q G )). To model the excitation of the IR mode in the manner of the experimental investigations 8,10 , we add a pulse-like driving term, . Here F 0 is the pulse amplitude, ω the pulse frequency and σ the temporal width of the pulse envelope. For ultrashort pulses (σ → 0) the driving term can be described by a δ-function. The experimental pulses, however, exhibit a temporal intensity distribution of 0.3 ps (full width at half maximum (FWHM)), which is of the order of the period of the excited polar phonon mode. Consequently, we use a finite σ 0 =0.18 ps obtained by converting the FWHM value. We set ω IR to the frequency of mode B 1u (17) and take the driving force amplitude F 0 = 30 meV/ Å, which corresponds to a peak electric field strength of 3.0 MV/cm, consistent with the experimental value For the cubic coupling case we then solve explicitly the following differential equations: neglecting the quartic term, since its inclusion does not alter qualitatively or quantitatively the dynamics. To study the effect of modes that couple only with quartic anharmonicity we solve: A. Cubic anharmonicities We begin by solving the cubic coupling equations (Eqns. ( A g max (14) A g avg ( A g max (14) A g avg ( A g (14) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 A g (14) A g (14) -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 coupled to the A g (14) G mode. In Fig. We see that on excitation of the B 1u mode, oscillations of the A g (14) mode are induced through the cubic anharmonic coupling. As shown in Ref. 10, the form of the cubic coupling causes the A g (14) mode to oscillate around a non-zero displacement, in this case with pulse strength F 0 = 30 meV/ Å, the average displacement Q = -0.03 √ u Å. This change in average structure has been referred to as a transient structural distortion in the literature. In Fig. Since a 3 is negative, the frequency decreases as expected. The small zero frequency peak obtained for the A g (14) mode indicates the static displacement. We note that the small oscillating part of A g (14) also gives rise to an even smaller peak at 14 THz, however it is much weaker than the zero frequency peak and is not visible on the scale of Fig. Next we vary the strength F 0 of the pump pulse and show in Fig. The origin of the new behavior of the A g (14) mode at high pump strength is the shift in frequency of the B 1u (17) pump mode due to the mutual anharmonic coupling. At the pump strength corresponding to the divergence between the maximum and average values of the A g (14) mode, the frequency of the B 1u (17) mode shifts so that it matches the eigenfrequency of the A g (14) mode, and the resonant coupling drives the amplified oscilla-tions of the A g (14) mode. We illustrate this behavior in Fig. In the remaining two panels of Fig. We find that the other phonon modes of A g symmetry that couple in cubic order to B 1u (17) show similar behavior. For the A g (4) mode the induced quasi static off-centering amplitude is 0.01 √ u Å after excitation of B 1u by our reference pulse with strength F 0 . For the two other A g modes the static off-centered amplitudes are half of this size. The dynamics of the mode oscillation as a function of pulse strength, frequency and width is qualitatively similar for all modes. We note finally that in a real system the excitation of the B 1u (17) mode generates a structure that is a superposition of the displacements caused by all relevant A g modes, rather than just the one considered here. Finally, we discuss our results with respect to the experimental findings of Ref. 8. In Ref. 8, time-resolved x-ray diffraction on optically pumped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.5+x found a quasi-static structural change corresponding to a reduction in the Cu -apical oxygen distance of 2.2 pm, which was attributed to cubic anharmonic phonon-phonon coupling. This is the same distortion pattern that we obtain in this work for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , suggesting that it should be found across the entire yttrium barium copper oxide series, and is at least qualitatively independent of the doping concentration. We note, however, that our calculations do not capture the second finding of Ref. 8, of induced changes in the interand intra-plane distances, since the smaller unit-cell size that we use in this work does not allow this degree of freedom. We now discuss the effect of the structural modulations induced by phonon excitation on the electronic and magnetic properties. We focus in particular on the changes in the magnetic exchange interactions and the density of states at the Fermi level, both of which are believed to be relevant for superconductivity in cuprate superconductors Here, N E F increases quadratically with B 1u (17) mode amplitude, reaching ∼ 2.7 % difference at the maximum amplitude, with the change dominated by the states in the CuO 2 planes. Consequently, although the time averaged amplitude of the polar B 1u (17) mode is zero, its oscillation causes a change in N E F comparable in magnitude to that caused by the quasi-static distortion and likely more relevant for the description of the physics in the copper-oxygen planes. Next, we evaluate the magnetic exchange interactions by mapping our calculated DFT total energy differences onto a Heisenberg model using the approach of Refs. 21,22. We use a simple Heisenberg model with only two magnetic exchanges, J inter and J intra (Fig. To summarize this section, we find that excitation of the B 1u (17) phonon mode causes a quasi-static decrease in both the magnetic exchanges and the density of states at the Fermi energy, accompanied by strong oscillations of these values. In this section we analyze the coupling between the pumped B 1u (17) mode and the coupled B modes that do not allow cubic coupling by symmetry in order to isolate the effects of the quartic anharmonicities. Since quartic coupling renormalizes the mode frequencies according to Eqn. (3) we focus on the B 2g (2) mode which has the largest renormalization due to its low frequency. In Fig. A g (14) B 2g (2) (d) Next we investigate the effect of the pump strength and show in Fig. To better understand the nature of the oscillations in the range of the critical pump strength we show in Fig. In summary, we have computed the anharmonic phonon-phonon couplings up to fourth order in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 and explored the structural dynamics induced by pulsed pumping of an IR phonon mode. Consistent with previous work For moderate to large pulse strengths (F 6 MV/cm), the quasi-static displacement caused by the cubic coupling exhibits additional large-amplitude modulations of the A g mode. In addition, for even stronger pulse strengths (F 10.5 MV/cm) the quartic coupling becomes activated and the coupled B g (2) mode become imaginary, at which point its oscillation becomes nonsinusoidal with large amplitude. These effects were not discussed in earlier work, which used lower pulse strengths, but are accessible for example with freeelectron lasers, for which field strengths reach up to 50 MV/cm. Indeed our predicted induction of a highfrequency dynamical shear strain at high field provides a motivation for provision of THz sources at free-electron lasers to allow experimental exploration of this regime, where measurement of the induced changes in the the superconducting behavior could be valuable in understanding the pairing mechanism. In particular, we saw that while the induced changes in the quasi-static structure does not have a strong effect on the electronic properties, the oscillating changes, particularly along the eigenvector of the B 1u mode, strongly modify the magnetic exchange interactions, which are likely relevant for superconductivity Finally, we note that the link between the dynamic and quasistatic structural changes of either cubic or quartic anharmonic origin and the magnetic exchanges suggests non-linear phononics as a route to novel coupled phononmagnon behavior. An example of such a coupling could be the recently published work of Ref. 24, in which intense optical excitation of two orthogonal phonon modes has been shown to excite a magnon. the experiments of Ref. 10, only a mode G of A g symmetry allows a 3 = 0, whereas G modes of all symmetry have a 4 = 0.