Unconventional superconductivity often emerges at the border of long-range magnetic orders. Understanding the lowenergy charge dynamics may provide crucial information on the formation of superconductivity. Here we report the unpolarized/polarized optical conductivity study of high quality MnP single crystals at ambient pressure. Our data reveal two types of charge carriers with very different lifetimes. In combination with the first-principles calculations, we show that the shortlifetime carriers have flat Fermi sheets which become gapped in the helimagnetic phase, causing a dramatic change in the low-frequency optical spectra, while the long-lifetime carriers are anisotropic three-dimensional like which are little affected by the magnetic transitions and provide major contributions to the transport properties. This orbital-dependent charge dynamics originates from the special crystal structure of MnP and may have an influence on the unconventional superconductivity and its interplay with helimagnetism at high pressures. Magnetic quantum fluctuations at the border of long-range antiferromagnetic or ferromagnetic orders have been generally believed to be the major pairing force for unconventional superconductivity. The discoveries of superconductivity in the helical magnets CrAs To shed light on the nature of the charge dynamics and its interplay with magnetism, we performed infrared optical measurements on MnP at temperatures from 300 K to 10 K at ambient pressure, where a para-ferromagnetic transition has been reported at about T C1 = 289.5 -292 K and a ferro-helimagnetic transition at T C2 = 47 -53 K in previous studies Transport and heat capacity measurements. Figure Unpolarized optical spectra. Figure Two broad peaks are seen at around 8100 cm -1 and 16000 cm -1 (denoted as L1 and L2), independent of temperature. These peaks may be attributed to electronic correlations or inter-band transitions between the bonding/antibonding bands of Mn-3d and P-3p orbitals Polarized optical spectra. Figure To explore the properties of the charge carriers, we analyze the polarized σ 1 (ω) using a combined multi-component Drude and Lorentz formula, , where the first term gives the Drude contribution from itinerant charge carriers with the plasma frequencies ω p,i and the scattering rates γ i , and the second Lorentz term originates typically from inter-band transitions located at ω 0, j (corresponding to the direct gap) with the strength Ω j and the damping coefficient Γ j . The above formula can be applied because MnP exhibits weak electronic correlations with a small γ e ≈ 8.3 mJ/mol K 2 at ambient pressure. An extended Drude formula may be needed near the critical pressure, where exotic non-Fermi liquid behavior has been observed 3 . We first focus on the b-axis polarized data, which show interesting gap feature in the helimagnetic phase. Our analysis suggests that at least two Drude and two Lorentz (L1 and L2) components are needed in order to fit the experimental data above 60 K. The two Lorentz components describe the peaks centered at ω 0,1 ≈ 8100 cm -1 and ω 0,2 ≈ 16000 cm -1 . In addition, two Drude components (denoted as D1 and D2) are required to fit the low and intermediate frequency regions in the ferromagnetic phase. Below 60 K, one of the components (D2) becomes gapped and turns into a Lorentz peak (L0), while the other gives rise to the narrow Drude peak (D1) below 100 cm -1 . The spectra are then composed of one Drude component (D1) and one Lorentz component (L0) in the helimagnetic phase. This indicates that there exist at least two types of charge carriers that behave very differently across the ferro-helimagnetic phase transition along the b-axis in MnP. To see this more clearly, we provide in Fig. For the polarized data with E ⊥ b, however, the two low-frequency terms are strongly overlapped. While we may expect some changes in the D2 component in the helimagnetic phase, it is impossible to be disentangled from the whole spectra because its contribution to the spectra at low frequencies (∝ ω 2 p,2 /γ 2 ) is two or three orders of magnitude smaller than that of the D1 component. As a matter of fact, we find that the low-frequency spectra can be equally well fitted with either two Drude terms or a Drude term plus a Lorentz term without affecting the fit at higher frequencies. This issue is avoided in the b-axis data due to the rapidly narrowed width of the D1 Drude peak in the helimagnetic phase, which reveals the change in the D2 component at around 100 cm -1 . This direction-dependence in the D1-component is due to the special ferromagnetic alignment of the Mn-spins along the b-axis in the helimagnetic phase at ambient pressure. We hence focus on the b-axis data in the following discussions. To gain further insight into the properties of the charge carriers, we compare in Fig. First-principles calculations. To understand the microscopic origin of both carriers, we performed the first-principles calculations for MnP using the full-potential augmented plane-wave and local orbital methods, as implemented in the WIEN2k code Figure The existence of two types of charge carriers with distinct properties results naturally from the particular crystal structure of MnP and is therefore robust against pressure or other external tuning parameters without altering the crystal structure The discovery of superconductivity in MnP has stimulated many experimental and theoretical studies in past few years. Despite of these and earlier efforts, some fundamental issues remain unclear. Our work made contributions in the following aspects: • Our work provides the first optical data that may help to reveal the peculiar charge dynamics of MnP. The optical measurements were very challenging due to the small size of the superconducting single crystals. So far, no other probes has been able to provide such information and ARPES has failed to produce useful data, possibly due to the lack of a good cleaved surface. • The temperature dependence of the optical data reveals the coexistence of two types of charge carriers with very different lifetimes. This can be clearly seen from the spectra alone and is therefore model-independent. The model analysis only helps to provide a better illustration of the two components and a quantitative estimate of the magnitude of their lifetimes. • Crossing the helimagnetic transition, the Fermi surfaces of the short lifetime carriers become gapped, which coincides with the gap opening of the d y 2 -band in the GGA band structure calculations. While one should not expect the simple GGA to give a quantitative solution of such a correlated material, the connection provides an insight on the origin of the short lifetime carriers and the helimagnetic instability. As a matter of fact, it has been shown that the special band crossing along the Y-S direction as in Fig. • Based on the above analysis, one may expect that a realistic model of MnP must take into account the two-component feature of the charge carriers. While the short lifetime carriers are primarily responsible for the helimagnetic instability, superconductivity can only emerge out of the long lifetime carriers, possibly with pairing glues coming from the helimagnetic spin fluctuations. To summarize, we report optical investigations on the single crystal MnP and find that the optical conductivity can only be well understood with a multi-component Drude and Lorentz formula. In combination with band structure calculations, our analysis reveals the existence of two types of charge carriers with distinctly different characters. The short-lifetime charge 10/10