Ever since the discovery of high-T c superconductivity in layered cuprates, the roles that individual layers play have been debated, due to difficulty in layer-by-layer characterization. While there is similar challenge in many Fe-based layered superconductors, the newly-discovered Ca 10 (Pt 4 As 8 )(Fe 2 As 2 ) 5 provides opportunities to explore superconductivity layer by layer, because it contains both superconducting building blocks (Fe 2 As 2 layers) and intermediate Pt 4 As 8 layers. Cleaving a single crystal under ultrahigh vacuum results in multiple terminations: an ordered Pt 4 As 8 layer, two reconstructed Ca layers on the top of a Pt 4 As 8 layer, and disordered Ca layer on the top of Fe 2 As 2 layer. The electronic properties of individual layers are studied using scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S), which reveals different spectra for each surface. Remarkably superconducting coherence peaks are seen only on the ordered Ca/Pt 4 As 8 layer. Our results indicate that an ordered structure with proper charge balance is required in order to preserve superconductivity. Since the discovery of Fe-based superconductors in 2008, tremendous effort has been expended to understand the origin of their physical properties, that exhibit strong coupling between structure, magnetism, and superconductivity. Similar to high-temperature (T c ) cuprate superconductors, Fe pnictide superconductors form a layered structure with Fe 2 As 2 building blocks. Depending on the spacers that separate these building blocks, these superconductors are often categorized as "111" (e.g. LiFeAs) In this paper, we report experimental investigations of superconducting Ca 10 Pt 4 As 8 (Fe 2- x Pt x As 2 ) 5 single crystals layer-by-layer using scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/S). The layer-by-layer probing of these layered superconductors is extremely important as illustrated in the recent study of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ , where it was found that "the well-known pseudogap feature observed by STM is inherently property of the BiO planes and thus irrelevant directly to Cooper pairing" For the Ca 10 Pt 4 As 8 (Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 ) 5 single crystals we used for this study, an atomicallydefined layered structure is clearly imaged by high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) taken along [210] direction (Fig. Similar to previous report Figure However, the region B (see Fig. In addition to the bare Pt1-55  (region A) and Ca2-55  (regions B) surfaces, we observe another surface. As shown in Fig. As will be discussed later, this is identified as a Ca covered Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 layer ("Ca-disordered"). Returning to the Ca2-55  surface, we now illustrate that it is metastable. In the surface can be seen in between clusters (one of such area is marked with a yellow circle in Fig. As for the Ca-disordered Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 surface (Fig. between Pt 4 As 8 layer and Ca covered Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 layer (Fig. The most significant observation on the cleaved Ca10-4-8 surfaces comes from the STS measurements. From the bulk measurements, T c of Ca10-4-8 is ~ 34 K (see Fig. 5ab show spectra taken on the Ca2-55  and Ca2-10 10  surfaces with corresponding STM images (insets). The annealed surface (Ca2-10 10  ) shows enhanced superconducting coherence peaks (Fig. The STS data for the Pt1-55  surface shows a kink with positive bias but smooth / dI dV with negative bias (Fig. What preserves superconductivity on the Ca-ordered Pt 4 As 8 surfaces (Ca2-55  and Ca2-10 10  ) but diminishes superconductivity on the bare Pt 4 As 8 surface (Pt1-55  ) and Ca-disordered Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 surface? It is well known that the Fe 2 As 2 layer is responsible for superconductivity in bulk Fe-based superconductors, and the Pt 4 As 8 layer is expected to be superconducting as well, given the nature of 3D superconductivity (Fig. x Pt x As 2 is due to the disorder of Ca atoms. However, this cannot explain why there is no coherence peaks seen in the bare Pt 4 As 8 layer, where we observed an ordered structure (Fig. Here we propose that the lack of superconductivity on a bare Pt The fact that STS reveals no sign for superconductivity on the bare Pt 4 As 8 surface and the disordered Ca on Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 indicates that both structure order and charge balance are crucial for superconductivity. We believe the unequal distance of Ca atoms with respect to both Fe 2- x Pt x As 2 layer and Pt 4 As 8 layer is the reason for the existence of these strange surface structures. When the surface contains ingredients sufficient to maintain charge balance, properties seen in bulk can be preserved on the surface. This is supported by our observation of superconducting coherent peaks in STS on the Ca2-55  and Ca2-10 10  surfaces of Ca 10 Pt 4 As 8 (Fe 2- x Pt x As 2 ) 5 . While three-dimensional superconductivity in layered superconductors is considered through tunneling between layers, our STM/STS study of Ca 10 Pt 4 As 8 (Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 ) 5 reveals that proximity effect would not maintain the superconductivity on the surface if the surface experiences different chemical environment. As can be seen in Fig. In summary, we have investigated the detailed surface structures and electronic properties of Ca 10 Pt 4 As 8 (Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 ) 5 using STM/STS. We observe five different surfaces as summarized in STEM measurements. STEM imaging is performed using a JEM-ARM200F microscope equipped with probe-corrector operating at 200 kV. Samples for TEM observation along different axis-zone direction are prepared by using Focused Ion Beam (FIB). the sample is cleaved, most of Ca atoms stay on the top of Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 layer, which are disordered as shown in Figs. 3c (as-cleaved) and 4d (after annealing). In contrast to the Ca/Pt 4 As 8 surface, the disordered Ca/Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 surface is insensitive to annealing. Only the surface corrugation changes from ~ 1 Å (as-cleaved) to ~ 2 Å (after annealing). The large amount of disordered Ca atoms prevents from seeing the bare Fe 2-x Pt x As 2 layer. Cleaving a  ] can be utilized to support the large inward relaxation. In bulk, positively charged Ca atoms are positioned in Lei, B. et al. Evolution of high-temperature superconductivity from a low-T c phase tuned by carrier concentration in FeSe thin flakes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 077002 (2016). 29. Horcas, I. et al. WSXM: A software for scanning probe microscopy and a tool for nanotechnology. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78, 013705 (2007).