A Weyl semimetal 1 arXiv:1607.05131v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 18 Jul 2016 The discovery of Weyl semimetals In quantum field theory, the Weyl fermions were first shown by Hermann Weyl to emerge as solutions to the relativistic Dirac equation. The Weyl semimetals are topologically non-trivial and are known to demonstrate exotic quantum phenomena and unique surface states. Since a tip-induced superconducting (TISC) phase emerges only under point contacts, the traditional bulk characterization tools for characterizing superconducting phases fail to detect TISC. However, by performing point contact spectroscopy of such point contacts it is possible to explore different regimes of mesoscopic transport where the expected spectral features for superconducting point contacts are well understood. Such experiments can reveal mesoscopic superconducting phases like a TISC that emerge only under point contacts on exotic materials. In Figure Therefore, the point contact spectra presented above hint to the possible existence of a tipinduced superconducting (TISC) phase on TaAs -similar to what was observed on the 3D Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 If the point contact are indeed superconducting, it should be possible to observe characterizing spectroscopic features in two other regimes of mesoscopic transport, namely the intermediate and the ballistic regime. In the intermediate regime, in addition to the critical current dominated conductance dips, two peaks symmetric about V = 0, which are known as hallmarks of Andreev reflection, must also appear. With further reducing the contact size it should be possible to transition to the ballistic regime where the critical current driven dips should disappear and only the double peak feature associated Andreev refection must remain. In order to understand the nature of this new superconducting phase we concentrate on the temperature and the magnetic field dependence of the ballistic regime spectra presented in Figure The gap structure (double conductance peak) is seen to decrease with increasing magnetic field, as expected. A plot of ∆ vs. H as extracted from the fitting of the spectra in Figure The value of the transport spin polarization is seen to decrease with increasing Z as seen in Figure In order to further confirm the presence of a spin polarized current along with superconductivity at TaAs point contacts, we have performed field-angle dependence of the point contact resistance where the direction of the magnetic field was rotated using a 3-axis vector magnet with respect to the direction of current. The field-angle dependent magnetoresistance data is presented in Figure In conclusion, we have shown the emergence of a tip-induced supercondcuting (TISC) phase in mesoscopic point contacts between Ag and the Weyl semimetal TaAs through transport and magneto transport measurements at various regimes of mesoscopic transport. We used a modified BTK formalism that includes spin polarization to fit the experimental data which hinted to the coexistence of superconductivity and high transport spin polarization thereby indicating the flow of spin polarized supercurrent through TaAs point contacts. The TISC, though shows the possibility of an unconventional pairing mechanism, no zerobias conductance peak or a pseudogap could be observed in the ballistic limit data. This is in contrast to the earlier observations made on a similar TISC phase on the 3D Dirac semimetal Cd 3 As 2 . The surprising co-existence of superconductivity and high transport spin polarization at TaAs point contacts make the Weyl semimetals particularly interesting for spintronic applications. Note: While preparing this manuscript we noticed that another group found some possible indication of superconductivity 