Stimulated by a very recent experiment observing successfully two superconducting states with even-and odd-number of electrons in a nanowire topological superconductor as expected from the existence of two end Majorana quasiparticles (MQs) [Albrecht et al., Nature 531, 206 (2016)], we propose a way to manipulate Majorana qubit exploiting quantum tunneling effects. The prototype setup consists of two one-dimensional (1D) topological superconductors coupled by a tunneling junction which can be controlled by gate voltage. We show that, upon current injection, the time evolution of superconducting phase difference at the junction induces an oscillation in energy levels of the Majorana parity states, whereas the level-crossing is avoided by a small coupling energy of MQs in the individual 1D superconductors. This results in a Landau-Zener-Stückelberg (LZS) interference between the Majorana parity states. Adjusting the current pulse and gate voltage, one can build a LZS interferometry which provides an arbitrary manipulation of the Majorana qubit. The LZS rotation of Majorana qubit can be monitored by the microwave radiated from the junction. Zero-energy quasiparticle excitations in topological superconductors behave like Majorana fermions In a very recent experiment We study a prototype setup of Majorana qubit in-volving a quantum tunneling junction between two one-dimensional (1D) topological superconductors as sketched schematically in Fig. As revealed by previous works with basis of the even-and odd-parity state iγ 2 γ 3 |0, 1 = ±|0, 1 , where σ x,z are Pauli matrices and θ = φ 1 -φ 2 is the phase difference between the two superconductors. The interaction term δ between the two Majorana parity states is due to the couplings between MQs in individual 1D topological superconductors [between γ 1 and γ 2 in the left one and between γ 3 and γ 4 in the right one in Fig. LZS interference between the two parity states with (a) δ/Em = 0.04 and (b) δ/Em = 0.1. The frequency of oscillation in the superconducting phase difference induced by the bias current is ω = 30Em/ . θ = (2n + 1)π with the relative weights determined by the MQ interaction δ, whereas coincide with the two pure parity states elsewhere [see Eq. ( When the current passing through the junction is beyond the critical current of the junction, the superconducting phase difference starts to evolve with time, which triggers a quantum mechanical evolution of the Majorana qubit as can be read from Eq. ( with Ψ = ψ 0 |0 + ψ 1 |1 . When the system is driven dynamically through θ = (2n + 1)π, the Majorana qubit may either stay in its original parity state, or evolve into the opposite parity state [see Fig. The dynamical process can be revealed by integrating numerically Eq. ( An analytic description of the quantum mechanical evolution of the Majorana qubit is available resorting to the Floquet theorem, which provides a general theoretical scheme for treating any system with timeperiodic hamiltonian To the first-order perturbation approximation which involves a 2×2 Floquet matrix, we obtain a LZS oscillation in occupation probabilities |ψ 0 (t)| 2 = cos 2 (ω m t/2) and starting from the initial state ψ 0 (0) = 1 and ψ 1 (0) = 0, where J 0 (x) is the Bessel function. The frequency of Majorana qubit rotation is linearly proportional to the interaction between the two parity states as can be understood intuitively. In contrary, the frequency of oscillation in superconducting phase difference ω is involved in a nonlinear way, and does not influence much the Majorana qubit rotation in the large limit because the reduced probability for parity flipping at a single passage is compensated by the increasing number of passages. For the case of Fig. Knowing that the Majorana qubit can rotate completely between the even-and odd-parity states, it is intriguing to check whether one can control the MF qubit arbitrarily. For this purpose, we investigate the response of the system to pulses of bias current. As shown in Figs. Since scalability is important for practical implementation of qubit gate, we investigate a system with two qubits as schematically shown in Fig. In order to manipulate the phases of the four Majorana qubit states, we can turn off the bias current and control the timing for switching off the junction coupling E m , which rotates the phases of the Majorana qubit states to desired values [see Eq. ( LZS interferometry has so far been proposed for manipulating superconducting flux qubits and Cooper-pair box qubits where C and R are the effective capacitance and resistance of the junction [see Fig. As shown in Fig. The oscillation of superconducting phase difference at the junction upon current injection radiates a microwave In a previous work Finally we give typical numbers for relevant physical quantities. The topological superconducting gap is in the order of 200 μeV according to the state-of-art experiments To summarize, we investigate theoretically a Landau-Zener-Stückelberg interference of Majorana parity states in a junction between two one-dimensional topological superconductors upon current injection. We demonstrate that the Majorana qubit can be rotated completely between the even-and odd-parity states, and a Landau-Zener-Stückelberg interferometry can be implemented by adjusting the pulse length of current injection, which along with the control of junction with gate voltage provides an arbitrary manipulation of the Majorana qubit. The present proposal has the potential advantage that current injection can be performed quickly as compared with operation involving magnetic flux. The scheme is scalable at least linearly upon introducing a sequence of one-dimensional topological superconductors coupled with quantum tunneling junctions. The dynamics of Majorana qubit upon current injection can be monitored by the power spectrum of microwave radiated from the junction.