The quantum character of Josephson junctions is ordinarily revealed through the analysis of the switching currents, i.e. the current at which a finite voltage appears: A sharp rise of the voltage signals the passage (tunnel) from a trapped state (the zero voltage solution) to a running state (the finite voltage solution). In this context, we investigate the probability distribution of the Josephson junctions switching current taking into account the effect of the bias sweeping rate and introducing a simple nonideal quantum measurements scheme. The measurements are modelled as repeated voltage samplings at discrete time intervals, that is with repeated projections of the time dependent quantum solutions on the static or the running states, to retrieve the probability distribution of the switching currents. The distribution appears to be immune of the quantum Zeno effect, and it is close to, but distinguishable from, the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin approximation. For energy barriers comparable to the quantum fundamental energy state and in the fast bias current ramp rate the difference is neat, and remains sizeable in the asymptotic slow rate limit. This behaviour is a consequence of the quantum character of the system that confirms the presence of a backreaction of quantum measurements on the outcome of mesoscopic Josephson junctions. Josephson Junctions (JJ) are a well established playground for macroscopic quantum tunneling The work is organized as follows. In Sect. II we set the stage for the analysis of quantum measurements, first describing in Subsect. II A the basic equations and the appropriated boundary conditions to hinder spurious reflections, then in Subsect. II B we describe a procedure to project the two outcomes of the measurements (either zero or nonzero voltage) for the calculation of the probability distribution of the switching currents. In Sect. III we detail the effect of the measurements on the zero voltage solution. Sect. IV contains the main outcome of the approach: the effect of the measurement frequency and of the bias current ramp time on the probability distribution of the switching currents. After the Conclusions of Sect. V, the Appendix details the dependence of the distribution upon the sweep bias time in the adiabatic, WKB approximation. In this Section we describe the basic equations, included the treatment of boundary conditions, in Subsect. II A. The procedure to retrieve the probability distribution of the switching currents from the projection procedure is in Subsect. II B. The quantum dynamics governing the gauge-invariant phase difference φ between two superconductors is given by a probability distribution ψ(φ, t ′ ), as results from the solution of a Schrödinger equation: in normalized units Here time is normalized to h/M , where for a small JJ the mass reads M = C (Φ 0 /2π) 2 , where C is the junction capacitance and Φ 0 = h/2e denotes the magnetic flux quantum. The dimensionless parameter V 0 = E J /E C is the normalized maximum energy barrier that results from the ratio between the Josephson energy E J = I 0 Φ 0 /2π and the Coulomb energy E C = h2 /[C (Φ 0 /2π)] 2 . Where I 0 is the critical current of the JJ. Normalizing the bias current with respect to I 0 , the time dependent applied current I(t) reads γ(t) = I(t)/I 0 , that is ramped in a time T from γ(0) = 0 to γ(T ) = 1. To increase the normalized bias current γ amounts to tilt the potential associated to Eq.( decreases and eventually, close to γ = 1, becomes small enough to make the tunnel probability current sizable. The process is initiated for γ = 0 when the Hamiltonian (2) is periodic; at this initial point it is appropriated to use the eigenfunctions: where ce 2n are ce Mathieu's cosine elliptic functions Here θ is the Heaviside step function. The boundary conditions for the zero current case are periodic, ψ(-π, 0) = ψ(π, 0), while for any finite current the appropriate boundary conditions are such that the wavefunction vanishes at ±∞. The limit at -∞ is physically ensured, for the increasing potential forbids propagation. More care is necessary at the edge at +∞, for the potential unbounded from below requires an absorbing condition that determines a net probability flux at infinity. In principle the integration extends indefinitely in space, but for numerical simulations, that we perform with a Cranck-Nicholson method The wavefunction ψ(φ, t) exhibits the special features of a quantum solution, for instance it can tunnel through an energy barrier It is the connection between the phase φ and the accessible quantities γ and v that allows to detect tunnel events. In fact, the experiments to ascertain the quantum nature of the JJ are based on the analysis of the distribution of the passages, or switchings (as often named in JJ jargon), to the finite voltage state wavefunction ψ 1 (φ, t) just before the voltage measurement (denoted by a dashline in Fig. To include the effect of the measures at precise time intervals, we use the following simple model of non ideal quantum measurements. Let us assume that in the ramp time T one performs N repeated measurements of the voltage at each instant t = nT /N, n = 1, 2, ..., N . When a measurement occurs, the two possible outcomes are: i) a finite voltage has been measured (switching), or ii) no voltage is detected (zero voltage state). We identify the switching probability p (t = nT /N ) of outcome i) with the probability to localize the wavefunction ψ 1 (φ, t) behind the maximum of the potential, φ > φ * : Quantum mechanics dictates to model the effect of the measurement process on the wavefunction. Following the standard von Neumann interpretation of measurements, one should project the state on the two corresponding subsets. Unfortunately, the operator associated to the projections on the two measurements outcomes is not easily defined Here the prefactor [1p (t = nT /N )] -1/2 ensures the correct normalization . In the end, at each nth measurement at the time t = nT /N we retrieve both a probability of a voltage switch p (t = nT /N ) given by Eq.( We start noticing that Eq. ( The distribution of switching current probability P γsw (n/N ) is the quantity that can be promptly compared with experiments where is the normalized plasma frequency. The corresponding probability distribution of the switching currents reads: (here N = 1exp -T 1 0 Γ(x)dx is the normalizing factor, the details of the derivation are in the Appendix.) Eq. ( In this Section we describe the behavior of the quantum wavefunction after a measurement. We only distinguish two outcomes of a voltage measurement in JJ: i) a running state in the φ > φ * region at finite voltage; ii) a state localized in the φ < φ * region at zero voltage. In the former case i) the current is registered as a switch, the procedure is completed, and it is not necessary to know the further evolution of the device. In the latter case ii) the information obtained by the measurement has modified the wavefunction, as described by Eq. Further in Fig. In Fig. By way of this part, we have notice that the truncation, see Eq. ( We here collect numerical results and theoretical estimates. The transient dynamics in between two measurements described in Sect. III suggests that two regimes can be recognized in the quantum escape simulations: a) small time intervals between two measurements, i.e. T /N comparable with the relaxation time; (b) large time lag between measurements, when T /N is large and the relaxation time can be neglected. We treat the two regimes in the following subsections: In the first case brute force numerical simulations are the only mean to retrieve the escape rate and the current distribution. To the contrary, for long time intervals T /N numerical simulations are difficult, inasmuch the integration time becomes prohibitive. In this regime we resort to an adiabatic approximation of the dynamics in between two measurements, as will be discussed in Subsect. IV B The usual technique to reveal tunnel in JJ is the PDF of the switching current, that we have retrieved with the methods described in Sect. II B and that are displayed in Fig. time T for different values of the number of measurements N (for reference, we also include the WKB approximation). From Fig. We here discuss the method to retrieve the switching current distributions for large ratios of the ramp times respect to the number of measurements, namely T /N . In the limit of long intervals between subsequent measurements, T /N → ∞, the relaxation time after each measurement becomes negligible and the consequences of wavefunction collapse becomes inessential. Figure In this representation is evident that the peak of the distribution moves when the ramp time decreases , approaching the WKB limit. For relatively slow ramp times, namely T = 10 4 , there is still a detectable difference with the WKB approximation the effect of measurements. The normalized value 10 4 corresponds, typical timescale of the JJ to an accessible ramp time. Therefore, even if ramp times are not available, the neat difference between the standard proach that neglects (the green curves in Figs. In conclusion, we have modeled the influence of measurements on Josephson mesoscopic devices with a time dependent Schrödinger equation, dealing with the problem of the boundary conditions with an appropriated analogue of a perfect matched layer. Solving this model, we have studied the effect of the number of measurements and of the bias current ramp time on the switching current distribution. effect is evident in the fast ramp time regime, as a consequences of the presence of a relaxation time, but it is also sizable the slow ramp regime. In the limit of continuous monitoring our approach a bell shaped distribution that compatible the standard WKB result. As the of measurements increases, the peak of the switching current moves towards lower values. The effect, in the adiabatic regime, is best highlighted when the dimensionless energy barrier V 0 is of the same order of magnitude as the lowest energy level, while the shift becomes vanishingly small for larger V 0 values. Thus, the main feature of our findings is that the peak of the switching currents distribution depends on the measurement scheme: increasing the number of measurements, while keeping the ramp time constant, tunnel events occur at a lower current. We underline that the change of the switching statistics as a consequence of measurements is a quantum signature that has no classical counterpart and cannot be confused with the effect of undesired noise entering the system. We feel it is important to mention some limitations of the present work. First, we have neglected fluctuations and dissipation, that require a different version of the Schrödinger equation noticing that a bias threshold γ in the range [0, 1] is uniquely identified along the ramp by the instant t when t = γT . If ∆γ is an increment of the bias small enough that the tunnel rate Γ of Eq.( Prob (γ sw > γ + ∆γ) = exp [-Γ(γ)∆γT ] Prob (γ sw > γ) . (A1) i.e., the probability to observe a switching current greater than γ + ∆γ is equal to the probability to have jointly a switch above γ sw = γ and that no escape has occurred in the tiny time interval ∆t = T ∆γ. The exponential factor assumes that the effect of the bias change (during the process the bias rises to 1 in the time T ) is negligible in ∆t, and is the probability to have no switching during the small time interval ∆t = T ∆γ . Eq. (A1) can be recasted in a differential equation in the limit of infinitesimal ∆γ introducing CDF (γ) = 1 -Prob (γ sw > γ). Furthermore we note that P γsw (γ) = d dγ CDF (γ). After straightforward manipulations we have: with the additional condition that PDF should be normalized to unity. The solution of the previous equation, with the specified normalization condition, gives for P γsw (γ) the following simple expression: that is Eq.( In the quantum measurements regime the discrete histogram giving the distribution of the measurements in the discrete set of switching current {γ k = k N } N k=1 can be computed starting again Eq. (A1). In we can write Prob(γ sw >γ k ) = F (γ k )exp(-Γ(γ )∆γT (γ sw > γ )(A4) where, taking into account the result of dynamic, we have that that is valid in the limit T /N larger than the relaxation time and in the adiabatic regime. In Eq. (A5), Γ(γ) is the numerical rate and the prefactor F (γ) > 1, as shown in Fig. 