The electrical resistivity ρ and Hall coefficient RH of the tetragonal single-layer cuprate La1.6-xNd0.4SrxCuO4 were measured in magnetic fields up to H = 37.5 T, large enough to access the normal state at T → 0, for closely spaced dopings p across the pseudogap critical point at p = 0.23. Below p , both coefficients exhibit an upturn at low temperature, which gets more pronounced with decreasing p. Taken together, these upturns show that the normal-state carrier density n at T = 0 drops upon entering the pseudogap phase. Quantitatively, it goes from n = 1 + p at p = 0.24 to n = p at p = 0.20. By contrast, the mobility does not change appreciably, as revealed by the magneto-resistance. The transition has a width in doping and some internal structure, whereby RH responds more slowly than ρ to the opening of the pseudogap. We attribute this difference to a Fermi surface that supports both holelike and electronlike carriers in the interval 0.2 < p < p , with compensating contributions to RH. Our data are in excellent agreement with recent high-field data on YBa2Cu3Oy and La2-xSrxCuO4. The quantitative consistency across three different cuprates shows that a drop in carrier density from 1 + p to p is a universal signature of the pseudogap transition at T = 0. We discuss the implication of these findings for the nature of the pseudogap phase. After more than two decades, the pseudogap phase of cuprate superconductors remains an enigma, the subject of active debate. Most experimental studies so far have been carried out either at high temperature, above the onset of superconductivity at T c , where signatures are typically broad, or at low temperature, inside the superconducting phase, where it is difficult to separate the pseudogap from the superconducting gap. Experiments of a third kind are called for: in the T = 0 limit, without superconductivity Twenty years ago, Ando, Boebinger and co-workers pioneered this approach with measurements of the electric resistivity ρ(T ) in the cuprate La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO), using pulsed fields up to 61 T [ Boebinger and co-workers also performed measurements of the Hall coefficient R H , again in fields up to 60 T, in both Bi 2 La 2-x Sr x CuO 6+δ (Bi-2201) Starting in 2007, high-field Hall measurements in YBa 2 Cu 3 O y (YBCO), also up to 60 T, revealed that R H is deeply negative at T → 0 in the doping range 0.08 < p < 0.16 Recently, Hall measurements in YBCO were extended to higher doping by using fields up to 88 T means that the critical doping for CDW order, p CDW = 0.16 ± 0.005, is distinctly lower than the pseudogap critical point, which in YBCO is located at p = 0.19 ± 0.01 The second finding in YBCO is a dramatic drop in n H as doping is decreased below p In this paper, we study a third cuprate, La 1.6-x Nd 0.4 Sr x CuO 4 (Nd-LSCO), known to ex-hibit an upturn in both ρ(T ) and R H (T ) Large single crystals of Nd-LSCO were grown by a traveling float-zone technique in an image furnace, with nominal Sr concentrations x = 0.20, 0.21, 0.22, 0.23 and 0.25. Samples were cut into small rectangular platelets of typical dimensions of 1 mm in length and 0.5 mm in width (in the basal plane of the tetragonal structure), with a thickness of 0.2 mm along the c axis. The hole concentration p of each sample is taken to be p = x, except for the x = 0.25 sample, whose doping is p = 0.24 ± 0.005 (see the Appendix). Each sample is labeled by its p value. Six contacts were made on each sample with H20E silver epoxy diffused by annealing at high temperature in oxygen (two contacts for the current, two for the longitudinal resistivity and two for the transverse Hall signal). Measurements were performed using a standard four-point technique with the current applied along the length of the sample (in the CuO 2 plane). The magnetic field was applied parallel to the c axis (normal to the CuO 2 plane). All samples were measured in Sherbrooke at a fixed field of H = 0 and H = 16 T. In Nijmegen, two types of measurements were carried out: field sweeps up to 37.5 T at a typical speed of 4 T/min, at various fixed temperatures; temperature sweeps at a fixed field of H = 33 T. Electrical resistivity of Nd-LSCO at p = 0.22, as a function of temperature for two values of the magnetic field: H = 16 T (red) and H = 33 T (burgundy). The dots are obtained from the isotherms in Fig. The aim of our study was to investigate in detail the onset of the pseudogap phase, as the material is taken across p (Fig. At p = 0.24, ρ(T ) is known to be perfectly linear below 80 K In Fig. It is useful to characterize the resistivity of Nd-LSCO in two ways. First, by fitting the linear regime above 70 K to ρ(T ) = ρ 0 + AT (dash-dotted line in Fig. There is a positive magnetoresistance (MR) in all samples, which grows as H 2 (Fig. In Fig. The Hall coefficient R H was measured simultaneously on the same samples as the resistivity. The data for five samples with dopings p = 0.20, 0.21, 0.22, 0.23 and 0.24 are displayed in Fig. V /e(1 + p), where V is the unit-cell volume and e is the electron charge, in agreement with the value expected for a single large holelike Fermi surface containing 1 + p holes per Cu atom. At p = 0.20, 0.21 and 0.22, there is a clear upturn in R H (T ) at low T , starting roughly below the temperature where ρ(T ) has its minimum (Fig. In Fig. At p = 0.24, it is certainly reasonable to interpret n H as a carrier density (with units of holes/Cu atom), since the data yield n H (0) = 1.3 ± 0.1 and the Luttinger rule requires the carrier density to be n = 1 + p = 1.24 for a single large holelike Fermi surface. By itself, the drop in n H below p does not necessarily imply a drop in carrier density, for it could be due to a change in Fermi-surface curvature, such as could occur at a nematic quantum critical point Following Ref. 4], we define the carrier density n ρ derived from ρ(T ), as n ρ ≡ (1 + p)[ρ 0 /ρ(0)]. By construction, this gives n ρ = 1 + p at p = 0.24 since at that doping there is no upturn, and ρ(0) = ρ 0 . In Fig. It is instructive to investigate the impact of the pseudogap phase on the mobility μ of the charge carriers. We estimate μ in two separate ways. First, by looking at the magneto-resistance, which varies as MR ∝ (ω c τ ) 2 ∝ (μH) 2 in the weak-field limit, where ω c is the cyclotron frequency and τ is the scattering time. The MR in our data does vary as H 2 (Fig. The second way to estimate the mobility is through the Hall angle, controlled by the ratio R H /ρ, which is proportional to μ in a single-band (single-carrier) metal. In Fig. At p = 0.24, Matt et al. observe no gap at all, confirming that the pseudogap phase begins below p = 0.24 Note that the signature of T in ρ(T ) can be different in different cuprates or samples. While it is typically an upturn in samples of Nd-LSCO and LSCO carrier density overwhelms any loss of inelastic scattering, and ρ(T ) rises below T . To see in YBCO a low-T upturn in ρ(T ) one needs to introduce disorder, as was done by Rullier-Albenque et al. with electron irradiation In summary, the loss of carrier density detectable in transport properties is a generic signature of the critical point p at which the pseudogap opens in the normal state of cuprate superconductors at T = 0. Having established that p = 0.23 is the critical doping at which the pseudogap phase begins in the normal state of Nd-LSCO at T → 0 (Fig. Indeed, in YBCO, XRD studies find that CDW mod-S Doping dependence of the carrier density in Nd-LSCO, estimated in two ways: 1) from the Hall effect, as nH = V /eRH(0) (red squares; Fig. In LSCO, high-field Seebeck data were used in a similar fashion to pin down the end point of FSR, giving p CDW = 0.15 ± 0.005 In Nd-LSCO, CDW order has been detected by XRD at p = 0.15 Having established that p is purely the critical point of the pseudogap phase, devoid of superconductivity or CDW order, let us see what its intrinsic properties are, as may be deduced from transport measurements. The key signature is a drop in carrier density from n = 1 + p at p > p to n = p at p < p . This conclusion can only be reached by looking at both R H and ρ. While the drop in n H by itself does suggest a drop in n, it is not conclusive, since it could be just a change of Fermi-surface curvature, or a deformation at roughly constant volume. It is the huge upturn in ρ(T ) that really shows there is a loss of p 0 p p FIG. carrier density. The fact that n ρ p at p = 0.20, 0.21 and 0.22 is striking (Fig. One of our important findings is that the pseudogap phase onsets rapidly at T = 0: n ρ drops from 1 + p to p in a doping interval of at most 0.015 (Fig. The transition in n H is wider than in n ρ , and it has additional structure (Fig. A possible explanation for this difference is the presence of electronlike carriers in the Fermi surface of the pseudogap phase, within a small doping interval immediately below p . This is why the upturn in R H (T ) (Fig. We propose that the narrow peak in n H observed in LSCO just below p 0.18 (Ref. 7) has the same origin. In Fig. The simplest scenario to explain a transition from n = 1 + p to n = p is a quantum phase transition into a phase of antiferromagnetic (AF) order below a QCP at p , with a wave vector Q = (π, π). The new periodicity imposed by the spin modulation breaks the translational symmetry and hence imposes a new, smaller Brillouin zone, sketched by the dashed line in Fig. Recently, Storey calculated the Hall coefficient of a typical cuprate as a function of doping within such an AF scenario In summary, the AF scenario accounts naturally for the observation that n = p below p , and it explains why there is a width to the drop in n H , due to the presence of electron pockets. It is not clear, however, that such a scenario really applies to hole-doped cuprates. (Note that it is quite reasonable for electron-doped cuprates [45].) In order to confirm its applicability, one would need to detect AF modulations in the normal state at T → 0. In Nd-LSCO, magnetic Bragg peaks are observed by neutron diffraction up to p = 0.20, the highest doping investigated so far In LSCO, SDW order is observed at low T up to a critical doping p SDW 0.13, in zero magnetic field A number of theoretical scenarios have been proposed to account for the pseudogap phase of cuprate superconductors. In some, the pseudogap phase is a state that breaks a symmetry. For example, d-density-wave order breaks translational symmetry with the same Q vector as the commensurate AF state, and therefore produces the same reduced Brillouin zone, Fermi-surface pockets (as in Fig. Scenarios without broken translational symmetry could also apply. In the Yang, Rice, and Zang (YRZ) model In the FL* model We propose three avenues of investigation that could help discriminate between the various scenarios. First, it is important to understand what controls the actual location of the critical point, which varies considerably amongst hole-doped cuprates In summary, we performed high-field measurements of the resistivity and Hall coefficient in Nd-LSCO across the critical doping where the pseudogap phase ends, at p = 0.23. At p > p , R H (T ) is flat and it yields a Hall number n H 1 + p, consistent with a carrier density of n = 1 + p holes per Cu atom. The resistivity is linear in T as T → 0. At p < p , both ρ(T ) and R H (T ) exhibit an upturn at low T , showing that the pseudogap phase causes a drop in carrier density. Quantitatively, we observe a drop from n 1 + p at p > p to n p at p < p . As observed in LSCO At T = 0, the change from a metal with n = 1 + p carriers to a metal with n = p carriers happens very rapidly, within an interval δp/p < 6 %. We conclude that the onset of the pseudogap phase at T = 0 is a transition (vs doping), whereas it appears to be a crossover as a function of temperature. Below p , we find that the (positive) Hall angle drops at low temperature, possible evidence for the presence of electronlike carriers in the pseudogapped Fermi surface. This could explain the small anomalous peak in n H vs p observed in LSCO Our data are quantitatively consistent with the drop in carrier density observed in YBCO from high-field Hall data Its n H value is consistent with p = 0.246. We therefore find that p = x within ±0.003 for the first four samples, and p = 0.24 ± 0.005 for the fifth sample (Table 