Éliashberg theory, being generalized to the electron-phonon (EP) systems with not constant density of electronic states, as well as to the frequency behavior of the renormalization of both the electron mass and the chemical potential, is used to study hydrogen sulphide 3 SH phase c T under pressure. The phonon contribution to the anomalous electron Green's function (GF) is considered. The pairing is considered within the overall width of the electron band, and not only in a narrow layer at the Fermi surface. The frequency and the temperature dependences of the electron mass renormalization ReZ ( ) ω , the density of electronic states ( ) N ε , renormalized by the EP interaction , the spectral function of the electron-phonon interaction, obtained by calculation are used to calculate the electronic abnormal GF. The Éliashberg generalized equations with the variable density of electronic states are resolved. The dependence of both the real and the imaginary part of the order parameter on the frequency in the 3 SH phase is obtained. The 177 c T K = value in the hydrogen sulfide 3 SH phase at the pressure P = 225 GPa has been defined. The calculation of the superconducting transition temperature in the hydrogen sulphide [ ] 1, 2 is usually carried out either by using extremely lax and insufficiently reasoned description of superconductivity with a freely selectable electron density functional [ ] -not taking into account the variable nature of the electronic density of states ( ) N ω . The solution of the Éliashberg equations on the real axis is considered to be a difficult task. Therefore the critical temperature c T with the Éliashberg formalism is usually calculated in the Green's function presentation with the use of a set of discrete Green's function values on the imaginary axis and not taking into account the variable nature of the electronic density of states (see N ω and the specific properties of matter in which the superconducting state is established. For this purpose we construct in the present paper a revised version of the Migdal-Éliashberg theory for the EP system at nonzero Given all that is written above, we consider EP system with the Hamiltonian which includes the electronic component ˆe H , the ionic component ˆi H and the component corresponding to the electron-ion interaction in the harmonic approximation ˆe i H -, so that ˆˆˆˆˆ. Here the following notations are introduced: μ as the chemical potential, N as the number of electrons operator in the system. The matrix electron Green function Ĝ is defined in the representation given by Nambu as follows ( ) ( ) , where conventional creation and annihilation operators of electrons appear as Nambu operators. SP of the retarded GF at the discrete frequency points set ( ) = ± ± on the imaginary axis can be written as , χ ξ ω is the complex function, the real part of which is commonly referred to as the EP renormalization of the chemical potential interaction. The real part of the ( ) , m p χ ω term after analytic continuation determines the frequency-dependent shift of the chemical potential given by the following formula Z p ω term the real part of which after analytic continuation sets the renormalization of the electron mass, and the imaginary part sets the damping of an electron is given by the expression the phonon contribution to the self energy part of the retarded e-GF ˆR g is expressed as follows: ( ) ( ) We use the technique for the real frequency Éliashberg equations' solution. This we obtain the equations for anomalous GF self-energy part form: we obtain the equations for both the real Re ( ) φ ω and imaginary part energy part as the system of two equations . 3) we have neglected in the first approximation the Coulomb contribution to the order parameter in view of the smallness of the Coulomb pseudopotential hydrogen sulfide SH3 phase and imaginary part Imφ ω of the as the system of two equations having the following near the c T midrange were obtained in Im χ ω in ( For the imaginary part of the complex anomalous order parameter φ we similarly obtain the following expression: Near Tc the product tends to zero for all values of the argument, so that the expression , whereas the expression in the second term of ( . As a result the nonlinear equations for the real part Reφ ω of the order parameter after ξ′ integration with the account of the delta function properties is taken as follows: For the imaginary part Im ( ) φ ω of the order parameter we obtain as a result of the ξ integration taking into account the properties of the delta function the following expression: The right hand side of equations ( , the z′ integral in ( can not be less than μ -, so that the integration over z′ at negative z′ breaks provided ( ) ( ) ( ) The integrand is equal to zero under such z′ that ( ) ( ) ( ) < .The root will assume to be positive ≥ for any z′ sign. Assuming the constancy of the "bare" electron density of states ( ) N ω , we can pass from a system of equations ( When assuming constant electronic density of states the equations for the complex order parameter near Tc are simplified to the following form: Usually already extremely oversimplified equations ( ( ) ( ) ( ) From the above it is clear that the use of such a simplified form of the Éliashberg equations can not qualify for a quantitative description of the superconducting transition temperature Tc in the specific materials. In this paper we determine Tc and the frequency behavior of the complex order parameter at different temperatures by solving the Éliashberg equations in the form of a non-linear system of equations ( 3 SH phase at the pressure of 225 GPa with the full account of the alternative character of the electronic density of states. The system of equations ( SH hydrogen sulfide phase at at the pressure P = 225 GPa. It was found that the process of the convergence of the solution for the real part of the order parameter Reφ ω in solving the system of equations ( Reφ ω as well as Imφ ω tend to zero with increasing number of iterations thus indicating no effect of superconductivity at these temperature. In this case, however, the order parameter preserves the characteristic structure of the superconducting state decreasing with increasing number of iterations. Equations ( Reφ ω as well as the behavior of the imaginary part of the order parameter ( ) at the temperatures T = 175K, 180K, 300K is shown in Fig. Analyzing the results and summing everything written before, we arrive at the .The neglect of the terms proportional to 24 -). As it has been shown in[ ] 25 in the case of the strong