We theoretically study a finite size SF1N F2 spin valve, where a normal metal (N ) insert separates a thin standard ferromagnet (F1) and a thick half-metallic ferromagnet (F2). For sufficiently thin superconductor (S) widths close to the coherence length ξ0, we find that changes to the relative magnetization orientations in the ferromagnets can result in substantial variations in the transition temperature Tc, consistent with experiment [Singh et al., Phys. Rev. X 5, 021019 (2015)]. Our results demonstrate that, in good agreement with the experiment, the variations are largest in the case where F2 is in a half-metallic phase and thus supports only one spin direction. To pinpoint the origins of this strong spin-valve effect, both the equal-spin f1 and opposite-spin f0 triplet correlations are calculated using a self-consistent microscopic technique. We find that when the magnetization in F1 is tilted slightly out-of-plane, the f1 component can be the dominant triplet component in the superconductor. The coupling between the two ferromagnets is discussed in terms of the underlying spin currents present in the system. We go further and show that the zero energy peaks of the local density of states probed on the S side of the valve can be another signature of the presence of superconducting triplet correlations. Our findings reveal that for sufficiently thin S layers, the zero energy peak at the S side can be larger than its counterpart in the F2 side. In the field of superconducting spintronics, there is interest in spin-controlled proximity effects for manipulating the superconductivity in ferromagnet (F ) and superconductor (S) layered systems Recent experiments involving superconducting spin valves have investigated variations in the critical temperature, T c Besides through studying T c , the existence and type of superconducting correlations in superconducting spinvalves can be identified through signatures of the proximity-induced electronic density of states (DOS) strong spin valves with high sensitivity to magnetization changes and a corresponding T c suppression. To realistically and accurately model these systems, where h E F , we use a fully microscopic microscopic framework, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations, to determine the singlet and triplet pair correlations selfconsistently. This approach naturally supports the study of a broad range of intermediate ferromagnetic exchange energies, including the half metallic phase, by simply setting the exchange field value close to the Fermi energy. The half metallic regime is also accessible within the quasiclassical approximation A schematic of the spin valve configuration is depicted in Fig. To accurately describe the physical properties of our systems with sizes in the nanometer scale and over a broad range of exchange fields, where quasiclassical approximations are limited, we numerically solve the microscopic BdG equations within a fully self-consistent framework. The general spin-dependent BdG equations for the quasiparticle energies, ε n , and quasiparticle wavefunctions, u nσ , v nσ is written: where h i (i = x, z) are components of the exchange field. In Eqs. ( contains the Fermi energy, E F , and an effective interfacial scattering potential described by delta functions of strength H j (j denotes the different interfaces), namely: , where is written in terms of the dimensionless scattering strength H Bj . We assume h x,i = h i cos θ i and h z,i = h i sin θ i in F i , where h i is the magnitude of exchange field, and i denotes the region. To minimize the free energy of the system at temperature T , the singlet pair potential ∆(x) is calculated self-consistently where the sum is over all eigenstates with ε n that lie within a characteristic Debye energy ω D , and g(x) is the superconducting coupling strength, taken to be constant in the S region and zero elsewhere. The pair potential gives direct information regarding superconducting correlations within the S region only, since it vanishes in the remaining spin valve regions where g(x) = 0. Greater insight into the singlet superconducting correlations throughout the structure, and the extraction of the proximity effects is most easily obtained by considering the pair amplitude, f 3 , defined as f 3 ≡ ∆(x)/g(x). To analyze the correlation between the behavior of the superconducting transition temperatures and the existence of odd triplet superconducting correlations in our system, we compute the induced triplet pairing amplitudes which we denote as f 0 (with m = 0 spin projection) and f 1 (with m = ±1 spin projection) according to the following equations where ζ n (t) ≡ cos(ε n t) -i sin(ε n t) tanh(ε n /(2T )), and t is the time difference in the Heisenberg picture. These triplet pair amplitudes are odd in t and vanish at t = 0, in accordance with the Pauli exclusion principle. The quantization axis in Eqs. (3a) and (3b) is along the z direction. When studying the triplet correlations in F 1 , we align the quantization axis with the local exchange field direction, so that after rotating, the triplet amplitudes f 0 and f 1 become linear combinations of the f 0 and f 1 in the original unprimed system The study of single-particle excitations in these systems can reveal important signatures in the proximity induced singlet and triplet pair correlations. A useful experimental tool that probes these single-particle states is tunneling spectroscopy, where information measured by a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) can reveal the local DOS, N (x, ε), as a function of position x and energy ε. We write N (x, ε) as a sum of each spin component (σ =↑, ↓) to the DOS: We now proceed to present the self-consistent numerical results for the transition temperature, triplet amplitudes, and local DOS for the spin-valve structure depicted in Fig. We first study the critical temperature of the spin valve system. The linearized self-consistency expression near (degrees) T c takes the form, ∆ i = q G iq ∆ q , where ∆ i are the expansion coefficients for ∆(x) in the chosen basis. The G iq are the corresponding matrix elements, which involve sums of the normal state energies and wavefunctions. To determine T c , we compute the eigenvalues λ, of the corresponding eigensystem ∆ = λG∆. When λ > 1 at a given temperature, the system is in the superconducting state. Many of the computational details can be found in Ref. It was experimentally observed To demonstrate the correlation between the strong T c variations and the generation of triplet and singlet pairs, Fig. Next, Fig. It is immediately evident that samples must have interfaces as transparent as possible To correlate the large spin-valve effect observed in Fig. Overall, there is a dramatic change in both triplet components when the S part of the spin valve is increased in size. For example, the f 1 triplet correlations in N and in F 2 evolve from having two peaks two a single maximum at θ = 90 • . The D S trends also reflect the importance of self-consistency of the pair potential ∆(x) for thinner superconductors, where a self-consistent singlet component f 3 (x) can substantially decline, or vanish altogether, in contrast to simple step function. Indeed, the observed disappearance of the singlet and triplet pair correlations for thin superconductors at θ 90 • (see top panels), can only occur if the pair potential is calculated self-consistently [Eq. ( To further clarify the role of the triplet correlations in the spin valve, we now discuss the explicit relative time evolution of the triplet states in Fig. h 2 , f 0 declines sharply in the half-metallic region. Also, in agreement with Fig. To explore these proximity induced signatures further, we investigate the experimentally relevant local DOS. An important spectroscopic tool for exploring proximity effects on an atomic scale with sub-meV energy resolution is the scanning tunneling microscope (STM). We are interested in determining the local DOS in the outer S segment of the SF 1 N F 2 spin valve. By positioning a nonmagnetic STM tip at the edge of the S region, the tunneling current (I) and voltage (V ) characteristics can be measured A complimentary global view of the above phenomena is presented in Fig. To reveal further details of the exchange interaction which controls the behavior and type of triplet correlations present in the system, we next examine the characteristics of the spin currents that exist within the spin valve. When the magnetizations in F 1 and F 2 are noncollinear, the exchange interaction in the ferromagnets creates a spin current S that flows in parts of the system, even in the absence of a charge current. If the spin current varies spatially, the corresponding nonconserved spin currents in F 1 and F 2 generate a mutual torque that tends to rotate the magnetizations of the two ferromagnets. This process is embodied in the spin-torque continuity equation where τ (x) is the spin transfer torque (STT): is the magnetization, and μ B is the Bohr magneton (see Appendix A). The spin current tensor here has been reduced to vector form due to the quasi-one dimensional nature of the geometry. We calculate S(x) by performing the appropriate sums of quasiparticle amplitudes and energies [see Eq. (A10)]. In the steady state, the continuity equation, Eq. ( In equilibrium, the net τ y in F 2 is opposite to its counterpart in F 1 . Since no spin current flows in the superconductor, we have S y (d S ) = 0, and the net torque in F 1 is equivalent to the spin current flowing through N . In our setup, the exchange field in F 1 is directed in the x -z plane, and therefore the spin current and torque are directed orthogonal to this plane (along the interfaces in the y direction). Likewise, if the magnetizations were varied in the y -z plane, the spin currents would be directed along x. Figure In conclusion, motivated by recent experiments In the case of F layers with uniform magnetization, there is no net spin current. The introduction of an inhomo-geneous magnetization texture however results in a net spin current imbalance that is finite even in the absence of a charge current.