We analyze the recently measured anomalous transport properties of an ultracold gas through a ballistic constriction [S. Krinner et al., PNAS 201601812 (2016)]. The quantized conductance observed at weak interactions increases several-fold as the gas is made strongly interacting, which cannot be explained by the Landauer theory of single-channel transport. We show that this phenomenon is due to the multichannel Andreev reflections at the edges of the constriction, where the interaction and confinement result in a superconducting state. Andreev processes convert atoms of otherwise reflecting channels into the condensate propagating through the constriction, leading to a significant excess conductance. Furthermore, we find the spin conductance being suppressed by superconductivity; the agreement with experiment provides an additional support for our model. Transport measurements through one-dimensional ballistic channels provide invaluable insight into the complex many-body systems by connecting microscopic quantum dynamics with macroscopic observables, such as the conductance G n , spin conductance G s and heat transport. In the normal state, these quantities exhibit plateaus as a function of the gate potential at integer multiples of the conductance and heat conductance quantum, respectively In the presence of weak interactions, the constriction exhibits conductance plateaus of integer multiples of the 1/h as a function of the confinement strength, in accordance with several similar experiments in ballistic nanostructures We resolve the puzzle of anomalous conductance by associating it with multichannel AR processes at the normal-superconductor interfaces at the two ends of the constriction (see Fig. The experimental geometry is shown in Fig. We determine the superconducting profile in the constriction within the local density approximation (LDA), whereby we consider a small part of the system of length L y , where the parameters of the gas are assumed to be constant. We also take into account the renormalization of interactions due to confinement effects. The constriction is described by a harmonic Hamiltonian of trapping frequencies ω = (ω x , ω z ) = (ν x , ν z )/2π, local gate potential V g and chemical potential μ, where ) ω z denotes the channel energies, and a n,q,σ annihilates an atom in channel n = (n x , n z ), spin σ =↑, ↓ and momentum q along the y axis. The interaction between the 6 Li atoms is given by the standard point interaction g δ (3) (r), where g is the bare interaction strength where the interaction strength g = g/(l x L y l z ) of energy dimension is defined using oscillator lengths l x(z) = /mω x(z) . The matrix elements V n1n2 N = φ νx (0) φ νz (0) N, ν|n 1 , n 2 , with ν = n 1 + n 2 -N, arise from the matrix elements of the point-like interaction potential We decouple Eq. ( in vectorial notation for the band indices. Here, (a σ,q ) n = a n,σ,q denotes the vector of annihilation operators, the SC matrix is given by ∆ n1n2 = ∆ 0 V n1n2 0 , and the matrix ξ σ,q contains the band energies on its diagonal. Using a Bogoliubov transformation, one can now determine the quasi-particle energies E n,q . Then, in order to determine the pairing amplitude ∆ 0 , one needs to minimize the finite temperature BCS free energy F M F = E M F -T n,q log 1 + e -En,q/T at a fixed chemical potential, as set by the leads. The mean-field condensation energy E M F = n,q (ξ n,q -E n,q ) -|∆0| 2 g however still contains the bare interaction term g, and a divergent sum over excitation energies. In order to regularize this term, we make use of the vacuum Bethe-Salpeter equations In contrast to three-dimensional systems, Eq. ( We determine the conductance and spin conductance of the waveguide in a Landauer picture where 1 denotes the unit matrix, n F stands for the Fermi function, and the energy arguments of r pp ( ) and r ph ( ) are neglected for brevity. As can be seen from Eq. ( As shown in Fig. Fig. The comparison of Fig. As an experimental test of our theory, we propose to investigate the channel's conductance at large, equal spin imbalances in both leads, leading to the suppression of the constriction's superconductivity due to Fermi surface mismatch. At large imbalances, the SC-normal transition could thus be measured using the drop of anomalous conductances, and from the increase of spin conductance, to their respective values in the normal state The above analysis of quantum transport assumes a static order parameter in the superconducting region. Its finite size may constrain the fluctuations of the number of atoms in the region. The constrained particle number fluctuations enhances the fluctuations of phase of the order parameter. These effects were studied extensively in the context of Coulomb blockade in a superconducting island coupled to a normal-metal lead, see, e.g. Refs. 48 and 49. The overall conclusion is that at large conductance of the interface the effects of Coulomb blockade (i.e., constraints on the particle number) are negligible. The corresponding energy scale turns out to scale as exponent of -G/G q if the large conductance of a junction is achieved by increasing the number of conducting channels Conclusion -We demonstrated that the recently observed anomalous transport measured in Ref. 