In the studies of iron-pnictides, a key question is whether their bad-metal state from which the superconductivity emerges lies in close proximity with a magnetically ordered insulating phase. Recently it was found that at low temperatures, the heavily Cu-doped NaFe1-xCuxAs (x > 0.3) iron-pnictide is an insulator with long-range antiferromagnetic order, similar to the parent compound of cuprates but distinct from all other iron-pnictides. Using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, we determined the momentum-resolved electronic structure of NaFe1-xCuxAs (x = 0.44) and identified that its ground state is a narrow-gap insulator. Combining the experimental results with density functional theory (DFT) and DFT+U calculations, our analysis reveals that the on-site Coulombic (Hubbard) and Hund's coupling energies play crucial roles in formation of the band gap about the chemical potential. We propose that at finite temperatures charge carriers are thermally excited from the Cu-As-like valence band into the conduction band, which is of Fe 3d-like character. With increasing temperature, the number of electrons in the conduction band becomes larger and the hopping energy between Fe sites increases, and finally the long-range antiferromagnetic order is destroyed at T > TN. Our study provides a basis for investigating the evolution of the electronic structure of a Mott insulator transforming into a bad metallic phase, and eventually forming a superconducting state in iron-pnictides. Similar to the cuprates and iron-chalcogenides, in the phase diagram of the iron-pnictides, a superconducting dome develops upon doping a non-superconducting, often magnetically ordered, parent compound. The superconducting dome and/or magnetic phase are formed from an underlying normal state which exhibits bad-metal behavior with large electrical resistivity at room temperature Very recently it has been shown that, adjacent to the superconducting phase, an AFM insulating state occurs in heavily doped NaFe 1-x Cu x As To get more insight into the insulating behavior of NaFe 0.56 Cu 0.44 As at low temperatures as observed in the transport measurements (Fig x Cu x As with x up to 0.14 showed that, except for introducing extra charge carriers, the overall band dispersion barely changes with Cu doping, and the Fermi surface and/or all the energy bands near E F are dominated by Fe 3d orbitals x Cu x As. In summary, using ARPES combined with DFT and DFT+U calculations, we have revealed the electronic structure of the heavily Cu-doped NaFe 1-x Cu x As (x = 0.44) and showed that its ground state is a narrow-gap insulator whose origin lies in strong electron interactions of Fe 3d orbitals. The on-site interaction (Hubbard U and Hund's coupling J H ) remove the hybridizations between Fe 3d and other Cu-As orbitals in the vicinity of E F . The interactions furthermore elevate the Fe 3d bands near E F to above the chemical potential and push the fully occupied Fe 3d valence band further down in binding energy. Consequently, an energy gap opens up about the chemical potential, which instigates an insulating phase in the heavily Cu-doped NaFe 1-x Cu x As. The effect induced by U and J H resembles the situation in the parent compounds of the high-T c cuprates (Mott insulators), with the Mott induced charge transfer gap that underscores the insulating behavior. The quantitative differences with cuprates are that the top of the valence band is derived from Cu-As hybridized bands and is very close to (or touching) the chemical potential; and the charge transfer gap between valence and conduction bands is very narrow. The occupation of Fe 3d conduction band by thermally activated electrons increases the hopping processes between the Fe sites and thus suppresses the AFM ordering, eventually destroying the long-rage order at T > T N .