The concept of stimulated emission of bosons has played an important role in modern science and technology, and constitutes the working principle for lasers. In a stimulated emission process, an incoming photon enhances the probability that an excited atomic state will transition to a lower energy state and generate a second photon of the same energy. It is expected, but not experimentally shown, that stimulated emission contributes significantly to the zero resistance current in a superconductor by enhancing the probability that scattered Cooper pairs will return to the macroscopically occupied condensate instead of entering any other state. Here, we use timeand angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to study the initial rise of the non-equilibrium quasiparticle population in a Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ cuprate superconductor induced by an ultrashort laser pulse. Our finding reveals significantly slower buildup of quasiparticles in the superconducting state than in the normal state. The slower buildup only occurs when the pump pulse is too weak to deplete the superconducting condensate, and for cuts inside the Fermi arc region. We propose this is a manifestation of stimulated recombination of broken Cooper pairs, and signals an important momentum space dichotomy in the formation of Cooper pairs inside and outside the Fermi arc region. 1 arXiv:1607.07131v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 25 Jul 2016 Numerous studies have utilized ultrafast infrared pulses to break Cooper pairs and create non-equilibrium quasiparticles (NEQPs) in conventional and high-temperature superconductors Here we report a systematic trARPES study of the temperature, momentum, doping, and density dependence of the initial buildup of NEQPs in high temperature superconductor Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi2212). In the superconducting state, and at low pump fluence, it takes ∼ 0.9 ps for the NEQP population to reach the maximum. In contrast, in the normal state, or when the pump fluence is sufficiently strong to deplete the entire superconducting condensate, the maximum in the NEQP population is reached immediately (within our time resolution 300 fs) after the arrival of the pump pulse. The NEQP population residing outside the Fermi arc also builds up almost instantly. Along the Fermi arc, the NEQP buildup time shortens as the energy gap increases. We propose that these findings provide evidence of stimulated recombination of quasiparticles into the superconducting condensate. Buildup of non-equilibrium states. Figure as a function of time for T = 20 K < T c and T = 90 K > T c . Consistent with Fig. From now on, we focus our attention on ∆I e (t) for the usually overlooked t ≤ t buildup . Strikingly, in the superconducting state, the maximum intensity change (t buildup ) is reached at ∼1 ps, while in the non-superconducting state the maximum intensity change is reached instantly. If ∆I e is integrated only above the maximum superconducting gap (∆ max ), no delay in t buildup is observed. In supplementary Figure Pump intensity dependence of the buildup of non-equilibrium states. Figure To precisely define the buildup time, t buildup , we fit ∆I e (t) using a resolution-convolved function given by where γ is the long-time NEQP population decay rate. The Gaussian accounts for the experimental time resolution, and its full width at half maximum (FWHM) is 300 fs. Equation 2 captures the dynamics of the initial buildup of non-equilibrium quasiparticles quite well (see solid lines in Fig. Momentum dependence of the buildup of non-equilibrium states. In momentum space, similar delayed buildup is observed in ∆I e (t) throughout the Fermi arc region. Fig. For each momentum we extract the corresponding gap value. The NEQP is then plotted as a function of gap size. Gap values are extracted using a standard procedure of fitting the symmetrized energy distribution curves at the Fermi momentum to phenomenological single particle spectral functions Note that the difference cannot be attributed to the lack of a gap inside the Fermi arc region, since the Fermi arc itself does not develop until about 0.6 ps after pumping Interestingly, the build up time of the NEQP population is identical to that of the photoinduced shift of the superconducting gap at the same momentum (Fig. In the following we propose an explanation of these observations that takes into account the quantum coherence of the Cooper pair condensate. When the pump pulse photoexcites the material, the input energy is partially stored in the electronic degrees of freedom and partially in the lattice degrees of freedom. Where there is a superconducting condensate, those NEQPs whose time reversal partner is also excited can quickly recombine into Cooper pairs due to a process of coherent recombination stimulated by the existing pair condensate. This process serves to reduce the proportion of input energy initially stored in electronic degrees of freedom, hence causing the observed delay in the buildup of the NEQP population. Such a stimulated recombination process is absent when the superconducting condensate is depleted by either the temperature or the high pump fluence. After t buildup , what are left are "unpaired" excited quasiparticles, meaning the time reversed partners of these quasiparticles are not simultaneously excited. At a longer time scale, due to momentum-changing impurity, some subset of those "unpaired" excited quasiparticles will change into "paired" ones and quickly recombine. The bottleneck of the recombination process is the conversion of unpaired NEQPs into paired ones, which is considerably slower A cartoon of of this physical scenario is shown in Fig. The importance of including stimulated recombination into the RT equations is summarized in Fig. However, when the RT equations are augmented to include the stimulated recombination channel (see Supplementary Figure when "paired" NEQP recombine they can emit phonons (bosons) with a sufficiently wide range momentum. Within this scenario, the momentum dependence of the buildup time can be easily accounted for by the momentum dependence of the recombination rate (γ), that increases as we move away from the node One alternate interpretation of our results is that initial NEQPs far from the node scatter towards the node, allowing the NEQP population near the node to build up over a longer period of time. Such scattering would be induced by the anisotropic form of the superconducting gap. However, this interpretation does not account for the absence of a buildup time at high fluences or high temperatures. Above the critical fluence, the superconducting gap is not suppressed until about 0.6 ps after the pump pulse To conclude, our main finding is that upon photoexcitation the delay in the buildup of non-equilibrium quasiparticle population in higher temperature superconductors is sensitive to whether there is a superconducting condensate. We propose that our observation reveals the stimulated recombination of photoexcited quasiparticles. Measurements were taken on our home-built trARPES system. The experimental setup is the same as that reported previously 