We report measurements of the magnetic susceptibility of twinned single crystals of YBa2Cu3O6+x from just above their superconducting transition temperatures to 300 K with magnetic fields of up to 5 T applied parallel and perpendicular to the CuO2 planes at 7 values of x. Appropriate analysis allows the relatively small, but still important, Curie terms to be separated from other contributions to the susceptibility. Our data support a picture in which the Curie terms arise from oxygen disorder in the Cu-O chains. This agrees with published work on polycrystalline samples where the sample cooling rate was varied, but here we show that the Curie plots flatten out above 200 K. We identify small effects of charge density wave (CDW) instabilities in the temperature (T ) derivative of the in-plane susceptibility dχ ab (T )/dT and discuss their x-dependence. For x =0.67 we make a detailed comparison with published high energy X-ray diffraction data using a minimal model involving Fermi arcs, thereby obtaining values for the CDW energy gap and the Helmholtz free energy in a coherence volume. At 80 and 100 K the latter is comparable with, or smaller than kBT respectively, highlighting the probable importance of thermal fluctuations. We note that the effect of the Lorentz force on charge carriers in the Fermi arcs could provide a simple mechanism for enhancing the CDWs in high magnetic fields, as suggested by recent experiments. Nearly ten years ago the surprising observation of "slow" quantum oscillations in under-doped oxygenordered YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.5 (YBCO) crystals One fundamental thermodynamic property that could contribute towards understanding these questions is the T -dependent static magnetic susceptibility χ(T ) above T c . Here we report measurements of χ c (T ) and χ ab (T ) with magnetic field H parallel and perpendicular to the crystalline c-axis for relatively large twinned single crys-tals of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x at 7 values of the oxygen content x. In other CDW materials such as K 0.3 MoO 3 While performing this analysis we again found the surprising result, briefly mentioned previously A YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x crystal was grown by Dr. K. Iida Field-warming magnetisation curves M c (T ) at 10 Oe after zero-field cooling, shown later in the inset to Fig. The values of x were determined more precisely than in our previous paper Optical microscope images of the twin patterns in our UD57, UD62, UD64 and UD68 crystals showed typical spacings of 1000 nm corresponding to a limit of 1400 nm on the chain lengths from this source. The UD64 and UD68 crystals appeared to be completely twinned but for UD57 and UD62, twins could only be seen in about 50% of the area studied. For UD68 there were clear microcracks separated by ≃ 50μm which aided oxygenation. From the above arguments it probable that the twinning described here does not have significant effects on the CDW. However against this, it is considered that twinning causes stress and macroscopic oxygen segregation in YBCO crystals The temperature dependences of the static magnetic susceptibility χ c (T ) to the c axis and χ ab (T ) to the ab plane for H = 5 T are shown in Fig. A. Analysis of Curie terms Fig. χ c (T ) because of the large anisotropy Because all our samples are derived from the same large crystal we can confirm the result of Ref. 29 that the Curie terms are caused by oxygen disorder in the chains and therefore faster cooling increases C by ∼ 10%. The results in Fig. induces a transfer of spectral weight from the wings of the pseudogap to low energies. It is possible that oxygen disorder in the Cu-O chains of YBCO is having the same effect. Some support for this picture is given by Curie plots (not shown here) of the difference data in Ref. In either of the scenarios involving oxygen disorder in the chains, the flattening out above 200 K could be connected with evidence from thermal expansion studies Apart from the T dependence caused by the pseudogap, there is no obvious sign of CDW effects with an onset temperature T CDW ≃150 K found in the NMR Fig. In order to see the effect of the CDWs we have to define a T -dependent background caused by the pseudogap. In view of the flattening of the Curie plots above 200 K we have defined our "best" background as a straight line that fits the data from the onset T CDW ∼ 150 K given by RXS up to 200 K. These straight lines are shown in red in Fig. where A = N 0 (gμ B ) 2 , y = E G /2k B T , N 0 is the electronic DOS at high energies, assumed to be independent of energy, and E G is the pseudogap energy. Previously With the exception of UD72 (which may be atypical in that there appears to be a Curie term above 200 K in Fig. diffraction data for UD67. In order to estimate the magnitude of the changes expected in dχ ab (T )/dT we use the published hard X-ray diffraction data of Chang et al. We use a model in which there is a uniform CDW gap, of the same states-conserving form that also occurs in superconductivity, over a certain length of the Fermi arcs (specified by the parameter "fract" in Fig. An alternative picture which would be in better agreement with scanning tunnelling spectroscopy studies However we are reluctant to abandon the concept of Fermi arcs because it could be very important for understanding the effect of a magnetic field on the CDW. The Lorentz force from a magnetic field perpendicular to the CuO 2 planes drives electrons from one end of the Fermi arc to the other. In a very simple qualitative picture this tends to pile up charge at one tip of an arc and to deplete it at the other, which would enhance a CDW in an applied magnetic field even when superconductivity has been heavily weakened or destroyed. There is experimental evidence in favor of this suggestion in that the CDW intensity in UD67 increases strongly between 25 and 28 T associated with the CDW transitions. The small size of the CDW anomalies discussed in the previous Section raises questions as to what is driving the CDW and how much free energy is gained by opening a CDW gap in the electronic DOS. We can answer the second question by continuing to model the data in terms of fermionic quasi-particles. Although this is the electronic contribution, in the harmonic approximation there is no change in the lattice entropy in the CDW state, The entropy, specific heat and free energy differences calculated in this model, with the same parameters used for the best fit in Fig. We have measured the anisotropic magnetic susceptibility of 7 crystals of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x and used a special method for separating out the Curie term caused by a small concentration of localized spins that are induced by disorder on the Cu-O chains. We show that this term flattens out above 200 K for all samples and discuss two possible mechanisms for this unusual effect. By assuming that our crystals have the same CDW onset temperatures as those measured by resonant X-ray scattering we can detect small effects in the magnetic susceptibility associated with the formation of charge density waves. These are stronger for samples on the T c (x) plateau, supporting scenarios in which the charge density waves are the main cause of the plateau. The effects are very small, which we ascribe, at least partly, to the pseudogap reducing the electronic entropy and density of states above T CDW . For UD68 we have analyzed them using a minimal model involving a cylindrical Fermi surface and short Fermi arcs. This analysis shows that the CDW causes a reduction in electronic free energy in a coherence volume that is less than k B T at 100 K and comparable with, or up to a factor 2 larger than, k B T at 80 K. This is consistent with CDW being a bulk effect, i.e. not necessarily nucleated around defects 