Chiral p-wave superconductors in applied magnetic field can exhibit more complex topological defects than just conventional superconducting vortices, due to the two-component order parameter (OP) and the broken time-reversal symmetry. We investigate the electronic properties of those exotic states, some of which contain clusters of one-component vortices in chiral components of the OP and/or exhibit skyrmionic character in the relative OP space, all obtained as a self-consistent solution of the microscopic Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations. We reveal the link between the local density of states (LDOS) of the novel topological states and the behavior of the chiral domain wall between the OP components, enabling direct identification of those states in scanning tunneling microscopy. For example, a skyrmion always contains a closed chiral domain wall, which is found to be mapped exactly by zero-bias peaks in LDOS. Moreover, the LDOS exhibits electron-hole asymmetry, which is different from the LDOS of conventional vortex states with same vorticity. Finally, we present the magnetic field and temperature dependence of the properties of a skyrmion, indicating that this topological defect can be surprisingly large in size, and can be pinned by an artificially indented nonsuperconducting closed path in the sample. These features are expected to facilitate the experimental observation of skyrmionic states, thereby enabling experimental verification of chirality in emerging superconducting materials. Topological defects play an important role in condensed matter physics, especially those which can be described and classified by homotopy groups of their order parameter (OP) space. 1,2 For example, when the OP space is two-dimensional, a vortex appears as a topological defect [see Fig. Since recently, spin-triplet chiral p-wave superconducting states attract great interest because of their exotic properties and the possibility to have topologically protected quantum states. First, there exist domain walls with spontaneous supercurrent separating domains with different degenerate time-reversal-symmetry-broken ground states. tence of coreless vortices (CLVs) with nonzero vorticity in only one OP component Such CLVs are extremely interesting, exhibiting a variety of different aspects. First, they are analogous to a giant vortex in s-wave superconductor 6 since they contain multiple flux quanta, but exhibit a larger size. Then, CLV is similar to a domain wall separating domains where different OP components dominate. In this paper, we study the possible topological defect states in chiral p-wave superconductors, ranging from domain walls, and vortices, to coreless vortices and skyrmions, by solving the microscopic Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations self-consistently. The purpose of this paper is to clarify their topological properties and also to reveal their detailed electronic properties. The bound electronic states in e.g. vortices are known to be important for many applications. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II A we introduce our theoretical methodology for chiral p-wave super-conductors. In Sec. II B we define the skyrmionic topological defects in the relative OP space in two-component OP systems. In Sec. III we summon the results for three distinct states without a skyrmionic topology. Those are the vortex-free state, the parallel vortex state and the anti-parallel vortex state. In Sec. IV we present results on coreless vortex states. Their OP structures, supercurrent distribution, energy spectra and LDOS are discussed. We show that they are associated with skyrmionic topological defects in relative OP space. In Sec. V we reveal the magnetic field and temperature dependence of the properties of the skyrmion, followed by the investigation of an effective skyrmion pinning in Sec. VI. Finally, our findings are summarized in Sec. VII. A. Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations for chiral p-wave superconductors We consider chiral p-wave superconductors whose order parameter (OP) is expressed as (1) Here the ∆ ± (r) are the real spatial p x ± ip y -wave OP and Y ± (k) = (k x ± ik y )/k F are the pairing functions in relative momentum space. We consider a disk geometry with radius R. The corresponding p x ± ip y -wave BdG equations are written as: where is the single particle Hamiltonian with m being the electron mass, E F the Fermi energy and A(r) the vector potential (we use the gauge ∇ • A = 0). For simplicity, we take the cylindrical two dimensional Fermi surface. The term Π(r) is written as with ± = e ±iθ (∂ r ± i r ∂ θ ) in cylindrical coordinates. u n (r)(v n (r)) are electron(hole)-like quasi-particle eigen wavefunctions with the normalization condition and E n are the corresponding quasiparticle eigenenergies. The boundary conditions for the wavefunctions are where k F = 2mE F / 2 is the Fermi wave length, g the coupling constant and f is the Fermi distribution function. The summations in Eq. ( In order to perform the self-consistent simulation, we include the contribution of the supercurrent to the total magnetic field. Then, the vector potential A(r) in Eqs. ( However, we find that the A 1 (r) is negligible due to the very thin superconducting sample. As a result, the contribution of the supercurrent to the total magnetic field can be completely neglected in this type of simulation. In this paper, we only consider vortex and skyrmion states with cylindrical symmetry. Therefore, the p x ± ip y components of the order parameter are expressed as ∆ ± (r) = ∆ ± (r)e iL±θ with winding numbers L ± , respectively. Due to operators ± in Eqs. ( In a cylindrical system, the quasiparticle wavefunctions u n (r) and v n (r) can be expanded in terms of the following Bessel set 4 : where c nμj and d nμ ′ j are coefficients, μ,μ ′ ∈ Z are angular quantum numbers corresponding to the angular momentum, and ), (10) with J μ the μth Bessel function and α jμ the jth zero of J μ . Note that μ ′ = μ -L + -1 because of the phase winding in ∆ ± , i.e. L -= L + + 2. Then, the BdG equations are reduced to a matrix eigenvalue problem and can be solved separately in each subspace of fixed μ and μ ′ . After the self-consistent solutions are obtained, we calculate the LDOS as usual (11) For each quasiparticle state, we can define the spectral weight Z n : Z n ∈ [0, 1] and it represents the contribution of the electronic part of the wave function of a Bogoliubov quasiparticle state. A state with Z n < 0.5 indicates a hole-like state while Z n > 0.5 is an electron-like state. A Bogoliubov quasiparticle state is well formed when it couples between half-electron and half-hole, i.e. for Z n = 0.5. Next, we remark that the quasi-particle states have the following time-reversal relation: It indicates that a state having energy E n and angular momentum (μ, μ ′ ) carries the same information as a state having energy -E n and angular momentum (-μ ′ , -μ). This allows us to reduce half of the computational time by only considering half of the angular momentum (μ, μ ′ ). Due to this, it is sufficient to display the quasiparticle excitation spectrum with both positive and negative energy E n but with only positive angular momentum μ or μ ′ . We also remark that our chiral p-wave BdG equations are invariant under the time-reversal operations: where B is the magnetic field. In the bulk the two degenerate ground states are the p x + ip y and p x -ip ywave states. At zero temperature, their OP (∆ + , ∆ -) = ∆ 0 (1, 0) and ∆ 0 (0, 1), respectively, where ∆ 0 ∈ R is the bulk OP at zero temperature. These two states can be mirrored by Eq. ( Next we define the p x and p y -wave OP ∆ x and ∆ y . They often show interesting properties and can provide important information about the vortex and skyrmion states. The OP expressed by ∆ x and ∆ y can be written as Eq. (1) can also be expressed as By comparing Eqs. ( B. Skyrmionic character in relative order parameter space In a two-component OP system, a 2D skyrmionic texture is not obvious by looking at the OP configurations. However, it can be well-understood by projecting the system onto a pseudo-spin space. In this section, we show that the pseudo-spin space is actually a relative OP space where both relative amplitude and relative phase between the two OP components play an important role. The relative OP space leads to skyrmion, which does not occur in a one-component OP system. As a result, both winding numbers of each OP component and the topological charge associated with the skyrmion are necessary to describe the superconducting state. We start from a complex two-component OP field 1. The χ(r) generates a four-dimensional OP space and it points to the surface of a solid unit sphere in fourdimensional space S 3 . Next we compare the χ(r) with pesudo-spin n. Following Ref. 43, the pseudo-spin n is defined as: where σ is the Pauli matrices and n is a 3D unit vector |n| = 1, and points to the surface of a solid unit sphere in three-dimensional space S 2 . It is worth noting that n is a gauge invariant field. Let χ = e iθ χ, the n does not change, i.e. We take θ = -θ 1 so that χ can be reduced to a threedimensional field, i.e. where φ = θ 2 -θ 1 is the relative phase and α = tan -1 |χ 2 |/|χ 1 | represents the relative amplitude. Note that 0 α π/2 indicates that χ is a set of points on a unit hemisphere. In the last step, we rotate χ globally by an angle -90 • about the y-axis in order to match the orientation of pseudo-spin vector n. Finally, we reach χ = (sin α cos φ, sin α sin φ, cos α). A straightforward calculation of the pseudo-spin vector n results in n = (sin 2α cos φ, sin 2α sin φ, cos 2α), (22) with 0 2α π. It is clear that n has the same structure as χ, except for the azimuthal angle, α → 2α, so that n is a set of points of a whole unit sphere S 2 . As a result, the pseudo-spin vector n represents the relative OP space as well. Such a three-dimensional real vector field n can exhibit non-trivial skyrmionic topological defects on an enclosed surface such as S 2 , as shown e.g. in Fig. and counts the number of times that n wraps the enclosed surface. It is classified by the second homotopy group π 2 (S 2 ) ∈ Z, where Z is an integer. It is worth to mention that the two-component OP field ∆(r) can be separated into three parts: ∆ the total amplitude, e iθ the common phase term, and n representing the relative OP space. The total amplitude ∆ does not contain any topological structure due to its scalar nature. The common phase term e iθ has two effects: 1) the global U (1) gauge invariance for superconductivity; 2) the common phase distributions and the common winding number L. Actually, the first two terms represent a one-component OP system. The third part n arises an effect resulting from the two-component OP. It is different from the phase soliton where only the relative phase is taken into account. Finally, one sees that the two-component OP system contains additional topological possibilities next to just vortices, where winding numbers (L 1 , L 2 ) of both OP components and the topological charge Q are all necessary to describe the superconducting state. Therefore in this manuscript, we use (L 1 , L 2 , Q) to label different observed states. In this section, we investigate three prominent vortex states not exhibiting a skyrmionic topology: Vortex-free state (L + , L -, Q) = (0, 2, 0), parallel vortex state (1, 3, 0) and anti-parallel vortex state (-1, 1, 0). Since Q = 0 for all these states, we omit it in this section. The OP structures, supercurrent density, quasiparticle excitation spectrum E n , and LDOS for the considered states will be presented, where some findings coincide with previous works. The calculations are performed for the sample of radius R = 51ξ 0 , where ξ 0 = v F /π∆ 0 is the BCS coherence length at zero temperature, with v F the Fermi velocity and ∆ 0 the bulk OP at zero temperature. E F = ω D and ω D /∆ 0 ≈ 14, resulting in k F ξ 0 = 9. We also set the applied magnetic field to H = 0, so the reported properties are surly not a consequence of the magnetic field. The considered temperature is T = 0.1T c . The results remain qualitatively the same when we change the magnetic field H and temperature T . We first introduce the vortex-free state (L + , L -) = (0, 2), with ∆ + as a dominant component. The results are summarized in Fig. Here we note that the spontaneous surface supercurrent is the major characteristic of the superconducting state with broken time-reversal symmetry. Experiments to date have observed the surface bound states Next we present the case of two types of singly quantized vortex states with ∆ + dominant: the parallel vortex state (L + , L -) = (1, 3) and the anti-parallel vortex state (L + , L -) = (-1, 1), shown in Fig. Previous works concerning vortex states in chiral pwave superconductors rarely presented the p x and p y OP components ∆ x and ∆ y . We actually found that they can be very useful in the analysis of interesting properties, especially related to the vorticity of the sample. The central plots in Fig. The vortex cores in ∆ x and ∆ y are at the sample center and they overlap. Unlike the cylindrical vortex core structures in ∆ ± , the vortex cores are deformed in ∆ x and ∆ y , and exhibit different profiles for the (1, 3) and (-1, 1) states. It is interesting that ∆ y can be obtained by rotating ∆ x with 90 degrees clockwise for the (1, 3) state and anticlockwise for the (-1, 1) vortex state. It is also interesting to note that the relative phase θ x -θ y twirls twice for both cases, exhibiting a cloverleaf profile. For the (-1, 1) vortex state, ∆ x and ∆ y alternate between being fully in-phase and fully out-of-phase around the vortex core. The right hand side plots in Fig. It was demonstrated in Ref. 65-67 that there exists a pair of zero-energy Majorana modes for a single vortex with odd vorticity in the chiral p-wave superconductivity. The energy levels of the vortex bound states appear at integer points E n ∼ nE δ , where n is an integer and E δ is the level spacing of the order of ∆ 2 0 /E F . The LDOS showing in Fig. Coreless vortices are one of the most striking states emerging in the chiral p-wave superconductivity. They exhibit an additional topology which is skyrmionic. The one known coreless vortex state is the doubly quantized one We first present the topological structures of the state (L + , L -, Q) = (0, 2, 2) in Fig. Next we present the electronic properties of this skyrmionic topological defect in the (0, 2, 2) state in Fig. Fig. The domain-wall bound states cross zero energy with the lowest energy level having a small gap of the order ∆ 2 0 /E F . The Andreev bound states are induced near the gap energies E ≈ |∆ 0 |, leading to peaks in LDOS at the domain wall, as seen from Fig. In addition, we found that the domain-wall bound states are electron-dominant (with spectral weight Z n < 0.5) when they cross the zero bias, while the Andreev bound states are hole-dominant (with spectral weight Z n > 0.5), as seen from Fig. Due to the electron-dominant domain-wall bound states and the hole-dominant Andreev bound states, the LDOS near the domain wall exhibits asymmetry for bias energy E ↔ -E, as visible in Fig. Since the skyrmionic topological defect appears in the relative OP space, whereas the vortex appears in the OP space, a vortex can be added to the (L + , L -, Q) = (0, 2, 2) state leading to the skyrmion-vortex coexisting state (L + , L -, Q) = (1, 3, 2). The results for such a topological "hybrid" are presented in Fig. The quasiparticle excitation spectrum E n (μ n ) also shows the superposition of the vortex bound states and the chiral domain wall bound states. Since the domain wall is now larger, the domain wall bound states and the Andreev bound states shift to larger μ n . In addition, we find that the domain wall bound states become even more electron-dominant and the Andreev ones more holedominant, resulting in more pronounced electron-hole asymmetry in LDOS around the domain wall compared to the skyrmion (0, 2, 2) state. The LDOS of the coexisting skyrmion-vortex state exhibits distinctly strong zerobias peak at the vortex core, and a significantly weaker one at the domain wall. Finally, we mention that the skyrmion-anti-vortex coexisting state (L + , L -, Q) = (-1, 1, 2) is unstable. Due to the attractive interaction between the anti-vortex and the skyrmion, such state evolves into the parallel vortex state (L + , L -, Q) = (1, 3, 0). The skyrmion is a chiral domain wall in ∆ ± and an enclosed chain of one-component vortices in ∆ x , ∆ y representation of the two component OP. In either case, the skyrmion is a loop-like structure in OP space and it has very different properties from the vortex as a point-like defect. For example, the size of the vortex depends solely on the superconducting coherence length ξ. However, the size of the skyrmion depends also on the applied magnetic field because the chiral domain wall is expected to move under the influence of the magnetic field. We therefore report in this section the magnetic field and temperature dependence of the size of the skyrmion in the (L + , L -, Q) = (0, 2, 2) state, and the consequences of varied skyrmion size on the energy spectrum. Fig. Vortex matter in superconductivity is known to be pinned where the OP is suppressed, which can have technological relevance for e.g. increasing the maximal current a superconductor can sustain without the onset of vortex motion and related onset of resistance and heating. The skyrmion matter is a chain of enclosed onecomponent vortices according to the OP representation using ∆ x and ∆ y , implying that skyrmions can be pinned in an analogy to vortices. If so, then the size and the position of the skyrmion could be controlled artificially, which may be beneficial for the observation of skyrmions and for further fluxonic manipulations. In this section, we therefore consider the possibility to pin the skyrmion by an embedded normal-metal ring in the superconductor, where the superconducting coupling constant g is suppressed to zero, leading to |∆| = 0 inside the ring. The median radius of the ring is labeled r p , and the width of the ring is 0.5ξ 0 . Such narrow rings do not break the phase coherence between the superconductivity inside and outside of the ring. We investigate the OP profile, energy spectrum and LDOS when the skyrmion is pinned by such a normal-metal ring. The calculations are performed self-consistently for T = 0.1T c and in absence of the magnetic field, since we do not want the competing effects to shadow the conclusions. Fig. The surface bound states are not affected by our exercise until the skyrmion gets close to the sample surface. As seen from the panels for r p /ξ 0 = 44, the OP profiles at the surface are strongly affected by the domain wall. The supercurrents induced by the domain wall and ones running near the surface combine, causing interactions between the domain wall bound states and the surface bound states. As seen from the energy spectrum E n (μ n ), these two branches of bound states avoid crossing each other. Finally, we note that the quasiparticles interference above the gap energy |E| > ∆ 0 is enhanced with the r p increasing. The quasiparticles interference effect is known to result in additional BCS-like energy gaps and more Bogoliubov quasiparticle states with Z n = 0.5 above the gap energy ∆ 0 . 72 Here, it is induced by the inhomogeneous OP profile stemming from the normalmetal ring, the skyrmion and the surface. In summary, we have studied the topological and electronic properties of characteristic vortical and skyrmionic states in chiral p-wave superconductors, by solving Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations self-consistently. We have presented the distribution of the two-component order parameter, the supercurrent, quasiparticle excitation spectra, and LDOS, for each of the typical states. We pointed out that the chiral order parameter representation using components ∆ ± = p x ± ip y is ideal to study the properties of chiral domain walls in the given state, while the p x -and p y -components of the order parameter conveniently reveal the properties of vortices. While conventional vortices are rather well understood in the literature (as point-like topological defects, with core in the order parameter, supercurrent flow around it, and the vortex bound states and LDOS peaks at the core), the topological defects comprising one-component vortices, and/or chiral domain walls as well as their interaction with conventional vortices, are an entirely new topic. Moreover, a chain of one-component vortices (half the vorticity of a complete vortex, analogous to halfquantum vortices of spin-triplet superconductors Our analysis in varied magnetic field and temperature shows that the size of the skyrmion can be strongly tuned, being increased by increasing temperature and by decreasing applied magnetic field. The size of the skyrmion is typically an order of magnitude larger than a vortex. Furthermore, contrary to conventional vortices, a skyrmion survives changing the polarity of the applied magnetic field, due to the finite energy cost of breaking the chiral domain wall so that vortices within the skyrmion can leave the sample. As a consequence, the skyrmion can significantly increase in size at negative magnetic field, since the decreasing energy of currents flowing inside the skyrmion compensates the increasing energy of the longer chiral domain wall. Finally, we have shown that even in the absence of the magnetic field the size of the skyrmion can be manipulated by pinning on a normal-metal ring of prescribed size. Considering that due to recent experimental achievements in e.g. superconductor-ferroelectric hybrids one can draw practically at will the normal-metal paths inside the superconductor, 