We investigate the thermodynamic and transport properties of silver-substituted BaFe 2 As 2 (122) crystals, up to ~4.5%. Similar to other transition-metal substitutions in 122, Ag diminishes the antiferromagnetic (T N ) and structural (T S ) transition temperatures, but unlike other electron-doped 122s, T N and T S coincide without splitting. Although magnetism drops precipitously to T N = 84 K at doping x = 0.029, it only weakly changes above this x, settling at T N = 80 K at x = 0.045. Compared to this persistent magnetism in Ag-122, doping other group 11 elements of either Cu or Au in 122 diminished T N and induced superconductivity near T C = 2 K at x = 0.044 or 0.031, respectively. Ag-122 crystals show reflective surfaces with surprising thicker cross sections for x ≥ 0.019, the appearance that is in contrast to the typical thin stacked layered feature seen in all other flux-grown x122 and lower Ag-122. This physical trait may be a manifest of intrinsic weak changes in c-lattice and T N . Our theoretical calculations suggest that Ag doping produces strong electronic scattering and yet a relatively small disruption of the magnetic state, both of which preclude superconductivity in this system. High-temperature superconductivity (HTS) is the most mysterious and elusive property in condensed-matter physics found in two Cu-and Fe-based material families. BaFe 2 As 2 transitions from tetragonal (I4/mmm) non-magnetic state into orthorhombic (Fmmm) striped-AF phase below T S =T N = 132-134 K (flux-grown crystals). In this paper, we provide experimental evidence for the properties of Ag-122 crystals using the variety of temperature-dependent magnetization, resistivity, heat capacity, Hall effect, and neutron diffraction measurements. Comparing 4d Ag-122 to 3d Cu-and 5d Au-dopants of the same group, similar suppression of T N is seen up to x ~ 0.02. But while Cu-and Au-122 give superconductivity at ~ 2 K at x = 0.044 Table Single crystals of Ag-doped BaFe 2 As 2 were grown out of FeAs self-flux technique. Bulk phase purity of Ag-122 crystals was checked by collecting data on an X'Pert PRO MPD Xray powder diffractometer using monochromatic Cu K α1 radiation in the 10-70° 2θ range, on ground crystals, each weighing ~ 30 mg collectively. Lattice parameters were refined from full-pattern refinements using X'Pert HighScore Plus software. The Bragg reflections were indexed using the tetragonal ThCr 2 Si 2 tetragonal structure (I4/mmm), with no impurity phases. The refined lattice constants are listed in Table In an attempt to understand the observed behavior, in particular, the lack of superconductivity and maintenance of a magnetic state for Ag-122, we have performed first principles density functional theory calculations using the commercially available all-electron code WIEN2K 62 within the local density approximation (LDA). We have chosen the LDA rather than the GGA as it may give a better account of properties in 122s. There are two basic effects that must be considered in these calculationsthe effect of electron count or charge doping, and the effects of strainthe change in structural parameters such as lattice constants with doping. In order to properly account for these effects we have performed calculations in the tetragonal unit cell with one of the four equivalent Fe atoms substituted by Ag, Cu, Co or Mn, using the room-temperature structural parameters for 122 doped with each of these at x ~ 0.04. Note that the experimental observations for 122 with each of these dopants are very different: Ag doping produces no superconductivity, Cu a very slight superconductivity with maximum T c of 2 K, Co doping a substantial superconducting dome with T c values of 20 K, and Mn no superconductivity. What is the reason for these disparate behaviors? To answer this question, in this work we consider the impact of the dopant on electronic scattering. Such scattering has long been known to negatively impact superconductivity. One measure of such scattering, as described in [10], is the effective disruption of the electronic structure occasioned by the dopant atom. To the extent that the states arising from the dopant atom mirror those of the overall system, both in their energy range and magnitude, one may expect that such a dopant introduces charge without inordinate electronic scattering, and thus might induce superconductivity. On the other hand, a dopant that induces an energetically distinct set of electronic states can reasonably be expected to create large scattering and thus be less likely to induce (or allow) superconductivity. The simplest way to access this is through examination of the calculated density-ofstates (DOS). We depict the results of these calculations in Figure In fact, Co-122 has larger superconducting dome (T C,max  22 K, and x = 0.1) than Cu-122 (T C,max = 2 K, and x = 0.015). In conclusion, this manuscript is the first study of silver substitution in BaFe 2 As 2 . We represent T-x phase diagram through extended experimental work. We describe the persistent magnetism in Ag-122 due to electronic scattering, and its relevant lattice parameter changes with x that are even reflected in crystalline morphologies.