We study the superconductor-insulator transition in nanohole ultrathin films in a transverse magnetic field by numerical simulation of a Josephson-junction array model. Geometrical disorder due to the random location of nanoholes in the film corresponds to random flux in the array model. Monte Carlo simulation in the path-integral representation is used to determine the critical behavior and the universal resistivity at the transition as a function of disorder and average number of flux quanta per cell, fo. The resistivity increases with disorder for noninteger fo while it decreases for integer fo, and reaches a common constant value in a vortex-glass regime above a critical value of the flux disorder D c f . The estimate of D c f and the resistivity increase for noninteger fo are consistent with recent experiments on ultrathin superconducting films with positional disordered nanoholes. There is growing interest in the superconductorinsulator (SI) transition in ultra-thin films with a lattice of nanoholes Very recently, intriguing experimental results have been obtained near the SI transition in thin films with a disordered triangular lattice of nanoholes with con-trolled amount of positional disorder In this work, we study the SI transition in geometrically disordered nanohole thin films by numerical simulation of a Josephson-junction array model with flux disorder. Geometrical disorder due to the random locations of the nanoholes in the film corresponds to random flux in the array model. Monte Carlo (MC) simulation in the path integral representation is used to determine the critical behavior and the resistivity at the transition as a function of flux-disorder strength D f and average number of flux quanta per cell, f o . It is found that the resistivity at the transition increases with disorder for noninteger f o while it decreases for integer f o , and reaches an approximately common constant value in a vortex-glass regime above a critical value D c f . The distinct behavior for noninteger f o results from the interplay of vortex-lattice commensurability and flux-disorder effects. The estimate of D c f and the resistivity increase for noninteger f o are in good agreement with available experimental data on positional disordered nanohole thin films 5 for noninteger f o while it calls for further measurements for integer f o . We consider a Josephson-junction array model, which allows for both flux disorder and charging effects The first term in Eq. ( where D a measures the disorder in the areas δS p /S o . Experimentally, the flux disorder D f can be varied by changing f o via the external field or the geometrical disorder D a using different samples 5 . We also allow for bond disorder in the form of random Josephson couplings 26 E ij = E J e ij , where e ij = 1 ± D b with equal probability and disorder parameter strength D b . In the numerical simulations described below we set D b = 0.3 but its value does not change the main results. With this choice the magnetoresistance behavior of films with a triangular lattice of nanoholes without flux disorder To study the quantum phase transition at zero temperature, we employ the imaginary-time path-integral formulation of the model 8 . In this representation, the twodimensional (2D) quantum model of Eq. ( where e ij = E ij /E J and τ labels the sites in the discrete time direction. The ratio g = (E c /E J ) 1/2 , which drives the SI transition for the model of Eq. ( Equilibrium MC simulations for E c > 0 are carried out using the 3D classical Hamiltonian in Eq. ( When J x = 0, the system is out of equilibrium since the total energy is unbounded. The lower-energy minima occur at phase differences θ τ,i+x -θ τ,i , which increase with time t, leading to a net phase slippage rate proportional to V x =< d(θ τ,i+x -θ τ,i )/dt >, corresponding to the average "voltage" per unit length. The MC simulations are carried out using the Metropolis algorithm and the time dependence is obtained by identifying the time t as the MC time. The measurable quantity of interest is the phase slippage response ("nonlinear resistivity") defined as R x = V x /J x . Similarly, we define R τ as the phase slippage response to the applied perturbation J τ in the layered (imaginary-time) direction. Above the phase-coherence transition, g > g c , R x should approach a nonzero value when J x → 0 while it should approach zero below the transition. From the nonlinear scaling behavior near the transition of a sufficiently large system, one can extract the critical coupling g c , and the critical exponents ν and z. In the absence of charging effects, R x remains zero below a critical value J x = J c , which provides an estimate of the critical current for the model of Eq. ( where z o is an additional critical exponent describing the MC relaxation times, t x ∼ ξ zo and t τ ∼ ξ zo τ , in the spatial and imaginary-time directions, respectively, and ξ = |g/g c -1| -ν . The + and -signs correspond to g > g c and g < g c , respectively. The two scaling forms are the same when z = 1, corresponding to isotropic scaling. The joint scaling plots according to Eqs. 4 are shown in Fig. The above estimate of g c and z does not take into account the finite-size effects. It assumes that the system is sufficient large and the coupling is not too close to g c such that the correlation length is smaller than the system size. To improve these estimates we consider the finite-size behavior of the phase stiffness in the imaginary time direction γ τ . The phase stiffness γ τ , which is a measure of the free energy cost to impose an infinitesimal phase twist in the time direction, is given by 13 where ǫ τ = τ,i cos(θ τ,i -θ τ +1,i ) and I τ = τ,i sin(θ τ,iθ τ +1,i ). In Eq. ( where F (x) is a scaling function and δg = g -g c . This scaling form implies that data for γ τ L 2-z as a function of g, for different system sizes L, should cross at the critical coupling g c . Fig. where σ Q = (2e) 2 /h is the quantum of conductance and γ(iw n ) is a frequency dependent phase stiffness evaluated at the finite frequency w n = 2πn/L τ , with n an integer. The phase stiffness in the x direction is given by where C = 1/((4/3 √ 3)N L τ g 2 ), N is the total number of sites in each layer, (x • ûj,j+x )e i,j+x sin(∆ x θ τ,j )e iwnτ , (9) ûj,j+x is a unit vector between nearest neighbors sites and ∆ x θ τ,j = θ τ,j -θ τ,j+x -A o j,j+x -t j,j+x . At the transition, γ(iw n ) vanishes linearly with frequency and σ assumes a universal value σ * , which can be extracted from its frequency and finite-size dependence 13 The parameter α is determined from the best data collapse of the frequency dependent curves for different systems sizes in a plot of σ(iwn) σQ versus x = ( wn 2π -α 2π wnLτ ). The universal conductivity is obtained from the intercept of these curves with the line x = 0. The calculations were performed for different system sizes with L τ = aL z , using the above estimates of z and g c . From the scaling behavior in Fig. We have performed extensive calculations as a function of the flux disorder strength D f for integer f o = n and noninteger f o = n + 1/6. The behavior of the critical couplings g c for the SI transition as a function of D f is shown in Fig. f for increasing frustration. Since in the present calculations δf is uniformly distributed, rather than approximately Gaussian distributed as in the experiments, a conversion factor is required for comparing the critical values. Requiring the variance of both distributions to be the same leads to an equivalent flux disorder strength ∼ 0.5/ √ 3 = 0.29, which is in reasonable agreement with the experimental value. For integer f o , the resistivity in Fig. The change of the resistivity and the different behavior for noninteger f o as a function of D f , can be understood as the interplay of vortex-lattice commensurability and flux disorder effects. In absence of disorder, the SI transition for noninteger f o is in a different universality class from the zero field case In conclusion, we found that the resistivity at the SI transition increases with magnetic-flux disorder D f for noninteger frustration f o while it decreases for integer f o , and reaches an approximately common value in a vortexglass regime for D f > D c f . In the simplest scenario, one expects different critical behavior for weak and strong disorder. Although the obtained constant value of the resistivity for D f > D c f indicates universal behavior in a different universality class, the variation of the resistivity for small disorder, however, may be a result of crossover effects due the limited system sizes. In the experiments, temperatures not sufficiently low should have similar effects. In the absence of such effects, the results can not rule out a truly non universal behavior. The results could also be tested experimentally in microfabricated Josephson-junction arrays with controlled parameters. However, for a more realistic description of these systems, disorder from offset charges and dissipation effects The author thanks J. M. Valles Jr. for helpful discussions and suggestions. This work was supported by São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP, Grant # 2014/15372-3) and computer facilities from CENAPAD-SP.