Surface distributions of two level system (TLS) defects and magnetic vortices are limiting dissipation sources in superconducting quantum circuits. Arrays of flux-trapping holes are commonly used to eliminate loss due to magnetic vortices, but may increase dielectric TLS loss. We find that dielectric TLS loss increases by approximately 25 % for resonators with a hole array beginning 2 μm from the resonator edge, while the dielectric loss added by holes further away was below measurement sensitivity. Other forms of loss were not affected by the holes. Additionally, we estimate the loss due to residual magnetic effects to be 9 × 10 -10 /μT for resonators patterned with flux-traps and operated in magnetic fields up to 5 μT. This is orders of magnitude below the total loss of the best superconducting coplanar waveguide resonators. Superconducting coplanar waveguide (SCPW) resonators are extensively used in astronomy In this Letter, we examine the tradeoff between increased TLS loss and reduced magnetic vortex loss that occurs when the ground plane of SCPW resonators is patterned with an array of holes. Fractal resonators also reduce magnetic losses, but are typically optimized for use in high magnetic fields and have not demonstrated quality factors as high as coplanar designs in small field environments. When a thin-film superconductor is cooled through its transition temperature T c in a magnetic field B cool , it is energetically favorable for magnetic flux to be trapped as vortices at some defect Because the holes have sharp edges and expose the substrate, they introduce new dissipation sites from surface TLS defects. As modern high-Q resonators are sensitive to nanometer thick amorphous dielectrics at surfaces 20 , these additional edges can increase loss if the holes are placed near the resonator where the electric fields are the largest. Consequently, we must determine how closely holes can be safely placed from the resonator. We characterize this loss with quarter-wavelength SCPW resonators that are capacitively coupled to a feedline, with frequency multiplexing to measure 10 resonators per chip. An optical image of a device wirebonded in a mount is shown in Fig. Our resonator circuits were fabricated from 100 nm aluminium thin films grown on c-plane sapphire substrates. The first type is made in a conventional electron beam deposition system with base pressure of 3 × 10 -8 Torr. Films from this tool yield resonators with Q i 8 × 10 5 near a measurement photon number N photon = 1 and are thus representative of resonators made with standard deposition techniques. The second type was prepared in a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system with a base pressure of 1 × 10 -11 Torr. With an in-situ O 2 plasma cleaning of the substrate at 650 • C 1 , we found lower resonator loss Q i 1.5×10 6 for N photon = 1. The high quality factors make the MBE grown resonators sensitive probes of subtle decoherence mechanisms that may be induced by the holes. We report measurements from two circuits from each film for a total of four circuits. The resonators and holes were etched simultaneously in an inductively coupled plasma. The etch was performed at 0.7 Pa using BCl 3 and Cl 2 flow rates of 20 and 40 SCCM and 70 W bias power. For measurement, individual devices were wirebonded in Al sample mounts and anchored to the cold stage of an adiabatic demagnetization refrigerator (ADR). A schematic of our apparatus is shown in Fig. The loss is determined by measuring the resonator intrinsic quality factor Q i using transmission spectroscopy 1 . In the initial measurement phase, we measure Q i versus applied magnetic field at high power for better signal to noise ratio, since vortex loss has weak power dependence Figure For MBE grown resonators with hole patterns we consider data in the field range of B cool applied = 1.4 -6.4 μT. Fields in this range are less than the critical field for vortex formation in the center trace of the resonator and allows us to estimate the residual magnetic loss in the absence of local magnetic vortices. By assuming an excess loss model that is linear in B cool applied , we estimate the residual magnetic loss to be 8.6 ± 1.3 × 10 -10 /μT. We show the data supporting this estimate in the supplement. This model decomposes the total internal loss of the resonator 1/Q i into a power independent loss term 1/Q 0 that includes such loss modes from quasiparticles and radiation, and a power dependent term of magnitude 1/Q TLS that comes from TLS defects. Here N photon is the excitation number of photons in the resonator and N sat describes the saturation field of the TLS bath. The parameter α is related to the electric field distribution of the resonator, and may be influenced by interactions between TLS defects within the bath. To quantify the excess loss due to the dense hole pattern we perform linear regression analysis controlling for the difference between the MBE and ebeam films. When using the resonators for quantum devices at low magnetic fields, this increase in loss is undesirable. The hole spacing should thus be carefully chosen, first to be close enough to provide protection from external fields of magnitude ∼ Φ 0 /d 2 , where d is the edge to edge spac-ing between holes We have characterized dissipation from arrays of fluxtrapping holes in SCPW resonators. We find that excess dielectric loss can be made vanishingly small by increasing the distance between the resonator edge and the array. In our experiment, a 6 μm separation was enough to remove excess dielectric loss; power-independent loss mechanisms were not affected by the arrays. We also estimate the residual magnetic loss in resonators with ground plane holes to be ∼ 10 -9 /μT, showing that SCPW resonators can be made insensitive to small magnetic fields without magnifying other loss mechanisms. Supplementary information for "Dielectric surface loss in superconducting resonators with flux-trapping holes" We show the data and analysis estimating residual magnetic loss in superconducting resonators with fluxtrapping hole arrays. We describe the design rules used to embed a meandered resonator in a rectangular array of holes. We show data supporting the claim that the maximum in Q i is obtained at an applied magnetic field that cancels the ambient field. We report the TLS model parameters for resonators from the MBE and ebeam deposited films from which we estimate the excess loss attributable directly to the densest hole pattern. In the main text, we infer resonator loss 1/Q i by measuring the system scattering parameters (S-parameters) of superconducting coplanar waveguide (SCPW) resonators capacitively coupled to a feedline. The circuit model for this system has been analysed previously Here S-1 21 is the inverse of transmission data calibrated to enforce S 21 = 1 far off resonance. f 0 and φ are the resonant frequency and impedance mismatch angle and Q * c is the coupling quality factor scaled by an impedance ratio. We extract the internal quality factor Q i and its statistical uncertainty σ Qi by fitting measurements of our device to this model. Figure Fig. Qi in terms of parameters extracted directly from device data. We obtain our estimate of residual magnetic loss from the parameter m in these fits. This estimate is m = 8.6 × 10 -10 ± 1.3 × 10 -10 /μT , where the uncertainty represents the standard error. In the main text, we describe the hole pattern as having a constant distance between the edges of adjacent holes and between the resonator edge and the nearest hole. However, the curved portion of our meandered resonator geometry does not allow us to easily satisfy both of these constraints simultaneously. We expect that excess dielectric loss from hole patterns will be primarily determined by the resonator edge to hole edge distance and dominated by the row of holes nearest the resonator edge. The compromise that we have adopted is to have two rows of holes follow the contour of the resonator with a constant spacing between adjacent holes and the resonator edge. This composite structure is then embedded in a rectangular array of regularly spaced holes. An example is shown in fig. In the main text, we claim that the maximum in Q i is obtained at an applied magnetic field that cancels the ambient field. If the Q i maximum were due to vortex mediated quasiparticle recombination 2 rather than field cancellation then we would expect to observe a second maximum at a symmetric, negative magnetic field. Fig In the main text, we claim that the TLS loss due to the densest hole pattern is 2.5 ± 1.3 × 10 -7 . This claim is derived from measurements of 23 resonators summarized in table A. Megrant, C. Neill, R. Barends, B. Chiaro, Yu Chen, L. Feigl, J. Kelly, Erik Lucero, Matteo Mariantoni, P. J. J. O'Malley, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, T. C. White, Y. Yin, J. Zhao, C. J. Palmstrøm, John M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, (2012) I. Nsanzineza, and B. L. T. Plourde, Phys. Rev. Lett 113, (2014) R Core Team (2013). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL http://www.R-project.org/.