To understand the complex physics of a system with strong electron-electron interactions, it is ideal to control and monitor its properties while tuning an external electric field applied to the system. Indeed, complete electric-field control of many-body states in strongly correlated electron systems is fundamental to the next generation of condensed matter research and devices 1-3 . However, the material must be thin enough to avoid shielding of the electric field in the bulk material. Two-dimensional materials do not experience electrical screening, and their charge carrier density can be controlled by gating. 1T-TiSe2 is a prototypical two-dimensional material that shows charge density wave (CDW) and superconductivity in its phase diagram 4 , presenting several similarities with other layered systems such as copper oxides 5 , iron pnictides 6 , and crystals of rare-earth and actinide atoms 7 . By studying 1T-TiSe2 single crystals with thicknesses of 10 nanometres or less, encapsulated in two-dimensional layers of hexagonal boron nitride, we achieve unprecedented control over the CDW transition temperature, tuned from 170 kelvin to 40 kelvin, and over the superconductivity transition temperature, tuned from a quantum critical point at 0 kelvin up to 3 kelvin. Electrically driving TiSe2 over different ordered electronic phases allows us to study the details of the phase transitions between many-body states. Observations of periodic oscillations of magnetoresistance induced by the Little-Parks effect show that the appearance of superconductivity is directly correlated to the spatial texturing of the amplitude and phase of the superconductivity order parameter, corresponding to a two-dimensional matrix of superconductivity. We infer that this superconductivity matrix is supported by a matrix of incommensurate CDW states embedded in the commensurate CDW states. Our results show that spatially modulated electronic states are fundamental to the appearance of twodimensional superconductivity. The charge carrier density-or equivalently, the Fermi energy-strongly controls phase transitions in correlated systems. Traditionally, charge carrier density can be controlled by doping, that is, by chemical modification of the material. Unfortunately, the alteration of the system's chemical composition leads to the unavoidable introduction of disorder. In strongly correlated systems, owing to their exponential sensitivity to the local electronic environment, disorder can have a profound impact that masks the intrinsic many-body behaviour The Fermi energy not only controls the number of electric carriers but also the screening of external electric fields and internal electron-electron interactions Electrical transport measurements under electric-field-induced doping enabled us to construct the phase diagram shown in Fig. TiSe2 nanosheets with thicknesses of 10 nm or less were prepared by mechanical exfoliation of a high-quality single crystal (Extended Data Fig. Variation of the charge carrier density leads to strong variations of the electrical resistance of the device as shown in Fig. On increasing the electron density we observe the superconductivity state as shown in Fig. When the superconducting coherence length (T) becomes larger than the sample thickness close to TC we expect the material to behave as a 2D system and the superconducting transition is anticipated to be of the Kosterlitz-Thouless (K-T) type with vortex-antivortex unbinding where TK-T is the K-T transition temperature, and a and b are material parameters. The experimental result reproduces this relation close to TK-T, as shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of the sheet resistance can be written as RS = RS0+CT  (where RS0 is the residual resistance at 3 K), which decreases monotonically with carrier density as shown in Fig. The presence of the competing orders in this 2D system has striking consequences for the electronic transport. In Fig. The periodicity in magnetic field reflects a spatial periodicity given by the cyclotron equation, c = (0/B) It is clear that the well defined structure of the magnetoresistance reflects spatial fluctuations of the electronic pairing. A consistent explanation for these features is based on the Little-Parks effect The length scale we observe is associated with the trapping of magnetic flux quanta by the Cooper pairs. The existence of such a superconductivity matrix over a range of temperature and charge carrier density in a single crystal is remarkable, leading us to suggest that the superconductivity matrix must be pinned and stabilized by an underlying matrix of inhomogeneous electronic states. Fluctuations of an underlying charge or spin order parameter have led to the discovery of superconductivity in a wide range of systems; the suppression of the CDW transition from 170 K to 40 K, concomitant with the appearance of superconductivity and non-Fermi-liquid behaviour, strongly indicates that the CDW plays a part. We now consider how local variations of the CDW can stabilize the superconductivity matrix. The CDW corresponds to a spatial modulation of the charge density , where  is the CDW order parameter, r is the position in the 2D plane and Q is the CDW ordering vector. On the basis of symmetry alone, the Ginzburg-Landau free energy for  can be written as where a, b, c, m* and  are phenomenological parameters that determine the energy scale for the spatial variation of . Variations in the amplitude  are energetically very costly since the CDW has to be locally destroyed. However, variations in the CDW phase are energetically allowed and can be expressed as: where 0 is the CDW order parameter in the uniform CCDW, K is a reciprocal lattice vector in the direction of Q, (r) is a spatially varying phase and we have included the known CCDW wavevector for TiSe2 (1/2, 1/2, 1/2). When  = n (where n is an integer) we again have a CCDW, whereas if (r) = Q.r we have an ICDW. For illustrative purposes, we assume that the variation in (x) is one-dimensional in nature and substitute equation (3) into equation ( where g depends on the Ginzburg-Landau parameters and x = |K/2  Q| r is the dimensionless length scale. The last equation reflects how the free energy changes locally with the phase. Minimizing equation (   A full solution to this problem in 2D is lacking, but we speculate that domain walls form a periodic matrix illustrated schematically in Fig. As shown by ref. 23, ICDW dynamic phase fluctuations-that is, phonon modes of the ICDW (not the lattice)-can exist in these domain walls. It is conceivable that these ICDW phonons induce superconductivity pairing and localize Cooper pairs in onedimensional regions of the 2D system. Another intriguing aspect of our results is displayed in Fig. It is unlikely that our 2D samples would develop a superconductivity order parameter that is qualitatively distinct from that of CuxTiSe2 (for example, dwave). The existence of the ZBCP therefore suggests that, together with the spatial modulation of the superconductivity amplitude (which is demonstrated by the Little-Parks effect), 、 there may also be a modulation of the superconductivity phase, although the correspondence between the amplitude variation and the phase variation cannot be determined from our measurements. The observed state in 1T-TiSe2 bears some similarity to the pair density wave (PDW) superconducting CDW phases. However, further experiments are required to substantiate the PDW hypothesis. Although one-dimensional PDW states have attracted more attention within the context of the cuprate superconductors The coexistence of CCDW and ICDW was first observed by recent X-ray measurements of TiSe2 at pressures close to where the superconductivity phase was expected In summary, we studied samples of TiSe2 a few nanometres in thickness and tuned the material through the CDW and superconductivity phases using the electric field effect. This technique allowed us to study in great detail the QCP in the material and classify its universality class. We also identified the interplay between TiSe2 single crystals were grown in two steps by the chemical vapour transport method The quality of the bulk single crystals was confirmed by X-ray diffraction and temperature-dependent Raman spectroscopy TiSe2 was exfoliated in a pure argon atmosphere by Scotch tape Electrodes for transport measurements were fabricated by standard electron beam lithography techniques using a PMMA positive resist, followed by deposition of Ti (10 nm)/Au (65 nm). Thin crystals (one to three layers) of commercial hexagonal boron nitride were transferred onto the nanosheets within the argon atmosphere Atomic force microscope results show that the surface is clean (as shown in Extended Data Fig. Electrical transport measurements were performed in both a As discussed in the main text, the superconducting transition under different fixed perpendicular magnetic fields was measured. Extended Data Fig. . The minimum  that corresponds to the maximum HC2 point is about 22 nm, which is more than twice as large as the thickness of the measured device, indicating that superconductivity in our device is expected to have a 2D character. For the K-T transition, the current-voltage response becomes nonlinear; a V  I  relation is expected as a result of the vortex-antivortex pair unbinding To confirm the z value that determines the nature of the quantum critical behaviour in our system, we also measured the temperature-dependent superconducting transition under perpendicular magnetic field at a fixed charge carrier density of n = 2.67 × 10 14 cm 2 (see Extended Data Fig. The magnetoresistance oscillation is observed when we sweep a perpendicular magnetic field at different temperature in the superconducting state. From the QCP point n = 1.2 × 10 14 cm 2 to the near-optimum doping n = 5.9 × 10 14 cm 2 , the oscillations can be observed for all doping levels. However, these oscillations can only be clearly observed for certain temperatures T0 and magnetic fields B0, whereas T0 and B0 values increase with increasing doping. For instance, for n = 1.3 × 10 14 cm 2 , T0 is 0.3 K and B0 is 0.06 T; for n = 2.7 × 10 14 cm 2 , T0 increases to 0.4 K and B0 increases to 0.13 T, as one can see from Extended Data Fig. We plot the temperature dependence of the sheet resistance between 3 K and 100 K with the doping level ranging from 4 × 10 14 cm 2 to 13 × 10 14 cm 2 as shown in Extended Data Fig. At doping levels away from optimal doping, 7.5 × 10 14 cm 2 , we observe Fermiliquid behaviour at low temperatures below TCDW. At the optimal doping level an exponent of 3/2 is observed over a wide range of temperature; this exponent is similar to the one observed in MnSi 