We consider photoemission from cuprate high-temperature superconductors taking into account joint relaxation of strongly coupled fields: a field of correlated electrons and phonon field. Such relaxation occurs in systems with predominantly long-range electron-phonon interaction at sufficiently high carrier concentration due to coexistence of autolocalized and delocalized carriers. A simple method to calculate analytically a high-energy part of the ARPES spectrum arising is proposed. The approach suggested yields all the high-energy spectral features like broad bands of Gaussian shape and "vertical dispersion" patterns being in good quantitative agreement with the experiments at any doping with both types of carriers. Demonstrated coexistence of autolocalized and delocalized carriers in cuprate superconductors is important for understanding their transport and magnetic properties. Presence of large-radius autolocalized carriers shown may be helpful in explanation of charge ordering in doped cuprates. Thirty years of theoretical modeling of cuprates demonstrating high-temperature superconductivity by separating one "main" interaction failed to explain their properties. Obviously this points out that simultaneous interplay of charge, spin and lattice degrees of freedom is crucial. Recently such complex approach was successfully applied to quasi-1D cuprates: experimental results on resonant inelastic X-ray scattering turned out to be in complete accordance with the theoretical description based on simultaneous consideration of electron relaxation and electron-phonon interaction (EPI) Here we consider photoemission from cuprate high-temperature superconductors taking into account joint relaxation of strongly coupled fields: a field of correlated electrons and phonon field. Broad bands with Gaussian shape Simultaneous presence of broad Gaussian bands and "vertical dispersion" emerges in a model with strong long-range (Frohlich) EPI The main difference of systems with strong Frohlich EPI is coexistence of autolocalized and delocalized carriers occurring at sufficiently high carrier concentration The model under consideration allows simple analytical calculation of high-energy part (HEP) of the ARPES spectrum. The suggested method takes advantages of two facts. First, the phonon vacuum reconstruction during the system relaxation is accompanied with radiation of different number of phonons in different acts with the Poissonian distribution of the probability, the average number of phonons is determined by the change of the phonon vacuum energy Only two system characteristics are necessary for the calculation: dispersion of the correlated carriers and effective dielectric constant characterizing the strength of the long-range EPI Predicted energetic and momentum position and line-width of the features in the HEP of ARPES spectrum of cuprates are in good quantitative agreement with the experiments at any doping with both types of carriers The article is organized as following. First we discuss the model that allows considering high carrier concentrations in a system with simultaneous presence of strong electron correlations and strong long-range EPI. Then we briefly discuss the variety of the relaxation pathways in such a system after its photoexcitation. Next section describes suggested analytical method to calculate the HEP of ARPES spectrum from such systems. Then it is applied to systems doped with electrons and holes to any doping level including undoped system. The calculated spectra are compared with the experimental ARPES spectra of cuprates from undoped up to overdoped with electrons or holes, good quantitative agreement is demonstrated. In conclusion we briefly discuss the implications of the results obtained. LP is formed by a carrier at strong long-range EPI, if the bandwidth W of the "bare" carrier exceeds its average kinetic energy in the polaron Carrier tunneling between nodes inside the LP polarization potential well is much quicker (adiabatical) than the ions motion, as ratio of the carrier average kinetic energy in LP E kin =E p ≈ ε max /3.2 where a is the lattice constant; zero energy in (3) Eq.( The carrier momentum in LP and in large bipolaron has large uncertainty 0 k  tied with the polaron volume V 0 (the large polaron and bipolaron have close volumes k 0 is ordinarily about π/(4a)  π /(3a), therefore momentum is not suitable to characterize the carrier AS. Spontaneous breaking of the translational symmetry in a system with strong EPI results in the ground state degeneration as polarons can be located in different regions of the crystal The maximum AS momentum is much smaller than 0 k  because phonon group velocity limits the AS velocity are prohibited by Pauli exclusion rule. Therefore they are shown with dashed line on Fig. Pauli exclusion rule also causes absence of EPI screening by delocalized carriers. In undoped parent compounds screening is absent due to completely filled band. At carriers concentration n<n 0 and low temperatures there are no delocalized carriers. At n>n 0 delocalized carriers are present in the system. But to form screening charge the squared modulus of a DS wave function should be non-zero in a localized area of the order of the polaron size. Then the carrier momentum should be from the interval 0 k k  , which is prohibited by Pauli exclusion rule. Ground state of a single hole at strong EPI is a hole polaron. However, at strong EPI completely filled band contains about n 0 /2 electron bipolarons. Then where in the coordinate space do the hole ASs can locate? Obviously the hole is not localized inside the electron bipolaron as it is not profitable energetically. The more so that between electron bipolarons there are areas of negative polarization charge attracting the holes. It is worth noting that due to large radius of the carrier ASs in cuprates the electron bipolarons and the hole ASs contain phonon vacuum deformation in mainly different harmonics with the wave vectors around Γ and (π/2, π/2) points of the first Brillouin zone, respectively. Taking into account the phonon subsystem relaxation after electron photoexcitation resulted some time ago in understanding the nature of broad bands in optical and ARPES spectra of cuprates. It is multiple phonon generation at creation/decay of the phonon vacuum deformation, the number of phonons is different in different acts Here we show that for such systems (with strong Frohlich EPI) generalizing the relaxational approach If photoelectron comes from delocalized state, i.e. its in-plane momentum 0 k k  , the system relaxation is absolutely different and simple, without changing the phonon vacuum. A "boundary" k=k 0 between the two types of the system relaxation with different relaxation energy displays itself in ARPES spectrum as "vertical dispersion". It should be noted that in systems where SPs are formed there is not a coexistence of localized and delocalized carriers and correspondingly there is not "vertical dispersion" pattern in the ARPES spectrum. Even more interesting relaxation occurs in undoped or hole-doped systems. The hole left after the photoelectron escape relaxes to the Fermi surface and forms AS due to strong EPI. Such final state occurs for doping lower than the ASs maximum concentration n 0 . At higher doping the final state is delocalized hole at the Fermi surface (as in the electron doping case with n>n 0 ). If the photoelectron originates from the electron AS (bipolaron) it is restored in the final state. Each relaxation way is discussed in details below at calculating its display in the ARPES spectrum. 4. Simple analytical method to calculate the high-energy part of ARPES spectrum from systems with strong long-range EPI The method of calculating ARPES spectrum from systems with strong Frohlich EPI takes advantages of using the coherent states basis for the phonon field state in the (bi)polaron with the vector of the system initial state written in the adiabatic approximation as a product of the electron wave function ψ(r) in the polaron and a vector of the phonon field state  q q d in the coherent states representation. Рarameters d q of the phonon vacuum deformation in the q-th harmonics due to EPI are simply expressed through the corresponding Fourier-transform of the squared electronic wave function The energy conservation law (δ-function argument in Eq. ( , where E p ,   , E kin and Φ are the polaron binding energy, photon energy, photoelectron energy and work function, respectively. Ordinarily in ARPES three latter values are replaced by binding energy so that the energy conservation law has the form . It (and, consequently, the argument of δfunction in Eq.( where ψ k is Fourier-transform of the electron wave function in the initial state,  is the average number of radiated phonons and pol pvd E is the average polarization field energy in the polaron state due to the phonon vacuum deformation. According to known Pekar results , and E p is determined by Eq.( Due to phonon energy dispersion the energy dispersion curves A(k=const, ε) are envelopes of points obtained according to Eqs. Eqs. To simplify it one can calculate the electronic matrix element neglecting carriers correlation in the bipolaron (electronic wave function in the bipolaron is approximated as a product of two polaron ones), but still taking it into account calculating bipolaron binding energy. Then 2 k  in (7) coincides with the polaron case and the difference of bipolaronic A(k, ε) from the polaronic one is in the energy conservation equation: ) where E b is the bipolaron binding energy per carrier. Eq.( where pvd E  is the difference between the energies of the phonon vacuum deformation in the bipolaron and in the polaron. The values E b and bip pvd E for the one-center bipolaron with taking into account carriers correlation where We use the value of 3    As it was pointed out above at the carrier concentration n>n 0 the system relaxation after photoemission involves electron subsystem due to absence of the ground state degeneration. At n>n 0 , k>k 0 the relaxation does not affect the phonon vacuum. In this case two variants of the calculation yield the same result presented by Fig 2c : traditional one where the final state is a hole with the in-plane momentum k and one including relaxation of the hole to its minimum energy state on the Fermi surface. The energy conservation equation for the second calculation is , where E(k)= E UHB (k ) is determined by Eq.( is the number of radiated phonons. This yields ε(k)=E(k), i.e. spectral weight in the region k>k 0 follows "bare" electron dispersion crossing the Fermi level. This result allows using the electron band dispersion obtained from the experimental ARPES spectrum at sufficiently high doping for the carrier effective mass calculation. At n>n 0 , k<k 0 the initial state is bipolaron. Therefore 2 k  in (7) results in the same localization of the bipolaron band in the momentum space as at n<n 0 . However, the other relaxation way changes its position in the binding energies. Similarly to n<n 0 case after photoelectron escape the bipolaron polarization cloud begins to decay down to the polaron one with radiation of phonons, their average number is , provided the process is completed. The stroke designates that at n>n 0 the difference between the polarization field energy in the bipolaron and in the polaron is larger than in the single bipolaron case due to ASs contraction in the system ground state at high carrier density. Indeed, Eqs. At n>n 0 the relaxation due to strong EPI restores the bipolaron after photoelectron with k<k 0 escape. First a transition of a delocalized carrier towards the minimum energy state (or relaxation of the photohole) occurs. This process and decay of the bipolaron polarization "coat" into polaron one are both multi-phonon processes and occur during the characteristic phonon times. Therefore there will be a distribution of probabilities for the degree of the latter process completness. As a result some decrease of 1  will take place. However, this decrease is compensated to some degree by increase of ' pvd E  due to bipolarons contraction at high carrier density. Therefore for rough estimate of energetic position of the spectral weight at k<k 0 we suppose . The possible mistake is not essential in comparison with extremely large width of the ARPES band at k<k 0 . Relaxation empties the Fermi-surface state, its excess energy and momentum are transferred to the phonon field with creating the appropriate average number of phonons. The bipolaron restoration from the polaron is also accompanied with the radiation of phonons, their average number 1 2    since the initial and final phonon vacuums for the cases of decay and restoration are simply interchanged. According to Gaussian distribution property the average number of radiated phonons The energy conservation equation at n>n 0 , k<k 0 has the form . Using it to express ν(ε) for substitution into P ν The theoretical calculation of the case of optimal doping with electrons in the frames of Hubbard model without EPI yields To calculate photoemission from undoped and hole-doped cuprates we use the correlated carriers dispersion (2) modified by strong Frohlich EPI (Fig. At k<k 0 the energy conservation equation and the average number of radiated phonons are where E LHB (k) is determined by Eq.( The ARPES band dispersion at k>k 0 obtained as average of the first Eq.( i.e. it follows the "bare" carrier dispersion shifted deeper by h p E 3 . This is similar to the SP model where E LHB (k) is determined by Eq.( (where h denotes hole ASs) is larger than h p E 3 . Its location in the momentum space does not change. If due to close binding energy per carrier in the polaron and bipolaron state the photohole can appear in some concentration interval with comparative probability in both these states the spectral weight will be smeared over more wide area of energies. Interestingly, that this stage of the spectral weight transfering deeper upon doping the authors of At hole concentration n>n 0 the final state of the photohole is delocalized state at the Fermi surface. Since it does not induce the phonon vacuum deformation the whole HEP of the ARPES spectrum is lifted (in comparison with the n<n 0 case) along the energy axis by the value . Energy conservation equations have the form The ARPES band dispersion at k>k 0 follows unshifted "bare" carrier dispersion similarly to the electron doping case at n>n 0 . The HEP of the ARPES spectrum calculated according to Eqs. In summary, we suggest a new approach to calculating the HEP of ARPES spectrum from cuprates which takes into account joint relaxation of strongly coupled fields: a field of correlated electrons and phonon field. Such type of the relaxation occurs only in the case of strong long-range EPI at sufficiently high carrier concentration when degeneration of the ground state is absent due to coexistence of autolocalized and delocalized carriers. Separation of the momentum space between two these types of carrier states according to Pauli exclusion rule together with different relaxation pathways for autolocalized and delocalized initial states result in fragmentation of the band in ARPES spectrum into two parts in different regions of the wave vector space. Predicted theoretically value of the "vertical dispersion" momentum position (the k 0 value) is in good agreement with the experiments on cuprates with both types of doping. The phonon field relaxation at formation or decay of the carrier ASs causes broad bands of Gaussian shape in the ARPES spectrum. Besides realizing the possible reason of fragmentation of the HEP in ARPES spectrum of cuprates we suggest a new method to calculate analyticaly the HEP of ARPES spectrum in systems with strong carrier correlations and strong long-range EPI at arbitrary carrier concentration. It takes advantages of applying coherent states basis for the phonon field state description. As the input the method uses dispersion of the correlated carriers and the effective dielectric constant characterising the EPI. The calculated position, width and shape of the bands in the HEP of ARPES spectrum of cuprates are in good agreement with the experiments at any level of doping with both types of carriers. The experimentally observed double scale of HEA energy in electron-doped cuprates with respect to that in hole-doped cuprates arises naturally in the frames of model under consideration. Indeed, in this approach the momentum k 0 of the break in the delocalized carrier dispersion at essential doping due to Pauli exclusion rule is invariant in electron and hole-doped cuprates due to close size of the bipolarons in them. But the corresponding energy E(k 0 ) (the energy of HEA) is determined by the LHB and UHB dispersion which are different as it is illustrated for nodal direction by Eqs.( Thus, the suggested approach allows to obtain theoretically both characteristic features observed in HEP of experimental ARPES spectra of cuprates: broad bands of Gaussian shape and "vertical dispersion" patterns. This differs it from the previous theoretical results obtained in models considering electron correlations without taking into account strong EPI The present approach allows also understanding several experimental findings being unclear in some earlier models. First, manganites are also characterized by broad bands in ARPES spectrum but do not demonstrate "vertical dispersion" patterns that was considered as proof that strong EPI cannot be the reason of this feature Second, some notes concerning the observation conditions of HEA can be made. They are important because changes in HEA manifestation in some cuts in different BZs at change of the photon energy observed experimentally Finally, demonstrated broken by strong EPI translational symmetry in cuprates allows also discussion of charge ordering observed in doped cuprates The agreement of the calculated HEP of the ARPES spectrum with the experiments on cuprates confirms coexistence of autolocalized and delocalized carriers in them. This result may be useful for understanding temperature and doping dependence of their transport and magnetic properties 