Among iron based superconductors, the layered iron chalcogenide Fe(Te 1-x Se x ) is structurally the simplest and has attracted considerable attentions. It has been speculated from bulk studies that nanoscale inhomogeneous superconductivity may inherently exist in this system. However, this has not been directly observed from nanoscale transport measurements. In this work, through simple micromechanical exfoliation and high precision low-energy ion milling thinning, we prepared Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) nano-flake with various thickness and systematically studied the correlation between the thickness and superconducting phase transition. Our result revealed a systematic evolution of superconducting transition with thickness. When the thickness of Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) flake is reduced down to 12nm, i.e. the characteristic length of Te/Se fluctuation, the superconducting current path and the metallicity of normal state in Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) atomic sheets is suppressed. This observation provides the first direct transport evidence for the nano-scale inhomogeneous nature of superconductivity in Fe(Te 1- x Se x ). KEYWORDS: iron based superconductors, Fe(Te 1-x Se x ), inhomogeneous superconductivity, iron chalcogenide The discovery of layered iron pnictides 1-10 and iron chalcogenide Iron chalcogenide Fe(Te 1-x Se x ) has the simplest crystal structure among all discovered Fe-based superconductors. This system displays a complex coexistence of two antiferromagnetic correlations with in-plane wave vector (,0) magnetic order to superconductivity with (,) spin resonance The crystal structure of Fe(Te 1-x Se x ) can be viewed as the stacking of sandwich-like Te/Se-Fe-Te/Se layers as shown in the inset of Figure The existence of weak van der Waals (vdW) bonding between adjacent charge neutral layers makes it easy to exfoliate Fe(Te 1-x Se x ) crystals down to atomically thin sheets, providing an excellent platform to explore its properties in nano-scale. The optimally doped (x=0.5) bulk single crystals were synthesized using a flux method as reported elsewhere The Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) nano-devices with Ohmic contact were fabricated using standard electron-beam lithography (see Methods). To eliminate the influence of contact resistance for the transport measurements, four-terminal configuration of the device has been adopted, as illustrated in Figure Owing to the fact that the thickness of the thin flakes cannot be precisely controlled using the microexfoliation method, it is difficult to obtain a precise description of the evolution of superconductivity with thickness. To establish a completed thickness dependence of the electronic properties of Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) system, we have applied an alternative approach to produce thin flakes with desired thickness, i.e., using low-energy Argon ion milling to thin down Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) crystals to thin flakes. Ion milling is widely used to prepare thin specimen for TEM measurements We selected a device fabricated with an exfoliated thin flake with thickness of 37.86 nm (T c ~ 12K before ion milling) and then reduced its thickness by using ion milling as described above. The temperature dependence of resistivity was measured right after each step of thinning. As shown in Figure What is the origin of the suppression of superconductivity with reducing thickness in our Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) thin flakes? Although our observation of superconductivity suppression and non-metallic normal state in thin flake samples appears to be similar to the behaviors previously observed on epitaxial Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) films To understand the suppression of superconductivity in thin flakes, we studied the normal state electronic properties of these devices, and summarized the derivative of the temperature dependence of the normal state resistivity d/dT in the contour plot presented in Figure As pointed out in Ref In addition to the Te/Se ratio discussed above, superconductivity in Fe(Te 1-x Se x ) system can also be controlled by excess Fe at the interstitial site of Te/Se layer Another approach to examine the presence of superconducting islands is magnetotransport measurement. The suppression of superconductivity by magnetic field can lead to significant magnetoresistivity (MR). We first checked such a scenario in a thick device (t = 39 nm) with the superconducting transition occurring in 12-14K (Figure Additionally, with the thickness approaching the critical thickness (~12 nm), we observed considerable non-zero MR well below T c (~4% at 8T and 5.5K) that follows B 2 dependence, suggesting that it should primarily arise from the non-superconducting island. Such observation, together with the low temperature residual resistivity upturn (see Figure In summary, through transport measurements on Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) nano-flake, we found that superconductivity is suppressed when the sample thickness is reduced below 12nm by microexfoliation or low-energy ion milling. Our analyses indicate that such superconductivity suppression is caused by the nano-scale phase separation owing to inhomogeneous distribution of Te/Se and/or the present of tiny amount of excess Fe. This observation provides the first direct transport evidence for the nano scale inhomogeneous superconductivity nature in iron chalcogenide system. Single-crystal thin flakes of Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) were achieved by using micro-mechanical exfoliation method. The fresh inner surface of Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) crystal was split open with a Scotch tape and then transferred to SiO 2 /Si (10nm/290nm) wafer. The flake thickness was first estimated according to its color contrast under an optical microscope and then precisely measured by an atomic force microscope (AFM). Thin layers with thicknesses ranging from a few nanometers up to hundreds of nanometers can be produced. To fabricate Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) nanodevice, four-terminal contact leads pattern was first created by standard electron beam lithography, then followed by 5nm Ti and 50 nm Au deposition as the contact metal with an e-beam evaporator. Ohmic contact can be realized on such device. For TEM study, thin Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) flakes were first exfoliated onto a silicon substrate with a few nanometer poly acrylic acid (PVA) layer and 300nm polymethyl-methacrylate (PMMA) coating as top layer. PMMA layer with attached flakes was then released from the substrate by dissolving PVA layer in water and further transferred onto a rigid silicon based TEM grid with 30nm thick Si 3 N 4 membrane window. The low-energy ion milling on as-exfoliated Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) flakes was carried out on an AJA-IM ion milling system with milling parameters set as beam voltage/acceleration voltage of 600V/120V and ion beam incident angle of 5. To calibrate the milling rate, electron-beam lithography was used to pattern a layer of PMMA that covers half of the Fe(Te 0.5 Se 0.5 ) crystal and exposes the other half to ion milling. After ion milling thinning, the PMMA was then dissolved in Acetone and the resulted thickness difference on the same crystal between milled and un-milled area was measured by AFM to obtain a milling rate. 