We report on the emergence of robust superconducting order in single crystal alloys of TaSe2-xSx (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) . The critical temperature of the alloy is surprisingly higher than that of the two end compounds TaSe2 and TaS2. The evolution of superconducting critical temperature Tc (x) correlates with the full width at half maximum of the Bragg peaks and with the linear term of the high temperature resistivity. The conductivity of the crystals near the middle of the alloy series is higher or similar than that of either one of the end members 2H-TaSe2 and/or 2H-TaS2. It is known that in these materials superconductivity (SC) is in close competition with charge density wave (CDW) order. We interpret our experimental findings in a picture where disorder tilts this balance in favor of superconductivity by destroying the CDW order. The interplay of disorder and interactions is a fruitful area of investigation. In the absence of electron-electron interactions, disorder can turn a metallic system into an Anderson insulator Here we report that in the 2H-TaSe2-xSx alloy series the CDW is suppressed and the superconductivity is maximized with crystallographic disorder. The Tc(x) evolution is correlated with the high temperature linear resistivity ρ(T)=aT+b. The constant term b can be attributed to impurity-like carrier scattering off the local CDW fluctuations, and it also appears in dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) of bad metals at high temperature On very general grounds (Anderson theorem) s-wave superconductivity is immune to weak disorder Powder patterns for all samples have been successfully indexed within the P63/mmc space group. Representative refinement is shown in Fig. When compared to the parent 2H-TaSe2 with electronic specific heat coefficient γ = 4.5 mJ mol -1 K -2 , γ is larger for 50% S-doped sample [Fig. The ratio of the gap at the critical temperature 2∆/kBTc = 2.17 can be obtained by linear fitting ln(Ce/γTc)-Tc/T data [Fig. In a multiband electronic system with local CDW fluctuations We present the evolution of superconducting Tc in 2H-TaSe2 with S substitution x (normalized to Tc value for x = 0) in Fig. It should be noted that electron-irradiated 2H-TaSe2 shows enhancement of superconducting Tc up to about 2.5 K ( In contrast, isoelectronic substitution in 2H-TaSe2-xSx single crystal alloy series allows for clear separation of disorder from doping-induced changes. The basic electronic structure of 2H-TaSe2, 2H-TaSeS and 2H-TaS2 is quite similar as shown in the LDA calculations (Supplementary material), leaving disorder as the origin of the increase in Tc. The intense variation of physical properties at low energy is a prime example of emergent phenomena. Below the CDW transition temperature a gap opens in 2 H-TaSe2 on two distorted sublattices in contrast to undistorted sublattice The normal state properties of this material are not well understood theoretically. Our experimental results indicate that the low temperature specific heat coefficient of the alloy is very close to that computed in LDA (please see Supplementary Material), suggesting that the correlations due to Coulomb interactions are weak, while the electron phonon coupling couples strongly to a few states not too close to the Fermi surface, which is consistent with the results of ref 35. Alternatively, strong correlations are invoked in the exciton liquid model of 2H-TaSe2. This model of CDW in 2H-TaSe2 provides an explanation of some anomalous normal state properties such as linear resistivity above CDW transition, pseudogap, optical conductivity σ(ω,T) and incoherent metal features Pressure should bring phonon hardening following the contraction of lattice parameters from 2H-TaSe2 to 2H-TaS2 (Fig. Single crystals of 2H-TaSe2-xSx (0≤x≤2) were grown via iodine vapor transport method. The source and growth zone were set at 900 • C for 3 days and then kept at 900 • C and 800 • C, respectively, for 10 days. Black plate-like single crystals with a typical size of 3 • 3 • 0.2 mm 3 were obtained. The element analysis was performed using an energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) in a JEOL LSM-6500 scanning electron microscope. Electrical resistivity, specific heat and magnetization measurements were performed in a Quantum Design PPMS-9 and MPMS XL-5. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns on single crystals were taken using a Rigaku Miniflex. Room temperature powder XRD measurements were carried out at the X-ray Powder Diffraction (XPD, 28-ID-C) beam line at National Synchrotron Light Source II. The raw room temperature powder X ray 2D data were integrated and converted to intensity versus scattering angle using the software Fit2D The error bars are about 0.01 for x, up to 0.04 for normalized Tc and up to 0.01 for the normalized parameter b and FWHM (also see Table However, the impurity-like scattering due to local CDW fluctuations (phase disorder scattering) term b becomes negative for that range of x, making the overall resistivity ρ0 smaller or similar to x = 0 and x = 2 crystals (Table x Tc(K) In what follows we will show that in the asymptotic high temperature limit we observe the Of interest is the high temperature linear term, specifically its temperature independent part b. We show the values of b obtained from this procedure in Table TaSe2 and TaS2, we adopted their respectively experimental crystallographic structure. For TaSeS we assumed an artificial structure that is interpolated from the structures of TaSe2 and TaS2. And to mimic the doping, we assumed a layered commensurate substitution with two different patterns, S-S-Se-Se stacking and S-Se-S-Se stacking along c axis without site mixing and in-plane disorder. The results of these two situations are very similar so only the 