We investigated the superconducting order parameter of the filled skutterudite LaPt4Ge12, with a transition temperature of Tc = 8.3 K. To this end, we performed temperature and magnetic-field dependent specific-heat and thermal-conductivity measurements. All data are compatible with a single superconducting s-wave gap. However, a multiband scenario cannot be ruled out. The results are discussed in the context of previous studies on the substitution series Pr1-xLaxPt4Ge12. They suggest compatible order parameters for the two end compounds LaPt4Ge12 and PrPt4Ge12. This is not consistent with a single s-wave gap in LaPt4Ge12 considering previous reports of unconventional and/or multiband superconductivity in PrPt4Ge12. The pairing mechanism of a superconductor determines the symmetry of its order parameter, which in turn is connected to the symmetry of the superconducting gap. Superconductors, whose averaged order parameter over the entire Fermi surface yields zero, are called unconventional. They attract much interest 1 in modern condensed matter physics because a description of the underlying physics has to go beyond the standard Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory for an s-wave order parameter. Their gap contains nodes, whose existence and position can be detected by a variety of experimental probes. Often, only a combination of results from different probes allows one to draw a conclusive picture. The search and study of unconventional superconductors was triggered by the discovery of heavy-fermion superconductivity In this context, the filled-skutterudite compounds M T 4 X 12 (M = electropositive metal, T = transition metal, and X = usually a pnictogen) attracted much attention with the discovery of PrOs 4 Sb 12 , which is the first Pr-based heavy-fermion superconductor and believed to be of unconventional type The continuous evolution of T c across the doping series (Pr 1-x La x )Pt 4 Ge 12 suggests compatible order parameters of the end members PrPt 4 Ge 12 and LaPt 4 Ge 12 For the synthesis of single crystals of LaPt 4 Ge 12 , a bulk sample of mass 2 g was placed in a glassy-carbon crucible, sealed in a Ta tube and enclosed in a quartz ampoule. The ampoule was heated up to 870 • C within 5 h and kept at this temperature for 10 h. Then it was cooled down to 845 • C and held for 30 days and furnacecooled. Single crystals of 1-4 mm size were mechanically extracted from the sample We investigated three high-quality single crystals of LaPt 4 Ge 12 selected from the same batch with a residual resistivity ratio (RRR) of 17 and a residual resistivity ρ 0 of 3.8 μΩcm. Crystal #1 with a mass of m = 14.7 mg and crystal #2 with 67.2 mg were used for specific-heat measurements by a relaxation method (Heat Capacity Option in a PPMS by Quantum Design). On crystal #3 we performed transport measurements with a standard twothermometer-one-heater technique. For this purpose, we cut it first into a rectangular bar along the principal cubic crystal axes with a cross-sectional area of 0.492 mm 2 and a contact distance of 1.08 mm. This arrangement was used for thermal-conductivity measurements in a PPMS (Thermal Transport Option) above 2 K and in zero magnetic field. Afterwards, a long plate was cut from crystal #3 again along the principal cubic crystal axes with the dimensions (0.04 × 0.50 × 1.92) mm 3 . This sample #3a was used to measure thermal conductivity both as a function of temperature and isothermally as function of magnetic field for temperatures below 1 K and for magnetic fields of 0 ≤ H ≤ 2 T. The heat current j was applied along the same direction as for the PPMS measurement. A superconducting split-coil magnet generated a magnetic field H ⊥ j. The specific heat C(T ) of LaPt 4 Ge 12 was measured at zero field and in a field of 2 T, which is above the superconducting critical field (Fig. where C E describes the Einstein specific heat from a single phonon mode. The fit result is also plotted in Fig. The specific heat exhibits a sharp superconducting transition at 8.0 K with a width of 0.13 K, which is an indication of the good quality of our crystals. The jump height is larger than expected from the predictions of the weak-coupling BCS model (∆ 0 = 1.76 k B T c ), which cannot reproduce our data. However, we are able to describe C e (T )/T adjusting the gap to ∆ 0 = 2.03 k B T c . This value is in resonable agreement with the results from photoelectron spectroscopy: ∆ 0 = 1.95 k B T c ( Both C e,1 and C e,2 are calculated within the BCS theory, but with variable gap sizes ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 . The third free parameter of this model is the weighting factor x. Since our data can already be described with a single gap ∆ 0 , one of the two gaps considered for the α-model must be greater, the other one smaller than ∆ 0 . We therefore evaluate the α-model numerically in the parameter range (1k B T c ∆ 1 ∆ 0 ), (∆ 0 ∆ 2 3k B T c ) using the data between 2 K < T < T c . Using Eq. 2, we determined the corresponding x from the height of the specific heat jump at T c , which we obtained from the single band calculation with ∆ 0 = 2.03 k B T c . The results for x are shown in Fig. In order to find all parameter sets (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 , x), which are able to describe our data, we evaluate the variance which we plot in Fig. The magnetic-field dependence of the γ 0 -coefficient in the superconducting state was determined by an extrapolation of C e (T, H = const)/T data to zero temperature assuming an exponential behavior at low temperatures in the superconducting state. Figure Since the temperature dependence of the specific heat does not indicate the presence of nodes in the superconducting gap function, we will focus here on the case of fully gaped superconductors. A deviation of γ 0 (H) from the predicted linear dependence was observed in several s-wave superconductors (2) anisotropic Fermi surface; (3) non-linear contributions from the vortex lattice, which arise due to a fielddependent vortex-core radius We first discuss case (1). In the multiband superconductor MgB 2 , two distinct field scales were identified LaPt 4 Ge 12 has a complex, anisotropic Fermi surface with several bands crossing the Fermi level We cannot exclude that a field dependent vortex core radius provides a further mechanism for the observed deviations, however, so far there are no indications for such a scenario in LaPt 4 Ge 12 . Figure The exponent we obtain from the power law fit is a = 1.4. In an s-wave superconductor, the thermal conductivity at sufficiently low T /T c is expected to be entirely due to phonons. With the relation A second fit (dashed red) with Eq. 4 using the experimental specific-heat results indicates a dominant phonon contribution scattered by sample boundaries. one can estimate the phonon contribution κ p from the specific heat C p and the mean free path l p . C p = βT 3 is the phonon specific heat from a Debye model determined above. The sound velocity v p can be calculated from C p using the two equations where Θ is the Debye temperature, V = 7.25 • 10 -9 m 3 is the volume of sample #2 and N = 17mN A /M = 3.84 • 10 20 is the number of atoms in the crystal. This leads to Θ = 208 K and v p = 1860 m/s. However, the experimental specific-heat data on LaPt 4 Ge 12 follow only approximately a T 3 dependence, but can be better described by a T 2.5 law below 4 K (see inset of Fig. With the results from the low-temperature thermal conductivity, we can also understand the behavior in the whole temperature range (Fig. Assuming an s-wave superconductor, the drop can be attributed to the decreasing number of electronic heat carriers, hence, κ s e decreases rapidly. The hump indicates an enhanced mean free path of phonons due to the decreasing number of electronic scattering centers, therefore, κ s p increases below T c . J. Bardeen, G. Rickayzen, and L. Tewordt (BRT) developed a standard theory for thermal conductivity in the case of an s-wave superconductor We now turn to the field-dependence of κ(H)/T for LaPt 4 Ge 12 , which is presented in Fig. A clear kink is visible at μ 0 H c2 = 1.4 T. This is slightly lower than 1.6 T from the extrapolation of the specificheat data on polycrystals obtained at T ≥ 1.8 K from resistivity data down to 0.3 K 21 . The latter observation is in agreement with resistivity measurements on our samples (not shown), which show a slightly higher H c2 than from thermal transport and specific heat (Fig. Generally, κ(H) is almost constant below H c1 However, there are drastic changes above H c1 due to the properties of the vortex state: In addition to the delocalized quasiparticles due to thermal excitations above the gap, there are quasiparticles from the core region, which lead to an increase of κ s e 47, In Fig. The good agreement of κ(H) in LaPt 4 Ge 12 with that of a dirty s-wave superconductor fits to the specific heat results and the temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity. We find in addition, that our sample is actually in the dirty limit, since the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length ξ = 20 nm is of the same order as the superconducting mean free path l = 60 nm. Here, we used the upper critical field to determine ξ with μ 0 H c2 = Φ 0 /2πξ 2 = 1.4 T. To calculate l, we applied l = [ ξ -2 -1.6•10 12 ρ0γnTc 1.8•10 24 (ρ0γnTc) 2 ] 0.5 cm , The good agreement with results for a dirty s-wave superconductor implies, that the field dependence of the thermal conductivity is composed of a phonon part κ s p , which decreases with increasing field due to scattering on vortices, and an electronic contribution, which increases due to an enhanced number of localized states in the vortex cores tunneling to ever closer neighboring vortices. This behavior is indicated in Fig. Since our specific-heat results indicate that a description within a two-band model is also consistent with the data, we like to analyze our thermal-transport data with respect to this scenario as well. A typical feature of κ(H) in multiband systems is a plateau at intermediate fields as shown in Fig. We performed specific-heat and thermal-conductivity measurements to investigate the superconducting order parameter of LaPt 4 Ge 12 . The specific heat shows a sharp superconducting transition at 8.0 K and its zero-field temperature-dependence in the superconducting state can nicely be described assuming a single BCS s-wave gap of the size ∆ = 2.0 k B T c . The field dependence of the γ 0 -coefficient deviates from the simple linear behavior for s-wave pairing. Such a deviation can arise, if the Fermi surface shows strong anisotropies as is the case for LaPt 4 Ge 12 . We used the specific-heat results to analyze the low-temperature thermal-transport in detail. The temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity reveals a dominant phonon contribution at low temperatures and a negligible electronic residual term. Together with the dependence of the thermal conductivity on magnetic field, this behavior suggests a single gap BCS s-wave superconductor. However, we cannot completely exclude a two-band scenario from our experimental results, in particular if both gaps have a similar size ∆/k B T c or if one of them has only a tiny contribution to the thermal-transport and thermodynamic properties. The analysis of the specific heat data enables us to limit the possible range of amplitudes ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 and weighting factors x within the two-gap α-model. The possible parameter range is comparatively large, since a single-band model is already sufficient to describe our experimental results. Since the sister compound PrPt 4 Ge 12 is discussed to be a multigap and/or unconventional superconductor, further thermal conductivity and specific heat measurements on the substitution series (Pr 1-x La x )Pt 4 Ge 12 are highly desired. They might help to resolve the question, if PrPt 4 Ge 12 and LaPt 4 Ge 12 have compatible superconducting order parameters as was suggested by the smooth evolution of T c (x) across the substitution series. We are indebted to R. Daou and H. Rosner for valuable discussions.