The superconductor-to-insulator transition (SIT) induced by means such as external magnetic fields, disorder or spatial confinement is a vivid illustration of a quantum phase transition dramatically affecting the superconducting order parameter. In pursuit of a new realization of the SIT by interfacial charge transfer, we developed extremely thin superlattices composed of high Tc superconductor YBa2Cu3O7 (YBCO) and colossal magnetoresistance ferromagnet La0.67Ca0.33MnO3 (LCMO). By using linearly polarized resonant X-ray absorption spectroscopy and magnetic circular dichroism, combined with hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, we derived a complete picture of the interfacial carrier doping in cuprate and manganite atomic layers, leading to the transition from superconducting to an unusual Mott insulating state emerging with the increase of LCMO layer thickness. In addition, contrary to the common perception that only transition metal ions may response to the charge transfer process, we found that charge is also actively compensated by rare-earth and alkaline-earth metal ions of the interface. Such deterministic control of Tc by pure electronic doping without any hindering effects of chemical substitution is another promising route to disentangle the role of disorder on the pseudo-gap and charge density wave phases of underdoped cuprates. Heterointerfaces between dissimilar layers of semiconductors have long been at the forefront of condensed matter physics in topics ranging from charge transfer in a p -n junction to several Hall effects arising in two-dimensional electron gases. For the case of complex oxide interfaces, the past decade has witnessed a rapid growth in science and ability to synthesize interfaces between a wide variety of oxides with atomic layer precision The case of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x /La 0.67 Ca 0.33 MnO 3 (YBCO/LCMO) interface provides a ideal system where antagonistic combination of unconventional magnetism and high T c superconductivity defines a number of intriguing phenomena governed by the charge redistribution between magnetic electrons of manganite and Cooper pairs of the cuprate to equalize chemical potential across the boundary (see Ref. To address this question, we explored a set of interfacecontrolled layered heterostructures composed of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 (2 u.c.) and La 0.67 Ca 0.33 MnO 3 (N=1, 2 and 3 u.c.) to investigate the emergent behaviors due to the reconstructed charge and magnetic moments at the complex oxide interface. By utilizing the combined power of resonant X-ray absorption (XAS) and hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HXPS), we are able to elucidate how the large transfer of electrons from LCMO effectively tunes the YBCO layer across the doping phase space from being a superconductor (SC) into the antiferromagnetic (AFM) phase. Additionally, the electronic responses of Ba and La atoms demonstrate their important roles as electron acceptor and electron donor, respectively, sharing the doped charges with the CuO 2 plane, thus revealing a strong similarity to doping by oxygen content, x in the bulk YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x . The structure was determined by X-ray diffraction. The superlattice (SL) period of ∼22 Å from the spacing of the diffraction peaks (Fig. To understand the transition from superconductor to insulating state, we made use of polarized soft-XAS and hard-XPS to extract an element-resolved picture of the electronic and magnetic states. Beginning with the Mn L-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), we find that, rather than the expected 3.33+ valence From Fig. Figure From the behavior of the XAS data it is evident that the amount of electrons doped to Cu sites is much smaller than the 0.67 x N electrons donated by the LCMO block. In order to find out how the charge transfer influences energy levels, we consider HXPS results from other atoms in the SLs in Fig. On the other side of interface, the La 3d 5/2 BE of Y2/L1 moves to lower binding energy by about 0.5 eV compared to Y9/25 and bulk LCMO. A BE shift to lower energy of ∼0.5 eV is also observed for the case of the Ca 2p 3/2 XPS data as shown in Fig. From a chemical structure standpoint, one can consider how balancing charge in a larger unit cell helps to understand the charge transfer. The key is the missing chains at the interface that lead to a partial and charge imbalanced YBCO unit cell that needs to be compensated by the LCMO layers Taking all the experimental results together, we can confirm that the suppression of the SC state is due to doping of electrons into YBCO from the LCMO layer. To quantify this, using the T c data from the films together with data from the bulk Together with this reduction in T c , we also observed a significant increase in the Cu XMCD at high-fields (5 T) connected with increase in magnetic order associated with the onset of the AFM phase. The same trend using XMCD to probe Cu magnetism was recently seen for bulk YBCO as a function of doping Given the striking similarity between the effect of chemi- cal doping and the interfacial "doping" by electron/hole transfer, there are a number of interesting questions which arise in the view of the recent discovery of a charge density wave (CDW) phase competing with SC pairing. Specifically, recent extensive work on underdoped YBCO revealed the presence of long-range charge fluctuations in CuO 2 in a wide range of hole doping In conclusion, by variable-polarization XAS, MCD, and HXPS, we have shown a clear superconductor to insulator transition driven by interfacial doping in an ultra-thin cupratemaganite superlattice. Without changing the concentration of vacancies in the chains, we can utilize the chemical potential imbalance at the LCMO/YBCO interface to dope electrons into YBCO over a wide range of the phase diagram. This offers an interesting route to examine the link between dopant disorder and phenomena in underdoped superconductors. As noted in recent work, there is a clear correlation between the spatial dopant arrangements and charge order observed in the cuprates The high-quality epitaxial superlattices (SL) consisting of 2 unit cell (uc) of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 (YBCO) and N uc of La 0.67 Ca 0.33 MnO 3 (LCMO) (N = 1, 2, 3) were grown by pulsed laser interval deposition on 5×5 mm 2 SrTiO 3 (001) substrate. The layer-by-layer growth these 20 repeat superlattices (labelled as Y2/LN with N=1,2,3) were monitored by in-situ reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED). In addition to these superlattices, a thick bulk-like LCMO, YBCO, and (Y9/L25) 3 were also grown as a reference. Samples were capped with a protective coating of 4 u.c. of SrTiO 3 , which is very stable in air. The SL structures were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) in air at room temperature using a standard four-circle diffractometer, operating at Beamline 33-BM-C of the Advanced Photon Source (APS). The dc transport properties were measured from 300 to 2K in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) using the van der Pauw geometry. The XAS measurements (X-ray Linear Dichroism measurements (XLD) and X-ray Magnetic Circular Dichroism (XMCD)) were performed at the Cu L 3 edge and Mn L 3 edge, respectively, at the 4-ID-C beam line of the APS. The XLD spectra were measured in bulk sensitive totalfluorescence-yield mode, and energy calibrations were carried out by measuring a CuO (Cu 2+ ) standard simultaneously in the diagnostic section of the beamline. Each spectrum was normalized to the beam intensity monitored by a gold mesh set in front of the samples. In order to avoid spurious XMCD signals, XMCD spectra were recorded with both ±5 Tesla mag-netic fields. (HXPS) data were obtained at beamline 15XU of the SPring-8 Synchrotron. (Y2/L1) SL and the bulk YBCO and LCMO samples were measured at a photon energy of 3.238 keV and an overall energy resolution of 0.25 eV. A Y9/L25 SL, with the structure from top to bottom of 4 u.c. STO/[25 u.c. LCMO/9 u.c. YBCO]x3/STO substrate, was measured at a photon energy of 2.2 keV and a resolution of 0.1 eV. Using these multi-keV photon energies yields more buried interface sensitivity than normal soft x-ray photoemission, through increased mean depths of emission, as controlled by the photoelectron inelastic mean free path (IMFP): as estimated from the TPP-2M formula 