Multi-gap superconductors exhibit interesting properties. In an N -gap superconductor, we have in general U (1) N phase invariance. This multiple-phase invariance is partially or totally spontaneously broken in a superconductor. The Nambu-Goldstone modes, as well as Higgs modes, are important and will play an important role in multi-condensate superconductors. The additional phase invariance leads to a new quantum phase, with help of frustrated Josephson effects, such as the time-reversal symmetry breaking, the emergence of massless modes and fractionally quantizedflux vortices. There is a possibility that half-flux vortices exist in two-component superconductors in a magnetic field. The half-quantum flux vortex can be interpreted as a monopole, and two half-flux vortices form a bound state connected by a domain wall. There is an interesting analogy between quarks and fractionally quantized-flux vortices in superconductors. The study of multi-band superconductors started from works by Moskalenko There are many interesting properties in multicondensate superconductors. We show important characteristics in the following: (2) Unusual isotope effect has been observed in multiband superconductors. This depends on the nature of the attractive interaction in the pairing mechanism (5) A new type of superconductors, called the 1.5 type as an intermediate of types I and II, has been proposed for two-gap superconductors In this paper we give a short review on several interesting properties concerning Nambu-Goldstone modes in multi-condensate superconductors. We focus on superconductors in the clean limit, and impurity effects in multi-band superconductors are left for future studies. The paper is organized as follows. In section II we give a brief survey on multi-band superconductivity. We examine the effective action and discuss the plasma and Leggett modes in section III. We discuss the Higgs mode briefly in section IV. Section V is devoted to a discussion on time-reversal symmetry breaking. In section VI we show that the half-quantized-flux vortex can be regarded as a monopole in a multi-gap superconductor. In section VII we discuss the emergency of massless Nambu-Goldstone mode when there is a frustration between Josephson couplings. We investigate a Z 2symmetry breaking where fluctuations restore time reversal symmetry from the ground state with time-reversal symmetry breaking in the subsequent section VIII. In section IX we examine an SU (N ) sine-Gordon model. This model is a generalization of the sine-Gordon model to that with multiple variables and is regarded as a model of G-valued fields for a Lie group G. This model is reduced to a unitary matrix model in some limit. We give a summary in the last section. Two years after the BCS theory was proposed Leggett An intensive study of multi-gap superconductivity started since the discovery of MgB 2 , and especially ironbased superconductors. A new kind of superconductivity, called the type 1.5, was proposed for MgB 2 Let us consider the Hamiltonian for multi-gap superconductors: where i and j (=1,2,• • • ) are band indices. K i (r) stands for the kinetic operator: where μ is the chemical potential. We assume that g ij = g * ji . The second term indicates the pairing interaction with the coupling constants g ij . This model is a simplified version of multi-band model where the coupling constants g ij are assumed to be constants. In the functional-integral formulation, using the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, the partition function is expressed as follows: where G = (g ij ) is the matrix of coupling constants and . (G -1 ) ij (i = j) indicates the Josephson coupling. The condition for the matrix G has been discussed in Ref. In order to obtain the effective action for phase variables θ j , we perform the gauge transformation so that ∆ j are real and positive. The effective action is written in the form ) where D is given by the following matrix We define the fluctuation mode (Higgs mode) η j of the amplitude of ∆ j as where ∆ 0j is the gap function given by the saddle point approximation. The effective action for phase modes θ j is given by the usual quadratic form with the Josephson coupling. For the two-band model with equivalent bands, i.e., ξ 1 = ξ 2 = p 2 /(2m) -μ for simplicity, the Lagrangian reads where • • • indicates higher order terms including the coupling terms between amplitude modes and phase modes. We introduced the scalar potential Φ which represents the Coulomb interaction and defined γ denotes the Josephson coupling strength given by γ = γ 12 ≡ (G -1 ) 12 . ρ F is the density of states at the Fermi level and n s is the electron density per band given by The derivative of the total phase ∇φ represents the plasma mode with the plasma frequency ω 2 p = 4πn e e 2 /m where n e is the total electron density including up and down spins. This is seen by writing the terms of φ in the following form by integrating out the scalar potential Φ: after the Fourier transformation. This indicates that the plasma mode is described by the derivative of the total phase ∇φ. By performing the analytic continuation iω n → ω + iδ, we obtain the dispersion relation as where ω 2 pl = 8πn s e 2 /m and c s = v F / √ 3 with the Fermi velocity v F . We have n s = n e /2 and ω 2 pl = ω 2 p at absolute zero T = 0. The Lagrangian of the phase difference mode (Leggett mode) φ is given by the sine-Gordon model. This mode is a massless mode if the Josephson coupling γ vanishes. When φ is small, the sine-Gordon model describes an oscillation mode, by using cos φ = 1 -φ 2 /2 + • • • . We assume that γ is positive so that φ describes a stable oscillation mode. The frequency of this mode is proportional to the gap function: The dispersion relation is given as This kind of oscillation mode is known as the Josephson plasma mode The effective action density for Nambu-Goldstone modes for an N -band superconductor is written as where ρ j , n j and m j are the density of states, the electron density and the electron mass in the j-th band, respectively. For N = 2, this action density reads When we neglect the scalar potential Φ for neutral superconductors, the dispersion relations of the Nambu-Goldstone mode and the Leggett mode are determined by the condition that the determinant of the 2 × 2 matrix vanishes . The dispersion relations of the Nambu-Goldstone and Leggett modes are, respectively, given by where v F j is the Fermi velocity of the j-th band. For charged superconductors, we must have the scalar potential Φ in L. We integrate out the scalar potential Φ to obtain the effective action given as after the Fourier transformation: for φ = θ 1 -θ 2 . In the long-wavelength limit k → 0, the quadratic terms of the mode φ are given by The dispersion of the Leggett mode is given by The dispersion of the plasma mode is where ω pl is the plasma frequency for the two-band model. In general, in an N-gap superconductor, there are N -1 Leggett modes because one mode becomes a massive mode with the plasma frequency by coupling to the Coulomb potential. When N bands are equivalent, the Josephson term is invariant under an S N group action. When there is an anisotropy that breaks the equivalence among several bands, we have lower symmetry than S N . Let us discuss the fluctuation of the amplitude of gap functions, which can be called the Higgs mode. Recently, there has been an increasing interest in a role of the Higgs mode in superconductors where σ 1 is the Pauli matrix and G (0) l is the Green function defined by θj is a mean-field value of θ j , which was put zero in the previous section. The excitation spectra is determined from the condition detH = 0 where H is the matrix H = (H jl ) defined by This action is reduced to the Higgs part of Ginzburg-Landau functional when the temperature T is near T c with vanishing gap at T = T c . At low temperature the spectrum has a gap being proportional to the mean-field gap function. An effect of the Higgs mode in a superconductor has not been sufficiently clarified yet and there may be a need for further studies. For N = 2 (two-band superconductor), the matrix (H jl ) is written as where Π l is Then the dispersion relation of the Higgs mode ω = ω(q) is given by a solution of the equation where detG = g 11 g 22 -g 12 g 21 . The first term in L H gives a correction to the Josephson coupling when replacing η j η l by the expectation value η j η l . A Higgs-Leggett coupling appears from the third term in L θ in eq.( The gap function, defined as ∆ i (r) = j g ij ψ j↓ (r)ψ j↑ (r) , satisfies the gap equation where N j is the density of states at the Fermi surface in the j-th band and E j = ξ 2 j + |∆ j | 2 . ∆ i in this section is the mean-field solution in section III which is obtained by a saddle-point approximation. We set and We write the gap equation in the following form, γ ij (i = j) gives the interband Josephson coupling between bands i and j When the gap functions ∆ j are complex-valued functions, the time-reversal symmetry is broken. The condition for TRSB is that the following equation for the imaginary part Im∆ j has a nontrivial solution: where we adopt that ∆ 1 is real for simplicity and γ ij are real. We assume that γ ij = γ ji . In the case of N = 3, the condition for TRSB has been obtained When we assume γ 13 = 0, we obtain Similarly, we have by assuming γ 12 = 0 From the gap equation The complex numbers ∆ 1 /γ 23 , • • • form a triangle in the TRSB state. The transition form TRSB to the state with time-reversal symmetry takes place when the triangle relation is broken. From eqs.( where j, n and m are different to one another and γ E is the Euler constant. The stability of TRSB state has been examined by evaluating the free energy For N > 3 it is not straightforward to derive the condition for TRSB. We consider here a separable form for the Josephson couplings: where γ j ( = 0) (j = 1, • • • , N ) are real constants. The condition γ 12 γ 23 γ 31 = γ 2 1 γ 3 2 γ 2 3 > 0 is satisfied. For N = 4 we obtain from eq.( Then the triangle condition in eq.( (41) We assume that the polygon is not crushed to a line, which means, in the case N = 3, the triangle inequality holds. Under these conditions, the solution with timereversal symmetry breaking exists and massless excitation modes also exist at the same. The existence of massless modes will be examined in next section. The sine-Gordon model has been studied to investigate a new dynamics of multi-gap superconductors The sine-Gordon model has a kink solution The phase-difference gauge field B is defined as The half-quantum vortex can be interpreted as a monopole where ζ = x+iy. The singularity of θ j can be transferred to a singularity of the gauge field by a gauge transformation. We consider the case θ 2 = -θ 1 : φ = 2θ 1 . Then we have Thus, when the gauge field B has a monopole-type singularity, the vortex with half-quantum flux exists in twogap superconductors. Let us consider the fictitious z axis perpendicular to the x-y plane. The gauge potential (1-form) is given by where r = x 2 + y 2 + z 2 , and θ and φ are Euler angles. Ω ± correspond to the gauge potential in the upper and lower hemisphere H ± , respectively. Ω ± are connected by At z = 0, Ω μ coincides with the gauge field for halfquantum vortex. If we identify φ with φ, we obtain at θ = π/2. {Ω ± } is the U (1) bundle P over the sphere S 2 . The Chern class is defined as The Chern number is given as In general, the gauge field B has the integer Chern number: C 1 = n. For n odd, we have a half-quantum flux vortex. The half-flux vortex has been investigated in the study of p-wave supercon-ductivity As we can expect easily, a fractional quantum-flux vortex state is not stable because the singularity (kink, domain wall) costs energy being proportional to the square root of the Josephson coupling. Thermodynamic stability was discussed in Ref. We examined the phase modes that are Nambu-Goldstone modes by nature emerging due to a spontaneous symmetry breaking in section III. There, one mode becomes massive by coupling to the scalar potential, called the plasma mode, and the other modes become massive due to Josephson couplings, called the Leggett modes. In this section we show that massive modes change into massless modes when some conditions are satisfied. The Josephson potential is given as where γ ij = γ ji are chosen real. Obviously the phase difference modes θ i -θ j acquire masses. This would change qualitatively when N is greater than 3 or equal to 3. We discuss this in this section. We show that massless modes exist for an N -equivalent frustrated band superconductor. Let us consider the potential for N ≥ 4 given by For Γ > 0, there are two massive modes and N -3 massless modes, near the minimum (θ This can be seen by writing the potential in the form where Configurations under this condition have the same energy and can be continuously mapped to each other with no excess energy. At i S i = 0, the vectors S i form a polygon. The polygon can be deformed with the same energy (see Figs. It has been shown that there is a large region in the parameter space where massless modes exist. Let us discuss the Josephson potential in a separable form. This is given by This is written as where P = j γ j ∆ j . V has a minimum when P = 0 is satisfied. P = 0 is equivalent to the polygon condition in eq.( In this section we did not consider an effect of the amplitude mode (Higgs mode) η j . This mode may be important when discussing the stability of massless modes. This is a future problem. In this section we present a field theoretic model that shows a chiral transition. This model is extracted from a model for multi-gap superconductors. The model should be regarded as a model in field theory, and we also discuss applicability to real superconductors. We adopted the London approximation to derive the model, where the fluctuation modes (Higgs modes) η j of the gap functions are neglected. A role of the fluctuation mode concerning the existence of the phase transition would be a problem for future discussion. Let us consider an action for phase variable θ j : where we neglect τ dependence of θ j . We simply assume that K j ≡ n sj /(2m j ) = K, ∆ j0 = ∆ 0 and γ ij = γ ji = γ, namely, all the bands are equivalent. Then the action for the phase variables θ j is where t/Λ d-2 = k B T /K and λΛ 2 = 2γ∆ 2 0 /K. We have introduced the cutoff Λ so that t and α are dimensionless parameters. We assume that α > 0 in this paper. We consider the case N = 3 and discuss the phase transition in this model. Apparently this model has S 3 symmetry. If we neglect the kinetic term, the ground states is twofold degenerate. The two ground states are indexed by the chirality κ. We perform a unitary transformation: √ 3)η 3 , where η i (i = 1, 2, 3) indicate fluctuation fields. η 3 describes the total phase mode, η 3 = (θ 1 +θ 2 +θ 3 )/ √ 3, and is not important because this mode turns out to be a plasma mode by coupling with the long-range Coulomb potential. The action S[η] ≡ S[θ] becomes This model shows the chiral transition for the mass parameter μ. Here A is a constant. The equation for α has a fixed point at t = 8π. In two dimension d = 2 the renormalization group flow is the same as that for the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition (see Fig. There is a chirality transition at a finite temperature where the states with chirality κ = ±1 disappear and We integrate out the field η 2 to obtain the effective action. The effective free-energy density in two dimensions is obtained as for φ ≡ 4π/3 + √ 2η 1 where Λ is a cutoff, c is a constant and ǫ 0 = k B T α/t = 2γ∆ 2 0 /Λ 2 . The critical temperature T chiral of the chirality transition is determined by the condition that we have a minimum at φ = π (first-order transition). T chiral is shown as a function of α in Fig. We have shown a model which shows a transition due to growing fluctuations. The disappearance of the chirality results in the emergency of a Nambu-Goldstone boson. This represents the phenomenon that the Nambu-Goldstone boson appears from a fluctuation effect. Please note that this does not say that a discreet symmetry can be broken by Nambu-Goldstone boson proliferation. A Nambu-Goldstone would emerge as a result of a discree symmetry breaking. At T > T chiral two spins in Fig. In this section let us consider a generalized Josephson interaction where the Josephson term is given by a Gvalued sine-Gordon potential for a compact Lie group G. This model includes multiple excitation modes, and is a nonabelian generalization of the sine-Gordon model. The Lagrangian is written as for g ∈ G. When g = e iφ ∈ U (1), this Lagrangian is reduced to that of the conventional sine-Gordon model. This model can be regarded as the chiral model with the mass term. Here we consider the SU (N ) or O(N ) model: G = SU (N ) or O(N ). In the limit t → ∞ with keeping λ ≡ α/t constant, the SU (N ) sine-Gordon model is reduced to a unitary matrix model. It has been shown by Gross and Witten that, in the large N limit with the coupling constant λ = N β, for the model N βTr(g + g † ), there is a third-order transition at some critical t c Brezin and Gross considered the model to generalize the coupling constant λ to be a matrix and also found that there is a phase transition where λ is a real number λ ∈ R and g 0 ∈ G is a some element in G. We put g 0 = 1 in this paper. with a real constant c. The scalar fields π a indicate fluctuations around the classical solution, that is, the nonabelian perturbation to the state g 0 . We expand g by means of π a as and evaluate the beta functions of renormalization group theory. The renormalization group equations read where There is a zero of beta functions in two dimensions(d = 2): This is a bifurcation point that divides the parameter space into two regions. One is the strong coupling region where α → ∞ as μ → ∞, and the other is the weak coupling region where α → 0 as μ → ∞. In the weak coupling region, we can use a perturbation theory by expanding g by means of the fluctuation fields π a . This results in the existence of multiple frequency modes. We expect that these modes may be observed. There may be a possibility to classify excitation modes using a group theory. The Nambu-Goldstone-Leggett modes play a nontrivial role in multi-condensate superconductors. We discussed the plasma and Leggett modes, time-reversal symmetry breaking, half-quantized flux vortex and its structure as a monopole in a superconductor, massless modes, and generalized sine-Gordon models. An N -gap superconductor has N -1 phase-difference variables, and the U (1) N -1 phase invariance can be partially or totally broken. The N -1 phase modes are in general massive due to the symmetry breaking by Josephson couplings. When the Josephson couplings are frustrated, symmetry is partially broken and some of phase modes can become massless. When the phase fluctuation is large, we cannot use a perturbation in the phase variable φ as done by 