Recent progress in two-dimensional superconductors with atomic-scale thicknesses is reviewed mainly from the experimental point of view. The superconducting systems treated here involve a variety of materials and forms: elemental-metal ultrathin films and atomic layers on semiconductor surfaces; interfaces and superlattices of heterostructures made of cuprates, perovskite oxides, and rareearth metal heavy-fermion compounds; interfaces of electric-double-layer transistors; graphene and atomic sheets of transition-metal dichalcogenide; iron selenide and organic conductors on oxide and metal surfaces, respectively. Unique phenomena arising from the ultimate two-dimensionality of the system and the physics behind them are discussed. Superconductivity arises from the Cooper pair formation of a huge number of conduction electrons in a metal at sufficiently low temperatures. Since it is a representative order-disorder phase transition, the dimensionality of the system, i.e., one, two, or three dimension (1D, 2D, 3D), can have a crucial influence on its characteristics There is a long history regarding this problem. First of all, we should note that, for a 2D system, the famous Mermin-Wager theory prohibits the superconducting phase transition that accompanies a symmetry breaking and a long-range correlation of the order parameter is the Cooper-pair condensation temperature and TKTB is the KTB transition temperature). In a practical sense, the system may be considered superconducting if the correlation of the order parameter is sufficiently developed at low temperatures. Nevertheless, 2D superconductivity is on the verge of transition to a metallic or an insulating state and thus could be fragile. Indeed, introduction of disorder into a 2D superconductor can readily induce a superconductor-insulator (S-I) transition During this decade, the studies on ultrathin 2D superconductors have seen remarkable progress beyond the traditional experimental framework in various fields, and the existence of 2D superconductors with truly atomic-scale thicknesses has also been established. This was mostly driven by rapid advancements on nanotechnology in recent years, including molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), in-situ ultrahigh vacuum (UHV)-low temperature (LT) measurement, scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS), etc. These technologies now allow various types of superconducting materials to be fabricated with the atomic-scale precision and to be characterized in unprecedented details, which will be the subject of the present review article. For example, ultrathin elemental metal films grown on silicon surfaces in a layer-by-layer fashion were found to exhibit robust superconductivity down the monolayer (ML) thickness regime The study on 2D superconductors has evolved into one of the most active fields of superconductivity, which is highly relevant for material science, device physics, and instrumental technologies as well as for fundamental physics. In the present article, the recent progress in 2D superconductors will be reviewed. The main interest here is to overview the topics in various research fields in a comparative way and is to find commonalities and differences among them. This will help us grasp what is unique in 2D superconductors in general and to understand how new physics and novel phenomena emerge as a consequence of the atomic-scale thicknesses of the materials. It is my great hope that this holistic and comprehensive approach will stimulate researches of individual fields, promote interactions among them, and help create new interdisciplinary realm of research. While the topics treated in this paper share the atomic-scale two-dimensionality, they are so extensive and diverse in terms of material that it is impossible to cover all literatures in each field. Nevertheless, I believe that even the selected set of work introduced here allow us to achieve the present goal to a considerable degree. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the 2D superconductors made of granular and amorphous metal thin films, which have been studied since 1970s mainly from the viewpoint of the KTB and S-I transitions. This will serve as a basis for understanding the progress in more modern 2D materials. Section 3 constitutes the main body of the paper and describes the recent topics of 2D superconductors in individual fields. These 2D superconductors features high crystallinity and well-defined, sharp interfaces in general. Figure Readers are also referred to Table The Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory of superconductivity allows the definition of the GL coherence length GL, which is the characteristic length scale for spatial variation of the amplitude of the order parameter . A superconducting film with a thickness d << GL is considered to be 2D because  becomes uniform in the out-of-plane direction to avoid a cost in free energy Straightforward way of preparing a superconducting thin film is the vacuum evaporation of an elemental metal such as Pb and Al on an insulating substrate. This can be followed by deposition of a capping layer (e.g. SiOx) for the purpose of avoiding post-oxidation and contamination. If glass or surface-oxidized silicon is used as a substrate, the metal overlayer often grows in the form of a granular film when the thickness is reduced because of a poor wettability of metal on these substrates. This naturally introduces disorder into the metal film, the degree of which can be controlled by the film thickness and is represented typically by the sheet resistance Rsheet The effect of the low dimensionality manifests itself as an enhancement of fluctuations as mentioned earlier. This can be seen first of all as a precursor of the superconducting transition. Namely, a 2D superconductor exhibits a sizable decrease in conductivity even above Tc due to the temporal formation of Cooper pairs and the inertia of Cooper pairs after decaying into quasiparticles Within the microscopic theory of superconductivity, the former is expressed by the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) term and the latter the Maki-Thompson (MK) term. The contribution of the AL term to 2D conductivity, which is added to the normal conductivity, is given by where R = 16ħ e = 65.8 kΩ ⁄ is a universal constant. The contribution of the MK term is expressed by a similar form that includes material dependent parameters. These effects should appear commonly in all 2D superconductors. In a 2D system, conduction electrons can be readily localized due to the quantum interference effect in the presence of disorder, which is known as the Anderson localization 2 The data clearly show a S-I transition around Rsheet  RQ  h/4e 2 (= 6.45 k). The presence of this universal constant suggests that the transition is actually a quantum phase transition and can be described by the so-called dirty-boson model at least near the critical point Apart from the particular model, the possibility of a quantum phase transition has also been tested using the finite-size scaling analysis Here, x is a control parameter for the phase transition (e.g., disorder and film thickness) and Rc is the critical resistance that separates the superconducting and the insulating phases, corresponding to x = xc. F(u) is a universal function of u that goes to unity for u0. The parameters z and  characterize the critical behaviors near the quantum phase transition, which gives crucial information on the universality class of the system. The experiment cited above concluded that this scaling analysis worked fine, with the extracted parameters of z = 2.4 and 1.2 for the insulating and superconducting sides of the transition, respectively Remarkably, a S-I transition with Rc = RQ and a nearly perfect scaling behavior were demonstrated using a 1-UC-thick La2-xSrxCuO4 and an ionic liquid EDL gate (see Sec. 3.5) Another important phenomenon that is relevant for 2D superconductors in general is the Kosterlitz-Thouless-Berezinskii (KTB) transition Since no free vortices exist for T < TKTB, the true zero resistance state can be realized. However, the vortex-antivortex pairs become unbound under a finite external current. This unbinding occurs progressively as the current is increased, leading to a current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of a powerlaw dependence, i.e., V ∝ I . As T is lowered from above TKTB, exponent a jumps universally from 1 to 3 at T = TKTB and increases further at lower temperatures, which is one of the hallmarks of the KTB transition. The phase transition is unique in the sense that it does not lead to a true long-range order, but rather to a quasi-long-range order where the spatial correlation of the order decays as a function of distance according to a power-law dependence. The general features of the KTB transition have been observed using 2D superconductors with moderately high sheet resistances, which were prepared in the similar method as described above The right panel displays a I-V characteristics in the log-log plot. The exponent a of the relation V ∝ I was found to cross 3 around TKTB = 1~ 94 K. It should be noted that the occurrence of the KTB transition requires that the logarithmic interaction between vortices be retained up to a sufficiently (ideally, infinitely) long distance. Cutoff of the logarithmic interaction stemming from a finite sample/domain size, a finite perpendicular penetration depth, a residual magnetic field, etc. leads to a non-vanishing zero-bias resistance down to T = 0 3. Recent progress in 2D superconductors with atomic-scale thicknesses One of the first experiments on superconducting ultrathin metal films with atomically welldefined thicknesses and high crystallinity was performed using Pb films grown on a clean Si(111)-(77) surface with the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) method in UHV Furthermore, Pb films can grow on a clean Si surface in a layer-by-layer fashion at low temperatures The Tc of the Pb film was found to remain around 5~7 K down to the thickness of 4 ML, which was close to the bulk Tc value of 7.2 K. However, the Tc decreased substantially to 1~2 K in the sub-4 ML regime, where structural disorder in the macroscopic scale was unavoidable. A particular interest in ultrathin metal films with the atomically smooth interfaces arises from the fact that conduction electrons are quantized in the out-of-plane direction to form quantum well states (QWS). The quantum confinement occurs when the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rule is satisfied where (E) is the electron wavelength at an energy E, d is the film thickness, (E) is the total phase shift at the boundaries, and n is an integer. Since (EF) = 1.06 nm for Pb (EF: Fermi energy), d must be both in the order of nanometers and atomically uniform for this effect to be observed. The formation of QWS leads to an oscillation in the electron density of states at the Fermi level, (EF), as a function of d, with the periodicity of (EF)/2. Since the Tc of a BCS-type superconductor is proportional to exp[-1/(EF)V] Another important consequence of the QWS in atomically thin Pb films is the manifestation of "magic thicknesses" during the growth. When the energy positions of QWS are located far from EF for a certain thickness, the film becomes stable due to a decrease in electronic energy. This occurs with a periodicity of (EF)/2 and the resulting magic thicknesses are d = 4, 5, 7, 9, ... ML for Pb films This effect helps to make the film thickness constant at one of these values, and when the nominal coverage of Pb is slightly less than it, flat voids with a lower local magic thickness are created on an otherwise uniform film. The unique morphology leads to a strong pinning of magnetic fluxes at these voids and to realization of the so-called hard superconductor This unexpected robustness of superconductivity was observed for Pb ultrathin films grown on a Si surface by ex-situ magnetization measurements using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) It was also shown that the structural stability and the superconducting properties could be tuned by adding Bi into Pb to make ultrathin alloy films This indicated that, in this 2D geometry, the superconducting order was anomalously suppressed by scattering in violation of Anderson's theorem. Ultrathin metal films on semiconductor surfaces have been studied not only by the conventional electron transport and magnetic measurements but also by LT-STM/STS. In this case, superconductivity is detected by observing the superconducting energy gap through the measurement of bias-voltage dependent differential conductance (dI/dV). This technique allows direct and real-space investigations of spatially inhomogeneous superconducting properties at atomic scales, which are hardly accessible by the conventional macroscopic experiments. Since the surfaces of the samples treated here are atomically clean and well-defined, this system is highly suited for STM investigation in UHV. Particularly interesting is the observation of superconducting vortices under application of magnetic field Such anomalous behaviors were observed for vortices within an ultrathin Pb island using a LT-STM When a superconductor is in close contact with a normal metal, the superconducting correlations may propagate into the neighboring region Cooper pair injection into the S region, and this Andreev reflection can be multiplied and enhanced in the case of a narrow S-N-S junction. Since the proximity effect is caused by the Andreev reflection, the former is also enhanced by this mechanism. The essentially same phenomenon was observed when the proximity region was terminated and confined by a surface atomic step It has been generally accepted that metal thin films fabricated on a substrate should lose superconductivity when they approach the atomic-scale limit in thickness. In the case of granular and amorphous films, this phenomenon can be understood in terms of the disorder-driven superconductorinsulator (S-I) transition as discussed in Sec. 2. However, crystalline thin films with atomically uniform thicknesses for which the disorder is minimized also tend to lose superconductivity in this limit. For example, ex-situ magnetic measurements revealed that the Tc of a Pb ultrathin film decreased as a function of thickness d according to the relation: where Tc0 is the asymptotic value of Tc(d) for d   (the bulk limit) and dc is the critical thickness for the disappearance of superconductivity The naturally grown ultrathin film of Pb on a clean Si(111) surface retains the atomic structure of a bulk crystal while an amorphous-like wetting layer exists at the interface to the silicon substrate, which is the result of the first stage of the Stranski-Krastanov growth mode The above finding was based on the tunneling spectroscopy experiments using STM, but more direct evidence of superconductivity was obtained through in-situ electron transport measurements under the UHV environment (see Figs. reconstruction A/cm at 1.8 K (correspondingly, 3D supercurrent density of 3-610 5 A/cm 2 ) This assignment was corroborated by STM observation of Josephson vortices, which in this case were trapped at the atomic steps on the Si(111)-(73)-In surface There are two unique features that should be considered for atomically thin 2D superconductors in general. First, when magnetic field is applied in the in-plane direction, there exists no orbital pairbreaking effect that usually dominates the upper critical magnetic field Hc2. This is because electrons cannot move in the out-of-plane direction (see Fig. (≡ μ H ) at T = 0 where (0) is the BCS energy gap and HP is called the Pauli paramagnetic limit The second important feature is the manifestation of the Rashba effect due to the space-inversion symmetry breaking of the system and the spin-orbit interaction (SOI) where k ⃗ = (k , k , 0) is the kinetic momentum, is the strength of the Rashba SOI, ε ⃗ is the unit vector perpendicular to the 2D xy plane, and is the Pauli matrices. The Rashba effect leads to a spin splitting and the spin-momentum locking where electron spins are chirally polarized in the directions perpendicular to both the electron momentum and the electric field (see Fig. Fermi surface can form Cooper pairs with non-zero momentum q, leading to Ψ (y) ∝ exp(iqy) + exp(-iqy) ∝ cos (qy) similarly to Eq. ( The resulting superconducting state is often called a FFLO-like state, while the original FFLO state is caused purely by the Zeeman effect and does not require the Rashba effect. Another possible consequence of the magnetoelectric effect is induction of unidirectional supercurrents perpendicular to the magnetic field (note that magnetic field usually induces circular supercurrents as a vortex; see also Fig. Finally, 2 ML-thick Ga atomic layer on GaN(0001) was found to exhibit superconductivity. The measured sheet resistance showed an onset of transition at Tc onset = 5.4 K and appearance of the zero resistance at Tc zero = 3.8 K, which were much higher than Tc = 1.08 K for the bulk stable phase of -Ga The prepared atomic sheets with thicknesses down to half-UC (including two CuO2 planes) were protected by graphene sheets from degradation and transport measurements were performed. While the sheet resistance Rsheet of the sample increased from a few  to 5 k as the sheet thickness was reduced from 270 to 0.5 UC, sharp superconducting transitions were consistently observed, with nearly constant Tc of ~82 K. This indicates that the interlayer coupling does not play an important role for the superconductivity of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x. Superconductivity of exfoliated atomic sheets of other layered materials will be described in Sec.3.6. As seen in Sec. rather it is analogous to the dislocation-induced melting of a 2D crystal treated in the original paper by Kosterlitz and Thouless Ref. The KTB transition observed here indicates that superconductivity in this system is of 2D character, thus limiting the maximum thickness of the conducting layer sufficiently below the coherence length of GL(0) ~70 nm. A subsequent experiment on the same system revealed a strong anisotropy of critical magnetic field (Hc2///Hc2  20) and showed that the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 superconductivity had indeed a strong 2D character More direct information on the conducting layer thickness was obtained with a microscopic imaging technique based on atomic force microscopy (AFM) Thanks to an extremely high dielectric constant of SrTiO3 (r ~300 at RT and ~20,000 at LT) and a carrier density much lower than those of usual metals, the 2D conduction can be electrically tuned using a back gate on the substrate Clear S-I transitions were also demonstrated through electrostatic gate control. The critical sheet resistance for the transition was Rc  4.5 k, which was close to but lower than the quantum resistance of Cooper pairs, RQ = 6.45 k Intriguingly, the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface exhibits not only superconductivity but also ferromagnetism, as in a theoretical prediction of ferromagnetic alignment of local spins at Ti 3+ sites of the interface TiO layer Magnetic-field dependence of superconducting transition temperature Tc, which was electrically tuned by a back gate, was found to have hysteresis within the range of -30 mT < 0H < -30 mT Ferromagnetic domains were observed as separate dipoles and persisted over the whole temperature range of the experiment, while inhomogeneous superconducting domains appeared below 100 mK. A control experiment using Nb -doped samples showed that magnetism in this system could only arise from the interface. It should be noted that the space inversion symmetry is broken at the interface, which is important for the emergence of the Rashba effect (see Sec. 3.2). The spin-orbit interaction (SOI) needed for the Rashba effect was also detected and was successfully controlled by a gate voltage In the preceding two sections, we have seen that the interface between two non-superconducting (metallic or insulating) materials may spontaneously host a conduction channel with 2D superconductivity. Realization of such an interface superconductivity in an artificial and controlled way, preferably in a field-effect transistor (FET) configuration, should provide great opportunities for basic physics, materials science, and device applications In the early stage of the EDL device, a polymer electrolyte consisting of KClO4 and polyethylene oxide was used to fabricate a n-type FET with a 2D channel at the SrTiO3 interface Substitution of the polymer electrolyte with ionic liquid, which is an organic salt in the liquid state even at room temperature, enables even an stronger gating function and accumulation of a higher density of carriers at the interface This form applies when the coherence length in the out-of-plane direction,  GL, is larger than the interlayer distance. In contrast, for an isolated 2D superconductor with a thickness much smaller than the magnetic penetration depth, Hc2() obeys the relation: which is called the 2D Tinkham model ⁄ | = = 0) while, for the latter, it exhibits a cusp-like shape (i.e., |∂H ∂θ ⁄ | = > 0). In Ref. [142], Hc2() for the field-induced superconductivity of ZrNCl exhibited a huge anisotropy between the in-plane ( = 0) and out-of-plane ( = 90) directions. Furthermore, a cusp-like angle dependence of Hc2() was found around  = 0, which was well described by Eq. ( From the analysis of the angle dependence, the thickness of the superconducting region was determined to be 1.8 nm. This value corresponds to the (ZrNCl)2 bilayer thickness and is smaller than the 1-UC-thickness of ZrNCl (= 2.76 nm). Thus it is considered a superconductor in the 2D limit. Correspondingly, the 2D signatures of the KTB transition and the superconducting fluctuation were found from the analysis of temperature dependence of the zero bias resistance (see Sec. 2). This atomically thin 2D superconductor is relatively clean; the electron mean free path was estimated to be 18~35 nm from the normal sheet resistance, and this value is comparable to the Pippard's coherence length Pippard = 43.4 nm (ξ ≡ ħ v Δ(0), ⁄ v : Fermi velocity, Δ(0): BCS energy gap at T = 0). These ideal 2D character and high crystallinity led to an almost free vortex motion under magnetic fields of 0Hc2 > 1.3 T. For 0.05 T < 0Hc2 < 1.3 T, a quantum creep motion of vortex lattice was indicated, and the detected finite residual resistances at the lowest temperatures demonstrated the presence of metallic states in this regime 2H-type MoS2, a band insulator and a representative transition-metal dichalcogenide, was also turned into a superconductor using an EDL transistor device with ionic liquid Tc. The Tc = 10.8 K is ~40% higher than the maximum Tc of alkali-doped bulk MoS2 crystal. The fact that electron carriers are confined within a MoS2 monolayer has a remarkable consequence as explained in the following (see Fig. where k ⃗ = (k , k , 0) is the kinetic momentum in the K and K' valleys, K is the momentum of the K valley, ε = ±1 is the valley index, β is the strength of the intrinsic SOI, and σ is the zcomponent of the Pauli matrices. When Cooper pairs are formed by two electrons with opposite spins (up and down) and momenta (at K and K'), the only allowed spin directions are along the out-of-plane direction. The resultant state, called Ising superconductivity, is robust against in-plane magnetic field because the spin polarization direction is perpendicular to the field. Although the spin-valley locking is analogous to the in-plane spin-momentum locking that originates from the Rashba effect (see Eq. These Hc2// values are also an order of magnitude larger than those of alkali-doped bulk MoS2 crystal, for which Hc2// is dominated by the orbital pair-breaking effect caused by the interlayer coupling. It should be noted that a huge Hc2// value surpassing the Pauli limit was also indicated for the 2D superconductor with Rashba effect as discussed in Sec.3.2, but its origin is different. In the system with in-plane inversion symmetry breaking like the MoS2 monolayer, the presence of the Rashba effect tends to weaken the spin-momentum locking because their spin polarization directions are orthogonal. In 2004, graphene was mechanically exfoliated from a piece of graphite to fabricate an highperformance ambipolar FET device for the first time Finding superconductivity in graphene has been a long-standing goal in this field and should also greatly contribute to the study on 2D superconductivity. Until today, however, superconductivity was not reported in pristine graphene except for graphene-based junctions where Josephson supercurrents were detected to run Recently, metal-doped few-layer graphene was reported to exhibit superconductivity in a variety of experiments. For example, a wet chemistry method allowed preparation of K-doped few-layer graphene from graphite flakes in dimethoxyethane solution, and superconductivity with Tc = 4.5 K was found based on magnetic susceptibility measurement Thus prepared multi-layer graphene was Ca-intercalated ex situ by following the standard intercalation method used for bulk compounds The mechanical exfoliation of graphene from graphite has motivated creation of atomic sheets from layered materials using the same method. Particularly, the studies on atomic sheets of transitionmetal dichalcogenides are now very active, in view of valleytronics (electronics combined with the valley degree of freedom in certain semiconductors) and optoelectronics applications investigate. An early experiment in 1972 already reported on the exfoliation of atomic sheets of NbSe2 from a bulk crystal and the electron transport data indicative of the superconducting transition at a few UC thickness With this technique, monolayer (half-UC-thick) NbSe2 was found to exhibit superconductivity with Tc  2 K. Similarly prepared monolayer NbSe2 showed a superconducting transition at 3 K, while a strong enhancement of the CDW transition up to Tc = 145 K was detected from the Raman spectroscopy measurement Exactly like MoS2, NbSe2 monolayer is of half-UC thickness and lacks the in-plane inversion symmetry. Together with a strong SOI of transition-metal Nb, this can lead to the spin-valley locking as observed for the field-induced superconductivity in the MoSe2 EDL transistors 3.5). This expectation was recently demonstrated by using a mechanically exfoliated NbSe2 monolayer that was encapsulated by thin layers of BN, which exhibited superconductivity with Tc = 3.0 K Magnetotransport measurements showed that superconductivity was remarkably robust against inplane magnetic field, with an estimated upper critical field at zero temperature 0Hc2//(0) ~ 35 T. This value is more than six times the Pauli paramagnetic limit 0HP. Analysis of the temperature dependence of Hc2// gave a spin splitting energy 2SO ~76 meV, equivalent to a spin-orbit field 0HSO ~660 T (HSO  SO/B). These results indicate that the NbSe2 monolayer is an Ising superconductor where the spins of Cooper pairs are aligned in the out-of-plane direction due to the spin-valley locking. Furthermore, magnetotransport measurement on NbSe2 bilayer with a 1-UC-thickness (Tc = 5.26K) showed that its true superconducting state was easily destroyed by a small out-of-plane magnetic field of 0.175T (see Fig. The tetragonal phase -FeSe with PbO-type structure belongs to the iron-based high-Tc superconductor family (see Fig. Surprisingly, 1-UC-thick FeSe layers (monolayers) epitaxially grown on a SrTiO3(001) substrate using the MBE technique were found to exhibit superconductivity at much higher temperatures than for bulk crystals. The reported Tc ranges from 23.5 K to 109 K depending on the type of measurement and the experimental environment. The first indication of a high Tc of the monolayer FeSe was given by UHV-LT-STM experiments with a similar setup described in Sec. 3.1 and 3.2 More direct evidence for high-Tc superconductivity of the 1-UC-thick FeSe layer was provided by ex-situ electron transport and diamagnetic response measurements using insulating SrTrO3 substrates. The samples were capped with protection layers made of FeTe and amorphous-Si The transport measurements indeed revealed a high Tc, with Tc onset = 40.2 K and Tc zero = 23.5 K. The latter value is close to Tc = 21 K determined from the diamagnetic response. In accordance with the high Tc, a large out-of-plane upper critical field 0Hc2 > 52 T was indicated at 1.4 K from the magnetotransport measurements. A large critical current density Jc = 1.710 6 A/cm 2 was also observed at 2 K, which is two orders of magnitude larger than that of bulk FeSe. Nevertheless, the protection layers used in these experiments may have caused structural and chemical disorder in the FeSe layer and have adversely affected the observed superconducting properties. To avoid this problem, in-situ electron transport measurements were performed using a micro four-point-probe technique in UHV without any protection layers The emergence of high-Tc superconductivity driven by the atomic-scale thinning is highly unusual because Tc becomes generally suppressed with decreasing layer thickness as in Eq. ( The Fermi surface of a bulk FeSe crystal consists of a hole-like pocket near the  point and an electron-like pocket near the M point in the Brillouin zone, making FeSe a multiband superconductor. In contrast, the FeSe monolayer on a SrTiO3 substrate has only an electron-like pocket near the M point, featuring a complete change in the topology of the Fermi surface [178], the maximum available Tc estimated from the energy gap is dependent on the number of FeSe layers and indeed the monolayer had the highest Tc. Very recently, the same trend was also observed in STS studies on the thickness-dependent energy gap of FeSe on SrTiO3 In this final subsection, we will treat two important superconducting materials: organic conductors and rare-earth based heavy-fermion compounds. These two systems are known to exhibit varieties of exotic phenomena originating from strong electron correlations and/or intrinsic low dimensionality of the crystal. Examples include CDW/SDW formation, non-BCS type superconductivity such as d-wave Cooper pairing, the Kondo lattice, and coexistence and competition of superconductivity and magnetism -(BETS)2GaCl4 (BETS=bis(ethylenedithio)tetraselenafulvalene) belongs to the family of charge-transfer complex type organic conductors and exhibits superconductivity at Within a bulk crystal, 2D conduction layers consisting of hole-doped BETS molecules are stacked in the perpendicular direction while separated by GaCl4 insulating layers, forming a highly anisotropic quasi-2D electron system. This native 2D character of the organic crystal poses a question whether 1-UC-thick layer (monolayer) of (BETS)2GaCl4 can become superconducting or not, as in the case of cuprates discussed in Sec. 3.3. Such an experiment was performed for monolayers of (BETS)2GaCl4 grown on a Ag(111) surface using a UHV-LT-STM (see Fig. A subsequent experiment on the same system revealed that the obtained molecular structure was sensitive to the substrate temperature during the deposition There are many open questions for the monolayer of (BETS)2GaCl4 and its superconductivity. For example, precise determinations of molecular arrangement and of its electronic states are still far from complete. Particularly, charge transfers between the BETS/GaCl4 molecules and the Ag substrate are very likely to take place as a result of their chemical potential difference. This should have a strong influence on the system, since the charge transfer within the molecular unit (2BETS + GaCl4) is the driving force for the emergence of superconductivity in this type of complex organic conductors. Use of a closely related organic conductor -(BETS)2FeCl4 would also be very interesting because it is one of the few examples of magnetic-field-induced superconductors As for rare-earth based heavy-fermion compounds, there have been no report on a 2D superconductor with an atomic-scale thickness, but superlattices made of few-UC-thick layers of heavy-fermion superconductor CeCoIn5 and normal metal YbCoIn5 were successfully created The crystal of CeCoIn5 has the space inversion symmetry, but introduction of a superlattice with atomically thin layers can artificially break this symmetry, consequently inducing the Rashba effect in a controllable way In Ref. Furthermore, anomalous behaviors were observed in the angular dependence of Hc2(), where  is the angle of magnetic field relative to the in-plane direction obeys the 2D Tinkham model (see Eq. ( However, when Hc2() is dominated by the Pauli paramagnetic pair-breaking effect, the angle dependence is expressed by the 3D anisotropic GL model regardless of the interlayer coupling strength (see Eq. ( was confirmed in a subsequent experiment, where additional space inversion symmetry breaking was introduced by an asymmetric stacking sequence of CeCoIn5(n)/YbCoIn5(m)/CeCoIn5(n)/YbCoIn5(m') (m  m') In the present review, we have seen that the existence of 2D superconductors with atomic-scale thicknesses have already been established in a wide range of fields and that they are now under extensive investigations from different viewpoints. The relevant superconducting materials encompass almost all categories to think of, from simple elemental metals on semiconductor surfaces, graphene, transition-metal chalcogenides, and FeSe to more complex compounds and molecules such as cuprates, perovskite oxides, rare-earth based heavy-fermion systems, and organic conductors. This means that the degree of electron correlation, which is one of the key factors in the modern solid-state physics and materials science, ranges from the weak to the strong limit. In terms of experimental technique, the studies of 2D superconductors feature a large variety as well. For example, LT-STM/STS and ARPES are powerful tools to directly probe the superconducting energy gaps of atomically thin superconductors exposed to the surface. Their usage is not limited to the studies treated here, but they surely have great advantages because of their surface sensitivity. Highly advanced MBE and PLD techniques allow researchers to grow different kinds of heterostructures in a layer-by-layer fashion and to fabricate atomically well-defined interfaces and superlattices with ideal 2D characters. Two recent technical breakthroughs, the EDL-FET device and the mechanical exfoliation of atomic sheets, have also greatly activated and broadened the present topics. Undoubtedly, the state-of-the-art nanotechnology including the above examples has been essential for the studies on superconductors in the 2D limit and will surely continue to drive their developments in the coming future. New phenomena and physics revealed in these systems are so diverse and significant that they are also worthwhile to repeat here. Contrary to the general belief that superconductivity is fragile and must be suppressed as the material thickness approaches the atomic-scale limit, many 2D systems have been found to exhibit robust superconductivity at low temperatures as far as the structural and compositional quality of the sample is sufficiently high. This promises practical applications of these materials and devices in future. In some cases, the observed Tc is comparable to or even higher than that of the bulk counterpart, and particularly for FeSe monolayers grown on SrTiO3 substrates, Tc is surprisingly high. Its origin is now under hot debate, but it is clear that the interface (or charge transfer through the interface) rather than the atomic-scale thickness itself plays the essential role. This may be called an interface-induced high-Tc superconductor, but the ultimately small layer thickness helps this effect manifest itself in a dramatic way. Aside from the Tc issue, there are many interesting phenomena and effects that take place, or are expected to do so, because of the two-dimensionality CDW also enrich the physics and phenomena found in the regime of the 2D limit. Although the studies on 2D superconductors with atomic-scale thicknesses have already been developed to a very high level, further important progress is sure to come in the next decade. This will be brought not only by focusing on individual topics described in Sec. 3, but also by crossing their boundaries, i.e., by promoting the overlap among the categories shown in Fig. 