Quantitative description of charge transport across tunneling and break-junction devices with novel superconductors encounters some problems not present, or not as severe for traditional superconducting materials. In this work, we explain unexpected features in related transport characteristics as an effect of a degraded nano-scaled sheath at the superconductor surface. Model capturing main aspects of the ballistic charge transport across hybrid superconducting structures with normally-conducting nm-thick interlayers is proposed. The calculations are based on a scattering formalism taking into account Andreev electron-into-hole (and inverse) reflections at normal metal-superconductor interfaces as well as transmission and backscattering events in insulating barriers between the electrodes. Current-voltage characteristics of such devices exhibit a rich diversity of anomalous (from the viewpoint of the standard theory) features, in particular, shift of differential-conductance maximums at gap voltages to lower positions and appearance of well-defined dips instead expected coherence peaks. We compare our results with related experimental data. The Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory of superconductivity (S) is based on the assumption that electrons in the BCS state are bound into Cooper pairs by a sufficiently weak attractive interaction between them. These pairs are correlated so that, in order to break a pair, one has to change energies of all other pairs. It means that, unlike in the normal-metal (N) state, there is an energy gap  for singleparticle excitations. The most complete and convincing evidence for the appearance of the energy gap came from the well-known Giaever effect of electron tunneling through N-I-S and S-I-S heterostructures where I stands for a nanometerthick insulating layer that permits only single tunneling processes Nowadays, electron tunneling spectroscopy is a well-developed technique aimed to provide extensive information about energy spectra of conducting electrodes and an insulating interlayer between them The first finding of such kind was revealed for tunnel junctions with some transition metals, especially, for Nb-based devices and intensively discussed in 70s of the previous century long before the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity. We mean the so-called 'knee', a sudden current decrease in low-temperature I-V characteristics of Nb-based S-I-S junctions at voltages slightly just above a strong increase of the current that was expected to occur at the sum of V  values for the two superconducting electrodes Below we discuss the origin of the 'knee' phenomenon analyzing ballistic transport in tunneling S-I-S structures where each superconducting electrode is covered by a nanometer-scale degraded sheath. The next puzzling experimental feature was the so-called 'peak-dip-hump' structure clearly observed in conductance-vs-voltage curves for break-junctions based on high-T c BSCCO samples Its derivation has not been clear and, in particular, was believed to represent a physical quantity responsible for pairing in the studied compound The last unusual feature which will be analyzed in the paper relates the innergap structure in S-c-S junctions where c stands for a constriction with a transmission probability 1 D  . The authors of ref. We start with a model N-I-n-S system which consists of a normal counterelectrode, a nm-thick insulating barrier, a superconducting electrode studied, and a nano-scale clean non-superconducting (n) interlayer between I and S films. Confinement of electrons in the n-metal film results in discrete quantum-well states that can be probed directly by single-electron tunneling spectroscopy. Below we provide an intuitive geometric picture for the localized resonances that play decisive role in the formation of related transport characteristics. The important impact of the bound states on the charge transport across S-N-S Josephson junctions and ability to probe them by tunneling experiments are well known (see the review To calculate energies E of the bound states in ballistic junctions we should take into account the principal difference between backscattering processes at I-n and n-S interfaces. In the first case, an electron (hole) incident on the I-n interface from the n side is retroreflected into an electron (hole) of the same energy E and of the same absolute value of momentum but travelling in the opposite direction to the incoming charge. On the contrary, the reflected from the n-S interface quasiparticle has the same energy E and almost the same momentum is travelling in the opposite direction, and its charge is opposite in sign to that of the incident quasiparticle. Such process is known as Andreev reflection Taking wave vector, note that a hole is moving in the direction opposite to that of its wave vector. The reflection coefficients can be calculated from the boundary conditions for the wave functions. Each backscattering from the insulating layer provides a phase shift of  whereas the Andreev reflection within the energy gap of an s-wave superconductor contributes an additional phase shift Adding the phases accumulated along an electron 'round-trip' in the n interlayer with two subsequent Andreev reflections, we get the following expression for the phase shift which is valid for an s-wave superconducting electrode,  is the incident angle, F v is the Fermi velocity. The Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization rule requires an electron wave-function phase accumulation  s along an enclosed propagating loop inside the n interlayer to be an integer multiple of 2. Thus, the lowest bound level valid when n 0 d  . For vanishing n d we get the classical result s    , i.e., a well pronounced singularity at the energy gap value. When the thickness n d is finite, s    . It is clear from Eq. ( where n  is the relevant length scale which is determined by electronic characteristics of the nmetal and the gap value of the S-electrode in contact. In the most traditional superconductors, like Pb, Sn, etc., due to comparatively large F v and small s  100 n   nm and, hence, the effect of the n-interlayer can be observed merely for n d of the order of tens nanometers. Such interlayers can be introduced within the junction only artificially. If however the Fermi velocity is small and at the same time the energy gap is large, as it is in transition metals and novel high-T c compounds, a completely different situation is expected. In this case, degradation of the superconductor surface on the length scale of the order of several nanometers which is typical for these materials can result in crucial modifications in related transport characteristics. We shall discuss these changes and the information about the S-electrode spectra that can be extracted from such measurements. In the following, we approximate the spectrum of electrons in all conducting layers by parabolic bands and limit ourselves to the planar geometry of the studied heterostructures with an x-axis normal to interfaces. Next, we assume that the electron wave function may be factorized into in-plane and tunneling-direction components and will discuss only the latter one considering the in-plane momentum k  constant. For a non-superconducting metallic interlayer it reads as k  is the wave vector of an excitation with the energy , which is a solution of the equation , the sign  corresponds to electron (e) and hole (h) excitations, respectively, F E is the Fermi energy, m is the quasiparticle mass. To take into account the finite value of the mean free path of a quasiparticle excitation l n in a nm-thick n-interlayer we have introduced an additional imaginary term i/(2l n ) in the wave vector ( ) n x k of an electron (a hole) in the n interlayer, see also Notice that the stepwise approximation for the superconducting pair potential in the n-S bilayer used below and known as a rigid-boundary condition is not selfconsistent. According to Likharev is the decaying depth of a quasiparticle wave function. When , we get a simple Lorentzian   approximation we can derive reflection and transmission probability amplitudes for an electron (hole) to be transmitted through the barrier The elastic scattering process by which normal current is transferred to a supercurrent at the interface between a superconductor and a non-superconducting metal, the Andreev effect ( )=sign( ) ( )  with , the misorientation angle between the surface normal and the crystalline axis along which the order parameter reaches maximum. We start with a simplest case of superconducting heterostructures with normal interlayers. To calculate the current I-vs-voltage V curves for N-I-n-S junctions with an s-wave superconductor, we use the Landauer-Büttiker formalism applied to superconductor-based structures where N R is the normal-state resistance,  is the injection angle between an electron wave vector and the x axis, the reference potential of a superconducting side is put to zero, ( ) f  is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, ( , ) D   is the electron penetration probability. It is easier to calculate the latter quantity in an N part of the structure where R   and eh ( , ) R   are angle-dependent probability amplitudes for an electron entering the N-electrode to be scattered back as an electron or as a hole, respectively. To obtain them, we interpret the charge transmission across a heterostructure as a sequence of an infinite number of interface scattering events including Andreev electron-hole and vice versa transformations at N/S boundaries As is expected, the temperature and charge scattering processes significantly destroy the anomalous features (see the insets in Figs Before turning to novel high-temperature superconductors, let us discuss old experiments on four-layered N-I-n-S structures having the n interlayer for sure. Here we refer to three papers with n = Cu and S = Pb [24] supposed that the dip is the result of quasiparticle interference in the copper interlayer. Our simulations, Figs. Further confirmation of the bound-state assertion for the conductance peak came from an experiment Since, for example, the difference in wave vectors in Ni is of the order of several nm -1 , effects very similar to those predicted for N-I-n-S junctions with n d of the order of tens nanometers can be now observed in N-I-F-S ones with a few nm thick Ni interlayer. Indeed, an anomalous ''double-peak'' conductance feature revealed in ref. We should note that the calculations shown in Fig. It is important that for such film orientation, independently on the n-layer thickness d n the phase shift d   vanishes at  = 0. Hence, in this case we should always observe a zero-bias peak which is known to be a d-wave superconductivity indicator Since high-T c samples are often composites of randomly oriented superconducting grains, we predict that, in the presence of an additional n interlayer, their conductance spectra should exhibit a pronounced peak-dip-hump structure which is present in all orientations and a weak zero-bias anomaly specific for a certain tunneling direction. Physical mechanisms of the charge transmission across heterostructures with two superconducting electrodes are more complicated. In this section we limit ourselves to s-wave pairing taking into account the fact that, after averaging over the realizations of the disorder, the order parameter in composites of randomly oriented superconducting grains with d-wave paring has global s-wave symmetry Let us start with simplest tunneling transmission processes in S-n-I-n-S junctions. The presence of bound states at the electrode surfaces gives rise to unusual features in transport characteristics when the energies of the discrete levels align by applying the external bias. When properly aligned, we get the tunneling current peak and a negative differential resistance just above the resonant bias. Our calculations were done using a standard formula for tunneling current in a symmetric S-n-I-n-S configuration We have presented scattering-like approach for studying Andreev bound states in a normal interlayer within ballistic superconducting heterostructures. Calculated transport characteristics of such devices exhibit a rich diversity of anomalous (from the viewpoint of the standard theory) transport characteristics, in particular, shift of 