We use renormalization group (RG) analysis and dimensional regularization techniques to study potential superconductivity-inducing four-fermion interactions in systems with critical Fermi surfaces of general dimensions (m) and co-dimensions (d -m), arising as a result of quasiparticle interaction with a gapless Ising-nematic order parameter. These are examples of non-Fermi liquid states in d spatial dimensions. Our formalism allows us to treat the corresponding zero-temperature lowenergy effective theory in a controlled approximation close to the upper critical dimension d = dc(m). The fixed points are identified from the RG flow equations, as functions of d and m. We find that the flow towards the non-Fermi liquid fixed point is preempted by Cooper pair formation for both the physical cases of (d = 3, m = 2) and (d = 2, m = 1). In fact, there is a strong enhancement of superconductivity by the order parameter fluctuations at the quantum critical point. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. Ising-nematic quantum critical point 2 III. Superconducting Instability 4 A. One-loop diagrams generating terms proportional to V 2 S 5 B. UV-divergent terms proportional to ẽ 5 C. One-loop diagrams generating terms proportional to ẽ V S 6 D. Beta-functions for the coupling constants 7 E. Fixed points of the beta functions 9 IV. Summary and outlook 10 Acknowledgments 12 A. Computation of the Feynman diagrams proportional to V 2 S 12 B. One-loop diagrams proportional to ẽ V S 13 1. Cancellation of the terms proportional to ẽ ṼS near m = 2 15 C. Treatment of the terms proportional to ẽ in the Wilsonian RG language 16 Non-Fermi liquids are unconventional metallic states that cannot be studied using the framework of the Laudau Fermi liquid theory . Such systems can arise when a gapless boson is coupled with a Fermi surface. One class of non-Fermi liquids involve the critical boson carrying zero momentum, such as the Ising-nematic critical point Superconducting instabilities in such non-Fermi liquid scenarios have attracted a lot of attention in the recent literature We consider a four-fermion interaction V in the pairing channel with a tree-level scaling dimension equal to -d+1+m/2. We find that the scatterings in the BCS channel are enhanced by the square root of the Fermi surface volume, which goes as k m F . Consequently, the effective coupling that dictates the potential superconducting instability, is given by Ṽ , which has an enhanced scaling dimension of -d + 1 + m. Clearly, Ṽ is marginal when the co-dimension takes the value dm = 1. Our goal is to examine how the interactions of the fermions with critical bosons affect the pairing instability. The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we review the dimensional regularization procedure devised in our earlier work to obtain a perturbative control of the Ising-nematic quantum critical point. The four-fermion interactions, which can be responsible for potential BCS instability, are introduced in Sec. III. There we compute the divergent terms contributing to the beta-functions to the lowest order. The solutions to the RG equations in various possible scenarios are discussed in Sec. III E. We conclude with a summary and outlook in Sec. IV. The detailed computation of the relevant Feynman diagrams has been shown in the appendix. We consider the Ising-nematic quantum critical point involving an m-dimensional Fermi surface interacting with a massless boson in d = (m + 1) space dimensions written in a coordinate system centred at an arbitrary point K * of the convex Fermi surface (see Fig. denote the momentum components perpendicular and parallel to the Fermi surface at ±K * , respectively. The momenta are rescaled such that the Fermi velocity, and the curvature of the Fermi surface at ±K * , are equal to one. A perturbative control of the Yukawa coupling (and the strength of UV/IR mixing in non-Fermi liquid states with m > 1 where a mass scale μ is introduced to make kF and e dimensionless. Here The gamma matrices associated with K have been written as Γ ≡ (γ 0 , γ 1 , . . . , γ d-m-1 ). Since in real systems, dm lies between 1 and 2, we will consider only the 2 × 2 gamma matrices so that the corresponding spinors always have two components. We will use the representation where are fixed in general dimensions. The bare fermion propagator is given by G . Note that we have used an exponential factor in order to damp out the fermion propagator, which acts as a soft cut-off for the directions tangential to the Fermi surface in loop-integrals. This restricts the integration along the directions tangent to the Fermi surface to a small region compared to k F by damping the propagation of fermions with F . We denote the UV cut-off for K and k d-m as Λ, which is naturally given by the choice Λ = μ. Hence, two dimensionless parameters, e and kF = k F /Λ, appear in the above action. If k is the typical energy at which we probe the system, we must impose the restriction k << Λ << k F . The renormalization group flow is generated by changing Λ and requiring that low-energy observables are independent of it. The boson propagator that we will use in our computations includes the one-loop self-energy, and is given by to the leading order in k/k F , for This is because the bare boson propagator is independent of (k 0 , . . . , k d-m ), resulting in the loop integrations involving it being ill-defined. Hence we need to resum a series of diagrams that provides a non-trivial dispersion along these directions In our previous work The form of the one-loop fermion self-energy showed that it blows up logarithmically in Λ at the critical dimension We also found that the RG equations, with the increasing logarithmic length scale l =ln μ, are given by to order ẽ2 , where ε = d cd and Here p4 = p1 + p2 -p3. With the motivation of analysing superconducting instability for our non-Fermi liquid system, we will add the appropriate four-fermion interaction terms to the action in Eq. ( can give rise to BCS pairing, where F(p 1 , p 3 ; p 2 , p 4 ) is a function invariant under the simultaneous exchanges (p 1 , p 3 ) ↔ (p 2 , p 4 ). Hence, we need to consider the four-fermion terms: where k denotes the momentum components, (k d-m , L (k) ), of the (d+1)-dimensional energy-momentum vector k. The subscript "S" ("A") denotes that Here we have have made the V S/A 's dimensionless by using the mass scale μ, with representing the scaling dimension of V S/A . We will find from our analysis of the RG flow, in order for superconducting instability to set in, we must have p 1 = p 3 and p 2 = p 4 . Furthermore, assumption of rotational symmetry allows us to write: where θ 1,2 denote the angles for p 1,2 on the Fermi surface. For simplicity and in order to obtain analytic expressions, we will consider only the case of a constant non-zero V S , for which we need at least two flavours of fermions. Then, with N = 2, Eq. ( It is straightforward to apply our formalism for a system with a given number of flavours and a specific angular dependence of V S/A . A. One-loop diagrams generating terms proportional to V 2 We need to consider one-loop diagrams as shown in Fig. which is logarithmically divergent at dm = 1 such that we can express it as The results from Figs. 2b and 2c are k F -suppressed and hence do not contribute to the beta-functions. Noting that Tr σ z G 0 (k , the full contribution from all one-loop diagrams proportional to V 2 S is given by: for dm = 1ε. Following earlier studies We consider Fig. FIG. . Due to symmetry of D 1 (p 1p 2 ) under p 1 ↔ p 2 , they contribute as e 2 μ x D1(p1-p2) N for terms responsible for BCS instability. Using , the decomposition into angular momentum channels for an m-dimensional Fermi surface leads to the contribution being proportional to: which is independent of the angular momentum channel. This expression tells us that for m = 2δ and d = m + 1γ ε, we get a pole such that . This term, when continued to the strongly coupled regime of m = 1, will translate into the infrared divergence there. The resulting counterterm is given by C. One-loop diagrams generating terms proportional to ẽ VS The set of one-loop diagrams which can generate terms proportional to ẽ V S are shown in Fig. FIG. Here p4 = p1 + p2 -p3. their contribution to the beta-function is captured by the term where Furthermore, the contribution from Figs. 5a and 5b, after cancellation with Figs. where There are two more diagrams in this class, as shown in Fig. Beta-functions for the coupling constants We have found that the one-loop divergent terms are proportional to Hence, the upper critical dimension for the four-fermion BCS interaction is dc = m + 1, which is different from d c = m + 3 m+1 for the Yukawa coupling (see Eq. ( Furthermore, from the form of the divergent terms, it is apparent that is the effective coupling constant for the four-fermion interactions, which has an enhanced tree-level scaling dimension given by d v + 1/2 = dcd. ṼS is marginal when the co-dimension dm = 1. The counterterms for the four-fermion interaction term take the form: where we use the definition Adding the counterterms to the original S SC , and denoting the bare quantities by the superscript "B", we obtain the renormalized four-fermion interaction as: where The dynamical critical exponent and the anomalous dimension for the fermions are given by with u 1 defined in Eq. ( Implementing the condition = 0, we get Comparing the coefficients of the different powers of ε on both sides, the solution takes the form: upto O ẽ2 , ẽ ε, ε 2 in one-loop corrections. This can be simplified as: The RG flows for some representative values of (d, m) have been plotted in Fig. The fixed points for the beta functions can be found from the solutions of ∂ ṼS ∂l = 0 and ∂ ẽ ∂l = 0, using Eqs. ( 1. At (d = 3, m = 2), there is only finite solution given by ( Ṽ * S = 0, ẽ * = 0), corresponding to an IR unstable fixed point [cf. Fig. A few comments are in order regarding the enhanced superconductivity near (d = 3, m = 2) and (d = 2, m = 1). The Yukawa-like coupling ẽ gives rise to an effective attractive interaction for Cooper pairing and hence drives the system towards superconductivity even with an initially positive value of ṼS , as long as ẽ is non-zero, as the flow continues towards Ṽ * S with large negative values. It can be shown that the energy scale at which this happens is always larger than the non-Fermi liquid energy scale (i.e., the scale where the non-Fermi liquid effects become appreciable). However, the magnitude of the pairing gap will depend on the initial values of the coupling constants. An analysis along these lines is very similar to that of Metlitski et al. We have used RG to study potential superconducting instability induced by four-fermion interactions for Ising-nematic quantum critical points, in a perturbative expansion near the upper critical dimension d c (m) of the order parameter coupling with quasiparticles. Using the small parameter ε = d c (m)d, the RG flow equations and fixed points for both the effective order parameter coupling ẽ and BCS-channel coupling ṼS have been computed as functions of d and m. We have found that for (d = 3, m = 2), the flow towards the non-Fermi liquid fixed point is preempted by Cooper pairing, such that for an initial ẽ > 0, an attractive or repulsive four-fermion interaction in the BCS-channel eventually leads to superconductivity, enhanced by the coupling ẽ. In a thin slice near (d = 5/2, m = 1), the non-Fermi liquid fixed point is a stable fixed point. To reach the physical scenario with (d = 2, m = 1), we have to set ε = 1/2, which is not quite perturbatively controlled. However, if we extrapolate our results for ε > 0.17 to d = 2, then the (2 + 1)-d quantum critical point is expected to have strong enhancement of superconductivity by the order parameter fluctuations, such that even an initially repulsive ṼS will eventually flow to the strong-coupling regime with large negative values. Let us compare our results with previous works. In Ref. Lastly, although we have considered the simplest case of zero angular momentum and two (N = 2) flavours of fermions, our analysis can be easily extended to a scenario involving a non-zero angular momentum channel with any value of N . In future work, we would like to develop similar formalism for fermions coupled to transverse gauge fields, and also for SDW and CDW quantum criticl points at which the critical bosons carry finite momenta. where β d is defined in Eq. ( Performing the angular momentum decomposition, we get Setting p 1 (= p 3 ) = 0 and P 1 = P 4 for simplification, which is valid for extracting the divergent term, we get: In the last step, we have ignored the terms involving δ p2 in the denominator, and used θ k to denote the angle between L (k) and L (p2) . In order to proceed further and obtain an analytic expression, we need to examine which terms in the integral lead to singularity. If k = (K, k d-m , L (k) ) denotes the momentum flowing through a boson propagator within a loop diagram, such that |K| is order of Λ, the typical momentum carried by a boson along the tangential direction of the Fermi surface is given by |L |L (p2) | ≫ Λ, and the second term for α p2) cos 2 θ k } factor of the denominator where δ = 2m. Finally, performing the K integrals, the leading order terms are found to be: Now we need to carry out the angular momentum decomposition to get The log 2 divergences in the diagrams in Fig. where γ E = 0.577 is the Euler-Masheroni constant. The above must be considered in conjunction with the diagram in Fig. (B13) F . In the words of Son Setting P 1 = P 2 gives the "instantaneous" contribution in the BCS-channel with angular momentum l, which can be expressed as: which is independent of the angular momentum channel l. We would like to emphasize that the (d = 3, m = 2) Fermi liquids are also unstable to Cooper pairing for an infinitesimally weak interaction regardless of its sign, but in some higher angular momentum channel (l > 0)