The symmetry requirement and the origin of magnetic orders coexisting with superconductivity have been strongly debated issues of iron-based superconductors (FeSCs). Observation of C 4 -symmetric antiferromagnetism in violation of the inter-band nesting condition of spin-density waves in superconducting ground state will require significant change in our understanding of the mechanism of FeSC. The superconducting material Sr 2 VO 3 FeAs, a bulk version of monolayer FeSC in contact with a perovskite layer with its magnetism (T N ~ 50 K) and superconductivity (T c ~ 37 K) coexisting at parent state, has no reported structural orthorhombic distortion and thus makes a perfect system to look for theoretically expected C 4 magnetisms 1-3 . Based on variable temperature spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (SPSTM) with newly discovered imaging mechanism that removes the static surface reconstruction (SR) pattern by fluctuating it rapidly with spin-polarized tunneling current, we could visualize underlying C 4 symmetric (2 2) magnetic domains and its phase domain walls. We find that this magnetic order is perfectly consistent with the plaquette antiferromagnetic order in tetragonal Fe spin lattice expected from theories based on the Heisenberg exchange interaction of local Fe moments and the quantum order by disorder 4 . The inconsistency of its modulation Q vectors from the nesting condition also implies that the nesting-based C 2 symmetric magnetism is not a unique prerequisite of high-T c FeSC. Furthermore, the plaquette antiferromagnetic domain wall dynamics under the influence of small spin torque effect of spin-polarized tunneling current are shown to be consistent with theoretical simulation based on the extended Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation. [1] Iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) have shown wide range of intriguing phenomena related to the coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity below the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) In the localized moment scenario, the exchange interactions between the Fe spins can be typically described by J1-J2-J3 Heisenberg model (or J1-J2-J3-K with K as a coefficient describing the tendency towards the nearest-neighbor collinearity or the existence of easy axis/plane) 4,6,7, Supplementary Section 1). Such DDS orders can be classically stabilized with energy gain of | | due to the anisotropy associated with the lattice orthorhombicity and indeed has been observed in non-superconducting parent compound of Fe1+yTe with strong orthorhombic lattice distortion Furthermore, its crystal structure shows that every FeAs monolayer is sandwiched by two perovskite Sr2VO3 monolayers as shown in Fig. [4] For real-space magnetic imaging on FeSCs, we have developed a novel technique of spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (SPSTM) with antiferromagnetic Cr-cluster tip created in situ on a Cr surface and performed a comparative study with W tip and Cr-cluster tip. The 4.6 K STM topographic images of cold-cleaved (~10 K) surfaces taken with non-spinpolarized W tip in Fig. [6] To visualize the temperature-dependence of the symmetries of the lattice and the magnetic orders in this interesting FeSC, we developed variable temperature SPSTM technique with temperature range spanning the superconducting critical temperature (Tc ~ 37 K), the magnetic transition temperature (TN ~ 50 K) and a higher transition temperature for a poorly understood order parameter (T* ~ 150 K) [7] This plaquette order is distinct from the C4 magnetic orders in other FeSCs induced from inter-band nesting reported by neutron scattering measurement [8] So far we have demonstrated that the Fe magnetic moments forming the plaquette order are highly stable as shown in Fig. [10] The effect of tip scanning on the pDWs by spin torque effect of the spin polarized tunneling current is visualized in the sequential images shown in Fig. described by the wavevector , .) With dominant second-neighbor interaction , stripe phase is favored with ordering wavevector , 0 . In the presence of or , and finite third-neighbor interaction introduces frustration in the system and stabilizes two different spiral orders depending on the ratios / and / , and they are described by the wavevectors either , or , . Those four distinct phases are well understood and some of them have already been observed in FeSC materials 4,7,21 . On the other hand, in the limit of 0 but finite and , there are extensive degeneracies in the classical ground state with ordering wavevectors , . However, it turns out that quantum fluctuation lifts such accidental degeneracies of the ground states via their zero-point energies, often referred as quantum order-by-disorder mechanism As shown in the upper red area in Fig. As mentioned above, orthorhombicity with anisotropic (which breaks C4 symmetry) favors the DDS order to minimize spin-spin interactions. Indeed, such orthorhombic distortions are present in most FeSC below ~150 K and they strongly influence the symmetry of the spin structures at low temperatures Furthermore, it may play a key role in the study of the interplay between magnetic order, superconductivity and their quantum fluctuations in the absence of magnetoelastic effect associated with structural distortion. There have been several reports However, the stray magnetic field due to the ferromagnetic Fe film or cluster may disturb the sample and interfere with the accurate measurement of the true magnetic ground states. In particular, it leaves controversial issues in determining the magnetic ground state for the systems where multiple magnetic orders and/or type II superconductivity compete with one another, since vortices can be always formed close to the ferromagnetic Fe tip. In order to overcome such problems, we have developed AFM Cr-cluster-terminated tip which has negligible stray field but is more challenging to achieve spin polarization. The negligible stray field with Cr-cluster tip is a big advantage in accurate SPSTM measurements since such AFM tip can capture the delicate spin states close to the domain walls. The spin-polarized Cr cluster tip was prepared by collecting Cr atoms on the apex of the W tip by controlled field emission with parameters depending on the sharpness of the base W tip. The Cr cluster tip was then tested for proper in-plane spin-polarization by observing multiple levels of differential conductance at set point bias near -50 meV on multiple antiferromagnetic terraces with identical orientation on a stepped Cr surface as shown in Fig. The Sr2VO3FeAs sample with size about 250 μm × 250 μm was glued on the sample holder using silver epoxy and a cleaving rod was glued on top of it using identical epoxy. The sample holder was cooled down to ~ 10 K by contacting a copper block at 4. In the case of the BaFe2As2-based FeSCs The domain walls of the plaquette (ODS) order can be determined by first detecting the (2×2) spatial modulation phases ( , ) with a technique similar to the time-domain phase detection method known as the lock-in technique. To detect the modulation phase in a-direction, we choose the Bragg peak position in Fig. As we repeat scanning over the same area with Cr tip, some portions of the phase domain walls (pDWs) of plaquette order were subject to shifts and mergers in almost random fashions. This phenomenon can be understood by the meta-stability of the Fe spin configurations near the pDWs due to competition between two neighboring domains: Fe spins near the pDW can conform to either phase domain with very small energy difference although there will typically be a certain energy barrier. Using the spatial lock-in technique explained in Section 6, we could visualize the dynamics of the pDW motions clearly as shown in Figs. 