Anderson's Garden is a drawing presented to Philip W. Anderson on the eve of his 60th birthday celebration, in 1983. This cartoon (Fig. Beyond mean field theory -i) emergent gauge fields, ii) Ginzburg Landau theory with RVB gauge fields, iii) prediction of superconducting dome, iv) an early identification and study of a non-fermi liquid normal state of cuprates and so on. Here I narrate this story, years of my gardening attempts and end with a brief summary of my theoretical efforts to extend RVB theory of superconductivity to encompass the recently observed very high Tc ∼ 203 K superconductivity in molecular solid H 2 S at high pressures ∼ 200 GPa. I visited Phil Anderson at Princeton over the three-year period 1984-87. An intense collaboration with Anderson, rather a resonance took place for few months, November 1986 to March 1987. I was drawn deep into the world of strongly correlated electron systems, novel quantum phases in Mott insulators and high Tc superconductors The first part of the present article is a personal account of my enjoyable stay at Princeton, collaboration with Anderson and a brief account of how I got involved in the theory of quantum spin liquids in Mott insulators and high Tc superconductivity in cuprates. Anderson's Garden is a cartoon drawing presented to him on the eve of his 60th birth day, in 1983, by a colleague (artist unknown ? The third part of this article summarizes my work on the theory of superconductivity, discovered recently My first meeting with Phil Anderson was at the International Center for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy in the summer of 1983. I was in my mid 30's, visiting ICTP and SISSA for an extended period, after failing to get a permanent academic job in my home country. In those days, for many of us, theoretical physcists from third world countries, ICTP was a haven and played an important role in shaping our academic future. Now, after nearly 3 decades, theoretical physics scenario in India has improved in India, but much more is desired. Erio Tosatti, my wonderful host at Trieste, had invited Phil Anderson for a colloquium. After the colloquium was over, Erio came rushing. He said, 'Phil is free, come and talk to him'. Even though I had a great admiration for Anderson, I was reluctant and some what shy to meet him, because of his stature in the field. However, Erio insisted that I meet. I agreed, after Arun Jayannavar, a good friend visiting ICTP, agreed to accompany me. The post lunch discussion with Phil lasted for more than an hour. Mostly I spoke. Anderson was in a sleepy/dreamy state; he made occasional remarks. I was describing my foray into CDW states, why supersolid 4 He should exist in spite of a no-go theorem of Anderson sketched in his book Basic Notions in Condensed Matter Physics, my variational approach to quantum roughening in solid 4 He and a few other topics that I was thinking about at that time. We parted. I was elated. Other reason for a smooth entry to RVB theory at Princeton was my ealier interest in quantum magnetism and help from friends. I had studied consequences of (Jordan-Wigner) Fermi sea in 1D spin-half Heisenberg antiferromagnetic insulator and predicted in 1978, an unexpected Friedel type oscillation Discussion with Anderson was special. We provided a mutual sympathy field and talked on topics that went beyond condensed matter physics. For example, he used tell me how low energy nuclear physics is incomplete, if it uses only 2 body nuclear potentials; vacuum structure of QCD might have important role to play etc. We discussed whether human made machines will ever develop qualities such as self consciousness. During my stay Anderson offered two graduate courses on theoretical biology. Having developed some interest in Biology during my Ph.D. days at Bangalore, and having an eye on neuroscience at Princeton, I enjoyed both courses. Beyond condensed matter physicists, being in the company of many legendary figures at Princeton was a great treat for me. Princeton University and Institute for Advanced Studies also attracted great minds from all over the world, regularly for colloquia, seminars and visits. On the family front, we had wonderful time at Princeton. We went on outings on most weekends; often strayed into states of New York, Pennsylvania and Washington DC; several long drives to Niagara falls. Also a memorable trip to Florida for 2 weeks in a motorhome. I drove the motorhome, filled with 3 families (a total of 14 adults and children) in Indian style. We established life long friendship with wonderful people. It was November 1986. And end of nearly two and a half years of stay at Princeton, from September 1984, without any substantial achievement, except for few papers on cooperative ring exchange theory of fractional quantum Hall effect, spin glasses and travelling salesman problem. I had started feeling uneasy about my non publishing mode. However, Anderson did not seem to mind. Once, at the beginning of my 2nd year of stay, he made a comforting and prescient remark: 'To do anything substantial it will take 3 years'. He was kind. He seems to have appreciated my regular interaction with him, students, faculty, visitors and Another happy coincidence. During my random walks in Anderson's garden in 1986, but several months before cuprates appeared in the scene, I read twice, Anderson's 1973 RVB theory paper Our paper with Zou and Anderson Our free energy for the spin liquid state in a Mott insulator, in terms of the bond singlet variable, has a local U(1) symmetry. Doping reduces the symmetry to a global U(1) symmetry. However, our action, a generalized RVB Ginzburg-Landau free energy expression for doped Mott insulators, had memory of the Mott insulator in the superconducting state. Interestingly, our free energy also had d-wave solution as the lowest energy solution. However, we were sticking to extended-s symmetry solution because of the then available experimental results that indicated pseudo fermi surface like behaviour in the superconducting state. To Anderson, experiments come first. Our hypothesis was that strong U(1) gauge field fluctuations will stabilize an extended-s wave solution, as opposed to d-wave solution. This turned out to be not the case. The d-wave solution that Kotliar-Liu, Michael Ma and others found has stood the experimental test. In our paper we hinted at a hidden local particle-hole symmetry (Z 2 ), in addition to the local U(1) symmetry. According to Anderson The community was quick to accept our idea and theory of emergent gauge fields. Very soon connection of the magnetic fluxes and electric fields of the emergent U(1) RVB gauge fields to spin current (chirality) (Wiegmann, Wen, Wilczek and Zee) and valence bond density (Read and Sachdev) were established As we were understanding mechanism of superconductivity and developing approximation methods to study superconducting state, it became clear that Anderson's mind was getting diverted into the anomalous normal state of the optimally doped cuprate. Interestingly, Anderson was very satisfied with local superexchange as the pairing mechanism and origin of a strong pairing scale, our RVB mean field theory and several important notions and scenarios that emerged with it. The now well known Temperature-Doping phase diagram with a dome, was predicted on very general grounds in our PRL in 1987 Our paper While Anderson respected that a theory should be able to describe physics qualitatively and quantitatively, he also realized that a straight forward theoretical analysis is going to be tough, because of the projection and a consequent strong coupling character; one should not get intimidated by difficulties and and get help wherever it comes from, be it mean field theories or phenomenology. Similarly successive reduction and model building, using microscopics as well as phenomenology, is an important part of the game. They are physics and phenomenology motivated renormalization procedures. A model should be simple and not simpler (sic). physics is more appropriate for the optimally doped region. Underdoped pseudo gap region is dominated by residual unscreened coulomb interactions, disorder effects and electronphonon coupling, not contained in the tJ model. The best way to understand the mechanism of superconductivity in its purest form is in the optimally doped regime. Anderson used to call experimental phenomenon seen in under doped regime as arising from nanoscopic phase separation and metallurgical complications. However, thanks to continuing experimental efforts, new physics such as existence of 'small fermi surface', hiding in the background of a variety of competing phases, has emerged from quantum oscillation experiments, for example. This is unexpected, as we have a strong memory of the Mott insulator in the form of very ill defined quasiparticles at the chemical potential as shown by ARPES. I have offered an explanation at the Aspen Center for Physics. Aspen is a beautiful mountain resort and a great place to contemplate. There is music in the background, flowers, mountains and possibilities of nice hikes in the summer; small number of lectures and generally free, welcome and friendly atmosphere. Anderson, Elihu Abhrahams, Ravin Bhatt, Steve Kivelson, David Pines and several others had worked hard to maintain Aspen Center as a great Physics Center in the world. Having been obsessed with cuprates, flower petals in the garden reminded me of d-orbitals of copper and 2p orbitals of oxygen in the CuO 2 layers. I took that opportunity to make a quick sketch and posted a card to Anderson (figure Looking back, this picture emphasized graphite (a single layer of which is graphene) as RVB home. In the wake of superconductivity in MgB 2 this idea surfaced again I should also point out that experimental groups of Kopelevich and Esquinazi Then came Na x .CoO 2 .yH 2 O, a hydrated sodium cobalt oxide superconductor. Narrow band and correlation based physics superconductivity was obvious. I predicted a d + id chiral RVB type of superconductivity In my view, Fe arsenide superconductor is an example of double RVB system Silicene, Germanene and Stanene are 2d analogues of graphene. C,Si,Ge and Sn occur in the same column in the periodic table. However the atomic radii of Si and Ge are about 60 percent larger than that of carbon. According to electronic structure calculations this leads to a substantial, 3 fold reduction in the band width of p-π band in silicene and germanene. Based on band theory estimates of the t and U parameter and some overwhelming phenomenology I came to the conclusion that silicene and germanene are likely to be Mott insulators Few other interesting systems of our interest are superconductivity in spin ladder compound Thanks to Piers Coleman's comments and provocation at a strong correlation workshop at ICTP Trieste, I ended up predicting These exciting results needs to be reconfirmed by measurement of Meissner effect, Josephson tunnelling etc. Theory papers have appeared, based on ab-initio calculation, before and after the experiment. They predict a variety of structures and high Tc superconductivity, based on electron-phonon interaction mechanism. Unfortunately, the structure of H 2 S is not known experimentally. In an earlier (2004) experiment X Ray scattering revealed a structure at high pressures. There is molecular dissociation and formation of sulphur-sulphur bond and sulphur helices, known in allotropes of S, Se and Te. Position of hydrogen atom could not be determined, in view of a low electron number associated with H atom. In the absence of phase separation, H atoms or H molecules are likely to occupy small interstitial positions in the densely packed sulphur helix lattice. Sulphur atom has a large atomic radius compared to H atom. In our theory I view these paired valence electrons that form covalent bonds in molecules as stable but confined Cooper pairs. Thus in H 2 S the two saturated covalent bonds correspond to two confined Cooper pairs. Molecular solid H 2 and H 2 S are in this sense Cooper pair insulators. They are so deeply bound that this is irrelevant in normal situations. However, high pressure, a peculiar liberator, could deconfine some of these confined Cooper pairs and create a superconducting state. That is pressure, under some conditions and for a range or pressures, prefer to liberate paired electron rather than single electrons. Specifically I suggest the following structural and valence bond reorganization for the superconducting H 2 S at high pressures. It leads to strong sulphur-sulphur bond and helical chains or a structure with a dominant saturated S-S bonds. Some dissociated H atoms can remain neutral H-atoms and some as H 2 molecules. At high pressure strongly bonded S atoms form a dense packing. Because of its large atomic radius S atoms leave only small interstitial space for H atom or H 2 molecule. The interstitial crystalline network which accommodates H atoms, can be quasi-1, quasi-2 dimensional or 3 dimensional. The H-H distance and H sublattice structure is now dictated by the sulphur sublattice. In general the structures do not allow for saturated H-H bonds. For example a dimerized H-atom chain allows for saturated H-H bonds. Whereas, uniform chain or a honeycomb lattice type structure leads to valence bond resonance. I find that in some pressure ranges, the H-H transfer matrix elements (direct and through sulphur atoms) is small compared to ionization energy of H-atom, leading to possibility of a Mott insulating sublattice of neutral H atoms. In my picture, the Mott insulating subsystem of neutral H-atoms is in general unstable to internal doping. Because, in general, a differing electro negativity of the sulphur and H sublattices will result in a charge transfer between the two subsystems. This charge transfer dopes the H atom Mott insulator and opens a door for superconductivity in a doped Mott insulator. My estimates of the doped Mott insulator parameters, for a few structures for H 2 S available in the literature from LDA calculation gives possibility of superconductivity reaching the scale of 200 K, as seen in the experiment. Pressure induced dissociation in H 2 S has been suggested to create H 3 S, following a phase separation. Our picture goes through for such hydrogen rich solids, including a recent pressure induced superconductivity in PH 3 Interaction and collaboration with Anderson, since 1983 has been inspiring and wonderful. It is indeed amazing that one man could do so much to science. It is equally amazing that one man could influence so much, those who cross his path. It gives me great pleasure to congratulate Anderson on this happy occasion and wish him, Joyce and Susan all well.