We analyze the spin anisotropy of the magnetic susceptibility of Sr2RuO4 in presence of spin-orbit coupling and anisotropic strain using quasi-two-dimensional tight-binding parametrization fitted to the ARPES results. Similar to the previous observations we find the in-plane polarization of the low q magnetic fluctuations and the out-of-plane polarization of the incommensurate magnetic fluctuation at the nesting wave vector Q1 = (2/3π, 2/3π) but also nearly isotropic fluctuations near Q2 = (π/6, π/6). Furthermore, one finds that apart from the high-symmetry direction of the tetragonal Brillouin zone the magnetic anisotropy is maximal, i.e. χ xx = χ yy = χ zz . This is the consequence of the orbital anisotropy of the xz and yz orbitals in the momentum space. We also study how the magnetic anisotropy evolves in the presence of the strain and find strong Ising-like ferromagnetic fluctuations near the Lifshitz transition for the xy-band. Introduction: Since its discovery in 1994, Strontium Ruthenate, Sr 2 RuO 4 , has been one of the few widely studied triplet superconductors Recent experiments reveal that the transition temperature to the superconducting state in Sr 2 RuO 4 can be enhanced locally if pressure is applied A local enhancement of the transition at ∼ 1K was observed near lattice deformations One of the intriguing complications of Sr 2 RuO 4 is its multiorbital and multiband character as the Fermi surface (FS) of this system shows three bands and very likely not all of the FS pockets are contributing equally to the Cooper-pairing At the same time, other groups argue in favor of the dominant contribution to the Cooperpairing from the large electron pocket of the xy-character. It is centered near the Γ-point of the Brillouin Zone (BZ) The γ-band is believed to be mainly affected by the application of anisotropic strain, consequently, the increase of T c upon strain is mainly attributed to this band In this paper, we study the evolution of the magnetic anisotropy of the spin susceptibility in Sr 2 RuO 4 in the presence of spin-orbit coupling and anisotropic strain using the tight-binding model fitted to the available ARPES results The crystal field of the O 2-oxygen ions breaks the degeneracy of the 4d states of Ru 4+ into two subshells, the threefold t 2g orbitals and the twofold e g orbitals. The orbital character of the FS is dominated by t 2g subshell which has a lower energy because the orbitals lobes point between the oxygen ions in contrast to the e g orbitals. The system is not particle-hole symmetric and has a relatively low effective bandwidth As a starting point, we use the effective three orbital model including the t 2g orbital manifold: where orbital indexes are given by j = xz, yz, xy, where k and σ (σ = -σ) represent momentum and spin, respectively. The electronic dispersion is defined with the help of tight-binding parametrization and the hopping parameters (t 1 = 88, t 2 = 9, t 3 = 80, t 4 = 40, t 5 = 5, μ = 109 (all in meV)) are fitted to the available ARPES experiments Written in terms of the xy↑ the spin-orbit coupling acquires the following form 36 of Hubbard intra-(U ) and inter-(U ) orbital terms as well as the residual Hund coupling, J. The physical components of the spin susceptibility are given by where k = k + q, and σ u=x,y,z are the Pauli matrices. Here, q, p, s, t and α, β, γ, δ are the orbital and the spin indexes, respectively. The Green's function is defined by where the transformation from the orbital and the spin basis to the band pseudospin basis is performed by substitution of Here, a sσ (i, k) is the matrix-element that connects band (i) and orbital (s). Performing the Matsubara frequency sum over iω n -→ ω + i0 + , the expression for the components of the bare susceptibility in the multi-orbital case, is given by here the anisotropy of the susceptibility enters through the orbital-and spin-dressing factor that implies summation over the repeated indexes. On the diagrammatic level, the bare susceptibility can be also written as: where we define the following notation for the diagrams This allows to write each components within shorthand notation as Again, for the physical part of the susceptibility, the summation of indexes is implied. Here for zero spin-orbit coupling, λ = 0, the first two bubbles of each component have the same value while the last two bubbles of each component vanish, ensuring the O(3) symmetry of the system. If spin-orbit coupling acts only among the d xz and d yz orbitals, the only term is λS z L z and already leads to a splitting of the transverse and longitudinal part of the susceptibility, χ xx 0 (q, ω) = χ yy 0 (q, ω) = χ zz 0 (q, ω). However, if spin-orbit coupling acts among at least one additional orbital, the transverse components χ xx 0 (χ yy 0 ) differ due to the term λ(S + L -+ S -L + ), implying full spin anisotropy in the entire BZ χ xx 0 (q, ω) = χ yy 0 (q, ω) = χ zz 0 (q, ω). The diagrammatic treatment for the random phase approximation needs to be done separately for the longitudinal (zz) and the transverse (xx, yy) components of the spin susceptibility. In particular, one finds and Here, each entry of the matrix is a tensor with four orbital indexes {pqst}, and the summation over orbital indexes for the physical part of the susceptibility has to be performed at the end. Furthermore, the matrix equations in the spin space can be decoupled by applying the similarity transformation, S = (σ x + σ z )/ √ 2, which yields four de- where uu = xx, yy, zz. Furthermore, U s ≡ U ↑↑ ↑↑ -U ↑↑ ↓↓ = U ↑↓ ↑↓ contains the Hubbard-type on-site interactions U , J and U = U -2J. In particular, U (U ) is the intra-(inter-) orbital Coulomb repulsion, and J represents Hund's coupling. The tensor U s is given by Numerical results: The well-known fact of the electronic structure of the Sr 2 RuO 4 is the nesting of the quasi-one dimensional xz, and yz-bands at the incommensurate wave vector Q 1 As it is generally believed that the pure AF fluctuation cannot be responsible for the triplet character of the Cooper-pairing, we have analysed the behaviour of the spin response in the entire BZ. In particular, in Fig. Another interesting feature we see from Fig. Observe that this anisotropy should become strongly visible once the strain is applied. In the following we include its effect on the electronic structure via anisotropic intra-orbital hopping parameters along x and y direction of the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian, such that it breaks the C 4 symmetry of the system, similar to Ref. 22. We find that for 2.65% strain the Fermi surface of the xyband touches the Van Hove singularity at the Y point. Although all FS pockets are just C 2 symmetric under strain, the larger electron band around Γ is distorted significantly To conclude we study the anisotropy of the spin fluctuations in Sr 2 RuO4 in the presence of spin-orbit coupling and anisotropic strain using quasi-two-dimensional tight-binding parametrization fitted to the ARPES results. Similar to the previous observations we find the in-plane polarization of the low q magnetic fluctuations and the out-of-plane polarization of the incommensurate magnetic fluctuation at the nesting wave vector Q 1 = (2/3π, 2/3π). Most importantly we also find strong fluctuations near much smaller wave vector Q 2 = (π/6, π/6), which shows very weak anisotropy. Furthermore, one finds that apart from the high-symmetry direction of the tetragonal Brillouin zone the magnetic anisotropy is maximal, i.e. χ xx = χ yy = χ zz . This is the consequence of the orbital anisotropy of the xz and yz orbitals in the momentum space. We also study how the magnetic anisotropy evolves in the presence of the strain and finds strong Ising-like ferromagnetic fluctuations which appear when the xy-band touches the Van Hove point at the Y -point of the BZ.