We theoretically study the properties of thermal conductance in a normal-insulatorsuperconductor junction of silicene for both thin and thick barrier limit. We show that while thermal conductance displays the conventional exponential dependence on temperature, it manifests a nontrivial oscillatory dependence on the strength of the barrier region. The tunability of the thermal conductance by an external electric field is also investigated. Moreover, we explore the effect of doping concentration on thermal conductance. In the thin barrier limit, the period of oscillations of the thermal conductance as a function of the barrier strength comes out be π/2 when doping concentration in the normal silicene region is small. On the other hand, the period gradually converts to π with the enhancement of the doping concentration. Such change of periodicity of the thermal response with doping can be a possible probe to identify the crossover from specular to retro Andreev reflection in Dirac materials. In the thick barrier limit, thermal conductance exhibits oscillatory behavior as a function of barrier thickness d and barrier height V0 while the period of oscillation becomes V0 dependent. However, amplitude of the oscillations, unlike in tunneling conductance, gradually decays with the increase of barrier thickness for arbitrary height V0 in the highly doped regime. We discuss experimental relevance of our results. With the discovery of graphene In recent years, a silicon analogue of graphene, silicene Very recently, it has been reported that low energy excitations in silicene follows relativistic Dirac equation akin to graphene Proximity effect in Dirac materials has attracted a great deal of attention in recent times The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In Sec. II, we describe our model and method. Sec. III is devoted to the thin barrier regime where results are presented for three different doping concentrations. Results for the thick barrier limit are shown in Sec. IV. Finally, we summerize and conclude in Sec. V. We consider a monolayer of silicene consisting of two sublattices A and B. Two sublattice planes are separted by a distance 2l due to the buckled structure. When an electric field is applied perpendicular to the silicene sheet, a staggered potential is generated between the two sublattices A and B. In general tight-binding Hamiltonian for this system is given by The operator ĉ † iα creates an electron at site i with spin ploarization α while the operator ĉiα annihilates it. The first term describes the nearest-neighbor hopping of amplitude t on honeycomb lattice, where < i, j > denotes the nearest-neighbor sites. The second term is for the effective spin-orbit coupling (SOC) with λ SO ∼ 4 meV Here d i and d j are two nearest bonds between the next nearest-neighbors. The sum << i, j >> is over the next nearest-neighboring sites. The third term is the Rashba SOC of amplitude λ R , where μ ij = ±1 for the A(B) site. The fourth term represents the staggered sublattice potential, where ζ i = ±1 for the A(B) sites. We consider λ R = 0 throughout our analysis. The low energy Hamiltonian of silicene can be ( where v f is the fermi velocity of the electrons, μ is the chemical potential and E z is the external electric field. η = ±1 corresponds to the K and K valley. In Eq. ( In this work we consider a normal-insulatorsuperconductor (NIS) set-up of silicene in x -y plane as depicted in Fig. Silicene NIS junction can be described by the Dirac Bogoliubov-de Gennes (DBdG) equation of the form where E is the excitation energy, ∆ is the proximity induced superconducting pairing gap and H η is given by Eq.( Solving Eq.( where the normalization factors are given by A = ( Here μ N is the chemical potential in the normal silicene region. Due to translational invariance in the y-direction, corresponding momentum k e(h) 1y is conserved. The angle of incidence α e and the Andreev reflection (AR) angle α h are related via the relation For the rest of the paper, we have denoted the band gap (elE z -λ SO )/∆ at K valley by λ and the gap (elE z + λ SO )/∆ at K valley by λ . In the Insulating region wave functions can be found from normal region wave functions (Eq.( Here, u The transmission angles for electron-like and hole-like quasi-particles are given by, for α = e, h. The quasiparticle momentums can be written as where μ S = μ N + U 0 and U 0 is the gate potential applied in the superconducting region to tune the Fermi surface mismatch. The requirement for the mean-field treatment of superconductivity is that μ S ∆ where r and r A are the amplitudes of normal reflection and Andreev reflection in the N region respectively. t e and t h denote the amplitudes of transmitted electron like and hole like quasiparticles in the S region. Using boundary conditions at the two interfaces, we can write From these equations we can find the reflection and AR amplitudes r and r A , required for evaluating the electronic contribution of TC. For the NIS junction, normalized thermal conductance κ is given by Here, R e and R h are reflection and AR probability respectively. From current conservation, we obtain 32 In this section, we present our numerical results based on Eq.( where k e I , k h I are the electron and hole momentum inside the insulating barrier respectively. χ is defined as the barrier strength of the insulating region. Such limit has been considered before in Ref. 47 for the analysis of tunneling conductance in graphene. We take U 0 to be very large compared to the superconducting pairing potential ∆. For simplicity, we consider θ e = 0 and θ h = 0 in Eq. (10) and Eq. (11). Due to significant chemical potential imbalance between the normal and superconducting sides, there is a large mismatch of Fermi wavelengths in these two sides resulting in interesting behavior in TC. Before proceeding to present our numerical results, here we illustrate whether both valleys contribute to TC at all doping conentrations or not. For silicene, the band gap at K valley satisfies λ μ N /∆ for the undoped and moderately doped regime. Consequently, K valley does not contribute to TC in these two regimes. Nevertheless, in highly doped regime, μ N ∼ 100∆ which is much larger than both the band gaps λ and λ at K and K valley respectively (see Fig. In Fig. The oscillatory behavior of the TC can be explained as follows. Nonrelativistic free electrons with energy E incident on a potential barrier with height V 0 are described by an exponentially decaying (non-oscillatory) wave function inside the barrier region if E < V 0 , since the dispersion relation is k ∼ √ E -V 0 . On the contrary, relativistic free electrons satisfies a dispersion k ∼ (E -V 0 ), consequesntly corresponding wave functions do not decay inside the barrier region In this subsection, we present our results for the moderate doping case where chemical potential in the normal part of the silicene sheet is 0.5∆. This regime is qualitatively different from the undoped one because the doping concentration has now almost same order of magnitude with λ. So it is interesting to analyse whether non-trivial behavior of TC emerges out due to the interplay between doping and band gap at the two valleys. In Fig. Transition from non-monotonic to monotonic behavior of TC takes place at T ∼ 0.6T c independent of χ value. This non-monotonic characteristics is more promiment in Fig. Here in this subsection we present the features of TC while normal portion of silicene is highly doped (μ N ∼ 100∆). In this case the mean-field condition: μ N + U ∆ 45 can be satisfied by assuming U ∆ or taking U ∆ as before. Former one does not exhibit any Fermi surface mismatch between the normal and superconducting regions. On the other hand, the latter one contributes to large density mismatch between the two sides. We have numerically calculated κ for U = 0 μ N , U = 100∆ μ N and U = 10000∆ μ N regime. The corresponding results are presented in Fig. The oscillatory behavior of TC with respect to the barrier strength χ persists in the highly doped regime as well (see Fig. However, as the Fermi wavelengths mismatch becomes vanishingly small in the highly doped regime, periodicity of oscillation converts to π. Here also, λ as well as λ have neglizible effect on the thermal transport as μ N is the dominant energy scale in this particular regime. Similar periodicity of π in the behavior of tunneling conductance in graphene for the highly doped regime was reported earlier in Ref. 47. Note that, for the highly doped regime, major contribution in κ originates from the retro AR in contrast to SAR in the undoped regime. Also the periodicity of κ changes from π/2 to π as long as U μ N . Such change of periodicity with doping, in the behavior of thermal conductance in the thin barrier limit, can be an indirect way to identify the crossover from SAR to retro AR in Dirac materials. Although, it is not apparent to compute separately the individual contribution of retro AR and SAR to κ when μ N = 0. This is because within our scattering matrix formalism we have to average over all values of energy (see Eq.( In this section we examine TC in the thick barrier limit where we consider a barrier of width d and height V 0 . The height of the barrier can be tuned by applying an additional gate voltage in the insulating region Note that, in the thick barrier limit, extended BTK formalism When the doping concentration is moderate (μ N = 0.5∆) in the normal silicene regime, TC exhibits similar features as in the thin barrier limit. Here we illustrate the behavior of TC as a function of barrier height V 0 and thickness d in Fig. To summerize, in this article, we investigate thermal conductance κ by Dirac fermions in silicene NIS junction where superconductivity is induced in silciene sheet through the proximity effect. We study the behavior of TC in this set-up both for thin and thick insulating barrier limit. We show that TC exhibits π/2 periodic oscil-lation with respect to the barrier strength in thin barrier limit for undoped (μ N = 0) and moderately doped (0 < μ N ≤ ∆) regime where the Fermi surface mismatch between the normal and superconducting sides is significant. The oscillation becomes π periodic as a function of barrier strength in the highly doped (μ N ∆) regime where Fermi surfaces in the two sides are almost aligned. This change of periodicity (π/2 to π) in thermal response with the variation of doping concentration can be an indirect probe to identify the crossover from SAR to retro AR. Nonetheless, TC shows conventional exponential dependence on temperature independent of doping concentration and barrier characteristics. The external electric field reduces TC monotonically in the undoped regime. However, a non-trivial interplay between band gap at Dirac points and doping concentration appears in the moderately doped case. Consequently, electric field can tune TC in the later regime. On the other hand, electric field has negligible effect on TC when μ N /∆ λ. In the thick barrier limit, oscillation of TC persists both as a fucntion of barrier thickness d as well as barrier height V 0 . The latter can be tuned by an additional gate voltage appled at the insulating region. However, we show that the periodicity of TC no longer remains constant, rather becomes functions of both d and V 0 . Also after a certain barrier thickness (d ∼ 0.4λ F ), amplitude of oscillations in TC decays for arbitrary V 0 in the highly doped regime. In our analysis, we consider only the electronic contribution in TC and neglect the phonon contribution at small temperatures (T < T c ). Very recently, nanoscale control of phonon excitation in graphene has been reported As far as experimental realization of our silicene NIS set up is concerned, superconductivity in silicene can be induced by s-wave superconductor like Al However, the effects of external electric field might not be visible in the above regime as envisaged by our theoretical calculation. To realize non-trivial effects due to the electric field on TC, chemical potential in the normal silicene region can be μ N ∼ 80 -120 μeV and the external electric field E z can be within the range E z ∼ 170-180 eV/μm. In this moderately doped regime (0 < μ N ≤ ∆), the criterion for d and V 0 can be similar to the highly doped regime as mentioned before. Note that, in our analysis, we have considered a bulk silicene material following Ref. 32. The bulk-boundary correspondence has not been taken into account within our scattering matrix formalism. So, we cannot distinguish between the topological phase or the band insulating phase within our formalism even if we tune the electric field E z in our calculation. Hence, in our analysis, the contribution in the thermal conductance is arising from the bulk states only. We expect our results to be analogous to the recently discovered 2D materials like germenene, stanene 