We theoretically study the coupling of electric charge and spin polarization in an equilibrium and nonequilibrium electric transport across a two dimensional Josephson configuration comprised of disordered surface channels of a three dimensional topological insulator. In the equilibriun state of the system we predict the Edelstein effect, which is much more pronounced than its counterpart in conventional spin orbit coupled materials. Employing a quasiclassical Keldysh technique, we demonstrate that the ground state of system can be experimentally shifted into arbitrary macroscopic superconducting phase differences other than the standard '0' or 'π', constituting a φ0-junction, solely by modulating a quasiparticle flow injection into the junction. We propose a feasible experiment where the quasiparticles are injected into the topological insulator surface by means of a normal electrode and voltage gradient so that oppositely oriented stationary spin densities can be developed along the interfaces and allow for directly making use of the spin-momentum locking nature of Dirac fermions in the surface channels. The φ0-state is proportional to the voltage difference applied between the injector electrode and superconducting terminals that calibrates the injection rate of particles and, therefore, the φ0 shift. Topological state of matter has been a striking topic during the past decade and has attracted extensive attention both theoretically and experimentally The surface channels may be employed as an appealing opportunity that can support spin-momentum locked modes, namely, the orientation of particle's spin is locked to its momentum direction Motivated by the recent experimental progresses in fabricating TI-superconductor (S) heterostructures In the equilibrium state, we predict that the system responses to a dc supercurrent flowing across the junction by developing a stationary spin density oriented along the junction interfaces. This phenomenon can be viewed as a direct magnetoelectric effect i.e. the Edelstein effect. In the conventional intrinsic spin orbit coupled metals, analogous effect was first theoretically predicted in Refs. 24 and 25 and later observed experimentally in Refs. 26 and 27. It was shown that spin polarization can be produced in the spin orbit coupled metals by externally applied electric field. We also demonstrate an inverse coupling between the charge and spin degrees of freedom in S-TI-S heterostructures. In particular, it is shown that the injection of quasiparticle current at the middle of junction in opposite directions yields spontaneous magnetizations with opposite orientations in each segment. The current-induced magnetization is directly coupled to the phase difference between the superconducting terminals. This phenomenon renders the minimum of junction free energy into a superconducting phase difference between the S terminals φ = φ 0 , which is generally unequal to 0 or π. The φ 0 is proportional to the voltage difference between the injector electrode and superconducting terminals and inverse of Fermi velocity on the surface states. φ 0 -junctions were also predicted in ferromagnetic Josephson junctions with spin orbit interaction Nearly all of the past theoretical works on the spin orbit coupled Josephson structures involves ferromagnetism or an external magnetic field as key ingredients to establish the magnetoelectric effect. In this paper, however, we demonstrate that an internal Zeeman-like term can be generated and electrically controlled in S-TI-S heterostructures (in the absence of any ferromagnetic elements or an external magnetic field) simply by means of quasiparticles injection. The Zeeman-like term causes an anomalous phase shift φ 0 in the supercurrent that can be electrically controlled via the quasiparticle flow injection generated by a voltage difference. So far, the electric control of the superconducting critical temperature The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we summarize the theoretical framework used and basic assumptions made for studying a disordered topological insulator Josephson junction under nonequilibrium conditions. The direct magnetoelectric effect in S-TI-S heterostructures is presented in Sec. III. The electrically controllable inverse magnetoelectric effect is discussed in Sec. IV. We finally summarize concluding remarks in Sec. V. Numerous systems in laboratory deal with nonequilibrium processes. To theoretically describe a system that experiences nonequilibrium situations, one powerful approach is the Keldysh technique within the Green function framework The Hamiltonian that describes the Rashba type surface states in the presence of an in-plane exchange field h(r) = (h x (r), h y (r), 0) reads: in which Ψ = (Ψ ↑ , Ψ ↓ ) T , α is the Fermi velocity, e z is a unit vector normal to the surface of TI (see Fig. Here τ is the mean free time of quasiparticles and ν is the density of states at the Fermi level of the normal state of TI. The advanced (A), retarded (R), and Keldysh (K) blocks of Gor'kov Green function in the Keldysh technique are defined as follows: where {..., ...} and [..., ...] stand for anticommutator and commutator relations, respectively. Also, the time ordering operator is shown by a step function in time Θ t1,2 ≡ Θ(t 1 -t 2 ). The other components of Keldysh block i.e. F K αβ , F †K αβ , and GK αβ are related to this component Eq. (4e) the same way as those of the retarded and advanced components given above, namely Eqs. (4b)-(4d), to Eq. (4a). We now introduce the following matrix Green function in the Nambu space: where ĜR old ( F R old , F †R old , ĜR old ) are 2 × 2 matrices in the spin space. The elements of these matrices are given above by Eqs. (4a)-(4d). This definition can be extended to the advanced and keldysh blocks ǦA and ǦK . It is also convenient to introduce a full 8 × 8 Green function in the Keldysh space as follows: Therefore, by averaging the Green function over the impurity scattering potential in the Born approximation we find the following Gor'kov equation: Here, the two time dependent products of AB operators is equivalent to We consider a situation where the chemical potential μ is the largest energy scale in the system and hence a quasiclassical approximation is the well suited framework to describe the system. We now can introduce the quasiclassical Green function where a Fourier transformation of the Green function with respect to the relative space arguments and an integration over ξ = αp -μ are performed. Furthermore, following the standard procedures in which η = (-σ y , σ x , 0), n F = p F /|p F |, and τ i , i = x, y, z are Pauli matrices in the particle-hole space. This is a nonequilibrium generalization to the Eilenberger equation derived in Ref. 12 for the equilibrium situations. Recently, the analogous quasiclassical equation was also discussed for Dirac edge and surface electrons with another type of spin-momentum locking p F σ 52 . In the stationary situations, that we consider throughout the paper, one can perform a Fourier transformation with respect to t 1 -t 2 → ε. Thus, the Eilenberger equation can be expressed by: (10) To find a general solution to Eq. ( where ĝ′ ,ĝ ′′ , ĝ|| , and ĝz depend on (ε, R, n F ) and are 4×4 matrices in the particle-hole and Keldysh space. It can be shown that ĝ|| and ĝz are smaller than both ĝ′ and ĝ′′ by a factor of order of (τ -1 , h, ε)/μ ≪ 1. Therefore, one can safely neglect these terms in the expansion without missing significant information. The Eilenberger equation in this approximation decomposes into two coupled equations for ĝ′ and ĝ′′ : where h 1 = h x n F,y -h y n F,x . It is apparent that Eqs. (12a) and (12b) allow for a solution of ĝ′ = ĝ′′ . This means that the spin structure of full Green function is determined by (1 + ηn F )/2. Physically, this operator projects the Green function onto the conduction band of TI surface states as schematically depicted in Fig. In the diffusive regime, where the quasiparticles' motion is fully randomized by strong scattering resources so that ε, h < τ -1 , the Eilenberger equation reduces to the Usadel equation 53 . To have a self-contained presentation, we here give a short recap of basic notations and equations generalized for a nonequilibrium situation where the zeroth harmonic (isotropic) is larger than the first harmonic: ĝs ≫ ĝa . Following the derivation steps described in Ref. 12, one obtains the Usadel equation to ĝs : where D = α 2 τ is the diffusion constant and the first harmonic term can be expressed in terms of ĝs as follows: The operator ∇ is defined for the Rashba type band structure of surface states as follows: Note that the formalism can be straightforwardly extended to the Dresselhaus type where γ is the ratio of resistance of the interface barrier per unit area to the resistivity of the TI surface states and n is the unit vector normal to the interface (it points towards the superconductor region). In the tunneling low proximity regime we consider throughout our calculations, the opacity of interfaces γ should be sufficiently large to satisfy this condition. The superconducting bulk solution can be given by: where τ ± = (τ x ± iτ y )/2, δ is an infinitesimal positive value and the system temperature is denoted by T . In the context of quantum transport, the electric current is one of the most important physical quantities that can explain transport experiments. The electric current density across the surface channels of TI junction we consider can be expressed by: Rewriting the current density via the quasiclassical Green functions in the diffusive limit we obtain: where σ N = 2e 2 νD is the normal state conductivity. In this section, we develop a theory of the dissipationless direct magnetoelectric effect to the disordered topological insulator Josephson junction depicted in Fig. In terms of the Green function, the components of spin polarization take the following form: Within the quasiclassical diffusive regime we consider for the disordered topological insulator, the spin polarization components can be rewritten as Substituting ĝK a from Eq. ( Comparing the last expression to Eq. ( That is, the electric current and electron spin polarization orientation are perpendicular while their amplitudes are directly proportional. When a superconducting phase gradient φ is applied between the superconducting terminals, a dc Josephson current flows across the junction. In the tuneling and low proximity limit, the supercurrent has a standard sinusoidal relation I = I c sin φ in which I c is the critical supercurrent where ∆(q) = iσ∆(q). The Green function in the Matsubara representation reads: Ĝ Following similar steps as Ref. 29, one obtains the spin density in the real space representation as: where F (r) = (∇∆ * (r))∆(r) -∆ * (r)(∇∆(r)). Considering ∆(r) = |∆|e iφ(r) one finds that at the charge neutrality point at which μ = 0 the spin density reduces to: while within μ >> T c regime one arrives at: As seen, in both regimes, the spin polarization and the direction of the current (which is proportional to the phase gradient ∇φ(r)) are orthogonal to each other. We note that similar direct magnetoelectric effect was also predicted for superconductors and superconducting heterostructures with intrinsic spin orbit interactions This issue however can be resolved in the surface channels of a 3D TI. The surface electrons are fully spinmomentum locked and therefore they have only one conduction band. Hence, the relation between the spin polarization and supercurrent contains no reducing coefficient of order of ∆ so /ε F and the effect should be much stronger than that of the conventional spin orbit coupled materials with ∆ so /ε F ≪ 1 discussed so far in the literature. In this section, we first show that a nonequilibrium quasiparticle injection on the surface of 3D TI induces a Zeeman-like field which is proportional to the voltage difference between an injector electrode and superconducting terminals that drives the quasiparticle flow. We then calculate the dc Josephson current through a disordered topological insulator junction where a flow of nonequilibrium quasiparticle current is injected into the TI region. We discuss the appearance of φ 0 states which is controlable by means of the quasiparticle flow injection. In this subsection, we demonstrate that an electric current flowing through the surface states of the 3D TI can induce a Zeeman-like term. We consider a highly simple model which is sufficient to reveal this effect. In order to more simplify our discussions, we consider fully ballistic surface states without any disorder. In this case, the Hamiltonian is given by Eq. ( Moreover, we include the electron-electron interaction at the Hartree-Fock level. Thus, the self-energy reads: where We also assume that μ contains the spin independent part of self-energy and focus on the spin part of Σ = Σ σ. The Green function with interactions reads: where Σ = (Σ x , Σ y , Σ z ) and By now substituting the Green function Eq. ( In equilibrium at V = 0, the spin dependent part of the self-energy vanishes due to the integration over momentum. However, in the presence of bias voltage the integral results in a nonvanishing finite value. If we assume an electric current in the x direction of a ballistic system, we then are able to substitute μ → μ + (V /2)sgnp x in Eq. ( In conclusion, based on a simplified model, we have shown that an electric current can generate spin dependent exchange that results in an effective Zeeman-like term. This induced exchange field can be controlled by the applied voltage to inject quasiparticles. A more detailed study of the particular connection between the induced Zeeman-like term and the injected quasiparticles' current is an interesting problem, however, is beyond the scope of the present paper and can be addressed elsewhere. The flow injection of quasiparticles into the junction generates a nonequilibrium situation in the TI region. The Josephson current in this nonequilibrium situation is determined not only by the condensate wave functions in the TI region but also by the nonequilibrium distribution function in this segment. The current can be calculated by Eq. (20). It is convenient to calculate it at the interfaces of TI-S by exploiting the boundary conditions Eq. ( where ± signs refer to the boundary conditions at x = ±d/2. The Keldysh component of the full Green function can be expressed via the retarded and advanced components with the distribution function: where the distribution function is a diagonal matrix in the particle-hole space: There is a general relation (due to the particle-hole symmetry) between φ and φ. For our case of spinless fermions it reduces to φ(ε) = -φ(-ε). Utilizing the distribution function, the current Eq. ( Here, we assume that the left and right superconducting terminals possess ∓φ/2 macroscopic phases so that the phase difference between the superconductors is φ. The anomalous components of Green function at the interfaces are denoted by f R,A s and f R,A s . In order to find the Josephson current to the leading order with respect to the interface conductance γ -1 we expand the Green function around the bulk solution in the TI region. To obtain Eq. ( To find the anomalous Green function within the TI region, we solve the linearized Usadel equation in the surface channels: where κ = ±1 refer to the retarded and advanced components. The Usadel equation should be solved together with the boundary conditions Eq. ( and at the interface between the domains (x = d I ): where ǫ → 0. The solution to f R,A s component takes the following form: in which λ R,A = -2iκε/D and χ l,r = 2h(d/2 ± d I )/α. To calculate the current across the junction, one needs also to obtain a solution to f R,A s . The solution to this component however can be simply given as . By substituting the obtained f R,A s and f R,A s into the current definition (42), we are able to analyze the transport properties of the system proposed. The current relation ( where and j 2 is expressed by the remaining parts of Eq. ( These expressions imply that the main contribution to the resistance of the system originates from the tunnel process at the TI-S interfaces. The following combination of the distribution functions enables us to even decompose j 2 component of current to two parts j 2,1 and j 2,2 : in which χ = χ r -χ l and ± at the right hand side of Eq. (52a) pertinent to the left and right interfaces. As seen, j 2,1 reverses its direction at the left and right S-TI interfaces. Consequently, this component is unable to contribute to the current between the superconductors. This is also a part of the injected electric current and does have no effect on the Josephson current. In contrast, the current component j 2,2 does not change its sign at the superconductor interfaces, and therefore represents the nonvanishing current flow through the junction. This term reveals an electrically controllable φ 0 -junction that we discuss in detail in the next subsection. The Josephson current flowing through the junction is expressed by Eq. (52b). The ground state of the system corresponds to zero current and it is apparent that this condition is satisfied at a nonzero phase difference between the superconducting leads namely at: φ = χ = -4d I h/α. According to the previous section, this anomalous phase shift is proportional to the voltage bias V between the superconducting terminals and the additional normal injector electrode. Therefore, the φ 0 ground state of the Josephson junction can be experimentally switched on and off by simply controlling the quasiparticle flow injection. The quasiparticle injection controls not only the anomalous phase shift but also modifies the critical current of the Josephson junction. To illustrate this fact, we plot the corresponding critical current in Fig. Motivated by recent experiments on hybrid structures of topological insulator-supercondutor 