A systematic study is performed on the spinel oxide, i.e. LiTi 2 O 4 thin films oriented along [111]-, [110]-, and [001]-directions, to reveal the crystallographic dependence of transport properties. With decreasing temperature, the LiTi 2 O 4 displays roughly identical onset temperatures of twofold symmetry of in-plane angular dependent magnetoresistivity (AMR) (at ~ 100 K), crossover from negative-to positive-magnetoresistance (at ~ 50 K), and coherence length in the superconducting state. While, the twofold symmetry in AMR itself suggests anisotropic electron scattering. The superconducting transition temperature (T c ) seems insensitive to the lattice parameter. Moreover, the spherical aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (Cs-STEM) discloses that oxygen vacancies exist in the LiTi 2 O 4 films. These oxygen vacancies cause the change of lattice but show little influence on superconductivity, differing from high-T c cuprates where subtle variation of oxygen way lead to a significant change in superconductivity. The metallic spinel lithium titanate LiTi 2 O 4 is the only known spinel oxide superconductor, which was discovered by Great efforts have been made on improving the quality of LiTi 2 O 4 material in the past four decades In this paper, we have grown the high quality LiTi 2 O 4 thin films on [001]-, [110]-and [111]-oriented substrates. All LiTi 2 O 4 films show almost the same T c (~ 11 K) with transition width of less than 0.5 K. For these samples of different orientations, a crossover from positive to negative magnetoresistance (MR) happens at ~ 50 K and a twofold symmetry in in-plane angular dependent magnetoresistivity (AMR) shows up below ~ 100 K, indicating roughly isotropic band structure but anisotropic scattering in this system. Furthermore, unexpected oxygen vacancies have been detected by the spherical aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy techniques (Cs-STEM), which lead to reduction of Ti 4+ ions. Interestingly, we find that the T c seems insensitive to the variation of lattice constant as long as the samples are in the metallic regime. The LiTi 2 O 4 thin films are deposited with different oxygen pressures and substrates by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique with thickness of ~ 200 nm in the present work. Before the deposition, the MgAl 2 O 4 (MAO) substrates are annealed at 1000 o C for 5 hours in air The θ-2θ X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of [001]-oriented samples grown under different oxygen pressures (P O2 ) are shown in Fig. with φ 0 the fluxoid quantum. We first summarize our major results, that is, for LiTi 2 O 4 films of different orientations electrical transport properties are crystalline-independent, e.g. consistent onset temperatures of two-fold symmetry in AMR and crossover of magnetoresistance from negative to positive in the normal state, as well as roughly identical coherence length in the superconducting state. However, the superconducting transition temperature seems insensitive to the lattice constant in metallic LiTi 2 O 4 films. Previous work on [001]-oriented LiTi 2 O 4 has disclosed that the positive MR and two-fold symmetry of AMR plausibly originate from an orbital-related state below 50 K, and the negative MR stems from spin-orbit fluctuations, which should also work for the [110]-and [111]-oriented films. That is, the electron scattering could be anisotropic in magnetic field and vary with temperature. While, the trajectories of electron motion in fields seem almost crystalline-independent, where the effective mass is isotropic and agreement with the band calculations In order to clarify this issue, we performed the Cs-STEM on our LiTi 2 O 4 films as shown in Fig. From the line profiles corresponding to the rectangle area 1-4 in the enlarged and filtered ABF image in Fig. With substituting of Li for Ti, Li 1+x Ti 2-x O 4 holds the onset transition temperature of superconductivity for x < 1/3, and seems suddenly to be an insulator at x = 1/3 (i.e. Li 4 Ti 5 O 12 ) Compared to Li 4 Ti 5 O 12 in which the oxygen sites are fully occupied In conclusion, high quality LiTi 2 O 4 films were successfully synthesized on various substrates and along different orientations. A careful study of electrical transport properties on [001]-, [110]-, and [111]-oriented samples discloses identical onset temperatures of two-fold symmetry in AMR (~ 100 K) and crossover from negative to positive MR (~ 50 K) of different orientations. While, the anisotropic AMR in LiTi 2 O 4 films indicates an anisotropic electron scattering. Meanwhile, unexpected oxygen vacancies are found to exist in the superconducting LiTi 2 O 4 based on our Cs-STEM results, which result in the reduction of Ti ions. We also find that the T c seems to be insensitive to out-of-plane lattice constant, implying that these oxygen vacancies are not the key role in superconductivity. In order to approach the nature of LiTi 2 O 4 , further investigations are required to solve intriguing issues such as that more oxygen vacancies come out under lower vacuum deposition and do not influence on T c . band splitting can be seen in the asterisks marked EELS spectra of Ti L 2, 3 , which indicates a high Ti 4+ /Ti 3+ ratio in corresponding areas in the LiTi 2 O 4 film. In addition, the marked EELS spectra also show different shape of O K edge due to less oxygen vacancies in these areas.