The pressure-temperature phase diagram of the orthorhombic ferromagnetic superconductor UCoGe was determined by resistivity measurements up to 10.5 GPa. The Curie temperature TC is suppressed with pressure and vanishes at the critical pressure pc ≈ 1 GPa. Superconductivity is observed in both the ferromagnetic state at low pressure, and in the paramagnetic state above pc up to about 4 GPa. Non-Fermi liquid behavior appears in a large pressure range. The resistivity varies linearly with temperature around pc and evolves continuously with pressure to a T 2 Fermi-liquid behavior for p 5 GPa. The residual resistivity as a function of pressure shows a maximum far above pc at p ⋆ = 7.2 GPa and the amplitude of the inelastic scattering term of the resistivity decreases by more than one order in magnitude at p ⋆ , which appears to mark the entrance into a weakly correlated regime. The pressure dependence of the upper critical field for magnetic field applied along the b and c axis illustrates the drastic difference in the field dependence of the ferromagnetic superconducting pairing. While for H b axis Hc2(T ) is driven by the suppression of the ferromagnetic order, it is dominated by the strong initial suppression of the ferromagnetic fluctuations for a field applied in the easy magnetization axis c. Magnetic quantum criticality has attracted major attention in recent years. The magnetic quantum phase transition is accompanied by an increase of quantum fluctuations, which induces strong deviations from the standard Fermi-liquid behavior of a metal 1 . New quantum phases such as magnetically mediated non-conventional superconductivity (SC) 2 , nematic orders The collapse of antiferromagnetism occurs in many heavy fermion systems through a continuous second order quantum phase transition, and a superconducting dome has been observed in the vicinity of p c . In contrast, in the case of a ferromagnet, the quantum phase transition at p c changes near p c to be first order in systems with low disorder In this article we focus on the high pressure phase diagram of UCoGe which orders at T C ≈ 2.7 K with a tiny ordered moment of M 0 ≈ 0.05 μ B at p = 0 High quality single crystals of UCoGe (orthorhombic TiNiSi structure) were grown in a tetra-arc furnace by the Chzochralski method. Measurements under hydrostatic pressure were performed in a DAC (p < 11 GPa) and a piston cylinder cell (p < 2.5 GPa) with argon and Daphne oil 7373 as pressure transmitting media, respectively, ensuring very good pressure conditions Figure The T -dependence of the resistivity has been parameterized by fitting a power law ρ(T ) = ρ 0 + A n T n in the normal state. Here ρ 0 is the residual resistivity and A n gives the strength of the temperature dependent scattering term. In the case of a Fermi-liquid n = 2 and the coefficient A 2 is related to the average effective mass m ⋆ of the quasiparticles. In multiband heavy-fermion materials A 2 ∝ (m ⋆ ) 2 is generally obeyed. To evaluate the pressure and temperature dependence of the exponent n we performed fits with the power law on an sliding window of 0.3 K in the normal state. This allows to plot n(p, T ) in Fig. Theoretically, a T 5/3 temperature dependence is predicted in the quantum critical regime for a three dimensional ferromagnet A T -linear resistance has been observed in different strongly correlated electron systems, like high-T c cuprate or iron-pnictide superconductors close to the optimal doping The residual resistivity ρ 0 obtained from the fit is represented in Fig. H b c2 (T ) for field applied along the b axis is represented in Fig. To summarize we determined the (p, T ) phase diagram of UCoGe up to 10.5 GPa by resistivity measurements. T C vanishes at p c ≈ 0.9 GPa and SC has been observed up to 4p c . Ferromagnetic fluctuations account for the unusual normal state transport properties observed up to 5 GPa as well as the pressure and field dependence of H c2 . The superconducting critical field H c c2 for field along the c axis is determined by the pressure and field dependence of the ferromagnetic fluctuations which are suppressed for H ≈ 1 T at p = 0. H b c2 for transverse magnetic field changes drastically on crossing the ferromagnetic phase boundary below p c . Entering in the paramagnetic regime above p c H b c2 recovers rapidly the conventional initially linear T dependence of the upper critical field. Finally, the crossover pressure p ⋆ marks a change in the magnetic and electronic properties linked to the pressure dependence of the 5f occupation number and a smooth crossover from a strongly to weakly correlated regime. Our experiment gives now a sound basis on the anisotropic SC response of H c2 on the static and dynamic components of the ferromagnetism. To our knowledge, it is an unique example where the magnetic coupling is deeply modified (here for H c) in low magnetic fields. Close to p c the comparable strength of T C and T sc leads to remarkable non-Fermi-liquid behavior which indicates the strong coupling of magnetism and superconductivity. This is remarkably different from other ferromagnetic superconductors driven to quantum criticality by pressure (UGe 2 ) 