Advances with trapped ultracold atoms intensified interest in simulating complex physical phenomena, including quantum magnetism and transitions from itinerant to non-itinerant behavior. Here we show formation of antiferromagnetic ground states of few ultracold fermionic atoms in single and double well (DW) traps, through microscopic Hamiltonian exact diagonalization for two DW arrangements: (i) two linearly oriented one-dimensional, 1D, wells, and (ii) two coupled parallel wells, forming a trap of two-dimensional, 2D, nature. The spectra and spin-resolved conditional probabilities reveal for both cases, under strong repulsion, atomic spatial localization at extemporaneously created sites, forming quantum molecular magnetic structures with non-itinerant character. These findings usher future theoretical and experimental explorations into the highly-correlated behavior of ultracold stronglyrepelling fermionic atoms in higher dimensions, beyond the fermionization physics that is strictly applicable only in the 1D case. The results for four atoms are well described with finite Heisenberg spin-chain and cluster models. The numerical simulations of three fermionic atoms in symmetric double wells reveal the emergent appearance of coupled resonating 2D Heisenberg clusters, whose emulation requires the use of a t-Jlike model, akin to that used in investigations of high T c superconductivity. The highly entangled states discovered in the microscopic and model calculations of controllably detuned, asymmetric, double wells suggest three-cold-atom DW quantum computing qubits. The unparalleled experimental advances and control achieved in the field of ultracold atoms have rekindled an intense interest in emulating magnetic behavior using ultracold atoms in optical traps To date the theoretical studies of magnetism of a few ultracold atoms have mainly addressed We remark that the physics of ultracold atoms in 1D and 3D single traps has been investigated also away from the fermionization point using a Lippman-Schwinger equation approach, see Refs. In this paper, using large-scale configuration-interaction (CI) calculations as means for exact diagonalization of the microscopic Hamiltonian, we report that for N = 4 (even number) strongly interacting ultracold fermions in a double-well trap with parallel arrangement [DWPA We remark that the emergence of a resonance associated with the symmetrization of the many-body wave function in two-center/three-electron bonded systems is well known The emergence of the simple, as well as the resonating, Heisenberg clusters is a consequence of the spatial localization of the strongly-interacting, highly correlated fermionic atoms and the formation We note that due to the quantum character The resonant coupling of magnetic configurations through the tunneling of electrons between occupied and empty sites has long been studied. Two well-known relevant fields are: (i) the socalled direct exchange mechanism superconductivity via studies utilizing the ability to prepare and measure trapped ultracold fermionic atom systems with precise control over the number of atoms and the strength of interatomic interactions. We complement our investigations by further highlighting the differences arising from the different geometries of the traps in both the parallel and linear (LI) arrangement; in analogy to the DWPA designation defined above, a double-well trap with linear arrangement of the two needle-like wells will be denoted as DWLI; see schematics in Figs. 2(I,II). Our theoretical predictions can be directly confirmed using the recently developed experimental techniques. We stress again that the regime of ultracold Wigner-molecule (UCWM) formation and of the associated simple-Heisenbergchain and t-J resonating-spin-chains magnetism appears for strong interparticle interactions and contrasts sharply with the regime of itinerant magnetism Finally, we note that the related three-electron system in semiconductor double quantum dots has recently attracted a major attention in conjunction with the fabrication and implementation of pulse-gated fast hybrid qubits for solid-state-based quantum computing Before leaving the Introduction, we wish to clarify that the term antiferromagnetic is used by us to characterize finite systems having a ground state with the minimum possible value of the total spin, i.e., S = 1/2 for N = 3 fermions and S = 0 for N = 4 fermions. The plan of the paper is as follows: A statement of the many-body Hamiltonian, including a description of the doublewell employed by us, is given in Section 2. In Section 3, we describe investigations concerning four ultracold 6 Li atoms in double-well traps with both parallel and linear arrangement of the individual needlelike wells. A comparison with the case of four fermions in a quasi-1D single well is also included in order to appreciate the rich additional magnetic behaviors associated with a double well. Section 3 is divided into two subsections, with Sec. 3.1 describing results of purely microscopic CI calculations, and Sec. 3.2 establishing the mapping onto the Heisenberg 4-fermion phenomenological Hamiltonian. Section 4 presents our studies concerning the case of three ultracold 6 Li atoms in DWPA and DWLI traps, as well as the comparison with the corresponding case of a single well. Sec. 4.1 describes CI results for both the symmetric and tilted cases; for the tilted case, this section establishes the mapping onto a 3-fermion Heisenberg model. Going beyond the Heisenberg model, Sec. 4.2 introduces the t-J model and establishes, in analogy with the CI results, its validity for describing the case of symmetric double wells. Section 5 describes the entanglement properties of the CI many-body wave functions. The appendices provide detailed information concerning the mathematical formalism associated with the spin eigenfunctions and the finite Heisenberg and t -J models. In particular, Appendix A provides a brief description of the branching diagram that describes the multiplicities (number of degenerate spin states) of a given total spin S. This Appendix also presents in the Ising basis the general formulas that describe a spin eigenfunction (i) with S = 0 and S z = 0 for four fermions and (ii) with S = 1/2 and S z = 1/2 for three fermions. These general formulas incorporate in a compact form both the orthogonal basis of spin functions that spans the spin space for a given S, as well as any linear superposition of them. In addition, Appendix A describes the process of mapping the many-body CI wave functions onto these spin eigenfunctions. Appendix B discusses the mathematics of the Heisenberg model for 4 localized fermions in a ring-like rectangular configuration (DWPA case), while Appendix C discusses the corresponding case for an open chain arrangement (DWLI case). Appendix D discusses the mathematics of the Heisenberg model for 3 localized fermions in a triangular (DWPA case) and linear (DWLI case) configuration, both associated with tilted wells. Finally, Appendix E discusses the mathematics of the more general t -J model for 3 localized fermions in the case of a double trap with symmetric wells. A DWLI trap can be treated as a strictly-1D problem along a single direction. The DWPA trap which consists of two parallel needle-like wells, however, cannot be treated solely along one direction (e.g., the x-direction). Instead it requires consideration of the y coordinate as well. To treat both cases in a unified way, we consider a many-body Hamiltonian for N fermions of the form where r i -r j denotes the relative vector distance between the i and j fermions (e.g., 6 Li atoms). This Hamiltonian is the sum of a single-particle part H(i), which guarantees the needle-like shape of the individual wells, and the two-particle contact interaction. The external confining potential [in H(i)] that models a double well (DW) is based on a two-center-oscillator (TCO) model vary independently; here we choose ω x1 = ω x2 = ω x . The needle-like shape of each individual trap is enforced by assuming that ω x << ω y (DWLI case) or ω x >> ω y (DWPA case). The TCO further allows consideration of a tilt ∆ between the left and right wells. Fig. As we mentioned in the Introduction, we use the CI method for determining the solutions of the many-body problem specified by the Hamiltonian (1). The CI method expresses the fermionic many-body wave function as a supperposition of Slater determinants, and it is well known in quantum chemistry and in few-body physics of electrons; for a basic description of the CI method, see Ref. CI method in the literature mentioned above. Convergence in the CI calculations is reached through the use of a basis of up to eighty TCO single-particle states as needed. Note that the TCO single-particle states automatically adjust to the separation d as it varies from the limit of the unified atom d = 0 to that of the two fully separated traps (for sufficiently large d). We verified that for ω y /ω x = 100 (strictly-1D single trap), our CI calculations agree with the results of Table The matrix elements of H MB between the CI determinants are calculated using the Slater rules. An important ingredient in this respect are the two-body matrix elements of the contact interaction in the basis (of dimension K) formed out of the single-particle (space) eigenstates φ i (r) of the TCO Hamiltonian. Because the individual wells remain needle-like in all of our calculations here, the s-wave scattering between two ultracold fermions takes place primarily along a single dimension, either the y-dimension or the x-dimension. As a result, the parameter g xy in front of the δ(r i -r j ) function in Eq. ( where u is a dummy variable and W is the lowest-in-energy single-particle state in the y (x) direction for the LI (PA) trap configurations, respectively. Note that the 1D strength g relates to the 3D s-scattering length a 3D via the relation precisely as is done in the experimental studies of Ref. For the CI calculations in this paper, we assume that the total-spin projection S z = 0 for 4 fermions or S z = 1/2 for 3 fermions. This suffices to provide the full energy spectrum, as long as the many-body Hamiltonian does not depend on S z . Naturally, the many-body wave functions characterized by a given total spin S are different for the different projections S z > 0. For lack of space, we will not consider here many-body wave functions with S z = 0 for four fermions or with S z = 1/2 for three fermions. For an earlier study of such wave functions in the case of four electrons in a double quantum dot, see Ref. We treat here three different types of traps: a SW quasi-1D trap [see Fig. We start with the four-atom double-well systems, followed by a comparison with the single-well trap (end of Secs. 3.1 and 3.2), which is used as a reference point to allow for a deeper appreciation of the richness of magnetic behaviors introduced by the double-well geometries. Figs. 1 and 2 illustrate the evolution of the spectra of N = 4 6 Li atoms for the DWPA and DWLI cases, respectively, as a function of the separateness of (or alternatively the strength of tunneling between) the two 1D wells (resulting from both the effect of separation in distance, d, and the height of the interwell barrier V b ). The limiting case of the single-well ("united atom") quasi-1D trap (at d = 0) is displayed in Fig. In all instances, i.e., for both the DWPA and DWLI cases, as well as the SW case, there are two states with total spin S = 0, three states with S = 1, and one state with S = 2. These total-spin multiplicities, denoted here by G(N = 4, S), arise from the group-symmetry properties of the spin eigenfunctions The similar behavior of the sixfold-multiplet bands irrespective of the different geometries of the double-well traps, i.e., DWPA versus DWLI, indicates an underlying physical process independent of dimensionality (2D versus 1D). This underlying physics involves spatial localization of the 6 Li atoms at extemporaneously created sites within each well and the ensuing formation of quantum UCWMs, as can be seen by an inspection of corresponding single-particle densities (SPDs, green surfaces in Figs. The SPD is the expectation value of the one-body operator where |Φ CI N denotes the many-body (multi-determinantal) CI wave function. We note that the SPD is the sum of the spin-up and spin-down single-particle densities, defined as where σ and σ i denote up or down spins. In all cases the SPDs display four humps corresponding to the four localized fermions at the self-generated localization sites. The detailed arrangement of these sites varies in order to accomodate the geometry of the traps. For the DWPA case [Fig. Although several distinct spin structures can correspond to the same SPD of a UCWM, the spin eigenfunction associated with a specific CI wave function can be determined with the help of the many-body SR-CPDs, P σσ 0 , which yield the conditional probability distribution of finding another fermion with up (or down) spin σ at a position r, given that a specific fermion with up (or down) spin σ 0 is fixed at r 0 . In detail, the spin-resolved two-point anisotropic correlation function is defined as Using a normalization constant we further define a related spin-resolved conditional probability distribution (SR-CPD) as In particular, by calculating the ratios of the volumes under the CPD humps and equating them to the corresponding ratios of the squares of the angle-dependent coefficients of the general expressions for the spin eigenfunctions, one can determine the numerical values of the coefficients that map the spin eigenfunction to a specific SR-CPD (for details, see Appendix A and Ref. where the α's (β's) denote up (down) spin-1/2 fermions situated at the self-generated sites (the maxima of the humps in the SPDs or CPDs); the methodology and detailed calculations used in determining the angle θ in the general spin eigenfunction in Eq. (A.2) are described in Appendix A. The equal in absolute value |C i | = 1/2, i = 1, . . . , 4 coefficients in front of the four primitives in Eq. ( The mapping to the spin eigenfunction in Eq. ( Furthermore, the discussion above applies also to the excited states. For example, the SPD and SR-CPD of the first excited state with S = 0, S z = 0 in the DWPA trap of Fig. We note that the spin eigenfunctions in Eqs. The two coefficients 3) in front of the first two primitives in Eq. ( The spin eigenfunction associated with the 4-fermion S = 0, S z = 0 CI ground state at -1/g = -0.1( √ 2l 0x ω x ) -1 in the case of well-separated wells in the DWLI linear configuration [see star in Fig. Returning to the case of four fermions in a single quasi-1D trap [Figs. where C 1 = 0.332411, C 2 = -0.575017, and C 3 = 0.242606. In the next section, we utilize the trends uncovered by the CI solutions for the spectra and wave functions of the many-body Hamiltonian, in order to develop a Heisenberg-model phenomenology. This development aims at providing tools for analyzing quantum magnetism in double (and multi-well) ultracold-atom traps. We have verified that the CI energy spectra presented in Figs. where the symbol < ij > denotes that the summation is restricted to the nearestneighbor sites. The second term is a scalar, leading simply to an overall energy shift; For the open 1D linear configuration of the DWLI and SW traps, J 12 = r = 0, J 34 = 0, and J 23 = J 14 = s = 0. The energy eigenvalues E i and eigenvectors V i of H H [Eq. The topology of the spin chain in Fig. For the single-well case, all six CI energies have distinct values; see the spectrum in Fig. which is independent of s and allows for the determination of f . Fitting to the CI spectrum, we get f ∼ 1.35. This value agrees with that resulting from the nearestneighbor exchange constants of harmonically trapped particles listed in Table I of Ref. With the value of r/s = 1. The cases of asymmetric wells are amenable to straightforward interpretations based on pure Heisenberg models. The moderate tilt [Fig. with J 12 = s and J 13 = J 23 = r; for the numbering of the three sites, see the schematics in Fig. This CI-derived spin function is schematically portrayed in Fig. A larger tilt ∆ = 2.5 ω y generates a (3,0) CI ground state, associated with a linear UCWM [see the SPD in Fig. Fig. A qualitatively different behavior, bringing extra intricacies and opening igress to novel complex physical systems, is exhibited by the symmetric DWPA cases (∆ = 0) for N = 3 shown in Fig. We mention that the resonating behavior and the symmetrization of the many-body wave function in two-center/three-electron bonded systems is well known To model the exact-diagonalization results shown above, one must go beyond the aforementioned simple Heisenberg Hamiltonian model [see Eq. ( where H c is the coupling between the two simple Heisenberg rings defined over the sites (135) and (246); see the two 3 × 3 blocks on the diagonal (upper left and lower right) in Eq. ( The Hamiltonian H tJ is equivalent to a six by six matrix, where the upper index ∆ denotes explicitly the dependence on the tilt. When |∆| >> |t| and |∆| >> |t 2 |, one recovers the isolated-triangle Hamiltonian, H trg H , in Eq. ( Similar trends pertaining to the doubling of the spectrum (from three to six states) in conjunction with the emergence of two resonating UCWMs apply also in the case of N = 3 ultracold fermions in a symmetric (∆ = 0) DWLI (linear arrangement) trap, as is illustrated in Fig. The entanglement entropy S vN for three 6 Li atoms in a DWPA trap in the configurations, whose spectra are shown in Fig. For the CI many-body wave functions, we adopt as a measure of entanglement the von Neumann entropy where ρ is the single-particle density matrix and C = -log 2 N , yielding S vN = 0 for an uncorrelated single-determinant state. The single-particle density matrix ρ is given by and it is normalized to unity, i.e., Tr ρ = 1. The Greek indices μ (or ν) count the spin orbitals (of dimension 2K) and where α(β) denote up (down) spins. Since the allowed maximum value for S vN in our CI calculations is log 2 (2K)log 2 (3) = 5.70 (we use a typical basis of K = 78 single-particle space orbitals), it is notable that the calculated values in Fig. In this paper, we have presented timely advances in the growing field of few-body ultracold atoms with the aim of enhancing understanding of experimental endeavors and lodging new directions of research in this area. We progressed in two main courses: (i) uncovering universal non-itinerant and fermionization-like aspects of the physics of ultracold few fermions trapped in double-well confinements, with various 1D and 2D trapping geometries, as a conduit for emulating quantum magnetism and related phenomena beyond the strictly 1D single-well (SW) case, and (ii) making headways in the development and implementation of benchmark numerical simulations (exact diagonalization of the full microscopic Hamiltonian with configuration interaction, CI, techniques) as tools for modeling theoretical and experimental results with effective spin-Hamiltonians (Heisenberg and t-J models). Our calculations for N = 3 and N = 4 ultracold fermionic 6 Li atoms in SW and double well (DW) traps with linear (DWLI) or parallel (DWPA) geometries, reveal formation of antiferromagnetic ordering for the lowest-energy bands over the entire range of interparticle contact repulsion studied here. For N = 4 ultracold atoms in a symmetric DWPA trap with very strong interatomic repulsion, we find (via miscroscopic, CI, calculations) formation of a two-dimensional ultracold Wigner molecule (UCWM) of non-itinerant character. For the symmetric parallel DW trap the formation of the 2D UCWM leads to mapping of the interacting 4-atom trapped system onto a 2D rectangular Heisenberg ring cluster, whereas for a symmetric DWLI trap (as well as for a SW trap) we find a four-atom linear (1D) UCWM in juxtaposition with mapping onto a linear Heisenberg spin-chain. These mappings enable employment of the corresponding Heisenberg model Hamiltonian, whose solutions reproduce well the results of the microscopic, numerically-exact, calculations. For N = 3 ultracold atoms in DWLI or DWPA traps with a finite tilt (detuning) between the two wells, the numerically calculated (CI) spectrum for strong interatomic repulsion is described well with the use of the aforementioned Heisenberg Hamiltonian. As noted already in the Introduction, the high measure of entanglement predicted for the set of lowest energy states of the three strongly repelling fermionic atoms, together with the controllable tilt between the two wells, motivate consideration of this double well system as a cold-atom quantum computing qubit. In contrast to the asymmetric DW case, description of the N = 3 ultracold-atom CI spectra for symmetric (vanishing tilt) DWLI or DWPA traps, that manifest doubling of the number of states in the lowest band, as well as modeling the corresponding SR-CPDs, are not attainable with the simple Heisenberg model, requiring instead the more intricate t-J-type model For further detailed applications of this procedure, see Refs. Appendix B. Heisenberg model for 4 localized fermions in a DWPA configuration The single particle densities and CPDs in Figs. where the indices k in S k denote the locations of the four sites, which are associated with the four humps in the s.p. density of Fig. For the case of all four fermions being trapped in a single well, one has an open linear 4-site Heisenberg chain, which is obtained from Eq. (B.1) by setting J 34 = 0, i.e., To proceed, it is sufficient to use the six-dimensional Ising subspace for zero total-spin projection (S z = 0), which is spanned by the following set of basis states: Using the raising and lowering operators S + i = S x i + iS y i , S - i = S x i -iS y i , and the identity S i •S j = S x i S x j + S y i S y j + S z i S z j , the Heisenberg Hamiltonian given by Eq. (B.1) can be written as H in matrix form, as follows Due to the reflection symmetry in x and y, H RP,gen H has only two different exchange constants J 14 = J 23 = s and J 12 = J 34 = r. (r here decreases rapidly with the distance, or the interwell barrier height.) As a result, the matrix form of H RP,gen H simplifies to the following The general eigenvalues E i and corresponding eigenvectors V i of the matrix (B.5) are calculated easily using MATHEMATICA where The corresponding (unnormalized) eigenvectors and their total spins are given by: where and f = r/s. To understand how the Heisenberg Hamiltonian in Eq. (B.5) captures the behavior seen in the CI spectra of Fig. Furthermore, the fact that all six curves in the CI lowest-energy band cross at the same point 1/g = 0 suggests that s ∼ F (-1/g) and r ∼ F (-1/g) with (x = -1/g) Of interest is the fact that the ability of the Heisenberg Hamiltonian in Eq. (B.5) to reproduce the CI trends is not restricted solely to energy spectra, but extends to the CI wave functions as well. Indeed when r → 0, the last two eigenvectors of the Heisenberg matrix (having S = 0) become The CI spectra and spin functions for the smaller barrier V b = 6.08 kHz can be analyzed within the framework of the 4-site Heisenberg Hamiltonian (B.5) when small (compared with J 14 = s), but nonnegligible, values of the second exchange integral J 12 = r are considered. In this case, the partial three-fold and two-fold degeneracies are lifted. Indeed in Figs. In the case of a single well and of a double-well in a linear arrangement, the Heisenberg Hamiltonian H 4LI,gen H in Eq. (B.2) is of relevance. In the Ising basis, and using J 14 = J 23 = s, J 12 = r, and J 34 = 0 in Eq. (B.4), this Hamiltonian reduces to H 4LI H , i.e., The general eigenvalues of the matrix (C.1) are: The corresponding (unnormalized) eigenvectors and their total spins are given by: V 1 = {-1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1} T , S = 1, (C.8) V 2 = {0, -1, -r/(s -√ s 2 + r 2 ), r/(s -√ s 2 + r 2 ), 1, 0} T , S = 1, (C.9) Appendix D. Heisenberg model for 3 localized fermions in tilted wells In the case of N = 3 strongly-interacting fermions in a single 1D well or a tilted doublewell with a parallel arrangement of the two 1D wells, the simple Heisenberg model is applicable. For a (2, 1) fermion configuration, the three sites form an isosceles triangle (see Figs. The case of 3 fermions in a single well [forming a linear Wigner molecule, see Fig. Appendix E. The t-J model for 3 localized fermions in a symmetric double well The (2,1) case of three strongly-interacting fermions in a tilted double well [with ∆ = 0.5 kHz, see Fig. We have found that the CI results in Figs. 4(a) and 4(f) can be reproduced by using two hopping parameters only, i.e., by setting t 1 = t 3 = t; for the definition of t j 's, see the main text. In this case, the relevant generalization of the Heisenberg Hamiltonian matrix in Eq. (D.1) is given by The t-J Hamiltonian matrix in Eq. (E.1) exhibits a very rich behavior. In the following, we will limit our analysis to the case with r = 0, i.e., for large interwell barrier V b which is also the case of both spectra in Fig. 