To understand the recently observed high temperature superconductivity in the monolayer CuO2 grown on the Bi2Sr2CaCu2O 8+δ substrates, we propose a two band model of the hybridized oxygen px and py orbitals with the proximity effect of the substrate. We demonstrate that both the nodal and nodeless superconducting states can be induced by the proximity effect, depending on the strengths of the pairing parameters. High transition temperature (T c ) superconductivity in cuprates remains one of the most challenging topics in condensed matter physics Recently, We begin with a brief summary of the electronic structure of the high T c superconducting copper oxides. The parent compounds of the copper oxides are anti-ferromagnetic Mott insulator, and superconductiv-ity arises upon chemical doping, which introduces charge carriers in the CuO 2 planes. The layers in cuprates are generally charged, either with positive charge such as in the BiO layer in Bi-2212 or with negative charge such as in the sandwiched CuO 2 layer. The charge carriers on the CuO 2 plane in the parent compound is -2e per unit cell consisting of one copper and two oxygen atoms. The copper has a valence of 2+ and is in 3d 9 configuration with a single hole of d x 2 -y 2 orbital, and oxygen has a valence of 2-and is in configuration of 2p 6 . Due to the strong on-site Coulomb repulsion, each Cu-atom is occupied with a single 3d hole carrying spin-1/2 moment. Chemical doping introduces additional holes into CuO 2 plane. These additional holes primarily reside on the oxygen sites, forming the Zhang-Rice spin singlets, which move through the square lattice of Cu-ions by exchanging with neighboring Cu spin-1/2 moment. This leads to an effective twodimensional t-J model or large on-site repulsive Hubbard model We now turn to examine the electronic structure of the MBE grown monolayer CuO 2 on the top of a BiO layer, which is the surface plane of charge neutral Bi-2212 substrate. If we neglect the charge transfer from the monolayer CuO 2 to the inner planes, the monolayer CuO 2 is charge neutral as required by total charge neutrality. Therefore, the Cu ion has valence of 2+, or 3d 9 configuration, while the oxygen-ion has valence of 1-and is hence in configuration of 2p 5 in the monolayer CuO 2 . The charge carriers in the CuO 2 monolayer thus have additional two holes in average on the oxygen-ions per unit cell, which is in contrast with the bulk superconducting cuprates. It is expected that some charge carriers on the monolayer CuO 2 may be transferred to the inner planes of the substrate Bi-2212, so that the actual charge carriers on the oxygen-ions will be slightly reduced. With such a large charge carrier concentration, we expect the CuO 2 monolayer itself to be a good metal, whose low energy physics is totally different from the cuprates near a Mott insulator. In this paper we propose that the superconductivity observed in the CuO 2 monolayer is proximity induced superconductivity from the substrate cuprate. The primary reason in support of this scenario is that the transition temperature of the superconductivity in the monolayer is essentially the same as that of the Bi-2212 substrates as reported in Ref. The rest part of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present a model Hamiltonian for proximity induced superconductivity in monolayer CuO 2 . In the third section, we discuss the possible nodeless superconducting gap of the model and present numerical results for the phase diagram on the nodal or nodeless superconducting phases. The paper ends with a short summary and discussion. In this section, we propose a two-band model for the monolayer CuO 2 on the Bi-2212 substrate and examine the proximity effect induced d-wave superconductivity. We first discuss the Hamiltonian part without the pairing, i.e., a non-interacting electron system on a square lattice with oxygen orbitals of either 2p x or 2p y as shown in Fig. where and t x , t y , and t xy are assumed to be positive parameters, and characterize the nearest neighbor intra-and inter-orbital hopping terms, respectively. More accurate description for the monolayer would also include Cu-3d x 2 -y 2 orbital. The holes on the O-site (2p x and 2p y ) are strongly coupled to the localized Cu-3d x 2 -y 2 spin, and the system may be described by the Kondo lattice model with two conduction bands The inter-orbital hopping term hybridizes the two orbitals into two bands with dispersion The model is symmetric under reflection with respect to x-axis or y-axis (Cu-O bonds), and has C 4 rotational symmetry: To describe the proximity effect of the cuprate substrate with d-wave superconductivity, we introduce dwave pairings for the carriers on the oxygen 2p x and 2p y orbitals as shown in Fig. where the Nambu spinor has been introduced as , and the Hamiltonian matrix is given by with Note that the d-wave pairing symmetry of the substrates requires where k = (k y , -k x ). By transforming the gap function matrix for p x and p y orbitals into the hybridized band basis, we arrive at where θ k =tan -1 2ǫxy ǫx-ǫy in the range of [0, π]. It shows that the hybridized bands of p x and p y orbitals are subjected to mixture of s-wave and d-wave pairings together with ∆ xy (k), which is neither s-or d-wave symmetry due to the mirror reflection symmetry breaking with regards x-or y-axis. For consideration of mirror symmetry, we will set ∆ xy = 0 in what follows. Actually an analysis of the proximity pairing for the monolayer on top of the substrate Bi-2212 suggests the leading order in ∆ xy vanishes By diagonalizing the Hamiltonian matrix, we obtain the superconducting quasiparticle spectrum. The quasiparticle dispersion takes the simple form where Two quasiparticle bands E + (k) and E -(k) are separated, and E -(k) corresponds to the lower one. With the expression for the quasiparticle spectra, we are in good position to examine the gap nodes and the STM probe of the gap. The d-wave pairing in the bulk cuprates has the form of ∆ d (k) ∝ (cos k x -cos k y ), and there are four nodes along the lines of k x = ±k y , which are crossing points of the lines with the Fermi surface. As the intra-band pairing is dominated by d-wave pairing form, it is expected that gap nodes in quasi-particle excitations are very likely to occur. However, the mixture with s-wave pairing could potentially open the gap nodes as long as the s-wave component is relatively strong enough e.g. if t xy is small, and ∆ 0 is large. The exact criterion is given by the zeroes of B k , which will be discussed in the next section. In this section, we examine the possibility of nodeless gap in the two-orbital d-wave superconductivity in the previous section. From Eqs. ( Next, unlike the limit case we demonstrated above, we show that a weak coupling pairing theory does not lead to a gapful d-wave state when t xy >> |t x -t y |. This condition is more physically relevant since t xy is the nearest neighbor hopping. Within the weak coupling theory, we may consider only intra-band pairing and neglect the inter-band pairing since the two bands are not degenerate in the presence of the inter-orbital hopping. Since then the intra-band pairing is almost pure d-wave symmetric, the nodal structure in the d-wave pairing therefore remains in two-orbital bands within the weak coupling theory. This shows that the vanishing of the gap nodes requires a strong pairing coupling, comparable to the energy splitting of the two bands. Below we shall consider a ǫ FIG. FIG. representative case to illustrate the gap property. For the monolayer CuO 2 , the band structure parameters are not so known, and the proximity induced pairing strengths are also not known. Therefore the choice of the parameters we will use below is for the purpose of illustration. We choose a set of parameters t xy = 1, t x = 0.5, t y = 0.3 for the non-interacting part of the model. We will discuss the band structure and then examine the gap property. The hybridized bands are plotted in Fig. In Fig. on ∆ x + ∆ y instead of each of them in separate forms. At small values of ∆ ′ s, the gap has nodes, consistent with the weak coupling pairing analyses. Note that B k is non-negative, which is required for the quasiparticle solutions as implied in Eq. ( In the nodeless superconducting phase with ∆ x = 0.6, ∆ y = 0.3, ∆ 0 = 2.1, and μ = 0.2, the lower quasiparticle band E -(k) in the Brillouin zone is calculated and displayed in Fig. In summary, the successful growth of the monolayer CuO 2 on Bi-2212 reported by Zhong et al. We wish to point out that the non-interacting two orbital model we used in the paper is a simplified model and the coupling between the O-2p bands and the localized spin on the Cu sites has the Kondo coupling, which is expected to greatly reduce the band widths of the Oorbitals near the Fermi level After finished this paper, we noted that nodeless excitation spectrum in a two-orbital model with d-wave symmetry was previously discussed in the context of iron based superconductivity 