Bilayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) belong to a class of materials with two unique features, the coupled spin-valley-layer degrees of freedom and the crystal structure that is globally centrosymmetric but locally non-centrosymmetric. In this work, we will show that the combination of these two features can lead to a rich phase diagram for unconventional superconductivity, including intra-layer and inter-layer singlet pairings and inter-layer triplet pairings, in bilayer superconducting TMDs. In particular, we predict that the inhomogeneous Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state can exist in bilayer TMDs under an in-plane magnetic field. We also discuss the experimental relevance of our results and possible experimental signatures. Introduction.-Unconventional superconductivity We first illustrate the difference from symmetry aspect. Although inversion symmetry exists in bilayer TMDs, the inversion center should be chosen at the center between two layers, labeled by "P" in Fig. In this work, we study possible superconducting pairings based on a prototype model of bilayer TMDs. The superconducting phase diagram as a function intra-layer (U 0 ) and interlayer (V 0 ) interactions is summarized in Fig. Phase diagram of bilayer TMDs -A prototype model for TMDs where s and τ are two sets of Pauli matrices for spin and layer degrees, ǫ = ± is for valley index and ξ k = 2 2m k 2μ with chemical potential μ. Here the β so term is the Ising SOC while the t term is the hybridization between two layers. The eigen-energy is given by ε s,λ = ξ k + λD 0 with D 0 = β 2 so + t 2 and s, λ = ±. s does not appear and thus the eigen-states with opposite s are degenerate, as shown in Fig. (See appendix for details). Possible superconducting pairings are studied based on the linearized gap equations 1-3 (See appendix). Around the valley K (or -K), the Fermi surfaces for two spin states in each layer are well separated by Ising SOC β so term. Therefore, we below assume the Fermi energy only crosses the lower energy band at each valley (Fig. for the E u pairing, from which the corresponding critical temperature in each channel can be determined. The A 2u pairing does not exist because V A 2u ,e f f = 0. The phase diagram can be extracted by comparing different T c0,i (Fig. The A 1u pairing appears when the repulsive inter-layer interaction is stronger than the attractive intralayer interaction (-V 0 > U 0 > 0) because repulsive inter-layer interaction will favor opposite phases of pairing functions between two layers. The A 1u phase is separated from the A 1g phase by a critical line U 0 = -V 0 . When both U 0 and V 0 are repulsive interaction (U 0 , V 0 < 0), no superconductivity can exist. For the 2D E u pairing, ∆ E u ,1 and ∆ E u ,2 are degenerate. By taking into account the fourth order term in the Landau free energy (See Appendix), either nematic superconductivity Magnetic field effect -Next we study the effect of magnetic fields on bilayer superconducting TMDs. Generally, magnetic fields have two effects, the Zeeman effect and the orbital effect. The Zeeman coupling is given by where B labels the magnetic field and the Bohr magneton is absorbed into g factor. The orbital effect is normally included by replacing the momentum k in ξ k with the canonical momentum π = k + e A with vector potential A (Peierls substitution). The orbital effect of in-plane magnetic fields is normally not important for a quasi-2D system. However, it is not the case in bilayer TMDs due to its unusual band structure. Let's choose A = (0, -B x z, 0) for the in-plane magnetic field B x , in which the origin z = 0 is located at the center between two layers. As a result, ξ k is changed to ξ π = 2 2m (k 2 x +(k y -eB x z 0 2 τ z ) 2 )-μ after the substitution, where z 0 is the distance between two layers. The Ginzburg-Landau free energy is constructed as where L 4 describes the fourth order term. The superconductivity susceptibility χ (2) i j,μν can be expanded up to the second order of q and B (q i q j , B i B j and q i B j with i, j = x, y, z). The mag-netic field correction to T c0,i for different pairings can be extracted by minimizing the above free energy (See appendix). Due to the orbital effect, the Hamiltonian (1) is changed to where v Q = eB x z 0 2m and the chemical potential μ in ξ k is redefined to include the B 2 x term. We first focus on the limit t → 0, in which the energy dispersion of the Hamiltonian (4) is shown in Fig. in which the detailed form of P and Q are defined in Appendix. The term Q = KB x q y with a constant K mixes A 1g and , the free energy is changed to The corresponding critical temperature is determined by maximizing ln T c T c0 = 1 4N 0 (P(B x , q) + αQ(B x , q)) with respect to q and α. From the explicit form of P and Q, the maximum is achieved by q x = 0 and |q y | = q c = eB x z 0 = 2Q, thus realizing the FFLO state. The corresponding correction to T c vanishes (T c = T c0 ). As a comparison, the T c of zero momentum pairing decreases with magnetic fields as x and the FFLO state is always favored in the limit t → 0 for in-plane magnetic fields. The form of the stable pairing function depends on the sign of Q. Let's assume B x > 0 and K > 0 in Q = KB x q y . If q y = q c > 0, Q > 0 and thus ∆ + pairing is favored. If q y = -q c < 0, Q < 0 and ∆ -is favored. ∆ + (q c ) and ∆ -(-q c ) are degenerate for the second order term of free energy. The FFLO state in the real space is ∆(r) = ∆ + (q c )e iq c y + ∆ -(-q c )e -iq c y . ( The exact form of pairing function is determined by the fourth order term of ∆ + (q c ) and ∆ -(-q c ), which is phenomenologically given by If B a > 0, we need This state is known as LO phase In the limit t → 0, ∆ + and ∆ -are just the singlet pairing on the top and bottom layers according to Table We notice that the FFLO phase has been proposed in noncentrosymmetric SCs under a magnetic field When t 0, the occurence of the FFLO phase will be shifted to a finite magnetic field. We numerically minimize free energy with respect to the momentum q and calculate the magnetic field correction to T c . In Fig. x (red and blue lines in Fig. x dependence and becomes weaker. Experimentally, one can control the hybridization between two layers by inserting an insulating layer in between, and the deviation of the T c correction from the B 2 x dependence implies the occurrence of FFLO states in this system. We further construct the phase diagram by evaluating gap functions as a function of temperatures and magnetic fields for t = 10meV in Fig. Besides the orbital effect, the correction of T c due to the Zeeman effect, which is the same for zero-momentum pairing and the FFLO phase, is given by ln x for A 1g pairing and ln x for A 1u pairing. Additional factors t 2 /β 2 so and t 4 /β 4 so greatly reduce the B 2 x dependence for the A 1g and A 1u pairings in the limit t ≪ β so . The behavior of out-of-plane magnetic field (B z ) in bilayer TMDs is similar to that of conventional SCs (See Appendix). Discussion and Conclusion -In realistic bilayer superconducting TMDs, the Fermi energy will cross both spin states in each layer. However, once the Ising SOC is larger than other energy scales (β so ≫ t, k f v Q , v f q), the Fermi surfaces for two spin states in one layer are well separated and the physics discussed here should be valid qualitatively. Based on the existing experiments, the A 1g pairing is mostly likely to exist at a zero magnetic field. In this case, we predict the occurence of the FFLO phase under an in-plane magnetic field. The onset magnetic field is determined by the ratio between inter-layer hybridization t and Ising SOC β so ( t β so ∼ 0.27 in NbSe 2 ) where the H 0 term is for single-particle Hamiltonian and the V term is for interaction. We may consider the path integral formalism of the BdG Hamiltonian in the imaginary time, given by where the action is given by In the path integral formula, c and c are the Grassmann field for the operators ĉ and ĉ † with c(β) = -c(0) and c(β) = c(0). Let us assume the symmetry group for the single-particle Hamiltonian H 0 as G and we can decompose the interaction term into the representation matrices (denoted as γ iμ of the group G, where i labels the representation and μ labels the dimension of the representation i. Let's define where the minus sign for V αβγδ (p, p ′ , q) keeps V i (q) > 0 for attractive interactions. The interaction term can be written as iμ ∆iμ , we may apply Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation to the above action and obtain where ∆ iμ is superconducting order parameter (gap function). This action only contain fermion bilinear terms and thus we can integrate out the electrons c and c. We write the resulting path integral as Z = D∆ * D∆exp -S e f f with the effective action S e f f = dτL e f f . Here the Lagrangian is expand as a function of the order parameters ∆ and ∆ * with the form where L 2 is for the second order term and L 4 is for the fourth order term. The second order term L 2 is given by where superconductivity susceptibility χ (2) is given by Here the single-particle Green function is defined as for holes for our interacting Hamiltonian in the Matsubara frequency space. The fourth order term L 4 is given by where Here we have neglected the spatial dependence (no q dependence) in the fourth order superconductivity susceptibility χ The superconducting order parameter is determined by minimizing Ginzburg-Landau free energy, which can be determined by considering δL δ∆ * iμ = 0. Near the critical temperature, the order parameter can be regarded a perturbation and in this case, we only need to consider the second order term and obtain the linearized gap equation for the pairing in the representation i. The linearized gap equation will be used to study the critical temperature of our system. To solve the linearized gap equation, it is essential to calculate Matsubara Green functions and superconductivity susceptibility. In this part, we consider the Hamiltonian of bilayer TMD (Eq. (1) in the main text) with Zeeman coupling, given by where ξ k = k 2 2mμ term describes kinetic energy, β so term describes Ising spin-orbit coupling (SOC), t term is for the hybridization between two layers and the last term is for Zeeman coupling with the magnetic field B. The eigen-energy of the above Hamiltonian is given by where . The corresponding Matsubara Green function for electrons can be written in a compact form as where The hole Green function is where Now we only focus on the uniform case (q = 0) and may substitute the form of electron and hole Green functions into superconductivity susceptibility to obtain Since T r γ † iμ P e ǫ sλ γ jν P h ǫ s ′ λ ′ does not depend on iω n and k, we can fisrt integrate out iω n ,k . This integral can be further simplified. One can show that the singular behavior of the above expression comes from the term λ = -λ ′ when D 0 is large. Therefore, we consider the case with λ = -λ ′ = -(the case with λ = -λ ′ = + is similar). In this case, we define and direct calculation shows that where N 0 is density of states at the Fermi energy, γ = 1.57, ω D is Debye frequency, which is chosen to be 10meV in our calculation, and ψ is the di-gamma function. Therefore, we have χ 0,++ = χ 0,--= N 0 ln 2γω D πkT = χ 0 and χ 0,+-= χ 0,-+ = χ 0δχ with where C = -ψ (2) 1 2 ≈ 16.83. With the above expression, the superconductivity susceptibility is simplified as To obtain the gap equation, we need further to decompose the pairing interaction into different representations. The pairing interaction is introduced as ĤV For simplicity, we assume the interaction is momentum independent (on-site interaction) and only consider the following non-zero V and (2) inter-layer interaction where σ and η reverse the value of σ and η. Here we introduce additional minus sign before U 0 and V 0 so that the attractive interaction is defined for U 0 > 0 and V 0 > 0. Next we decompose the interaction into different channels with the form where γ matrices label different representation matrices. For the D 3d group, s y and s y τ x (labeled as γ A 1g ,1 and γ A 1g ,2 ) belong to the A 1g representation, s y τ z (labeled as γ A 1u ) belongs to A 1u , s x τ y (labeled as γ A 2u ) belongs to A 2u and {τ y , s z τ y } (labeled as {γ E u ,1 , γ E u ,2 }) to E u . More explicitly, γ A 1g ,1 and γ A 1g ,2 describe intra-layer and inter-layer singlet pairings (c , γ A 1u corresponds to intra-layer singlet pairings with opposite phases between two layers (c ) gives inter-layer triplet pairing (c ↑+ c ↑-and c ↓+ c ↓-). With these matrices, we can compare matrix elements of interactions in Eq. (B14) with those in Eq. (B12) and Eq. (B13) and obtain Next we need to evaluate the element T r γ † iμ P e ǫ s-γ jν P h ǫ s ′ + and discuss the gap equation in different representations separately. (1) A 1g representation (s y , s y τ x ) Since we have two possible representation matrices for the A 1g representation, the gap function can be expanded as ∆ A 1g = ∆ A 1g ,1 s y + ∆ A 1g ,2 s y τ x . We can compute χ (2) A 1g ,μν directly and only keep terms up to the second order in B. The superconductivity susceptibility is given by where χ A 1g ,11 is for s y , χ A 1g ,22 is for s y τ x and χ A 1g ,12 and χ A 1g ,21 describe the coupling between s y and s y τ x . Since V A 1g ,1 = U 0 2 and V A 1g ,2 = V 0 2 , we obtain a set of linear equations Let's first discuss the case without magnetic field B = 0 and in this case, the gap equations are The above equations can be viewed as an eigen-equation for ∆ A 1g ,1 and ∆ A 1g ,2 and its eigen-values are 1 χ 0 = 0 and 1 . With the expression of χ 0 , we find the first eigen-solution corresponds to vanishing T c and the second eigen-solution gives rise to the critical temperature The corresponding eigen-state of A 1g pairing satisfies Therefore in case t ≪ D 0 , the ∆ A 1g ,1 part dominates. For a non-zero but weak B, we have δχ ≪ χ 0 and the critical temperature is close to T c0,A 1g . The correction to the critical temperature can be obtained by substituting (B20) into (B18) and is determined by For an in-plane magnetic field (D 1 = tB ), we have while for an out-of-plane magnetic field (D 1 = β so B z ), we have Comparing the critical temperatures for in-plane magnetic fields and out-of-plane magnetic fields, we find that the paramagnetic effect for in-plane magnetic fields is much weaker than that for out-of-plane magnetic fields due to the factor t 2 β 2 so , which will lead to the high in-plane critical magnetic field and is consistent with the experimental observations in bilayer TMD materials. (2) A 1u pairing (s y τ z ) The superconductivity susceptibility is given by and the corresponding gap equation is At zero magnetic field B = 0 and δχ = 0, we find In a weak magnetic field and in the limit t ≪ β so , Thus, for out-of-plane magnetic fields, and for in-plane magnetic fields, We find a factor t 4 β 4 so for in-plane magnetic fields but not for out-of-plane magnetic fields. (3) A 2u pairing (s x τ y ) In this case, we find that χ (2) A 2u = 0 and thus no superconducting phase is possible for this representation. (4) E u pairing ( τ y , s z τ y ) Since the E u pairing are two dimensional, we can write down a gap equation for each component. However, since they are related to each other by symmetry, we expect two components share the same T c . Therefore, we only consider τ y part here. The superconductivity susceptibility is At zero magnetic field, we have For a weak magnetic field and t ≪ β so , we have For out-of-plane magnetic fields, and for in-plane magnetic fields, Therefore, we find Zeeman coupling will not reduce the T c for out-of-plane magnetic fields and the contribution of in-plane magnetic fields has a factor of 1 + . This is because the E u pairing corresponds to the interlayer equal spin pairing. In the above, we have presented our derivations and results of the linearized gap equation for bilayer TMD materials. In this section, we will construct the Ginzburg-Landau free energy for our system. In particular, this approach will allow us to study inhomogeneous superconductivity when we consider the orbital effect of magnetic fields. The Ginzburg-Landau free energy is given by Eqs. (A9)-(A13), in which one needs to evaluate superconductivity susceptibility χ (2) and χ With a finite q, the superconductivity susceptibility χ (2) is changed to There is no momentum dependence in T r γ † iμ P e ǫ sλ γ jν P h ǫ s ′ λ ′ and thus, we only need to consider ξ k± q 2 . We may treat q as a small number and expand it as ξ k± q 2 = ξ k ± 2 v k • q up to the linear term in q. Since we have already discussed the Zeeman coupling, we will neglect this term in the discussion below for simplicity (F s = D 0 ). In this case, we define which is independent of s and s ′ . χ (2) i j,μν (q) = ss ′ ,λλ ′ χ 0,λλ ′ (q)T r γ † iμ P e ǫ sλ γ jν P h ǫ s ′ λ ′ . Furthermore, we only focus on λ = -λ ′ =and in this case, where v f is the Fermi velocity, e k is the unit vector of the momentum k and Ω k is the solid angle for the k integral. By expand the digamma function and perform the Ω k integral, we obtain From the above equation, we can construct the second order term L 2 in the Landau free energy. We will next discuss the pairing in each representation, separately. The T in the above expression should be replaced by the T c0 for the corresponding pairing. For the fourth order term, we need to evaluate χ We again only consider the most singular part of the momentum-frequency space integral, which is contributed from λ 1 = λ 3 =and λ 2 = λ 4 = +. Therefore, we have where ζ(x) is the zeta-function. (1) A 1g pairing Direct calculation of superconductivity susceptibility almost recovers our previous results with the replacement of χ 0 by χ 0 (q). Therefore, we have χ A 1g ,11 = 4χ 0 (q), χ A 1g ,12 = χ A 1g ,21 = -4t D 0 χ 0 (q) and χ A 1g ,22 = 4t 2 D 2 0 χ 0 (q). Therefore, the second order term of Landau free energy is written as One can take the derivative of L 2,A 1g with respect to ∆ * A 1g ,i and recover the linearized gap equation. Since the ∆ A 1g ,1 pairing dominates when t ≪ β so , we may substitute ∆ A 1g ,2 with ∆ A 1g ,1 and obtain when the temperature is close to T c0,A 1g . We further label . The fourth order term can also be computed directly with the electron and hole Green functions, and we obtain where 8(πkT ) 2 . Since we only concerns the temperature close to the critical temperature, T in K and B can be replaced by T c0,A 1g . Eqs. (C8) and (C9) together form the Landau free energy for the A 1g pairing. For the out-of-plane magnetic field, the orbital effect can be taken into account by replacing -i∇ → -i∇ + 2e A, where A is the gauge potential. The orbital effect of in-plane magnetic fields will be discussed in details later. (2) A 1u pairing The second order term in the Landau free energy for the A 1u pairing is given by where The fourth order term is given by where The second order term and the fourth order term are given by and where 0 in the weak coupling limit. It is known that when B E u ,2 < 0, the nematic superconductivity with pairing function (∆ E u ,1 , ∆ E u ,2 ) = ∆ E u (cos θ, sin θ) will become stable. On the other hand, if In this part, we will discuss the orbital effect of in-plane magnetic fields, which turns out to be important for inducing inhomogeneous superconducting pairing. Normally, the orbital effect of in-plane magnetic fields is neglected in 2D systems because of quantum confinement along the out-of-plane direction. However, as we will show below, it will have an interesting consequence in 2D TMD materials due to the unique band structures. Let us assume the magnetic field is along the x direction and the corresponding gauge potential is chosen as A = (0, -B x z, 0). The distance between two layers of TMD materials is taken as z 0 and the origin point is chosen at the center between two layers. Thus, in our Hamiltonian, we need to replace ξ k by ξ π = 2 2m (k 2 x + (k y -Qτ z ) 2 )μ, where Q = eB x z 0 2 . We may expand ξ π and keep only the first order term in B x . The resulting Hamiltonian is with v Q = eB x z 0 2m and the corresponding energy dispersion is given by where The energy dispersion is shown in Fig. where we have used ξ -k = ξ k and Next we need to use the Green function and eigen-energy of the Hamiltonian to evaluate χ (2) (q). We treat both q and the magnetic field B x (the corresponding Q and v Q ) as perturbations and expand superconductivity susceptibility up to the second order in q and B x . In particular, in-plane magnetic fields break the D 3d symmetry, and thus can couple the pairings in different representations. Direct calculations show that the A 1g pairing is coupled to the A 1u pairing. Therefore, we first discuss the coupled A 1g -A 1u pairing and then consider E u pairing. Let us label the A 1g pairing ∆ A 1g ,1 and ∆ A 1g ,2 by ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 , and the A 1u pairing ∆ A 1u by ∆ 3 . The corresponding Landau free energy is given by where The superconductivity susceptibility in the above Landau free energy is given by The critical temperature can be obtained by minimizing the above Landau free energy, but this is quite complicated. Therefore, we can consider the following simplifications. We consider the limit t ≪ β so , in which the ∆ 1 pairing will dominate over ∆ 2 for the A 1g pairing. Therefore, we can substitute ∆ 2 by ∆ 2 = -V 0 t U 0 D 0 ∆ 1 and obtain the Landau free energy where Here The corresponding linearized gap equation is given by By solving this generalized eigen-equation, one can obtain two solutions for the critical temperature T c , which is a function of magnetic fields B x and momentum q. The true T c is obtained by maximizing the larger solution with respect to q. Fig. In this section, we first consider a simple limit t → 0, in which we find D 0 = β so and T c0,A 1g = T c0,A 1u = 2γω D πk exp (-1/(2U 0 N 0 )) = T c0 and P = R. In this case, the Landau free energy takes a simple form where Since v Q ∝ B x , we find that ∆ 1 and ∆ 3 pairings are coupled to each other by a new term with the form ∆ * 1 B x q y ∆ 3 .We notice a similar term ∆ * B i q j ∆ (i, j are two indices for axis) describes the electro-magnetic effect in non-centrosymmetric superconductors. Since ∆ 1 and ∆ 3 have opposite parities under inversion, this term does not break inversion symmetry, in sharp contrast to the term ∆ * B i q j ∆ in non-centrosymmetric superconductors. According to the above Landau free energy, the critical temperature can be obtained by maximizing the following function By substituting the form of P and Q, we can re-write the above equation as It is easy to see that when we choose q x = 0 and |q y | = , the right hand side of the above expression is maximized. The corresponding T c is given by ln T c T c0 = 0, (D27) from which one can see there is no correction to T c . In contrast, for q = 0, we find which is always smaller than the finite momentum pairing. Therefore, we conclude that under in-plane magnetic fields, the stable superconducting phase occurs for a non-zero q y , leading to the FFLO state. The stable q y is given by With flux quantum φ 0 = h 2e , we have λ c = 2π q c = 2π eB x z 0 = 2φ 0 B x z 0 . Thus, the wave length of the FFLO state is determined by the corresponding area for magnetic flux quantum. We notice that q y = q c and q y = -q c are two degenerate states. To see this, we perform a transformation and (∆ 1 -∆ 3 ) and the corresponding Landau free energy is transformed as Physically, ∆ + describes the pairing in the top layer and ∆ -is for the pairing in the bottom layer. Thus, the diagonal form of the above Landau free energy just corresponds to the decoupling between two layers. Let's assume B x > 0 and if q y > 0, Q > 0 and thus ∆ + is favored. For q y < 0, Q < 0 and correspondingly, ∆ -is favored. Since ∆ + (q c ) and ∆ -(-q c ) pairings are degenerate, the full real space expression of the FFLO state is given by ∆(r) = ∆ + (q c )e iq c y + ∆ -(-q c )e -iq c y . (D30) In the above expression, the first term describes the helical phase in the top layer while the second term is for the helical phase in the bottom layer with opposite momentum. The relative magnitude of ∆ + (q c ) and ∆ -(-q c ) are determined by the fourth order term in Landau free enregy. The general form of the fourth order term is If B a > 0, we need |∆ + | = |∆ -| to minimize the second term in the above expression. This corresponds to the stripe phase with its pairing amplitude oscillating in the real space. If B s < 0, we have either |∆ + | = 0 or |∆ -| = 0, which corresponds to the helical phase, in which only the phase oscillates while the amplitude persists. Microscopically, the fourth order term can be computed from (C6). More specifically, the fourth order terms for A 1g and A 1u pairings are given by 1 (q 1 )∆ * 1 (q 3 )∆ 1 (q 2 )∆ 1 (q 4 )δ q 1 +q 3 =q 2 +q 4 (D32) where the summation {q} is for q 1 , q 2 , q 3 , q 4 . For the study of the FFLO state, it turns out that one also needs to take into account the coupling between the A 1g and A 1u pairing for the fourth order term, which is given by 1 (q 1 )∆ * 3 (q 3 )∆ 1 (q 2 )∆ 3 (q 4 ) + ∆ * 3 (q 1 )∆ * 1 (q 3 )∆ 3 (q 2 )∆ 1 (q 4 ) + ∆ * 1 (q 1 )∆ * 1 (q 3 )∆ 3 (q 2 )∆ 3 (q 4 ) +∆ * 3 (q 1 )∆ * 3 (q 3 )∆ 1 (q 2 )∆ 1 (q 4 ) + ∆ * 3 (q 1 )∆ * 1 (q 3 )∆ 1 (q 2 )∆ 3 (q 4 ) + ∆ * 1 (q 1 )∆ * 3 (q 3 )∆ 3 (q 2 )∆ 1 (q 4 ) δ q 1 +q 3 =q 2 +q 4 (D34) Collecting all the above terms, we find the fourth order term for the A 1g and A 1u pairings can be written as a compact form ∆ 1 (q 2 ) + α β so D 0 ∆ 3 (q 2 ) ∆ 1 (q 4 ) + α β so D 0 ∆ 3 (q 4 ) δ q 1 +q 3 =q 2 +q 4 . (D35) In the limit t → 0, the fourth order term is reduced to the form which is also decoupled between the top and bottom layers. In combining with the form of L 2 in Eq. ( Since only ∆ + (q c ) and ∆ -(-q c ) are favored by the second order term, the fourth order term involving ∆ + (q c ) and ∆ -(-q c ) is given by Compared with Eq. (D31), we find B s = B a = 7N 0 ζ(3) 16(πkT c0 ) 2 . Since B a > 0, we conclude that stripe phase will be favored when the temperature is close to T c . The phase diagram of the gap function as a function of magnetic fields and temperature is shown in the main text. Here we will present more analytical results and show that the transition between the uniform A 1g pairing and the FFLO state is of the first order. By solving the gap equation (D21), we can obtain the T c as a function of momentum q and magnetic field B x . Since the state with q x = 0 will always be favored, we focus on q y here. The critical temperature is an even function of q y and it can be expanded as T c (q y ) = T c0 +T c1 q 2 y +T c2 q 4 y up to the fourth order in q y , where T c2 < 0. The transition between uniform superconductivity and FFLO state occurs when T c1 changes from negative to positive. Since the transition is tuned by magnetic field B x , the parameter T c1 takes the form T c1 = S 1 (B x -B c0 ), where S 1 > 0 and B c0 labels the critical magnetic field. For a postive T c1 , the maximum In addition, T c0 should be an even function of magnetic field, x . We focus on the magnetic field around B c0 and thus expand T c0 as Furthermore, the eigen-vector for the corresponding T c in Eq. (D21) is simplified as around B c0 since the A 1g pairing will always dominate and the amplitude ∆ 0q is to be determined. With these simplifications, we are able to evaluate the free energy analytically. The second order term is derived as The main difference between zero momentum and finite momentum pairings lies in the fourth order term. For zero momentum pairing (T c1 < 0), the fourth order term is given by By minimizing L 2 + L 4 for q y = 0, we find the minimal free energy is given by as a function temperature T , which is assumed to be close to T c0 . On the other hand, for a non-zero q y , the fourth order term is much more complicated. The q 1 , q 2 , q 3 and q 4 in Eq. (D35) can take the following six cases: (1) q 1 = q 2 = q 3 = q 4 = q y ; (2) q 1 = q 2 = q 3 = q 4 = -q y ; (3) q 1 = q 2 = -q 3 = -q 4 = q y ; (4) q 1 = -q 2 = -q 3 = q 4 = q y ; (5) -q 1 = -q 2 = q 3 = q 4 = q y ; (6) -q 1 = q 2 = -q 3 = -q 4 = q y . Furthermore, we only focus on the stripe phase, which has been confirmed in numerical calculations. Thus, we take |∆ 0,-q | = |∆ 0q | and as a result, the full Landau free energy takes the form the minimal of which gives the temperature dependence of the free energy Now let's fix the temperature T smaller than T c0 and study the phase transition by varying magnetic field B x . The transition happens at B c0 for the temperature at T c0 but will shift a bit away when the temperature T is lower than T c0 . To see that, we need to consider the limit of q y → 0. In this limit, T c (q y ) → T c0 and thus F q y =0 > F q y =0 (D45) Thus, at B x = B c0 , the zero momentum pairing is more stable. The difference comes from the form of fourth order term when q y = 0 and q y 0. To determine the critical magnetic field at T , we may expand the free energy around B c0 . With B x = B c0 + δB, we find F q y =0 = -16N 0 (πk) 2 7ζ(3) up to the first order in δB. Thus, the critical magnetic field is determined by when T → T -c0 and ln T Tc0 is treated as a small number. At the δB c , the first derivative of the free energy is given by ∂F q y =0 ∂δB = -16N 0 (πk) 2 7ζ(3) and up to the first order in ln T . We find ∂δB at δB c , thus confirming the phase transition is of the first order nature. Next we will discuss the possible detection of the FFLO state. A Josephson junction between the FFLO state and a conventional superconductor is considered, as shown in Fig. where Ψ FFLO and Ψ BCS are the pair functions for the FFLO state and conventional superconductors. t is the hopping parameter. We take the form Ψ BCS = Ψ 0 e iφ , where φ is the phase factor, and Ψ FFLO = Ψ + e iq c y + Ψ -e -iq c y according to the form of the gap function. With these forms of the pair functions, the Josephson current is found to be where the y-direction integral is taken from -L/2 to L/2 and thus the maximum supercurrent is The maximum supercurrent will depend on the details of Josephson contact, and if we assume I c,+ = I c,-= I c0 , we find Since q c ∝ B x , the maximum supercurrent reveals an interference pattern for in-plane magnetic fields, just like the Fraunhofer pattern in a normal Josephson junction under out-of-plane magnetic fields Finally we discuss the orbital effect of the E u pairing. Direct calculation shows that up to the second order in v Q and q, Finally, we would like to comment about the orbital effect of out-of-plane magnetic fields. We consider the form of Landau free energy in the real space as where A = Cln T T c0 . The orbital effect of magnetic fields is taken into account by -i∇ → D = -i∇ + 2e A, where the vector potential A can be chosen as A = (0, B z x, 0). The corresponding linearized gap equation is given by This is nothing but the Landau level problem, which can be solved exactly by introducing the boson operators a = 4eh z (π xiπ y ), where π x(y) = -i∂ x(y) + 2e A x(y) . The above gap equation can be simplified as The lowest eigen-energy of the above equation is 2eB z K + A = 0, (E5) leading to the correction which is linear in B z .Therefore, the T c correction from the out-of-plane magnetic fields is determined by the ratio K C . By looking at the parameters in Landau free energy, we find for the representation i (i = A 1g , A 1u , E u ), the ratio is given by Therefore, the correction is determined by T c0,i , and a weaker T c,i correction for the pairing with higher T c0,i . The stable superconducting phase will always be stable under an out-of-plane magnetic field. 3d group. Here c ση is electron operator with η = ± for layer index σ for spin. s and τ are Pauli matrices for spin and layer. M. Sigrist and K. Ueda, Reviews of Modern physics 63, (1991). 2 V. P. Mineev and K. Samokhin, Introduction to unconventional