The electronic structure of FeSe, the simplest iron based superconductor (Fe-SC), conceals a potential of dramatic increase of Tc that realizes under pressure or in a single layer film. This is also the system where nematicity, the phenomenon of a keen current interest, is most easy to study since it is not accompanied by the antiferomagnetic transition like in all other Fe-SC's. Here we overview recent experimental data on electronic structure of FeSe-based superconductors: isovalently doped crystals, intercalates, and single layer films, trying to clarify its topology and possible relation of this topology to superconductivity. We argue that the marked differences between the experimental and calculated band structures for all FeSe compounds can be described by a hoping selective renormalization model for a spin/orbital correlated state that may naturally explain both the evolution of the band structure with temperature and nematicity. FeSe, the simplest iron based superconductor FeSe is also a system with intricate evolution of the electronic band structure with temperature. In the first place, it is a nematic transition that is associated with spontaneous breaking of the symmetry between the x and y directions in the Fe-plane, reducing group symmetry of the lattice from tetragonal to orthorhombic. It is called "nematic" and believed to be a result of intrinsic electronic instability because its effect on electronic properties is much larger than expected based on the structural distortion observed FeSe is quite different from all other Fe-SC's and is a sort of uncomfortable example for spin-fluctuation theories: FIG. It is also interesting to see whether the FeSe compounds follow the general correlation that T c is maximal when a certain Van Hove singularity crosses the Fermi level In any case, the exact knowledge of the electronic structure of FeSe-based compounds should be important for understanding their intriguing physics. In this review we summarize the results on electronic band structure of different FeSe incarnations, comparing the results of band structure calculations to ARPES experiment, and examine its evolution with temperature, discussing its possible reasons and consequences. The paper is organized as following. In the main Sec. II we consider three FeSe incarnations, starting from their phase diagrams (Fig. Phase diagrams. Some examples of the phase diagrams of different FeSe-based compounds are shown in Fig. There are many possible selenium-tellurium-sulfur combinations to study the isovalent doping in Fe(Se,Te,S) starts to superconduct below 5 K. Phase transitions. The resistivity curves in isovalently-substituted FeSe 1-x Te x (a) and FeTe 1-x S x The superconducting gap values in FeSe differ essentially from one experiment to another. For example, the gaps determined from ARPES are equal to 1.5 and 1.2 meV in the center and corner of the Brillouin zone (BZ), respectively In contrast to superconducting ferro-pnictides, the layers of iron chalcogenides are neutral and kept together by weak van der Waals interaction. Therefore, intercalation by atoms and molecules is the most easy way to modify their structure (for recent review see The structures of the intercalates like K 0.8 Fe 1.7 Se 2 or Tl 0.6 Rb 0.4 Fe 1.67 Se 2 may be optimal for superconductivity since T c = 32 K seems to be maximal but starts to decrease with pressure One unit-cell (1UC) thick FeSe films grown on a Seetched SrTiO 3 (STO) (001) substrate have shown the superconducting gap about 20 meV in tunneling spectra A universal phase diagram for the superconducting and structural transitions vs. lattice constant for all mentined FeSe families The electronic structures of FeSe single crystal, calculated In the first column of Fig. So, in reality, as a result of the "red-blue shift" shown in Fig. domains The electronic structure of Fe(Se,Te) differs from FeSe by position of γ band, that crosses the Fermi level forming the outer FS around the BZ center, and by position of β band that forms small 3D FS The intercalated FeSe superconductors are electron doped, so that only the electron-like FS's remain, as one can see in Fig. The calculated FS is generally supported by a number of published ARPES spectra measured for FeSe intercalated by alkali metals, in particular for A x Fe 2-y Se 2 (A = K, Cs) However, there are some differences between calculations and experiment. First, it is a small electron pocket that appears in BZ center: κ band in Fig. Second, a larger electron pocket is seen sometimes around Γ-point Even more complicated picture comes from recent ARPES paper The results of LDA+DMFT Finally, one should note that in the intercalated compounds the intrinsic phase separation is often an issue and the studied crystals are just a mixture of metallic/superconducting and insulating/AFM phases The ARPES spectra from the one unit cell (1UC) film on SrTiO 3 (STO) substrate have been measured shortly after discovery of high T c superconductivity in such films the high-symmetry cuts measured at 16 K along ΓM direction and centered at Γ (left) and M (right): the hole band is located 80 meV below E F . Comparing the intercalates with respect to single crystals was natural to expect that their electronic band structure is (1) more two-dimensional, and (2) shifted below the Fermi level due to electron doping. One can see that the electronic structure of 1UC on STO is remarkably similar to that of intercalates, see Fig. First, it was suggested The doping may also be due to charge transfer from STO impurity bands driven by work function mismatch Unlike the intercalates, all published ARPES spectra for 1UC FeSe show no traces of the electron pocket at the BZ center. This, however, cannot be considered as proof of its absence since all the data have been measured insitu with helium discharge lamp, i.e. with only 21.2 eV photons The continuous ARPES measurements during the an-nealing process Recently, similar enhancement of superconductivity related with similar electronic structure has been found in the topmost layer in potassium-coated FeSe single crystal One can see that in experiment, comparing to calculations, ∆ε decreases essentially for each of the bands but to zero for d xy band. From Fig. where a is the Fe-Fe distance, t 1 , and t 2 are the hopping integrals. Within this oversimplified approximation, ∆ε = t 1 = 0 would mean that the hopping between the nearest neighbors is blocked completely. Naturally, the peculiar for Fe-SC's spin or orbital orderings, even in form of spin/orbital-fluctuations, should suppress the near-neighbor hopping, but in order to understand its complete suppression, more sophisticated model should be elaborated. As for proximity to Lifshitz transitions, only FeSe, and to a greater extent Fe(Se,Te), may belong to Γ h -class of Fe-SC's, similarly to LiFeAs and Ba(Fe,Co) 2 As 2 , where superconductivity could be enhanced by a shape resonance In Table It is indeed the case for FeSe, as one can see from Table Nematicity. To address the nematicity issue we should go back to single crystals. Fig. However, even in the original set of spectra from Mpoint measured at different temperature There are also different opinions about FS splitting in the BZ center. The results of Ref. 61 support the nematic domains scenario Temperature evolution. As we have shown above, the electronic band structure of bulk FeSe compounds changes dramatically with temperature across the nematic transition. Interestingly, the band structure continues to evolve far above In any case, it is tempting to suppose that at hight enough temperature, the band structure, or at least the FS topology, coincides with the result of LDA band structure calculations but an interaction like the hopping selective renormalization develops with lowering temperature and with increase of the strength of fluctuations of certain order. While the temperature dependent ARPES is rather complicated In this review, we have analyzed the published results on electronic structure of FeSe-based superconductors: isovalently doped crystals, intercalates, and single layer films. We have summarized the results of first-principle calculations and ARPES experiments in Fig. The nematicity is certainly a result of intrinsic electronic instability but the details of its effect on electronic structure is still controversial. In particular, the role of three-dimensionality is not studied at all. As for proximity to Lifshitz transitions, only FeSe, and to a greater extent Fe(Se,Te), may belong to Γ hclass of Fe-SC's (see Fig. 