It is commonly believed that in the absence of disorder or an external magnetic field, there are three possible types of superconducting excitation gaps: the gap is nodeless, it has point nodes, or it has line nodes. Here, we show that for an even-parity nodal superconducting state which spontaneously breaks time-reversal symmetry, the low-energy excitation spectrum generally does not belong to any of these categories; instead it has extended Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces. These Fermi surfaces can be visualized as two-dimensional surfaces generated by "inflating" point or line nodes into spheroids or tori, respectively. These inflated nodes are topologically protected from being gapped by a Z2 invariant, which we give in terms of a Pfaffian. We also show that superconducting states possessing these Fermi surfaces can be energetically stable. A crucial ingredient in our theory is that more than one band is involved in the pairing; since all candidate materials for even-parity superconductivity with broken time-reversal symmetry are multiband systems, we expect these Z2protected Fermi surfaces to be ubiquitous. Introduction.-The theory of superconductivity is conventionally formulated in terms of pairing of spin-1/2 fermions In this Letter, we show that the presence of multiple bands qualitatively changes the nodal structure of a time-reversal-symmetry-breaking (TRSB) superconductor. Specifically, the expected line or point nodes of an even-parity superconducting gap Our conclusions are relevant for a wide range of candidate TRSB superconductors, such as UPt 3 Model.-Our starting point is a general Hamiltonian with time-reversal and inversion symmetries containing four electronic degrees of freedom at each momentum. These four degrees of freedom can arise from either the combination of spin 1/2 and two orbitals of equal parity, or from fermions with effective angular momentum j = 3/2. We work with a j = 3/2 generalized Luttinger-Kohn Hamiltonian where 1 4 is the 4 × 4 unit matrix, and the J i are spin-3/2 matrices given in the SM For definiteness, we discuss the case of only one of the two bands crossing the chemical potential so that there is only one normal-state Fermi surface; if there are two, identical arguments pertain to both. While our conclusions are general, numerical results are given for the spherically symmetric Hamiltonian , where α and β are constants (β is the spin-orbit coupling) and μ is the chemical potential, which leads to x k z , and c xy = √ 3βk x k y . The superconducting state is taken to have even parity. Fermionic antisymmetry permits six possible gap matrices η i in the spin-3/2 space: where is the unitary part of the time-reversal operator T = U T K, with K denoting complex conjugation. The η s gap is a spin-singlet state and represents pure intraband pairing. The other gaps, however, describe spin-quintet (J = 2) pairs and involve both intra-and interband pairing While our results apply to all TRSB even-parity superconducting states, for concreteness we consider the gap function where ∆ 1 and ∆ 0 are real constants. Existence of Fermi surfaces and Z 2 invariant.-We now show that Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces are a generic feature of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) and construct their topological invariant. The first step is to show that H(k) can be unitarily transformed into an antisymmetric matrix, i.e., there exists a unitary Ω such that HT (k) = -H(k) for H(k) ≡ ΩH(k)Ω † . The main ideas of the proof are explained in the following, details and a representative Ω are given in the SM , where τi are the Pauli matrices in particle-hole space, while P acts as U P H(-k)U † P = H(k) with U P = τ0 ⊗ 1 4 . Hence, CP symmetry reads with U CP = U C U * P = τx ⊗1 4 . This implies that (CP ) 2 = U CP U * CP = +1 and thus U CP = U T CP . Any symmetric matrix can be diagonalized by a unitary congruence, i.e., there exist a unitary Q and a diagonal Λ such that U CP = QΛQ T with the transposed matrix Q T . Insertion into Eq. ( Since Λ is diagonal, we can define a square root √ Λ. The sign of the root for each diagonal component of Λ can be chosen arbitrarily and is then held fixed. This allows us to split the unitary matrices in the CP symmetry relation, which gives ( is antisymmetric, as we wanted to show. We can then define the Pfaffian P (k) ≡ Pf H(k). Since det H(k) = det H(k) = P 2 (k), the zeros of P (k) give the zero-energy states of H(k). It has recently been shown that Fermi surfaces of Hamiltonians with CP symmetry squaring to +1 can possess a non-trivial Z 2 charge, making them topologically stable against CP -preserving perturbations Under what conditions do protected Fermi surfaces exist? In the normal state, the Pfaffian -is always non-negative and has second-order zeros on the Fermi surface. Hence, the normal-state Fermi surface is not protected by the Z 2 charge. Furthermore, for timereversal-symmetric superconductivity, P (k) can also be chosen non-negative for all k so that there is no nontrivial Z 2 invariant The existence of protected Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces is now illustrated for the k z (k x +ik y ) state of Eq. ( which is negative for all k such that s -< + -< s + , where . s + and s - exist and are distinct if the radicand is positive. In the plane k z = 0 and along the line k x = k y = 0, this holds for any ∆ 0 > 0 since symmetry dictates that c 2 xz + c 2 yz vanishes there. We then find s -= -4∆ 2 0 < 0 and s + = 0, i.e., s + vanishes on the normal-state Fermi surface. Since + -changes sign across the normal-state Fermi surface, there is always a region with s -< + -< s + in this plane and along this line and, due to the continuity of the c i (k), also in their neighborhood. The resulting region with P (k) < 0 is bounded by a Fermi surface, as illustrated in Fig. Stability of Fermi surfaces.-Even-parity TRSB superconductors are usually argued to be energetically favored over time-reversal-symmetric states because they maximize the gap in momentum space where G(k, ω n ) and G(k, ω n ) are the normal-state electron and hole Matsubara Green's functions, respectively. For vanishing spin-orbit coupling β, introduced below Eq. ( Pairing-induced pseudomagnetic field.-To gain additional insight into the Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces, it is useful to rewrite the Hamiltonian in a basis for which the normal-state Hamiltonian is diagonal. We denote the eigenvectors of H N to the twofold degenerate eigenvalues ± by |±, i=1, 2 , which we choose to form a pseudospin basis, i.e., |±, 2 = P T |±, 1 . In this basis, the superconducting state is described by the Hamiltonian Here, H N,± = ± σ0 and ∆ ±± are antisymmetric matrices with ∆ ±± = ψ ± (k) iσ y , where σμ are the Pauli matrices in pseudospin space. ∆ +-is the interband pairing potential, the explicit form of which depends on the choice of bases in the two-dimensional eigenspaces of ± and is hence not illuminating. The intraband gap functions ψ ± (k) are obtained by transforming Eq. ( In the absence of ∆ +-, H would describe two decoupled pseudospin-1/2 singlet superconductors with, at most, line or point nodes. Hence, the interband pairing is responsible for the appearance of the extended Fermi surfaces. This can be shown by treating the off-diagonal interband blocks of Eq. ( where The direction of h(k) is basis-dependent and is thus not physically meaningful. The correction γ(k) is always present and results in a small modification of the normalstate dispersion + , whereas the second term h(k)• σ only appears for TRSB gaps. This reveals that in the TRSB state the interband pairing manifests itself as a pseudomagnetic field in the normal-state Hamiltonian. The origin of the extended Fermi surfaces becomes clear from the excitation spectrum of the low-energy pairing Hamiltonian, where ν = ±1. The pseudomagnetic field |h(k)| evidently splits the dispersion. The square root in Eq. ( The low-energy effective model also allows us to estimate the dimensions of the Fermi surfaces. Perpendicular to the normal-state Fermi surface, the Bogoliubov Fermi where k F is the normal-state Fermi momentum. Their width in the direction parallel to the normal-state Fermi surface is δk /k F ∼ ∆ 0 /( + --). Since we typically expect ∆ 0 μ, we find that δk ⊥ δk , which implies oblate spheroidal Fermi surfaces near the original point nodes and flattened toroidal Fermi surfaces near the original line nodes, as seen in Fig. Pseudomagnetic fields appear in any TRSB phase of our model with interband (spin-quintet) pairs. Our analysis generalizes to other systems with multiband pairing: we expect non-vanishing contributions to the pseudomagnetic field from all the interband potentials, implying that Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces are a generic feature of such systems. Equation Conclusions.-We have established that broken-timereversal even-parity superconductors generically support two-dimensional Fermi surfaces. The states at these Fermi surfaces are charge-neutral Bogoliubov quasiparticles. The Fermi surfaces are protected by a topological Z 2 invariant, which can be written in terms of a Pfaffian, and thus cannot be removed by any perturbation that is CP invariant. They are also energetically stable for plausible parameters, i.e., the corresponding state has lower free energy than an associated time-reversal-symmetric state. The Z 2 -protected Fermi surfaces appear in multiband systems, where interband pairing produces an effective pseudomagnetic field, which "inflates" the expected point or line nodes. Since all candidate materials for TRSB even-parity superconductivity have multiple relevant bands, we expect that these Z 2 -protected Fermi surfaces are ubiquitous. The existence of Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces in the superconducting state should lead to characteristic experimental consequences: a nonzero density of states at the Fermi energy, visible for example in tunneling and photoemission experiments, would coexist with ideal conductivity and flux expulsion. The low-temperature thermodynamic response would show a linear temperature dependence of the specific heat, and heat conduction should also be unconventional where ŝμ (σ ν ) are the Pauli matrices in orbital (spin) space. Hermiticity implies c μ,ν (k P , where U P = 1 4 (U P = -1 4 ) if the orbitals are both even (odd). The extra sign for the odd case obviously drops out and can be disregarded. Hence, for the Hamiltonian to be symmetric under inversion, we simply require Under the assumption of real-valued orbitals, ŝy and the spin components σx , σy , σz are odd under time reversal, whereas the remaining matrices are even. This is achieved by U T = ŝ0 ⊗ iσ y . In order for the Hamiltonian H N (k) to be invariant under time reversal, only those Kronecker products can appear in Eq. ( We now show that the generalized Luttinger-Kohn model The generalized Luttinger-Kohn model involves five sets of products of the j = 3/2 matrices, specifically (2J 3), and (J y J z + J z J y )/(2 √ 3). These matrices also form a set of five Dirac matrices and there is a unitary transformation between them and the five allowed nontrivial Kronecker products discussed above. Specifically, we find with the unitary matrix Note that one can pairwise swap the orbital-spin matrices ŝμ ⊗ σν by an appropriate unitary transformation so that this mapping is entirely general. We hence see that the generalized Luttinger-Kohn model is equivalent to the most general single-particle Hamiltonian of a time-and inversion-symmetric material with two identical-parity orbitals and spin. The generalized Luttinger-Kohn representation is convenient, however, as it allows us to exploit the symmetry properties of the angular-momentum matrices J i under rotations to gain insight into the underlying physics. We can obtain six on-site pairing states in the orbital-spin representation by multiplying the six allowed Kronecker products by the unitary part of the time-reversal operator, U T = ŝ0 ⊗ iσ y . We hence obtain one orbitally trivial spinsinglet gap proportional to ŝ0 ⊗ σy and five "anomalous" gaps proportional to ŝx ⊗ σy , ŝz ⊗ σy , ŝy ⊗ σz , ŝy ⊗ σ0 , and ŝy ⊗ σx , which are either orbital-triplet spin-singlet or orbital-singlet spin-triplet pairing states. It is straightforward to map these states onto the gap matrices in the equivalent spin-3/2 formulation: the orbitally trivial spin-singlet state maps onto the singlet gap matrix η s , while the anomalous gaps map onto the quintet gap matrices. Hence, we can describe any even-parity pairing state, without loss of generality, in terms of a linear combination of the six spin-3/2 gap functions with even-parity coefficients ψ i (k). In this section, we provide additional details on constructing the topological invariant protecting the Fermi surfaces. Our starting point is the Hamiltonian in the superconducting state, Recall that H N (k) is even in k. We employ the spin-3/2 basis used in the main text. We first show that a kindependent unitary matrix Ω exists such that HT (k) = -H(k) for H(k) = ΩH(k)Ω † , i.e., the Hamiltonian can be transformed into antisymmetric form. The proof proceeds as follows: 1. The Hamiltonian H(k) satisfies parity and charge-conjugation symmetries and thus also their product, i.e., where The τi denote Pauli matrices in particle-hole (Nambu) space. We find that the CP symmetry squares to +1 since (CP In the presence of such a symmetry, two-dimensional Fermi surfaces are characterized by a Z 2 invariant 2. For any CP symmetry that squares to unity we have U * CP = U -1 CP = U † CP and thus U CP = U T CP , hence U CP is symmetric. Any (complex) symmetric matrix can be diagonalized by a unitary congruence, i.e., there exist a unitary matrix Q and a diagonal matrix Λ such that (note the transpose) Inserting this equation into Eq. ( Since Λ = Q † U CP Q * is unitary and diagonal, it can be written as Λ = diag(λ 1 , λ 2 , . . .) with |λ i | = 1. Now let where for each i, √ λ i is the complex root with arbitrary but fixed sign. Also let with the same choice of signs as in Eq. With the unitary matrix Ω ≡ √ Λ † Q † , Eq. ( For the Hamiltonian H(k) given in Eq. ( This yields where we have suppressed the argument k. The terms involving the normal-state Hamiltonian H N are obviously antisymmetric. For this, it is crucial that H N is even in k. From Eq. ( Note further that the ambiguity in the signs of the roots in √ Λ means that Ω can be multiplied on the left by a diagonal matrix D with arbitrary components ±1 on the diagonal. With Ω → DΩ we get Ω † → Ω † D and H(k) → D H(k)D. This leads to Pf H(k) → det D Pf H(k). Hence, P (k) is only determined up to an overall sign. But this sign is selected by fixing the root √ Λ once for all k. Thus sign changes in P (k) are meaningful. Since det H(k) = det H(k) = P 2 (k), the zeros of P (k) give the nodes of the superconducting state. Thus if the Pfaffian changes sign as a function of k, the surface separating regions with P (k) ≷ 0 is a two-dimensional Fermi surface. However, P (k) can in addition have zeros of even multiplicity, which do not separate regions with different sign. These accidental zeros can form two-dimensional surfaces or line or point nodes. For the general k z (k x + ik y ) state of Eq. ( where ± (k) are the normal-state eigenenergies. We have chosen the signs in the root √ Λ in such a way that P (k) > 0 in the limit of large k. Equation ( Finally, we show that the Pfaffian can be chosen non-negative if the system is also time-reversal symmetric and the combined inversion and time-reversal symmetry squares to -1, i.e., if there exists a unitary matrix U P T so that U P T H T (k)U † P T = H(k) and U P T U * P T = -1. Hence, if both symmetries are present, the Z 2 invariant exists but is necessarily trivial. This has essentially been shown using the method of Clifford algebra extensions in 1. Kramers' theorem shows that under the last two conditions all eigenvalues of H(k) have even degeneracy. Furthermore, condition 2. P (k) is a polynomial of the components of H(k), which are linear combinations of the components of H(k). Hence, P (k) is a polynomial of the components of H(k). The coefficients are independent of k. 3. We have Consider the eigenenergies E i (k) as functions of a real parameter h, which can be any real or imaginary part of a component of the hermitian, finite-dimensional matrix H(k). Theorem 7.6 of Alekseevsky et al. 6. Noting the ambiguity in choosing Ω and thus the overall sign of the Pfaffian, we can choose π(k) = +1 at some k and consequently at all k. Thus we indeed obtain P (k) = i E 2 i (k) ≥ 0. In this section, we provide additional details on the free-energy expansion. We show that states with broken time-reversal symmetry featuring Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces can be energetically stable. The relative stability of spin-singlet broken-time-reversal states over time-reversal-invariant states with the same transition temperature has been attributed to the gapping of nodes that appear in the time-reversal-symmetric state by breaking this symmetry We consider the spherically symmetric normal-state Hamiltonian H N (k) = αk 2 + β (k • J) 2 -μ and an on-site gap function that is a linear combination of η xz and η yz . For this gap function, it is known that there are two essentially different possible ground states respectively. These two matrices have been normalized such that Tr ∆ † ∆ = ∆2 ( ∆ is assumed real).