We present a systematic investigation of the effects of "nonmagnetic" impurities on the s-wave BCS-BEC crossover in atomic Fermi gases within a pairing fluctuation theory. Both pairing and impurity scattering Tmatrices are treated self-consistently at the same time. While the system is less sensitive to impurity scattering in the Born limit, for strong impurity scatterers, both the frequency and the gap function are highly renormalized, leading to significant suppression of the superfluid Tc, the order parameter and the superfluid density. We also find the formation of impurity bands and smearing of coherence peak in the fermion density of states, leading to a spectrum weight transfer and finite lifetime of Bogoliubov quasiparticles. In the BCS regime, the superfluidity may be readily destroyed by the impurity of high density. In comparison, the superfluidity in unitary and BEC regimes is relatively more robust. Ultracold atomic Fermi gases have been a rapidly growing field over the past decade, and have attracted enormous attentions from various disciplines including condensed matter, atomic and molecular physics, nuclear matter and astrophysics. Owing to the high tunability of multiple parameters, atomic Fermi gases have become a prototype for quantum simulations of a vast range of existing quantum systems in, e.g., condensed matter and for engineering highly exotic quantum states Associated naturally with a two-component Fermi gas is the physics of superfluidity and pairing, whose counterpart condensed matter system is superconductivity. The related impurity effects in superconductors have also been an important subject, including superconducting alloys Pseudogap phenomena have been widely recognized as the pairing strength become strong. It is thus interesting to go beyond weak coupling BCS theory and study the impurity effects in the presence of strong pairing. Indeed, experimentally, impurities can be introduced via doping atoms of foreign elements In a conventional s-wave BCS superconductor, weak impurities renormalize the frequency ω and gap ∆ in the exact same fashion In this paper, we will present a systematic treatment of the impurity effects on a two-component ultracold atomic Fermi gas as a function of the impurity strength, impurity concentration, and pairing interaction strength, in the case of s-wave pairing throughout the BCS-BEC crossover. We will use the formalism developed in Ref. Our main results are as follows: (a) In the presence of strong impurity scattering, the frequency and the gap function are highly renormalized, leading to significant suppression of the superfluid T c . (b) In the BCS regime, impurities induce impurity bands, subgap states and strong smearing of the coherent peak (CP), thus the superfluidity may be readily destroyed by the impurity. Besides, we find an effective power law dependence of T c as a function of pairing strength It should be noticed that there are also other theoretical approaches toward the interplay of BCS-BEC crossover and impurity, mainly using functional integral formalism and the replica trick The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. In Section II we briefly capitulate the theoretical formalism developed in Ref. The formalism for BCS-BEC crossover at finite temperature in a clean system can be found in Section II(A) of Ref. where k F is the Fermi wave vector and a is the two-body swave scattering length. Now by solving self-consistently the gap equation, atomic number equation and pseudogap equation, one can study BCS-BEC crossover at finite temperature in atomic Fermi gases as a function of 1/k F a. The impurity Hamiltonian is given by with u(xx i ) = uδ(xx i ), where x i denotes independent, randomly distributed impurity sites. We refer to these impurities as "nonmagnetic" in the sense they cannot convert one species of atoms into the other, similar to a superconductor where a nonmagnetic impurity does not cause spin flips. At the AG level The frequency and gap renormalizations now are given in terms of the impurity T -matrices, T ω and T ∆ (and its complex conjugate), by where being impurity density. Here ω = (-ω). Now except that iω and ∆k acquire new expressions, the Green's function G, Gor'kov function F , and the pair susceptibility χ(Q) remain formally the same in terms of iω and ∆k . These expressions reduce to the AG-level results in the lowest order (Born limit). It should be pointed out and where we have used a four-momentum notation, K ≡ (k, iω l ), Q ≡ (q, iΩ n ), with ω l and Ω n being the odd and even Matsubara frequencies, respectively. Here we have also defined the impurity averaged Green's functions Ḡω = k G(K) and Ḡ-ω = k G(-K), and the anomalous Green's function Fω (and its complex conjugate F † ω ) as where Γ 0 (K) = ∆k /∆ is the renormalized pairing vertex function. For isotropic impurity scattering, T ω and T ∆ † are independent of momentum. In the static limit, Q → 0, the expression for T ∆ † becomes Unlike the cases of d-wave where Fω ≡ 0 so that this gap renormalization vanishes, here for our s-wave pairing, φ k = 1, the gap renormalization is given by where For the momentum independent vertex function in Eq. ( where with Finally, the full Green's function is given by In order to numerically calculate the impurity renormalization functions, the Matsubara frequencies need to be analytically continued to the real frequencies, iω l -→ ω + i0 + . In general, we have iω = -iω, due to the absence of the particle-hole symmetry. Therefore, both the positive and negative frequencies should be analytically continued at the same time. For l > 0, Here ω ± = ±ω -Σ ′ ± , and we choose ω > 0 and Σ ′′ ± > 0. The superscripts R and A denote retarded and advanced analytical continuations, respectively. We obtain where ǫ k = k 2 /(2m) -μ with μ being the chemical potential, and From Eq. ( where λ R (ω) can be calculated from Eqs. ( Equations ( For the 3D Fermi gas and the contact impurity potential we consider here, the real part of ḠR ω diverges, caused by the momentum integral over k far away from the Fermi surface. In the AG theory, this ultraviolet divergence is absorbed into the chemical potential μ, signifying an additive correction, δμ, to the chemical potential It is easy to show that ḠR ω=0 is real and thus can be fully absorbed into a renormalized chemical potential. In the lowest order (Born limit), -ω , so that our regularization scheme reduces to that of the AG theory, with δμ ∼ n i u 2 ḠR ω=0 . Beyond the Born limit, the corrections to Σ ω and Γ 0 (ω) caused by the regularization are proportional to 1/ ḠR ω=0 and 1/( ḠR ω=0 ) 2 , respectively, which are negligible. With the renormalization functions Σ ω and Γ 0 (ω), one can calculate the pair susceptibility whose real and imaginary parts are given respectively by and where f (ω) is the Fermi distribution function. Here Γ R 0 (ω|Q) can be obtained from Eq. (4b) after analytical continuation, with For Q = 0, we obtain where Substituting into the Thouless criterion, 1 + gχ(0) = 0, we have the gap equation where we have used the Lippmann-Schwinger equation ( Now the fermion number equation becomes where A(k, ω) = -2 Im G R (ω, k) is the renormalized spectral function and is the density of states. Next we evaluate the pseudogap, which is given by where b(x) is the Bose distribution function, and the retarded In actual numerics, we follow Ref. The numerics is done as follows. First, for given (initial) values of the parameters [μ, T c , ∆], the renormalization spectrum Σ ω and Γ 0 (ω) are solved. Next, these renormalization functions are substituted into the gap, pseudogap and fermion number equations and an equation solver is used to obtain μ(T c ), T c , and ∆(T c ) at T c and gap, order parameter as well as μ below T c . With these newly obtained parameters, the equation solver will repeat the above process, until self-consistent solutions are obtained. In this subsection, we numerically solve the the coupled equations for Σ ′ ± , Σ ′′ ± , Γ ′ 0 , Γ ′′ 0 as a function of ω for given impurity levels and study the impurity renormalization effects on the frequency and gap function, as well as the DOS. We first present in Fig. For weak scattering in the Born limit, the impurity band does not exist. Only when the scattering strength |u| becomes large enough are there significant spectral weight gain outside the main band. The location of the impurity band (if it exists) is largely determined by the impurity strength u, whereas the impurity density n i affects the magnitude of Σ ′′ (ω) and Γ ′′ 0 (ω) and the spectral weight of the impurity band. The impurity band becomes prominent only when it is located outside the main band. In the BCS regime, the gap ∆ becomes small. Once the impurity band is clearly visible, it will appear on the far left side in a plot such as Fig. Next we show in Fig. One prominent feature in Fig. Shown in Fig. In Fig. Figure In this subsection we present the effects of impurities on T c throughout BCS-BEC crossover. Plotted in Fig. Figure netic" impurities may to certain extent have a pair-breaking effect. On the other hand, impurity scattering and particlehole fluctuations are very different. In the BCS regime, while the latter simply reduces T c by a factor of 0.45, here strong impurities in the unitary regime can destroy superfluidity completely whereas weak impurities in the Born limit (not shown) may leave T c intact. The result shown in Fig. Next, we study the effects of impurity scattering strength on T c . Shown in Fig. Note that the T c curve in Fig. Now we investigate the transport properties of a Fermi gas in the presence of impurities. The superfluid density can be derived using a linear response theory. Following Ref. where First we plot in Fig. With the calculated gap parameters, we show the corresponding calculated superfluid density as a function of temperature for the above the three impurity densities in Fig. In summary, we have studied the effects of impurities on the s-wave BCS-BEC crossover in ultracold atomic Fermi gases, including the impurity effects on frequency and gap renormalizations, fermion density of states, superfluid T c , as well as finite temperature gaps and superfluid density. Our results reveal that while the system is less sensitive to impurities in the Born limit, strong impurities in the unitary scattering regime cause a much stronger renormalization for both the frequency and the gaps throughout the entire BCS-BEC crossover, leading to a finite lifetime of Bogoliubov quasiparticles and fermion pairs, and hence a significant suppression of the superfluid T c and superfluid density. The Anderson's theorem breaks down except for weak impurities in the BCS regime. Indeed, in the weak coupling BCS regime, where the gap is small, strong impurities at moderately high densities may readily destroy the superfluidity and suppress T c down to zero, leading to an effective power law dependence on the pairing strength. Such a BCS-BEC crossover phenomenon in the presence of impurities may be realized experimentally by introducing atoms of foreign elements or using optical speckles, with Feshbach resonance in Fermi gases of 6 Li or 40 K.