A normal metal -superconductor hybrid single-electron trap with tunable barrier is utilized as a tool for spectrum analysis at the extremely low signal levels, using only well filtered cryogenic microwave background as a photon source in the frequency range from about 50 to 210 GHz. We probe millimeter wave propagation in two superconducting systems: a Josephson junction array around its plasma frequency, and a superconducting titanium film in the limit when the photon energies are larger than the superconducting energy gap. This regime is relevant for improving the performance of cryogenic quantum devices but is hard to access with conventional techniques. We show that relatively simple models can be used to describe the essential properties of the studied components. Interactions between photons and superconducting quantum systems are of two-fold interest: Those can be directly utilized in circuit quantum electrodynamics Typical energy level spacing in a superconducting quantum device corresponds to the energy of a microwave or millimeter wave photon, which is significantly larger than thermal energy k B T at temperatures below 100 mK. The lowest microwave background levels have been obtained in experiments that combine on-chip filters with a low-noise sample stage having efficient radiation shielding and signal-line filtering We have used the SINIS [S=superconductor (Al), I=insulator (AlO x ), N=normal metal (AuPd))] trap as an on-chip millimeter wave detector to study spectral transmission of two stages of on-chip filters: a Josephson array filter (JAF) and a resistive capacitively shunted transmission line filter (RCF). Since millimeter waves can generate a significant amount of quasiparticles (QPs) in both studied systems, thus altering their response, it is beneficial to study them at the lowest possible signal levels that can be reached in cryogenic experiments. Our signal source is simply the electromagnetic background of a sample chamber with efficient signal-line filtering and two nested shields A simplified schematic of the measurement circuitry is presented in Fig. The detector chip was mounted on a separate copper sample inset with a printed circuit board for bonding and connectors for signal lines. The inset was attached to the sample stage with screws. These simple insets can be easily modified to suit the needs of different experiments. The sample was fabricated on thermally oxidized silicon substrate. Using standard UV-lithography, a 50 nm thick Al groundplane was deposited and then buried under 200 nm of thermal PECVD grown SiO 2 (Fig. Even as all quantum devices are extremely sensitive to environment fluctuations, the effects of microwave photons are rarely straightforward. Radiation shielding and filtering, or lack thereof, can be observed indirectly by any quantum device, but generally this does not provide quantitative information. Here with aid of sophisticated but well established data analysis we demonstrate the possibility to utilize a SINIS single-electron trap (Fig. When a photon absorption occurs, the charge state of the normal metal island of the SINIS single-electron trap, n 1 (Figs. A significant benefit of the SINIS trap as a microwave photon detector is that the threshold energy of photon assisted tunneling can be tuned between δE = ∆ Al and δE = ∆ Al + E c , where ∆ Al ≈ 220 μeV and E c ≈ 650 μeV are the BCS gap of aluminum and the charging energy of the island, respectively. The corresponding range for threshold frequencies f th = δE/h is between about 50 GHz and 210 GHz (h is the Planck constant). The overall quantum efficiency is low because of inevitable impedance mismatch between the high impedance tunnel junctions and the environment. Figure To obtain spectral information, the photon assisted tunneling (PAT) rate Γ and thus the electron hold time τ of the trap node needs to be attained in terms of background noise spectrum. For this purpose the probability density theory was used where e is the elementary charge, T is the electron temperature, R T is the tunneling resistance of the junction, n S (E) is the BCS density of states, f (T, E) is the Fermi function, and P (E) is the probability density to emit or absorb energy E in the tunneling process. The effect of the charging energy is described by the electrostatic energy change δE. For simplicity, this equation is expressed for tunneling from the superconductor to the normal metal, but the opposite process can be described in a similar way. Neglecting quantum fluctuations, P (E) can be written in terms of the spectral noise density at the detector, S V,det (ω), as where R q = h/e 2 is the resistance quantum, = h/(2π), and ω = 2πf is the angular frequency of the noise. In the weak noise limit, the second exponential term can be approximated with first order expansion which is valid at energies above about k B T where α is a normalization factor close to one. As a source of millimeter waves in our experiment we used thermal radiation from warmer parts of the cryostat. It is a major source of microwave background for cryogenic environments at T < 100 mK. Its effect on quantum electronic devices is often modelled using fluctuation-dissipation theorem with an electromagnetic environment, e.g. a resistor, at an elevated temperature Starting from the Planck radiation law, we write the spectral voltage noise density, originating from the photon bath in the sample chamber, as Here S P (ω) is the power spectrum of the microwave radiation observed at the chip, c is the speed of light, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T P is the temperature of the black body emitter of the model. The coupling coefficient β 0 (unit Ωm 2 ) is between the black body source and the chip and can be considered frequency-independent for the sensitive frequency range of the detector. In principle β 0 could be used to compare the shielding and filtering levels of cryogenic setups even though its origin cannot be fully distinguished. However it would require identical measurement environment for the sample, for example bond wire configuration and inner sample chamber geometry. One should note that even though both the fluctuation-dissipation theorem and the Planck radiation law have exact physical origins, in this context they should be considered as phenomenological models. Such thermal distributions are only a crude approximation as the signal at the sample chamber has already penetrated the sample stage shields and/or signal line filters. Also in a realistic case the black body emitter temperature should have distribution based on the cryostat construction, i.e. the noise is not emitted by objects with the same temperature. Yet the collection of data (see Fig. In our experiments, photons from the sample chamber were transmitted through the RCF and JAF filters and became absorbed in the detector, causing PAT events in the SINIS trap, see Figs. Figure The threshold frequencies were much higher than the pair-breaking frequency of titanium, 2∆ Ti /h ∼ 34 GHz, where ∆ Ti = 85 μeV is the BCS energy gap of titanium, and thus the attenuation of RCF was expected to have only weak temperature dependence. On the other hand, we expect no temperature dependence of the JAF below T = 100 mK, because it is extremely difficult to suppress the QP density of superconducting Al structures below the effective temperature of about 100 mK Figure Finally, Fig. Our experimental data presented in Fig. When the filtering is efficient, i.e. κ F is small, the noise coupled by stray capacitances from other nearby electrodes, κ 0 (see Fig. All signal lines coming to the sample region have essentially similar transmission line filters as the RCF that is connected to the JAF and the trap, see Fig. We calculate frequency-dependent transmission coefficients κ(ω) for lossy lumped element transmission lines using Telegraphers equations, see for example where V in and V out are voltages in the input and output ports of the filter, respectively, l is the length of the transmission line, and γ = iωC shunt Z series is the complex propagation coefficient, where Z series is the series impedance and C shunt the shunt capacitance per unit length for the tranmission line. Using Eq. ( Coupling of the microwave background noise into the signal lines is weaker in the middle of the chip than on the bonding pads outside the ground plane, and that difference is quantified by the fitting parameter A < 1. In the frequency range of our experiments, the product κ 0 S V,in has a shape very close to the Planck spectrum of Eq. ( The relation between voltage noise density entering the chip, S V,in in Eq. ( Even though the simulations of Fig. The starting point for the data analysis are the results of Fig. On second iteration we simultaneously fitted all data sets with the Eq. ( The green line and green symbols of Fig. As shown in the large-scale image of Fig. The superconducting transition of a thin nonhomogeneous film has a finite width as a function of temperature due to local variations of T c and phase fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter. In the model this was taken into account by dividing the transmission line to superconducting and normal-metal parts connected in series, with temperature dependent lengths l S (T ) and l N (T ), respectively, as shown in Fig. To model the high frequency conductivity in the superconducting film well established theory formulated by Mattis and Bardeen is a dissipative part with thermal and photon excited QPs and is the dissipationless superfluid response. In the equations above, σ N is the normalstate conductivity of the titanium film. First we demonstrate that the temperature dependence of the RCF cannot be explained solely by the superconductivity of the film. We used the circuit of Fig. -Re (iωC gp Z S (T, ω) l S (T ) , where Z N = R N is the normal state and Z S = Z QP Z CP /(Z QP + Z CP ) is the superconducting state impedance per unit length and is the impedance per unit length for the QP channel and Z CP = iωL CP = iω(R N /ω)/(σ MB2 /σ N ) for the Cooper pair (CP) channel. The normal state resistance of the Ti film per unit length R N = 505 Ω/mm is obtained from an independent measurement. The capacitance to ground plane was used as fitting parameter and the best fits were obtained with C gp = 0.2 pF/mm, which is in reasonable agreement with the value of 1 pF/mm estimated from geometry. Equation ( Here the QP and CP channel impedances are The impedance ratio x = 0.1 between the comparably large well conducting grains and thin semi-insulating grain boundaries (Fig. We again calculated the transmission using Eqs. ( We want to stress that a proper microscopic model would be required for better understanding of the phenomenon, which is, however, beyond the scope of this experimental paper. This simple phenomenological model yields with realistic parameters a plausible explanation for our observations of unexpected high frequency propagation in a disordered superconducting film. The Josephson array filter (JAF) consists of two branches, with 5 and 35 aluminum SQUIDs in series, respectively (Fig. The critical current I c (Φ) I c (0) cos(πΦ/Φ 0 ) has maxima and minima when the magnetic flux Φ through the SQUID loop is integer or half integer multiple of the flux quantum Φ 0 , respectively. The magnetic field that corresponds to Φ 0 in the SQUID loops of JAF is about 16 mT. The frequency range of the SINIS trap detector is higher or comparable to the magnetic flux dependent plasma frequency of the SQUIDs f p ∼ 20 -200 GHz. This region is hard to model theoretically. We use a simplified model suitable for experimental work. The chain of the 5 SQUIDs of the JAF, with total length about l chain = 15 μm, is treated as a lumped element RLC-transmission line circuit where l sq = 3 μm is the length of one SQUID. The capacitance per unit length between the transmission line and environment is estimated to be about C p = 300 aF/μm. The critical current of the Josephson junctions at Φ = 0, I c (0) = 0.49 μA, was used as a fitting parameter. The best fits were obtained with a critical current 2.7 times the value estimated from the measured junction resistance R J = 2.3 kΩ and superconducting energy gap ∆ Al = 220 μeV using the Ambegaokar-Baratoff relation The damping resistance R sq is considered to originate from dielectric losses and quasiparticle excitations Transmission coefficient of the JAF, based on Eq. ( which depends on magnetic field via L sq (Φ). It was used in Eqs. ( However, the resonances themselves cannot be observed directly in the experiment, since the parasitic coupling, κ 0 , dominates when JAF has a large attenuation. The region where κ 0 dominates is marked in the left panel of Fig. In spite of the simplicity of the model with respect to the physical complexity of the system, the uncertainty of the experimentally defined parameters, and the unavoidable structural non-idealities, the fits in Fig. Finally, the full coupling model of Fig. We demonstrated that a single-electron trap excited by individual photons can be used to obtain spectral information of cryoelectronic devices at millimeter wave frequencies with extremely low signal levels. Our source of millimeter wave photons was the electromagnetic background in a well shielded and filtered sample chamber at temperatures between 30 and 400 mK. Our results are consistent with an attenuated Planck spectrum of a black-body emitter at 1.5 K before the filter elements. Two series-connected elements were used as cryogenic millimeter wave filters, a 15-μm-long Josephson array filter (JAF) consisting of an array of aluminium SQUIDs, and a 3.5-mm-long resistive transmission line filter (RCF) made of titanium. Both filters were effective attenuators for millimeter waves. When the attenuation of JAF was tuned by a magnetic field, the hold time of electrons in the single-electron trap changed by two orders of magnitude. We demonstrated that even a simple circuit model, in spite of the theoretical complexity of the SQUID at frequencies comparable to the plasma frequency, is suitable for a qualitative describtion of the millimeter wave transmission. In RCF, the attenuation was observed to decrease considerably when temperature was decreased below the superconducting transition temperature of titanium. This behaviour can be explained by resonance effects in a disordered metal film consisting of weakly connected superconducting grains.