The superconducting proximity effect in semiconductor nanowires has recently enabled the study of new superconducting architectures, such as gate-tunable superconducting qubits and multiterminal Josephson junctions. As opposed to their metallic counterparts, the electron density in semiconductor nanosystems is tunable by external electrostatic gates providing a highly scalable and in-situ variation of the device properties. In addition, semiconductors with large gfactor and spin-orbit coupling have been shown to give rise to exotic phenomena in superconductivity, such as φ 0 Josephson junctions and the emergence of Majorana bound states. Here, we report microwave spectroscopy measurements that directly reveal the presence of Andreev bound states (ABS) in ballistic semiconductor channels. We show that the measured ABS spectra are the result of transport channels with gatetunable, high transmission probabilities up to 0.9, which is required for gate-tunable Andreev qubits and beneficial for braiding schemes of Majorana states. For the first time, we detect excitations of a spin-split pair of ABS and observe symmetrybroken ABS, a direct consequence of the spinorbit coupling in the semiconductor. The linear conductance G = 2e 2 h T i of a nanostructure between two bulk leads These subgap states with |E ABS | ≤ ∆ are localized in the vicinity of the nanostructure and extend into the banks over a length scale determined by ξ. Note that Eq. ( Direct microwave spectroscopy has recently demonstrated the occupation of the ABS by exciting a Cooper pair in atomic junctions We investigate ABS excitations in Josephson junctions that consist of indium arsenide (InAs) nanowires covered by epitaxial aluminium (Al) shells In this circuit, inelastic Cooper-pair tunneling (ICPT, Fig. Here I c,spec is the critical current of the spectrometer junction, V spec is the applied voltage bias, and Z(ω) is the circuit impedance at a frequency ω = 2eV spec /h. Since Z(ω) peaks at the resonant frequencies of the hybrid SQUID First we characterize the contribution of the plasma mode with the nanowire junction gated to full depletion, i.e. G = 0. We show the I(V ) curve of the spectrometer junction of device 1 in Fig. where E C is the charging energy of the circuit and E J is the Josephson coupling of the tunnel junction (Fig. Estimating E J = 165 μeV from the normal state resistance Next, we investigate the spectrometer response as a function of the gate voltage V g applied to the nanowire. Note that the spectrometer response to the ABS transitions is superimposed on the plasma resonance peak. In order to achieve a better visibility of the ABS lines, we display -d 2 I spec /dV 2 spec (V spec ) rather than I spec (V spec ) (see Supplementary Material for comparison). In the presence of ABS, the spectrum exhibits peaks at frequencies where hω = 2E ABS,i Notably, for V g values close to full depletion (see red bar in Fig. 1/4 ≈ 40 -70 μeV, similar to the observed value of 22 μeV. The discrepancy is fully resolved in the numerical analysis of the circuit model developed below. We provide a unified description of the energy spectrum of the circuit as a whole, and consider the following Hamiltonian for the hybrid SQUID (Fig. Here δ is the operator of the phase difference across the tunnel junction, conjugate to the charge operator N , [ δ, N ] = i. The first two terms in Eq. (3) represent the charging energy of the circuit and the Josephson energy of the tunnel junction (Fig. In Fig. We now discuss the evolution of the ABS as a function of an in-plane magnetic field B aligned parallel to the nanowire axis, which is perpendicular to the internal Rashba spin-orbit field (see the inset in Fig. and expect no split of the measured spectral lines. The experimental data (Fig. In order to explain the field dependence of E tot , we study the behaviour of ABS in a simple model consisting of a short Josephson junction in a one-dimensional quantum wire with proximity-induced superconductivity, Rashba spin-orbit and an applied Zeeman field parallel to the wire We perform the calculations in the limit where the Fermi level E F in the wire is well above the Zeeman energy E Z = 1 2 gμ B B and the spin-orbit energy E SO = mα 2 /2h 2 with m the effective mass and α the Rashba spin-orbit coupling constant. In this case and in the short junction limit, the ratio E tot (π)/∆ is a function of just two dimensionless parameters: E Z /∆ and √ E SO E F /∆. First we extract ∆ = 152 μeV and T = 0.56 at B = 0 (leftmost panel in Fig. The theoretical energy spectrum shown in Fig. In addition to the interplay of spin-orbit and Zeeman couplings, the orbital effect of the magnetic field , where B * ∼ Φ 0 /A and A is the cross-section of the nanowire. A simple model which includes both orbital and Zeeman effect, but no spin-orbit coupling, yields B * ≈ 400 mT when fitted to the experimental data (see Supplementary Material for details). In this case, the fit is insensitive to the value of the g-factor. However, the model also predicts the occurrence, at φ = π, of a fermion-parity switch at a field B sw < B * whose value depends on the g-factor. Because agreement with the experimental data imposes the condition that B sw > 300 mT, in the Supplementary Material we show that this scenario requires g < ∼ 5, which is lower than g-factor values measured earlier in InAs nanowire channels Furthermore, we can consider the qualitative effect of the inclusion of a weak spin-orbit coupling (E SO ∆) in this model containing only the orbital and Zeeman effects. We note that, without spin-orbit coupling, the upper Andreev level E + ABS (B) crosses a continuum of states ∆(B) with opposite spin upon increasing the mag- netic field (see Fig. We finally note that in all cases we neglect the effect of B on the Al thin film, justified by its in-plane critical magnetic field exceeding 2 T We present the ABS spectrum in the presence of several transport channels in Fig. In conclusion, we have presented microwave spectroscopy of Andreev bound states in semiconductor channels where the conductive modes are tuned by electrostatic gates and we have demonstrated the effect of Zeeman splitting and spin-orbit coupling. The microwave spectroscopy measurements shown here could provide a new tool for quantitative studies of Majorana bound states, complementing quasiparticle tunneling experiments Correspondence and request of materials should be sent to Attila Geresdi. Josephson junctions The devices are fabricated on commercially available undoped Si wafers with a 285 nm thick thermally grown SiO x layer using positive tone electron beam lithography. First, the electrostatic gates and the lower plane of the coupling capacitors are defined and Ti/Au (5 nm/15 nm) is deposited in a high-vacuum electron-beam evaporation chamber. Next, the decoupling resistors are created using Cr/Pt (5 nm/25 nm) with a track width of 100 nm, resulting in a characteristic resistance of 100 Ω/μm. Then, a 30 nm thick SiN x layer is sputtered and patterned to form the insulation for the coupling capacitors and the gates. We infer C c = 400 fF based on the surface area of 6.5 × 30 μm 2 and a typical dielectric constant ε r = 7. In the following step, the tunnel junctions are created using the Dolan bridge technique by depositing 9 and 11 nm thick layers of Al with an intermediate oxidization step in-situ at 1.4 mbar for 8 minutes. Then, the top plane of the coupling capacitors is defined and evaporated (Ti/Au, 20 nm/100 nm) after an in-situ Ar milling step to enable metallic contact to the Al layers. Next, the InAs nanowire is deterministically deposited with a micro-manipulator on the gate pattern The channel of device 1 is defined by wet chemical etch of the aluminium shell using Transene D at 54 • C for 12 seconds. The channel of device 2 is determined by in-situ patterning, where an adjacent nanowire casted a shadow during the epitaxial deposition of aluminium Finally, the nanowire is contacted to the rest of the circuit by performing Ar plasma milling and subsequent NbTiN sputter deposition to form the loop of the hybrid SQUID. We show the design parameters of the devices in Table We characterise the circuit based on the plasma resonance observed with the semiconductor nanowire gated to zero conductance, i.e. full depletion. In this regime, we infer the environmental impedance Re[Z(ω)] based on Eq. ( with x = ω/ω 0 the dimensionless frequency. The resonance of the circuit is centered at ω 0 = (LC) -1/2 with a quality factor of Q = R C L and a characteristic impedance of Z 0 = L/C. Consistently with this single mode circuit, we find one peak in the I(V ) trace of the spectrometer that we fit to Eq. (S1) (Fig. In addition, we use the superconducting gap and the linear resistance of the junctions to determine the Josephson energy E J and the Josephson inductance L J . With these, we infer the circuit parameters listed in Table We measure the I(V ) trace of the hybrid SQUID as a function of the gate voltage V g at V spec = 0 (Fig. We evaluate G in Fig. V SQUID (μV) Before describing the quantum model of the circuit in detail, we discuss the estimate for the energy splitting at the avoided crossing between the ABS transition and the plasma frequency shown in Fig. For simplicity, we model the plasma oscillations as a bosonic mode with a flux-independent frequency given by hω p = √ 2E J E C , and the weak link as a two-level system, with energies ±E ABS (φ) defined by Eq. ( where z = E C /2E J . This term describes a linear coupling between the two-level system and the phase difference across the junction. g(φ) is then given by the current matrix element between the ground and excited states of the weak link, which was derived in Ref. The square of this current matrix element gives the microwave absorption rate of the weak link, plotted in Fig. which is the expression used for the estimate in the main text. We note that Eq. ( We now describe the theoretical model of the hybrid SQUID that was used to fit the experimental data. Our model is based on Refs. with [ δ, N ] = i. The Hamiltonian of the weak link is with ). Here σ2 and σ3 are two Pauli matrices which act on a space formed by the ground state of the weak link and an excited state with a pair of quasiparticles in the weak link. By expanding the product above, the Hamiltonian can be put in the form ĤABS (φ) = V 2 (φ) σ2 + V 3 (φ) σ3 . The two functions V 2 and V 3 are: We introduce the ground (|g ) and excited states (|e ) of the weak link in the presence of an equilibrium phase difference, where E ABS (φ) is given in Eq. ( with the coefficients The coefficients are normalized: To find the resonant frequencies of the hybrid SQUID, we solve the eigenvalue problem Ĥ|Ψ = E|Ψ numerically. We adopt the basis |δ, ± ≡ |δ ⊗|± for the joint eigenstates of the δ and σ3 operators: δ σ3 |δ, ± = ( δ |δ )⊗(σ 3 |± ) = ± δ |δ, ± . For the numerical solution, we use a truncated Hilbert space where the phase interval [-π, π) is restricted to M discrete points, with lattice spacing 2π/M . A complete basis of the truncated Hilbert space is given by the 2M vectors |δ k ⊗ |± with δ k = 2πk/M (k = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . , ±(M -1)/2), and |± the eigenvector of σ3 . The Hamiltonian is thus represented as a 2M × 2M matrix in this basis and diagonalized numerically. We choose the parameter M large enough to guarantee convergence of the eigenvalues. Once the spectrum is known, we use the transition frequencies from the ground state, ω n = E n -E GS , to do a least-square fit to the experimental data. The details of the numerical procedure are listed in the Jupyter notebooks available at Once an eigenstate |Ψ is determined numerically, we represent its two-component wavefunction in the basis of the weak link eigenstates {|g , |e } from Eq. (S10), evaluated at φ = φ: where The probability densities |Ψ(δ, σ)| 2 plotted in Fig. Finally, in Fig. Equilibrium phase drop In the main text, we have often assumed that the equilibrium phase drop across the weak link, φ, is close to the total applied phase, φ ≈ φ. Here, we verify this assumption by calculating the equilibrium phase drop of the hybrid SQUID model we presented in the previous section. Since φ = φ -δ, (see Eq. (S5)), it is sufficient to show that the equilibrium phase drop δ ≡ GS| δ|GS across the tunnel junction is small. δ is given by the position where the ground state Josephson energy of Eq. (S5) is minimal for E C = 0. From this condition, after taking a derivative of the Josephson energy, we obtain the following transcendental equation for δ: FIG. We note that the above expression defines a zero net current through the hybrid SQUID with the two arms hosting the same supercurrent. For E J ∆T /4, a good approximate solution is given by up to quadratic corrections in (∆T /E J ). In Fig. Andreev bound states in a proximitized Rashba nanowire in a parallel magnetic field In this Section, we introduce the model used to describe the behavior of ABS as a function of the magnetic field B. We start from the standard Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian of a Rashba quantum wire with proximitized s-wave superconductivity and an external Zeeman field Here, the two sets of Pauli matrices τ x,y,z and s x,y,z act in the Nambu and spin spaces, respectively; m = 0.023m e is the effective mass in InAs We seek bound state solutions of the the BdG equations, at energies |E| < ∆. We will consider in particular two opposite regimes: (a) E F E SO , E Z , ∆ and (b) E F = 0, see the two insets in the corresponding panels of Fig. 1. We linearize the BdG equations for the homogeneous system (V = 0, φ = 0) around E = E F . In this way, we obtain two effective low-energy Hamiltonians, H eff and H eff , which are linear in the spatial derivative. They can be written as: We now have three sets of Pauli matrices: τ x,y,z (Nambu space), ρ x,y,z [distinguishing the inner/outer propagating modes, and replacing the spin matrices s x,y,z of Eq. (S18)], and σ x,y,z (distinguishing left-and right-moving modes, and not to be confused with the σ matrices used in the previous Section). For regime (a), we have also introduced the Fermi momentum k F = √ 2mE F , the Fermi velocity v = k F /m and the energy difference Z between the two helical bands at the Fermi momentum. Note that, in the regime (b) where E F = 0, the linearization requires E SO ∆, E Z , so it corresponds to the limit of strong spin-orbit coupling. 2. Using Eq. (S18), we compute the transfer matrix T of the junction in the normal state (∆ = 0), at energy E = E F . The transfer matrix gives a linear relation between the plane-wave coefficients of the general solution on the left and right hand sides of the weak link. In computing T , we neglect all terms ∝ E -1 F in regime (a). In regime (b), the transfer matrix is computed for E Z = 0, since the effect of magnetic field on scattering can be neglected to due the small dwell time in the short junction. At E Z = 0, the transfer matrix depends on the single real parameter T , the transmission probability of the junction. The latter is given by T = 4k 2 F /(4k 2 F + V 2 ) in regime (a), and T = 1/(1 + V 2 /α 2 ) in regime (b). 3. Using the transfer matrix T as the boundary condition at x = 0 for the linearized BdG equations, we obtain the following bound state equation for E: where G(E) is the integrated Green's function, and H eff (q) is the Fourier transform of either of the linearized Hamiltonians of Eq. (S20). [In regime (b), v must be replaced by α in the expression for G(E)]. In deriving the bound state equation, we have neglected the energy dependence of the transfer matrix, which is appropriate in the short junction limit. In regime (b), this also requires that the length of the junction is shorter than α/E Z , so that we can neglect resonant effects associated with normal-state quasi-bound states in the Zeeman gap, which would lead to a strong energy dependence of the transmission 4. After performing the integral for G(E), the roots of Eq. (S21) can be determined numerically. For the two regimes, this leads to the typical behavior of the ABS shown in Fig. From G(E), we can also compute the proximity-induced gap of the continuous spectrum ∆(B): ∆(B) is the minimum value of E such that the poles of G(E) touch the real axis in the complex plane [of course, ∆(B) can also be found by minimizing the dispersion relation obtained by diagonalizing Eq. (S20) in momentum space]. In regime (a), the relevant spectral gap is always at the finite momentum, so the behavior of ∆(B) depends on the strength of the spin-orbit coupling, as shown in Fig. First, with increasing spin-orbit coupling, the linear behavior ∆(0)-∆(B) ∝ B changes to to a quadratic suppression ∆(0) -∆(B) ∝ B 2 for small B. This is due to the vanishing first-order matrix elements of the Zeeman interaction, due to the removal of the spin degeneracy of finite-momentum states by the spin-orbit interaction. Secondly, the proximity-induced gap ∆(B) never closes -as long as the superconductivity in the aluminium shell is presentbecause spin-orbit interaction competes with the Zeeman effect and prevents the complete spin polarization of the electrons. These two facts explain the behavior of ∆(B) shown in Fig. An in-depth theoretical study of Eq. (S21), including a detailed analysis of its roots at finite magnetic fields and the code used in the numerical solution, is in preparation. It will also be interesting to extend the current model beyond the linearization to allow the calculation of the spectrum at arbitrary values of E F . The lack of spin-orbit interaction leads to a linear decrease of ∆(B) (black line), which becomes parabolic in the limit of √ ESOEF EZ = 1 2 gμBB (blue and green lines). The green line corresponds to the best fit to the experimental data shown in the main text. Because a quadratic suppression of ∆(B) and the ABS energies may also be due to the orbital effect of the magnetic field, without invoking spin-orbit interaction, it is important to compare the data with this scenario. In a simple model which includes orbital and Zeeman effect, the field-dependence of the Andreev bound states may be written down as follows: Here, B * ∼ Φ 0 /A is the magnetic field scale which governs the suppression of the proximity-induced gap due to the orbital field, A is the cross-section of the nanowire and Φ 0 = h/2e. In writing Eq. (S23), we have neglected the effect of the orbital field on the scattering at the junction. This should be a good approximation as long as the junction is modeled by a δ(x) potential with no dependence on the radial coordinate of the nanowire. Thus, essentially, the phase dependent part of the Andreev bound state energies can be obtained by replacing ∆ with ∆(1 -B 2 /B 2 * ) in Eq. (1) of the main text. In the absence of spin-orbit coupling, the Zeeman term enters additively in Eq. (S23). Using Eq. (S23), we can perform a fit to the experimental data to determine the optimal value B * = 400 ± 2 mT. Note that the fit is insensitive to the value of g, since g drops out from the sum E (orb) ABS,+ + E (orb) ABS,-. However, Eq. (S23) predicts the occurrence of a fermion parity-switch at a field B sw < B * given by the condition E (orb) ABS,-(φ, B sw ) = 0. From this condition, and assuming the knowlede of both B sw and B * , the g-factor can then be deduced by inverting Eq. (S23) at φ = π, The occurrence of this fermion-parity switch must be accompanied by a drastic disappearance of the ABS transition In Fig. The considerations above motivate the approximation used in the main text, where we attribute the quadratic suppression of E tot (B) to the joint effect of spin-orbit and Zeeman couplings; the orbital effect does not play a dominant role in the observed dispersion. We have presented three different scenarios that can be used to interpret the magnetic field dependence of the ABS transition energies. We have fitted all three models to the entire data set available, consisting of a flux bias sweep of the ABS spectra at six different magnetic fields (B = 50, 75, 100, 150, 200 and 300 mT). For each flux bias at which it was visible, we have extracted the position of the ABS transition. For each value of B we attributed to all the data points an error bar corresponding to the half-width at half-maximum of the ABS peak at φ = π, neglecting for simplicity the flux variation of the width. The total dataset consisted of more than 300 datapoints. We then performed a least-square fit to the ABS transition energies predicted by the three different models. The results are illustrated in Fig. 