We show that topological phases should be realizable in readily available and well studied heterostructures. In particular we identify a new class of topological materials which are well known in spintronics: helical ferromagnet-superconducting junctions. We note that almost all previous work on topological heterostructures has focused on creating Majorana modes at the proximity interface in effectively two-dimensional or one-dimensional systems. The particular heterostructures we address exhibit finite range proximity effects leading to nodal superconductors with Majorana modes localized well away from this interface. To show this, we implement a Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) proximity numerical scheme, which importantly, involves two finite dimensions in a three dimensional junction. Incorporating this level of numerical complexity serves to distinguish ours from alternative numerical BdG approaches which are limited by generally assuming translational invariance or periodic boundary conditions along multiple directions. With this access to the edges, we are then able to illustrate in a concrete fashion the wavefunctions of Majorana zero modes, and, moreover, address finite size effects. In the process we establish consistency with a simple analytical model. The field of topological superconductivity has generated exotic physics that realizes ideas from fields as diverse as high energy In this paper, our goal is to arrive at Majorana surface states in a different class of topological superconductors: nodal superconductors based on helical ferromagnet (F)-superconductor (S) junctions. These systems are readily available and well studied in the spintronics community The resulting topological superconductivity exhibits a rich nodal structure To incorporate these more complicated features of the F/S proximity structures into the present topological study, we introduce a BdG analysis in which there are two finite dimensions in a three dimensional system. In this way the numerics is more sophisticated than in alternative analyses Our system is described by a mean-field Hamiltonian involving fermions created (annihilated) by operators ψ † σ (r) (ψ σ (r)) with spin σ =↑, ↓. The single particle Hamiltonian H sp = -∇ 2 /2m -E F σ 0 describes free fermions of mass m, and Fermi energy E F ; the identity operator σ 0 acts in spin space. Throughout we set = k B = 1. The helical ferromagnet introduces a coupling term H FM = h(r) • σ, where σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is a vector of Pauli matrices operating in spin space. The conical order of the exchange field h, assumed to reside only in the ferromagnet, is written as (2) where h 0 is the internal field strength of the ferromagnet. Here the helical ferromagnet parameters are set by a lattice constant along the c-axis of a, α ∈ [0, π] is the opening angle and β sets the periodicity of the helix to be λ = 2πa/β. The exchange field we use throughout is consistent with the parameters discussed by Chiodi et al, For notational convenience, Eq. ( To understand possible topological phases, it is useful to first neglect the position dependence in ∆(r) and focus on an infinite superconductor with a uniform (non proximity induced) gap parameter ∆; the magnitude of the helical ferromagnet field strength is assumed constant throughout. Applying a gauge transformation ψ ↑ → e -iβz/2a ψ ↑ and ψ ↓ → e iβz/2a ψ ↓ , the single particle part of Eq. ( where h = h 0 (sin αx + cos αẑ) and v so = β/2ma. In this way, the presence of helical magnetism can be viewed as imposing the important combination of a constant Zeeman field and one-dimensional spin-orbit coupling Because the gauge transformed Hamiltonian is translationally invariant, we consider the Nambu spinor Ψ k = ψ ↑k , ψ ↓k , ψ † ↑k , ψ † ↓k T , allowing Eq. ( Here k = (k x , k y , k x ) is a 3D momentum for a dispersion (k) = k 2 /2m -μ, where E F → μ = E F -mv 2 so /2 is a renormalized chemical potential; in this work, we presume μ > 0 as is appropriate to F/S heterojunctions. We also define the Pauli matrices τ i to operate in particlehole space with τ ± = (τ x + iτ y ) /2. The topological phase diagram is analytically tractable for the conical opening angle α = π/2. In a different context, this Hamiltonian has been explored elsewhere at other opening angles The one-dimensionality (or "equal Rashba-Dresselhaus" limit) of the spin-orbit coupling results in a topological phase structure that is qualitatively distinct from that frequently studied in proximity systems. Rather than gapped topological phases, the above dispersion relation is associated with bulk nodal topological phases, which are characterized The physics of the nodal points depends crucially on the dimension of the system, with a three-dimensional system having zero, one, or two nodal lines, while in two dimensions there are zero, two, or four Dirac points It is important to establish that these topological nodal features are robust. We consider a perturbation of the form mτ i σ j . As long as particle-hole symmetry Ξ = * τ x (where * is anti-unitary complex conjugation) and chiral symmetry C = -τ y σ x are preserved, the only effect of m is to renormalize μ, ∆ or h 0 . Notably perturbations of this form will not introduce a gap in the system. This chiral symmetry is exact for α = π/2, and therefore, in this case, the nodal structure is topologically protected. In particular we consider the 2D limit by setting k y = 0; when h 0 < |∆|, the system is gapped and in the trivial phase. When |∆| < h 0 < μ 2 + |∆| 2 , the gap closes resulting in a topological phase with four Dirac points at In the strong magnetic field limit, h 0 > μ 2 + |∆| 2 , the two Dirac points at ±k - x annihilate, resulting in two total Dirac points at ±k + x . The boundaries of these inequalities correspond to topological phase transitions. In a general topologically-non-trivial phase, one finds gapless surface modes x . When the system has a finite extent, these will turn out to be connected by a flat band, as in the left panel of Fig. The dispersion relation for a thin (homogenous) topological superconductor (kF dy = 10) where the exchange field strength and the pair potential are forced to be uniform throughtout the bulk. The three distinct zero-energy flat bands, and additional Dirac points, can be understood as coming from a finite-size quantization of modes along the ŷdirection. The location of these flat bands is consistent with an analytic analysis of the BdG dispersion. with two vanishing eigenvalues. Projecting into the degenerate subspace of these latter two eigenvalues yields where Here Ω = h 2 0 -∆ 2 and the rotated Pauli matrices are given by σ1 = σ x , σ2 = (h 0 σ z + iΩσ y )/h 0 , and the two distinct signs ±, reflect distinct fermion helicities. Equation ( x > 0 will drive a topological phase transition in the dimensionally reduced Hamiltonian. This results in a flat band of Majorana edge states connecting the Dirac points. Motivated by interest from the superconducting spintronics community, we address the triplet, time dependent correlation func- , where f σσ (r, t) = ψ σ (r, t)ψ σ (r, 0) . Both components can be seen to vanish at t = 0. Using Eq. ( with α (ω n , k) even in k and Matsubara frequency ω n . In this way both the m s = 1 and m s = -1 (f - ↑↑ and f - ↓↓ ) triplet correlations can be present while m s = 0 (f - ↑↓ +f - ↓↑ ) is entirely absent. As a consequence, the m s = 0 component, if it is present, can only be induced near the edge, where Majorana modes appear. The above mapping onto the SSH model suggests that the proximity region of a F/S heterostructure can host interesting topological phases with Majorana flat band edge states. We next confirm this by numerically implementing the counterpart proximity junction calculations using a fully self-consistent scheme which allows for a spatially inhomogeneous gap ∆(r). Specifically, we consider the geometry in Fig. The pair potential and exchange fields are functions of y and z, and because the Hamiltonian H is translationally invariant along x, this property allows us to write where kF dy = 50. The momentum modes ky = nπ/kF dy, along ŷ, are still quantized, but with spacing that is five times denser than the thin junction discussed in Fig. where r ⊥ = (y, z) and k x is the momentum along x direction. Then for each value of k x , we then solve for the BdG eigenvalues and eigenfunctions Here, the momentum label k x only enters in x /2m, and in this way, the system is "dimensionally reduced" with respect to the topological properties. The self-consistent order parameter (which depends on the interaction strength g(r)) is to be distinguished from the anomalous pairing amplitudes. The former is zero in the ferromagnet, while the latter is not. We have (11) We similarly define the pair amplitudes F (r) ≡ ψ ↑ (r)ψ ↓ (r) . The exchange field h(r ⊥ ) of the ferromagnet is given in Eq. ( As a consequence the rotated exchange field h(r) is The helical axis of h(r) now makes an angle θ with respect to the ẑ-axis. This leads to The nodal structure in the BdG wavefunction demonstrates a 3D like nature, in contrast to the quasi-2D like nature on the left panel. We find the wavenumber is approximately kF , as is expected from the discussion of the analytic model. We numerically solve the BdG eigenvalue problem of Eq. ( We generically define the matrix elements of an operator M to be Our BdG eigenvectors are then used to construct a self-consistent gap profile ), where the sum over the energy index n also includes an integral over k z states. The coupling function g(r ⊥ ) = gΘ(y -d F ), where Θ(y) is the unit step function, is taken to be a constant inside the superconducting region while vanishing in the ferromagnet. Where topological phases enter is governed by the details of the resulting energy dispersion in the Ho subsystem. These, in turn, depend on the pairing correlations. These correlations are associated with real space pairing oscillations (deriving from LOFF-like physics) and depend rather strongly on h 0 . In this context, and because of the inequalities associated with topological order, the value presumed for h 0 is important, and is here taken to agree with experiment With this analysis, we are able to transform the inhomogenous BdG differential equation into an algebraic matrix that can be numerically diagonalized In order to calibrate the results obtained in a proximity junction, it is useful first to identify signatures of Majorana phases in a simpler situation in which a true order parameter is presumed as in the analytical model, but in a system with finite sample dimensions. This situation is more physical than in the analytically tractable model since these finite dimensions are inevitable in a proximity situation. Here, we perform a series of numerical calculations based on the assumption of a homogeneous gap taking the exchange field and the pair potential as constant. The analysis here builds on the numerical algorithm developed in the previous section, without the complexity of establishing a self-consistent spatially dependent gap. By varying the sample thickness systematically, in effect, we study a crossover of the edge mode structure from quasi-2D to 3D. Several different thicknesses k F d z were considered, ranging from k F d z = 70 to k F d z = 150, and our results were found to be independent of this parameter for all the cases considered. In all calculations we assumed that the sample was infinite in the x-direction. We can more carefully map out how the system evolves by analyzing the behavior of the energy dispersion. The positive-energy branches of the continuum BdG dispersion are For a 3D homogeneous and infinite sample, nodal points can only occur when k z = 0, which gives where we have chosen the negative sign. For simplicity, here and in the remainder of this section, we normalize energies to E F and momentum to the Fermi wavevector, k F . The correction to the chemical potential by the helical wavevector We consider a finite sample of width d y in the ŷ direction, with k min y = π k F dy and k max y ≈ 1. When d y goes to infinity, k min y vanishes. However, for a sufficiently small sample, the discretized nature will result in quantized momentum modes k y = nπ k F dy for integer n. The resulting excitation spectrum will be approximated by "cuts" through the full 3D spectrum, where k y is fixed. To see this, consider the spectrum when k y has been replaced with a quantized mode: (25) This quantity vanishes when is satisfied. As a result, the finite size along d y effectively renormalizes the chemical potential and shifts the topological phase boundary. For the example we address below, we take h 0 = 0.1, ∆ = 0.032, k F d y = 10 and k F d z = 150. Thus the two nodal points occur at k - x = 0.86 and k + x = 0.96. The zero energy flat band in a finite-size system then lies in the range 0.86 < k x < 0.96. When n = 2, we have 0.66 < k x < 0.79. For n = 3, we have 0 < k x < 0.37. This analysis shows that there will be three zero energy flat bands for n = 1, 2, 3. Furthermore, for each band indexed by n, the corresponding wavefunction amplitudes show n maxima along the ŷ-direction at two edges in the ẑdirection. This is illustrated as Fig. To understand the limit as the width d y tends to infinity, we take the case of a large but finite y-thickness (k F d y = 50), as illustrated in the electronic structure in Fig. With this framework we now present numerical solutions to the BdG equations in a proximity configuration, as given in Eq. We first observe from Figs. As a summary figure, it is useful to first to compare results for a true proximity system with one in which there is a homogeneous gap, as in the figures of the previous section. Figure We turn to Fig. In Fig. To establish whether the zero energy flat bands of Fig. Before looking for additional support, it is useful to see if these Majorana flat bands are related to the oddfrequency pairing amplitude, as has been suggested or investigated To establish experimental signatures for the existence of Majorana modes, we address the local density of states (LDOS) which can be probed using scanning tunneling microscopy or photoemission. Recent work In this paper we have suggested a different heterostructure for readily observing nodal topological superconductivity and related Majorana surface flat bands. This is to be contrasted with the widely studied p x ± ip y proximity heterostructures We employ a numerical Bogoliubov-de Gennes scheme which can accomodate finite length scales in two of the three dimensions. While we encounter increased numerical complexity, in contrast to periodic boundary conditions, we then have access to edges and can study the Majorana wavefunctions associated with the E = 0 flat bands. This numerical scheme should also be compared with Eilenberger-based approaches which it was suggested We emphasize, throughout, that with our selfconsistent proximity calculation, there is a clear distinction between analytical models for the equivalent topological phases (with a presumed homogeneous order parameter) and the counterpart proximity-induced phase which contains no pairing interaction and thus no order parameter in the magnetic subsystem. Nevertheless, a numerical study of a homogeneous system which includes edges and finite size effects, provides a calibration showing how Majorana flat band states will appear without proximity effects. A comparison of the wavefunction plots we find in our junctions (induced solely by proximity) provides strong support for identifying these bound surface states with Majorana flat bands. Importantly, our calculations show that localized Majorana modes appear away from the junction interface. This presents an experimental advantage as these Majorana states are much more accessible than in a buried proximity interface. In a rather complete review of intrinsic nodal topological superfluids In this paper we have singled out the zero bias tunneling feature and moreover demonstrated how it is modified as the height of the junctions is reduced. This latter is suggestive of the interaction between Majorana bound states We end by noting that we have not considered the effect of disorder in our proximity calculations, although the s-wave odd-frequency spin triplet state is not particularly sensitive to impurity effects, as compared with the p-wave even-frequency spin triplet protected Majorana bound states. In a topologically nontrivial phase, bulk topological signatures are associated with gapless surface modes. Specifically, we are considering a topological superconductor, where we expect the edge modes to be zero-energy Majorana states. When h 0 > ∆ and Ω 2 ≡ h 2 0 -μ 2 < ∆ 2 , phase transitions are signaled by a closing BdG spectral gap at k = (±k ± x , 0, 0), where x , there exists a surface state associated with a flat band connecting two nodal points. We may show this explicitly by looking at low energy excitations around k ± x . The structure of the transition can be understood from a small-momentum expansion k = k c + q around the point k c = (±k + x , 0, 0). To first order in q, Our BdG Hamiltonian has four distinct energy bands due to broken spin degeneracy, two are particle-like and two hole-like. The spectrum is gapless at k c in the sense that the lower particle band and the higher hole band vanish at this point. This can be understood explicitly by diagonalizing H(k c ) → O -1 H(k c )O directly at this point: where For notational clarity, we apply a similarity transformation using the matrices O and O -1 , rather than a unitary transformation with O and O † . The difference is a simple normalization of the column vectors of O, and the underlying physics is not affected. It is more instructive to look at the same similarity transformation applied to ∇ k H(k c ). We use the identities The structure of the low energy surface states should follow from only the gapless bands. We therefore apply the similarity transformation O -1 ∇ k H(k c )O and extract the second and the third (gapless) bands: Here we have defined new Pauli matrices σi that act only in the two-band low-energy subspace near the nodal points. The low-energy subspace x mh 0 q x σx . (B.9) Since {σ x , σz +iσ y Ω/h 0 } = 0, after defining the constant v 1 = Ωk + x /mh 0 , and the Pauli matrices σ1 = σx and σ2 = σz + iσ y Ω/h 0 , we obtain Eq. ( This has the form of a Dirac Hamiltonian q μ γ μ with {γ i , γ j } = 2δ ij . The signature ± before k + x , corresponding to excitations near the points ±k + x , defines distinct helicities of the excitations; thus, they are Weyl fermions. Moreover, if we regard q x as a parameter, i.e., applying a dimensional reduction, then the σ1 term is an effective "Dirac mass." In this low energy effective approximation, the phase transition reflects the sign of q x , which is associated with the sign of Dirac mass term. Breaking translational invariance in the ẑ direction by replacing q z → -i∂ z , we can consider an interface at z = 0 separating inequivalent phases q x > 0 and q x < 0. We have where M takes the role of v 1 q x , and is a positive constant for z > 0 and a negative constant for z < 0. The Jackiw and Rebbi or the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger To be more precise, we should be able to distinguish the trivial and topological phases. If we look at +k + x (-k + x ), the Dirac mass becomes negative when q x < 0 (q x > 0). This is consistent with other analyses. On the other hand, if we expand around ±k - x , we can again locally diagonalize H(k c ) with a different similarity matrix ∇ k H(k c ) • q → q z v so σz -Ω h 0 iσ y -(±) Ωk - x mh 0 q x σx . (B.14) This is identical, up to signs and a replacement k + x → k - x , to the effective Hamiltonian in Eq. B.9 found by expanding around the second set of Dirac points. The additional (-1) appearing before σ x is necessary to make the criterion for topological phases consistent with the above arguments if we define γ x consistently. Superficially, this approximation seems to depend on the ordering of eigenfunctions corresponding to the two gapless bands when constructing O and O . However, one can show straightforwardly that such an ambiguity does not change the relevant part of O -1 (τ z ⊗ I)O and O -1 (τ z ⊗ I)O . Our results are thus robust. Finally, note that the topological protection is a property of the full four-band BdG Hamiltonian, and is based upon the existence of chiral symmetry. This argument does not rely on the structure of the low-energy effective expansion. Provided chiral symmetry remains, no perturbations can emerge that will result in a mass term.