Superconductivity (SC) with the suppression of long-range antiferromagnetic (AFM) order is observed in the parent compounds of both iron-based and cuprate superconductors. The AFM wave vectors are bicollinear (π, 0) in the parent compound FeTe different from the collinear AFM order (π, π) in most iron pnictides. Study of the phase diagram of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x is the most direct way to investigate the competition between bicollinear AFM and SC. However, presence of interstitial Fe affects both magnetism and SC of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x , which hinders the establishment of the real phase diagram. Here, we report the comparison of doping-temperature (x-T) phase diagrams for Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.43) single crystals before and after removing interstitial Fe. Without interstitial Fe, the AFM state survives only for x < 0.05, and bulk SC emerges from x = 0.05, and does not coexist with the AFM state. The previously reported spin glass state, and the coexistence of AFM and SC may be originated from the effect of the interstitial Fe. The phase diagram of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x is found to be similar to the case of the "1111" system such as LaFeAsO 1-x F x , and is different from that of the "122" system. The discovery of superconductivity (SC) in iron-based superconductors (IBSs) Among those similarities like layered structure and very high critical field On the other hand, iron chalcogenides recently attracted much more attention in IBSs because of its unexpected high T c . Although the initial T c in FeSe was only 8 K Although Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x shows some similarities to iron pnictides like the Fermi surface topology which is characterized by hole bands around Γ point and electron bands around M point 8 , it manifests some unique properties different from iron pnictides. The most crucial one is the antiferromagnetic wave vectors, which is bicollinear (π, 0) in the parent compound FeTe Furthermore, the phase diagram of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x will give us another opportunity to testify some phenomena observed in iron pnictides like the coexistence of AFM and SC, and the possible QCP. Until now, although several phase diagrams have been already reported based on Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x single crystals Figure To probe the influence of Se doping to the SC in Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x , temperature dependence of zero-field-cooled (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) magnetization at 5 Oe were measured for the as-grown and annealed crystals. All the as-grown crystals usually show no SC or very weak diamagnetic signal. After removing the interstitial Fe by annealing, SC emerges from x = 0.05, and the value of T c is gradually enhanced with the increase of Se doping up to 14.5 K in Fe 1+y Te 0.57 Se 0.43 as shown in Figure Figure In crystals after annealing, the value of magnetic susceptibility does not show a systematic evolution and is irregular, which is caused by the magnetism from some Fe impurities. During the annealing process, the interstitial Fe are removed from their original positions (interstitial sites in Te/Se layers), and form some compounds like Fe 2 O 3 or FeTe 2 Figure Furthermore, temperature dependence of resistivity for all the as-grown crystals manifests a nonmetallic behavior ( should point out that a SC-like transition at low temperature is observed in the annealed crystal with x = 0.03, however, the zero resistivity is not reached in the measured low temperature limit of 2 K. Such a SC transition is filamentary in nature, since is not observed in magnetization measurements. It may come from the atomic-size fluctuation of Se doping or possible local strain effect. To get more insight into the influence of interstitial Fe to the transport properties, temperature dependence of the Hall coefficients, R H , for the as-grown and annealed Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.43) single crystals are measured and shown in Figure The R H for the as-grown crystals all show positive values before the AFM transition, which indicates that the hole-typed charge carriers are dominant. Besides, for x > 0.09, R H shows an obvious upturn behavior with decreasing temperature below 100 K. Such upturn behavior can be also explained by the localization effect due to the presence of the interstitial Fe For the annealed crystals, AFM transition is only observed in the crystals with x = 0 and 0.03, and the value of T N for FeTe is increased after annealing, which are all consistent with both the magnetic susceptibility and temperature dependence of resistivity measurements. For x ≥ 0.05 (the bulk SC region), R H keeps nearly temperature independent behavior at high temperatures, followed by a slight increase below 100 K, then suddenly decreases before reaching T c . The value even changes sign from positive to negative in the crystal with x = 0.43. The characteristic temperature at which R H shows the maximum value before decreasing is defined as T * , and also indicated by the solid orange arrows in the figure. It is obviously that the value of T * gradually increases with the increase in the Se doping level. The strong temperature-dependent R H is usually explained by the multiband nature of the sample. For the annealed Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x , hole-type charge carriers are dominant at temperatures above ~150 K, since the R H keeps temperature independent positive value. Below ~150 K, the slight increase in R H may come from the mobility change of the hole-type carriers or the remaining small amount of impurities formed during the removing process of the interstitial Fe (for example the FeTe m Based on the magnetization, magnetic susceptibility, resistivity, and Hall effect measurements described above, we can establish a doping-temperature (x-T) phase diagram for the as-grown and annealed Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.43) single crystals as shown and compared in Figures For x ≥ 0.12, the AFM transition is absent and replaced by a spin glass state (observed by magnetic susceptibility measurements, and marked by the righttriangles). The spin glass state is originated from the effect of interstitial Fe, which interacts with more than 50 neighboring Fe in the adjacent Fe layers, and induces the magnetic Friedel-like oscillation at (π,0) order After removing the interstitial Fe by O 2 -annealing, the phase diagram of Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.43) is dramatically changed. As shown in Figure The coexistence of AFM and SC states is absent in the annealed crystals. Thus, the previously reported coexistence of AFM, spin glass state with SC may be originated from the effect of interstitial Fe. Besides, the characteristic temperature T * observed in the R H is plotted in the figure, which also resides in the doping region of x ≥ 0.05, and gradually increases with increasing Se doping. It suggests that the multiband effect in Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x may be strongly related to the occurrence of SC. On the other hand, the rapid suppression of AFM state with small amount of doping, absence of coexistence of the AFM and SC states are all similar to the phase diagrams of LaFeAsO 1-x F x 34 and CeFeAsO 1-x F x In summary, the doping-temperature (x-T) phase diagrams for Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.43) single crystals before and after removing interstitial Fe by O 2 -annealing are established and compared based on the systematical studies of the structure, magnetic, and transport properties. Results show that the phase diagram is largely affected by the interstitial Fe. Without interstitial Fe, the AFM state is found to be suppressed quickly with Se doping, surviving only in a narrow region of x < 0.05. The AFM state is proved not to coexist with the bulk SC. The previously reported spin glass state, and the coexistence of AFM and SC may be originated from the effect of interstitial Fe. Besides, a characteristic temperature T * observed in the temperature dependent Hall coefficient in the annealed crystals is found to be accompanied by the bulk SC, which may indicate the important role of the multi-band effect in the realization of SC in this system. Future efforts on this point may be helpful to the understanding of the paring mechanism of this system. Sample growth and annealing. Single crystals Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.43) are grown by the self-flux method as described in detail elsewhere 