Recent observation of ∼ 10 times higher critical temperature in FeSe monolayer compared with its bulk phase has drawn a great deal of attention because the electronic structure in the monolayer phase appears to be different than bulk FeSe. Using a combination of density functional theory and dynamical mean field theory, we find electronic correlations have important effects on the predicted atomic-scale geometry and the electronic structure of the monolayer FeSe on SrTiO 3 . The electronic correlations are dominantly controlled by the Se-Fe-Se angle either in the bulk phase or the monolayer phase. But the angle sensitivity increases and the orbital differentiation decreases in the monolayer phase compared to the bulk phase. The correlations are more dependent on Hund's J than Hubbard U. The observed orbital selective incoherence to coherence crossover with temperature confirms the Hund's metallic nature of the monolayer FeSe. We also find electron doping by oxygen vacancies in SrTiO 3 increases the correlation strength, especially in the dxy orbital by reducing the Se-Fe-Se angle. Introduction: In addition to the cuprates, the discovery of superconductivity in Fe-based compounds with superconducting critical temperatures (T c ) ranging from 26 K to 56 K has created a new class of unconventional superconductors While there are many density functional based stud-ies describing the role of electron-phonon Method and structural details: The pcnitide height and/or bond angle between X-Fe-X (X=pnictide) plays an important role in determining the strength of the correlations Spectral function: Once we optimize the atom posi- verse quasiparticle lifetime equals to the scattering rate Γ=-ZImΣ(i0 + ), where Z=(1-∂ReΣ(ω)/∂ω)| ω→0 is the spectral weight and ImΣ(i0 + ) is the imaginary part of self-energy at zero frequency. At low temperatures when ImΣ(i0 + ) → 0, the system is in the coherent phase with infinite quasiparticle lifetime. When the temperature is above the coherent energy scale, ImΣ(i0 + ) and, consequently, the quasiparticle lifetimes are both finite. Our DFT+DMFT calculations show that the coherent scales of Fe-3d electrons are strongly orbital dependent (see SI Since the Fermi surface of FeSe/STO-Ovac is the closest to the ARPES measurements, we examine the oxygen vacant FeSe/STO system in more detail. First, we investigate the effect of U and J on Z in FeSe/STO-Ovac. When J is changed from 0.8 to 0.5 eV with a fixed U, the change in Z is found to be stronger than when U is changed from 5.0 eV to 2.0 eV with a fixed J (Table II in SI Quasiparticle weight: The structural-tuned coherent scales are directly related to the electron correlations. To examine degree of electron correlations in more detail, we compute the orbital dependent spectral weights Z (inverse of mass-enhancement m * /m band ) after analytic continuation of the self-energy by the maximum entropy method In the monolayer phase, the decrease in Z with O vacancies directly relates to the decrease in angle. To prove this, we compute Z as a function of Se-Fe-Se angle in FeSe-monolayers. Fig. Three angles are obtained from NM-DFT, SP-DFT, and DFT+DMFT optimization of FeSe monolayers. The fourth angle is for a monolayer structure with Se-Fe-Se angle of bulk. This directly shows that a monolayer structure with the angle of bulk FeSe is extremely correlated and the correlation is controlled by one single structural parameter, which is the Se-Fe-Se angle. We also plot the similar angle dependence of Z in bulk FeSe (Fig. Role of oxygen vacancies: O vacancies serve as a potential source for doping electrons to FeSe as seen in our DFT+DMFT spectral function as well as in the experiments DFT+DMFT hybridization: The change in the Se-Fe-Se angle can affect the hybridization (or bandwidth). The DFT+DMFT hybridization is shown in S.I. Fig. Supplemental Materials: How correlated is the FeSe/SrTiO 3 system ? Structural details and Methods To investigate the effect of interface on the electronic structure of FeSe, we construct FeSe monolayer with and without SrTiO 3 (STO) substrate. In our investigation we consider both undopped STO and STO with oxygen vacancies. We have optimized structures with self-consistent DFT with Embedded DMFT The DFT+DMFT Results. In S.I. spectral weight (S.I. Fig. In Table 