Hund's coupling is shown to generally favor, in a doped half-filled Mott insulator, an increase in the compressibility culminating in a Fermi-liquid instability towards phase separation. The largest effect is found about the frontier between an ordinary and an orbitally-decoupled ("Hund's") metal. The increased compressibility implies an enhancement of quasiparticle scattering, thus favoring other possible symmetry breakings. This physics is shown to happen in simulations of the 122 Fe-based superconductors, possibly implying the relevance of this mechanism in the enhancement of the the critical temperature for superconductivity. A wealth of unexpected phenomena have been discovered in strongly correlated materials and many technological applications are foreseen. At the heart of the observed remarkable behaviors is the many-body physics of the conduction electrons. Indeed their tendency to avoid each other leads to a complex dynamics with surprising properties, even more so in the typical multi-orbital landscape of these systems. In particular the different repulsion that two electrons feel depending on them being in the same or a different orbital, or on the alignment of their spins (embodied by the well known Hund's rules of atomic physics) plays an important role in these materials. Recently our understanding of the influence of Hund's coupling on the metallicity properties of correlated materials has drastically improved All of these results have been consistently found in Iron-based superconductors and related materials (see for example Here we show that multi-orbital correlations and Hund's coupling in particular seem to have another, hitherto undiscovered, influence on these systems, in that not only the quasiparticle weight and masses but also the residual interactions between quasiparticles can be affected in a highly non-trivial way. This happens in the zone of influence of the aforementioned half-filled Mott insulator. We show that Hund's coupling affects these interactions enhancing the compressibility of the electron fluid, up to a point in which the system is unstable towards phase separation. Besides the many implications that an intrinsic instability towards a phase separation can entail, it is worth stressing that simply these altered quasiparticle interactions can have direct effects on the interaction vertices with low-energy bosons and radically enhance some bosonic-mediated mechanisms towards long-range ordered phases. We will show that this might be the case for the pairing mechanism for the high-Tc superconductivity in Fe-based superconductors. We investigate the multi-orbital Hubbard model (with M orbitals) with Hamiltonian Ĥ - where d † imσ creates an electron with spin σ in orbital m = 1, . . . , M on site i of the lattice, and The number operator is n imσ = d † imσ d imσ , N = imσ n imσ , μ is the chemical potential, and customarily we set U = U -2J and we drop the last two terms in Ĥint (spin-flip and pair-hopping), which needs extra approximations to be treated within our method of choice (the effect of these terms is addressed in the Supplemental Material). We first study the degenerate model in which we only consider diagonal hopping in orbital space, equal for all orbitals i.e. t mm ij = t ij δ mm and m = 0, as a function of the average density of electrons per lattice site n = N /N sites . We treat the model in the Slave-spin mean-field approximation where f † kmσ is che creation operator of a quasiparticle with momentum k, orbital (band) character m and spin σ and k is the bare electronic dispersion relation which is the same for all the bands. In what follows the kspace structure of k is immaterial, and only the density of states (DOS) counts; we customarily choose a semi-circular DOS D( ) ≡ 2 πD 1 -( D ) 2 of bandwidth W = 2D for all bands. The renormalization parameters of the dispersion, Z and λ, are calculated in the selfconsistent SSMF scheme as an average on the auxiliary slave-spin hamiltonian zones (which in practice will be prevented by a charge modulation at finite q due to long-range Coulomb interaction, neglected in this study Hund's coupling is essential for this instability zone to appear, no diverging compressibility is found at J = 0. Already at very small J/U a wide zone opens at large U. This zone moves towards lower interaction strengths for increasing J/U , following the position of the Mott transition A similar behavior is found for the 3-orbital (Fig. Despite a marked difference, then, in the way the instability zone evolves at large U, the common robust feature is that in all these models the onset of Hund's coupling triggers the appearance of a zone departing from the Mott transition at half-filling where the system is unstable towards phase separation. The low-U frontier of this zone in all cases is rather horizontal in the U-doping plane, i.e. for U > U c it moves quickly towards the maximum doping it will reach. This frontier is found to follow a well known crossover, appearing in these models in several physical quantities. Indeed (see for instance Fig. Let's now analyze the origin of this behavior. Interestingly, this phase separation arises as an instability of the Fermi-liquid, the latter being enforced, within the SSMF method. Indeed it is worth stressing that the renormalization parameters in the quasiparticle Hamiltonian eq. (3) depend in an intricate way on all the couplings in the bare hamiltonian and the chemical potential, so that the effective system described by eq. ( where D * ( F ) is the total quasiparticle (i.e. renormalized) density of states at the fermi energy and F s 0 = D * ( F )f s 0 is the isotropic, spin-symmetric Landau parameter. From eq. ( Incidentally the mechanism reducing the width of the Hubbard bands was shown to coincide It is worth stressing that also the proximity to such a Fermi-liquid instability has several remarkable consequences (5) This implies an enhancement of this interaction vertex, if 1 + F s 0 decreases until vanishing as in the present case (for a complete plot of 1 + F s 0 in the 2-orbital model with J/U = 0.25 in the Supplemental Material). In turn the enhancement of the vertex can favor a symmetry breaking, if a related susceptibility is correspondingly enhanced. It is tempting to attribute to these effects the enhancement of a number of instabilities of the paramagnetic metallic phase in materials that are dominated by Hund's many-body physics Recently Misawa and Imada Analogously to the model studies, we find that in BaFe 2 As 2 the instability zone and the zone of enhanced compressibility that continues it, is located on the crossover frontier between the normal and the orbitallydecoupled ("Hund's") metal (Fig. The author is grateful to M. Capone, G. Giovannetti, G. Sangiovanni, M. Grilli, A. Chubukov, P. Bruno for helpful exchanges and discussions. In Fig. The phase diagram has thus a very elongated "moustache" shape in the U-density plane, as visible in the left panel of Fig. It is natural to ask oneself if this unstable zone is a robust physical feature. In particular it is worth checking if the instability is an artifact of the approximate treatment of Hund's coupling due to the chosen densitydensity Hamiltonian. Slave-spins cannot at present properly treat the full Kanamori hamiltonian at the same approximation level of the Ising one Indeed, in the 2-orbital model, the occurrence of an instability zone due to a diverging compressibility around the half-filled Mott insulator is confirmed. This zone, absent at J = 0 quickly widens its doping range with increasing J/U and it is most extended for J/U 0.02, then decreases again. The extent in doping is smaller than that for the Ising Hamiltonian, reaching densities around n=2.1. The low-U frontier of the instability zone still departs from the Mott transition, as in the Ising case. The shape of the instability zone is analogously reentrant in both this rotationally invariant and the density density case (i.e. the fact that the frontier δ c (U ) starts at δ = 0 at the critical interaction for the Mott transition U = U c , quickly grows with U > U c , and then decreases again at larger U until vanishing). Further investigation of the rotationally-invariant case is left for future work, but this preliminary analysis support the robustness of the physical conclusions of the present study. We have mentioned in the main article that the divergence of the compressibility found in the various studied models departs from the half-filled Mott transition, and coincides (at least close to this transition) with a cross-over, well known in all models and ab-initio studies of systems with strong Hund's coupling Moving to large dopings the cross-over becomes less sharp than close to half-filling, and the position of the compressibility enhancement seems not to exactly coincide with it. Rather the peak in the compressibility seems to be placed immediately inside the Hund's metal zone, still very close to the cross-over. Proximity of the compressibility divergence/enhancement with the cross-over into the orbitallydecoupled (that might be identified with the "Hund's metal") phase: 2-orbital (left panel) and 3-orbital (right panel) Hubbard models with Hund's coupling J/U = 0.25. Results for two densities are reported for each model, as a function of the interaction strength U/D: one crossing the instability zone (the smaller density in both cases) and one just outside it (larger density -refer to the phase diagram in the main article, left panel of Fig. The results illustrating the coincidence/proximity of the frontier to the Hund's metal and the compressibility divergence/peak are reported for the 2-orbital and the 3-orbital models in Fig. For the system described by the Hamiltonian the total number of quasiparticles, equal to the particle density, reads The electronic compressibility κ el = dn dμ is obtained by differentiation: and then, using the simple identity dX dμ = dX dn dn dμ this yields: . (S9) Here we have used the fact that the Luttinger theorem imposes that μ 0 = μ-λ Z , where μ 0 is the chemical potential for the non-interacting system with the same particle density, and the fact that D * (μ) = D(μ 0 )/Z. Indeed the Luttinger theorem states that the volume of the interacting Fermi surface is proportional to the particle density. i.e. n f = n, so that this useful expression can be found, relating the chemical potential in our interacting model to that of the non-interacting case with the same density. Indeed by equating the densities of particles at U=0 with the interacting quasiparticle density at zero temperature i.e. The dashed lines show that the compressibility diverges when -dλ/dn reaches the value of D * (μ) -1 + μ0 dZ dn which is a positive quantity. Thus dλ/dn has to be negative. the quasiparticle DOS is a definite positive quantity and dZ dn has always the sign of μ 0 near the half-filled Mott insulator in our particle-hole symmetric models. This is because μ 0 = 0 at half-filling in these cases (thus μ 0 has the sign of the doping from half-filling), and Z decreases monotonically when approaching the Mott insulating state (thus dZ dn has also the sign of the doping). This entails that dλ/dn has to become negative, and this is what is found numerically in all the examined cases in this article, as shown in Fig. 