Combining multiple emergent correlated properties such as superconductivity and magnetism within the topological matrix can have exceptional consequences in garnering new and exotic physics. Here, we study the topological surface states from a noncentrosymmetric α-BiPd superconductor by employing angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and first principle calculations. We observe that the Dirac surface states of this system have several interesting and unusual properties, compared to other topological surface states. The surface state is strongly anisotropic and the inplane Fermi velocity varies rigorously on rotating the crystal about the y-axis. Moreover, it acquires an unusual band gap as a function of ky, possibly due to hybridization with bulk bands, detected upon varying the excitation energy. Coexistence of all the functional properties, in addition to the unusual surface state characteristics make this an interesting material. Superconductivity in the presence of spin-orbit coupling, magnetism, and topological surface states can have exceptional consequences, such as chiral pairing α-BiPd is recently synthesized with all the aforementioned properties obtained intrinsically, and thus provides the long-sought material for new experiments and applications. So far, there have been few works on this material, mainly studying the magnetic and transport phenomena In this paper we report several interesting and unusual properties of the topological Dirac states present on the surface of this noncentrosymmetric α-BiPd superconductor by employing ARPES and first principle calculations. We detect the surface states that are having a Dirac node at a binding energy of 0.7 eV below Fermi level (E F ) at the Γ point dispersing along the Γ -X high symmetry line. Upon varying the photon energy, we notice surface states that are gapped as a function of k y at the node due to a possible hybridization with bulk bands, a unique feature of the surface state that is not disclosed in this compound so far. Upon varying the photon polarization we identify the orbital character of the detected bands. We further show that the Dirac fermions in α-BiPd are highly anisotropic on rotating the crystal about the y-axis such that, in going from Γ-X to Γ-Z the massless linear dispersive Dirac states become flat dispersive massive fermions. Therefore, the Dirac states found in this compound are of one dimensional (1D) character which could provide a natural route for the quantum wires. In general, the Dirac states found on the surface of 2D compounds such as graphene Single crystals of stoichiometric α-BiPd were grown by a self-flux melt growth method. The crystals have a platelet-like shape with shiny surfaces. As grown crystals show a superconducting transition at T c ≈ 4 K. Further elemental analysis on these single crystals are reported elsewhere Band structure calculations are performed on the orthorhombic crystal structure of α-BiPd ARPES data of α-BiPd are shown in Figs. Next, to delineate if the Dirac states seen in Fig. On comparing the EDMs shown in Figs. 1 with the bulk [Fig. Next, in Fig. There are multiple ways a band gap can open at the Dirac node In summary, we have studied the band structure of α-BiPd noncentrosymmetric superconductor using ARPES and first principle calculations. Dirac surface states are detected with a node at -0.7 eV from our studies. We notice that these Dirac states are highly anisotropic, which means along Γ-X symmetry line these show linear band dispersion and along the Γ -Z these states barely disperse. We have disentangled the orbital character of the surface states using polarization dependent measurements. Interestingly, we detect a photon energy dependent band gap at the Dirac node for the surface states due to a possible hybridization with bulk bands. Since these Dirac states are in close proximity to a bulk superconductor, we think, the interplay between the topological surface states and the bulk superconductivity can provide a platform for new quantum information such as chiral superconductivity T.S. acknowledges support by the Department of Science and Technology (DST) through INSPIRE-Faculty program (Grant number: IFA14 PH-86). T.S. acknowledges greatly the travel support given by IFW Dresden for the measurements. V.P.S.A and R.V. acknowledge the financial support from the Govt. of India through the DAE-SRC outstanding researcher award scheme.