We propose a system where coherent thermal transport between two reservoirs in non-galvanic contact is modulated by independently tuning the electron-photon and the electron-phonon coupling. The scheme is based on two gate-controlled electrodes capacitively coupled through a dc-SQUID as intermediate phase-tunable resonator. Thereby the electron-photon interaction is modulated by controlling the flux threading the dc-SQUID and the impedance of the two reservoirs, while the electron-phonon coupling is tuned by controlling the charge carrier concentration in the electrodes. To quantitatively evaluate the behavior of the system we propose to exploit graphene reservoirs. In this case, the scheme can work at temperatures reaching 1 K, with unprecedented temperature modulations as large as 245 mK, transmittance up to 99% and energy conversion efficiency up to 50%. Finally, the accuracy of heat transport control allows us to use this system as an experimental tool to determine the electron-phonon coupling in two dimensional electronic systems (2DES). Control and manipulation of thermal currents in solidstate structures is of particular interest especially at the nanoscale where heat strongly affects the physical properties of the systems. In this direction, coherent caloritronics Yet, the possibility of in-situ tuning the impedance matching and the electron-phonon coupling in such systems can pave the way to new device concepts, unexplored physical effects and novel quantum-state engineering. Here, we propose a device able to fully control the coherent heat transport between two bodies in non-galvanic contact by modulating their electron-photon interaction and their electron-phonon coupling. The system we study consists of a source S and a drain D electron reservoirs (see Fig. Above P e-ph S and P e-ph D are the power losses due to electron-phonon coupling in S and D, respectively, and P R S -R D is the electron-photon mediated power transfer between the two reservoirs in non-galvanic contact. As a consequence, for a non-zero P R S -R D the temperatures of the source T S and drain T D electrodes differ from the phonon temperature T bath and follow T S ≥ T D ≥ T bath (in the case of positive P in ). Here, we focus initially our attention on P R S -R D . The heat transport between two remote bodies mediated by the electron-photon interaction has been studied within a nonequilibrium Green's function formalism where T (ω) is the photonic transfer function of the system, while N S and N D are the Bose-Einstein distributions of the source and drain photon reservoirs, respectively. The frequency-dependent transfer function is defined as where Z S , Z D and Z CC (ω) are the frequency-dependent impedances of S, D and coupling circuit, respectively. The impedance of source and drain are assumed to be completely resistive (Z i = R i with i = S, D). In order to phase coherently modulate the electron-photon interaction, it is necessary to design an appropriate electronic circuit with a tunable Z CC . A typical intermediate quantum circuit is represented by a fluxcontrolled dc-SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device) The implementation that we have chosen in order to ensure phase-coherent heat modulation in non-galvanic contacts is depicted in Fig. are the impedances of the capacitor and the dc-SQUID, respectively. Contrary to the narrow-band pass filter characteristic of an inductive coupling We now turn to the analysis of P e-ph . In the following we impose a constant T S , thereby we will consider only the impact of P e-ph D on thermal transport. The changes in the electron-phonon coupling in the source electrodes P e-ph D has impact only on the power that is necessary to provide to the system in order to reach the desired value of T S . Equation where ζ(5) ≈ 1.0369, D P is the deformation potential and v S is the speed of sound in the material. In the dirty limit (diffusive regime) P e-ph scales with T 4 or T 6 depending on the nature of disorder As mentioned above, we propose to use gated 2DESs as source and drain electrodes. In two dimensional electronic systems the electron phonon coupling constant depends on the charge carrier concentration In the clean limit (i.e., implying the mean free path ≥ 1μm) it takes the form where A is the area of the graphene sheet, T e is the electronic temperature and is the electron-phonon coupling constant. In the latter, v F = 10 6 m/s is the Fermi velocity, D P is the deformation potential, E F = v F √ πn is the Fermi energy, ρ M is the mass density and v S = 2 × 10 14 m/s is the speed of sound in graphene. The temperature of lattice phonons of graphene is assumed to be the same of the substrate T bath , because the vanishing Kapitza resistance ensures full thermalization at low temperatures where the electron-phonon coupling constant takes the form In order to solve the energy balance system [Eq. ( Since P R S -R D (n) decreases for increasing n (see Fig. In order to envision the thermal efficiency of the system we introduce two parameters: the transmittance τ = T D (Φ = 0)/T S and the efficiency η = (∆T D /T S ) × 100. τ decreases for increasing temperature, because the electron-phonon coupling becomes stronger [see Eq. ( In order to discuss in detail the behavior of η with P R S -R D and P e-ph D , we show some curves at fixed values of T S (Fig. The system proposed in this work (see Fig. Finally, we want to point out that the system we pro-pose can be also used to experimentally determine the dependence of the electron-phonon coupling in 2D electronic system with the charge carrier concentration, the defects concentration and the temperature In summary, we have studied the impact of electronphoton and electron-phonon coupling in the coherent heat transport between two bodies in non galvanic contact within a simple circuital approach. We have proposed a system consisting of a pair of gated 2DES capacitively-coupled through a dc-SQUID. This arrangement guarantees robustness on the device parameters of the performances and feasable nano-fabrication process. Furthermore, the architecture we propose ensures both high transmissivity and large modulation of thermal transport. In principle, the possibility to modulate the impedance of the source electrode could be used to control the temperature of another quantum device without intefeering with its behavior (by matching and unmatching the input and output impedances). In order to determine the efficiency of the system, we have presented quantitative results for source and drain electrodes made of graphene in the clean and dirty limits. In both cases, the proposed system shows unprecedented thermal modulations (up to ∆T D M AX ∼ 245 mK), maximum transmittance τ M AX ∼ 0.99 and energy conversion efficiencies reaching η M AX ∼ 50%. The high modulation and control of thermal transport make this system the ideal platform for the investigation of electron-phonon coupling in 2D materials.