We study the quantum dynamics of Majorana and regular fermion bound states coupled to a quasi-one-dimensional metallic lead. The dynamics following the quench in the coupling to the lead exhibits a series of dynamical revivals as the bound state propagates in the lead and reflects from the boundaries. We show that the nature of revivals for a single Majorana bound state depends uniquely on the presence of a resonant level in the lead. When two spatially separated Majorana modes are coupled to the lead, the revivals depend only on the phase difference between their host superconductors. Remarkably, the quench in this case effectively performs a fermion-parity interferometry between Majorana bound states, revealing their unique non-Abelian braiding. Using both analytical and numerical techniques, we find the pattern of fermion parity transfers following the quench, study its evolution in the presence of disorder and interactions, and thus, ascertain the fate of Majorana bound states in a Fermi sea. Introduction.-One of the most intriguing features of a topological phase is the emergence of low-energy quasiparticles with fractional quantum numbers. Two examples of this fractionalization are solitons with fractional charge In this Rapid Communication, we propose a fermionparity interferometry based on the quantum dynamics of bound states after a quench couples them to a metallic lead. The dynamics of the ground state after such a quench shows revivals Motivated by this observation, we consider a lead coupled to one or two such bound states and study the quantum dynamics after a quench in the tunneling amplitudes. Remarkably, we find a unique pattern of fermion parity transfers accompanying the revivals of MBSs, due to their nonlocal encoding of fermion parity. For regular fermion bound states (including Andreev bound states), fermion parity is encoded locally and no fermion parity transfers occur. We present analytical solutions for an effective low-energy theory of the quench dynamics of Majorana and regular fermion bound states. We also report numerical solutions to a full lattice model, which allow us to study the effects of potential disorder and local interactions in the lead. In all cases, we find unique dynamical signatures of MBSs. The quench dynamics of MBSs in the lead effectively performs a fermion-parity interferometry, revealing their non-Abelian braiding. In the presence of disorder and interactions in the lead, the amplitude of this pattern is eventually washed out after several return cycles. Nevertheless, the pattern of fermion parity transfers remains robust, thus providing a smoking gun for MBS detection. Low-energy effective theory.-Our interferometer is composed of a system (s) in a gapped phase hosting regular or Majorana bound states, and a metallic lead (l) joined after a quench in a tunneling region (t), with the time-dependent Hamiltonian ) at endpoint a of superconductor ν contributes to the mode expansion of the electron operator the term u νa (x)γ νa , where the eigenfunction u νa (x) ∝ e -x/ξν e i(φν +ηa)/2 with x the position, ξ ν the coherence length, φ ν the phase of the superconductor, and η a = 0 (π) at the right (left) endpoint, a = I (II). For simplicity, we model the lead with spinless fermions, neglecting any spin dynamics. In the case of MBSs arising in spin-filtered nanowires off-res. impurities in the lead. In our low-energy theory, the lead degrees of freedom are the right-and left-moving modes, ψ R and ψ L , with Hamiltonian (in units of lattice spacing a = = 1) Thus the lead is composed of two independent Majorana chains. In this low-energy theory, the existence of a resonant zero-energy level is accounted for in the boundary condition ψ(x + 2 ) = ζψ(x), where ζ = +1 (-1) when there is a (no) resonant level. Since the system is gapped, at low energies we need only consider the contribution of the bound states to the tunneling Hamiltonian. Of course, all states in the superconductor couple to the lead; however, as we discuss in the conclusion, these states do not contribute to the physics of parity switching at return times. For regular fermions, d νa , H t (t) = νa λ νa (t)d † νa ψ(x a ) + H.c., where x a is the tunneling site in the lead and λ νa the corresponding tunneling amplitude. For the MBS γ νa , the tunneling term H t (t) in the lead Majorana basis is (1) The quench is assumed to be sudden, λ νa (t) = λ νa θ(t). The phase φ ν + η a of one of the superconductors at a single contact point can always be gauged away by mapping ψ → e -i(φν +ηa)/2 ψ. Thus, the dynamics only depends on the relative phase ∆φ between the superconductors. Moreover, as illustrated in Fig. MBS parity transfer.-First, let us consider the lead coupled at x I = 0 to a single MBS, γ I ≡ γ, with tunneling amplitude λ. The tunneling Hamiltonian is found by setting φ ν + η a = 0 in Eq. ( In order to account for revivals, we model the scattering off the bound state as a time-periodic perturbation. This is consistent with the linear continuum model since in this approximation all the lead modes propagate at the Fermi velocity, so they all scatter in regular intervals of return time. Thus, at x = 0 -and for 0 < t < τ , we have a free field γ 2 (0 , where γ 20 (ω) are the modes of the unperturbed lead with energy ω. The solution is given by where F is a functional of γ 20 only. Denoting Γ = λ 2 /2v F , the envelope functions f 0 (t; τ ) = e -Γt and, as- The fermion parity of the host superconductor is P (t) ≡ 2iγ γ(t) , where γ is the spatially separated MBS partner of γ, which remains static. For 0 < t < τ , P (t) = e -Γt P (0), and is revived for τ < t < 2τ as The maximum revival value is |P (τ +1/Γ)/P (0)| = 2/e ≈ 0.73. Remarkably, the sign of the fermion-parity revival depends on ζ: in a resonant lead it reverses. This pattern continues following each revival with the sign of the maximum parity switching at odd multiples of τ . For a regular fermion bound state, d, the equations of motion are found by replacing γ 2 → ψ, γ → id in ( with a free field ψ 0 (t). Thus the occupation of the bound state Therefore the pattern of fermion parity transfers between the MBS and the lead upon revivals is a unique signature of MBSs. This is our first main result. MBS fermion parity interferometry.-It may appear too difficult to observe such a pattern of fermion parity transfers since tuning a lead level to be resonant requires a high degree of resolution. However, as we now show, the fermion parity transfers between two MBSs coupled to the lead is a robust signature of their non-Abelian exchange regardless of the nature of the lead. For simplicity, we will assume here the phase difference between the host superconductors ∆φ = 0 or π as in Fig. The new cases are when both MBSs are coupled to the same lead Majorana mode, γ 2 , i.e. ∆φ = 0 in the offresonant lead, and ∆φ = π in the resonant lead. Then the equations of motion are γ Thus the relative sign of exchange depends on ζ. Projected to the subspace spanned by γ R,L , the effective evolution operator for ζ = -1 is |f 1 |U -, where U -= e π 2 γIIγI is the non-Abelian Ising braid operator We conclude that at odd multiples of return time, the fermion parities of γ I and γ II are (not) switched, regardless of the details of the lead, when ∆φ = 0 (π). This is our second main result. Numerics and effects of disorder and interactions.-In order to confirm and extend our results beyond the clean, noninteracting low-energy limit, we now study the quench dynamics of the many-body system in a lattice model numerically. We model the system as a one-dimensional chain with Hamiltonian H s = s w s d † s d s+1 + ∆d s d s+1 + H.c. , where d † s is the system fermionic creation operator at site s, w s = w + (-1) s m is the hopping amplitude with m the bond modulation, and ∆ = |∆|e iφ is the superconducting pairing. This Hamiltonian includes the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model for the lead, where c † r is the fermionic creation operator at site r, n r = c † r c r is the number operator, U the interaction strength, and V r the potential disorder with a uniform distribution over [-W/2, W/2] and disorder strength W . The lead is (off-)resonant for (even) odd N . The tunneling Hamiltonian is H t (t) = rs λ rs (t)d † s c r + h.c., with λ rs (t) the quenched tunneling amplitude between the system site s and the lead site r. As a first measure of the quench dynamics, we compute the dynamical fidelity, or the Loschmidt echo , where |Ψ(t) is the many-body ground state of the system. For this calculation, we set U = 0 and diagonalize the Hamiltonian exactly. The ground state overlaps can then be calculated using the Onishi formula A sampling of our results is shown in Fig. For two MBSs, Figs. We have confirmed that the revival pattern of MBSs in fidelity remains robust over several return cycles for relatively high disorder strengths, W 0.5w. Indeed, the pattern of fermion parity transfers can be directly observed in our numerics. As a second measure, we calculate the fermion parity, P (r, t) = Ψ(t)|(-1) Nr |Ψ(t) , where N r is the total number operator to the left of a cut between sites r and r + 1 in the lead. Since the total fermion parity is conserved, P (r a , t) for the case with two tunneling contacts at endpoints r a directly measures the fermion parity of the systems hosting the bound states at endpoint a. For this calculation we use the time-dependent density-matrix renormalization group method Concluding remarks.-Our fermion parity interferometry can distinguish MBSs from other fermionic bound states, including Andreev bound states. To see this, note that fermion parity transfers occur due to the nonlocal encoding of fermion parities in spatially separated MBSs. For an Andreev bound state γ E at energy E, the fermion parity ∼ γ † E γ E is local. Thus, like regular fermions, Andreev bound states would not show fermion parity transfers in our scheme. We have indeed confirmed this numerically. We also considered a lead with multiple channels [49] and confirmed that as long as the notion of a return time is meaningful, the pattern of fermion parity transfers continues to hold. Spatially separated MBSs have a tunneling time 1/ with energy splitting ∼ e -/ξ . Thus, our fermion parity interferometry would work for 1/Γ τ 1/ . The upper limit is not challenging since /ξ can be large. Restoring units of in micron, v F in eV Å, λ in meV, and a in Å, the time scales are 1/Γ ∼ (v F /λ 2 a) × 10 -9 s and τ ∼ ( /v F ) × 10 -11 s; thus, λ λ * = 10v F / √ a. These values can vary significantly depending on the realization scheme. For typical solid-state parameters, λ * ∼ 10meV, but it can be lowered for smaller v F and larger a. For example, in nanopatterned metallic surfaces We have investigated the quench dynamics of a topological system coupled to a Fermi sea. We have found that the lead can serve as an interference medium reveal-ing the non-Abelian exchange statistics of MBSs through a unique pattern of fermion parity transfers. Remarkably, this pattern remains the same in the presence of moderate interactions and disorder in the lead. We note that unlike effective braiding of MBSs In this Supplemental Material we provide additional details regarding the quench dynamics for Majorana fermions suddenly coupled to multiple Fermi liquid channels. We demonstrate analytically and numerically that the revival pattern is robust in the multi-channel case over several cycles of revivals. We also present a discussion of the feasibility of detecting our findings experimentally. We consider M independent lead channels and couple them to either a single Majorana bound state one end, or to two at both ends. The tunneling matrix element in each channel is w α (α = 1, . . . , M ), and the tunneling matrix element to the Kitaev chain is λ α . Then, for a coupling to Majorana bound state γ a , H t = α λ αa γ a c αa + h.c. The lead Hamiltonian H l = α w α c † αr c αr+1 + h.c. The tunneling Hamiltonian can always be written as H t = |λ a |γ a c1a via a rotation in the channel basis, c1a = α λ αa c αa /|λ a |, where |λ a | = α λ 2 αa . This rotation can be uniformly extended to all sites in the lead by a unitary transformation, U , in the channel basis, cαr = β U αβ c βr , such that U 1β = λ βa /|λ a |. For degenerate channels w α = w, and the lead Hamiltonian in the new basis is also H l = α w α c † αr cαr+1 +h.c. Thus, for degenerate channels, the problem is reduced to a Majorana bound state coupled to a single (rotated) channel in the lead. Therefore, our results remain exact. For non-degenerate channels, we return to the effective low-energy theory. Then, the lead Hamiltonian in the Majorana basis is given by We shall drop the endpoint index a here for brevity. The solution of the equations of motion results in the following relation (n-1)τ > + 1 Γ , the solution for γ has the same form in the first n -1 revivals. Thus, as long as the notion of a similar return time τ is well defined, i.e. the return times of different channels do not overlap, the same dynamics of revivals will result from the quench coupling to multiple channels. We have performed numerical calculations to support the argument above, presented in Fig. We also performed a numerical study where the lead is modeled as a slab of N × M sites, with tunneling w ↔ on horizontal bonds and tunneling w on vertical bonds. The lead is connected to Kitaev chains on its left and right ends. The results for the fidelity are presented in Fig. In the main paper, we focused on revealing the basic physics in our proposed setup, and estimated time scales that suggest the experimental possibility of observing our findings in solid-state realizations (∼ 10 -10 s) and a more accessible parameter regime in cold-atom systems (∼ 10 -2 s). We must emphasize that our proposal is not limited to measuring the Loschmidt echo, as, for example is the case in Ref. 1. Measuring a power-law decay over a smaller time scale In the following, we briefly discuss what could be a readily available way to observe our findings. Instead of requiring sensitivity to two different power-law decays (1) Measure the fermionic parity of each of the two Kitaev wires prior to the quench. (2) Turn on the couplings and wait for a time τ . (If required by the time scales for achieving the next step, turn off the couplings between the subsystems now.) (3) Measure the fermionic parity present at each of the two Kitaev wires following the quench. By comparing the results of steps (1) and (3) one can deduce whether the state after time τ is orthogonal or overlapping with the initial state. The experiment should then be repeated many times to ascertain a parity switch for each realization. Achieving steps (1) and ( 