We develop a novel field effect transistor (FET) device using solid ion conductor (SIC) as a gate dielectric, and we can tune the carrier density of FeSe by driving lithium ions in and out of the FeSe thin flakes, and consequently control the material properties and its phase transitions. A dome-shaped superconducting phase diagram was mapped out with increasing Li content, with Tc ∼ 46.6 K for the optimal doping, and an insulating phase was reached at the extremely overdoped regime. Our study suggests that, using solid ion conductor as a gate dielectric, the SIC-FET device can achieve much higher carrier doping in the bulk, and suit many surface sensitive experimental probes, and can stabilize novel structural phases that are inaccessible in ordinary conditions. Chemical doping is a conventional way to introduce charge carriers into solids by replacing one of the constituent elements with another element of a different valence state. For instance, high temperature superconductivity is realized by suppressing the antiferromagnetism or spin density wave with chemical doping of 10% or 10 21 dopant atoms per cm 3 in copper oxides and iron-based superconductors So far, only two types of field effect transistor (FET) devices, metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) FET (Fig. To demonstrate the capability of the SIC-FET device, we choose FeSe as a model material. FeSe has the simplest structure in iron-based high-temperature superconductors, with conducting FeSe layers stacked along c-axis [26]. FeSe and its derived superconductors are currently the focus of research in the field of iron-based superconductors Recently, we have systematically tuned the superconductivity of FeSe thin flakes by electron doping with a FET device Using the newly developed SIC-FET devices to increase electron doping in FeSe thin flakes by driving Li + ions into samples, we have found structural transitions from FeSe We prepared FET devices with the solid state lithium ion conductive glass ceramics as the gate dielectrics. The exfoliated FeSe thin flakes with a typical thickness of ∼18 nm were used to fabricate the transport channel. Li + in the lithium ion conductor can move under the applied electric field. For positive gate voltage, Li + accumulates on the surface of samples, and then enters into samples to tune the carrier concentration. Figure In FeSe-derived superconductors, numerous studies suggest that carrier concentration doped into FeSe layers is the primary factor that controls the superconducting transition temperature. When Li + ions in lithium ion conductor is driven to a FeSe think flake with gating electric field, we can effectively introduce electron carri-ers into FeSe layers. After intercalating Li + into FeSe thin flakes at 260 K, we quickly cooled down the FET devices to 210 K, below which the mobility of Li + ions in thin flake samples is completely suppressed. The gate voltage of 4.5 V, at which the resistance of sample starts to drop, was kept fixed during the whole measurements. In order to achieve a fine modulation of Li + ions intercalation, the FET device was relaxed at 260 K for a certain period of time before cooling down in each round. This procedure can lead to a series of doping levels with a controllable fashion. Using the four-terminal configuration, we measured a FeSe thin flake with various amounts of intercalated Li + ions below 200 K and show them in Fig. Owing to the small ionic radius of Li + ions, they can easily intercalated into layered materials and alter local crystal structures of materials. Figure To acquire more details about the electron doping and structural modification, in-situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray absorption near edge spectra (XANES) were performed on the SIC-FET devices to study FeSe thin flakes with different lithium contents. The XPS result for Fe 2p is shown in Fig. In summary, using solid lithium ion conductor as the gate dielectric, we developed a novel FET device (SIC-FET), which can effectively introduce electron carriers into layered materials. Compared to the MIS-FET and the EDL-FET devices, the SIC-FET device shows stronger capability of tuning carrier concentration, so that it can help to map out the phase diagram of FeSe over a wide range for the first time. Owing to the small ionic radius of Li + , the SIC-FET device can tune the carrier concentration of entire materials with thickness of ten nanometers. Besides, the SIC-FET device can be used to search for new materials or novel superconductors with metastable structures. In particular, the configuration of SIC-FET devices is suitable for many other surface-sensitive experimental examinations. In our studies, two novel Li-intercalated FeSe phases with ThCr 2 Si 2 -type structure, which cannot be synthesized by conventional methods, were obtained under the electric field. The investigation on the insulating Li y Fe 2 Se 2 -II phase could be helpful for the understanding of the superconducting mechanism for FeSe-derived superconductors. Our findings demonstrate the potential of the SIC-FET device to control superconductivity and to modulate the crystal structure, and open a new way to search for novel electronic or structural phases. Because of its significant advantage, the SIC-FET can serve in the modern electronic technology to some degree.