Uniformity in thickness and electronic properties of superconducting niobium titanium nitride (NbTiN) thin films is a critical issue for upscaling superconducting electronics, such as microwave kinetic inductance detectors for submillimeter wave astronomy. In this article we make an experimental comparison between the uniformity of NbTiN thin films produced by two DC magnetron sputtering systems with vastly different target sizes: the Nordiko 2000 equipped with a circular 100 mm target, and the Evatec LLS801 with a rectangular target of 127 mm × 444.5 mm. In addition to the films deposited staticly in both systems, we have also deposited films in the LLS801 while shuttling the substrate in front of the target, with the aim of further enhancing the uniformity. Among these three setups, the LLS801 system with substrate shuttling has yielded the highest uniformity in film thickness (±2%), effective resistivity (decreasing by 5% from center to edge), and superconducting critical temperature (Tc = 15.0 K -15.3 K) over a 100 mm wafer. However, the shuttling appears to increase the resistivity by almost a factor of 2 compared to static deposition. Surface SEM inspections suggest that the shuttling could have induced a different mode of microstructural film growth. Superconducting niobium titanium nitride (NbTiN) thin films are used for highly demanding circuits that operate in the frequency range of 1 GHz -1000 GHz. Having a gap frequency of F gap ∼1100 GHz, NbTiN is being used in transmission lines for astronomical instruments that operate at frequencies above the gap frequency of Nb (F gap ∼700 GHz) Here we investigate how the uniformity in thickness and physical properties of NbTiN films changes, when: (1) we adopt a sputtering target that is much larger than a 100 mm wafer (especially in one direction), and (2) shuttle the wafer under the target during deposition (Fig. In this paper we will especially focus on the parameters that are relevant for large arrays of MKIDs. In a typical MKID chip, ∼1000 MKIDs can be read out simultaneously with a bandwidth of 2 GHz We have used two sputtering machines in the experiments: a Nordiko 2000 system, a research-based sputtering machine from Nordiko Technical Services Ltd. and the LLS801, a refurbished and customized industry-based Evatec LLS801 sputtering system. The Nordiko is well explored for reactive NbTiN deposition In the LLS801, the substrates are mounted on the surface of a cylindrical drum of 670 mm in diameter. The target is situated outside of the drum, pointing normally at the substrate in static deposition mode (φ = 0 • ). In shuttle deposition mode, the drum rotates back and forth in the direction of the short side of the target, over an angular range of φ = ±20 • at a speed of 4.5 • s -1 . In order to compare the effect of the size of the target and wafer shuttling on the uniformity, we have deposited NbTiN films on three wafers in the following manner: 1) static deposition using the Nordiko 2000, 2) static deposition using the LLS801, 3) shuttled deposition using the LLS801. For all three methods, the plasma conditions had been optimized to make T c at the center of the wafer as high as possible All films were deposited on sapphire wafers (Kyocera, Cplane, 100 mm, thickness 0.36 mm, double side polished), which were cleaned with phosphoric acid. After film deposition, electron beam lithography and reactive ion etching are used to pattern a 5 mm × 5 mm grid of test structures. A single pattern contains one wire with a width of W = 150 μm and length of L = 450 μm, connected to probing pads for four-point probe measurements. Using this pattern, we conducted position depended measurements of t, square resistance R and T c , from which we calculate the effective resistivity ρ = R t. The obtained t, R and T c are used to calculate the magnetic penetration depth λ m as well as the change in frequency due to variations in film properties (see Appendix). If Fig. The effect of enlarging the target from a 100 mm circle (Nordiko 2000) to a 127 mm × 444.5 mm rectangle (LLS801) can be seen by comparing columns (i) and (ii) in Fig. However, for the T c distribution, the advantage of the larger target of the LLS801 is negligible. Whilst for the Nordiko 2000 the T c exhibits a concentric pattern that resembles those for the t and ρ, with the T c decreasing from the center to the edge, the T c of the film from the LLS801 shows a striking minimum at x ∼ 0, even though the resistivity is lowest there. This is possibly caused by not exactly perfect sputter conditions that result in a nitrogen deficit in the wafer center. This remaining non-uniformity in the films from the larger target of the LLS801 is greatly improved by the shuttling motion of the wafer, as can be seen by comparing columns (ii) and (iii) of Fig. The magnetic penetration depth λ m of an extremely dirty superconductor like NbTiN for T → 0 is approximately where h is the Dirac constant, μ 0 is the permeability of vacuum, and ∆ 0 ∼ 1.764k B T c is the superconducting gap energy at 0 K (k B is the Boltzmann constant). The kinetic inductance per unit length L k of a CPW is given by where L s is the surface inductance of the film, and g(S, W, t) is the geometry factor for a CPW where L g is the geometric inductance of the CPW 