The description of heteropairs like 40 K-6 Li near and in the superconducting state requires a fully selfconsistent theory [see Hanai and Ohashi, Phys. Rev. A 90, 043622 (2014)]. We derive analytic pseudogap Green's functions for the 'normal' and superconducting states from the Luttinger-Ward theory with the T-matrix in the static separable approximation. The selfconsistency in the closing loop of selfenergy has two pronounced effects on the single-particle spectrum. First, the single-particle excitations decay before the asymptotic quasiparticle propagation is established, therefore the normal state is not a Fermi liquid. Second, the pseudogap has a V shape even for s-wave pairing. The V-shaped pseudogap and the U-shaped BCS gap interfere resulting in slope breaks of the gap walls and the in-gap states in the density of states. Various consequences of an incomplete selfconsistency are demonstrated. The fully selfconsistent T-matrix approximation known as the Luttinger-Ward (LW) theory In this paper we derive an approximation convenient for eventual fits to experimental data on the BCS side of the BCS-BEC crossover. We start from analyzes of single-particle excitations in the LW theory of the pseudogap state. Assuming the dominant role of low-lying preformed pairs, we adopt the static and separable approximation of the T-matrix. In this approximation we obtain an analytical Green's function from which it is shown that the lifetime of excitations is the same as the time scale of binary correlations, therefore the quasiparticle concept is not applicable and the system is not a Fermi liquid. The corresponding DOS has the pseudogap. In spite of the s-wave pairing, the pseudogap has a V shape which compares well with numerical results of Hanai and Ohashi Although we discuss a rather general effect of the selfconsistent Green's function in the closing loop on the singleparticle energy spectrum, we prefer to relate all formulas to the specific example of 40 K- 6 Li gas and use the 40 K and 6 Li atomic masses in plots of the spectral functions. The bare Green's function for lithium atoms G R 0Li (k) = 1/ ω + i0ε Li depends on the kinetic energy ε Li = |k| 2 /(2m Li )μ Li counted from the chemical potential. The only important interaction is between lithium and potassium atoms. It is tuned by the magnetic field with the Feshbach resonance enhancement in the scattering s-channel where k ≡ (ω, k) and Q ≡ (Ω, Q). We assume non-retarded contact interaction so that the T-matrix depends only on the four-momentum of the interacting pair. In the Fourier picture the contact interaction is independent of momentum, therefore the wave function of pairs is isotropic having the s-wave symmetry. The functions The potassium function remains small as f FD < 1 while the two-particle function is large at very small frequencies Ω arXiv:1609.00240v2 [cond-mat.quant-gas] 20 Dec 2016 that appear only for very small pair momenta Q. Based on the dominant role of pairs with small four-momentum we adopt the approximation with D 2 = (2π) -4 dΩdQ T < (Q). In the following we take the value of D as a parameter and focus on properties of the single-particle spectral function and the density of states. Equation ( The advanced Green's function of potassium satisfies an analogous equation with Time-dependent excitations in the pseudogap state: these two equations has solution For comparison we show in Fig. Apparently, with the same approximation of the T-matrix, the KM and LW theories predict very different single-particle excitations. The KM theory results in quasiparticles of infinite lifetime, while the LW theory leads to excitations with non-exponential decay, see Fig. From the selfenergy (2) one can see that the time decay of the potassium propagator is the same as the time decay of the lithium selfenergy. Since the time scales of propagators and selfenergies are comparable, the quasiparticle picture is not applicable. An attempt to define the quasiparticle energy from 1/G R Li ( Li , k) = 0 yields the bare particle of infinite lifetime Li = ε Li and the weight of the pole is not defined because 1/(1 -∂ ReΣ Li /∂ ω) has discontinuity at energy ε Li . Indeed, from Eq. ( To enlighten consequences of the mass and density imbalance, we express the imbalanced function (3) in terms of the balanced one by the substitutions ε Li = ε αμ Li and 2 and η = 1 otherwise. For the balanced system = ε Li = ε K , w = ω, and α = 1. The imbalance thus merely scales the Green's function without causing unexpected features. The density of states (DOS) is proportional to the DOS of non-interacting lithium N Li = m Li k F /(2π 2 ħ h 2 ) and elliptic functions 1 which depend on the scaled energy x = w/D. As one can see in Fig. The gap opens at ω = (m K μ K -m Li μ Li )/(m K + m Li ) and has half-width 2D. For comparison, the KM theory results in a pseudogap of the same U shape The walls of the pseudogap (5) are convex functions, in contrast to the smeared BCS gap in which the concave region extends over more than a half of the gap bottom. The pseudogap found numerically by Hanai and Ohashi Since the perturbation of the local Green's function g R Li (ω) = g Li (ω)-iπ h Li (ω) -h 0Li (ω) is large only in a very narrow region |ω| ∼ 4D/(α + 1/α), the Kramers-Kronig relation g R Li (ω) = i/π dω g R Li (ω )/(ωω ) provides an effective way to include the above neglected finite lifetime due to binary collisions of atoms, by shifting energies into the complex plane ω → ω + i/τ. We do not discuss this effect keeping 1/τ → 0. The T-matrix approach can be modified to cover the superconducting state in three ways, which we list in order of increasing level of selfconsistency. First, building the loop in the selfenergy from bare Green's functions one obtains the KM theory in the version of Patton . This renormalized Gor'kov approximation neglects an effect of the condensate on the non-condensed pairs. The functions G R Li and G A K are known (4) so that the function GR Li is trivial. In the third approach one leaves Feynman diagrams and formulate the T-matrix in the multiple scattering expansion of Watson Here hats denote functions with the BCS gap included. Note that the gap does not enter the potassium propagator in the BCS selfenergy -∆ 2 G A K (-k) while the full selfconsistency appears in the pseudogap selfenergy -D 2 ĜA K (-k). The three above theories can be classified as approximations of the T-matrix theory in terms of the Nambu-Gor'kov matrices , π] and w, defined before (4). The spectral function ÂLi (k) = (-1/π)Im ĜR Li (k) is shown in Fig. The DOS in the superconducting state displayed in Fig. In summary, we have derived analytic pseudogap Green's functions for the 'normal' and superconducting states. We have shown that the full selfconsistency in the closing loop of the selfenergy has pronounced effects on the singleparticle spectrum. The 'normal' state is not a Fermi liquid, because the quasiparticle formation time is the same as the quasiparticle lifetime. The pseudogap has a V shape in spite of the s-wave pairing. These features contrast with the partly selfconsistent and partly non-selfconsistent KM theory which predicts infinitely long living quasiparticles and the U-shaped pseudogap. We have found that the V-shaped pseudogap has non-trivial interplay with the U-shaped BCS gap. In particular, the pseudogap features persist in the BCS gap causing slope breaks of the gap walls and in-gap states. The single-particle excitations in the superconducting state have non-exponential decay in time so that they escape a simple approximation by Bogliubov-Valutin quasiparticles.