We study magnetotransport properties of the electron-doped superconductor Pr2-xCexCuO 4±δ with x = 0.14 in magnetic fields up to 92 T, and observe Shubnikov de-Haas magnetic quantum oscillations. The oscillations display a single frequency F =255±10 T, indicating a small Fermi pocket that is ∼ 1% of the two-dimensional Brillouin zone and consistent with a Fermi surface reconstructed from the large hole-like cylinder predicted for these layered materials. Despite the low nominal doping, all electronic properties including the effective mass and Hall effect are consistent with overdoped compounds. Our study demonstrates that the exceptional chemical control afforded by high quality thin films will enable Fermi surface studies deep into the overdoped cuprate phase diagram. Understanding the ordering phenomena that compete or coexist with superconductivity in the cuprate superconductors remains an outstanding challenge. Central to this effort is identification of Fermi surface (FS) topology and evolution with doping via studies of magnetic quantum oscillations (QO), led by initial observation of QO in hole-doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.5 We study a superconducting PCCO film (thickness 100 nm) that was grown using molecular beam epitaxy and characterized as described in detail elsewhere We measured the high-field magnetoresistance in pulsed magnetic fields to over 92 T at the NHMFL Pulsed Field Facility. Measurements were carried out with the sample in He-4 and He-3 liquid (2 -4 K) or gas (5 -30 K), and care was taken to minimize heating effects during field pulses. The data reported here are from the rising field portion of the pulsed measurements; some hysteresis was observed and is reflected in the quoted uncertainties, but the QO analyses are consistent between rising and falling field sweeps. Figure To analyze the QO visible in the low-temperature magnetoresistance, we fit to and divide by 3rd-order polyno-mial background ρ(B) = ρ bkgd (1 + f QO (B)) to reveal oscillations periodic in inverse field shown in the main panel of Fig. With a circular orbit, A F = πk 2 F and the orbitally averaged Fermi velocity v F = k F /m * = 2.4 × 10 5 m/s. Though v F is somewhat below that determined by ARPES measurements of Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 4.3 × 10 5 m/s The QO evolution with temperature and field are in excellent agreement with fits to the lowest-order Lifshits-Kosevich where indicate that QO will only be visible on small FS pockets. The 255 T pocket cyclotron orbit size c = 2k F / eB is 12 nm at 100 T, while the mean free path o = (τ D /m * ) A F /π is 8.2 nm. The cyclotron orbit size for an ∼ 11 kT orbit, corresponding to either the lowtemperature Hall effect in this PCCO film (see discussion below) or the large pockets predicted by band theory At fixed magnetic field the decrease in QO oscillation amplitude with increasing temperature is a direct measure of the quasiparticle effective mass m * , a quantity that can be enhanced in proximity to a quantum critical point The small FS pocket indicating a reconstruction in PCCO similar to that seen in NCCO, coupled with similar observations of Ce-free Pr 2 CuO 4 films We gratefully acknowledge the scientific and support staff of the Los Alamos National High Magnetic Lab Pulsed Field Facility for their technical assistance on this project, in particular the 100 T operations team. We also appreciate fruitful conversations with Toni Helm. 