We consider a two-dimensional electron gas with strong spin-orbit coupling contacted by two superconducting leads, forming a Josephson junction. We show that in the presence of an in-plane Zeeman field the quasi-one-dimensional region between the two superconductors can support a topological superconducting phase hosting Majorana bound states at its ends. We study the phase diagram of the system as a function of the Zeeman field and the phase difference between the two superconductors (treated as an externally controlled parameter). Remarkably, at a phase difference of π, the topological phase is obtained for almost any value of the Zeeman field and chemical potential. In a setup where the phase is not controlled externally, we find that the system undergoes a first-order topological phase transition when the Zeeman field is varied. At the transition, the phase difference in the ground state changes abruptly from a value close to zero, at which the system is trivial, to a value close to π, at which the system is topological. The critical current through the junction exhibits a sharp minimum at the critical Zeeman field, and is therefore a natural diagnostic of the transition. We point out that in presence of a symmetry under a modified mirror reflection followed by time reversal, the system belongs to a higher symmetry class and the phase diagram as a function of the phase difference and the Zeeman field becomes richer. Since the realization of two-dimensional topological insulators a decade ago, a plethora of new phases of matter with nontrivial topology in one, two and three dimensions have been discovered in experiment. Considerable experimental and theoretical effort has been dedicated to the study of zero-energy Majorana bound states which arise in topological superconductors as edge states in one dimension or bound to vortices in two dimensions A key challenge for existing one-dimensional platforms such as proximitized semiconductor nanowires Here we pursue a different strategy to realize Majorana bound states motivated by recent experiments on Josephson junctions in proximity-coupled 2DEGs Carriers with energies below the superconducting gap are trapped in the quasi one-dimensional junction region between two superconducting leads as depicted in Fig. A key advantage of this setup is that the lateral dimension allows for additional experimental knobs such as a phase difference or a supercurrent across the junction. One of the central results of this work is that a phase bias can induce a robust topological phase in the junction. Most strikingly, in the absence of normal reflection, junctions at a phase difference of π host Majorana states to a large extent independently of parameters such as chemical potential, Zeeman field, width of the junction, or induced pairing strength, for as long as the gap in the bulk 2DEG does not close. Moreover, the phase difference can be used as a powerful switch that changes the topology of the entire phase space from trivial at zero to topological at π. This is in stark contrast to previous proposals which require careful gating and a Zeeman field beyond a critical value. A setup based on Josephson junctions may also facilitate the realization of topological superconductor networks. By tuning a global phase difference multiple Josephson junctions can be tuned simultaneously into a topological phase without tuning local parameters or requiring local probes. In the presence of normal reflection in the junction or at the interface to the superconductor deviations from this ideal behavior occur. As long as normal reflection is not too strong, however, our results still hold in extended regions of the parameter space. On the face of it, the system we consider belongs to class D in the ten-fold classification If the phase difference is not imposed externally the system can undergo a first order phase transition in which the phase jumps from a phase close to 0 to a phase close to π with increasing in-plane magnetic field. Similar transitions have previously been studied in ferromagnetic Josephson junctions This paper is organized as follows. We start by presenting the proposed setup and a summary of our results in Sec. II. We then show the derivation of the phase diagram for the system as function of the phase difference and the Zeeman field, and discuss the magnitude of the topological gap and the appearance of Majorana end modes in Sec. III. In Sec. IV we discuss the first order topological phase transition as function of the Zeeman field and how the critical current can serve as a novel experimental probe to detect this transition in the suggested setup. We conclude with discussion of the presented results in Sec. V. The paper is followed by appendices that cover several technical details. We consider a two-dimensional semiconductor with Rashba spin-orbit coupling, partially covered with two superconducting contacts in an in-plane magnetic field as depicted in Fig. Here k x is the momentum along x which is conserved in the system (we set = 1 throughout the manuscript), m is the effective mass of the 2DEG, μ is the chemical potential measured from the bottom of the spin-orbit split bands, α is the strength of Rashba spin-orbit coupling and E Z (y) = g(y)μ B B/2 is the Zeeman energy induced by an external magnetic field. We assume different g factors in the junction and underneath the superconducting leads and denote where θ(x) is a step function. For simplicity we focus on the case of zero Zeeman field underneath the leads and postpone the discussion of nonzero E Z,L to Sec. III A. The proximity induced pairing in the semiconductor 2DEG is accounted for by where φ is the phase difference between the two superconductors. The Pauli matrices σ, τ act in the spin and particle-hole basis respectively, and τ ± = τ x ± iτ y . States at subgap energies are confined to the quasi-onedimensional junction between the two superconducting leads. Under suitable conditions the junction can enter a one-dimensional (1d) topological superconducting phase. In this paper we study two experimental configurations in which the model described by Eq. ( We start by evaluating the topological index for particle-hole symmetric systems in class D. As we shall see in Sec. III B, the model has a higher symmetry involving a mirror reflection followed by time reversal that places it into the BDI class. Each topological (trivial) region in the phase diagram of class D will be split into subregions with an odd (even) Z invariant The index in class D can be defined as the fermion parity of the ground state at k x = 0 describing a one-dimensional Josephson junction in a magnetic field. Figure The resulting phase diagram as a function of Zeeman field and phase bias is shown in Fig. We can qualitatively understand the effect of weak normal reflection on the phase diagram from the subgap spectra shown in Fig. We next consider the second configuration in which the phase is determined by the condition that the ground state energy is minimal. Remarkably, we shall see in Sec. IV that in this case the system self tunes to the topological phase in a broad range of Zeeman fields, exhibiting a first order topological phase transition. Such a transition will be accompanied by an abrupt change in various thermodynamic quantities characterizing the system, e.g. the magnetization, as well as in the energy gap in the bulk. The origin of the first order transition is that the phase difference, φ GS , that minimizes the ground state energy changes abruptly between two distinct values, one in the trivial region and one in the topological region, at certain values of the Zeeman field. As a consequence, the junction is expected to show a hysteretic behavior as the Zeeman field is swept at low temperatures. Moreover, we find that the critical current exhibits a minimum at these values of the Zeeman field as shown in Fig. These findings can be understood semiclassically in the limit E Z,J αk F μ. Due to the Rashba-induced spinmomentum locking, the Zeeman field shifts the two Fermi surfaces uniformly along k y in opposite directions as depicted in Fig. When the constraint αk F μ is lifted, the phase difference in the ground state is not necessarily 0 or π and varies with E Z,J It is encouraging that the modulation of the critical current as function of an in-plane magnetic field, and in particular its revival, has been observed in experiment realizing the setup we consider A direct signature of topological superconductivity can be obtained by a straightforward extension of the setup in Fig. As was discussed in the previous section, topological phase transitions that change the parity of the number of Majorana end modes occur when there are zero-energy solutions of the model at k x = 0, given by Eq. ( where k F = (2mμ) 1/2 and v F = k F /m are the Fermi momentum and velocity respectively. The bound state spectrum can be obtained from the condition 1 = r ± A 2 t e t h (6) This equation implies a twofold degeneracy of the spectrum at φ = 0 and φ = π. This degeneracy is a consequence of a mirror symmetry and the absence of normal reflection from the superconducting leads. As an important consequence of this degeneracy the Z 2 topological index cannot change at φ = 0, π as zero-energy crossings always come in pairs. We first consider the case E Z,L = 0. Equation ( This condition sets the phase boundaries for the phase diagram. It creates a diamond structure with alternating trivial and topological regions as can be seen in Fig. For nonvanishing normal reflection probability at the superconducting-normal interface the equation for the bound states is identical to Eq. ( We have so far neglected the effect of the Zeeman field in the lead, which limits the realization of a topological phase to junctions wide enough that E T ∼ E Z,J . In the presence of a sizable Zeeman effect in the lead a topological phase may be accessible even in much narrower junctions where E T greatly exceeds experimentally realizable Zeeman fields. The zero-energy solutions of Eq. ( In the limit of a narrow junction with E Z,J E T , the first term inside the cosine can be neglected. The corresponding phase diagram is shown in Fig. Inside the gapped regime, the system remains always trivial (topological) at φ = 0 (φ = π) due to the degeneracy of the spectrum at these values of the phase difference. In the presence of normal reflection the phase difference φ in Eq. ( As mentioned in Sec. II, the model in Eq. ( To demonstrate this we use a tight binding version of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) (see Appendix D 2 for details of the model) and calculate the BDI invariant following Ref. To stabilize the topological phase with a single Majorana bound state at each end, it is favorable to break this additional symmetry. To this end we introduce different magnitudes for the two superconductors, ∆ 1,2 . When |∆ 1 | = |∆ 2 |, T no longer commutes with the Hamiltonian and the symmetry class is reduced to D. We therefore expect that gap closing lines observed in Fig. To verify this we employ the tight binding model and plot in Fig. The topological protection of the phase is governed by the size of the topological gap, which is determined by the lowest energy Andreev bound state in the junction. To estimate the magnitude of the gap, we need to consider the bound state spectrum for all k x . Once again, we consider the case of zero normal reflection probability and no Zeeman field in the leads E Z,L = 0. For k x = 0, the solutions of Eq. ( The largest gap in the topological region is obtained for φ = π and E Z,J = E T . For a narrow junction the gap is given by ∆, while for a wide junction the gap is smaller and given by E T . We will consider the scenario of a narrow but finite width junction with ∆ E T , which is likely to be the most relevant experimentally. Note that in order to reach the maximal gap in the topological region in this case, a relatively large Zeeman field E Z,J > ∆ is required. We next discuss the spectrum for non-zero k x . [36] In this case, spin is no longer a good quantum number, and spin-orbit coupling can not be gauged out. We denote the magnitude of the Fermi momentum on the inner (outer) Fermi surface in presence of spin-orbit coupling by k and k SO = mα. For a given k x , we denote the y component of the Fermi momenta on the two Fermi surfaces by k F,i,y = k 2 F,i -k 2 x 1/2 = k F,i sinθ i , where ). We note that for a given k x , the spins of the electrons on the two Fermi surfaces are no longer orthogonal. Therefore, when, e.g., an electron in the vicinity of the inner Fermi surface is Andreev reflected from the superconductor, it will be reflected as a superposition of holes from both the inner and the outer Fermi surfaces. However, in the limit of small spin-orbit coupling, αk F μ, the overlap between the spins on the different Fermi surfaces remains small. (This is assuming that the Zeeman field does not alter the Rashba induced spin-momentum locking, i.e. E Z,J αk F .) In the opposite limit of large spin-orbit coupling, a large momentum transfer δk y = k F,2,y -k F,1,y is required for such a process. If δk y ∆/v F,1,y , such scattering is suppressed. We conclude that Andreev reflection between different Fermi surfaces can be neglected if E Z,J , ∆ αk F . In this case the scattering equations for the two spin species (corresponding to the two Fermi surfaces) can still be decoupled. To write down the scattering equation we need to determine the phase shift acquired by an electron (or a hole) upon crossing the normal region of the 2DEG. To this end, we use the plane wave basis along y and diagonalize the Hamiltonian (1) in the normal region |y| < W/2. The resulting spectrum for the electrons is given by (11) The spectrum for the holes can be obtained using particle-hole symmetry. We see that the energy shift of an electron (or a hole) on Fermi surface i due to the Zeeman field, to first order in E Z,J , is given by ∆E i E Z,J sinθ i . Therefore, the phase accumulated when traversing the junction, (∆E i /v F,i,y ) W = (E Z,J /v F ) W , is the same for the two Fermi surfaces and is independent of k x . We conclude that the scattering equation for the bound states at nonzero k x is given by Eq. ( At high values of the Zeeman field, the gap can be further limited by the following effect. In the normal state, ∆ = 0, and in the presence of a non-uniform Zeeman field, E Z,J > E Z,L , a potential well is formed by the Zeeman energy in the normal region. The depth of this potential depends on k x . In the limit E Z,J αk F , the potential at k x k F is equal to -E 2 Z,J / (αk F ), as can be seen from Eq. ( . This allows us to obtain a lower bound on the optimal gap in the system. In a narrow junction, ∆ 1/ mW 2 , the gap at Z,J this gives a gap of order ∆ (α/v F ) 1/2 . Thus a gap of order ∆ can be reached for v F α but due to the slow, power-law dependence, the system has a sizable gap also for larger values of v F . In a wide junction, ∆ 1/ mW 2 , the superconducting gap will, in fact, be effected by a finite ξ B only once it becomes smaller than ξ = 1/ (mW ∆) W . This leads to a much looser constraint on the Fermi velocity, allowing for a gap of order 1/ mW 2 as long as v F /α < W/ξ. We conclude that a topological gap of order ∆ can be obtained if the junction is narrow, ∆ 1/ mW 2 , and the chemical potential is such that v F α. For a wider junction the size of the topological gap is governed by 1/ mW 2 . The optimal gap is obtained for φ = π and E Z,J E T . To complement this analysis we calculate the spectrum of the system as function of k x across the phase transition, using a tight binding version of the model, given in Appendix D 2, and plot it in Fig. In addition we calculate the gap numerically using the scattering matrix approach (see Fig. In the topological phase we expect the system to host Majorana bound states at its ends. To verify the appearance of these zero-energy bound states in the proposed setup we calculate the local density of states (LDOS) close to the boundaries of the system. To this end we diagonalize a tight-binding version of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Note that in presence of the effective time-reversal symmetry discussed in Sec. III B, multiple Majorana bound states will appear at each end of the system. The number of zero-energy states in this case will be determined by the BDI Z invariant. In this section we show that if the phase difference is not imposed externally, the system will self-tune into the topological phase in a wide range of Zeeman fields. Using the bound state spectrum obtained in Sec. III we calculate the ground state energy of the system and the Josephson current in the junction. At a critical value of the Zeeman field the system undergoes a first order phase transition, in which the ground state of the junction switches between values of φ corresponding to the trivial and the topological phases, and that this transition is accompanied by a minimum of the critical current. To this end, we need to sum over the contributions of all k x to the ground state energy. In the analysis of the gap presented in Sec. III C we found that in the limit ∆ μ, as well as E Z,J αk F,1/2 , and assuming E Z,L = 0 and no normal reflection, the spectrum for k x < k F,1 is given by Eq. , there is only a single spin species present in the system and thus only half of the bound states remain. We first calculate the ground state energy and the critical current in the limit αk F μ. In this limit (k F,2 -k F,1 ) /k F = 2k SO /k F → 0, and we can therefore neglect the contribution of momenta in the range k F,1 < k x < k F,2 . We later relax this constraint and discuss how the results are altered. We first focus on the limit of an ultra-narrow junction with a single bound state (for each spin species) for all k x , i.e. ∆ 1/ mW 2 , and consider the contribution of a single k x to the ground state energy. In this limit, the dominant contribution to the φ-dependent part of the ground state energy (and thus also to the Josephson current) comes from the Andreev bound states The spectra of the bound states as well as the resulting ground state energy are plotted in Fig. We next calculate the critical current in the junction in the same limit. At zero temperature, the Josephson The upper panel shows the bound state energies of the two spin species (plotted in red and blue) and the energies of their particle-hole symmetric states (indicated by dashed lines) for a single momentum kx < kF,1 in a narrow junction, as the Zeeman field is varied. The contribution to the ground state energy (obtained by summing over the negative energy states) and the Josephson current are plotted for each value of Zeeman field in the lower panel in blue and green, respectively. At EZ,J = ET/2 the value of φ for which the energy is minimized shifts from 0 to π. This transition is accompanied by a minumum in the critical current. current is given by I (φ) = 2e d dφ E GS . We note that the maximum of the Josephson current is obtained at the same value of φ for all k x . We can therefore calculate the critical current in the system, I c = max |I (φ)|, as function of the Zeeman field, based on a single k x . Due to the relative phase shift in the bound-states spectra of the two spins, the critical current of a single momentum is modulated as the Zeeman field is varied and is equal to I c = 2e∆max cos 2 φ B , sin 2 φ B (see lower panel of Fig. When a finite temperature is considered, the Josephson current is given by I (φ) = 2e d dφ F , where F is the free energy of the system. In the high temperature limit, T ∆, we obtain (see Appendix B) We find that only the first harmonic of the Josephson current is left. The critical current is proportional to cos (2φ B ) and is hence zero for φ B = (π/2) (n + 1/2). The suppression of the minimum of the critical current with temperature can be seen in Fig. We next lift the constraint of an ultra-narrow junction. More specifically, we assume that for some k x , ∆ E T,i (k x ). In the limit of k SO k F , we have E T,1 (k x ) E T,2 (k x ) and we therefore suppress the band index below. The maximal supercurrent is still obtained at the same value of φ for all k x as will be clear from the analysis below. Therefore, we can once again calculate the contribution of a single momentum k x to the critical current of the system, by considering the supercurrent due to that momentum only. In this case the contribution of the states above the gap to the energy and the Josephson current can not in general be neglected At zero temperature we obtain (-1) p+1 cos (2pφ B ) sin (pφ) p . (14) We note that since E T (k x ) decreases with increasing k x the contribution of larger k x to the critical current is smaller. For φ B = πn/2 the sum over p converges to a 2π periodic sawtooth function, and the critical current is maximal and equal to I c,max (k x ) = 4eE T (k x ) /π. For φ B = (π/2) (n + 1/2), all the odd harmonics are absent and we obtain a π periodic sawtooth function of half the amplitude, i.e. I c,min (k x ) = I c,max (k x ) /2 = 2eE T (k x ) /π. Note that also in this case the minima of the critical current occur at the values of the Zeeman field for which the minimum of the energy switches between being at φ = 0 and φ = π, as can be seen by integration of the Josephson current over φ. In the high temperature limit, which in this case corresponds to T E T (k x ), once again only the first harmonic is left: resulting in a vanishing current for φ B = (π/2) (n + 1/2). Note also that the critical current contribution from larger k x is suppressed more strongly at finite temperatures. We now lift the constraint αk F μ, and consider the contribution of momenta k F,1 < k x < k F,2 to the ground state energy. For simplicity, in this analysis, we will once again consider the limit of an ultra-narrow junction, ∆ 1/(mW 2 ). For k x > k F,1 , there is a single spin species in the system and the energy of the corresponding bound state is given by E -= ∆ cos (φ B -φ/2) (assuming α > 0). Upon integration of the energy over k x from -k F,2 to k F,2 we obtain This function is depicted in Fig. At φ B = π/4, or equivalently E Z,J = E T /2, it can be shown that φ 1 + φ 2 = π, and that E GS (φ 1 ) = E GS (φ 2 ). We can therefore conclude that at this value of the Zeeman field a first order phase transition occurs with the value of φ changing abruptly between φ 1 and φ 2 . As long as k F,1 > 0, or equivalently k F > k SO , we have φ 1 < π/2 and φ 2 > π/2 at the transition point. Therefore the system is in the trivial phase on one side of the transition and is in the topological phase on its other side. Figure Finite temperature will smoothen the cusp in the ground state energy of the system as function of the phase difference. However, for low enough temperatures two local minima in the free energy still exist allowing for a first order phase transition between them as the Zeeman field is varied. We note also that in presence of normal reflection the values of the Zeeman field for which the phase transitions will occur, as well as the values for which the critical current will be minimal, will generically shift away from E Z,J = (n + 1/2) E T and might no longer coincide. However, as long as the normal reflection probability is not too large, we expect these deviations to be small. Tight-binding calculations of the critical current, complementing this analysis, were presented in Fig. We have shown that one-dimensional topological superconductivity can be realized in a Josephson junction across a 2DEG with Rashba spin-orbit coupling and inplane magnetic field. Once the phase difference between the superconductors is set to π, a ballistic junction is driven into the topological phase without any further fine tuning. If the phase is not set externally, the system can self tune into the topological phase for a range of in-plane magnetic fields. In this case the modulation of the critical current serves as a diagnostics of the phase transitions. In practice, the system parameters should be chosen in a way to optimize the gap ∆ top protecting the topological phase. We find that narrow junctions with 1/ mW 2 ∆ allow for a gap of order ∆ in the topological phase. To reach this limit the chemical potential should ideally not exceed the spin-orbit energy mα 2 , although we find sizable gaps even for larger values of μ, as the gap decays at most as ∆ top ∼ ∆(α/v F ) 1/2 . The width of the junction also dictates the magnitude of the Zeeman field required to be close to the center of the topological phase, E Z,J E T , i.e. a large Zeeman field is required if the junction is narrow. Moreover, we assume in our estimate of the gap that the Zeeman field does not interfere with the Rashba-induced spin-momentum locking, i.e. that E Z,J αk F . Thus materials with large spin-orbit coupling are favorable. Although the orbital effects of the in-plane field have not been discussed in the manuscript, we note that nonzero magnetic field in the region between the superconducting leads and the 2DEG can give rise to a spatial modulation of the superconducting order parameter and destroy the gap in the system. Moreover, this effect can lead to oscillations of the critical current as function of the magnetic field that are not of topological origin. We further elaborate on this in Appendix C. While we expect the topological phase to be stable to a certain amount of disorder, the system will eventually enter a trivial phase at strong disorder. It would be interesting to compare the effects of disorder with topological superconductors based on semiconductor nanowires. The latter are restricted to relatively small chemical potentials, where the effects of disorder is particularly severe. This indicates that topological phases in planar Josephson junctions, for which this restriction does not exist, could be more resilient to disorder. Note added: While we were preparing this manuscript we became aware of Ref. 31 which discusses topological superconductivity in a similar setup, as well as Ref. the subgap states reduces to Eq. ( For φ = 0 and weak normal reflections r 1 the topological phase transitions are given by φ B = πn -arccos(E Z,L /∆) ± 2r sin (k F W + φ N ) . (A5) Hence in the presence of normal reflections topological phases are possible even at zero phase bias. The analytical result agrees well with numerical results shown in Fig. The corrections to the scattering phase are linear in r only at these two special values of φ. At other values 0 < φ < π the corrections are of order r 2 . This can be seen by comparing Figs. A topological phase may be accessible even in very narrow junctions where E Z,J , ∆ E T when the Zeeman field in the lead is of order of ∆. Eq. (A4) then yields the phase boundary The result plotted in Fig. (ii) μ E Z,J , strong normal reflection: Normal reflection should ideally be avoided as it weakens the proximity effect and reduces the overall gap of the system. To illustrate the effect of increasing normal reflections we consider the extreme case r → 1. For simplicity we also set E Z,L = 0. The phase diagram then becomes independent of φ and we find The phase boundaries E Z,J ±2μ + 2nE T + const. form diamonds in the E Z,J -μ plane. This trend can already be seen for rather weak normal reflection in Fig. Thus as normal reflection becomes stronger, the phase space decomposes into similar-sized patches of topological and trivial phase which alternate with period k F W as a function of chemical potential. Note that when the normal reflection is strong, the system may be thought of as a wire of width W weakly coupled to two superconductors. Then, the period of the oscillations corresponds to the addition of a single transverse channel to the wire. We conclude that normal reflection is generically detrimental to topological superconductivity. Even though normal reflection increases the phase space area of the topological phase at φ = 0, the small patches make the topology vulnerable to potential fluctuations. Moreover tuning the topology with a phase bias becomes less efficient in the presence of normal reflection. (iii) μ < E Z,J : The phase diagram has a qualitatively different behavior when the Zeeman energy exceeds μ as illustrated in Fig. where c i,j,s is the annihilation operator of an electron spin s on site (i, j) with 1 ≤ j ≤ 2W SC +W and 1 ≤ i ≤ L and ., . denotes nearest neighbors. The hopping and spinorbit coupling strength are denoted by t, α respectively. Proximity induced pairing strength ∆ is nonzero only in the leads 1 ≤ j ≤ W SC and W SC + W < j ≤ 2W SC + W . The Zeeman field along the x-direction has strength E Z,L (E Z,J ) in the leads (in the junction). This model has been used to calculate the local density of states in Fig. To describe an infinitely long junction we assume L → ∞ and perform a partial Fourier transform c j,k,s = j e iki c j,i ,s . The resulting Hamiltonian H TB (k) is used to calculate the BDI phase diagram in Fig. Tight binding model