Inelastic neutron scattering measurements have been performed to investigate the spin waves of the quasi-one-dimensional antiferromagnetic ladder compound BaFe2S3, where a superconducting transition was observed under pressure [H. Takahashi et al., Nat. Mater. 14, 1008-1012 The mechanism of high temperature (HT C) superconductivity has been one of the most intensely investigated topics since the discovery of the copper-oxide superconductors Recently, a SC transition up to 24 K has been observed in the quasi-one-dimensional (1D) ladder compound BaFe 2 S 3 under pressure in the range of 10 to 17 GPa In this paper, we report inelastic neutron scattering (INS) studies on the spin waves of a BaFe 2 S 3 powder sample. Similar to our measurements on RbFe 2 Se 3 The BaFe 2 S 3 samples were grown using the Bridgman method In Fig. BaFe 2 S 3 at ambient pressure exhibits a stripe ordered structure similar to that of RbFe 2 Se 3 where J r,r are the effective exchange couplings and (r, r ) label the iron sites, J s is the single ion Ising anisotropy term The J R , J L and J 2 are the intraladder exchange interactions along the rung, leg, and diagonal directions, respectively. J 7 is the seventh nearest neighbor (NN) exchange interaction of irons between two ladders, as defined in Fig. , and E 2t ≈ 211 meV. Solving Eq. ( We list the known SJ's and Fe-Fe bond lengths for the stripe ordered iron-based materials in Table The ratio of the exchange interactions has been suggested to be crucial for the SC pairing symmetry and even whether the superconductivity occurs in the FeSC In summary, we have measured the spin wave spectra of the stripe AF order in the 1D ladder compound BaFe 2 S 3 on a powder sample. Guided by the analytical expressions for the extrema of the spin waves and their experimentally determined values, the exchange interactions have been successfully determined. Spherically averaged simulations using the parameters so-determined match well the measured spectra. The explicit values for the exchange interactions in BaFe 2 S 3 are distinct from those of the other 1D and 2D analogs due to its unique structural geometry. The results reveal that the 1D AF ordered ladder parent state of the superconductivity in BaFe 2 S 3 exhibits the commonly observed antiferromagnetic spin excitations just as in the parent compounds of the other FeSC. However, there are important quantitative differences from the previously realized combinations of exchange interactions for the stripe AF ordered parent state of the FeSC, suggesting that a wider range of interactions may still result in superconductivity.