We present a detailed study of the equilibrium properties and stochastic dynamic evolution of the U(1)-invariant relativistic complex field theory in three dimensions. This model has been used to describe, in various limits, properties of relativistic bosons at finite chemical potential, type II superconductors, magnetic materials and aspects of cosmology. We characterise the thermodynamic second-order phase transition in different ways. We study the equilibrium vortex configurations and their statistical and geometrical properties in equilibrium at all temperatures. We show that at very high temperature the statistics of the filaments is the one of fully-packed loop models. We identify the temperature, within the ordered phase, at which the number density of vortex lengths falls-off algebraically and we associate it to a geometric percolation transition that we characterise in various ways. We measure the fractal properties of the vortex tangle at this threshold. Next, we perform infinite rate quenches from equilibrium in the disordered phase, across the thermodynamic critical point, and deep into the ordered phase. We show that three time regimes can be distinguished: a first approach towards a state that, within numerical accuracy, shares many features with the one at the percolation threshold, a later coarsening process that does not alter, at sufficiently low temperature, the fractal properties of the long vortex loops, and a final approach to equilibrium. These features are independent of the reconnection rule used to build the vortex lines. In each of these regimes we identify the various length-scales of the vortices in the system. We also study the scaling properties of the ordering process and the progressive annihilation of topological defects and we prove that the time-dependence of the time-evolving vortex tangle can be described within the dynamic scaling framework. Three dimensional field theories with continuous symmetry breaking are relevant to describe a host of physical systems. These theories are used to model superfluid systems Phase transitions with spontaneous symmetry breaking lead to the formation of topological defects of different kind: domain walls, strings or vortices, monopoles, etc. depending on the type of symmetry that is broken. The topological defects we will be interested in are line objects, be them vortices, disclinations or cosmic strings In this paper we study the statics and stochastic dynamics of a three-dimensional relativistic field theory with global U(1) symmetry. This model serves to describe, in different limits, the physical systems mentioned in the previous paragraph as well as relativistic bosons at finite chemical potential The equilibrium phase diagram and critical phenomenon of the 3d U(1) complex field theory are well documented in the literature. In particular, the static critical exponents have been estimated with Monte Carlo simulations combined with high temperature expansions The construction of the vortex network on a lattice involves some ambiguity. Indeed, when a branching point at which more than one vortex line enter and exit, some criterium has to be used to decide upon the way the reconnection is done. We use here two well-documented rules -The stochastic criterium (S) in which the vortex line elements are reconnected at random. -The maximal criterium (M) in which the vortex line elements are reconnected in such a way that one among the resulting vortex loops has the maximal possible length. At each step of our analysis we compare the results obtained for the two rules. We pay special attention to the geometric transition between a phase in which all loops are finite, and another one in which some loops are infinitely extended. We also characterise in detail the shape and statistics of the loops on both sides of the threshold and at the geometric transition that, we show, does not coincide with the thermodynamic instability of the U(1) complex field theory. We relate the statistical properties of the closed loops in their extended phase to the one of fully-packed loop models in which each link on a lattice is covered by part of one and only one loop The relaxation dynamics across a second order phase transition proceeds by coarsening and annihilation of topological defects In the analysis of the phase transition and static vortex statistics we ensure that the system reaches thermal equilibrium. In the analysis of the evolution after a deep instantaneous quench below the ordering transition temperature we simply let the system evolve from a chosen initial state under subcritical conditions. The vortex string network already present in the initial state evolves after the quench and we characterise its evolution in full detail. We identify various dynamic regimes and we explain what determines them in terms of the changing vortex configurations. We base this analysis on the work in The paper is organised as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the model. In Sec. III we describe the equilibrium properties and phase transition in the model; it can be read independently from the rest of the paper. In Sec IV we discuss the properties of the vortex network in equilibrium. Section V is devoted to the analysis of the fast quench dynamics. Finally, in Sec. VI we present our conclusions and some lines for future research. A short account of some of our results appeared in The Lagrangian density for relativistic bosons with finite chemical potential reads where c is the speed of light and g and ρ are real parameters, g, ρ ∈ R, in the potential energy density with Mexican hat form and a degenerate circle of minima at |ψ| 2 = ρ. The parameters μ ∈ R and ρ receive different interpretations in different communities. The term proportional to μ breaks the particle-antiparticle symmetry and in the high-energy literature it is associated to a chemical potential, while ρ fixes the vacuum expectation value of the U(1) symmetry breaking. In the condensed matter literature instead the chemical potential is associated to ρ that fixes the particle density |ψ| 2 in the system and μ is related to the mass of the particles. This theory is global U(1)-invariant as the Lagrangian density remains unchanged under the global transformation, ψ ′ (x, t) = e iδ ψ(x, t), and accordingly for ψ * , with δ a space and time independent real parameter. Moreover, L * = L. The Lagrangian density (1) is also invariant under the Lorentz boost with Lorentz factor γ c = (1 -v 2 /c 2 ) -1/2 , if the field transforms as Indeed, under these transformations, L[∂ t ψ(x, t), ∂ t ψ * (x, t), ψ(x, t), ψ * (x, t)] = L[∂ t ′ ψ ′ (x ′ , t ′ ), ∂ t ′ ψ ′ * (x ′ , t ′ ), ψ ′ (x ′ , t ′ ), ψ ′ * (x ′ , t ′ )]. The inverse transformations are t = γ c (t ] and these imply The equation of motion for ψ follows from the Euler-Lagrangian equation and reads We consider two opposite limits: μ → 0 and c → ∞. In the former case, the complex field ψ does not change under the Lorentz transformation which are known as the Goldstone and the Gross-Pitaevskii models respectively. The latter describes the dynamics of gaseous Bose-Einstein condensates Under the time evolution in Eq. ( is conserved. The static solutions to The choice of χ breaks the U(1) symmetry. Vortex static solutions are also supported by this equation Next, we consider the statistical properties of the system described by the U(1) complex field at finite temperatures. In canonical equilibrium the statistical average of a real finite functional of the fields f = f (ψ, ψ * , ψ, ψ * ) reads where T is temperature. We set the Boltzmann constant to k B = 1 in this paper. When f depends only on ψ and ψ * , i.e., f (ψ, ψ * , ψ, ψ * ) → f (ψ, ψ * ), Eq. ( with These are the kind of functionals that we consider in this paper, unless we specify a different dependence. At T = 0 the ground state is |ψ| 2 = ρ and the U(1) symmetry of the energy functional E 0 for the phase shift of ψ is spontaneously broken. We therefore expect the temperature at which the spontaneous breaking of this symmetry occurs to be the one for Bose-Einstein condensation. A simple and efficient method to sample the thermal averages defined above is to use the over-damped Langevin equation that ensures An alternative dynamic approach uses, instead of the energy functional in Eq. ( with the generalized momentum φ and its complex conjugate φ * . The under-damped Langevin equation becomes See Refs. Equation (17a) is the conventional under-damped Langevin equation corresponding to the over-damped Langevin equation see App. A. Although the above discussion applies in all dimensions, we concentrate in threedimensional systems in this paper. We close this section by making explicit the numerical procedure that we used to solve eqs. ( x 2 = k∆x with k = 0, . . . , L -1, x 3 = l∆x with l = 0, . . . , L -1, and x 0 = i∆t with i = 0, . . . We define the complex field ψ on the discretised space-time as ψ x ≡ ψ(t, x) with x ≡ (i∆t, j∆x, k∆x, l∆x). We call ê0 , ê1 , ê2 , ê3 the orthonormal basis of unit vectors on the vector x. The spatial gradient then becomes and the spatial integral dx → (∆x) 3 j,k,l , with ∆x the lattice spacing. We use periodic cubes with linear sizes L = 40, 60, 80, and 100. For the time evolution, we use the lowestordered stochastic Runge-Kutta method for Eq. and for Eq. (17b), and the lowest-ordered symplectic method for Eq. (17a) and for Eq. ( with ∆W x,a = 0 and ∆W x,a ∆W x ′ ,b = δ x,x ′ δ a,b . As regards the numerical parameters, we use c = 1, ρ = 1, g = 1, μ = 0.5, γ L = 1, ∆x = 1 in all cases, and ∆t = 0.005 for Eq. ( and ∆t = 0.01 for Eqs. ( With these parameters, space and time are measured in units of the equilibrium correlation length at T = 0 in the mean-field approximation, x 0 ≡ 1/ √ gρ, and the corresponding correlation time t 0 ≡ γ L /x 2 0 . The order parameter is further measured in units of √ ρ with ρ the zero-temperature density. Then the velocity c, parameter μ, temperature T , and the Langevin noise ξ a are measured in units of x 0 /t 0 , t 0 /x 2 0 , x -2 0 , and ρ/t 0 , respectively. In this section, we focus on the equilibrium properties attained by the dynamical model. As we will show, this model undergoes a second order phase transition at a critical point below which the U(1) continuous symmetry is spontaneously broken. We confirm numerically that the universality class it the same as the one of the usual U(1) complex field theory These have been obtained with finite-size scaling of Monte Carlo data for system sizes up to L = 128 and high-temperature expansions. The ǫ-expansion RG method yields Our aim in this section is twofold. On the one hand, we test whether the three dynamic formulations, given by the Langevin equations In this section, we perform a double average of data: we take an ensemble average by taking the mean over 100 noise realisations for the same initial state ψ(t = 0) = √ ρ, and we average over 3000 different times at t = (1000 + i)∆t with 1 ≤ i ≤ 3000 for each dynamical run. The total number of data contributing to each data point shown is, therefore, 100 × 3000. We write this ensemble average as • • • stat and we use this as the equilibrium ensemble average • • • eq . The lattice linear sizes used are comparable to the ones utilized in Monte Carlo studies of the phase transition and critical phenomena There are three well-known definitions of the order parameter m for the spontaneous breaking of the U(1) symmetry. In the usual one is statistical physics, m is calculated as m ≡ lim h→0 ψ h eq by applying a perturbation h that couples linearly to the field. In the case of the model with Hamiltonian H this is achieved as where the sub-index h recalls that the complex fields ψ h and φ h are computed under the external field h. The resulting Langevin equation becomes In the context of Bose-Einstein condensation and superfluidity, however, the external field h does not find an easy implementation and, instead, the following definition is considered: where the integral 1/(4πr 2 ) dΩ r=r is the average over the solid angle at r = r. Numerically, m is computed as m ∝ |C(r = L/2)|, and in order to improve the numerical accuracy of the measurement of the integral over the spherical surface, 1/(4πr 2 ) dΩ r=r , we average over all lattice sites falling within the shell [|r|, |r| + 1). This definition corresponds to the off-diagonal long-range order lim r→∞ ψ † (x)ψ(x + r) for the presence of the Bose-Einstein condensate in a quantum-boson system. In many numerical works, the definition is instead used due to its numerical simplicity. All definitions of m should give the same temperature dependence for sufficiently large system size L. We adopt the definition We end with a note on the difference between m and the particle number observable, L -3 jkl |ψ x |, that is different from zero at all T (see the inset in Fig. The critical temperature can be better evaluated from the Binder ratio, U 1 , and the ratio of correlation functions, U 2 , U 1 and U 2 are expected to take fixed values independently of the system size L at the critical temperature T c . (a) Figure As well as for m, the other Langevin equations ( We also calculated the susceptibility and the specific heat that assuming the equilibrium ensemble average shown in Eq. We implemented these definitions numerically as The equilibrium correlation length ξ eq was calculated by assuming that the connected correlation length decays exponentially as C(r) -m 2 → r -r/ξeq , from the corresponding small-k behaviour or the structure factor with ψ(k) = dx ψ(x)e -ik•x the Fourier transformation of the field, estimated numerically from where S(k → 0) is the linear interpolation from S(∆k) and S(2∆k) to the value at k = 0 with ∆k = 2π/L. The panels (a)-(d) in Fig. Finite-size scaling The correlation function C(r)/L -1-η is also expected to be a universal function on r/L at the critical temperature T c . We can see this universality in Fig. We next consider the helicity modulus Υ defined as where F (∆) is the free energy -T log Z 0 (∆) and Z 0 (∆) the partition function under the twisted boundary condition along x-direction: We calculated Z 0 = e -E 0 /T stat and we used ∆ = 0.01/L. We confirmed that Υ takes almost same value for ∆ = 0.02/L and ∆ = 0.005/L. The Noether current for the phase shift ψ → ψe iδ given from the Lagrangian (1) is where f and θ are defined from ψ = f e iθ . Equation The equilibrium relaxation time τ is defined as where f (t) relax is the noise average of f (t) at time t of evolution from the fully ordered Being a dynamic parameter, the numerical τ can depend on the type of Langevin equation used [Eqs. Figure We can evaluate τ within an approximation in which the noise term is "renormalised" into the linear term originating in the potential energy by the replacement ρ → m 2 (T ). Equation ( and admits the stationary solution |ψ| 2 = m 2 . Proposing a linear perturbation δψ on top of the background m, ψ = m + δψ, the equation governing ψ becomes We now assume δψ ≪ m at the late stage t → ∞ of the relaxation and we neglect the term O(δψ 2 ) in the right-hand-side of this equation. Further rewriting the unknown as , we obtain the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation: We now consider the k → 0 mode. Equation ( where we implicitly assumed m ≪ 1 near the critical temperature. In the dissipation-less limit γ L → 0, ω N ± become gapless Nambu-Goldstone modes while ω H ± remain gapful Higgs modes. For finite γ L , ω N -is the slowest relaxation mode and the relaxation time τ is evaluated as However, close to T c the approximation used to derive (48) breaks down and the relaxation time τ is expected to show critical behaviour, with a new dynamical critical exponent z eq The equilibrium critical dynamical exponent of the classical O(N) model in d dimensions with relaxational dynamics has been computed with an ǫ = 4 -d expansion and reads For N = 2 in d = 3 one finds z eq = 2.0145. If one uses z eq = 2 + η, then z eq ≈ 2.038, using the value of η given in Eq. We wish to have our own estimate for z eq . Since it is very hard to determine z eq from the direct measurement of τ , we fix it from the universal scaling behaviour of τ /L zeq as a function of {(T -T c )/T c }/L -1/ν that should be independent of L. We then define where , and τ (L, T ′ ) is the numerically obtained relaxation time for a system with size L at temperature T = T c (1 + T ′ L -1/ν ). Due to the scaling argument for τ (L, T ′ )/L zeq , ∆(z eq ) should be minimized for the exact z eq . We calculate ∆(z eq ), summing over all pairs of systems sizes L 1 , L 2 = 40, 60, 80, 100, with z eq = 1.9, 2.0, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and T ′ max = 0.05/20 -1/ν , 0.1/20 -1/ν , 0.2/20 -1/ν (ν = 0.6703). We find that ∆(z eq ) takes minimal values for z eq = 2.1 independently of T ′ max and the type of Langevin equation used. In this section we study the statistical properties of the vortex-loop network in equilibrium. We start by recalling a number of known results on the statistical properties of line ensembles under different conditions. Although we present data for equilibrium configurations generated with the under-damped Langevin equation ( The relation between second order thermodynamic phase transitions and percolation phenomena was established in the late 70s, by using the finite dimensional Ising model of magnetism as a working example. In this system the most natural objects to consider are the domains of neighbouring aligned spins. Although these percolate and become critical at a threshold, their critical point does not necessarily coincide with the thermodynamic transition only if the spin clusters are constructed in a very specific way. The receipt demands to break the bonds between parallel spins with a temperature dependent probability, and thus build the so-called Fortuin-Kasteleyn clusters In 3d models with continuous symmetry breaking as the one we study here, closed line defects or closed vortices are the natural topological objects to consider. In this and other models with loops the lines undergo a geometric transition between a "localised" phase, with only finite length lines, and an "extended" phase, in which a finite fraction of the lines have diverging length in the thermodynamic limit. The actual scaling of their length with the system size depends on the boundary conditions. For periodic boundary conditions lines can wrap around the system many times. As in the Ising model, the line-defect geometric transition does not inevitably coincide with the thermodynamic one. In our study we will confirm that this is not the case for the U(1) relativistic field theory, as already shown in The tools to perform a geometric analysis of individual lines and ensembles of lines are well established and have been very successful in the field of polymer science, see for example The linear length along the loop, l, and the radius of the smallest sphere that contains the loop, R, are related by in the limit l ≫ a with a a microscopic length-scale. R can also be the mean-square endto-end distance or the radius of gyration of the loop. D is the fractal Hausdorff dimension of the line (D = 1 for a smooth line). In the thermodynamic limit the number density of vortex loops with length l should behave as [81] with m L the line tension and α L the so-called Fisher exponent. (This form should be corrected by system-size dependent terms to capture finite size corrections.) The line tension vanishes at criticality as with β L another characteristic exponent. By requiring that the average number of loops per unit area, with radius of the order of R, scales as n(R) ≃ R -d and equating this law to the Other scaling arguments, that use the algebraic decay of correlation functions at criticality, allow one to relate D and α L to the anomalous dimension of the field in the field theory that characterises the statistical properties at criticality. More precisely, D = (5 -η)/2 and α L = (11 -η)/(5 -η) • Gaussian random walks. D = 2 and α L = 5/2. This result was found in dense polymer solutions • Self-avoiding random walks. • Self-seeking random walks. These are walks such that α L < 5/2. • Coulomb phase in spin-ice. Loops that are shorter than L 2 behave as Gaussian random walks. Loops that are longer than L 2 wrap around the system many times, occupy a finite fraction of the system's volume, and for them α L = 1 • Fully-packed loop models. These are general models on a lattice with various symmetries and loop fugacity (a colour variable), n, as a free parameter. Their field theory representation is given by CP n-1 models for oriented loops Interestingly enough, we will see some of these statistics emerging in different length and time regimes of the U(1) model. We consider all 3L 3 unit plaquettes in the cube: L 2 plaquettes along the yz-plane with four corners at (x, x + ∆x ê2 , x + ∆x ê2 + ∆x ê3 , x + ∆x ê3 ), those along the zx-plane with vertices at (x, x + ∆x ê3 , x + ∆x ê1 + ∆x ê3 , x + ∆x ê1 ) and those along the xy-plane (x, x + ∆x ê1 , x + ∆x ê1 + ∆x ê2 , x + ∆x ê2 ). The quantity measures the vorticity of the plaquette (x, x + ∆x ê2 , x + ∆x ê2 + ∆x ê3 , x + ∆x ê3 ). The θ's are the phases of the field ψ at the corners of the plaquette and [α] 2π is the angle α modulo 2π, i.e. [α] 2π = α + 2πn with n an integer such that [α] 2π ∈ (-π, π]. In this way, a dual oriented linear object is assigned to each plaquette with v = 1 or -1. These oriented line elements join to form closed vortex loops. In practice, we decide whether a vortex pierces the plaquette by calculating the flux or winding number where Im[log(ψ B /ψ A )] gives the phase difference θ AB ≡ θ B -θ A + F AB for the two complex values ψ A,B ≡ |ψ A,B |e iθ A,B . The phases θ A,B and the phase difference θ AB are defined in the range (-π, π] and the function F AB is given by The flux v 1 x takes the form of v 1 x = (θ AB + θ BC + θ CD + θ DA )/(2π), and the phase difference θ DA in the range (-π, π] becomes The flux v 1 x equals -1, 0, 1, and 2 for the first, second, third, and fourth lines in Eq. ( x = 2 quite rarely arises because three phase differences θ AB , θ BC , and θ CD should be equal to π for this to occur, as shown in Eq. ( In other rare cases, the flux v 1 x can take fractional values 0 < |v 1 x | < 1 when vortex cores just touch one of the four vertices or the sides of plaquettes. We have never encountered the values v 1 x = 2 and 0 < |v 1 x | < 1 in our simulations. In the same way, we define the fluxes v 2 x and v 3 x for the plaquettes (x, x + ∆x ê3 , x + ∆x ê1 + ∆x ê3 , x + ∆x ê1 ) and (x, x + ∆x ê1 , x + ∆x ê1 + ∆x ê2 , x + ∆x ê2 ), respectively. x takes the value 1, a vortex element with length ∆x along the êa -direction pierces the centre of the plaquette from (x + ∆x/2, y + ∆x/2, z + ∆x/2) -∆xê a to (x + ∆x/2, y + ∆x/2, z + ∆x/2). The direction of the vortex line is reversed in the case v a x = -1. The total vortex length in the system is, therefore, proportional to the total number of plaquettes with non-vanishing flux, j,k,l 3 a=1 |v a x | = 0, and the averaged vortex density ρ vortex is defined as (Note that this quantity depends on the size of the space discretisation used, ∆x, see App. B and (Vachaspati and Vilenkin We now consider the length l of vortex loops. As we discussed above, we place straight vortex line elements at the centres of all plaquettes with non-zero flux |v a x | = 1 and we connect them with the constraint of not crossing the lines. The length of each loop is even in units of ∆x and the minimal length is 4∆x. When four or more plaquettes in one unit cube have non-zero flux, i.e., four or more vortex elements pierce the cube, we have to decide how to connect the vortex elements. This is shown in Fig. At higher temperature, the vortex loops are longer and the method used to connect the vortex elements becomes important. The comparison between the upper and lower snapshots in Fig. As temperature increases from 0.8 T c , longer loops appear and the size of the longest loop increases, as shown by the fact that the support of N (M,S) (l) extends further away on the horizontal axis. With the maximal rule, N (M) (l) gets close to a power-law, N (M) (l) ∼ l -2.17 We also stress the difference between N (M) (l) and N (S) (l). At temperatures far below T c (T = 0.8 T c in Fig. and the behaviour is quite similar. The qualitative change of the vortex line length distribution and its dependence on the connecting criteria can already be seen in Figs. hand, the weight of the number density clearly depends on the system size, suggesting the existence of very long vortex loops with lengths comparable and increasing with the system size. With the maximal convention the tail of the number density, before the bump, bends down and, clearly, it is not algebraic. With the stochastic one, the data at T c suggest a smooth crossover from l -2.17 at short length scales to a different behaviour at long length scales; we will discuss this issue in the next paragraph where we will study the percolation phenomenon in detail and we will find that the percolation threshold with the stochastic convention although very close to T c is not at T c . We consider now the infinite temperature data and the string length derived with the stochastic criterium in more detail and we compare it to predictions for fully-packed loop models of different kind. It was shown in as the fractal dimension of the loops at the largest scale is 3 in our case. (Corrections to the power in the second line should be taken into account for l ≃ L 3 and these depend on the model In Fig. There are several ways to discuss line percolation in this kind of systems and they do not yield the same threshold and they do not coincide with the one for the thermodynamic instability T c , see the analysis This value hardly depends on the criteria for connecting vortices and is consistent with the results obtained with Monte Carlo simulations of the 3d XY -model We consider now the bump structure in the number density N (M,S) (l). A bump in the number density N (M,S) (l) at large value of l starts to develop at T (M,S) L and is due to the finite size of the system. To describe it one should write a finite system size additive correction As discussed above, the scaling of the bump in N (M,S) (l), and the peak and tail in N (M) (l) and N (S) (l) at high temperature, suggest the existence of very long vortex loops with length of the order of, or even much longer than, L. In order to distinguish loops that wrap around the system from long but contractible loops, we define and calculate two quantities. The first observable just focuses on the size of the vortices, that we define as the maximal side of the rectangular parallelepiped covering the vortex loop in the x, y, and z-directions (see Fig. system-size ≡ Number of vortex loops, the size of which is larger than L stat . found with the analysis of N (M) (l) in the infinite system size limit. system-size shown in Fig. We should note that the summation of winding numbers for all vortex loops vanishes identically: loops (w x , w y , w z ) = (0, 0, 0) In this Section we analysed the statistical properties of the vortex tangle in equilibrium. The full vortex configuration is independent of the reconnection method and boundary conditions in the low temperature regime. The distribution of vortex lengths is simply exponential. Different percolation thresholds can be identified by working with different vortex-related observables We do not see any special feature in the density of vortex elements or the mean number of vortex lines at the line tension point. However, signatures of the vanishing line tension point are seen in other quantities. We see a maximum in the ratio between the number of loops that are longer than the system size and the total number of loops when the maximal criterium is used (though the height of the maximum decreases with L increasing and we cannot exclude that this effect disappears in the thermodynamic limit). (This feature is not shared by the numerator in this ratio.) The number of vortex loops that are longer than the system size and that are non-contractible constructed with the stochastic criterium behave similarly to an order parameter for the geometric transition. No quantity of this kind for the maximal rule behaves as an order parameter. Interestingly enough, the thermodynamic threshold T c seems to appear as the temperature at which ρ vortex and N (M,S) loop change concavity. At high temperature the influence of the reconnection method becomes very important as there are loops with length of the order of the linear size of the system or longer. The boundary conditions also become important. As in the quench dynamic analysis we will use the equilibrium state at high temperature as the initial configuration, it is specially important to characterise the vortex tangle at very high temperature. With the maximal criterium we found that one line carries most of the vortex mass in the sample at very high temperature. With the stochastic criterium we found that the statistics of loops with length l ≪ L 2 is Gaussian while even longer loops exist and their number density falls-off as (l/L 3 ) -1 . Vachaspati & Vilenkin We note that the behaviour of vortex loops in the three-dimensional model is quite different from the one of the topological defects in the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition of the two-dimensional system. In the latter, the phase transition occurs at the same temperature at which the vortex pairs unbind. In the former, percolation occurs at a different temperature from T c . This is similar to what happens in the Ising model of magnetism: in two-dimensions the percolation of geometric clusters occurs at the critical temperature while in three-dimensions this is not the case. The fact that percolation of geometric objects does not always occur at the thermodynamic critical phenomenon has been known since the work in In this section, we consider the stochastic dynamics following an instantaneous quench from equilibrium at T = 2 T c to T = 0. The analysis in the previous section allowed us to characterise the vortex configurations at the initial state at high temperature in full detail. Here we will be particularly concerned with the evolution of these states after an infinitely fast deep quench. We will show that during the low temperature dynamics vortex lengths with statistics and fractal dimension numerically identical to the one at the percolation threshold T (M,S) L will be relevant, although the quench protocol does not spend any time at nor even close to it. These features exist for all microscopic dynamic rules. Whether the initial state has an order parameter ψ that vanishes or not, can have a highly non-trivial influence on the subsequent dynamics. This fact was derived by Toyoki and Honda (In some references, e.g. The statistical and geometrical properties of the vortex loops at high temperatures were characterised in detail in Sec. IV and we will use this information here. Let us consider the dynamics in the initial stage of evolution within the mean-field framework. By approximating the initial high temperature state as ψ(t = 0) ≃ 0 and the time- The solution to the linear set of equations is ω - 1,2 (k) are rapidly decaying modes for all k and vanish in the non-relativistic limit c → ∞, while ω + 1,2 (k) are slowly growing modes for k √ gρ and decaying modes for k √ gρ. In the first stage of the ordering process, ω + 1,2 (k √ gρ) are the most important modes. The time scale of the growth is and the mean-field approximation breaks down beyond it. Figure One sees from the pictures that the reconnection rule used to build the vortex loops becomes irrelevant relatively soon, as the configurations in the upper and lower panels in the column (c) are very similar and in (d) are identical. After a transient, the system is expected to enter a dynamic scaling regime The dynamic exponent in the low temperature phase, z d , is different from the one found in quenches to the critical point that, in turn, coincides with the equilibrium critical one z eq discussed in Sec. III D. We will now determine z d . The dynamic growing length, ξ d (t), can be measured in different ways by exploiting the dynamic scaling hypothesis with Φ and f two scaling functions. Figures a similar definition to the one used for the equilibrium correlation length ξ eq in Eqs. In the algebraic regime, ξ d (t) ≃ t 1/z d , the estimated exponents, z d , are 0.43 for the overdamped Langevin equation ( As we will show in Sec. V D, the exponents characterising the vortex density ρ vortex decay, and the growth of the dynamical correlation length ξ d , are well related by ξ d ∝ 1/ √ ρ vortex within numerical accuracy. Again, we obtain a weak discrepancy between our result for the over-damped Langevin equation and the prediction; ξ d ∝ t 1/2 At sufficient long times and for finite system sizes the growing length saturates. Saturation is observed in the curves for L ≤ 100 when the curves depart from the power law and reach a plateau. For L = 500 the saturation is pushed beyond the numerical time window. We postpone the finite-size scaling analysis of the dynamic correlation length in Sec. V E. We now examine the phase ordering process from the point of view of the vortex dynamics. In Figs. Our next task is to examine how do the vortex dynamics depend on the evolution equa-tion. Figures In the initial stage of evolution for 0 t 5, inertial effects are apparent in the behaviour of ρ vortex (t) for the under-damped dynamics and the ultra-relativistic limit independently of the system size, as shown in Figs. After a short transient of the order of t ≃ 5 for our system sizes, the vortex density enters the proper scaling regime in which ρ vortex (t) should be proportional to t -1 We have calculated the dynamic correlation length and the vortex density using other values of the time and space discretisation parameters and we found essentially the same estimates for the exponent z d with deviation from the expected value z d = 2 for the overdamped dynamics. We may ascribe the origin of this difference to the fact that with this kind of dynamics the vortices are very soon diluted in the sample, for times 0 ≤ t 1 see Fig. The various curves in each panel in Fig. The two complementary panels in Fig. Figures We note that similar good universal properties have been obtained using the ultrarelativistic limit of the under-damped Langevin equation (17a), and the non-relativistic We now analyse the statistics of vortex lengths in the course of time. We have already identified three time regimes from the study of the growing length and vortex density: transient, dynamic scaling, and saturation. We therefore study the vortex length statistics in each of these regimes separately. We first focus on the short-time transient, say t ≤ 7, just before ρ vortex enters the scaling regime in which the space-time correlation scales with the growing length and the vor-tex density ρ vortex relaxes algebraically. As already observed in the analysis of ρ vortex the reconnection rule and microscopic dynamics affect the observations during this transient. Accordingly, we present the data for the stochastic and maximal criteria separately. = 2.17, the dotted line the power l -1 , and the almost vertical peaks at the far right of the plot correspond length scales that diverge with the system size. Figure First, we confirm that the dependence on the microscopic dynamics is very strong during this initial period but it disappears at around t ≃ 7. Second, we can see that the peak at long l is progressively washed out as the very long loops break up into smaller ones. Third, we observe that the curves at t ≃ 7 have three distinct length regimes with smooth crossovers between them: -an incipient smooth increase at very short lengths, say l 20, -an algebraic decay, ≃ l -2.17 , at 20 l 200 and -a slower algebraic decay, ≃ l -1 , at 200 l. A very interesting feature of these curves is that the algebraic dependence after l 20 for t = 3 -7 strongly resembles the power-law decay of the number densities N (M,S) (l) at the percolation temperature T (M,S) L shown in Fig. L . Another fact to remark is the disappearance of the peak at very large l (a feature of the initial condition treated with the maximum rule that is absent from the data analysed with the stochastic one) and the generation of the l -1 tail characteristic of fully-packed loop models (that was absent initially for this recombination rule). In order to check the scenario of the spontaneous approach to the percolating state, we study the scaling of the large vortex loop weight as done in Fig. Figure We end the analysis of the early dynamics by stating that, apart from the very specific peak at very long l in the initial state with the maximum criterium that is soon erased dynamically, the dynamic vortex tangle built with the two rules has the same statistical and geometric properties. The quantitative analysis of the system-size dependence of the time needed to achieve the percolation structure at the intermediate length scales We now turn to the scaling regime in which the growing length and vortex density grow and decay algebraically, respectively. As the recombination rule becomes irrelevant in this time-regime, we simply omit the upper-scripts (M) or (S). Figure The small l weight is clearly time dependent. In Sec. V G we conjecture that it is given The key point is to keep the full form of the N evaluated at t p appearing in the numerator, in such a way to include the two power laws. The double algebraic decay at t = 0 or t p are well approximated by N(l, t p ) ≃ l -α L [c n 1 (t) + c n 2 (t)l (α L -1)n ] 1/n . ( A sharp cross-over between the two power laws is obtained for large n (n = 6 is sufficient, see Fig. l * dl l -1 ≃ c 1 (t)l 1-α L 0 that scales as L 3 if c 1 (t) = L 3 c 1 (t p ). According to Fig. Let us first focus on long length scales. From the numerator in Eq. 79 one estimates a crossover at a dynamic length l * (t), that is advected towards smaller scales as time evolves, l * (t) ≈ (c 1 (t p )/c 2 ) 1/(α L -1) -γ 2 v (t -t p ) , as observed in the numerical data. We recover N(l, t) ≃ c 2 l -1 at l ≫ l * (t) Finally, this regime can also be split in two For α L ≃ 2.17 and ζ ≃ 1.1, the exponent in the left-hand-side is close to 2, the value used in the scaling checked in Fig. share the statistics of fully-packed loop models, with lines shorter than L 2 behaving as Gaussian random walks, and longer lines appearing with a weight proportional to l -1 . (iv) Moreover, we confirmed (v) We used the dynamic scaling hypothesis to extract the dynamic growing length from the analysis of the dynamic structure factor. We found that all dynamic evolutions yield data in good agreement with the expected dynamic exponent 1/z d = 1/2 apart from the over-damped Langevin equation that obtains a smaller value 1/z d ≃ 0.43 for the length and time-scales used. The fact that this equation overestimates z d had already been found in Our main results concern the out of equilibrium evolution of the vortex tangle. (vi) We showed that the network present in the initial state evolves towards a situation in which the strings present three length-scale regimes: loops that are shorter than the growing length ∆x ≪ l ≪ ξ d (t) = t 1/2 , loops that are longer than the growing length but still shorter than L 2 , ξ d (t) ≪ l ≪ L 2 , and very long loops L 2 ≪ l, behave very differently. In the first length-scale regime the lines feel the microscopic dynamics, they are smooth curves in 3d space, and the length distribution satisfies dynamic scaling with respect to the growing length ξ d ≃ t 1/z d . In the intermediate length regime the length statistics is very close, actually indistinguishable from, the one at the geometric threshold (although the evolution is done at zero temperature) and the lines behave as self-seeking random walks, in the sense that their fractal dimension is smaller than 2. In the very long length regime the statistics is the one of the longest loops in fully-packed loop models. (vii) Finally, we gave a (rough) analytic argument to derive the functional form of the number density of vortex lengths during the time-evolution of the system. This work suggests a number of possible lines for future research. The shape of the individual filaments could be examined by computing, for example, the local curvature and torsion (see, e.g., Appendix A: Fokker-Planck Here, we prove that the (uncommon) under-damped Langevin equation (15) takes the system to the equilibrium ensemble average in Eq. As a result, the phase differences θ XY also take uniformly distributed random values between -π and π independently of the positions X and Y . (Note that P θ XY (θ XY ) = (2π -|θ XY |)/(4π 2 ) when the range of θ XY is not -π < θ XY ≤ π but -2π < θ XY ≤ 2π with F XY = 0 for arbitrary θ X and θ Y .) We now consider the flux v P in Eq. (C1). Since θ DA takes the form in Eq. ( * P = Dψ Dψ * Dφ Dφ * f -c 2 (φ + iμψ) δ δψ -c 2 (φ * -iμψ * ) δ δψ * + 2γ L c 2 + δH δψ * + γ L c 2 (φ + iμψ) δ δφ + δH δψ + γ L c 2 (φ * -iμψ * ) δ δφ * + 2γ L T δ 2 δφδφ * P.