We use inelastic neutron scattering to study temperature and energy dependence of spin excitations in optimally P-doped BaFe2(As0.7P0.3)2 superconductor (Tc = 30 K) throughout the Brillouin zone. In the undoped state, spin waves and paramagnetic spin excitations of BaFe2As2 stem from antiferromagnetic (AF) ordering wave vector Q AF = (±1, 0) and peaks near zone boundary at (±1, ±1) around 180 meV. Replacing 30% As by smaller P to induce superconductivity, low-energy spin excitations of BaFe2(As0.7P0.3)2 form a resonance in the superconducting state and high-energy spin excitations now peaks around 220 meV near (±1, ±1). These results are consistent with calculations from a combined density functional theory and dynamical mean field theory, and suggest that the decreased average pnictogen height in BaFe2(As0.7P0.3)2 reduces the strength of electron correlations and increases the effective bandwidth of magnetic excitations. Since the discovery of unconventional superconductivity in iron pnictides near antiferromagnetic (AF) instability Using density functional theory (DFT) combined with dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) suitable for describing the Hund's coupling in iron pnictides In this paper, we present inelastic neutron scattering studies of temperature and energy dependence of spin excitations in BaFe 2 (As 0.7 P 0.3 ) 2 superconductor (T c = 30 K) Figures Our neutron scattering experiments were carried out on the MAPS and 4SEASONS chopper spectrometers at ISIS, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK and Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex, Japan, respectively. Some measurements are also carried out on EIGER triple-axis spectrometer in Paul Scherrer Institut, Switzerland. Our BaFe 2 (As 0.7 P 0.3 ) 2 single crystals were grown by a self-flux method Since there is no evidence that the P dopant forms long range order in BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 , we use an effective pnictide position in the DFT+DMFT calculations to simulate the physical consequence of P doping. In BaFe 2 (As 0.71 P 0.29 ) 2 , the As and P heights are 1.332 and 1.151 Å from the Fe plane, respectively In previous inelastic neutron scattering studies of lowenergy spin excitations in powder Figures To quantitatively compare the experimental results with a combined DFT+DMFT theory Figure Figure The reduction of the pnicogen height in BaFe 2 (As 0.7 P 0.3 ) 2 from BaFe 2 As 2 reduces the low energy spin excitation intensity centered at Q AF and eliminates the static long-range AF order in the undoped BaFe 2 As 2 . At the same time, the pnicogen height in BaFe 2 (As 0.7 P 0.3 ) 2 is still high enough to maintain intermediate electronic correlation strength with sufficient low-energy spin fluctuations to mediate superconductivity. For spin excitation mediated superconductors By comparing the absolute intensity changes of the resonance below and above T c , we find that spin excitations changes across T c are still much larger than the superconducting condensation energy In summary, we have used inelastic neutron scattering to map out spin excitations of isovalently doped BaFe 2 (As 0.7 P 0.3 ) 2 . By comparing spin excitations of this material with those of BaFe 2 As 2 and DFT+DMFT cal-culations, we conclude that iron pnictogen height in iron pnictides directly controls the spin excitation bandwidth and electron correlations. These results are consistent with the idea that electron correlations in iron-based superconductors arise primarily from the Hund's coupling J H , and low-energy spin excitations are consequences of nesting between hole and electron Fermi surfaces.