When connecting a voltage-biased Josephson junction in series to several microwave cavities, a Cooper-pair current across the junction gives rise to a continuous emission of strongly correlated photons into the cavity modes. Tuning the bias voltage to the resonance where a single Cooper pair provides the energy to create an additional photon in each of the cavities, we demonstrate the entangling nature of these creation processes by simple witnesses in terms of experimentally accessible observables. To characterize the entanglement properties of the such created quantum states of light to the fullest possible extent, we then proceed to more elaborate entanglement criteria based on the knowledge of the full density matrix and provide a detailed study of bi-and multipartite entanglement. In particular, we illustrate how due to the relatively simple design of these circuits changes of experimental parameters allow one to access a wide variety of entangled states differing, e.g., in the number of entangled parties or the dimension of state space. Such devices, besides their promising potential to act as a highly versatile source of entangled quantum microwaves, may thus represent an excellent natural testbed for classification and quantification schemes developed in quantum information theory. The concept of entanglement is at the heart of quantum physics: as one of the cornerstones at the foundation of quantum mechanics and, at the same time, as a key ingredient in emerging quantum technologies introducing a new quantum resource into communication, computing, and sensing. These two interconnected aspects of entanglement are reflected in a branching of research interests. On one hand, a more abstract, mathematical direction of quantum information theory maps out the boundary between classical and quantum world and further charts quantum states into various classes of entanglement. More and more sophisticated (qualitative) witnesses and (quantitative) measures of entanglement are devised in this field On the other hand, proposed and realized entanglement sources in the optical and microwave regime typically strive to realize particularly simple entangled states, for instance, pure (squeezed) Gaussian states with small, negligible admixtures The creation of multipartite or other more complex entangled states requires increasingly complex pulse schemes. These are reachable in such systems since one can build on the immense research effort (and the resulting amazing progress in performance and control) which has been spent on these standard circuit-quantumelectrodynamics (QED) setups as part of the larger quest for universal quantum computing. Here we argue, however, that combining two key elements of circuit-QED setups, namely, Josephson junctions and microwave cavities, in a much simpler, less demanding device can offer an alternative, fully tunable and versatile entanglementgenerating source. Recently developed Josephson-photonics devices The nontrivial entangled states, which appear as (quasi-)stationary states of these voltage-driven, damped systems, allow one to explore the richness of entanglement phenomena along several dimensions: the number of entangled parties, continuous or discrete degrees of freedom, fully entangled or biseparable states, all this is controllable in a single experimental setup. Josephsonphotonics devices or other entanglement sources utilizing similar entanglement creation mechanisms, hence, highlight the necessity of better bridging the gap between the abstract quantum-information branch of research on entanglement and more practical-oriented approaches aimed at utilizing entanglement as a resource for various quantum technological applications. In this paper, we will first briefly discuss a basic example of realizing either bi-or tripartite entanglement by a simple change of the voltage bias applied to the Josephson junction (Sec. II). After having thus demonstrated that such a device can, in principle, be used as a source of genuinely multipartite entangled microwaves, we will explain how also other characteristics of entanglement can be explored by varying other experimental "knobs". A detailed discussion of bi-and multipartite entanglement in Secs. III and IV, respectively, then reveals the full richness of entanglement phenomena in Josephsonphotonics devices. Limitations which occur in current experimental setups and possible improvements and modifications which might thus become necessary are discussed in Sec. V. We conclude in Sec. VI and address open questions which remain for future research. A Josephson-photonics setup, as pioneered by the experimental groups at Saclay/Grenoble Biasing the junction so that its Josephson frequency ω J = 2eV / matches the sum of the modes frequencies, ω J = q ω q , the transfer of a single Cooper pair across the Josephson junction gives rise to a simultaneous creation (or annihilation) of one photon within each of the modes. This common creation process is balanced by subsequent individual leakage of photons via output lines connected to each of the different resonators so that eventually a stationary [42] (and possibly entangled) state of the spatially separated cavities is reached. Formally, the particular resonant processes at the given bias are picked out by a rotating-wave approximation after the system Hamiltonian is transformed to a frame rotating with the Josephson frequency ω J The resulting effective time-independent Hamiltonian contains a renormalized Josephson energy, E * J = E J q √ κ q e -κq/2 , and normal-ordered Bessel functions J 1 of the first kind. These are functions of the photonic number operators n q = a † q a q of the various resonators, expressed in terms of creation/annihilation operators with [a q , a † q ] = 1, and the dimensionless parameter κ q = (2e 2 / ) L q /C q measuring each oscillator's zeropoint quantum fluctuations. In the Appendix A, we discuss the equivalent structure of the Hamiltonian for other resonances, e.g., if the chosen bias allows single photon excitations in some subset of all coupled oscillators. The bracketed term in Eq. ( Generally speaking, the effect of these nonlinearities on the dynamics of the system is governed by two different experimental parameters, the κ q parameter(s) and the Josephson energy E J . The former fixes the relative size of the transition matrix elements between neighboring states of oscillator q and thus effectively sets its level structure as we will see below in Sec. III B. The latter determines the driving strength and thus the population of the corresponding levels. As we will see later on [cf. Fig. Creating and annihilating photons according to the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( for the density operator ρ of the cavity degrees of freedom. A first basic example demonstrating the entanglement power of the device and at the same time illustrating the general strategy pursued in our investigation is sketched in Fig. No. of levels(κ) No. of parties(V ) the driving is turned up to investigate if (and what type of) entanglement is achieved. What statements on entanglement can be made depends on the choice of entanglement witness or measure. Later on, we will present a number of more elaborate witnesses designed to optimize the information on entanglement gained. For the moment, however, we consider a particularly simple witness experimentally accessible via measurements on the output lines. Namely, the violation of the inequalities bears witness to the presence of genuine bi-and tripartite entanglement for the full range of driving shown in Fig. These simple cases can now be used to exemplify the key strategy of this investigation. The versatile entangling properties of Josephson-photonics devices are exploited to explore the space of entanglement phenomena along several directions. Schematically, this is visualized in Fig. As a bottom line, we have demonstrated that the new experimental platform of Josephson-photonics devices has indeed the potential to create entangled photon states. The type of entanglement is determined by a small set of experimentally tunable parameters. To show this in detail, we now turn toward the simplest scenario, namely, bipartite entanglement. In the three-oscillator setup presented above, a bipartite system is realized by selecting a bias condition 2eV / = ω a + ω b . The corresponding effective Hamiltonian differs from an experimentally already realized twocavity setup merely in a renormalization of the Josephson energy, see Eq. (A1) in the Appendix A. In any case, the simultaneous creation of a single photon in each of the oscillators a and b leads to strongly correlated dynamics including potentially, but not necessarily, quantum entanglement. These two subsystems are called entangled if their corresponding mixed state ρ is not separable, i.e., if it can not be written as a convex combination of product states of the subsystems: ρ = j p j ρ j a ⊗ ρ j b with convex weights p j > 0 and j p j = 1. The question whether a given bipartite density matrix is separable or entangled is still lacking a general answer. Over the last decades, however, a large number of different criteria have been proposed to detect the presence of entanglement or to prove separability (for an overview see, e.g., Refs. An entanglement criterion both powerful and simple is the criterion based on positive partial transposition (PPT criterion) To additionally quantify the amount of entanglement of ρ, the logarithmic negativity We can now proceed to pursue our general strategy and explore the remaining directions of the space of entanglement phenomena (sketched in Fig. Two important features of Fig. is the amplification threshold in the parametric-amplifier limit κ → 0.) Secondly, E N has a distinct minimum at E J /E c2 J ≈ 2, nearly independent of the actual value of κ. At κ = 2, however, E N does not only take a minimum but vanishes and stays zero for all 2 ≤ E J /E c2 J . This feature, specific to κ = 2, is related to the restricted Hilbert space of each of the entangled parties, as the suppressions of any transitions to higher excited levels effectively reduces the harmonic oscillator to a two-level system. The special values of κ where the state space of each of the two oscillators is effectively reduced to a sixteen-(κ ≈ 0.23), three-(κ = 3 -√ 3), or two-level system (κ = 2) are indicated by dashed lines in Fig. where the nonvanishing matrix elements are a function of E J and γ. ) (the inverse of the golden ratio). The entanglement features of the 2 × 2 system are passed on nearly unchanged to systems with unequal κ q chosen such that one party still is a two-level system, while the dimension of the Hilbert space of the second party is increased, e.g., the 16×2 realization in Fig. Refs. Note that E N [ρ st ] = 0 does, in general, not imply separability for a 16 × 2 system. However, we know that if an N × 2 state ρ is invariant under partial transposition with respect to the qubit, i.e., ρ T b = ρ, then ρ is separable separability. Due to the simple structure of ρ st in the 16 × 2 case where all coherences are zero except for ρ st j0,(j+1)1 with j ∈ {0, . . . , 14}, we can decompose ρ st into different legitimate quantum states and find appropriate transformations U . The steady state is then expressed as off with ρ diag and ρ off being the diagonal and off-diagonal part of ρ st , respectively. Choosing 2) shows that ρ + (ρ -) and thus ρ st is separable. So, indeed, the 16×2 system here is separable whenever E N [ρ st ] = 0. Separability for strong driving in the N × 2 cases does not mean that quantum correlations between the two subsystems are absent. This is reflected in a nonzero quantum discord Steady-state entanglement vanishes for strong driving only in case that a qubit is involved. For all other realizations, e.g., the 3×3 or 16×16 realization, the logarithmic negativity takes a minimum around E J /E c2 J = 2 followed by an increase in E N . This increase can be traced back to coherences associated with higher photon creation processes, e.g., ρ 00,22 in the 3 × 3 case. These do not vanish but saturate in the limit E J /E c2 J → ∞. If the absolute value of these coherences in this limit is sufficiently large compared to the populations, entanglement can occur even in the regime of very strong driving. In this section, we want to focus on this strong-driving limit to illustrate that the κ direction of our sketch of entanglement space above is more complex than suggested so far by merely discussing the reduced Hilbert space of the two parties. To that end, we restrict the cavities to a 3 × 3 system but study the impact of modifying the relative size of the different transition matrix elements of the driving Hamiltonian. This is not purely an academic exercise but is motivated by recent circuit-QED experiments which employ additional oscillating driving fields to essentially cut off the harmonic ladder of energy states of a stripline cavity at some level N Steady-state logarithmic negativity EN in the strong-driving limit, EJ /E c2 J → ∞. State space is cut to a 3 × 3 system of two symmetric oscillators. Whether steadystate entanglement is observable depends on the κ parameter, which determines the ratio T1,2/T0,1 of the two transition matrix elements. Dashed lines indicate special realizations of 3 × 3 systems (see main text for details). (κ → 0) cut off to 3 × 3, (ii) a symmetric 3 × 3 system (κ = 2-√ 2), (iii) the "native" Josephson-photonics 3×3 system (κ = 3 -√ 3), and (iv) the 2 × 2 system (κ = 2) also natively realized in Josephson photonics without additional fields. The results depicted in Fig. Actually shown in Fig. Here, E N [ρ st ] = 0 is both necessary and sufficient for separability: if E N [ρ st ] vanishes, ρ st can be written as a sum of a separable (diagonal) state and a 2 × 2 state formed by the levels |0 and |2 which turns out to be separable if |ρ 00,22 | ≤ ρ 02,02 . The time-resolved statistics of photon emission events from the cavities has recently been studied experimentally and theoretically for Josephson-photonics setups The dynamics of entanglement is also often studied in the context of decoherence. Then, an initially prepared entangled state interacts with an environment leading to a decay and (oftentimes) a sudden death of entanglement after a finite time Here, we consider again the special case of a 16 × 2 system moderately driven, E J /E c2 J = 1.75, below the entanglement-separability threshold to its steady state. Then at τ = 0 -, a photon leaving the system is detected. Figure Let us first focus on symmetric decay rates, i. Dynamics after a photon measurement of the logarithmic negativity EN for a 16 × 2 system initially in steady state for EJ /E c2 J = 1.75. Observing a photon leaving oscillator a (magenta) or b (cyan) at τ = 0 -leads to a complete loss of entanglement. Features like entanglement sudden death and revival observable in the subsequent dynamics of EN (for symmetric decay) can be traced back to the presence of the two-level system and vanish for strong asymmetry (γa/γ b = 0.3). system is detected, the two-level system might still be in its excited state blocking further photon creation processes and thus hindering the development of entanglement. This is why E N stays zero for some time after the emission event during which it becomes more and more likely that the two-level system has already relaxed before bipartite entanglement is created again. In contrast, if a photon is emitted from the two-level system, a new creation process can occur immediately, which is reflected in a strong increase in E N on short time scales. In this case, the entanglement features a distinct maximum but vanishes again for a finite span of time before E N finally approaches its steady-state value. Note that the "suddenness" of death and revival features, here as well as in the decoherence dynamics of entanglement, is of course simply related to the definition of logarithmic negativity: while all density matrix elements and eigenvalues evolve smoothly, the sum of negative eigenvalues only does not. Turning toward asymmetric decay rates, γ a /γ b = 0.3, the degree of bipartite entanglement is generally lowered since the two-level system is much less populated. Furthermore, the delayed revival of entanglement is not that pronounced anymore as the probability that the two-level system is still excited after an emission event from the sixteen-level system is reduced. The fact that the vanishing of entanglement for a finite time span is lifted here completely indicates that this phenomenon can be traced back to the harsh state-space restriction in oscillator b, which has here a less dramatic effect due to the large γ b . In the preceding Secs. III A to III D, we have exploited that for the bipartite case the characterization of entan-glement is comparatively simple so that even the amount of entanglement can be quantified. As a general feature, the corresponding logarithmic negativity first increases with increasing driving to approach a maximum. For stronger driving, specific features crucially depend on the way the system is driven. Due to the high accuracy with which these devices can be characterized and controlled, the explicit values for parameters predicted here allow now to access desired entanglement properties in future experiments, e.g., by choosing the predicted optimal driving strength to maximize the amount of entanglement. The ratio γ a /γ b of the decay rates, as seen in the previous section, has a considerable impact on the characteristics of entanglement. Once the dimension of effective Hilbert space is determined, i.e., both the number of active oscillators and the number of accessible levels in each of these oscillators is fixed, there still remain two parameters, E J /E c2 J and γ a /γ b , which determine whether entanglement is present or not. This can be visualized in an entanglement map dividing the two-dimensional space spanned by these parameters into regions of separable or entangled states. In the two-qubit case, used in Fig. The phenomenon of such an entanglementseparability threshold has also been observed in a number of similar steady-state systems, see, e.g., Refs. Determining the exact boundary line between entangled and separable states for an arbitrary bipartite system is usually more difficult due to the lack of criteria which are both necessary and sufficient for the detection of entanglement. Nonetheless, the basic structure of such an entanglement map in the bipartite case is always quite trivial as any state falls in either of only two classes. This, however, changes drastically when turning toward multipartite systems in the following section, where the entanglement structure naturally becomes much more complex [cf. Fig. The structure of entanglement between more than two parties is much richer than in the bipartite case and does not represent a trivial extension of these results Here, we therefore concentrate on one of these special cases, namely, a three-qubit system realized for κ q = 2 in our setup. In Sec. IV A, we briefly review a commonly used classification scheme for mixed three-qubit states before we apply this to our specific 2 × 2 × 2 system in Sec. IV B and chart the corresponding map of entanglement classes. For pure three-qubit states, it is well known that there exist different equivalence classes of entanglement A pure three-qubit state is called a fully separable state if it can be written as For mixed three-qubit states corresponding classes based on the results for pure states via convex combinations can be defined. A mixed state is considered as a fully separable state if it can be written as a convex combination of fully separable pure states |φ j fs , i.e., ρ fs = j p j |φ j fs φ j fs | with convex weights p j > 0 and j p j = 1. Accordingly, a mixed state is called biseparable if it can be expressed as a convex sum of pure biseparable states |φ j bs and pure fully separable states |φ j fs . The pure biseparable states in this sum might be entangled with respect to different partitions. Additionally, we define subclasses of biseparable mixed states where pure biseparable states in the convex sum are all separable with respect to a fixed partition, i.e., either the partition a|bc, b|ac, or c|ab. States which are part of the W class can be expressed as a convex sum of pure W-class states |φ j W , pure biseparable states |φ j bs , and pure fully separable states |φ j fs . All mixed states which are not covered by the classification so far are in the GHZ class. States which belong either to the W or GHZ class are summarized as genuinely tripartite entangled states. We will now discuss how to chart a map of entanglement classes for the various stationary states of our Josephson-photonics device in the three-qubit case, κ q = 2. Figure We first find that the steady-state density matrix in the three-qubit case has a simple structure, when written in a standard product basis {|000 , |001 , |010 , . . . , |111 }. Alluding to the pattern of nonzero matrix elements, states of this structure are known as X states (here, there are some additional zeros). X states have been widely studied Despite their simple structure, states of this form yield a rich pattern in the map of entanglement classes as we will see in the following. Allowing for the decay rate of one of the qubits to differ from the other two, i.e., r = γ a/b /γ c = 1, the density matrix elements of ρ st in Eq. ( • Criterion C1 is a simple witness proposed by Gühne and Seevinck • Criterion C2 based by Novo et al. we can not make any statements. • Criterion C3 follows work by Wölk et al. 62. This implies that ρ st is biseparable, but not fully separable, in the regime • Criterion C4 is one of a large number of powerful criteria that is available for states which are diagonal in the GHZ basis |Ψ ± j = (|φ a φ b φ c ± | φa φb φc )/ √ 2 with φ l ∈ {0, 1} and φ l = φl . Dür et al. • Criterion C5 allows the detection of GHZ-class states and was derived by Eltschka and Siewert and -1 ≤ ν 0 ≤ 1, then ρ is part of the GHZ class. This criterion yields that ρ st is a GHZ-class state in the regime Dropping the restriction to equally damped oscillators, for r = 1 the structure of entanglement becomes slightly modified as new regimes occur. Firstly, a gap arises between the regime boundaries based on C1 and C2 so that a region develops where states are known (by C3) to be not fully separable, but the type of entanglement could not be determined. Secondly, we can identify two additional regimes of biseparable states where the states are separable with respect to a fixed partition. This is shown again by rewriting ρ st as a sum of GHZ-diagonal states and fully separable states. Building on work of Dür et al. Intuitively one might think that a strong symmetry between the three oscillators would favor genuine tripartite entanglement. The results in Fig. One important question which has not been addressed so far is whether there are also genuinely tripartite entangled states which belong to the W class. This has not yet been excluded by the criteria discussed here for the red region in Fig. To summarize this part, we have analyzed the surprisingly rich entanglement map of the photonic states which occur in form of stationary states in driven multimode cavity-Josephson circuits. This is even more striking considering the simple structure of these states [Eq. ( Current experiments in Josephson photonics have already realized two-cavity setups and taken first steps in tackling the nonclassicality of microwave emission Constructing setups of three or more cavities and tuning the bias voltage V between the corresponding resonances to switch directly from a bipartite to a multipartite system does not seem to pose a principle challenge. Besides the number of active parties, also the Josephson energy E J , i.e., the class of entanglement, is easily tunable over a few orders of magnitude via the magnetic flux when using a SQUID configuration for the Josephson junction. By contrast, the dimension of Hilbert space determined by the parameters κ q is currently fixed by design. While earlier experimental realizations were limited to the lowimpedance regime κ q 1, recent progress already makes it possible to reach values up to κ q ≈ 1.6 Our theoretical investigations have been restricted to a small portion of the "space of entanglement phenomena" [Fig. Leakage of excited photons from the resonators into the electromagnetic environment is the dominant but not the only source of decoherence in an actual experimen- tal realization. As discussed in Ref. The logarithmic negativity increases immediately and approaches, on a time scale of a few 1/γ, a quasistationary state decaying exponentially but only very slowly with rates of the order γ J . At γτ = 50, we finally switch of the device again by instantaneously reducing the driving to zero, resulting in a fast vanishing of the entanglement on time scales associated with 1/γ. In Fig. To study the complexity of entanglement phenomena in multipartite systems is a challenging and in many respects a still-unsolved problem, both in terms of theoretical concepts and in terms of experimental realizations. In this paper, we demonstrated that Josephson-photonics devices which combine the basic elements of circuit QED in form of a voltage-biased Josephson junction interacting with an array of microwave cavities may serve as simple and versatile sources for the creation of entangled photons in the microwave up to the low terahertz regime. The way these photonic states are created is strikingly simple and does not require complicated pulse shaping. The relevant parameters of these devices are well-characterized and their operation is controllable to such a degree that a small set of experimental knobs allows one to access a broad variety of stationary photon states with specific entanglement properties. In this work, we provided quantitative predictions for the amount of entanglement for the bipartite case which are of direct relevance for experiments currently being implemented. More generally, we showed how to design the number of entangled parties and the structure of their respective Hilbert spaces by varying experimentally accessible parameters. This way, various classes of entangled multipartite photon states can be realized. Specific attention has been then spent on multipartite entanglement of two-state systems since for this specific case advanced entanglement criteria have been developed recently. However, it turned out that even for these cases our theoretical understanding is far from complete. The type of driven, dissipative mesoscopic circuits considered here may thus trigger further research to better understand entanglement in more complex situations. For future experiments, one important question will be the best choice of witness. Complexity or ease of measurement will have to be balanced with the power of various possible witnesses to distinguish between different classes and detect entanglement in a wider or more restricted range. This links to the challenge of mitigating the debilitating impact of low-frequency noise on entanglement; either by choosing witnesses which can be measured during the time of quasistationarity, by further improving phase stability possibly via phase-locking schemes, or by exploiting observables and measurement schemes insensitive to phase noise (cf. Fransoninterferometric schemes In that context, we want to emphasize that in the current work we concentrated on questions concerning the entanglement of cavity modes. Various closely related questions can be studied in the frequency-and/or timedomain directly for output modes, including detailed modeling of filtering and photon detection. Related to these issues are possible limitations of our results inherent to the modeling of dissipation by a standard quantumoptical Lindbladian. How and when to improve on this modeling is an important topic for further studies. For applications as an entanglement source, an important feature distinguishing Josephson-photonics devices from other circuit-QED setups is the continuous mode of operation, which suggests particular potential as highintensity source. Operating several Josephson junctions in a parallel, self-synchronized manner may conceivable serve this purpose. For abstract entanglement theory, Josephson photonics constitute one powerful example that even simple Hamiltonians can dynamically generate a wealth of complex entanglement phenomena, worthy of interest. This may trigger efforts to characterize and understand the entanglement properties of states which are naturally occurring (as steady states) of similar dynamical systems as studied here; thereby complementing those where the investigated states are chosen arbitrarily or according to other criteria. Particularly fascinating is the question to what extent it is possible to directly connect the structure of the generating Hamiltonian to the entanglement class of the eventually resulting mixed states. For instance, instead of a tripartite Hamiltonian of the a † b † c † + c.c type as at the 2eV = (ω a + ω b + ω c ) resonance of Josephsonphotonics, we may consider a a † b † + b † c † + a † c † + c.c Hamiltonian, which is not realizable in pure form in the current setup. [There would be competing (a † ) 2 terms among other corrections.] We may then ask whether this can be related to entanglement of GHZ or W type, respectively, and try to pose and answer similar questions for other multipartite systems. Selecting the bias condition ω J = 2eV / = ω a + ω b in a setup of three cavities (denoted a, b, and c), only the oscillators a and b are directly involved in the fundamental creation/absorption process initiated by a tunneling Cooper pair. The presence of the passive oscillator c, however, results in a renormalization of this process in terms of the Bessel function J 0 in the RWA Hamiltonian close to that resonance (in a frame rotating with ω J ): (A1) Here, a ( †) , b ( †) , and c ( †) are the corresponding creation (annihilation) operators and ẼJ = E J √ κ a κ b e -(κa+κ b +κc)/2 . In the zero-temperature limit, oscillator c is in its ground state and consequently backaction on the fundamental creation/annihilation process does not occur, i.e., J 0 ( √ 4κ c n c ) → 1. The Hamiltonian of a three-cavity system with passive oscillator c then equals the Hamiltonian of a two-cavity setup [cf. Eq. ( The structure of the Hamiltonian in Eqs. (A1) and (1) relies on the existence of a single resonant process. If some of the modes are degenerate, there will be different competing resonant processes and the RWA Hamiltonian will be a sum of several terms of a form similar to that in Eqs. (A1) and (1).