The quantum Hall (QH) effect supports a set of chiral edge states at the boundary of a 2-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) system. A superconductor (SC) contacting these states can induce correlations of the quasi-particles in the dissipationless 1D chiral QH edge states. If the superconducting electrode is narrower than the superconducting coherence length, the incoming electron is correlated to the outgoing hole along the chiral edge state by the Andreev process 1-3 across the SC electrode. In order to realise this crossed Andreev conversion (CAC) 4-7 , it is necessary to fabricate highly transparent and nanometer-scale superconducting junctions to the QH system. Here we report the observation of CAC in a graphene QH system contacted with a nanostructured NbN superconducting electrode. The chemical potential of the edge states across the SC electrode exhibits a sign reversal, providing direct evidence of CAC. This hybrid SC/QH system is a novel route to create isolated non-Abelian anyonic zero modes, in resonance with the chiral QH edge 7-12 . Inducing superconducting correlations via the proximity effect into a 2DEG in the QH regime has been a long standing challenge and has attracted renewed attentions due to its promise for realising non-Abealian zero modes The microscopic picture of charge flow across the SC/QH system can be described by extending the Andreev process The contact transparency of the SC/graphene interface can be characterized by measuring the differential conductance enhancement which directly represents local Andreev process (LAP) efficiency. Fig. Employing a highly transparent SC/graphene contact, the CAC process can be now investigated in dissipationless chiral edge modes in the QH regime of graphene. For this experiment we performed non-local measurements, monitoring the voltage drop between electrodes e and c (downstream chemical potential, V D ) with current I biased between electrodes a and d. There is no apparent current flow between e and c except along a small segment of the NbN electrode (marked with a black box in the inset of Fig. To further quantitatively analyse the CAC, we now discuss the temperature dependent negative downstream , nearly insensitive to temperature T >T c,on . This estimation is also in good agreement with the value estimated from the NbN resistance measured from a segment fabricated as a part of the SC electrode in Fig. In principle, the observed negative non-local signal in R D can possibly be also attributed to other effects, such as ballistic electron transport Although we mostly focused on the most stable  = 2 QH state in this study, a negative downstream chemical potential is also clearly observed in  = 1 QH state. The spinpolarized (or spinless)  = 1 QH state is of particular interest as a possible host of Majorana zero modes. It is intriguing to note that the spin-polarized  = 1 QH state demonstrates the CAC process with a spin singlet s-wave SC, showing a substantially large negative downstream chemical potential. We understand this CAC process to be enabled by the large spin-orbit coupling inherited from the NbN superconducting electrode The superconducting film is optimized for high transparent contact to the graphene channel. After plasma etching of the h-BN encapsulated graphene, 5-nm-thick Ti is electron-beam evaporated at a pressure lower than 1×10 -8 Torr, followed by sputtering 5-nm-thick Nb and 50-nm-thick NbN superconducting films without breaking vacuum. For NbN film, we employ reactive sputtering in an Ar/N 2 environment. A thin layer of Nb film is deposited before the NbN film formation to protect the initial Ti layer from the reactive N radicals during the NbN film growth. The width of the SC is limited by the fabrication process (W > 50 nm). The length of the SC electrode (L ~ 1 m) was chosen to ensure the aforementioned asymptotic limit to create the zero-energy resonance mode at the end of SC electrode. All the other electrodes for source and voltage probes are made of Ti/Au normal metal. We fabricate the contacts by an in-situ etching scheme 