A method is presented to solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations with arbitrary distributions of vortices. The real-space Green's function approach based on Chebyshev polynomials is complemented by a gauge transformation which allows one to treat finite as well as infinite, ordered as well as disordered vortex configurations. This tool gives unprecedented access to vortex lattices at very low magnetic fields and glassy phases. After describing in detail the method and its implementation, we use it to address a series of problems related to d-wave superconductivity on the square lattice. We first study the continuity of the vortex-core energy spectrum and its evolution from the quantum regime to the semiclassical limit; we investigate the effect of the band structure on the vortex by following the self-consistent solution through a Lifshitz transition; we then study the evolution from the vortex lattice to the isolated-vortex limit with decreasing field and show that a new emerging length scale controls this transition; finally, we perform a statistical study of the vortex-core local density of states in the presence of positional disorder in the vortex lattice. The calculations reveal a number of qualitative differences between the properties of vortices in the quantum and semiclassical regimes. The vortices in superconductors provide excellent opportunities in the exploration of disordered elastic systems. The published numerical methods apply either to the isolated vortex or to ideal vortex lattices at rather high fields. For the isolated vortex in a continuum model, a projection on the basis of angular-momentum eigenstates reduces the calculation to a set of one-dimensional eigenvalue problems. This has been solved for three-dimensional s-wave The main obstacle when considering infinite (ordered or disordered) vortex configurations in real space is to obtain a good ansatz for the phase of the superconducting order parameter. For a single vortex in two dimensions, the phase at a given point is given by the angle formed by this point, the vortex center, and some arbitrary reference axis going through the vortex center. The method is ideally suited for two-dimensional lattice models and gives access to system sizes of typically a million sites, two orders of magnitude larger than with the usual Hamiltonian methods. The possibility to treat large systems will be essential for investigating the transition from the quantum regime to the semiclassical limit at mesoscopic scales. Here we focus mainly on the quantum regime, but we use large systems in order to achieve high energy resolution. We also study self-consistently low magnetic fields with intervortex distances as large as 100 lattice spacings. The paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a pedagogical and self-contained account of the method, going through the Chebyshev expansion (II A), the order-parameter ansatz for multivortex configurations (II B), the asymmetric singular gauge transformation for infinite vortex configurations (II C and II D), the self-consistency equations (II E), and finally discussing some issues regarding accuracy and implementation (II F). In Sec. III, the method is applied to four problems connected with two-dimensional d-wave superconductivity on the lattice: the continuity and symmetry of the vortex energy spectrum (III A), the evolution of the vortex core and spectroscopy across a Lifshitz transition (III B), the magnetic field scale above which the vortex-core states feel the orientation of the vortex lattice (III C), and the amount of disorder in the vortex lattice needed to wash out this information (III D). The main results are summarized in Sec. IV. The mean-field theory of inhomogeneous superconductivity can take the form of a Schrödinger-like eigenvalue problem (Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations) or the form of a Dyson-like equation (Gorkov equations). Both formulations are equivalent, the Green's function G(z) solution of the Gorkov equations at complex energy z being the resolvent of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian H: G αβ (z) = 〈α|(z -H) -1 |β〉. α and β are single-particle state indices and z -H is to be understood as z1 1 -H. In practice, we will only be interested in retarded Green's functions evaluated immediately above the real-energy axis, i.e., z = E + i0. The solution boils down to an inversion of the operator z -H. The method introduced in Ref. 40 H = (Hb)/a is a rescaled dimensionless Hamiltonian whose spectrum falls entirely within the interval [-1, 1] where T n ( H) is meaningful. Thus a is an upper bound for the width of the spectrum of H and b is the center of this spectrum. Likewise, Ẽ = (Eb)/a. The Bogoliubovde Gennes Hamiltonian has a symmetric spectrum, so one can set b = 0 (Appendix A; see, however, Sec. II F). The requirement to rescale the whole energy spectrum within the range [-1, 1] means that the spectral resolution is set by the largest energy scale, which is the main weakness of the method. Equation (1) reduces the calculation of the Green's function to the evaluation of the matrix elements 〈α|T n ( H)|β〉. This task is greatly simplified thanks to a recursion relation obeyed by the Chebyshev polynomials: The method applies to any problem with a bounded energy spectrum and such that H|ψ〉 can be computed. In fact, H|ψ〉 is the only time-consuming operation for this algorithm, whose overall performance therefore depends on how efficiently this operation can be implemented. A procedural implementation, as opposed to a straight matrix-vector multiplication, is preferable for sparse Hamiltonians. We specialize now to a superconductor on a discrete tightbinding lattice. A state vector |α〉 is represented by complex Bogoliubov-de Gennes amplitudes u α (r ) and v α (r ) at each lattice site r . The Hamiltonian connects the amplitudes at two sites r and r via the 2 × 2 block Up to a gauge transformation to be discussed later, the diagonal matrix elements are given by t r r = t 0 r r e i r rμδ r r , where t 0 r r is the bare hopping amplitude, μ is the chemical potential, and is the Peierls phase with A the vector potential and e = |e| the magnitude of the electron charge. We see that the calculation of the LDOS mimics the evolution of an electron injected at point r : starting with the state |r 〉, at each iteration the wave function is spread over neighboring sites by the application of H and the resulting amplitude u(r ) at the starting point is measured to get the corresponding coefficient of the Chebyshev expansion. The system size needed in order to obtain the matrix element 〈r |T n ( H)|r 〉 without boundary errors is therefore proportional to n and to the range of the hopping amplitudes. The order parameter is given by ∆ r r = -V r r 〈ψ r ↑ ψ r ↓ 〉, where V r r is the pairing interaction and ψ r σ annihilates a spin-σ electron at position r . It can be related to the anomalous Green's function F r r (z) = 〈r |(z -H) -1 |r 〉 and evaluated in the same way as the LDOS. Unlike the expression (4) for the LDOS, the expression relating ∆ r r to F r r depends on the gauge, and will be derived in Sec. II E. For large systems or systems lacking symmetries, the selfconsistent calculation of ∆ r r can be prohibitive. On the other hand, the fine details of ∆ r r are often irrelevant for the LDOS, which is the quantity we are ultimately interested to compare with experimental data. This underlines the need for a good starting ansatz, either to lower the number of cycles necessary in order to reach self-consistency, or to ignore self-consistency altogether. We express the order parameter as where ∆ A is our ansatz, ∆m sc and ∆p sc being the selfconsistent corrections to the modulus and phase, respectively. A good ansatz should respect the symmetries of the problem and be such that the differences between the LDOS calculated using ∆ A and ∆ are unimportant. From here on, we specialize to a two-dimensional lattice of sites r = (x, y). We consider a distribution of vortices at positions R = (X , Y ). The vortices can sit on or in between lattice sites. The order parameter is written as a superposition of contributions from each vortex in the form ∆ 0 is the gap magnitude and s r -r describes the local orderparameter symmetry. The most common symmetries are s and nearest-neighbor d x 2 -y 2 on a square lattice, for which we have The order parameter has no Peierls phase for symmetric gauges, but a phase e -i r r appears self-consistently in the asymmetric gauge (Sec. II C). The function S(r , r ) describes the modulus and phase of the order parameter for a single vortex at the origin: +∆φ(r ,r )+∆φ c (r ,r ) . ( Here we will use the empirical two-parameter function 31 and adjust the parameters ξ 0 and ξ 1 to minimize ∆m sc . The second factor in Eq. ( By convention, we set arg(0) = 0 and arg(-|x|) = π. This choice of sign corresponds to a positive magnetic field along the z axis with a supercurrent circulating counterclockwise around the vortex. For an s-wave gap, r = r in Eq. ( The ansatz ( The unitary transformation U = e i g 0 0 e -ih , where g and h are arbitrary functions of r , changes the Hamiltonian (2) into For an s-wave order parameter, the symmetric choice g = h = -φ/2, where φ(r ) is the phase of ∆ r r , removes the phase from the off-diagonal terms and puts a phase [φ(r )φ(r )]/2 on the diagonal ones. This is analogous to a usual gauge transformation A → A+ ħ h 2e ∇φ [see Eq. ( The problem here is that the halved phase difference appearing in the diagonal terms is discontinuous at the branch cut of each vortex. For a d-wave order parameter, there is also a discontinuity remaining in the off-diagonal terms. Franz and Tešanović For arbitrary vortex configurations, we have found it more convenient to use the asymmetric singular gauge This attaches all vortices to the particles and none to the holes. The spatial average of the Peierls-like phase built in this way into the hopping term is equal to the spatial average of -2 r r . As a result, the particles and holes now feel effective magnetic fields that are opposite on average. Performing the unitary transformation, one finds that the phase of the hopping term for particles is the sum of a Peierls phaser r and the function where we have introduced the notation δ = rr . This function is periodic for vortex lattices. The phase difference in the square brackets decreases as the inverse of the distance to the vortex, such that the expression must be regularized for infinite sums. The phase of the off-diagonal term is The discontinuity of the halved phase difference is exactly compensated by the correction ∆φ, such that the first two terms in the curly braces form together a continuous function whose sum is just half the sum in Eq. ( and the transformed Hamiltonian is simply We underline the non-gauge-invariant quantities expressed in the asymmetric gauge. The phase field (11) together with the ansatz (12) and the Hamiltonian (13) provide a convenient framework to treat finite as well as infinite, ordered as well as disordered vortex configurations. r +x , r ,r +ŷ ), and use Eq. ( The superfluid current density follows as j = -2e|∆| 2 v s . We proceed to the evaluation of the phase field (11) for infinite vortex configurations, starting with ideal vortex lattices. The phase field for disordered vortex configurations will be constructed by displacing vortices in an ideal lattice. The asymptotic behavior of the phase difference for a vortex at a large distance R from the points r and r + δ is Due to this slow decay, the sum in ( In practice, the divergent contributions from vortices at R and -R cancel. Since all common vortex lattices have inversion symmetry, we can group the vortices in pairs: The function Λ decays as 1/R 2 and its sum is convergent: The actual convergence of the sum (11) is faster than 1/R 2 , because the other spatial symmetries of the vortex lattice will in general suppress these 1/R 2 terms as well. In fact, if R is written as R(cos θ, sin θ), the term of order 1/R n in the expansion of φ(r + δ -R)φ(r -R) contains one contribution proportional to cos(nθ) and another proportional to sin(nθ). In a continuum limit, both contributions vanish upon integrating on θ. This shows that short-range physics dominates the sum in (11), which therefore also converges for disordered lattices or lattices lacking inversion symmetry. For each lattice point r , we denote R 0 the vortex closest to r and we compute the phase field as The notation • • • means that the result must be recast in the interval ]π, π]; this operation is needed-and was implicit in Eq. ( Φ δ (r ) = R Λ δ (r , R) can be evaluated exactly, as summarized in Table The magnetic field distribution has the periodicity of the vortex lattice. It is the sum of its average value and a periodic modulation which averages to zero: B(r ) = [ B + δB(r )]ẑ. Likewise, we can write the Peierls phase as = ̄ + δ . Only ̄ carries a nontrivial gradient, while δ is periodic. In the present study, we will neglect the periodic modulation of the field. This is justified at high fields when the intervortex distance d is small compared with the penetration depth λ. In the opposite limit λ d, the correction δ must be determined self-consistently. As the Peierls phase scales like 1/d 2 , however, it disappears in the low-field regime and δ is a correction to a small effect. For a vector potential A(r ) = B(-y, 0, 0) corresponding to a uniform field Bẑ, the Peierls phase is where B = Φ 0 /S with Φ 0 = πħ h/e the flux quantum and S the surface of the vortex unit cell, namely S = d 2 and S = ( 3/2)d 2 for square and triangular vortex lattices, respectively. Our choice of gauge for the vector potential is consistent with the definition ( Disordered vortex configurations are generated from a perfect vortex lattice by removing and adding individual vortices. If the numbers of vortices removed and added are equal, the average magnetic field is unchanged and the function Φ has no long-range gradient. Figure The self-consistent order parameter and the anomalous function where f (E) = (e E/k B T + 1) -1 is the Fermi function. Note that in general F r r (z) = F r r (z); the equality holds only for translation-invariant systems. Owing to the symmetry of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian, though, the relation F r r (z) = F r r (-z) always holds (Appendix A). If H is defined with b = 0, this same symmetry of H also implies 〈r |T n ( H)|r 〉 = (-1) n+1 〈r |T n ( H)|r 〉. The latter, together with the expansion (1), allows one to rewrite the order parameter as The first term of the sum in (1) drops because 〈r |T 0 ( H)|r 〉 = 〈r |r 〉 = 0. The coefficients D n carry the explicit temperature dependence according to The energy integration must be cut to the spectral range of H, or to a lower cutoff given by the pairing interaction. The second line follows after integrating by parts. The integral is now cut by the temperature and can therefore be extended again to ±∞, unless k B T ∼ a. For even values of n, the sine function is odd and consequently D n = 0. One sees that the coefficients become simply D n = 2 sin(nπ/2)/(πn) at T = 0. It is shown in Appendix A that Eq. ( The expressions ( Again, this only applies if b = 0. The expression appropriate in the case b = 0 is given in Appendix A. Two comments are in order. For an ideal vortex lattice the function Φ is periodic, but the Peierls phase is not. The ansatz (12) is therefore nonperiodic: it becomes periodic once multiplied by e i . The self-consistent expression (20) has the same property (Appendix A) so that the periodicity of ∆e i is preserved during the cycles to self-consistency. The nonperiodicity of ∆ balances the nonperiodicity of H such that all gauge-invariant quantities, in particular the LDOS, display the periodicity of the vortex lattice. Second, while ∆ r r is symmetric under the exchange of coordinates, in the asymmetric gauge we have This property is obvious in the ansatz (12) if one notices that both Φ and are antisymmetric under the exchange of coordinates. The property is also guaranteed by Eq. (20) as shown in Appendix A. On the contrary, the property ∆ A r r = (∆ A r r ) * , which is verified where ∆φ c = 0, is not obeyed by the self-consistent solution. Four parameters determine the accuracy of the calculation. Beside the energies a and b (Sec. II A), these are the order N of the Chebyshev expansion and the size M of the system. Ideally, the size of the system must be such that the last Chebyshev coefficient 〈r |T N ( H)|r 〉 is not perturbed by the system's boundaries. The optimal shape of the system depends on how the Hamiltonian diffuses the wave function. On a square lattice, for instance, the state |r 〉 spreads with a diamond-like shape if there are only nearest-neighbor hoppings. In such a case, it is better to define the system with a diamond shape as in Fig. Figure 2 mark the limits of the electronic spectrum, with ξ min and ξ max the extrema of the tight-binding band. While the use of a ∆ and b = 0 is in principle also mandatory for the calculation of the LDOS, in practice it is sufficient to choose values of a and b that fit the electronic excitation spectrum, i.e., a N = E max -E min and b N = (E max + E min )/2. The reason is that the Hamiltonian does not mix appreciably electron and hole states for energies larger than a few times ∆. In the example of Fig. Increasing M and/or N also improves the resolution. As the calculation of H|ψ〉 scales like M 2 , the total computing sites on the square lattice. This shape is optimal if the range of the Hamiltonian extends to the first, third, or fifth neighbors. We typically use M = 500, corresponding to a system of 501 001 sites. (b) Square-like system of size M = 2 with (2M + 1) 2 sites. This shape is optimal if the range of the Hamiltonian extends to the second or fourth neighbors. We typically use M = 350 in this case, corresponding to 491 401 sites. A possible sequential numbering of the sites is indicated. - time scales like N M 2 : optimal performance requires taking N as large as possible and M as small as possible. The choice N = 4M ensures that the LDOS is not perturbed by boundary effects, but higher values of N are sometimes acceptable. Figure If the Chebyshev expansion is stopped at order N , the approximate LDOS displays so-called Gibbs oscillations close to the LDOS singularities. Note that the correction factor (last in the curly braces) is not unity for Γ = 0 but 1 -n/N , which is the Fejér kernel: a delta-function-like Lorentz kernel has the good virtue of turning a truncated Chebyshev expansion into a causal function. Unless explicitly stated, all LDOS calculations reported in this paper use the Fejér kernel. While relatively large system sizes are required in order to converge the LDOS, the exact value is approached from below without oscillations. The Fejér kernel also leads to convergence from below, but at a much slower rate. Finally, with the Lorentz kernel the gap converges to a lower value because the scattering rate Γ is pair breaking. In the present example, N = 2000 and the Jackson kernel ensure a 0.1% convergence. All calculations of the self-consistent order parameter reported in this paper use the Jackson kernel and values of M and N that ensure at least 0.1% convergence. When studying systems with broken translational symmetry, we build the system of size M such that the site/bond where the LDOS/gap is being calculated sits at the center; i.e., we use a different system for each site. In this way the systematic errors associated with the system's boundaries are comparable for all sites. In this section, we present four brief studies illustrating the potential of the method. The first two studies deal with isolated vortices and do not require the asymmetric gauge, yet they reveal the sensitivity of the vortex core to the band structure and allow us to validate the model (8). The last two studies deal with infinite ordered and disordered vortex lattices and make use of the asymmetric gauge. We first address the dichotomy between discrete vortexcore bound states as predicted for superconductors of s-wave symmetry and the continuous energy spectrum expected for d-wave symmetry, both in the quantum and semiclassical regimes. Although this problem is not new, the improved energy resolution of the method allows us to differentiate discrete states from a continuum in parameter regimes where other methods see no distinction. We then investigate the self-consistent order parameter for an isolated d-wave vortex as the chemical potential is tuned across a Lifshitz transition. Variations of the order-parameter profile have been previously studied as a function of temperature, Next, still for a d x 2 -y 2 pairing symmetry, we consider the influence of nearby vortices on the LDOS in one vortex core. In a perfect vortex lattice, it is known that the LDOS not only depends on the field, but also on the vortex-lattice orientation with respect to the microscopic lattice. The inter-level spacing of the bound states predicted by Caroli et al. Consider the square-lattice tight-binding model of Sec. II F, ignoring the next-nearest neighbor hopping, and setting the chemical potential to zero. This model is halffilled with a bandwidth 8t 1 and a Van Hove singularity at the Fermi level. By varying the pairing strength, we tune the system from the quantum regime where ∆ 0 /t 1 ∼ 1 towards the semiclassical limit where ∆ 0 /t 1 1. Self-consistency is ignored here for simplicity, as it will be considered at length in the following subsection: a Ginzburg-Landau vortex core is assumed, with profile p(r) = tanh(r/ξ) and ξ/a = t 1 /∆ 0 ≈ ħ hv F /(π∆ 0 ). For a given system size, the FIG. We now turn to the spatial distribution of the zero-energy LDOS for the d-wave vortex. In the semiclassical approximation, this quantity has arms pointing along the nodal directions of the gap. The BCS expression ξ = ħ hv F /(π∆) suggests that the vortex core may show anomalies at a Lifshitz transition, where the Fermi velocity has a singularity. In order to explore the dependence of the self-consistent vortex-core order parameter on v F , we consider a tight-binding model on the square lattice typical for the cuprates, with hopping amplitudes t 1 = -250 meV and t 2 = 75 meV, and we vary the chemical potential μ between -500 meV and 0. The Lifshitz transition takes place at μ = -300 meV. Figures One observes a clear change, not only in the size, but also in the shape of the vortex-core profile across the Lifshitz transition. While the formula ξ = ħ hv F /(π∆) would predict a monotonic increase of the core size on increasing μ, with a weak anomaly at the Lifshitz point, the size actually increases on both sides of this point where it has a minimum. To be more quantitative, we define the size ξ c of the core as the "width at half height" given by the condition p(ξ c ) = 1/2. The solution is ξ c = ξ 1 W (ξ 0 /ξ 1 ) where W is the Lambert function. One sees in Fig. Figure The LDOS in and around d-wave vortices is not universal, as exemplified by the differences between the traces of Fig. Previous studies of ideal vortex lattices with d-wave order parameter have shown that the LDOS in the core changes significantly with increasing field. The microscopic model is the same as in the previous section, with μ = t 1 and ∆ = 41.3 meV: the Van Hove singularity of the bare DOS is at -50 meV and the largest gap on the Fermi surface is 40 meV. We consider two orientations of the vortex lattice with respect to the microscopic lattice, 0 • and 45 • . For both orientations, we compute the selfconsistent order parameter at various intervortex distances d between 20a and 100a. The corresponding field range is 35-1.5 T for a lattice parameter typical of the cuprates. Such low fields are unreachable by conventional numerical techniques, but relatively easy to access with the real-space method. We fit the ansatz (12) to the self-consistent solution and obtain the field dependence of the parameters ξ 0 and ξ 1 displayed in the insets of Fig. We first observe that the core size increases with increasing field. This trend suggests that the cores grow and eventually merge as the critical field is approached, which contradicts the idea that the cores shrink due to the overlapping currents. Next we calculate, for the two vortex-lattice orientations, the LDOS in the core and at the most symmetric point inbetween the cores, as a function of field. The result is displayed in Figs. Figure In order to better understand the meaning of , we return to the isolated vortex and study the behavior of the LDOS at long distances from the core, using a large system (M = 500). Figure Consequently, ξ 1 may be interpreted as half a characteristic dimension of the vortex, which describes the localization of states at finite energies. A systematic study of and its possible relation with ξ 1 is left for a future work. In superconductors with short coherence length, the vortices are easily pinned by defects leading to glassy vortex phases. Figures The data shown in Fig. The vortex cores hold keys to understand the superconducting state, especially its phase coherence and interaction with competing orders. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy provides an access to the LDOS, where much of this information is stored. While the measurements are usually performed in low magnetic fields and the vortex positions are often disordered, the calculations reported so far considered either isolated vortices or ideal vortex lattices at high fields. These results may not be relevant to interpret some of the experiments. The method described here opens new doors and improves our capability to simulate experiments realistically. We have demonstrated this by reporting self-consistent Bogoliubov-de Gennes calculations for fields as low as 1.5 T, as well as LDOS calculations for infinite disordered vortex configurations. Thanks to a good energy resolution and excellent scalability, the method is ideally suited for two-dimensional lattice models in the quantum limit. We have obtained several results for isolated vortices in d-wave superconductors: the vortex LDOS is not universal and depends largely on the band structure, which also affects the vortex-core profile; the representation of this profile requires at least two characteristic lengths, which show different behaviors compared with the canonical BCS coherence length; consideration of the vortex LDOS alone does not allow one to determine unambiguously the orderparameter symmetry; the LDOS is delocalized in all spatial directions at zero energy, while at finite energy it is confined by a third characteristic length different from those describing the vortex profile. The observation of this new emerging scale was not possible with previous methods, as it requires very large systems and/or vortex lattices at fields lower than 10 T. For two square vortex lattices, we have found that in the quantum limit, unlike in the semiclassical limit, the vortex cores grow with increasing field. Disorder in the vortex positions leads to a redistribution of spectral weight around a characteristic energy inside the gap. The net result is a broadening of the average zero-energy LDOS peak and disappearance of its dependence on vortex-lattice orientation. This disappearance crosses over from linear at weak disorder to exponential at stronger disorder, defining a characteristic positional disorder at 10% of the intervortex distance. Lastly, we showed that a sufficiently asymmetric distribution of supercurrent can dissociate the geometric and electronic vortex centers in response to the Lorentz force polarizing the LDOS. The numerical method used here has a broad scope and is straightforwardly generalized to include, e.g., multiple bands, impurity potentials, and competing orders such as antiferromagnetism or charge-density waves. NbSe 2 is an interesting material to consider, being a charge-density wave superconductor in which vortices have been extensively studied by STM, In the asymmetric gauge, the corresponding expression is To conclude this appendix, we show that in a vortex lattice, the self-consistency equation (20) warrants the property that ∆e i has the periodicity of the vortex lattice. We proceed by recurrence, noting that the property is satisfied by the ansatz (12), because the function Φ is periodic. If the order parameter has the required periodicity, a shift by a vortex-lattice vector R changes it according to ∆ r +R,r +R = ∆ r r e i( r r -r +R,r +R ) . The key point is that the phase r rr +R,r +R is a gradient which we can write as r rr +R,r +R = T R (r ) -T R (r ). Indeed, the Peierls phase is the sum of a linear term deter-mined by the average magnetic field and given by Eq. ( 