Supersymmetric (SUSY) gauge theories such as the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model play a fundamental role in modern particle physics, but have not been verified so far in nature. Here, we show that a SUSY gauge theory with dynamical gauge bosons and fermionic gauginos emerges naturally at the pair-density-wave (PDW) quantum phase transition on the surface of a correlated topological insulator (TI) hosting three Dirac cones, such as the topological Kondo insulator SmB6. At the quantum tricritical point between the surface Dirac semimetal and nematic PDW phases, three massless bosonic Cooper pair fields emerge as the superpartners of three massless surface Dirac fermions. The resulting low-energy effective theory is the supersymmetric XYZ model, which is dual by mirror symmetry to N =2 supersymmetric quantum electrodynamics (SQED) in 2+1 dimensions, providing a first example of emergent supersymmetric gauge theory in condensed matter systems. Supersymmetry allows us to determine exactly certain critical exponents and the optical conductivity of the surface states at the strongly coupled tricritical point, which may be measured in future experiments. Spacetime supersymmetry was introduced more than forty years ago as a means to resolve fundamental issues in particle physics such as the hierarchy problem However, all known examples only realize the simplest type of emergent SUSY: the Wess-Zumino theory An ideal candidate correlated TI to possibly realize this new type of SUSY is SmB 6 , which is proposed to be a topological Kondo insulator From the effective theory describing the PDW transition on the TI surface hosting three Dirac cones, we analyze the possible phases of the model at the meanfield level and find two PDW phases distinguished by the lattice rotational symmetry. In the nematic PDW phase, which breaks rotational symmetry spontaneously, there is a tricritical point separating first-and second-order PDW phase transitions. A renormalization group (RG) analysis reveals that the SUSY XYZ model, and thus N = 2 SQED, emerges at this tricritical point. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first example of emergent SQED in quantum materials. We calculate certain critical exponents and the optical conductivity of the surface states exactly, which may be tested in future experiments on correlated TIs with PDW transitions. Effective field theory: The hexagonal surface Brillouin zone (BZ) of a TI with C 3 symmetry (e.g., Bi 2 Se 3 and SmB 6 ) contains four time-reversal invariant (TRI) points: the Γ point, and three M points related by symmetry [Fig. where τ is imaginary time and h f 1 = -iσ y v x ∂ x + iσ x v y ∂ y is a Dirac-like Hamiltonian with v i the fermion velocities and σ i the Pauli spin matrices; h f 2 and h f 3 are obtained from h f 1 by rotations We consider the system near PDW criticality, where pairing is between different cones and the PDW order parameters are, e.g., φ 1 ∝ ψ 2 σ y ψ 3 [Fig. where r, u, u , u are phenomenological constants, c.p. denotes cyclic permutations, and y by rotations. Terms linear in spatial derivatives are forbidden due to time-reversal symmetry (we also implicitly assumed particle-hole symmetry to rule out terms linear in time derivative), and higher order terms omitted in L b are irrelevant in the RG sense. Boson and fermion velocities are initially different, but flow to a common value in the infrared as discussed later in the text. We hereafter assume u < 0 since the Josephson coupling between different condensates normally minimizes their superconducting phase difference. Moreover, the Dirac fermions and PDW order parameter fluctuations are coupled: where g is a coupling constant. Mean-field analysis: To facilitate the analysis of the possible PDW phases at the mean-field level, we rewrite the boson potential as and φ 1 = φ 2 = φ 3 , which we denote the isotropic PDW (IPDW) phase because it preserves the crystalline C 3v symmetry. In the IPDW phase, all three surface Dirac fermions are gapped by pairing. On the other hand, u -2u > 0 and u > 0 favors a qualitatively different type of PDW ordering: only one component condenses while the other two φ j =i vanish. We call this phase the nematic PDW (NPDW) because it breaks C 3v spontaneously. There is no secondary chargedensity-wave order formed in the NPDW phase. In the NPDW phase, only two Dirac points are gapped and one remains massless. For the special case u = 2u , the theory describes a bicritical point where the DSM-IPDW and DSM-NPDW phase boundaries meet [Fig. In the analysis above, we have implicitly assumed that the transition between the DSM and PDW phases is continuous. However, it is always possible for a transition to be discontinuous. We thus also consider the possibility of first-order PDW transitions as well as tricritical points between the first-and second-order transitions. The transition into the nematic PDW phase (i.e., u-2u > 0) should be first-order when u < 0, in which case a sixthorder term like w( 3 with w > 0 should be added to V b to stabilize the free energy. u = 0 is thus a tricritical point between the continuous (u > 0) and firstorder (u < 0) transitions into the nematic PDW phase [Fig. We have identified three multicritical points through the mean-field analysis above: one bicritical, and two tricritical. In the remainder of the paper we analyze the emergent low-energy, long-wavelength properties at these multicritical points. Remarkably, the tricritical point into the nematic PDW phase features an emergent SUSY of the XYZ/SQED type, as discussed below. Effective theory of the bicritical point: We first explore universal properties of the continuous DSM-PDW transition (i.e., r = 0) via a one-loop RG analysis in 4 -spacetime dimensions (the physical dimension corresponds to = 1) From the RG equations for the coupling constants g, u, u , u , we find a unique stable fixed point at g 2 st = 2 3π , u st = 0, and , where the subscript "st" means "stable". At this stable fixed point, the boson potential becomes 2 and has an emergent SO(6) symmetry. However, the full theory only has the reduced U(1) × C 3v symmetry due to the finite fermionboson coupling g st . Based on our earlier analysis, the fixed point with u st -2u st = 0 corresponds to a bicritical point where three phases (DSM, IPDW, and NPDW) meet. However, this multicritical point is a novel one as it has only one relevant direction (the mass term r). The term proportional to u-2u in Eq. ( Emergent XYZ/SQED at the NPDW tricritical point: Besides the stable fixed point discussed above, the RG equations also support another (unstable) fixed point at g 2 susy = u susy = 2 3π and u susy = u susy = 0. The fixed point action is invariant under the SUSY transformations , and δψ 2,3 are obtained by permutations of δψ 1 , where the infinitesimal transformation parameters ξ, ξ are Grassmann-valued two-component spinors, and σ 0 = -I with I the identity matrix. Remarkably, this fixed point is described by a new type of SUSY qualitatively different from all previously predicted in condensed matter. The bosonic PDW fields φ i and Dirac fermions ψ i combine into three chiral superfields , where θ is a Grassmann-valued two-component spinor and α, β are (pesudo-)spin indices. Intravalley pairing would have resulted in three decoupled copies of the N = 2 Wess-Zumino theory with superpotential Φ 3 i studied previously We now show that the XYZ/SQED fixed point with u = u = 0 and u > 0 corresponds to the tricritical point that separates the continuous and first-order transitions into the nematic PDW phase. Linearizing the RG equations for g, u, u , u near the SUSY fixed point, we can determine the eigenoperators at this fixed point and their eigenvalues, which are (- 7 3 ,-1,-1,1). The positive eigenvalue indicates that there is one relevant direction (besides the relevant direction of r). Consequently, the XYZ/SQED fixed point is unstable. This is consistent with our mean-field analysis of the tricritical point on the transition boundary between the DSM and NPDW phases, which is reached by tuning two parameters. The emergence at the NPDW tricritical point of the XYZ SUSY, which is dual to SQED, may be intuitively understood as follows. Heuristically, for a fermionic quantum critical point with the same number of Dirac fermions and complex order parameters to be possibly supersymmetric, one necessary condition is that the coupling among different bosonic order parameters should avoid flowing to infinity (namely it should not be relevant), otherwise the number of remaining effective gapless bosonic modes would be less than the number of fermionic ones. The nematic PDW breaks the U(1) gauge symmetry, as well as the lattice C 3 symmetry which is effectively a U(1) symmetry at criticality due to the irrelevance of anisotropic terms. From a symmetry point of view, it is thus natural to expect two gapless complex bosonic modes at a generic NPDW quantum critical point. However, the low-energy theory has three gapless Dirac fermions. To have a chance of being supersymmetric, the quantum phase transition must be tuned to a multicritical point such that a third complex bosonic mode remains gapless. Here this multicritical point is the NPDW tricritical point. Like the Wess-Zumino model, the XYZ model enjoys an R-symmetry Experimental signatures of SUSY at the NPDW tricritical point: Owing to the strong constraints imposed by N = 2 superconformal symmetry at the XYZ/SQED fixed point, several dynamical properties can be obtained exactly where e 2 is the quantum of conductance. The currentcurrent correlation function is highly constrained by conformal symmetry through the conformal Ward identity We now compute the exact optical conductivity at the NPDW tricritical point. Utilizing the R-symmetry of N = 2 superconformal field theories in 2+1 dimensions, one can find , where σ 0 (ω) is the optical conductivity at zero temperature and τ RR is the dimensionless coefficient of the two-point correlation function of the R-current [43, which may be tested in future experiments. Other experimental signatures include various critical exponents already mentioned such as the fermion/boson anomalous dimension η = 1 3 , which is exact owing to SUSY, and the correlation length exponent ν ≈ 0.75. The exact value of η implies that the local electronic density of states ρ(ω) scales as |ω| 4/3 at low energies Concluding remarks: We have shown that a novel type of SUSY emerges at the nematic PDW tricritical point on the surface of a correlated TI that hosts three Dirac cones, like SmB 6 . At this tricritical point, the three surface Dirac fermions and three complex bosons (corresponding to PDW order parameter fluctuations) are described by the so-called XYZ model, which is dual in the low-energy and long-wavelength limit to a SUSY gauge theory, N = 2 SQED. As such, our result also provides a direct physical setting for the investigation of mirror symmetry in condensed matter systems We have also predicted various critical exponents and the zero-temperature optical conductivity at the nematic PDW tricritical point, which could be tested in future experiments. If the SUSY proposed in the present paper is realized in condensed matter systems, it would help to determine various quantities nonperturbatively, such as the critical exponent ν of SQED in 2+1 dimensions, which are theoretically known only perturbatively (or numerically by bootstrap calculations The kinetic part of the Lagrangian for surface Dirac fermions is where i = 1, 2, 3 represent three valleys at the momentum points (0, - 3a where a is the lattice constant. v i are the two components of fermion velocity and σ i are the Pauli matrices. The (pseudo-)spin-singlet pairing order parameter is φ * ∝ ψ(σ y ⊗ λ)ψ, where ψ denotes (ψ 1 , ψ 2 , ψ 3 ) T , while λ denotes valley pairing and satisfies λ T = λ. Up to a phase, there are two possibilities for λ: intervalley pair-densitywave (PDW) pairing, and intravalley superconducting (SC) pairing, These matrices form two distinct three-dimensional reducible representations of the three-fold rotational symmetry. The coupling between Dirac fermions and bosonic order parameters is given by where φ a is the order parameter field and a = p, s denotes intervalley PDW pairing or intravalley SC pairing. Below, we focus on intervalley PDW criticality and omit the superscript p for simplicity. The symmetry that constrains the theory is C 3v × U(1) × P × T , where P denotes translation symmetry and T corresponds to time reversal symmetry. Each PDW order parameter possesses finite momentum of magnitude 2 √ 3π 3a (Fig. where r, u, u , u are constants, c.p. denotes cyclic permutations and h.c. indicates Hermitian conjugation. The kinetic part of the boson Lagrangian is where c x , c y are boson velocities, and h b 2 and h b 3 are obtained from h b 1 by rotation. Here, we perform a one-loop renormalization group (RG) analysis at PDW criticality. Fast modes are integrated out to generate the flow equations. The interaction term in the action is We assume that the velocity anisotropies δc ≡ c y -c x , δv ≡ v y -v x are small compared to v i or c i , i.e., |δc|, |δv| c i , v i , and perform calculations to leading order in the anisotropy. Feynman propagators for fermions and bosons are denoted by S i (p) and D i (p), respectively. The fermion Σ i (p) and boson Π i (p) self-energy renormalizations are given by where k ≡ Tr stands for the trace in (pseudo-)spin space, Λ is an ultraviolet momentum cutoff, and l > 0 is the flow parameter. The self-energies for the other two valleys Σ 2,3 , Π 2,3 are obtained in a similar way. The RG equations for the velocities are given by ) By solving these equations, we find that there is a line of stable fixed points with v x = c x ≡ v, δv = δc = 0. The linearized RG equations around the fixed point (v, v, 0, 0) read, in matrix form, The eigenvalues of the RG stability matrix at the fixed point are π 2 g 2 v 3 (-10 3 , -3, -4 3 , 0). This means the perturbation deviating from the fixed line is irrelevant, while the perturbation along the fixed line is marginal, corresponding to the fact that the value of v is not universal. The fixed point thus has emergent Lorentz symmetry. In the following, we set v x = v y = c x = c y = 1 for simplicity, and the three propagators are equal, namely, D i (p) = D(p) and S i (p) = S(p) for i = 1, 2, 3. Anomalous dimensions for the boson and fermion fields are given by η is the area of a unit (d -1)-sphere. The renormalization of the four-boson vertices is given below, where we work in 4-spacetime dimensions and use dimensional regularization: where we have rescaled the coupling constants as g → ( (2π) d A d-1 ) 1/2 g, u i → (2π) d A d-1 u i . After this rescaling, the anomalous dimensions become η φ = η ψ = π 4 g 2 . Since the flow equation for g 2 decouples from the others, one can immediately determine that g * 2 = 2 3π is a stable fixed point. Solving the full set of RG equations, we find a fixed point with From the RG equations, there is only one stable fixed point given by (g 