For any practical superconductor the magnitude of the critical current density, J c , is crucially important. It sets the upper limit for current in the conductor. Usually J c falls rapidly with increasing external magnetic field, but even in zero external field the current flowing in the conductor generates a self-field that limits J c . Here we show for thin films of thickness less than the London penetration depth, l, this limiting J c adopts a universal value for all superconductors-metals, oxides, cuprates, pnictides, borocarbides and heavy Fermions. For type-I superconductors, it is H c /l where H c is the thermodynamic critical field. But surprisingly for type-II superconductors, we find the self-field J c is H c1 /l where H c1 is the lower critical field. J c is thus fundamentally determined and this provides a simple means to extract absolute values of l(T) and, from its temperature dependence, the symmetry and magnitude of the superconducting gap. uperconductors are characterized by two microscopic length scales: the London penetration depth, l, and the coherence length, x. These strongly influence both their fundamental and applied behaviour, especially the critical current density J c -above which the current becomes dissipative. In practical superconductors, which are all type II, J c is arguably its most important property and for example, in the high-T c superconductors, a huge effort has been expended in attempting to maximize J c as a function of temperature, T, and magnetic field, H 1 . J c falls rapidly with increasing external field, but even in zero external field the current flowing in the conductor generates a self-field that itself limits J c . We refer to this limiting value as J c (sf). In a type-II superconductor, J c is widely thought to be governed by pinning of flux vortices as well as by geometrical factors arising from the detailed pinning microstructure. As a consequence, much of the above-noted effort has been applied to modifying and tuning this microstructure. On the other hand, nearly a century ago Silsbee where f 0 is the flux quantum and m 0 is the permeability of free space. Of course for a type-I superconductor, where flux vortices are absent, pinning is irrelevant and Silsbee's hypothesis is credible. J c may depend on geometry but not on microstructure. But for a type-II superconductor, the general consensus that pinning governs J c would insist that both geometry and microstructure are key players, and any kind of universal Silsbee criterion is untenable. Here, by examining a wide range of experimental data, we ask whether this criterion does have any relevance to type-II superconductors. Surprisingly, the answer for conductors of thickness comparable to l is yes, and here the relevant critical field is the lower critical field H c1 , given by 3 where k(T) 1⁄4 l(T)/x(T) is the Ginsburg-Landau parameter, which is effectively constant under the logarithm. With this thickness constraint, we find for type-I superconductors: and for type-II superconductors: As a consequence, J c (sf) is fundamentally determined just by l and x and independent of both geometry and microstructure. Because of the near constancy of ln(k), for type-II superconductors J c (sf) is dependent only on l and this then provides a simple means to extract absolute values of l(T) and, from its temperature dependence, the symmetry and magnitude of the superconducting gap. We present an indicative theoretical justification for this remarkably general and unexpected result, but we recognize that some questions remain to be resolved. We predict the doping and temperature dependence of J c (sf) for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-d (YBCO) as a test of our hypothesis. Hereafter, we consider only self-field J c values and therefore drop the identifier 'sf', except where we feel it is still needed. Basic model. We consider a thin film of the type-II superconductor in the form of a long thin tape of rectangular crosssection in the x-y plane and of thickness 2b and width 2a, such that bo oa. Our conductor is of quasi-infinite length along the z axis in which a current of magnitude I is flowing along its axis. The tape interior is defined by À arxr þ a and À bryr þ b. According to London, in the Meissner state for small currents the self-field and transport current penetrate to a depth Bl, and the amplitude of the local surface current density, J, is 4 where, in the usual notation, B is the magnetic flux density and H the field intensity, within the conductor surface. We use equation (5) to make an estimate of J c when bEl. In this case (i) the current penetrates the entire cross-section, so that J is no longer a surface current density but is approximately global across the film thickness, and (ii) when the x-component of H reaches H c1 , vortices of opposite sign will tend to nucleate at the opposing surfaces and self-annihilate at the centre. They will do so both because of the Lorentz force driving them inwards and because of the attraction of overlapping vortices of opposite sign on opposite faces, which diverges logarithmically when bol. The consequent onset of dissipation defines J 1⁄4 J c where, from equation ( while for d-wave symmetry: where D m is the maximum amplitude of the k-dependent d-wave gap, D 1⁄4 D m cos(2y). London penetration depth. Our approach is as follows. From J c (T) data we calculate the l data points as plotted. Using l 0 as the only fitting parameter, we then fit theoretical s-wave (dashed red) or d-wave (dashed blue) curves In Fig. Figure All our results for calculated absolute values of J c0 , l 0 and D 0 are plotted versus measured values in Fig. Figure and also notably, where the relative order of type-I and type-II materials is significantly altered, but without loss of correlation. Energy gaps and symmetry. We select two examples to illustrate the calculation of D 0 . Figure In the present case, any sample that is optimally doped will have the pseudogap present and this will steepen the slope in l(T), thus reducing the inferred gap magnitude. The red crosses show the low-T penetration depth measurements of Hardy et al. For NbN, we show in Fig. Figure in this way from the ground-state doping-dependent superfluid density, r s (0), reported previously for Y 0.8 Ca 0.2 Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7-d (refs 23,24). and the theoretical d-wave T-dependence of r s (T)/r s (0) (ref. 6), we generate the full p-and T-dependence of J c , which is shown as a false-colour map in the p-T plane in Fig. Predicted values are seen to rise to a sharp maximum of about 30 MA cm À 2 centred at p 1⁄4 0.19 holes per Cu in the slightly overdoped region, beyond optimal doping (PE0.16) where T c reaches its maximum. (Doping with Ca introduces some impurity scattering that lowers the superfluid density. As a consequence, the maximum J c is less than that predicted from the superfluid density for Ca-free YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 : 37 MA cm À 2 for nearly fully oxygenated chains, and B42 MA cm À 2 for fully ordered chains It is important to understand the significance of this skewed behaviour of J c (p) relative to optimal doping shown in Fig. The link between J c and the pseudogap is made by plotting in Fig. This sharp peak in J c (p) at p 1⁄4 p crit is recently confirmed by our wider group Refined model. We return now to better justify the theoretical basis for our observations. The usual approaches to field distribution and critical currents are those of Brojeny and Clem But, as we have suggested, an alternative approach is to consider the entry of vortices, not from the edges but from the large flat surfaces. For a very thin conductor the x-component of this self-field at the surface, B x (x, y 1⁄4 ± b), is uniform across the width and of magnitude m 0 bJ (ref. 36). Consequently, if the current I is increased until this field reaches B 1⁄4 B c1 , then vortices will nucleate at the flat surface in the form of closed loops around the conductor surface normal to the transport current where the inequality arises from the, as yet, indeterminate role of pinning. Now consider the interesting case when bEl. These vortex loops now experience the additional attractive force of adjacent vortices of opposite sense located just l apart. This force becomes unbounded and thus inevitably overcomes pinning. The vortices mutually annihilate at the centre and the process continues indefinitely causing dissipation. This vortex entry from the faces defines a first critical current density given by the equality sign in equation (8), which is alternative to a second, which is associated with vortex entry from the edges. Which of these has the smaller J c and therefore is the operative mechanism? To answer this, let us suppose that J 1⁄4 H c1 /b over the full conductor cross-section and we calculate the degree of flux entry at the edges. Rearranging equation ( From this we find that B y falls to the value of B c1 when x 1⁄4 ±0.917a, that is, perpendicular vortices can enter at either edge to only 4.2% of the film width. Thus the dominant NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8820 mechanism for J c when bEl is flux entry from the large flat surfaces and J c is given by: We note that, when b 1⁄4 l, equation ( where H c1 is the bulk value. This concurs with equation ( Here we have replaced l y by l c and l x by l ab , as is the usual convention for the cuprates, where l c 4l ab . Equation ( Pursuing this further, Zhou et al. 1 are s-wave, while (c) and (d) are d-wave superconductors. For both s-and d-wave cases, the T-dependence of k, calculated from l Â D (ref. 6), is weak and, in view of the logarithm and the cube root, we conveniently take k to be constant. The residual effect of a are in excellent agreement with directly measured values. Next, Fig. 1c shows five d-wave examples: FeTe 0.5 Se 0.5 , 2 Cu 3 O 7 (this work) representing the d-wave case, and (b) five films of NbN (refs 13-15), representing the s-wave case. The dashed black curves are the data fits to equations (7) and (6), respectively. NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:7820 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8820 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications & 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved. NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:7820 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8820 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications & 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.