We report a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy study of the charge density wave (CDW) order in 1T -TiSe2 and Cu0.08TiSe2. In pristine 1T -TiSe2 we observe a long-range coherent commensurate CDW (C-CDW) order. In contrast, Cu0.08TiSe2 displays an incommensurate CDW (I-CDW) phase with localized C-CDW domains separated by domain walls. Density of states measurements indicate that the domain walls host an extra population of fermions near the Fermi level which may play a role in the emergence of superconductivity in this system. Fourier transform scanning tunneling spectroscopy studies suggest that the dominant mechanism for CDW formation in the I-CDW phase may be electron-phonon coupling. Charge density wave (CDW) and superconductivity are two fundamental collective quantum states in solids. The interplay between these states and the nature of coexisting, competing phases in general are long standing questions in solid-state physics Incommensuration may occur through two mechanisms: through a slight change of the CDW wavevector away from commensuration, or through the emergence of domains 1T -TiSe 2 consists of two-dimensional Se-Ti-Se sandwich layers in which the Se sheets have a hexagonal close-packed structure and the Ti atoms are in the octahedral centers defined by the two Se sheets (Fig. To expose the charge distribution in the CDW phase and to separate it from the atomic corrugation it is necessary to look at dI/dV map. From the dI/dV map in Fig. STM images provide information on the ordering length scale and homogeneity of the CDW order. Examining the CDW pattern shown in Fig. We now investigate the fate of the CDW in Cu 0.08 TiSe 2 . Initial transport studies indicate that the C-CDW order parameter is heavily suppressed and is eventually destroyed as superconductivity emerges The discussion above suggests that domain structure in the I-CDW phase is accompanied by a splitting of CDW peaks in the FTs and obtaining I-FT images of the CDW peaks can be used to visualize this. To clarify this relationship, we performed a control experiment on the Cu 0.08 TiSe 2 surface. By moving the STM tip closer to the surface we find that we are able to remove Cu atoms Any effect of such DWs on the electronic structure is therefore expected to have a non-trivial origin. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, our data clearly show that the incommensuration due to Cu intercalation proceeds through DW formation. The emergence of the I-CDW phase as observed by us can be used to explain the loss of long-range coherence of C-CDW phase above the superconducting dome observed in ARPES measurements * vm1@illinois.edu