New FeSe-based intercalation superconductors, A x (C 8 H 11 N) y Fe 1-z Se (A = Li, Na), with T c = 39 -44 K have been successfully synthesized via the intercalation of alkali metals and 2-phenethylamine into FeSe. The interlayer spacings, namely, the distances between neighboring Fe layers, d, of A x (C 8 H 11 N) y Fe 1-z Se (A = Li, Na) are 19.04(6) and 18.0(1) Å, respectively. These d values are the largest among those of the FeSe-based intercalation compounds and are understood to be due to the intercalation of two molecules of 2-phenethylamine in series perpendicular to the FeSe layers. It appears that the relationship between T c and d in the FeSe-based intercalation superconductors is not domic but T c is saturated at ~ 45 K, which is comparable to the T c values of single-layer FeSe films, for d ≥ 9 Å. The compound FeSe has the simplest crystal structure among the iron-based superconductors and is composed of a stack of edge-sharing FeSe 4 -tetrahedra layers (simply called FeSe layers). Although the superconducting transition temperature T c is only 8 K, 1) it markedly increases to ~ 45 K via the co-intercalation of alkali or alkaline-earth metals and ammonia or organic molecules between the FeSe layers. By collecting the data of T c and the interlayer spacing between neighboring Fe layers, d, of a variety of FeSe-based intercalation superconductors, 2-30) it has been found that the relationship between T c and d appears domic. 16) That is, T c tends to increase with increasing d, have a maximum value of ~ 45 K at d = 9 -12 Å, and then decrease. Recently, single-layer FeSe films on SrTiO 3 substrates have attracted considerable interest, because the opening of a possible superconducting gap has been observed at a temperature as high as 42 -65 K in scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy 041112(R) (2015). (STM/STS) Here, we report on the successful synthesis of new FeSe-based intercalation Polycrystalline host samples of FeSe were prepared by the high-temperature solid-state reaction method as described in Ref. 15. Iron powder and selenium grains, which were weighed in a molar ratio of Fe:Se = 1.02:1, were mixed, put into an alumina crucible, and sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. This was heated at 1027 °C for 30 h and then annealed at 400 °C for 50 h, followed by furnace-cooling. The obtained ingot of FeSe was pulverized into powder to be used for the intercalation. Both the alkali metal and 2-PEA were intercalated into the powdery FeSe as follows. An appropriate amount of the powdery FeSe was placed in a beaker filled with a 0.2 M solution of pure lithium or sodium metal in 2-PEA. The amount of FeSe was calculated in the molar ratio of A:FeSe = 1:1. The reactions using lithium and sodium were carried out at 45 °C for 7 and 28 days, respectively. The product was washed with hexane. All the processes were performed in an argon-filled glove box. Both the host sample of FeSe and the intercalated samples were characterized by powder x-ray diffraction using Cu Kα radiation. For the intercalated samples, an airtight sample holder was used. The diffraction patterns were analyzed using RIETAN-FP. Figure The first step below ~ 300 °C is inferred to be due to the deintercalation or desorption of 2-PEA, because very similar TG curves have been observed for other FeSe-based intercalation compounds such as Li x (C 2 H 8 N 2 ) y Fe 2-z Se 2 Assuming that the composition of the intercalation compound is x = y = 1 in Li x (C 8 H 11 N) y Fe 1-z Se based on the nominal composition, the molar ratio of the intercalation compound Li(C 8 H 11 N)FeSe to the host compound FeSe in the intercalated sample is estimated from the mass loss below 300 °C to be about 42%. On the other hand, assuming x = y = 0.5 due to the less dense packing of the intercalants, the molar ratio of the intercalation compound Li 0.5 (C 8 H 11 N) 0.5 FeSe to the host compound FeSe in the intercalated sample is estimated to be about 85%. By taking into account both the powder x-ray diffraction result shown in Fig. x (C 8 H 11 N) y Fe 1-z Se + FeSe