Polarized Raman scattering spectra of superconducting K x Fe 2-y Se 2 and nonsuperconducting K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystals were measured in a temperature range from 10 K up to 300 K. Two Raman active modes from the I4/mmm phase and seven from the I4/m phase are observed in frequency range from 150 to 325 cm -1 in both compounds, suggesting that K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystal also has two-phase nature. Temperature dependence of Raman mode energy is analyzed in terms of lattice thermal expansion and phonon-phonon interaction. Temperature dependence of Raman mode linewidth is dominated by temperatureinduced anharmonic effects. It is shown that change of Raman mode energy with temperature is dominantly driven by thermal expansion of the crystal lattice. Abrupt change of the A 1g mode energy near T C was observed in K x Fe 2-y Se 2 , whereas it is absent in non-superconducting K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 . Phonon energy hardening at low temperatures in the superconducting sample is a consequence of superconductivityinduced redistribution of the electronic states below critical temperature. Since the discovery of superconductivity in FeSe layered compound K x Fe 2-y Se 2 The most striking feature of K x Fe 2-y Se 2 single crystals is the presence of two distinct phases: insulating and metallic/superconducting. Raman scattering study of K x Fe 2-y Se 2 single crystals has been performed by several groups. In order to determine the impact of superconductivity on phonon properties of alkali-doped iron selenides, we have performed Raman scattering study of superconducting K x Fe 2-y Se 2 and nonsuperconducting K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystals. Raman spectra were measured in a temperature range from 10 to 300 K. All phonons expected to appear in the investigated energy range, according to K x Fe 2-y Se 2 and K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystals were grown and characterized as described elsewhere in details. In total, A 1g (α xx+yy , α zz ), B 1g (α xx-yy ) and 2E g (α xz , α yz ) phonons are Raman active. A 1g (B 1g ) modes represent vibrations of Se (Fe) ions along the z-axis, whereas E g modes originate from vibrations of Fe and Se ions within the ab plane. Site symmetries of atoms in the I4/mmm group (see Figure giving the same Raman active modes distribution in the Brillouin zone center as in the case of FeSe. When measuring in the (001)-plane of the sample, only A 1g and B 1g modes are observable in the Raman scattering experiment. I4/m crystal structure is shown in Figure One can expect 27 Raman active phonons originating from the I4/m phase: Due to (001)orientation of our samples, only A g and B g modes can be observed in the Raman spectra. Figure Polarized Raman scattering spectra of K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystals, measured from the (001)-plane of the sample at various temperatures, are presented in Figure Ignatov et al. Behavior of the phonon modes with temperature can be properly described in terms of the phonon self-energy: where ∆ i (T ) represents change of the Raman mode energy and Γ i (T ) is the mode Therefore, temperature dependance of Raman mode energy can be described with: where ω 0,i is temperature independent contribution to the energy of the phonon mode i and ∆ i (T ) can be decomposed as: The first term in (3) represents change of phonon energy due to the thermal expansion of the crystal lattice, and is given by where γ i is the Grüneisen parameter of a given mode and α(T ) is volume thermal expansion coefficient of a material under investigation. The second term in (3) describes contribution of phonon-phonon scattering (lattice anharmonicity) to the Raman mode energy. If we describe anharmonic effects by threephonon processes, it follows: ). ( C and λ ph-ph are anharmonic constant and phonon-phonon interaction constant, respectively. Temperature dependence of Raman mode linewidth is caused only by phonon anharmonicity: where Γ 0 is the anharmonic constant. Parameter C is connected with ω 0 and Γ 0 via relation: ω 0 and Γ 0 can be determined by the extrapolation of the corresponding experimental data to 0 K. With these parameters known, we can fit the phonon mode linewidth, using To the best of our knowledge, thermal expansion coefficient α(T ) of K x Fe 2-y Se 2 is unknown. Because of that, we used experimental data for FeSe, given in Figure Energy and linewidth temperature dependence of the A 6 g and A 7 g modes of K x Fe 2-y Se 2 and K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystals are presented in Figure λ ph-ph 0. C (cm -1 ) 0.0130(9) 0.083(4) 0.0052( (4), ( Figure The dependence of A 1g and B 1g (A 6 g ) mode energy of K x Fe 2-y Se 2 and K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystals on temperature is given in Figure It is well established that upon entering superconducting state, some of the phonons are renormalized due to the change in electronic structure with the superconducting gap opening, and therefore electron-phonon coupling. Depending on the values of the corresponding phonon energies and the superconducting gap magnitude, it may result in hardening or softening of the phonons. In this article Raman scattering study of superconducting K x Fe 2-y Se 2 and nonsuperconducting K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystals has been presented. Two Raman active modes from the superconducting (I4/mmm) phase and seven phonon modes from the insulating (I4/m) phase are observed in the investigated frequency range. The same number of the observed modes in these two compounds, together with their similar energies, suggests that in K 0.8 Fe 1.8 Co 0.2 Se 2 single crystal phase separation is also present. Temperature-induced change of Raman mode linewidth is in good agreement with the lattice anharmonicity model. Behavior of Raman mode energy as a function of temperature for all the analyzed modes is well described by the contribution from the lattice thermal expansion alone. Sudden change of the A 1g mode energy near T C in K x Fe 2-y Se 2 is due to the rearrangement of the electronic states to which this mode couples as superconducting gap opens. From the superconductivity-induced A 1g phonon energy renormalization rather small electron-phonon coupling constant in Γ-point is obtained.