In scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) conductance curves, the superconducting gap of cuprates is sometimes accompanied by small sub-gap structures at very low energy. This was documented early on near vortex cores and later at zero magnetic field. Using mean-field toy models of coexisting d-wave superconductivity (dSC), d -form factor density wave (dFF-DW), and extended s-wave pair density wave (s PDW), we find agreement with this phenomenon, with s PDW playing a critical role. We explore the high variability of the gap structure with changes in band structure and density wave (DW) wave vector, thus explaining why sub-gap structures may not be a universal feature in cuprates. In the absence of nesting, non-superconducting results never show signs of pseudogap, even for large density waves magnitudes, therefore reinforcing the idea of a distinct origin for the pseudogap, beyond mean-field theory. Therefore, we also briefly consider the effect of DWs on a pre-existing pseudogap. The presence of density waves (DWs) in high temperature superconducting cuprates is now well-established Scanning tunneling microscopy played a key role in the discovery of DWs in cuprates. The early finding of a checkerboard DW in vortex cores The occurrence of sub-gap structures (SGS) exactly where charge order was found indicates a likely relation between these phenomena Along with proposed scenarios of spin density waves In this work, we consider phenomenological mean-field Hamiltonians for coexisting bond-centered density wave and pair density waves (similar to those experimentally reported in Ref. 33 and 34) combined to d-wave superconductivity, and we find qualitative agreement with ob-served spectra for sub-gap structures in the DOS. Our main conclusions are that (i) pair density waves are a key ingredient to obtain low-energy sub-gap structures in the dSC gap, and (ii) no pseudogap appears in the DOS for systems with charge or pair density waves alone and without nesting, clarifying the need for a distinct phenomenon to explain the tunneling PG. These conclusions hold for a range of established band structures for cuprates, and realistic magnitudes for the dSC and DWs mean fields, as well as for unidirectional and bidirectional DWs. A secondary conclusion of our work is that the band structure plays a role at least as critical as the periodicity of the DW in the reconstruction caused by DW, and in the corresponding DOS. The calculated DOS exhibit extraordinary complexity and variability that reflect the great variability observed in conductance spectra in STM The model, including the description of the various DWs, is described in Sec. II. After a brief discussion of the method in Sec. III, we describe the results in Sec. IV with additional discussion in Sec. V, including, in Sec. V B, a few additional calculations and discussion of how DWs sub-gap structures may modify the DOS in cases where a pseudogap Even assuming that sharp quasiparticles reappear in ordered states By contrast, the computations presented here are for simple, long-ranged commensurate order. In the past, similar simplifications were used to successfully obtain DW-induced quantum oscillation frequencies in YBCO The model we study is a 2D tight-binding mean-field one-band Hamiltonian at zero temperature on a square lattice with four terms: The first term is the underlying band structure: Operators c † r,σ and c r,σ respectively create and annihilate electrons at position r with spin σ. The sum on a spans all lattice vectors (pointing to all neighbors of r), and the parameters t a are the real-space components of the tightbinding dispersion ξ(k) = (k) -μ. Those are typically denoted t for first neighbor hopping, t for second neighbors, etc. Ab initio calculations The second term in the Hamiltonian represents d-wave superconductivity (dSC): resulting in coherence peaks located at ±∆. We adjust the mean-field ∆ phenomenologically; the gap magnitude that fits experimental tunneling spectra 10 is around ∆ = 0.12t = 30 meV, close to that of YBCO at optimal doping. The third term represents bond-centered density waves: We consider a bidirectional d-form-factor density wave (dFF-DW) following Refs. 34 and 36 by defining t Q,±x = -t Q,±ŷ ≡ t Q /2 (see Fig. The fourth and last term represents pair density waves: Following experimental evidence, we consider extended-s singlet pair density wave (s PDW) For the period of the DW, we consider rational fractions q L that correspond to q periods of the density wave over L unit cells. More specifically, we choose The magnitudes of mean fields t Q (dFF-DW) and ∆ Q (s PDW) are harder to determine than ∆ (dSC). In their study of quantum oscillations stemming from the Fermi-surface reconstruction by charge density waves, Allais et al. For commensurate wave vectors of denominator L, the k-space representation of Hamiltonian (1) can be expressed as a finite matrix Ĥ(k) of dimension 2L 2 × 2L 2 for bidirectional DW and 2L × 2L for unidirectional DW, with the factor 2 accounting for spin and pairing through Nambu formalism. The chosen basis is defined by the following Nambu spinor: m and n being integers between 0 and L, so that each diagonal term of Ĥ(k) corresponds to a displaced reduced Brillouin zone (rBZ). The position averaged local DOS is then obtained from with: . Each tilling illustrate the quantity e iQ(r+ a 2 ) which modulates nearest-neighbour hoping in Eq. 4, for the case of dFF-DW, and nearest-neighbour pairing in in Eq. 5, for the case of s PDW. On the left side, the dFF-DW form factor, t Q,a , defined with t Q,±x = -t Q,±ŷ , modulates the hopping with opposite signs on the x and y bonds. By contrast, on the right side, the s PDW form factor, ∆ Q,a , defined with ∆ ±Q,±x = ∆ ±Q,±ŷ modulates the pairing with same sign in both directions. These modulated hopping (pairing) terms can be seen as the corresponding effective static electric (pairing) potential applied on top of the original crystal potential. Although both the lattice potential and the DW potentials considered are C4 symmetric, two overlapping periodic C4 potentials only preserve C4 symmetry when their symmetry centers coincide. As one can see here, symmetry centers (green circles) of the form factors do not always coincide with those of the lattice (which could be either the lattice sites or the corners of the Wigner-Seitz cells), and thus C4 symmetry is broken for q L = 3 10 (middle left) and 1 3 (bottom left). For q L = 1 4 (top left), symmetry is preserved since the symmetry center falls back on a lattice site. In the case of s PDW, C4 symmetry is always preserved. Let us also specify that shifting the DW potential by a carefully chosen phase would preserve C4 symmetry in all cases. where the integral extends over all k-vectors for one rBZ and the trace sums contributions from all bands (equivalent to summing the local DOS from each Cu atoms of a L × L unit-cell). The trace sums only the spin up part of the Nambu representation, a subtlety indicated by the ↑ subscript. The term inside the trace is the momentumdependent spectral weight Â(k, ω), which we use to show the reconstructed Fermi surface (ω = 0). To do so, we rebuild the content of the original Brillouin zone using the diagonal elements of the matrix Â(k, ω), again counting only spin up terms. The only approximation is the choice of a manageable numerical η (between 0.05 and 0.005, specified for each figure), broadening the electronic dispersion so that the Dirac function δ Fig. The results of Fig. When pairing is added, the superconducting gap is very sensitive to both the wave vector Q = 2π q L of the applied DWs, and the underlying band structure. Fig. A first observation for Fig. A second observation for Fig. Our last and most important observation for Fig. To help understand the results for the density of states, Fig. dFF-DW only only We first discuss all of the preceding results. In a closing subsection, we briefly address the case where DWs appear on a pre-existing pseudogap. No gap appears in our low energy DOS without dSC because, in general, a DW alone does not open-up a gap at the Fermi surface. Contrary to the superconducting gap, a DW gap is not locked to the Fermi energy. In one dimension, for example, a DW of period L simply splits the Brillouin zone in L, therefore separating the original band in L new bands each containing 1/L of all the states. The L -1 gaps would thus appear at fixed fillings in the band, regardless of the energy. In two dimensions, for small DW magnitudes, the new bands do not have to split completely; they can overlap in ω space without touching in k-space, and this yields a more complicated picture. Still, in the limit of very large DW magnitudes t Q , the original band has to split completely into new bands containing a fixed fraction of the total number of states. This fraction is determined by the wave vectors of the DW at play. For example, the bidirectional dFF-DW of Fig. This observation-the fact that a DW gap is con-strained to appear at a wave-vector determined filling instead of a given energy-rules out most scenarios explaining the pseudogap with DW. The only density waves which would open a gap at the Fermi surface are those with wave vectors connecting flat segments of the Fermi surface, and they are inconsistent with combined photoemission, X-ray results 3 and detailed analysis of scanning tunneling spectroscopy There is one additional notable exception to this rule: given sufficiently large t Q for a DW with wave-vectors connecting flat segments of the dispersion slightly above, or slightly below the Fermi level, a gap centered away from the Fermi surface could be large enough to deplete states at the Fermi level. One example of such a gap is well known: it is the case of a cuprate-like dispersion gapped by a fairly large antiferromagnetic (AF) meanfield (shown in Fig. Let's now turn to the densities of states in the presence of dSC. A d-wave gap is anisotropic; the gapping energy changes with the direction of k. Thus, the DOS value at a given energy in the gap -i.e. the number of states at a given energy between the coherence peaksis tied to the number of states contained along a specific direction in k-space (the spectral weight). With a smooth FS, the spectral weight changes monotonically as a function of direction in k-space, and therefore the gap is smooth as a function of energy: it is the well-known V-shaped gap of standard d-wave superconductors. On the other hand, for a d-wave gap built on a complex reconstructed FS (shown in Fig. In our computations, the final form of substructures are most sensitive to the factors determining the under-lying complicated FS; here those were: (i) the nature of the reconstruction (whether it was s PDW or dFF-DW), (ii) the wave vector of the DWs, and (iii) the initial band structure. Varying the value of the superconducting mean-field ∆ did not have as much influence (not shown here). Among all DOS deformations obtained, sub-gap structures like those of tunneling experiments agree better with our DOS reconstructed by PDW. This suggests that the PDW measured in BSCCO 33 may be responsible for the substructures observed in cuprates. Moreover, as worked out by Agterberg and Garaud 26 , a vortex core can favor PDW through the suppression of dSC, so our result is consistent with the experimental fact that substructures are enhanced around vortex cores. Note, however, that the form of PDW used by Agterberg and Garaud's work is not the same as ours. An alternative and intuitive explanation for the enhancement of PDW near vortices might be that the nonzero momentum Q carried by PDWs accommodates better the high currents expected near vortex cores. However, in our model, there is no vortex, and every s PDW included are combinations of +Q and -Q causing no actual currents. Let's now turn to the spectral functions displayed in Fig. The very careful observer might notice x-y anisotropy in some of our dFF-DW Fermi-surfaces in Fig. Finally, note that a perfect fit to experiments was not the aim here, neither for the DOS nor the spectral weight, since we focused on general conditions enabling subgap structures. As discussed, the results are extremely sensitive to the band structure used, and knowing that BSCCO and YBCO are in fact bi-layer compounds, and that modeling the bi-layer splitting is known to improve the fit to conductance spectra substantially B. When DWs occur over a pre-existing pseudogap Since we showed that the PG is not caused by dFF-DW or s PDW, a natural extension to our investigation is to consider what happens when DWs appear on top of an already pseudo-gapped dispersion rather than the non-interacting bands we used up to now. A particularly clear illustration of this idea is given in Ref. 5, where an antiferromagnetic order is used to gap the antinode, leaving near the nodal position small hole pockets which nesting DWs wave vectors agree with experiments. Most phenomenological theories of the pseudogap (PG) may be separated in two categories. On the one hand, there are phenomenological PG inspired from the dSC gap; they open a particle-hole symmetric gap with a d-wave form factor at the Fermi level. An example of this is the pairing scattering model used to fit photoemission data in Refs. 66 and 67. For that kind of PG, the interplay with the FS reconstructed by DWs will be equivalent to that of the dSC cases presented in the two previous sections, and therefore, subgap structures similar to those discussed up to here can be expected. On the other hand, there are phenomenological PGs having more in common with an antiferromagnetic (AF) gap; they split the dispersion in two, yielding a strongly particle-hole asymmetric gap. Examples of such theories include YRZ theory To understand how DWs may lead to sub-gap structures in those AF-like theories, we consider Fig. Let us first consider how the dSC gap behaves when added to this system. In Fig. Sub-structures perfectly analogous to those of Fig. We then turn to the case of interest, illustrated in Fig. That DWs are nesting in the hole pocket also introduces some new features. First, dFF-DW has a gap at the Fermi level even without dSC. This is seen on the red dotted DOS of Fig. To sum up, the two kinds of T = 0 phenomenological PG considered here reflect well the dichotomy between "preformed pairs" and "distinct phase" scenarios We found that sub-gap structures like those seen near vortex cores, and sometimes reported at zero-field, appear as deformations of the dSC gap when it coexists with DWs, especially pair density waves. Arguably, the pair density wave is enhanced and sub-gap structures appear more clearly in the vicinity of a vortex core (where checkerboard DWs were first discovered), in high field, near impurities, or simply in extreme cases of inhomogeneity. Our results thus suggest that the PDW measured in BSCCO We also demonstrated, in the mean-field approximation and for reasonable one-band models, that neither dFF-DW nor s PDW alone could be responsible for the opening of the pseudogap in the DOS in the absence of nesting. Therefore, this work reinforces the idea that the pseudogap is a distinct phenomenon. Instead of causing a pseudogap, DWs cause various kinds of deformations of the dSC gap, comparable to the variability of local tunneling spectra. Those deformations of the DOS depend as strongly on the band-structures involved than they do on the wave vector of the DW. For a simple PG model where DWs nest the nodal hole pockets of an antiferromagnet acting as proxy for the pseudogap, we demonstrated similar deformations for the dSC gap. However, a two-band model like the antiferromagnet seemed detrimental to the agreement with experiments. To conclude, let us mention how further practical constraints on theories emerge from the idea that sub-gap structures are the consequence of DWs. The behavior of experimental sub-gap structures with position is very specific 