Metal electrodes are a universal element of all electronic devices. Conducting SrRuO3 (SRO) epitaxial thin films have been extensively used as electrodes in complex-oxide heterostructures due to good lattice mismatches with perovskite substrates. However, when compared to SRO single crystals, SRO thin films have shown reduced conductivity and Curie temperatures (TC), which can lead to higher Joule heating and energy loss in the devices. Here, we report that highquality SRO thin films can be synthesized by controlling the plume dynamics and growth rate of pulsed laser epitaxy (PLE) with real-time optical spectroscopic monitoring. The SRO thin films grown under the kinetically controlled conditions, down to ca. 16 nm in thickness, exhibit both enhanced conductivity and TC as compared to bulk values, due to their improved stoichiometry and a strain-mediated increase of the bandwidth of Ru 4d electrons. This result provides a direction for enhancing the physical properties of PLE-grown thin films and paves a way for improved device applications. Complex-oxide materials with intriguing properties have dawned a new era of the so-called 'all epitaxial functional devices' such as non-volatile memories However, so far, SRO thin films have shown inferior metallic properties as compared to their bulk counterparts. SRO single crystals typically have a Curie temperature (TC) around 160-165 K and a room temperature resistivity of ~150 μΩcm (Refs. 14-17), yet no films have been synthesized which maintain these properties (see Table substrates also exhibit a high room-temperature resistivity of ~225 μΩcm and low TC, which approaches 150 K for thickness above ~25 nm (Refs. 20-23). Hence, it is essential to ask, "Are the transport properties of SRO thin films inherently inferior to SRO single crystals, or is there a way to enhance the metallic properties in the thin film limit?" To answer these questions, we have investigated epitaxial thin films of SRO with various thicknesses (1-65 nm) grown on atomically flat GSO (110)o substrates (see Fig. In order to control the deposition rate, we have used a variety of laser spot sizes (0.16-0.41 mm 2 ) by changing the aperture size in our laser optics. Note that the shape of the laser spot (square) was the same for all spot sizes. In general, a larger (smaller) laser spot size produces a larger (smaller) PLE plume; therefore by changing the size of the laser spot, we can effectively control the deposition rate (for technical details, see Ref. 27). Note that the deposition rates we have used are between 150-800 pulses/u.c. (0.027-0.005nm/sec), which are significantly slower than the typical deposition rates (10-50 pulses/u.c.) of conventional pulsed laser deposition. Figure Figure SRO thin films display a change in the crystal structure above 16 nm. The resistivity and TC of thicker SRO thin films are similar to SRO bulk single crystals. The dc-transport behavior of SRO thin films is shown in Figure While a 1 nm thick film is insulating, SRO thin films with increased thickness show a clear metallic behavior. Note that ρ(T) is significantly reduced above ca. 16 nm and it is very similar to that of bulk crystals 17 . Moreover, as summarized in Table To investigate the discrepancy in the enhanced metallic properties observed in our SRO thin films compared to that of other thin film reports, we have performed a test growth of a 15 nmthick SRO thin film with an increased laser fluence of ~3.0 J/cm 2 . Note that the optimal SRO thin films are grown at ~1.6 J/cm 2 . The XRD θ-2θ scan of the test-grown SRO thin film shows a slight increase in the out-of-plane lattice parameter (decrease in 2θ values) compared to an optimal 16 nm-thick SRO thin film, as shown in Fig. It is well known that Ru vacancies can be formed in SRO thin films due to the volatile nature of the Ru atom. According to In order to verify the effects of the kinetically controlled growth rate on the properties of SRO thin films, we have grown two samples of similar thickness but with two different laser spot sizes. A 5 nm-thick SRO thin film was grown using the smallest laser spot size (0.16 mm 2 ) with an extremely slow growth rate (~800 pulses/u.c.). This film is compared to a 6 nm-thick film which was grown using a laser spot size of 0.35 mm 2 resulting in ~270 pulses/u.c. Our dctransport measurements show that the resistivity of the 5 nm film is reduced compared to the 6 nm-thick film (Fig. This work dismisses the notion that SRO thin films are inherently inferior to single crystals, which has become a generally accepted problem in the solid state community. We have discovered that it is possible to achieve SRO thin films with metallic properties similar to SRO single crystals by adjusting the laser spot size and effectively reducing the laser plume kinetic energy, thereby improving the overall stoichiometry of the films. Our results show that by controlling the laser spot size (laser plume energy), it is possible to fabricate epitaxial thin film electrodes for functional oxide devices, which do not hinder the functionality of the device as a result of degraded metallic properties. See supplementary material for the results of atomic force microscopy, first-principles calculations, XRD RSM, and additional transport measurements. This report, SRO/GSO (tensile strain), t > 15 nm 25-30 125-140 5-6 160-163 SRO single crystals We can clearly see that the TC and resistivity of our 16 nm sample is similar to the values reported for single crystals, and significantly improved from SRO/STO. ) films (compressive and tensile strain), respectively. The TC reaches a maximum of ~163 K at 16 nm and remains essentially constant above this thickness. This value is significantly higher than previous reports for SRO films under compressive or tensile strain, and is even comparable to the values for single crystals. The green shaded area highlights the thickness region where the conductivity and TC become maximum and comparable to single crystals (black dashed lines). (b) Comparison of the XRD θ-2θ data of two films grown at 350 pulses per unit cell but with different laser fluence. The red curve shows the 16 nm film (~1.6 J/cm 2 ) and the black curve shows the 15 nm film (~3 J/cm 2 ). (c) Comparison of the ρ(T) data for the same two samples. In order to examine the influence of tensile strain on the physical properties of SRO thin films, we performed first-principles calculations as a function of applied tensile strain. The summary of our results are shown here. (a) Although there is no appreciable change in the density of states at the Fermi energy, N(E F ), we do notice an increase in the in-plane bond angle which agrees with our predictions. (b) Also, note that while the out-of-plane (in-plane) exchange energy, J c (J ab ), decreases (increases), the average exchange energy, J avg increases when applying up to 1% tensile strain. SRO is a well-known itinerant ferromagnet and therefore, the ferromagnetic properties should be related to the transport properties, i.e. an increase in conductivity should coincide with an increase in T C , and vice versa. From our calculations we can expect that tensile strained SRO films will follow the later possible scenario from Figure 