To our knowledge there is no rigorously analyzed microscopic model explaining the electron-hole asymmetry of the critical temperature seen in high-Tc cuprate superconductors -at least no model not breaking artificially this symmetry. We present here a microscopic two-band model based on the structure of energetic levels of holes in CuO2 conducting layers of cuprates. In particular, our Hamiltonian does not contain ad hoc terms implying -explicitly -different masses for electrons and holes. We prove that two energetically near-lying interacting bands can explain the electron-hole asymmetry. Indeed, we rigorously analyze the phase diagram of the model and show that the critical temperatures for fermion densities below half-filling can manifest a very different behavior as compared to the case of densities above half-filling. This fact results from the inter-band interaction and intra-band Coulomb repulsion in interplay with thermal fluctuations between two energetic levels. So, if the energy difference between bands is too big (as compared to the energy scale defined by the critical temperatures of superconductivity) then the asymmetry disappears. Moreover, the critical temperature turns out to be a non-monotonic function of the fermion density and the phase diagram of our model shows "superconducting domes" as in high-Tc cuprate superconductors. This explains why the maximal critical temperature is attained at donor densities away from the maximal one. Outside the superconducting phase and for fermion densities near half-filling the thermodynamics governed by our Hamiltonian corresponds, as in real high-Tc materials, to a Mott-insulating phase. The nature of the inter-band interaction can be electrostatic (screened Coulomb interaction), magnetic (for instance some Heisenberg-type one-site spin-spin interaction), or a mixture of both. If the inter-band interaction is predominately magnetic then -additionally to the electron-hole asymmetry -we observe a reentering behavior meaning that the superconducting phase can only occur in a finite interval of temperatures. This phenomenon is rather rare, but has also been observed in the so-called magnetic superconductors. The mathematical results here are direct consequences of [ Theoretical foundations of superconductivity go back to the celebrated BCS theory -appeared in the late fifties (1957) -which explains conventional type I superconductors. The lattice version of this theory is based on the so-called (reduced) BCS Hamiltonian defined in a cubic box Λ N := {Z ∩ [-L, L]} 3 of volume We choose without loss of generality N such that L := (N 1/3 -1)/2 ∈ N. Here Λ * N is the reciprocal lattice of quasi-momenta (periodic boundary conditions) and the operator ã * k,s (resp. ãk,s ) creates (resp. annihilates) a fermion with spin s ∈ {↑, ↓} and (quasi-) momentum k ∈ Λ * N . The function ε k represents the kinetic energy and the real number μ is the chemical potential. The BCS interaction is defined via the BCS coupling function γ k,q which is usually assumed in the physics lit-erature to be -in momentum space -of the following form: with C ∈ (0, ∞]. The function γ k,q is not continuous in momentum space and so, it is slowly decaying, i.e., long range, in position space. (This means that it is not absolutely summable.) The case ε k = 0 is known as the strong coupling limit of the BCS model. Together with the choice C = ∞, this case is of interest, as its analysis is easier and at the same time it qualitatively displays most of basic properties of real conventional type I superconductors, see, e.g., Chapter VII, Section 4 in A general theory of superconductivity is, however, a subject of debate, especially for high-T c superconductors. An important phenomenon not taken into account in the BCS theory is the Coulomb interaction between electrons or holes, which can imply strong correlationsfor instance in high-T c superconductors. This problem was of course already addressed in theoretical physics right after the emergence of the Fröhlich model and the BCS theory, see, e.g., Indeed, the results of for real parameters μ, h ∈ R and λ, γ ≥ 0. The operator a * x,s (resp. a x,s ) creates (resp. annihilates) a fermion with spin s ∈ {↑, ↓} at lattice position x ∈ Z D , D = 1, 2, 3, ..., whereas n x,s := a * x,s a x,s is the particle number operator at position x and spin s. The first term of the right hand side of (3) represents the strong coupling limit of the kinetic energy, also called "atomic limit" in the context of the Hubbard model, see, e.g., x,y∈Λ N a * x,↑ a * x,↓ a y,↓ a y,↑ = see The Hamiltonian (3) defines in the thermodynamic limit N → ∞ a free energy density functional on a suitable set of states of the fermionic observable algebra of the lattice Z D (D-dimensional crystal). See [1, Section 6.2] for details. Minimizers ω of the free energy density are called equilibrium states of the model. We say that the model has a superconducting phase -at fixed parameters -if there is at least one equilibrium state ω of the model for which ω(a x,↓ a x,↑ ) = 0, i.e., if the U (1)-gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken. The main properties of the phase diagram of the strong coupling BCS-Hubbard model described in • There is a non-empty set of parameters S defining a s-wave superconducting phase with off-diagonal long range order. • Depending on parameters the superconducting phase transition is either of first order or of second order (see Fig. • The superconducting phase S is characterized by the formation of Cooper pairs and a depleted Cooper pair condensate, the density r β ∈ [0, 1/4] of which is defined by the gap equation. • There is a Meißner effect concerning the relationship between superconductivity and magnetization. The Meißner effect is defined here by the absence of magnetization in presence of superconductivity. Steady surface currents around the bulk of the superconductor are not analyzed as it is a finite volume effect. • There exists a superconductor-Mott insulator phase transition for near-one fermion densities per lattice site (see Fig. • The coexistence of ferromagnetic and superconducting phases is shown to be feasible at (critical) points of the boundary ∂S of S. • The critical temperature θ c can be (locally) an increasing function of the positive coupling constant λ ≥ 0 at fixed chemical potential μ ∈ R (see Fig. • For λ ∼ γ the critical temperature θ c shows -as a function of the fermion density ρ -the typical "superconducting domes" observed in high-T c superconductors: θ c is zero or very small for ρ ∼ 1 and is much larger for ρ away from 1 (see Fig. This model is of course too simplified with respect to (w.r.t.) real superconductors. For instance, the antiferromagnetic phase or the presence of vortices, which can appear in (type II) high-T c superconductors, are not observed. However, since the range of parameters in which we are interested turns out to be related to a first order phase transition, by high-low temperature expansions the -more realistic -model including kinetic terms should have essentially the same correlation functions as H N -up to corrections of order ||ε|| 1 ( 1 -norm of ε). Thus, the Hamiltonian H N may be a good model for certain kinds of superconductors or ultra-cold Fermi gases in optical lattices for which the strong coupling regime is justified, especially because all parameters of H N have a phenomenological interpretation and can be directly related to experiments, see Since the discovery of mercury superconductivity in 1911 a significant amount of superconducting materials has been found. This includes usual metals, like lead, aluminum, zinc or platinum, magnetic materials, heavy-fermion systems, organic compounds and ceramics. High-T c cuprate superconductors are among the most interesting superconducting materials for applications. In spite of that, a general microscopic theory explaining conveniently their thermodynamics is still not available. For instance, the experimentally wellknown electron-hole asymmetry of high-T c superconductors which usually show higher critical temperatures for donors of holes than for donors of electrons, is not clearly understood from the microscopic point of view. As far as we know no microscopic theory can give up to now some incontestable explanation of this fact unless one artificially breaks the electron-hole symmetry of models (for instance by imposing explicitly two different mass for electrons and holes). In fact, the most plausible explanation of the electron-hole asymmetry is given in The usual BCS model and the strong coupling BCS-Hubbard model have structural properties preventing their critical temperatures of superconductivity from being asymmetric w.r.t. the density of donors. The strong coupling BCS-Hubbard shows -at least and in contrast to the usual BCS model -the typical (though symmetric) "superconducting domes" of high-T c materials for the critical temperature. Therefore, the first objective is to investigate generalizations of the strong coupling BCS-Hubbard in order to find plausible -microscopicexplanations for the electron-hole asymmetry in high-T c cuprate superconductors. The (one-band) strong coupling BCS-Hubbard is a good starting point for further investigations on high-T c phenomenology, also because it correctly describes the non-superconducting phase of cuprates near half-filling, which is Mott-insulating and not metallic as in usual superconductors. Another class of superconductors which would be interesting to study are ferromagnetic superconductors We introduce a two-band model by using two copies of the (one-band) model H N defined by We prove that the thermodynamic behavior of such a two-band model inherits of course properties of the thermodynamic behavior of the one-band model H N described in • There is an electron-hole asymmetry w.r.t. the critical temperature of superconductivity which results from the inter-band interaction and intraband Coulomb repulsion in interplay with thermal fluctuations between the "s"-and "f "-bands. • Choosing the relative strength of parameters to each other according to experimental data about the energy levels of holes in CuO 2 layers of high-T c cuprate superconductors, we show that this asymmetry is in favor of a doping with donors of holes. This is just what is seen in cuprates. • There is a (rather small) set of parameters with a reentering behavior coming from a magnetic interband interaction. • There is a kind of "microscopic Meißner effect": The increase of the magnetic inter-band interaction destroys superconductivity without need of any magnetization induced by an external magnetic field. It follows that a reentering behavior can also appear without any ferromagnetism. Our two-band model is certainly not the final microscopic theory of high-T c cuprate superconductors even if one includes a small kinetic part as explained above. However, we are convinced that the model and analysis presented here highlight microscopic processes playing a crucial role in which concerns the phenomenology of high-T c materials -or at least a relevant part of it. The method presented in As a final remark the one-band and two-band models discussed here should be seen as a kind of "solvable" class of models capturing important phenomenological aspects and from which one can implement physically more realistic models -for instance by using perturbation theory. Indeed, a first natural extension of the two-band model -beyond the introduction of a small kinetic term as explained above -is the addition of a Heisenberg-type interaction for fermions within the non-superconducting band in order to spontaneously create a ferromagnetic phase and to get a reasonable microscopic theory of ferromagnetic superconductors. Another possible generalization is the introduction of a small inter-band interaction term describing tunneling effects between bands (inter-band hopping), see below In order to fix ideas about the microscopic structure of typical high-T c materials we consider the case of cuprates. It is known from experimental physics that superconducting carriers, mainly holes in the case of cuprates, move within two-dimensional CuO 2 layers made of Cu ++ and O --, see, e.g., Cu + = (Ar)3d 10 is a closed shell configuration (see, e.g., with λ Cu > 0 at each (two-dimensional) lattice site x for the copper band. O --= (Be)2p 6 corresponds to a closed shell configuration as well (see, e.g., Experiments on cuprates indicate that λ Cu ≈ 4eV and δ Cu-O ≤ 2eV (at least in [10, Fig. with λ O ≥ 0 when they are both on the oxygen site and an inter-band repulsion 2λ Cu-O (n x,↓ )(n x,↓ ) with λ Cu-O ≥ 0 if one carrier is on the oxygen site and the other one on the copper site, see, e.g., To each of these (almost independent) CuO 2 conducting layers there is a second layer of another chemical nature which acts as a charge reservoir and provides conduction fermions to the CuO 2 layer. These reservoir layers can be engineered in order to get the desired density of carriers (holes or electrons). In La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 compounds the holes added to CuO 2 layers of La 2 CuO 4 directly go into the oxygen band which is experimentally shown to be at the origin of superconductivity. Indeed, holes on copper bands cannot directly participate in superconductivity by forming Cooper pairs, see As suggested in where Here 1 is the identity on the fermion Fock space related to either L s or L f . In this model the kinetic energy is neglected as the strong coupling regime is realistic for CuO 2 layers. In fact, without changing qualitatively the phenomenology a small kinetic energy could be added as explained around Similarly to the discussion above about the energy levels in copper and oxygen bands of CuO 2 layers, we write In particular, if δ > 0, then the "f "-band is energetically lower than the "s"-band, whereas δ < 0 means the opposite. As far as CuO 2 layers are concerned the energy difference δ = δ Cu-O > 0 must be positive and small w.r.t. the repulsive coupling constant λ f = λ Cu ≥ 0. The inter-band interaction equals x,↑ + n with λ ≥ 0 and η ∈ R. Here n (s) x,s (resp. n x,s ) is the particle number operator of "s"-(resp. "f "-) fermions at position x ∈ Z D and spin s ∈ {↑, ↓}. The first term of the inter-band interaction V N represents the screened Coulomb interaction between "s"-and "f "-fermions, i.e., between carriers in the copper and oxygen bands of the CuO 2 conducting layers. If η = 0 then the second term in V N represents a magnetic interaction between "s"-and "f "-fermions on the same site of the lattices L s and L f . Note that the superconducting phase which appears for "s"-fermions in our two-band model, is a (perfect) s-wave phase (cf. For instance, the phenomenon we present here highlight why the explanation given in Observe also that the bands are denoted by "s" for "superconducting" and by "f " for "ferromagnetic" or "fixed". The charge carriers can be here fermions of any kind. In cuprates such fermions should be seen as holes (of electrons). Indeed, the two-band model can emerge from other physical systems or interpretations. For instance, the "s"-band could have represented holes within CuO 2 layers, whereas "f "-fermions could have been seen as holes within the charge reservoir layer. Another example could have been given by considering some tunneling between the conducting layer and the charge reservoir layer. The tunneling modes could then give origin to different effective energy levels. The latter can be interpreted as a discrete component of the kinetic energy in the direction perpendicular to the conduction plane. Indeed, we can assume that the layers of high-T c materials can be decomposed in independent groups of finitely many layers (for instance groups of two layers in the case of cuprates: One CuO 2 layer and one reservoir layer). Using periodic boundary conditions the kinetic energy w.r.t. the perpendicular direction to the conduction planes is -in this case -a discrete quantity and leads to the formation of finitely many different energetic levels per site. With this example the "s"-band would have represented holes or electrons with a zero perpendicular kinetic energy, whereas the "f "-band would have corresponded to holes or electrons moving with a velocity having a nonvanishing component perpendicularly to the conduction planes. Now, the first question we have to address in order to obtain the thermodynamics of the system is the computation of the grand-canonical pressure p := lim in the thermodynamic limit N → ∞ at fixed inverse temperature β > 0. Such an analysis is performed rigorously in . Using the methods of The exact form of the function f is only given for completeness. What is important is that it is some explicitly given function in the thermodynamic limit -even if we do not know, a priori, how to diagonalize the Hamiltonian H (s,f ) N at any fixed N ∈ N. This fact is important as it makes possible a computer aided rigorous analysis of the thermodynamic problem. There is, however, a certain amount on luckiness about this: The function f is obtained from the eigenvalues of some (16 × 16)matrix, the so-called approximating Hamiltonian of the model (see In fact, it would have been natural to include in our model H which on all lattice sites x ∈ Λ N annihilates a fermion in "f "-band to create another one within the "s"-band and vice-versa. Theorem 1 would still be satisfied for any t s,f ∈ R, but the function f would then be more difficult to obtain as the eigenvalues of the resulting (16× 16)-matrix are not that easy to compute. However, the hopping term To conclude, let R ⊆ [0, ∞) be the set of solutions r β ≥ 0 of the variational problem sup r≥0 -γ s r + β -1 ln f(r) = -γ s r β + β -1 ln f(r β ) Exactly as in the case of the one-band model H N (cf. [1, Section 6.2]) the set E parameterizes (one-to-one) the pure equilibrium states of the model H The parameterization E z β → ω z β can be chosen to be continuous and such that ω z β (a has a superconducting phase for the corresponding set of parameters. As in the one-band case any (weak * -) limit point of the local Gibbs states associated with H (s,f ) N is an equilibrium state (cf. The first important thing we would like to analyze here is the influence of a "f "-band on superconductivity of the "s"-band via the screened Coulomb interaction between fermions of both bands. As explained above it is natural to relate the chemical potentials μ s and μ f by the energy difference between bands, i.e., μ f := μ s + δ with δ ∈ R, see ( (a) Effect of an almost empty "f "-band (δ < 0) on superconductivity. (b) Breakdown of the half-filled "f "-band destroying superconductivity. (c) Breakdown of the half-filled "f "-band implying superconductivity. This should be the case of CuO 2 layers in cuprates. (d) Effect of an almost full "f "-band (δ > 0) on superconductivity. Before starting this program it is necessary to precise different thermodynamic functions. First, we recall that the solution r β ∈ R of the variational problem ( with for all r ≥ 0, G 0 (r) : = sinh(βg r,0 ) f(r)e β(λs +μ f ) g r,0 , . Therefore, the set The solution r β > 0 of ( r β = 0 is unique solution of of S and S 0 respectively, is called the set of (first order) critical points of the model. It consists per definition of all combinations of parameters for which x,↓ a (s) (resp. c * 0 ) annihilates (resp. creates) one Cooper pair of "s"-fermions within the condensate, i.e., in the zeromode for pairs of "s"-fermions. Indeed, away from any critical point the Cooper pair condensate density equals lim As already explained, the proof of this last result follows from a rather explicit description of the weak * -limit points of local Gibbs states ω N . We omit details as this fact is a simple adaptation of the results of Observe also that an analysis of the intra-band density correlation lim for "s"-fermions allows us to characterize the difference between the superconducting and non-superconducting phases in terms of space distributions of "s"-fermions: (n) Within the non-superconducting phase. The probability of finding two "s"-fermions on the same site goes to zero as N → ∞ and β → ∞, whereas the mean density of "s"-fermions goes to one. In other words, the probability of finding exactly one "s"-fermion on one given site is one in the limit N → ∞, β → ∞. This characterizes an insulating Mott phase and corresponds to well-known experimental facts related to cuprates outside the superconducting phase and near half-filling. (s) Within the superconducting phase. 100% of "s"fermions form Cooper pairs in the limit of zerotemperature in the sense that the conditional probability of finding a second "s"-fermion in one given site provided there is already one fermion in that site goes to one in the limit N → ∞, β → ∞. A high pairing fraction for carriers is a well-known property of real high T c -materials in contrast to the low pairing fraction of conventional superconductors. Such a study is performed in Other two important thermodynamic functions we need in the present section are the (infinite volume) densities per lattice site of "s"-and "f "-fermions: Using standard computations (cf. Section V), both densities can be explicitly computed. They are not depending on x ∈ Z D and respectively equal to and for any μ s , h s , μ f , h f , η ∈ R, γ s , λ s , λ f , λ ≥ 0 and β > 0 away from any critical point. Now we are in position to analyze the first case (a) about the effect of an almost empty "f "-band (δ < 0) on superconductivity. For simplicity we always take η = 0 in the four cases (a)-(d) in order to avoid complicated crosseffects due to inter-band magnetic interactions. Indeed, the thermodynamics for η = 0 will be analyzed separately afterwards. (a) The almost empty "f "-band: The first phase diagram to be discussed is given in Fig. per lattice site and per band is strictly increasing as a function of the chemical potential μ s . Therefore, for any fixed h s , δ, h f , η ∈ R, γ s , λ s , λ f , λ ≥ 0, β > 0 and ρ ∈ (0, 2) there exists a unique real number μ s,N,β such that where ω N represents the (finite volume) grand-canonical Gibbs state By representing diagrams w.r.t. the parameter ρ ∈ (0, 1) (instead of μ s ∈ [-1, 3]) we obtain the same kind of behavior as above, see Fig. This situation corresponds to Fig. With the present choice of parameters observe that increasing the mean particle density per site and band over the value d β = 1 causes the collapse -at the same time -of the superconducting phase in the "s"-band and of the half-filling in the "f "-band, see Fig. In this case we analyze the opposite situation to (b): The fact that the breakdown of the half-filling in the "f "-band can drive the "s"-band into a superconducting phase. This is illustrated in Fig. We concentrate our study between both vertical dashed black lines μs = -1 and μs = 2.5. In the case δ = 0.5, λ f = 1 (Fig. If the total density d β is too large (d β 0.73) then superconductivity is progressively suppressed and the "f "-band is not anymore half-filled, i.e., d The physical properties of this (poorly superconducting) phase with d β = 1 -ε (ε = o(1) > 0) are not the same as in the non-superconducting phase with d β = 0.5. The latter is a purely Mott-insulating phase of "f "-fermions and the first is a mixture (with fractions depending on the given density d β ) of a purely Mott-insulating phase of "f "fermions with a phase describing a full "f "-band. This is an interesting observation since the excess of doping of holes in real cuprates leads to the destruction of superconductivity and the appearance of a metallic phase, undoped cuprates being Mott insulators. Of course, in our case it is not clear what the thermodynamic phase with d β = 1 -ε has to do with a metal since no kinetic energy is included and no transport properties are analyzed. Observe further that such a property is particular to the given choice of parameters. See, e.g., Fig. We concentrate our study between both vertical dashed black lines μs = -1 and μs = 2.5. Consider again the case δ = 0.5 and λ f = 1 of Fig. We concentrate our study between both vertical dashed black lines μs = -1 and μs = 2.5. By analyzing the model at fixed total densities ρ ∈ (0, 1) of fermions (cf. ( Finally, observe that other choices of parameters, specially of the energy gap δ, can completely modify the properties described here, see Figs. other parameters being the same as in cases (a) and (b). The electron-hole asymmetry appears again and exactly for the same reasons, see Figs. 20 and 21. Observe, however, that the fermion density in the "f "-band is two (instead of zero or one) at low temperatures. Notice also that -in contrast to the case (a) -the maximal critical temperatures are always attained at d β > 1. I.e., in this situation (d) superconductivity above half-filling is more favored than superconductivity below half-filling. In fact, if δ > 0 and the energetically lower level "f " is full at zero temperature then no choice of parameters for which the maximum critical temperature is attained at d (s) β < 1 were found. Cases (b) and (d) can also be considered -as it was done for the cases (a) and (c) -w.r.t. a fixed total fermion density ρ ∈ (0, 2) (instead of a fixed chemical potential We concentrate our study between both vertical dashed black lines μs = 3 and μs = 6.5. μ s ), see From the physical description given at the beginning of Section II, cuprates seem to fit in case (c) since δ > 0 whereas d (f ) β = 1 and d (s) β = 0 at d β = 0.5 (no doping). In this case the non-superconducting band ("f "band) should be identified with copper orbitals -which is half-filled without doping -and the superconducting band ("s"-band) with oxygen orbitals -which is empty without doping. Note that experiments indicate that superconduction takes place in oxygen orbitals (see Section 5.11 of Note finally that the phenomenon of electron-hole asymmetry can also take place if the inter-band interaction is purely magnetic (instead of purely electrostatic) or is mixed (i.e., has magnetic and electrostatic components). As in cases (a) or (d) one can find examples where the maximal critical temperature of superconductivity is either at d x,↑ -n a new phenomenon takes place: The so-called reentering behavior which is analyzed below in more details. We fix η = 0 in An illustration of the Cooper pair condensate density as well as the critical temperature w.r.t. the chemical potential μ s of "s"-fermions is given for this situation in Figs. away from any critical point. In particular, -in contrast to what is observed in real ferromagnetic superconductors -no spontaneous magnetization can occur in this model, as the Hamiltonian is invariant under exchange of ↑ and ↓ spins for h s = h f = 0. A more complicated model including, for instance, Heisenberg-type intra-band interaction terms could show spontaneous magnetization. In order to simplify the analysis we induce magnetization by imposing a small external magnetic field h f = 0. See Fig. In contrast to models showing spontaneous magnetization and real ferromagnetic superconductors, this procedure has of course the drawback of implying -at any fixed temperature -small magnetizations at small fields h f , h s , i. Proceeding in this way the total magnetization density m β in the superconducting phase generally stays rather small: In Fig. Note that, if the range of temperatures with a superconducting phase is sufficiently small then the magnetization m β (in the superconducting phase) becomes almost zero, see, e.g., away from any critical point. In the superconducting phase, 100% of "s"-fermions form Cooper pairs in the limit of zero-temperature (β → ∞). This implies that M β = 0 in this limit. See Figs. 24 and 27 as well as Fig. Therefore, if the two-band model H (s,f ) N is supposed to describe a system of fixed (fermionic) atoms (playing the role of "f "-fermions) and moving fermions ("s"fermions), then the model does not seem -in this situation -to show the reentering behavior for any choice parameters. At fixed total fermion density ρ ∈ (0, 2) (cf. ( • At all temperatures θ > θ c1 0.28, the system is not superconducting. • At all temperatures θ ∈ (θ c2 , θ c1 ] with θ c2 0.09, the system is superconducting. • At temperatures θ ∈ (θ c3 , θ c2 ) with θ c3 0.06, a coexistence of the non-superconducting (which is magnetic in the presence of any non-vanishing external magnetic field) and superconducting phases appears. This seems to be the case in real ferromagnetic superconductors, cf. • At all temperatures θ ≤ θ c3 , there is a nonsuperconducting -ferromagnetic in presence of non-zero external magnetic fields -phase. Note that the possible choices of parameters leading to this peculiar behavior seems to be relatively rare. At fixed chemical potentials or at fixed total fermion density per band exactly equal one and if the parameters are chosen such that the reentering behavior takes place, then we observe the following property of the nonsuperconducting phase at low temperatures: The probability of finding exactly one "s"-fermion and exactly one "f "-fermion on a given lattice site goes to one as β → ∞. This can be interpreted as follows: At low temperatures there is formation of pairs composed by one "s"-fermion and one "f "-fermion, a sort of magnetic bound state (for instance, some kind of Kondo bound state). These pairs form in turn a Mott phase. This mechanism of "sf "pairing could be an explanation for the disappearing of the superconducting phase. Apparently, destroying such pairs in order to set "s"-fermions free to form Cooper pairs is energetically not favorable at low temperatures. with c ∈ C conveniently chosen. This procedure is known in mathematical physics as the "approximating Hamiltonian method" The maximizers of the c-depending pressures are solutions of Euler-Lagrange equations called gap equations. Applying this method to the model H (s,f ) N one obtains Theorem 1 because the approximating Hamiltonian H (s,f ) N (c) is a (tensor product of the same) (16 × 16)matrix which can be exactly diagonalized. In particular, its pressure p(c) can explicitly be computed for all c ∈ C. Since H (s,f ) N is gauge invariant it suffices to restrict the variational problem to positive real numbers r := |c| 2 ≥ 0. For more details we recommend Proofs of (15), ( 