We study properties of a periodically driven system coupled to a thermal bath. As a nontrivial example, we consider periodically driven metallic system coupled to a superconducting bath. The effect of the superconductor on the driven system is two-fold: it (a) modifies density of states in the metal via the proximity effect and (b) acts as a thermal bath for light-excited quasi-particles. Using Keldysh formalism, we calculate, nonpertubatively in the system-bath coupling, the steady-state properties of the system and obtain non-equilibrium distribution function. The latter allows one to calculate observable quantities which can be spectroscopically measured in tunneling experiments. The prospects of engineering exotic quantum states of matter using time-periodic driving generated recently much excitement in condensed matter and cold atom communities Periodic driving of isolated non-interacting quantum systems can be understood within the framework of the Floquet formalism which is based on the discrete time-translational invariance of the Hamiltonian. i.e. H(t) = H(t + τ ) with τ being the period of driving. Therefore, it is convenient to define the Floquet operator H F = H(t) -i∂ t The Floquet formalism describes well the short-time dynamics of the driven system. However, in order to understand the steady-state properties one needs to take into account system-bath interactions resulting in the relaxation and the redistribution of the Floquet states. Thus, ultimately one needs non-equilibrium distribution function in order to understand physical properties of the driven system in the steady-state. The goal of this paper is to address this issue. Understanding the statistical properties of the periodically driven systems with dissipation is a long-standing problem. Previous studies based on Markovian master equation formalism adapted for Floquet states indicate that the occupation distribution of Floquet states has rather nontrivial behavior Most of the efforts mentioned above are based on Markovian master equation formalism, which relies on the presence of a large time scale separation (i.e. bath correlation time is much smaller than system relaxation time, and the time scale associated with the driven system dynamics is smaller than the system relaxation time In order to demonstrate how this method works we consider a "toy problem" -periodically driven metallic system coupled to a fermionic bath, and calculate steadystate distribution function for arbitrary strength of the system-bath coupling. Next, we consider a more complicated example -Floquet system coupled to a superconducting bath which might be relevant for the realiza-tion of Floquet counterpart of topological superconductivity From the technical perspective, we use Keldysh Green's function approach for periodically driven systems. We first integrate out the fermionic bath and incorporate its effects through the self-energy. This allows one to obtain a non-equilibrium Green's function for the driven system as well as to calculate observable quantities such as linear differential conductance. The equations for the non-equilibrium Green's functions now depend on Floquet band indices and therefore become infinite dimensional. However, analytical solution can be obtained in the limit of small driving amplitude K, i.e. κ ≡ K/Ω 1 with Ω being the driving frequency. For practical reasons, this assumption is not very restrictive since the typical driving frequency Ω ∼ 1eV The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce our model consisting of a driven metallic system coupled to a fermionic bath. In Sec. III, we develop a Keldysh formalism for periodically driven system with a bath, and obtain system of equations for the Green's function equations. Approximate solution for the Green's function in the limit of small driving amplitude is developed in Sec. III. In Secs. IV A and V, we discuss non-equilibrium distribution function and physical observables such differential conductance. Finally, we summarize our results in Sec. VI. We consider a driven metallic system with timeperiodic chemical potential, which is coupled to a fermionic reservoir (either normal metal or superconductor). The Hamiltonian of the whole system can be written as The Hamiltonian H D describes the non-interacting driven system with the chemical potential μ 0 +μ(t) where μ(t) = μ(t+τ ) and τ = 2π/Ω (we assume τ 0 dtμ(t) = 0). H T is the tunneling Hamiltonian between the driven system and the bath. The bath Hamiltonian is given by the mean field BCS Hamiltonian where ∆ is s-wave pairing potential. The results for the normal metal bath can be obtained by simply setting ∆ = 0. It is convenient to study the problem in a rotating frame by applying a time-dependent unitary transformation U F (t) = e -if (t) kσ c † kσ c kσ with df (t)/dt = -μ(t), and the Hamiltonian in the rotating frame becomes In this rotating frame, the time-periodic part of the chemical potential vanishes, and the coupling between the driven system and the fermionic bath becomes timedependent. Physically, this term represents photoninduced transitions of quasi-particles between the driven system and the bath. We will study the interplay between these transitions and the dissipation due to the fermionic bath. It is convenient to consider the problem using a Keldysh path-integral formalism Here we introduced Nambu spinors -→ Ψ † 0k = (c † k↑ , c -k↓ ) and -→ Ψ † bath,q = (a † q↑ , a -q↓ ). The Green's function for the driven system in Nambu space reads The matrix M describes the coupling between -→ Ψ † 0k and -→ Ψ † bath,q , and is defined as We can now integrate out the bath degrees of freedom to find the following effective action: After rewriting the action in terms of the forward and backward components of the Keldysh contour and performing Larkin-Ovchinnikov rotation (see Ref. The Dyson's equation for the dressed Green's function becomes where Σ k (t 1 , t 2 ) is the bath self-energy. As follows from the discussion in the previous section, the Green's function Qk (t, t ), defined in Eq. ( and Fourier expansion for s: Using these identities, we will now derive Dyson's equation in the frequency domain for the problem at hand. After applying ∞ -∞ dt e -iω(t-t ) and 1 τ τ 0 ds e -inΩs to both side of Eq. ( We now calculate the self-energy due to the coupling to fermionic bath. The self-energy is which depends on the tunneling matrix note df (t)/dt = -μ(t). In the frequency domain, the self-energy becomes Combining Eq. ( where qbath (ω) is defined as Having obtained the self-energy due to the bath, we can calculate the non-equilibrium Green's function and the distribution function F (t, t ) for the driven system. In general, the relation can be written as After performing the Fourier transform using Eqs. ( The Green's function of the driven system [i.e. Eq. ( where the matrices Qα k , Σ α k , and F have the following structure and the matrix form for Q0k is given by ) Equations ( For concreteness we consider specific time-dependent perturbation in the form μ(t) = -K cos(Ωt). The corresponding function f (t) = (K/Ω) sin(Ωt), and, thus, the matrix M can be written as where J n (x) is the Bessel function of the first kind. In the limit of weak driving amplitude, i.e. κ = K/Ω 1, one can expand above equations up to the lowest order in κ. One can show that up to O(κ 2 ), the nonzero matrix elements are for n = 0, ±1 and the corresponding matrices are This simplification allows one to calculate the nonequilibrium Green's function explicitly. Using Eq. ( To leading order in κ, the Green's function for the zero Floquet band Qk (0, ω) is the same as the one for a system in the absence of the driving. The corrections to Qk (0, ω) appear in the second order in κ and the modified Green's function Qk (0, ω) becomes where M0 = includes the second order term in κ, while M0 only has leading order term as shown in Eq. IV. APPLICATIONS We now discuss tunneling experiment and calculate corresponding current between the driven system at the probe. Similar experiments were pioneered two decades ago as a unique tool to reconstruct intrinsic low-energy quasiparticle relaxation rates in quantum wires. Electron disequilibrium in the system was induced by applying DC voltage across the wire For the problem of our interest the full Hamiltonian including the tunnel probe can be written as Here H(t) describes the periodically driven system (1) with the superconducting bath (2), while H T P describes the tunnel probe where DC voltage potential eV applied to the tip was included. Fermion operator b † pσ creates an electron with spin σ and momentum p in the tunnel probe and H T describes the tunnel coupling between the tip and the system We assume that the coupling J kp is very weak, much smaller than the coupling W between the driven system and the superconducting bath, so we can treat this additional probing coupling as a small perturbation. In the rotating frame with the transformation U F (t), the fermion operators in the system have an extra timedependent phase c kσ → c kσ e -if (t) as shown in previous section. Therefore, in the rotating frame, the current through the tunnel probe is We perform the leading order perturbation expansion with respect to the tunneling Hamiltonian H T for the Green's function G < Cpσ,Bkσ (t, t), and obtain Here, the function g T,pσ , e.g. defined as g < T,pσ (tt 1 ) ≡ i b † pσ (t 1 )b pσ (t) , is the free fermion Green's function for the tunnel probe, and the function G kσ , defined as ) respectively, is the Green's function for the non-superconducting system including the self-energy contribution from superconducting bath. After the further Fourier transformation for g T and assuming J pk independent of k, we obtain where we have with eV being the constant voltage-energy offset applied to the tunnel probe; Γ T ( ) = π p |J p | 2 δ(p ) and f ( ) = 1/(e β + 1). For the leading order perturbative calculation in H T , if we consider constant density of states in the tip, then the coupling Γ T ( -eV ) = Γ T , and only f ( -eV ) depends on the voltage. Therefore, the differential conductance is Next we apply the Fourier expansion G >,< kσ (t, ) = n e inΩt G >,< kσ (n, ) and e if (t) = n e inΩt J n (κ) and perform an average of the current over a full period Accounting for the fact that G(n, ), and J ±1 (κ) ≈ ±κ/2, we find analytical expression for the tunneling density of states of a driven system with the accuracy up to κ 2 in the form Another physically interesting and experimentally measurable quantity is the occupation distribution function in the energy space, which can be computed by the non-equilibrium Green's functions form the Keldysh block of the matrix Green's function. In general, the distribution function characterize population of excited states and is important for understanding the statistical mechanics of the dissipative periodically driven systems. Fermionic occupation in non-superconducting system can be written as where we define the occupation distribution that can be obtained in the form We have similar expressions for the spin down. Here we drop the parts beyond the first Floquet band, and use the If the driving is much faster than the system dynamics, the fast oscillations e inΩt for n = 0 (i.e. the second term and beyond in Eq.( We first consider a normal metal bath where the density of states is constant, i.e. ρ(ω) = ρ F . After setting ∆ = 0, all the Green's functions become diagonal in the Nambu space. Therefore, we restore the conventional fermionic Green's function for normal metals. In this case, the bath Green's function (in Keldysh space) defined in Eq. ( where f (ω) = 1/(e ω/T +1) is the Fermi distribution function. After substituting Eq. ( which recovers the Green's functions for the equilibrium case for κ → 0 or Ω → 0. Above we have defined Γ = πρ F W 2 . The retarded and advanced parts of the Green's function matrix for n = 0 case are vanishing only if the bath density of states is assumed to be a constant. As shown in the last section, a normal metal tunnel probe with DC voltage bias can be used to determine the tunneling density of states, which only depends on zero Floquet band (n = 0) for normal metal bath This non-equilibrium Green's function directly reveals the information of the occupation of the system and their distribution can be obtained (2) (ω = 0) as a function of the driving frequency. We have chosen following parameters ρF ∆ = 1.0, W/∆ = 0.4 (note Γ = πW 2 ρF ). We plot this occupation distribution function in Fig. Next, we numerically compute the occupation distribution (for zeroth Floquet band) by evaluating the Matrix Eqs. In this section, we consider more interesting case of a superconducting bath, where the bath Green's function can be expressed in terms of the quasiclassical Green's function for a BCS superconductor The retarded, advanced, and Keldysh components of the quasiclassical Green's functions for an s-wave superconductor read where η → 0; the equilibrium distribution function is In order to recover the results for a normal metal bath, we can simply set ∆ = 0. For a superconductor, the bath density of states is not a constant, thus the retarded and advanced part of the Q(n = 0, ω) are not vanishing. Consequently, the tunneling density of states with a DC tip has corrections from Green's function with n = 0, and with the accuracy up to κ where ν(1, ) describes n = ±1 contributions. Let us first look at the tunneling density of states for the zeroth Floquet band (n = 0), which is defined as where C is the charge conjugation operator. In this case, the analytic result in the ω → 0 limit up to second order in κ can be simplified. We expand the DOS in small κ ν(0, 0 For finite ∆, we have ν (0) (0, 0) = 0 as expected, which corresponds to the DOS for the equilibrium system. We focus on the second part ν (2) (0, 0). The full analytic expressions are very involved and not enlightening, we refer the reader to Appendix B. Here, we only present some limits that can be simplified for two different regimes: Ω < ∆ and Ω > ∆ respectively for Ω → ∆ -0 (59) where we take the limit η → 0. Secondly, we consider contributions from the higher Floquet band (n = ±1), which is given by Again we focus on analytical expressions at ω = 0 The analytical expression for ν (2) (1, 0) is also cumbersome and can be found in appendix B. This function can be simplified in certain limits for Ω → ∆ -0 (62) For completeness, we numerically evaluate the drivinginduced correction ν (2) (0) = ν (2) (0, 0) + ν (2) (1, 0) in Fig. 10 -6 10 -4 10 -2 1 100 ω/Δ Occupation Distribution FIG. Following the same procedures as in the case of normal metal bath and evaluating the full matrices in Eqs. It should be noted that in an earlier study In this subsection we study the occupation distribution and non-equilibrium Green's function for the system with a superconducting bath. As discussed in Sec. IV B, fermionic occupation can be written as n ↑ (t) ≈ dω n ↑ (0, ω) -e iΩt n ↑ (1, ω) + c.c. , Here Qk,σσ is the diagonal part of the Nambu Green's function. The spin down channel has the similar form, and we drop the parts beyond the first Floquet band. If the driving is much faster than the system dynamics, we can drop the fast oscillation (e inΩt ) parts, i.e. the second term and beyond. We first consider perturbative expansion. For this case, the analytic results in the zero frequency ω = 0 can be simplified, and we find the Keldysh component in occupation distribution n σ (0, ω = 0) is exactly zero, i.e. k,↑↑ (0, ω = 0) = 0. Therefore, the occupation of the zeroth Floquet band at ω = 0 is proportional to the corresponding DOS with a pre-factor 1 2 (1 -κ 2 4 ). We would expect nontrivial results for ω > 0, their analytic form becomes very complicated and less transparent. We, therefore, only show numerical results. The non-oscillatory part n(0, ω) is shown in Fig. We plot the integrated occupations for the equilibrium case and for the driven non-equilibrium steady case as a function of temperature in Fig. and n E(out) . With varying temperature, n E(in) only has small changes while n E(out) has larger change. In addition, the occupation function shows a plateau between ∆ and -∆ + Ω, and also shows small occupation in the region ω ∈ (-∆ + Ω, ∆ + Ω) with the similar structure to ω ∈ (-∆, ∆). In fact, the transitions induced by periodic driving interplay with the dissipation due to the superconducting bath (especially for energy above the bulk superconducting gap); and this competition results in small finite occupation in the non-equilibrium stationary states. Finally, we consider the occupation distribution for the zeroth Floquet band from full solution of matrix Eqs. In this paper, we developed non-equilibrium Keldysh Green's function approach to study periodically modu- lated systems with dissipation. As a practical example, we considered periodically driven normal system in contact with a superconducting bath. After integrating out the fermionic bath degrees of freedom and incorporating their effects into the self-energy, we can treat effect of dissipation as well as superconducting proximity nonperturbatively. We obtained a set of kinetic equations, which have the same structural form as in equilibrium, with the important distinction that the Green's functions and self-energy are now infinite-dimensional matrices in the Floquet space. By self-consistently truncating the matrices for a finite bandwidth or employing perturbative treatment for the small driving amplitude, we computed various physical observables such as density of states and occupation distribution function for the zeroth Floquet band which can be measured in energy-resolved tunneling spectroscopy experiments. Perspectives for the transport measurements of the electron current shot noise in periodically driven wires are also briefly discussed. Our new approach and results are useful for understanding the dissipative driven systems and non-equilibrium systems with proximity-induced superconductivity. Our main findings for specific model considered here can be summarized as follows. In the case of a nonsuperconducting bath, we show that the steady-state distribution function is non-thermal with characteristic dependence on the driving frequency. In the case of a superconducting bath, only quasiparticles with energies above bulk gap can escape into the bath and thermalize. Below the bulk superconducting gap but above the induced gap, the steady-state occupation probability is enhanced because quasiparticles cannot escape into the superconducting bath. Thus, the steady-state distribution function exhibits complicated structure which depends on the induced and bulk superconducting gaps as well as driving frequency and amplitude. We also find that periodic driving modifies the proximity effect and leads to a finite density of states below the induced superconducting gap. This non-equilibrium effect becomes more significant with increasing the driving amplitude. 3/4 4 √ -∆ 4 √ Ω-∆