The fluctuating superconducting correlations emerging in dirty hybrid structures in conditions of the strong proximity effect are demonstrated to affect the validity range of the widely used formalism of Usadel equations at mesoscopic scales. In superconductor -ferromagnet (SF) structures these giant mesoscopic fluctuations originating from the interference effects for the Cooper pair wave function in the presence of the exchange field can be responsible for an anomalously slow decay of superconducting correlations in a ferromagnet even when the non-collinear and spin-orbit effects are negligible. The resulting sample-to-sample fluctuations of the Josephson current in SFS junctions and local density of states in SF hybrid structures can provide an explanation of the long range proximity phenomena observed in mesoscopic samples with collinear magnetization. The successful development of modern experiment in a wide class of superconductor (S) -ferromagnet (F) hybrid structures has opened a completely new research area, i.e., superconducting spintronics Note that this inverse square root dependence differs strongly from the standard relation I c ∼ ∆ 0 /(eR) for the SNS junction. Our further calculations nicely confirm the above δI estimate and, thus, the observation of this unusual relation between the supercurrent and normal junction resistance could provide a verification of the long range proximity mechanism caused by mesoscopic fluctuations. The ensemble averaging laying in the basis of the derivation of the Usadel equations from the quasiclassical Eilenberger theory overlooks the above fluctuation effects emerging at mesoscopic scales. As we show below these fluctuation effects reveal themselves even in the quasiclassical limit λ F → 0 when we can neglect the corrections found in Here V F is the Fermi velocity, s is the trajectory coordinate and the function f sing (s R ) = cos γ taken at the right S electrode determines the phase gain γ along the trajectory. The boundary conditions at the left electrode read: f sing (s L ) = 1, f t (s L ) = 0. Let us emphasize here that contrary to the standard consideration the Eilenbergerlike equations in our approach are written along a random trajectory with many sharp turns and therefore they do not contain the impurity terms. Summing up over all trajectories Γ we find the current: Here j(χ) = n≥1 (j n /2) sin(nχ) is the trajectory contribution at zero exchange field, and μ m = 2π 2 T 2 (2m + 1) 2 /∆ 2 0 + 1. The vectors n L and n F are the unit vectors normal to the left electrode surface and parallel to the trajectory direction, respectively. The vector n F parametrizes the trajectories outcoming from the left electrode. The random phase γ depends on the whole path between the electrodes and not just on the distance between the starting and ending points of the trajectory. Taking for simplicity the case of a homogeneous exchange field we find γ = 2h(s R -s L )/ V F = Ωt, where t is the time of flight of electron along the trajectory and Ω = 2h/ . To average the above current expression over the random time of flight t we need to introduce the distribution function describing the probability density w(r 2 , r 1 , t) to get the trajectory starting at a certain point r 1 at the left electrode at the time t 1 = 0 and touching the right electrode at an arbitrary point r 2 at the time t 2 = t. In the diffusion limit this probability density is almost independent on the quasiparticle velocity direction at the electrodes and satisfies the diffusion equation: Here we assume the elastic mean free path l to be less than all the relevant length scales so that, in particular, l ≪ ξ f . The boundary condition should be defined from the fact that the trajectory which touches the S electrodes should be removed out of game. An obvious reason is that the corresponding electron moving along the trajectory experiences in this case the full Andreev reflection. Thus, at the surfaces of both S electrodes we should put w = 0. Choosing r 1,2 at the left and right electrodes, respectively, we find the probability distribution P (t) for the first-passage time between two electrodes: where the integral is taken over the surface of the right electrode and n R is the unit vector normal to this surface. The value P (t) gives the probability of the trajectory starting at the point r L at t 1 = 0 to leave the junction in the time interval from t to t + dt. The average current can be written as follows: where cos nγ = Re ∞ 0 e -inΩt P (t)dt = ReP (nΩ). We assume here the surfaces of S electrodes to be flat and obtain a one-dimensional problem along the coordinate x perpendicular to these surfaces. Introducing the function W(x,t) satisfying the 1D diffusion equation DW ′′ xx -inΩW = 0 with the boundary conditions DW (x = 0) = l and W (x = d) = 0 one can find P (nΩ) = DW ′ x (x = d, nΩ). Substituting the solution of the above diffusion equation into the current we obtain: One can see that this expression reproduces the result of the Usadel theory only for the first harmonic I 1 ∝ sin φ in the current -phase relation The mesoscopic fluctuations affect the validity of the nonlinear Usadel equations also for SNS junctions To find the rms value of the supercurrent we evaluate now the expression where A nm = cos nΩt cos mΩ t . The calculation of the above double sum can be done similar to the calculation of the conductance R -1 = G(d, l) in a dirty wire above T c . Assuming the normal layer thickness to be rather large (d ≫ ξ f ) and omitting the averages of the fast oscillating phase factors (which should give the shortrange terms decaying at the length ξ f ) we get where Taking the Drude-type conductance G/G 0 = N l/d for a disordered wire of the length d we find the estimate The deviations from the Drude result arise naturally from the so-called interference or localization corrections to the conductance Comparing the rms value with the average current taken in the same limit d ≫ ξ f we find This expression for current fluctuations definitely can not be obtained within the averaged Usadel theory and results from the partial cancelation of the interference contributions in the product of the anomalous Green functions. Note that turning to the limit d ≪ ξ f , i.e., to the case of the SNS junction our consideration should give a vanishing δI value since we disregarded the quantum interference of random semiclassical trajectories responsible for standard mesoscopic fluctuations The average current, therefore, decays exponentially as I ∝ (lN/ξ f )e -d/ξ f √ 2 while the rms average becomes long ranged because of the partial phase compensation at close trajectories: (δI) 2 ∝ f 2 sing ∝ N l/d. Thus, the above calculations confirm the estimate (1) both for short and long junctions. Certainly, further increase in the distance d will give us the exponential decay of the supercurrent but at the distances ξ N . The mesoscopic fluctuations considered in our work should be most easily observed in ferromagnetic wires because their relative contribution decays with the increase of the N number. Let us perform the quantitative comparison of our theory with the experimental data of the Ref. We now briefly comment on the effect of mesoscopic fluctuation on the local DOS (LDOS) at the Fermi level. In the ballistic system for straight linear trajectories one can easily obtain an Eilenberger-type expression for this quantity as a sum of contributions from different quasiclassical paths. This expression can be simplified applying the normalization condition for quasiclassical Green functions and taking the perturbation expansion in powers of the f function (see, e.g., , where ν F is the normal metal LDOS. The ensemble average of this value certainly decays exponentially δν/ν F ∝ -cos 2γ ∝ -(l/ξ f )e -d/ξ f cos(d/ξ f + π/4) with the increase in the distance d from the S electrode. The fluctuating LDOS contains a long range contribution similar to the one calculated above for the critical current: (δν/ν F ) 2 ∝ l/dN . This nonexponential behavior of the fluctuating superconducting contribution to the LDOS could be measured by a local conductance probe at different points of a ferromagnetic nanowire placed in contact to a superconductor providing, thus, a possible explanation of the long range proximity effect observed in Refs. The direct observation of the giant sample-to-sample fluctuations assumes the measurements of the critical current or LDOS on different junctions. It would be much more convenient to find the way to change the interference phases γ in a given sample and measure the junction " fingerprints " in analogy to the observation of universal conductance fluctuations vs applied magnetic field To sum up, we suggest a theoretical model describing the mesoscopic fluctuations in SF and SN systems. This model allows to obtain a huge fluctuation contribution in supercurrent in SFS junctions and LDOS which survives the destructive effect of the exchange field and could, thus, provide an explanation of the experimental data on the long-range proximity phenomena in ferromagnetic wires even in the absence of the exchange field inhomogeneity. The resulting fluctuating supercurrent is a sign-changing quantity and, thus, the ensemble fluctuations cause the appearance of both zero and π-junctions. Our analysis reveals also that fluctuations can be responsible for anomalously large values of the second and higher harmonics in the current-phase relation. This To illustrate the mechanism of the random phase accumulation and extend our discussion of the Usadel theory validity we have compared its results Here we apply the approach based on the averaging over the quasiclassical trajectories for the calculation of the local density of states (LDOS) in the middle plane x = 0 of the superconductor -normal metal -superconductor junction (see Fig. where the distribution function P (t) is defined in the main text. The Fourier transform of the function P (t) reads where E T h = D/d 2 is the Thouless energy and d is the distance between the superconducting electrodes. Evaluating the above integral we obtain: where a n = π 3 (2n + 1) 2 /2. For the energies well above the Thouless energy the density of states approaches unity: For low energies E ≪ E T h we find: a n e -anE T h /E . Neglecting this exponentially small contribution we restore the standard result of the Usadel theory, namely, zero density of states below the minigap E < 3.12E T h 