We have investigated the phase dynamics and IV-characteristics of shunted Josephson junctions coupled to an LC circuit. When the Josephson frequency ωJ is close to the eigen frequency ωrc of the coupled resonance circuit, the IV-characteristic demonstrates an additional rc-branch. We have investigated the features of the rc-branch and of the superconducting current component for different values of the resonance frequency. It has been found that the maximal value of the superconducting current depends on the resonance frequency and that it increases when the end point of the rcbranch approaches the critical current. The dependence of the maximal superconducting current on the resonance frequency at different values of the dissipation parameter is peculiar, for the optimized maximum appears to be independent of the system parameters within 1%. One of the simplest and effective methods to influence the features of Josephson junctions (JJ) is to shunt the device with linear elements as capacitances, inductances, and resistances An essential point of interest of the shunting of Josephson junction by LCR-cirquit is that it allows the contemporary presence of two frequencies for the same set of parameters, or birhythmicity, which is encountered in some biochemical systems The existence of resonance features in the IVcharacteristics in various systems of JJs with a resonance circuit was reported in a number of experimental and theoretical works (see The effect of external electromagnetic radiation on the shunted system when creates new phenomena when the induced vertical voltage interval (usually called Shapiro Step, SS) appears in correspondence of the resonance circuit branch. Particularly, when the corresponding SS is on the resonance branch, the amplitude dependence of its widths is determined by the effective frequency which varies in a wide interval Much attention to the Josephson junctions is nowadays due to the appearance of the novel physical phenomena and a variety of modern applications The role of LCs shunts has been recently underlined in coupled systems The paper is organized in the following way. In Sec. 2, we introduce the model and the system of equations that is used in our numerical simulations. In Sec. 3, we present the results of simulation, analysis of the IV characteristics at different shunt parameters and demonstrate general features of the rc-branch and behavior of superconducting current. The variation of the resonance frequency and β-dependence of the maximal superconducting current are discussed in Sec. 4. We present a plot of the rc-branches at different value of the resonance frequency and show the resonance frequency dependence of the maximal superconducting current. In Sec. 5, we analyze the endpoint of rc-branch at fixed rc-frequency Finally, we discuss the obtained results and come to the conclusions. To stress the main features of the shunted systems we concentrate on the description of the electric schema presented in Fig. The total current through the system is a sum of the currents through JJ, I j , and the current through the shunt elements, I sh . To describe the properties of the considered system, we use the usual RCSJ model which captures its main features and very well reflects the experimental results 1 . In the framework of RCSJ-model 1 , the current I j is determined by where C j , R j , and I c are used for the capacitance, resistance and critical current of JJ, while V and φ denote the voltage and the phase difference, respectively. The current I sh is determined by I sh = C∂u c /∂t, where C and u c are the shunt capacitance and voltage. In the parallel shunt connection the voltage of the JJ is equal to the sum of voltages on the shunted elements, i.e., In this paper we do not take into account the shunt resistance to stress the main effects of the shunting resonator. In normalized units the corresponding system of equations can be written in the form 37 Here the bias current I is normalized to the critical current I c of JJ, time t-to the inverse plasma frequency ω p = (2eI c /C j ) 1/2 , the voltages V and u c (voltage at the capacitance C) are normalized to V 0 = ω p /2e; the shunt capacitance C -to the capacitance of the JJ C j , and shunt inductance L to (C j ω 2 p ) -1 . In the system of equations ( Here we present the results for the underdamped JJ with β = 0.5 ÷ 0.2. We note that JJ together with the LC-elements form a parallel resonance circuit with its eigenfrequency 1 and a series resonance circuit with In this paper, we concentrate mostly on the parallel resonance. The details of the model and simulation procedure are presented in Refs. As we have mentioned in the Introduction, the specific feature of IV-characteristic of shunted JJ is a resonance circuit branch. Figure The position of the rc-branch endpoint corresponds to the voltage V = 1.6, as expected for the eigenfrequency at N = 1, L = 1.9531, C = 0.25 in Eq. ( The dependence of the superconducting current I s as a function of the bias current I along the sweep path of Fig. The close behavior is observed at another parameters of the resonance circuit. In Fig. As we have stressed above, in this work we focus on the superconducting current the average current flowing through the nonlinear Josephson element. Such current contributes to the total bias current together with the current through the resistor (the capacitor current being obviously zero on average). The contribution of the current through the Josephson element is essential to lock the junction either to an external drive, as elucidated by the the standard Bessel function approach The dc current through the Josephson element is also a key feature of JJ arrays synchronization. In fact it is this term that activates the oscillations responsible of the coupling among the junctions, that would otherwise be just uncoupled In Fig. At variance with the previous case, the rc-branch is outside the hysteresis region. Another important difference is worth underlying: the maximal superconducting current is essentially smaller and consists of I s = 0.27 (point B ′ ), instead with I s = 0.52 at ω rc = 1.6. A question appears: which parameters determine the maximum value I s can reach along the rc-branch? To find the answer, we have made detailed investigations at different resonance frequency and dissipation parameter β. The results, collected in Fig. The rc-branches at β = 0.2 and the resonance frequency in the interval (1.9, 8.5) are presented in Fig. In Fig. All figures demonstrate the maximum of I s in the interval between I s = 0.581 and I s = 0.583. In case β = 0.2 it is I s = 0.5828 and at β = 0.1 and β = 0.05 it is I s = 0.5819 and I s = 0.5817, respectively. Decrease of dissipation (increase of hysteresis region in IVcharacteristic) leads to the shift of maximum for larger ω rc . The maximal value of I s on rc-branch is determined by how close its end point I end to the critical current I c . In considered cases the maximal values of I s are realized in the following way: at I end = 0.9227 in case β = 0.2, and at I end = 0.9318 in both cases β = 0.1 and β = 0.05. We have also addressed another question: the determinant of the the size of the rc-branch. To this extent it has we have changed the shunt inductance and capacitance in a wide interval, leaving the constant of resonance frequency, ω rc = 3.0. The results are shown in Fig. The reactance X of this system is expressed by with In this system can be observed two type of resonances: serial and parallel. The serial resonance in the system is realized when reactance is equal zero; when this is the case, Eq. (3) gives the resonance frequency. The formula leads to the maximum of ac current through this circuit branch and to the minimum of the ac voltage. The case when the admittance is equal zero, corresponds to the parallel resonance with frequency (4) that leads to the maximum ac voltage. With a parallel circuit resonator the equivalent resistance (L sh , C sh , C j in series) diverges, and so does the bias current (that is a sum of the superconducting and normal currents). At the resonance (using our normalization) we may write I s + βω rc = I end , where we take into account that I n = βω rc . So, at fixed I end the maximum of the superconducting current is determined by value of I n at the resonance. The approximation I s + βω rc ≃ I end is in very good agreement with numerical simulations. The equation I s + βω rc = I end has two unknown functions of bias current (or ω rc ). To clarify it, we plot the simulated dependence of I end and I s on ω rc at different dissipation parameters in Fig. For the parallel resonance the reactive impedance of From the simulations we have obtained that I end depends on ω rc . Fitting of I end by a fourth order polynomial with coefficients presented in Table 