Theoretically, it is commonly held that in metals near a nematic quantum critical point the electronic excitations become incoherent on the entire "hot" Fermi surface, triggering non Fermi liquid behavior. However, such conclusions are based on electron-only theories, ignoring a symmetryallowed coupling between the electronic nematic variable and a suitable crystalline lattice strain. Here we show that including this coupling leads to entirely different conclusions because the critical fluctuations are mostly cutoff by the non-critical lattice shear modes. At sufficiently low temperatures the thermodynamics remain Fermi liquid type, while, depending on the Fermi surface geometry, either the entire Fermi surface stays cold, or at most there are hot spots. In particular, our predictions are relevant for the iron-based superconductors. At an Ising nematic quantum critical point (QCP) in solids, discussed often in the context of the iron-based superconductors, cuprates, ruthanates, and quantum Hall systems, the ground state transforms from one having discrete rotational symmetry to another in which this symmetry is broken (see Figure At present it is widely believed that the effective electron-electron interaction becomes long-ranged near the nematic QCP These results are based on the simplest treatment of the typical model describing itinerant electrons interacting with the critical nematic collective mode of the electrons themselves where ν 0 is a constant with dimension of density of states, and q and Ω n are dimensionless momentum and Matsubara frequency, respectively. The dynamics of the collective mode is damped due to the excitation of particle-hole Ising nematic phase transition involving (x 2 -y 2 ) symmetry breaking. (a) The C4 symmetric Fermi surface (red) distorts and becomes C2 symmetric (green) in the nematic phase. (b) A tetragonal lattice with equivalent x and ŷ directions. (c) View of its x -y plane, which distorts in the nematic phase, red and green circles being the original and the distorted atomic positions respectively. In the nematic phase the unit cell lengths a and b along the two directions become inequivalent. is the orthorhombic strain. Even if the electron dispersion is two-dimensional, in the presence of the lattice the third dimension is important (see text). pairs close to the Fermi surface, D(q, iΩ n ) ∝ |Ω n |/q. At the QCP the tuning parameter vanishes, r = 0. More recently, a lot of work has been done to improve the theory in d = 2 Experimentally, the existence of NFL physics is wellestablished in the pseudogap and strange metal phases of the cuprates Nemato-elastic coupling. The link between nematic QCP and NFL behavior is based on an electrononly theory. In practice, in a solid the electronic environment is sensitive to the lattice strains, and this gives rise to a symmetry-allowed nemato-elastic coupling between the electron-nematic variable φ and a suitable component of the strain tensor of the type where λ is the coupling constant with dimension of energy. For the sake of concreteness we assume φ to transform as (x 2y 2 ) under the point group operations. Then, ε(r) = ε + i q =0 [q x u x (q)q y u y (q)] e iq•r is the local orthorhombic strain, u(r) is the atomic displacement associated with strain fluctuation, and the uniform macroscopic strain ε = 0 in the symmetry-broken nematic/orthorhombic phase, see Fig. , where C ijkl are the bare elastic constants (for an explicit expression in the more convenient Voigt notation used henceforth, see Supplementary Information (SI)) where C 0 is the bare orthorhombic elastic constant. At this point the renormalized orthorhombic elastic constant C0 ≡ C 0λ 2 ν 0 /r vanishes, triggering a simultaneous orthorhombic instability. We take r 0 to be a small parameter, i.e., the effective energy scale generated by the coupling λ is small compared to Fermi energy. Technically, this allows to track how the properties of the familiar electron-only theory are recovered at a sufficiently high temperature. Direction selective criticality. This is an inherent property of acoustic instabilities of a solid whereby criticality, or the vanishing of the acoustic phonon velocity, is restricted to certain high-symmetry directions in the Brillouin zone such as q1,2 ≡ (q x ± qy )/ √ 2 for a tetragonalorthorhombic transition transition in FeSC has also been pointed out In the presence of the nemato-elastic coupling λ the strain and the electron-nematic degree of freedom hybridize, and the resulting mode inherits the above anisotropy. The hybridization can be incorporated by integrating out the strain fluctuations giving rise to a renormalization of the nematic susceptibility of Eq. ( Here ρ is the density, μ is the polarization index, a q ≡ (q x , -q y , 0), and ûq,μ is the polarization vector for the bare acoustic phonons with angle-dependent velocity v (0) q,μ and dispersion ω q,μ = v (0) q,μ • q. To lowest order in r 0 , the frequency dependence of Π can be dropped. Then both the numerator and the denominator of Π are O(q 2 ). This implies that the effect of the nemato-elastic coupling is to soften the mass of the nematic fluctuations, albeit with an angular dependence, i.e. r → r(q) ≡ rν 0 Π(q → 0, Ω n = 0). Note, r(q) possesses the four-fold symmetry of the crystal lattice in the non-nematic phase. As shown in the SI [23], an immediate consequence of this angular dependent mass is that criticality is restricted to the two high-symmetry directions q = ±q 1,2 only, for which r(q) = 0 at the QCP, see Fig. In the following we assume that all the bare elastic constants are of order C 0 , such that the entire lattice effect can be modeled by the single parameter r 0 . With this simplification, that does not change the results qualitatively, the critical static nematic susceptibility is given by χ -1 (q ≈ q 1 ) ∝ r 0 (q 2 2 + q 2 z )/q 2 1 + q 2 1 . Note, the criticality around q 2 can be deduced by q 1 ↔ q 2 . This leads to two important conclusions. First, even if the electronic sub-system has two-dimensional dispersion, as in the cuprates and the FeSC, the q z dependence of χ(q) is generated by the lattice. Second, the direction selective criticality leads to anisotropic scaling with (q 2 , q z ) ∼ q 2 1 around q 1 , see Fig. Fermi surface dependent dynamics. The effect of the lattice is indirect. Since Π is essentially static at small r 0 , the critical dynamics is generated by the excitation of particle-hole pairs in the Fermi sea, and is given by D(q, iΩ n ) of Eq. ( The important point is that the interaction between the nematic collective mode and the electrons, given by H nem-el ∝ q,k h k c † k+q/2 c k-q/2 φ q in usual notations, is invariably accompanied by a form factor h k that transforms as (k 2 xk 2 y ). Note, Landau damping requires electrons to scatter along the Fermi surface. This implies that the damping of a collective mode with momentum along q depends on the form factor at those particular points on the Fermi surface where q is tangential to the surface. Ballistic nematicity. Consider the Fermi surface of the cuprates, shown in Figure Damped nematicity. Now consider the typical Fermi surface of the FeSC with hole and electron pockets around the zone center, and around (π, 0) and (0, π), respectively, as shown in Figure ) and exponent z = 3. The damping only involves certain hot spots of the electron pockets, on which we comment further below. Critical thermodynamics. For the sake of concreteness henceforth we assume that the electronic dispersion is two-dimensional. The free energy of the nematic fluctuations is F = (T /2) q,Ωn log χ -1 (q, iΩ n ), and the critical phase diagram is summarized in Fig. In this low T -regime the nemato-elastic coupling sets in, and direction selective criticality is restricted to region (i). The associated thermodynamics is as follows. Ballistic nematicity (Cuprates). In this case where the last term indicates that Landau damping requires a finite q 2component. The competition between these two terms yields an additional crossover scale T * ∼ r 2 0 E F . For T T * the dynamics is ballistic, giving the scaling 1 . But, above T * the dynamics is damped, with the scaling |Ω n | ∼ r 0 q 1 . In both these two regimes momentum scaling (q 2 , q z ) ∼ q 2 1 /r to Ts(r). r0 1 is the ratio between the lattice-generated energy scale and Fermi energy EF . Above the temperature scale TFL ∼ r 3/2 0 EF the nemato-elastic coupling can be neglected, and the familiar electron-only theory of nematicity giving non Fermi liquid (NFL) physics is appropriate. TFL is a crossover to Fermi liquid physics. Below TFL nemato-elastic coupling is important, and criticality is direction selective (see Fig. ical free energy can be estimated from the above scaling (for detailed calculation see SI Note, the T 3/2 contribution appears also in the context of elastic quantum criticality (EQC), even in the absence of itinerant electrons In the above c 1,••• ,4 are numerical prefactors. For both cases, once the nemato-elastic coupling sets in below T FL , the leading thermodynamics is Fermi liquid type, while the critical contribution is subleading, in stark contrast to what the electron-only theory predicts. Note, in our theory we do not expect increased entropy in the nematic phase Electron Self-energy. We calculate at zero temperature the frequency dependence of the electron self-energy on the Fermi surface, i.e., Σ k and G is the electron Green's function. As in the free energy calculation, the regions (i) and (ii) of the q-space are important. At sufficiently high frequency |ω n | T FL the contribution from (ii) gives S(iω n ) ∝ |ω n | 2/3 , and the entire Fermi surface is hot (barring the points where h k F = 0). Thus, at high frequency we recover the properties of the electron-only critical theory. For low frequency this contribution turns into a non-critical Fermi liquid correction with S(iω n ) ∼ -iω n /r 1/2 0 , which guarantees that the real part of the self energy stays Fermi liquid type everywhere on the Fermi surface. The contribution from region (i) can lead to singular self-energy provided it involves electrons scattering parallel to the Fermi surface. This implies that at most we expect "hot spots" where electronic lifetimes are short, see Fig. Discussion. The nemato-elastic coupling in Eq. ( For the iron-based superconductors we predict Fermi liquid behavior below T F L in thermodynamics and in single-particle properties, except at "hot spots" on the electron pockets where non canonical Fermi liquid behavior is expected. Our predictions can be tested by photoemission, and by quasiparticle interference effects in tunneling spectroscopy upon suppression of the superconducting phase in these systems. Supplementary Material for "Lattice effects on nematic quantum criticality in metals" In this section we provide the mathematical details of how nemato-elastic coupling leads to direction selective criticality. We start with an explicit expression for the elastic energy, and then we discuss how the electronic nematic susceptibility χ 0 (q, iΩ n ), see equation ( in the presence of the nemato-elastic coupling given by equation ( The most general elastic free energy for a tetragonal system, to lowest order in the strains, is given by Here [q i u j (q) + q j u i (q)] e iq•r , with (i, j) = (x, y, z) are the local strains, which has an uniform component ε ij and a fluctuating part that describe the acoustic phonons. The latter is defined in terms of the atomic displacement u, and c 11 etc. denote elastic constants in Voigt notation. In particular, the local orthorhombic strain, that enters equation ( The dynamical matrix N(q) is defined by the relation F E ≡ q =0 u * i (q)N ij (q)u j (q)/2, where summation over repeated indices is implied. We get N xx = c 11 q 2 x + c 66 q 2 y + 4c 44 q 2 z , N yy = N 11 (q x ↔ q y ), N zz = c 33 q 2 z + c 44 (q 2 x + q 2 y ), N xy = (c 12 + c 66 )q x q y , N xz = (c 13 + c 44 )q x q z , N yz = N xz (q x ↔ q y ). We write where ûq,μ are the polarization vectors, U q,μ are the associated displacements at q, and μ = (α, β, γ) is the polarization index. The eigenvalue equation N(q)û q,μ = ρω 2 q,μ ûq,μ , with the mass density ρ, defines the bare phonon dispersions ω q,μ . The electronic nematic variable φ(r) is characterized by the susceptibility χ -1 0 (q, iΩ n ) = ν -1 0 r + q 2 /k 2 F + D(q, iΩ n ) , in the electron-only theory, and is given in equation ( At the mean field level the effect of λ is to couple φ 0 with the uniform orthorhombic strain ε ≡ ε xxε yy , such that the Landau free energy density for the transition is modified to This implies that the QCP is shifted to a positive value of r = r 0 ≡ λ 2 ν 0 /C 0 . This is the content of equation ( softens to zero at the QCP, and in the nematic phase the lattice is orthorhombic with ε = 0, see Fig. where a q ≡ (q x , -q y , 0). Expressing the displacements in terms of the normal modes given by equation (S3), and noting that the phonon Green's function is U q,μ U q ,μ = δ qq δ μμ ρ -1 /(ω 2 q,μ + Ω 2 n ), it is simple to infer that the result of integrating out the lattice variables is to obtain equation (S1) with The acoustic phonon dispersion is linear in momentum with a direction dependent bare velocity v q,μ , i.e., ω q,μ = v (0) q,μ • q. This implies that Π(q, Ω n = 0) is only a function of the two angles q. Thus, the main effect of the nematoelastic coupling is to renormalize the mass of the nematic fluctuations, which is isotropic in the electron-only theory, and which becomes a four-fold symmetric function of q. In other words, r → r(q) ≡ rν 0 Π(q, Ω n = 0). (S8) Note, collective modes with direction dependent masses are well known from studies of certain structural phase transitions, such as an uniaxial ferroelectric transition that involves long range dipolar interaction Already at this point it is clear that at the QCP, defined by r = r 0 , the renormalized mass r(q) cannot vanish along all the directions. This leads to the concept of direction selective criticality, see Figure (S9) The evaluation of the renormalized mass r(q) and the identification of the critical directions can be performed simply by diagonalizing the 3 × 3 dynamical matrix N ij . However, this is cumbersome and less insightful. Instead, we will restrict the evaluation of r(q) to only along the high symmetry directions, and this is sufficient to identify the critical directions. Thus, along the direction q1 the only lattice eigenmode that contributes to mass renormalization has eigenvalue ω 2 q1 = (C 0 /ρ)q 2 1 and eigenvector ûq1 = (1, -1, 0)/ √ 2. This leads to Π(q, Ω n = 0; q = q1 ) = λ 2 /C 0 . Similarly, along the direction qx the contributing lattice eigenmode has eigenvalue ω 2 qx = (C 11 /ρ)q 2 x and eigenvector ûqx = (1, 0, 0), and this leads to Π(q, Ω n = 0; q = qx ) = λ 2 /C 11 . Using tetragonal symmetry we also infer that Π(q 1 ) = Π(q 2 ), and Π(q x ) = Π(q y ). On the other hand, along qz we get Π = 0. The stability of the bare lattice ensures that C 11 > C 0 (one of the Born stability criteria) From the above discussion one can infer that small deviations from a critical direction, say q = q1 , can be expressed as r(q ≈ q1 ) = c 2 (q 2 /q 1 ) 2 + c z (q z /q 1 ) 2 , where c 2,z are pre-factors that depend on the bare elastic constants. Now, in this work we are interested only in the leading temperature and frequency dependencies and the associated exponents of various quantities, and not their numerical prefactors. On the other hand, in a typical metal, the bare elastic constants are all of the order of 10 GPa, and their ratios are simply numbers of order one, that we are not interested to track in this work. Consequently, the calculation simplifies immensely if we assume that the bare elastic constants are all of the order of C 0 , such that the entire lattice effect can be modeled by the single parameter r 0 . It is easy to show that c 2,z ∝ r 0 . With this simplification the asymptotic form of the renormalized static nematic susceptibility can be written as Thus, direction selective criticality leads to anisotropic scaling with (q 2 , q z ) ∼ q 2 1 , see Figure At small r 0 the dynamics generated by the phonons can be ignored, and that of the nematic boson φ is entirely generated by its interaction with the electrons. This interaction has the structure, where h k ∼ cos k xcos k y is a form factor that transforms as (k 2 xk 2 y ). This leads to a nematic polarization of the form where G k (iω n ) = (iω nk ) -1 is the electron Green's function. For the sake of concreteness, from now on we assume that the electronic sub-system is two-dimensional, as in the case of the iron based superconductors and the cuprates. We simplify the evaluation of the above by assuming a two-dimensional circular Fermi surface where ψ k = ∠(q, k) and k = k/k. Note, the qualitative conclusions will not change for Fermi surfaces with crystalline anisotropy. The low energy contribution to the dynamics of the collective mode can be turned into a Fermi surface integral of the type The evaluation of the above is standard, and we get where cos θ q = q • q1 . Due to direction selective criticality, we need to evaluate D(q, iΩ n ) along the critical directions q1,2 , and this depends crucially whether h k itself vanishes along these directions. As shown in Figure (3) of the main text, this is indeed the case for a typical cuprate Fermi surface and for that of the hole pockets in the iron superconductors. Thus, for the cuprate Fermi surface the Landau damping vanishes along the critical directions for which θ q = 0, π/2, and we get which gives ballistic critical dynamics, and dynamical exponent z = 2. On the other hand, for the iron superconductors (FeSC), the typical Fermi surface is comprised of hole pockets centred at (0, 0), and electron pockets centred at (π, 0) and (0, π). For the same reason as above, the hole pockets cannot provide Landau damping of the critical nematic fluctuations. But, on the electron pockets the form factor h k ≈ 1, and in this case we get In other words, we get back standard Landau damping and exponent z = 3. Thus, depending on the underlying Fermi surfaces, we get two different classes of nematic quantum criticality. In this section we give details of the calculation of the free energy of the nematic fluctuations. The results are summarized in the phase diagram of Figure As mentioned in the main text, there are two regions in the momentum space that are important. (i) The region q ≈ ±q 1,2 , where critical fluctuations survive once the nemato-elastic coupling is significant. (ii) The region q z (q 1 , q 2 ) for which the entire nemato-elastic coupling can be neglected, and where we get the susceptibility of the electron-only theory with and q 2d = (q 1 , q 2 ). Note, since (ii) spans a larger volume in momentum space than (i), the leading contribution to thermodynamics is from (ii) at all temperatures. The contribution from (ii) is straightforward to evaluate. Above the temperature scale T FL ∼ r 3/2 0 E F we recover the usual electron-only theory with isotropic two-dimensional criticality and γ(T ) ∝ 1/T 1/3 . However, for T T FL it behaves as a massive mode, giving Fermi liquid type contribution with γ(T ) ∝ 1/r 1/2 0 . In this low T -regime the nemato-elastic coupling sets in, and criticality is direction selective which is restricted to region (i) of q-space. The associated thermodynamics now depends on the type of the dynamics of the fluctuations, and, therefore, on the Fermi surface of the electrons. Combining equations (S10) and (S13), the critical nematic susceptibility for T T FL is This leads to the following two regimes. Low temperature regime T T * ∼ r 2 0 E F . Here the dynamics is ballistic and the last term in the above equation can be neglected. This leads to the scaling |Ω n | ∼ q 2 1 , and (q 2 , q z ) ∼ q 2 1 /r 1/2 0 . The critical free energy is given by where E 2 q /E 2 F = r 0 (q 2 2 + q 2 z ) + q 4 1 . Note, the above momentum integral is restricted to (q 2 , q z ) q 2 1 /r where scaling holds. To leading order we get where a 1 ≈ -∞ 0 dqq 4 1 0 dpp ln 1e -q 2 √ 1+p 2 = 0.24. Note, the numerical prefactor a 1 depends on the ultraviolet cutoff of the scaling (q 2 , q z ) ∼ q 2 1 /r 1/2 0 , i.e., on the upper cutoff of the p-integral. As such, it is a non-universal quantity whose order of magnitude is significant, rather than its precise value. It translates into a specific heat coefficient γ(T ) ∝ T 3/2 . The T 3/2 contribution to γ(T ) also appears in the context of quantum critical elasticity even in the absence of itinerant electrons where n B is the Bose function, ≈ 0.02, and a 3 = ∞ 0 (dx/π 3 )x 5 /(e x -1) ≈ 4. Note, a 2 depends on the ultraviolet cutoff of the momentum integrals, and is non-universal. This gives a γ(T ) ∝ T 4 , which is a rather weak temperature dependence that is indistinguishable from higher order analytic Fermi liquid corrections in powers of T 2 . As before, the leading T dependence in this regime is the Fermi liquid type γ(T ) ∝ 1/r 1/2 0 contribution of the region (ii). In this case the critical fluctuations stay damped down to the lowest temperatures, and T * can be set to zero. Combining equations (S10) and (S15), the critical nematic susceptibility for T T FL is This gives the scaling |Ω n | ∼ q 3 1 and (q 2 , q z ) ∼ q 2 1 /r 1/2 0 , and a critical free energy (ωq 1 )/E F ) q 4 1 + r 0 q 2 2 + r 0 q 2 z = -a 4 a 5 T 8/3 1 q 3 (1+p 2 ) ≈ 0.09, and a 5 = (2/π 3 ) ∞ 0 dxx 5/3 /(e x -1) ≈ 0.12. As in the earlier cases, the pre-factor a 4 is non-universal. This leads to a critical γ(T ) ∝ T 2/3 which is subleading to the Fermi liquid contribution from region (ii). This completes the demonstration that, for both the universality classes, below the scale T FL the leading thermodynamics is Fermi liquid type. In this section we give the details of the calculation of the electron self-energy due to scattering with the critical nematic fluctuations. This can be written as where In the following we calculate the frequency dependence of the self-energy at zero temperature for electrons on the Fermi surface. As in the case of the free energy calculation, there are two regions of q-space that are important, namely (i) q ≈ q1,2 , and (ii) q z (q 1 , q 2 ). The contribution from (ii) is straightforward. At sufficiently high q y FIG. frequency |ω n | T FL the mass term in equation (S17) can be neglected and we recover the usual electron-only critical theory with S (ii) (iω n ) ∝ |ω n | 2/3 , and the entire Fermi surface is hot (except at points where h k = 0) 0 ) . The first term gives ReΣ ∝ ω/r 1/2 0 , and the second term ImΣ ∝ ω 2 ln |ω|/r 2 0 , as is expected for a Fermi liquid in two space dimensions In this case the critical fluctuations have ballistic dynamics at low enough frequencies. The general expression for the self-energy correction from region (i) is where cos θ k F ≡ nk F • q1 , see Figure For the leading frequency dependence we can set ν n = 0 in the integrand. This gives where This implies that the contribution of region (i) to the real part of the self-energy is Fermi liquid like, and it is of the same order as the contribution from region (ii). In order to obtain ImΣ we also study the subleading frequency dependence of S (i) nk F (iω n ). For nk F = ±q 1 the important contribution is from the first term in equation (S26) that involves the critical boson with momentum oriented along q2 , and vice versa. We expand the integrand in ν n , and for the self-energy around nk F = ±q 1 we get Note, the η-integral is now infrared divergent and it needs a suitable lower cutoff. This leads to It is important to note that the form factor h k = 0 for θ k F = 0. Thus, in the above the |ω n | 3/2 self-energy term is accompanied by a vanishing pre-factor h 2 k ∝ θ 2 k F . Using four-fold symmetry of the self-energy, the same argument is valid for nk F = ±q 2 . This guarantees that the leading ImΣ is from region (ii) and is Fermi liquid like. Thus, with a cuprate type of Fermi surface the putative hot spots at nk F = ±q 1,2 are rendered cold by the vanishing form factor. Furthermore, one can show that the subleading term for generic nk F has the form S (i) nk F (iω n ; θ k F ≈ 1) subleading ∝ |ω n | 5/2 /r 0 coming from the boson pole. This leads to a free energy F (T ) ∝ T 7/2 , which is consistent with equation (S19). In this case the critical fluctuations have standard Landau damped dynamics since they couple to the particle-hole continuum of the electron pockets. We get This can be evaluated as in the above. We introduce the variables (ξ, η), and after the ξ and q z integrals we get The leading frequency dependence is Fermi liquid like as in the ballistic case, and is also given by equation (S27 Note, on the electron pockets of the FeSC the form factor h k ≈ 1. Thus, the hot spots at nk F = ±q 1,2 survive on the electron pockets, where the single particle lifetime is shorter than what is standard for Fermi liquids in two space dimensions with ImΣ ∝ ω 4/3 . Furthermore, the sizes of the hot spots can be estimated as ∆θ hot ∼ |ω n | 1/3 /r 1/2 0 . Note, the free energy associated with the hot spots can be estimated as F (T ) ∝ T 8/3 , which is consistent with equation (S22). On the other hand, as in the case of the cuprates, the hot spots do not survive on the hole pockets due to vanishing form factor. Overall, we conclude that the effect of the nemato-elastic coupling is quite drastic on the single electron properties. In an electron-only theory of nematic QCP we expect the Fermi surface to be isotropically hot with non Fermi liquid features. In contrast, once the nemato-elastic coupling is included, Fermi liquid, or well-defined quasiparticles survive at the lowest frequencies. Depending on the Fermi surface of the system at most there are hot spots where the quasiparticle lifetime is shorter than what is usual in two dimensions. Thus, the entire cuprate Fermi surface stay cold, while for the FeSC hot spots exist only on the electron pockets but not on the hole pockets.