The low-energy physics of a superfluid 3 He-B is governed by Nambu-Goldstone bosons resulting from its characteristic symmetry breaking pattern. Here we construct an effective field theory at zero temperature consistent with all available symmetries in curved space, which are the U(1) phase × SU(2)spin × SO(3) orbital gauge invariance and the nonrelativistic general coordinate invariance, up to the next-to-leading order in a derivative expansion. The obtained low-energy effective field theory is capable of reproducing gyromagnetic responses of the superfluid 3 He-B, such as a magnetization generated by a rotation and an orbital angular momentum density generated by a magnetic field, in a model-independent and nonperturbative way. We furthermore show that the stress tensor exhibits a dissipationless Hall viscosity with coefficients uniquely fixed by the orbital angular momentum density, which manifests itself as an elliptical polarization of sound wave with an induced transverse component. V. Summary and conclusion 10 Since its discovery in 1972, the superfluid 3 He has been one of the most fascinating systems in condensed matter physics In spite of such long-standing study, our fascination for the superfluid 3 He never ends. Recently, it has received renewed interest from the perspective of topology While many fascinating features are exhibited by the superfluid 3 He, its quantitatively reliable analysis is often challenging because the system is strongly correlated. One powerful approach suitable for such strongly correlated superfluids is the effective field theory In order to exploit all available symmetry constraints, it is advantageous to couple the system with external gauge fields to temporarily promote the global symmetries to their local counterparts. In particular, the Galilean invariance is promoted to the nonrelativistic general coordinate invariance by putting the system in curved space with an external metric To this end, we first review the symmetries and their spontaneous breaking in the superfluid 3 He-B and discuss how they can be promoted to the local symmetries in curved space in Sec. II. We then construct an effective field theory at zero temperature up to the next-to-leading order in a derivative expansion in Sec. III. Its physical consequences are investigated in Sec. IV and, in particular, we predict the gyromagnetic and Hall responses of the superfluid 3 He-B. Finally, we summarize and conclude this paper in Sec. V and some detailed information is presented in Appendix. In what follows, we shall set = μ 0 = 1 with μ 0 being the vacuum permeability and employ shorthand notations (x) = (t, x) = (t, x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) for spacetime coordinates and φ ∂ In and after Sec. II B, α, β, γ, . . . and a, b, c, . . . refer to spin and orbital indices, respectively, with no distinction between upper and lower indices for them. In contrast, i, j, k, . . . refer to general coordinate indices in curved space, which are lowered and raised by a metric g ij (x) and its inverse g ij (x). We partly follow standard notations in general relativity such as for the metric determinant denoted by g(x) ≡ det[g ij (x)], the Christoffel symbols by Γ , and so on A. Superfluid 3 He-B in flat space The microscopic action describing a liquid 3 He with slight idealization of neglecting the dipolar coupling is where T is a spin-1/2 fermion field with its mass m and V (r) is an interatomic potential. Evidently, it is invariant under the U(1) phase and SU(2) spin rotations, ψ(x) → e iφ Sψ(x), as well as the SO(3) spatial rotation ∂ i ψ(x) → R ij ∂ j ψ(x). Therefore, the symmetry group of the microscopic action includes in addition to the spacetime translation, Galilean boost, parity inversion, and time reversal. The ground state of the liquid 3 He is a superfluid state, where the fermion bilinear in the spin-triplet (α = 1, 2, 3) and p-orbital (i = 1, 2, 3) channel acquires a nonzero vacuum expectation value. Here the spin index of the fermion bilinear is contracted by multiplying the outer Pauli matrix to make the order parameter matrix-valued and transform as ∆ i (x) → e 2iφ SR ij ∆ j (x)S † . In particular, the order parameter of the superfluid 3 He-B is provided by a constant ∆ i (x) = ∆ 0 σ i , which transforms as ∆ 0 σ i → ∆ 0 e 2iφ SL † σ i LS † with L being the SU(2) matrix related to the rotation matrix by L † σ i L = R ij σ j . Therefore, the spin and orbital degrees of freedom are locked by the pair condensation so that the symmetry group G is spontaneously broken down to SU(2) S+L . Because such spontaneously broken symmetry transformation does not change the energy of the system, the ground state is continuously degenerate. The spacetime variation of the order parameter in the ground-state manifold thus describes gapless excitations, which is parametrized by Here θ(x) and U (x) ∈ SU(2) are Nambu-Goldstone fields of the superfluid 3 He-B corresponding to the phase and spin-orbit collective modes, respectively, and transform as θ(x) → θ(x) + φ and U (x) → SU (x)L † . While the spin-orbit collective mode is usually represented by the rotation matrix B. Superfluid 3 He-B in curved space We now wish to promote the above global symmetries to their local counterparts. The local U(1) φ and SU(2) S rotations act on the fermion field as ψ(x) → e iφ(x) S(x)ψ(x). ( The microscopic action can be made invariant by coupling it with external U(1) and SU(2) gauge fields through the gauge covariant derivative and imposing their gauge transformations of so that D μ ψ(x) → e iφ(x) S(x)D μ ψ(x). On the other hand, in order to achieve the local SO(3) L invariance, we need to put the system in curved space with an external metric g ij (x) ≡ e a i (x)e b j (x)δ ab . Here a set of vector fields e a i (x) is called the vielbein (a = 1, 2, 3) and defines a local orthonormal frame, where the local SO(3) L rotation acts as and hence for the spatial covariant derivative which, including the interaction term as shown later, enjoys the U(1 Similarly, the order parameter of the superfluid 3 He-B in curved space becomes which in the ground-state manifold is parametrized by the Nambu-Goldstone fields as They transform under the gauge transformation as with the same relationship L † (x)σ a L(x) = R ab (x)σ b as before. While the external gauge fields are introduced to grant the gauge invariance to the microscopic action, their physical meanings can be extracted from Eq. ( The microscopic action in curved space furthermore enjoys the nonrelativistic general coordinate invariance. Under an infinitesimal but spacetime-dependent shift of spatial coordinates x i → x i + ξ i (x), the microscopic action remains invariant if the fields therein are transformed according to with ξ(x) ≡ ∂ t ξ(x) are referred to as scalars and vectors, respectively. Because the order parameter of the superfluid 3 He-B in curved space is merely a set of scalar fields, the Nambu-Goldstone fields transform likewise as So far we have not specified the interaction term in curved space. It is required not only to be invariant under the gauge transformation and the general coordinate transformation but also to produce the interatomic potential of 3 He atoms in flat space, which we shall model by the Lennard-Jones potential V (r) = C 12 /r 12 + C 6 /r 6 . Each power-law potential can be realized by coupling the fermion field with an auxiliary massless field φ(x, X) living in n + 2 spatial dimensions as where X I (I = 4, 5, . . . , n + 2) are coordinates in extra dimensions . Therefore, the Lennard-Jones potential in flat space can be incorporated in the microscopic action by the interaction term of S int = S 12 + S 6 in a way compatible with the gauge invariance and the general coordinate invariance in curved space. Because fermions are fully gapped in the superfluid 3 He-B, its low-energy physics is governed by the Nambu-Goldstone bosons. By integrating out the fermion and auxiliary fields in curved space, we obtain the effective action written in terms of the Nambu-Goldstone fields, θ(x) and U (x), as well as the external fields, A μ (x), B μ (x), and e a i (x). Crucially, it must be consistent with the gauge invariance and the general coordinate invariance of the microscopic action, which is our guiding principle in constructing the low-energy effective field theory. In order to proceed, we need to introduce a spin connection according to where σ i (x) ≡ e a i (x)σ a is a set of Pauli matrices in curved space to obey with ε ijk (x) ≡ e a i (x)e b j (x)e c k (x)ǫ abc = g(x)ǫ ijk being the antisymmetric tensor and as so that it plays the role of SU(2) L gauge field. What is crucial to our later predictions is that the second term in Eq. ( The gauge fields can appear in the gauge invariant effective action either through gauge covariant derivatives of the Nambu-Goldstone fields, or through their field strength tensors, Here D μ θ(x) and F μν (x) are gauge invariant, while the others are gauge covariant and transform as , and On the other hand, under the general coordinate transformation, the gauge covariant derivatives transform as While D i U (x) is a vector, D t θ(x) and D t U (x) are not scalars because of the last terms in their transformation laws. Such undesirable terms can be eliminated with the help of D i θ(x) by modifying the temporal covariant derivatives as which now transform as genuine scalars and are actually equivalent to the material derivatives in fluid mechanics. We are ready to construct the effective action with the building blocks introduced above. While there is an infinite number of terms allowed by the gauge invariance and the general coordinate invariance, they can be organized systematically according to a derivative expansion valid in the low-energy limit. Our power counting scheme is such that are regarded as O(1), while are regarded as small expansion parameters of O(p). It is indeed possible and more comprehensive to treat ∂ μ θ(x) as O(1) in spite of ∂ μ ∼ O(p) because θ(x) does not appear in the effective action without derivatives acting on it At each order in the derivative expansion, only a finite number of terms is allowed in the effective action. Here, in addition to the gauge invariance and the general coordinate invariance, the parity and time-reversal invariance of the microscopic action must be imposed as well on the effective action of the superfluid 3 He-B. The effective action is a spacetime integral of the corresponding Lagrangian density, which can be divided into a part involving only the phase collective mode and the rest involving the spin-orbit collective mode as well. The former part is actually identical to the effective action of spin-singlet s-orbital superfluids, which was already constructed up to the next-to-leading order in Ref. with f 0 [ * ] being an arbitrary function. Because no terms at O(p) comply with the required invariance, the nextto-leading order is O(p 2 ) where four distinct Lagrangian densities contribute to the effective action θ,1-4 (x) whose explicit expressions are provided by Eqs. (A1)-(A4) in Appendix. Similarly, the Lagrangian densities involving the spin-orbit collective mode do not contribute to the effective action at O(p), while five distinct contributions are found at O(p 2 ). In particular, only one of them involves the temporal covariant derivative of U (x) and is expressed as U,1-4 (x), in contrast, involve the spatial covariant derivative of U (x) and their explicit expressions are provided by Eqs. (A6)-(A9) in Appendix. Accordingly, the most general Lagrangian density up to the next-to-leading order in the derivative expansion proves to be where next-to-next-to-leading-order corrections are as small as O(p 4 ). 1 The obtained effective action of the superfluid 3 He-B depends on the ten unknown functions of f 0-4 [ * ] and g 0-4 [ * ]. While they cannot be constrained further from our perspective of low-energy effective field theory, two of them can be related to common thermodynamic quantities. To this end, we temporarily consider the uniform ground state in flat space where the Nambu-Goldstone fields are constant and the spatial components of the external gauge fields are turned off. Their temporal components set to be constant are equivalent to the chemical potential A t = μ and the Zeeman energy B t = (γ/2)σ • H as already discussed. Therefore, the Lagrangian density is reduced to where H is an applied magnetic field and γ ≈ -2.04 × 10 8 /(s T) is the gyromagnetic ratio of 3 He nucleus Because the Lagrangian density differentiated with respect to μ and H produces the particle number density and the magnetization, respectively, it must be identical to the pressure of the superfluid 3 He-B at zero temperature In particular, P 0 [μ] ≡ f 0 [μ] is the pressure and χ 0 [μ] ≡ γ 2 g 0 [μ]/2 is the magnetic susceptibility as functions of the chemical potential at zero magnetic field. The other functions, however, remain unidentified and thus we shall carefully extract universal predictions that are independent of them. By construction, our effective action and hence predictions are valid at a sufficiently low-energy and long-wavelength regime compared to the superfluid gap energy and coherence length, respectively. We arrive at the stage of investigating physical consequences of our low-energy effective field theory. When the effective action is invariant under an infinitesimal transformation of the fields therein by δθ(x), δU (x), δA μ (x), δB μ (x), and δe a i (x), we obtain the identity: where δS eff /δθ(x) and δS eff /δU (x) are eliminated with the help of the equations of motion for the Nambu-Goldstone fields and the SU(2) S gauge field is decomposed as B μ (x) ≡ B α μ (x)σ α . This identity applied to the gauge transformation and the general coordinate transformation immediately leads to the continuity equations in curved space. First of all, the U(1) φ gauge invariance with Eq. ( where are the mass density and its flux. Similarly, the SU(2) S gauge invariance with Eq. ( 1 We note that and multiplied by arbitrary functions of Dtθ(x) are O(p) consistent with the gauge invariance and the general coordinate invariance but are incompatible with the time-reversal invariance and the parity invariance, respectively. In general, by inspecting transformation laws of each building block, one can show that Lagrangian densities bearing odd powers of p are odd either in parity inversion or in time reversal and thus do not appear in our effective action. where are the spin density and its flux. On the other hand, the SO(3) L gauge invariance with Eq. ( δS eff δe a j ( . Finally, the general coordinate invariance with Eqs. ( where the momentum density proves to be identical to the mass flux and the SU(2) S field strength tensor is decomposed as G μν (x) ≡ G α μν (x)σ α . While the continuity equations themselves are rather common, the form of the momentum density therein reflects intriguing physics of the superfluid 3 He-B. In terms of the mass and spin densities introduced above as well as the mass and spin superfluid velocities defined by , the momentum density is expressed as where O(f 2-3 ) indicates contributions depending on the unknown functions with their explicit expressions being suppressed. Of particular interest is the term including which can be identified as an orbital angular momentum density because it, assumed to vanish at infinity, contributes to the orbital angular momentum in flat space as dx ǫ ijk x j j k (x) = dx l i (x) + • • • . The rotation matrix R αβ (x) appearing in Eq. ( where χ 0 (x) ≡ χ 0 [-Dt θ(x)] is the local magnetic susceptibility and the temporal component of the spin connection is decomposed as ω t (x) ≡ ω a t (x)σ a with We then parametrize the external gauge fields according to B α t (x) ≡ (γ/2)H α (x) and ε ijk (x)∂ j A k (x) ≡ 2mΩ i (x), so that H α (x) is an applied magnetic field and Ω i (x) is an angular velocity vector of the rotating frame. Therefore, we find the Barnett effect where the magnetization is generated by the rotation, as well as the Einstein-de Haas effect where the orbital angular momentum density is generated by the magnetic field, These gyromagnetic responses are consequences of the spin-orbit locking in the superfluid The intriguing physics of the superfluid 3 He-B is furthermore reflected in the stress tensor, which is evaluated as where P (x) ≡ L eff (x) is the local pressure and is the strain rate tensor. In particular, the viscosity tensor is found to be which is the so-called Hall viscosity and is dissipationless because of η ijkl (x) = -η klij (x) All the above predictions are expressed in the most general forms in curved space. They can be readily reduced to the physically relevant ones in flat space by simply setting e a i (x) = δ a i and hence g ij (x) = δ ij , ε ijk (x) = ǫ ijk , and ∇ μ = ∂ μ . Furthermore, the ground state is achieved by setting the Nambu-Goldstone fields constant and turning off the spatial components of the external gauge fields so that the mass and spin superfluid velocities vanish. The remaining external parameters are then the applied magnetic field and the local chemical potential A t (x) = μ(x) including a trapping potential. Finally, in order to investigate an experimental implication resulting from the Hall viscosity, let us consider a uniform state with mass density ρ subject to a constant magnetic field, which induces an orbital angular momentum density l in a direction fixed spontaneously. 3 Then, by weakly perturbing the system out of the ground state, a small modulation of the mass density, ρ ′ (x) ≡ ρ(x) -ρ 0 , can be produced. Its propagation as a sound wave in the superfluid 3 He-B is described by linearized hydrodynamic equations reduced from Eqs. ( where c 2 0 ≡ ∂P/∂ρ| ρ=ρ0 is the speed of sound. They are straightforward to solve up to the linear order in l by substituting ρ ′ (x) = ρ′ e ik•x-iωt and j(x) = je ik•x-iωt . In particular, longitudinal and transverse components of the momentum density are found to be jL respectively, with ω 2 = (c 0 k) 2 . While the dispersion relation is not modified, the sound wave proves to exhibit an elliptical polarization by acquiring the transverse component perpendicular to the orbital angular momentum density In summary, we established the effective field theory governing the low-energy physics of a superfluid 3 He-B at zero temperature. To this end, we first showed that its microscopic action, slightly idealized by neglecting the dipolar coupling and employing the interatomic potential of the Lennard-Jones type, enjoys the U(1) φ × SU(2) S × SO(3) L gauge invariance and the nonrelativistic general coordinate invariance when it is coupled with the external gauge fields and metric. These symmetry constraints were then exploited to construct the most general effective action written in terms of the Nambu-Goldstone fields up to the next-to-leading order in our power counting scheme. The obtained effective action proved to include a crucial contribution involving the magnetic susceptibility [Eq. ( In particular, the novel Hall viscosity is the physical quantity that has recently attracted significant interest partly because of its topological nature and universality Because the stress tensor is symmetric, the orbital angular momentum thus expressed with Cartesian coordinates is conserved automatically when the momentum is conserved. However, when a tiny magnetic anisotropy ∼ -χ 2 0 ( n • H) 2 in the energy density resulting from the dipolar coupling is taken into consideration For the ground state in flat space, Eq. (A6) leads to the spin current density provided byj i α (x) = ǫ ijk R αj ∂ k g 1 [μ(x)]/2. By assuming a uniform system in x and y directions and integrating it from z = -∞ (vacuum) to z = +∞ (bulk), the spin current is found to be dz j i α (x) = ǫ ijz R αj n/(12m) in the weak coupling limit, which for n = ẑ is consistent with the result of Ref.