Calculation of statistical properties of nuclei in a finite-temperature mean-field theory requires projection onto good particle number, since the theory is formulated in the grand canonical ensemble. This projection is usually carried out in a saddle-point approximation. Here we derive formulas for an exact particle-number projection of the finite-temperature mean-field solution. We consider both deformed nuclei, in which the pairing condensate is weak and the Hartree-Fock (HF) approximation is the appropriate mean-field theory, and nuclei with strong pairing condensates, in which the appropriate theory is the Hartree-Fock-Bogoliubov (HFB) approximation, a method that explicitly violates particle-number conservation. For the HFB approximation, we present a general projection formula for a condensate that is time-reversal invariant and a simpler formula for the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) limit, which is realized in nuclei with spherical condensates. We apply the method to three heavy nuclei: a typical deformed nucleus 162 Dy, a typical spherical nucleus 148 Sm, and a transitional nucleus 150 Sm in which the pairing condensate is deformed. We compare the results of this projection with results from the saddle-point approximation and exact shell model Monte Carlo calculations. We find that the approximate canonical HF entropy in the particlenumber projection decreases monotonically to zero in the limit when the temperature goes to zero. However, in a nucleus with a strong pairing condensate, the approximate canonical HFB entropy in the particle-number projection decreases monotonically to a negative value, reflecting the violation of particle-number conservation. Computationally, the exact particle-number projection is more efficient than calculating the derivatives required in the saddle-point approximation. Finite-temperature mean-field approximations, in particular the finite-temperature Hartree-Fock (HF) and Hartree-Fock-Bogoliubov (HFB) approximations The nucleus is a finite-size system. Consequently, the appropriate ensemble to describe it is the canonical ensemble with fixed numbers of protons and neutrons. However, the finite-temperature HF and HFB approximations are formulated in the grand canonical ensemble through the variation of the grand thermodynamic potential. It is then necessary to carry out a reduction to the canonical ensemble to restore the correct proton and neutron numbers. This reduction is usually done by expressing the canonical partition function as an inverse Laplace transform of the grand canonical partition function and evaluating this transform in the saddle-point approximation Here we address the restoration of particle-number conservation using an exact particle-number projection In contrast, particle-number projection after variation is feasible at finite temperature in both the HF and HFB approximations. A general formalism was presented in Ref. In this article, we derive unambiguous expressions for particle-number PAV for the HF and the HFB approximations and assess their accuracy numerically. For brevity, we will refer to particle-number PAV as the particle-number projection (PNP). In the HF approximation, particle number is conserved and the PNP is straightforward The outline of this article is as follows. In Sec. II, we discuss a formula for the particle-number projected partition function of the HF density operator. In Sec. III, we derive a general formula for the particle-number projected partition function of the HFB density operator assuming the condensate is time-reversal invariant. This formula simplifies in the BCS limit of the HFB approximation and, in particular, for a spherical condensate. In Sec. IV, we discuss how to calculate the approximate canonical thermal energy, entropy and state density from the projected partition functions. In Sec. V, we compare the PNP results with those from the discrete Gaussian approximations and the SMMC for the three heavy nuclei discussed above. Finally, in Sec. VI, we summarize our findings and provide an outlook for future work. We assume a generic nuclear Hamiltonian in Fock space spanned by a set of N s single-particle orbitals with a one-body part described by the matrix t and an antisymmetrized two-body interaction v The HF approximation is appropriate for nuclei with weak pairing condensates. The single-particle HF Hamiltonian is given by ĤHF = ij h ij a † i a j where h = t + v̺ and ̺ is the one-body density matrix determined self consistently where the trace is over the Hilbert space of all particle numbers and μ is the chemical potential determined by tr̺ = N . The subtraction of V = tr (̺v̺) /2 corrects for the double counting of the two-body interaction, ensuring that Ĥ HF = -∂ ln Z HF /∂β. The particle-number projection operator PN projects any many-particle state in Fock space onto the subspace of states with N particles. In a model space spanned by a finite number N s of single-particle orbitals, PN is given by a discrete Fourier sum where φ n = 2πn/N s are discrete quadrature points We define the particle-number projected HF partition function for N particles by This formula follows from the fact that [ ĤHF , N ] = 0 for all temperatures. In (4), we include the factor e -βμN to cancel the contribution of e βμ N in ζ n . This equation holds for any value of μ, but choosing a value of μ that is close to the chemical potential determined by N particles ensures the numerical stability of the Fourier sum in (4). For nuclei with strong pairing condensates, the appropriate mean-field theory is the HFB approximation. The HFB Hamiltonian is where h = t + v̺ is the density-dependent single-particle Hamiltonian, ∆ ij = ijkl vijkl κ kl /2 is the pairing field, and κ is the pairing tensor. We can rewrite (6) using a matrix notation The 2N s ×2N s matrix in In this basis where E k are the HFB quasiparticle energies. The grand canonical HFB partition function is then where the subtraction of V = tr (̺v̺) /2 + tr κ † vκ /4 accounts for the double counting of interaction terms, and As in the HF case, we define the particle-number projected HFB partition function for N particles by where In contrast to the HF approximation, [ ĤHF B , N ] = 0. Consequently, it is more difficult to evaluate the trace in Here we assume that the HFB Hamiltonian is invariant under time reversal, and thus its quasiparticle states come in time-reversed pairs |k , k with degenerate energies E k = Ek. where k runs over half the number of single-particle states from 1, ..., N s /2. In the following, we denote these states by k > 0. W is an N s × N s unitary matrix of the form The general Bogoliubov transformation matrix is 2N s × 2N s -dimensional In a more compact notation, where The matrix E is the diagonal matrix of the HFB quasiparticle energies E k (k = 1, . . . , N s /2). Similarly, the number operator N can be written as where and where we have used the transformation in To evaluate the trace, we use the group property of the exponentials of one-body fermion operators written in quadratic form. This property states that the product of two such group elements is another group element where the matrix C is determined from the single-particle representation of the group Applying this property to where the matrix C n (β) is determined from Using the formula for the trace of the exponential of a one-body fermionic operator (see Appendix I), we find Using where U 0 is given by Eq. ( ) and making the dimension of the relevant matrices 2N s × 2N s Eq. ( Eq. ( where u k and v k are real numbers satisfying u 2 k + v 2 k = 1. In this case, the Bogoliubov transformation in ( for each {k, k} pair. Eq. ( where ) and Evaluating the determinants in where we have used k>0 e -iφn = e iφnNs/2 = (-) n . The result in (32) can also be derived by writing explicitly the matrix elements of e iφ N in the subspace spanned by the four many-body states and by evaluating the traces of e iφn N e -β ĤHF B -μ N -V in each of these subspaces. We note that Eq. ( An important case of the BCS limit is that of a spherical condensate, in which both the total angular momentum quantum number j and the magnetic quantum number m are preserved by the Bogoliubov transformation. Consequently, the quasiparticle energies for a given j are independent of m and therefore are each 2j + 1fold degenerate. If the single-particle model space does not include more than one shell with the same j, the Bogoliubov transformation for this case is of the form The state density ρ(E) at energy E for a nucleus with proton and neutron numbers N p , N n is an inverse Laplace transform of the canonical partition function Z c (β). The average state density is obtained in the saddle-point approximation e Sc(β) . (34) Here β is determined as a function of the energy E by the saddle-point condition and S c is the canonical entropy In the particle-number projected finite-temperature HF approximation, the proton (neutron) partition function Z HF N p(n) is given by Eqs. ( Similarly, we define the approximate canonical HF entropy by With these definitions, the average state density is given by Eq. ( . The reason for these differences is the dependence of ĤHF on the grand canonical one-body density ̺. Similar relations define the approximate canonical energy and entropy in the finite-temperature HFB approximation starting from the particle-number projected proton (neutron) HFB partition function Z HF B N p(n) given by Eqs. As shown in Eqs. ( The authors of Ref. Here, we present results for the particle-numberprojected finite-temperature mean-field theories in three heavy nuclei. In Sec. V A we discuss 162 Dy, a typical strongly deformed nucleus for which the appropriate mean-field theory is the HF approximation. In Sec. V B we present results for 148 Sm, a typical spherical nucleus with a strong pairing condensate. Finally, in Sec V C we discuss a transitional nucleus 150 Sm, in which the pairing condensate is deformed. In this last nucleus, we use the general projection formula derived in Sec. III A. The PNP results are compared with the discrete Gaussian approximations and with the SMMC results We employed a configuration-interaction (CI) shell model Hamiltonian that includes a one-body part and a two-body interaction. The valence single-particle model space consists of the orbitals 0g 7/2 , 1d 5/2 , 1d 3/2, 2s 1/2 , 0h 11/2 , 1f 7/2 for protons and 0h 11/2 , 0h 9/2 , 1f 7/2 , 1f 5/2 , 2p 3/2 , 2p 1/2 , 0i 13/2 , 1g 9/2 for neutrons. The corresponding total number of singleparticle states (including their magnetic degeneracy) is N s = 40 for protons and N s = 66 for neutrons. The one-body Hamiltonian and two-body interaction used for the above nuclei are discussed in Refs. A. Particle-number projected HF for a strongly deformed nucleus: 162 Dy We applied the particle-number projected HF approximation to the strongly deformed nucleus 162 Dy, in which the pairing is weak, using Eqs. ( The approximate canonical energy obtained from the derivative of the logarithm of the particle-number projected partition function [Eq. ( To test our formulas for the particle-number projected HFB partition function in the BCS limit, given by Eqs. ( The inset shows the entropies for higher β values. In the paired phase, the approximate canonical entropies decrease rapidly, dropping below zero around β ≈ 4 MeV -1 . A negative entropy is unphysical because the entropy of a non-degenerate ground state is zero. This negative entropy originates in the intrinsic violation of particle-number conservation in the grand canonical HFB approximation and will be explained in detail for the PNP in Sec. V D. An explanation for the discrete Gaussian approximations is given in Ref. However, for large β values the PNP exhibits qualitative and quantitative improvements over the discrete Gaussian approximations. The entropy from the PNP asymptotes smoothly to a value of S c ≈ -2.30. The entropy from DG1 reaches a minimum around β ≈ 8 MeV -1 and subsequently increases with increasing β. Such an increase is unphysical because, for these values of β, the system is already in its ground state. The entropy from DG2 asymptotes smoothly to a negative value of S c ≈ -3.68. The absolute error in the estimate for the ground-state entropy is thus larger in DG2 than in the PNP by more than a unit in entropy. At large values of β, the PNP excitation energy for 148 Sm closely resembles the DG1 excitation energy shown in Fig. C. Particle-number projected HFB for a deformed condensate: 150 Sm To calculate the particle-number projected HFB partition function for 150 Sm, which has a deformed pairing condensate, we must use the general PNP HFB formalism of Sec. III A, i.e., Eqs. ( In Fig. FIG. The canonical entropy from the PNP, the discrete Gaussian approximation DG2, and the SMMC are shown in Fig. The entropy from the PNP is very close to that from DG2 in the unpaired phase but shows a quantitative improvement over DG2 in the paired phase. The entropy from the PNP asymptotes to S c ≈ -1.20, while the entropy from DG2 asymptotes to S c ≈ -2.52. As with 148 Sm, the absolute error of the ground-state entropy in the PNP is lower by more than a unit of entropy than the error in DG2. Furthermore, DG2 shows a large spike near the neutron pairing transition, which is not present in the PNP. The behavior of the state density, which is shown for the PNP, the discrete Gaussian approximation DG2, and the SMMC in Fig. D. Approximate canonical HFB entropy in the limit T → 0 As shown in Secs. V B and V C for the nuclei with pairing condensates, 148 Sm and 150 Sm, the approximate canonical entropy from the PNP asymptotes to a negative number. Here, we show how this unphysical result is due to the inherent violation of particle-number conservation in the grand canonical HFB approximation. We consider the limit of sufficiently large β, in which we can neglect the contribution of excited states to the partition function. In this limit, where E 0 is the ground-state energy and |Φ is the HFB ground state. This state can be written as a linear superposition of states with even particle numbers, where |ψ N is an N -particle state. Eq. (39) can then be expressed as where α N p(n) 2 is the probability that the HFB groundstate condensate contains N p(n) particles. Because particle-number is not conserved, α N p(n) 2 < 1. Using Eq. ( Since α N p(n) 2 < 1, this entropy is the sum of two negative numbers and is therefore negative. A closely related explanation for the discrete Gaussian approximations is given in Ref. Another advantage of the PNP over the DG1 approximation is its computational efficiency. We emphasize DG1 because this approximation was shown in Ref. Both the PNP and the discrete Gaussian methods require finding the self-consistent mean-field solutions for a set of β values. The additional cost of the PNP HF approximation scales as N 2 s , since calculating ζ HF n in Eq. ( In the discrete Gaussian approximation DG1, it is necessary to calculate numerically the derivatives of the proton and neutron numbers with respect to the chemical potentials, which requires finding additional mean-field solutions. The cost of calculating these derivatives accurately can be large, especially in the vicinity of the phase transitions where the mean-field solution can take many iterations to converge. We have derived expressions for exact particle-number projection after variation in the finite-temperature meanfield approximations. In the HF approximation, the PNP is straightforward because particle number is conserved. However, in the HFB approximation, the violation of particle-number conservation in the paired phase makes the PNP more difficult. We have derived an unambiguous expression for the particle-number projected HFB partition function under the assumption that the condensate is time-reversal invariant. In the BCS limit, and, in particular, for a spherical condensate, this expression simplifies considerably. We have assessed the accuracy of the PNP in both the HF and HFB approximations, using the SMMC as a benchmark. In addition, we have compared the performance of this method to the discrete Gaussian approximations formulated in Ref. However, the projection after variation method is inherently limited by the grand canonical mean-field theories to which it is applied. In a deformed nucleus, the PNP mean-field theory cannot describe the rotational enhancement that is observed in the SMMC below the shape transition temperature. In a nucleus with a strong pairing condensate, the intrinsic violation of particlenumber conservation below the pairing transition temperature will necessarily lead to a negative ground-state value of the PNP canonical entropy. It is therefore desirable to explore improvements to finite-temperature mean-field theories that can address these issues. One avenue for improvement is the variation after projection (VAP) method. VAP would involve a considerable computational cost. In particular, the entropy of the projected HFB density S N = -Tr( DN ln DN ), which is required for the calculation of the free energy at finite temperature, is difficult to calculate in the paired phase since the HFB Hamiltonian does not commute with the particle-number operator. VAP conserves particlenumber during the variation and is therefore expected to smooth the sharp transitions of the mean-field approximations and the unphysical negative entropy in the paired phase. Given the potential advantages of this method, it would be worth investigating the possibility of developing a VAP method for the finite-temperature HF and HFB approximations. Another improvement would be to use the PNP in the static-path approximation (SPA) Finally, the PNP expressions derived here for the HFB approximation assume that the condensate is timereversal invariant and are thus not completely general. For example, the condensates of odd-even and odd-odd nuclei break time-reversal symmetry. A general PNP formula was derived in Ref. Appendix I: Trace of exponential of fermionic one-body operator Here we derive the formula for the grand canonical trace of the exponential of a quadratic fermionic operator. Assuming a diagonalizable N s × N s matrix C, where ξ is defined in Sec. III A. Since C is diagonalizable, there is a similarity transformation S that bring C to a diagonal form (46) However, in general, S is not unitary. In this case, we make use of a nonunitary Bogoliubov transformation where η = d k1 , . . . , d k Ns /2 , dk 1 , . . . , dk Ns /2 T and η = dk1 , . . . , dk Ns /2 , dk 1 , . . . , dk Ns /2 . It can be shown that {d, d} have the same anti-commutation relations as {α, α † }. However, this transformation does not preserve the hermiticity relation of the operators. Therefore we must treat the kets and bras related to these operators differently. Because the anti-commutation relations are preserved, the usual creation and annihilation formulas apply to the left and right bases separately. We define the left and right vacuums by and left and right states by The anti-commutation relations ensure that where n k is the occupation number of state k. Furthermore, as discussed in Ref. This completes the proof of Eq. ( If the condensate is also axially symmetric, the magnetic quantum number m, which is the projection onto the symmetry axis, is a good quantum number. In this case, we choose the k states to have positive signature, i.e. m = 1/2, -3/2, 5/2, -7/2, ..., and k states have negative signature, i.e. -m.