We show that the Dynamical Casimir Effect (DCE), realized on two multimode coplanar waveguide resonators, implements a gaussian boson sampler (GBS). The appropriate choice of the mirror acceleration that couples both resonators translates into the desired initial gaussian state and manyboson interference in a boson sampling network. In particular, we show that the proposed quantum simulator naturally performs a classically hard task, known as scattershot boson sampling. Our result unveils an unprecedented computational power of DCE, and paves the way for using DCE as a resource for quantum simulation. The Dynamical Casimir Effect (DCE) consists in the generation of photons out of the vacuum of a quantum field by means of the abrupt modulation of boundary conditions -e.g. a mirror oscillating at speeds comparable to the speed of light. Predicted in 1970 [1], an experimental demonstration remained elusive until 2011, when it was implemented in a superconducting circuit architecture In this work, we establish a bridge between multimode parametric amplification induced by the modulation of boundary conditions -for which DCE is a paradigmatic case-and a non-universal quantum computing device, known as boson sampling (BS) BS has recently gained a great deal of attention, as it solves a tailor-made problem -the problem of sampling from the output distribution of photons in a linear-optics network-that is widely believed to be intractable in any classical device. Thus it represents a promising avenue for proving the long-sought quantum supremacy The DCE was observed in an open microwave coplanar waveguide interrupted by a single SQUID operated well below its plasma frequency Obviously, the DCE can be produced as well for different boundary conditions, such as the ones of a superconducting resonator interrupted by one Let us consider a one-dimensional (1D) superconducting resonator in the presence of one or two movable boundary conditions. In the absence of any flux modulation, the resonator field φ is characterised by a set of creation and annihilation operators {a l , a † l } associated to the set of solutions {u l , u * l } of the 1D massless Klein-Gordon wave equation -plane waves -with the corresponding boundary conditions -e.g. the well-known standing waves in the case of a perfect resonator The modulation of the SQUIDs changes the boundary conditions of the field, generating a new set of solutions {v l , v * l } and the corresponding new set of operators {a l , a † l }. Both sets are related by means of a Bogoliubov transformation: where the Bogoliubov coefficients {α jl , β jl } are given by the inner product: Therefore, they depend on the particular initial boundary conditions -which determine the functions u l -and the particular type of boundary modulation -which determine the functions v l . In the case of small boundary oscillations characterised by a dimensionless amplitude δ, the Bogoliubov coefficients can be computed perturbatively in a variety of a cases including single- Notice that the set {α jl } characterizes phase-shifting (j = l) and beam-splitting (j = l) among the modes A remarkable example is the DCE, where a modulation of frequency ω p generates Bogoliubov coefficients β lj growing linearly in time only for the modes in a resonance condition ω p = ω l + ω j -all the other Bogoliubov coefficients being negligible. Similarly, another resonance frequency ω p = |ω lω j | would make the corresponding α lj to increase linearly in time In the following, we will show how to use this scheme to implement a GBS protocol (see Fig. An important problem is the well known lack of addressability in a harmonic oscillator. We need to generate beam splitters interactions only between a selected pair of modes, without further driving unwanted transition between modes. A way to overcome this problem is by considering a pair of resonators of different lengthsand hence different energy spectrum-confining two resonator fields φ r , φ l and sharing a tunable mirror (see Fig. Therefore the collection of modes u consists of two collections of modes u l , u r given by the solutions to the Klein-Gordon 1D equation -plane waves-after imposing Dirichlet boundary conditions at points, say -L, 0 for u l and 0, L for u r : where and v is the propagation speed of the field. The collection of modes v is given by the transformed solutions of the field confined in both resonators when the common mirror -initially placed at x = 0-undergoes an effective harmonic motion of frequency ω p and amplitude A, given by x(t) = A sin ω p t = δL sin ω p t, where δ = A/L 1 is a dimensionless small parameter. Then we can obtain the Bogoliubov coefficients as a perturbative expansion in δ. In particular, the first order of the expansion will be given by where ω l ,ω j are the frequencies of the modes u l and v j respectively and 0 α (1) jl are the Bogoliubov coefficients associated to the transformation induced by a single change of mirror position x = δL at t = 0. Then: Now, if we select a mode u l in the left cavity and a mode v r in the right cavity: we find that: By inspection of Eq. ( or In the former case the corresponding α jl contain a term that grows monotonically in time, while in the latter the same happens for β jl . In both alternative scenarios, after a time ω ± p t 1, we can neglect all the oscillations, so we can assume that only the resonant terms are non-zero. In the first case (by simplicity, we assume L > L): while in the second one we obtain exactly the same expression for β jl , with a minus sign on the front. Notice that in our setup, the difference or sum of two mode frequencies when the modes correspond to different resonators is different for each pair. Thus Eq. ( Gaussian Boson Sampling and scattershot boson sampling GBS Parametric down conversion sources (PDCs) generate twomode squeezed states (I), half of them undergo idle evolution whereas the other half evolve under the unitary U (II). Single photon detectors collect the statistics p(n) at the output of the photonic network (III) b) GBS using a DCE-like dynamics in multimode superconducting resonators. The distinct modulation of the external magnetic flux Φext(t) amounts to blue (I) or red (II) sidebands that implements both initial state and unitary dynamics. Finally, ancilla qubits (III) could be employed to perform a Ramsey measurement scheme in order to resolve P (n) . The results of the previous section suggest that superconducting circuits are particularly suitable for implementing the above operators. In particular, we propose multimode coupled resonators as laid out in Fig. The charges q k are canonical conjugate variables of the flux modes φ k , which have frequencies ω k = kπv/L, where L is the size of the resonator and v = 1/ √ lc the speed of light in the coplanar waveguide-l and c are the inductance and capacitance per unit length, respectively. Naturally, a similar expression holds for modes φ k . E J± is the Josephson energy of the junctions in the SQUID loop, and φ ± represents the superconducting phase drop across each junction. The second line of Eq. ( An external magnetic field through the SQUID Φ ext = Φ + lj cos(ω + p t + φ lj ), with ω + p given by ( Similarly, pumping the SQUID with a field Φ ext = Φ - lj cos(ω - p t+φ lj ) at the frequency ω - p given by ( ), and U k connects nearest neighbor modes. Interestingly, the circuit depth can be reduced to K = O(M log(M )) by implementing non-local beam-splitters The final step of the protocol, after evolving under red and blue sideband Hamiltonians, is reading out the number of photons on each mode of the resonators. In the diluted limit of boson sampling, where the number of modes M = N 2 , more than one excitation per mode is unlikely to occur, for which parity measurements would be enough. In this case, one can perform Ramsey-type measurements, where ancilla qubits are coupled to a different mode of the resonator. For each qubit j of frequency Ω j , one applies two π/2 pulses separated by a time t n,j = πg 2 n /∆ n,j , where ∆ n,j = ω n -Ω j is the qubitnth cavity mode detuning. With the qubits initially in the ground state, the Ramsey-type measurement maps the even (odd) parity onto the excited (ground) state of the qubit. The qubit state can be finally measured by a projective measurement, revealing the n-th mode state partity, and thus whether there is 0 or 1 photon in such mode We would like to highlight that a similar system of coupled resonators with tunable coupling has already been implemented in the laboratory In order to remain within the employed perturbative approximations, we should have |β jl | < 0.1 for all the relevant j, l. Using Eq.( It is important to remark that errors stemming from noisy state preparation, imperfect implementation of the unitary U and measurement, will occur. This is one of the main limitations in any practical implementation of boson sampling, as the error rapidly scales with the size of the simulator. The implementation proposed in this work is not error-free either and, while the noise analysis may yield promising results as other circuit QED implementations of boson sampling Let us discuss the computational complexity inherent to a randomized DCE-like evolution. So far we have seen how DCE implemented in a two-coupled superconducting resonator system acts a quantum simulator of GBS by virtue of simple red-and blue-sideband dynamics. However, one could think of a more general scenario, in which the SQUID is fed with a multimode magnetic field implementing a Hamiltonian dynamics of of the form which resembles a generalized boson sampling Hamiltonian While cutting edge signal generators are capable of creating train pulses with hundreds of frequencies, and resonators allocating hundreds of modes have been developed In summary, we have shown how to use the DCE in order to implement a GBS device. We propose a setup consisting of two superconducting transmission line resonators with different energy spectra that are coupled by a SQUID. The ultrafast modulation of the magnetic field fed into the SQUID by an external pump plays the role of relativistic motion of a mirror shared by the two resonators. The corresponding Bogoliubov transformation results into multimode parametric amplification. We show how a suitable choice of parameters allows to implement GBS and in particular scattershot BS, thus demonstrating that DCE can be used to implement a task that it is widely believed to be classically hard. Moreover, we show that randomized DCE-like dynamics should be itself classically hard.