Recently, an extremely high superconducting temperature (T c ) of ~200 K has been reported in the sulfur hydride system above 100 GPa. This result is supported by theoretical predictions and verified experimentally. The crystal structure of the superconducting phase was also identified experimentally, confirming the theoretically predicted structure as well as a decomposition mechanism from H 2 S to H 3 S+S. Even though nuclear resonant scattering has been successfully used to provide magnetic evidence for a superconducting state, a direct measurement of the important Meissner effect is still lacking. Here we report in situ alternating-current magnetic susceptibility measurements on compressed H 2 S under high pressures. It is shown that superconductivity suddenly appears at 117 GPa and that T c reaches 183 K at 149 GPa before decreasing monotonically with a further increase in pressure. This evolution agrees with both theoretical calculations and earlier experimental measurements. The idea of conventional high temperature superconductivity in hydrogen-dominant compounds has thus been realized in the sulfur hydride system under hydrostatic pressure, opening further exciting perspectives for possibly realizing room temperature superconductivity in hydrogen-based compounds. Since the discovery of superconductivity slightly more than a century ago (1), the quest for ever higher critical onset temperatures, T c , has remained a great challenge and an important topic for experimental and theoretical research. Ashcroft proposed that hydrogen-dominated materials with high Debye temperatures might show high-T c superconductivity under pressures lower than those expected for metallic hydrogen Very recently, however, the highest known values for the superconducting transition temperature T c were observed in a newly discovered hydrogen sulfide system with a record T c of 200 K The Meissner effect is considered the most important feature to prove the presence of a superconducting state, although The details of the loading procedure for the H 2 S sample are described in Methods. With different thermodynamic routes, the sample undergoes different phase transitions, especially at different temperatures. The sample was compressed to at least 100 GPa at T < 100 K after loading. The magnetic susceptibility measurement setup in the diamond anvil cell is shown in Fig. The target sample was loaded into the hole of the non-magnetic gasket at about 2.0 GPa and 200 K, and the sample at 155 GPa and 300 K is shown in Fig. The basic principles of the magnetic-susceptibility technique for measuring the superconductivity are described in previous works The pressure dependence of T c in our two experiments is summarized in Fig. From the plot of T c versus pressure in Fig. A close study of Fig. In summary, the excellent superconducting properties of compressed sulfur hydride have been confirmed by magnetic susceptibility measurements. With increasing pressure, superconductivity appears at 38 K for 117 GPa, T c rises rapidly to 183 K at 149 GPa and then decreases to 140 K at 171 GPa. The pressure dependence of T c suggests a phase transition, which is consistent with both theoretical calculations and electrical resistance measurements. The present results, showing a true Meissner effect, provide enormously important evidence for a superconducting state with extremely high critical temperature in hydrogen sulfide. This should stimulate a great deal of future experimental and theoretical studies to explore possible high-temperature superconductivity in other hydrogen-dominated materials. 