We present a theory of the superfluid weight in multiband attractive Hubbard models within the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) mean field framework. We show how to separate the geometric contribution to the superfluid weight from the conventional one, and that the geometric contribution is associated with the interband matrix elements of the current operator. Our theory can be applied to systems with or without time reversal symmetry. In both cases the geometric superfluid weight can be related to the quantum metric of the corresponding noninteracting systems. This leads to a lower bound on the superfluid weight given by the absolute value of the Berry curvature. We apply our theory to the attractive Kane-Mele-Hubbard and Haldane-Hubbard models, which can be realized in ultracold atom gases. Quantitative comparisons are made to state of the art dynamical mean-field theory and exact diagonalization results. A manifold of quantum states possess a natural geometric structure given by the quantum geometric tensor The Berry curvature provides a coherent understanding of basic phenomena such as electron transport, polarization, and orbital magnetisation Recently, there has been great interest in models with flat or quasi-flat bands. A band is called quasi-flat if the ratio between the bandwidth and the energy gap to neighbouring bands (the flatness ratio) is much smaller than unity. A quasi-flat band with nonzero Chern number may support various fractional quantum Hall states Nonzero superfluid weight is a defining property of superconductors and leads to the Meissner effect and dissipationless transport. It sets the phase fluctuation energy scale that plays a significant role in high temperature superconductors In this article, we develop a general theory of the superfluid weight in multiband attractive Hubbard models in the framework of linear response theory. The superfluid weight defined through linear response is equivalent to the one defined in terms of the thermodynamic potentials, but it offers several advantages. For example, it is the starting point for investigating beyond-mean-field effects through many-body perturbation theory and facilitates the derivation of useful sum rules We show here how to separate in general the geometric contribution to the superfluid weight from the conventional one. The linear response approach clarifies the origin of the geometric effect. The conventional contribution is associated with the diagonal (intraband) matrix elements of the current operator that are derivatives of the band dispersions. Thus, the conventional contribution vanishes in the flat band limit. The geometric contribution, however, is associated with the off-diagonal (interband) matrix elements of the current operator and can be nonzero even for a flat band. In the presence of TRS and for uniform pairing, we find a novel form for the geometric contribution D s geom , where the quantum metric appears explicitly both in the case of an isolated, not necessarily flat, band and in two-band systems. A Bloch band is called an isolated band if it is separated from other bands by large enough band gaps. In the isolated band limit (see Sec. II A for details), we obtain where μ, ν = x, y, z are spatial indices, ∆ is the pair-ing order parameter, β = 1/T is the inverse temperature (the Boltzmann constant is taken to be 1 throughout this article), E k ≥ 0 is the BCS theory quasiparticle excitation energy, and g μν (k) is the quantum metric of the isolated Bloch band. A similar expression for two-band systems is given by Eq. ( The quantum metric is non-negative everywhere in the Brillouin zone and allows us to derive a bound on the superfluid weight using the Berry curvature B μν (k). For two-dimensional isotropic systems, Importantly, this bound depends on the absolute value of the Berry curvature. Therefore the geometric contribution is nonzero for any nonzero Berry curvature. Eq. ( Our mean-field results for the critical temperature are consistent with previous theoretical predictions The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present the derivation of the superfluid weight within the BCS theory and show how to separate the geometric contribution from the conventional one. We discuss the cases with and without TRS in Sec. II A and Sec. II B, respectively. In Sec. III we apply our theory to the attractive KMH model and HH model and compare the mean-field results with DMFT and ED results. Finally, conclusions and future prospects are presented in Sec. IV. We start from the lattice Hamiltonian where c † iασ (c iασ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator labelled by orbital iα (i is the unit cell label and α the sublattice label) and spin σ, and n iασ = c † iασ c iασ is the particle number operator. The first term in the Hamiltonian is the kinetic energy, which can be spin dependent. Note that we only consider the case of kinetic Hamiltonians which commute with the spin operator along the z-axis. The second term is the Hubbard interaction which we assume to be attractive, i.e., U > 0. The filling n ≡ (N ↑ + N ↓ )/N sites is controlled by the chemical potential μ. The superfluid weight can be obtained using linear response theory is the position operator. Here j p μ is the paramagnetic current operator while T μν A ν is the diamagnetic current operator. From linear response theory we find that the current density is j μ (q, ω) = K μν (q, ω)A ν (q, ω), where K μν is the current-current response function, The superfluid weight is defined through the static Meissner effect by taking the proper zero momentum limit of the transverse component of the current-current response function. At mean-field level one can use the result [32] This is equivalent to the definition in terms of the thermodynamic potentials, see Appendix A. We calculate K μν (q, ω) within the BCS framework by decoupling the Hubbard interaction as where the order parameter ∆ iα = -U c iα↓ c iα↑ should be determined self-consistently. We consider meanfield solutions that preserve the translational symmetry. Then the mean-field Hamiltonian reads The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian reads where the M by M matrix H σ (k) is the Fourier transform of the hopping terms and are momentum independent order parameters in orbital space. The diamagnetic and paramagnetic current operators are given respectively by and It is convenient to calculate the response function in imaginary time using the Matsubara formalism. Within the BCS mean-field theory, we obtain where ω n = 2πn/β, Ω m = 2π(m + 1/2)/β are bosonic and fermionic Matsubara frequencies and ∂ μ ≡ ∂ kμ is the derivative with respect to the momentum k μ . For simplicity, the volume (area in two dimensions) is taken to be 1. Here γ z = τ z ⊗ I M ×M and τ i are Pauli matrices acting in the particle-hole space, and I M ×M is the M by M identity matrix. Furthermore, is the Green's function and |ψ j (k) is the j-th eigenvector of the BdG Hamiltonian with eigenvalue E j,k . Hereafter the k-dependence of quantities will be omitted with some exceptions. Performing the Matsubara frequency summation and taking the ω = 0, q → 0 limit, we get the superfluid weight where n(E i ) = 1/(e βEi + 1) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution and the prefactor should be understood as -∂ E n(E) when i = j or E i and E j are degenerate. The first term in the parenthesis is the diamagnetic term and the second term is the paramagnetic term. For a single-band system, it is well known that the paramagnetic term vanishes at zero temperature, and the nonzero diamagnetic term leads to the Meissner effect. However, for a multiband system the paramagnetic term remains finite even at zero temperature. For our purposes it is convenient to write Eq. ( Here P + (P -) is the projection operator onto the particle (hole) space. Inserting these expressions into Eq. ( where w * +,im w +,jn w * -,jp w -,iq .( The matrix element of the current operator is where δ mn is the Kronecker delta function. The diagonal matrix elements of the current operator are given by the derivatives of the band dispersions and are therefore zero in the flat band limit. Therefore we separate the superfluid weight into two terms, where the geometric contribution D s geom,μν is defined as the terms that depends only on the off-diagonal elements of the current operator, Naively one may think that in the isolated band limit the only relevant terms in Eq. ( In the presence of TRS, the kinetic energy for spin up and spin down particles are related: H ↑ (k) = H * ↓ (-k). We further assume that the order parameter is uniform in orbital space, namely the matrix ∆ = ∆I M ×M is proportional to the identity. In this case we can choose a gauge such that ∆ is real. This is equivalent to the uniform pairing condition introduced in Ref. An important consequence of uniform pairing together with time reversal symmetry is the absence of interband pairing. This means that when the diagonal blocks of the BdG Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where G(k) is the unitary matrix that diagonalizes H ↑ (k) and whose matrix elements are given by the Bloch functions G(k) αm = α|m k . Then the BdG Hamiltonian in band space takes the simple form It is straightforward to write down the eigenfunctions and the eigenvalues. The eigenvalues appear in pairs: Substituting these into Eq. ( and The conventional term contains only diagonal elements of the current operator ∝ ∂ μ ε m and has exactly the same form as the superfluid weight for a single-band system summed over all bands. In the flat band limit, the conventional term is negligible. The geometric term comes from the off-diagonal part of the current operator and depends on the derivatives of Bloch wave functions. The geometric term is reduced to the quantum metric in the isolated band limit and in two-band systems, as will be shown below. First, let us discuss the isolated band limit. Suppose the chemical potential lies within an isolated band m, then we can perform a large band gap expansion as done in Appendix B. At zero order in the expansion in inverse powers of the band gap, the superfluid weight is determined solely by the properties of the isolated band and the geometric contribution takes a simple form where g m μν is the quantum metric that defines a distance in Hilbert space The quantum metric can be expressed in a compact form as the real part of the quantum geometric tensor R m μν : where P m = | m m| is the projection operator onto band m. The quantum geometric tensor is gauge invariant since the projection operator is gauge invariant. Our result can be easily generalized to a set of degenerate isolated bands. In that case, P is the projection operator onto those degenerate bands. The result, Eq. ( This bound can be straightforwardly generalized to threedimensional systems. It is worth mentioning that the quantum metric can be nonzero even if the Berry curvature vanishes For two-band systems, the noninteracting Hamiltonian can be written as H ↑ (k) = h 0 (k)I + h(k) • σ where σ i are 2 by 2 Pauli matrices and I is the identity matrix. The two Bloch bands are denoted by |± with the band energy ε ± = h 0 ± |h|. The corresponding quasiparticle energies are E ± = (ε ± -μ) 2 + ∆ 2 . The geometric contribution, Eq. ( The quantum metric for the two bands is the same for the two bands, g μν = ∂ μ ĥ • ∂ ν ĥ/2, while the Berry curvature is B ±,μν = ± ĥ • (∂ μ ĥ × ∂ ν ĥ)/2, where ĥ = h/|h| is a unit vector. In the two band case the equality det holds. However, we emphasize that, even in this case, the quantum metric can be nonzero even if the Berry curvature is zero. As a direct application of Eq. ( The first term is the conventional contribution and the second term is the geometric contribution. The same expression is obtained in Ref. In this section we consider the case with spin SU (2) symmetry, which includes, e.g., the HH model. The con-ventional spin SU (2) rotational symmetry implies that H ↑ (k) = H ↓ (k). We further assume that there is inversion symmetry so that the Bloch Hamiltonians for opposite momenta are related by a unitary transformation R, H ↑ (-k) = RH ↑ (k)R † , and the order parameters are invariant under inversion. Suppose |n(k) ↑ is an eigenvector of H ↑ (k), then |n(-k) ↑ = R|n(k) ↑ is an eigenvector of H ↑ (-k), therefore the matrix elements of the spin-down current operator and the spin-up current operator are related as Particle-hole symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian and inversion symmetry imply that for each k the BdG Hamiltonian has eigenvalues which always appear in pairs with opposite signs ±E i,k . The eigenfunction for the positive energy +E i,k can be written as |ψ Using these expressions, it is straightforward to write the superfluid weight in terms of u, v, and the current operator. To further investigate the geometric contribution of the superfluid weight in systems without TRS, we study a two-band model, i.e., the HH model in detail. We find that, in the isolated band limit, D s geom is also related to the quantum metric (see Appendix B 2), where E ± = (h 0 -μ) 2 + ∆ 2 + |h| 2 ± 2|h|E 0 are the energies of the higher (+) and lower (-) quasiparticle bands and z is the gap between the two branches (see Appendix B 2). In this section, we apply our theory to the attractive KMH and HH models. The KMH model has TRS while the HH model does not, corresponding to the two cases discussed in Sec. II A and Sec. II B, respectively. The interplay between band topology and Hubbard interactions, both repulsive and attractive, has been studied extensively and various phases have been predicted We write the Hamiltonian as where c † iσ (c iσ ) creates (annihilates) a spin-σ fermion on site i. Here ij and ij denote the nearest and nextto-nearest bonds on the honeycomb lattice. The directed phase φ σ ij represents the magnetic fields felt by spin-σ fermions, see Fig. The parameters t, t , and φ ij can be tuned in cold atom experiments We search for mean-field solutions that preserve the inversion symmetry, i.e., ∆ A = ∆ B . Our theory of superfluid weight is based on the BCS approximation, so before calculating the superfluid weight, we first discuss the validity of this approximation. For a flat band with TRS, it has been shown where V c is the volume of the unit cell, |m(k) is the Bloch function, and |α the wave function corresponding to a lattice site. For the KMH and HH models Eq. ( The validity of the BCS wave function in the U → ∞ limit has been investigated at both zero where The chemical potential becomes the magnetic field and the magnetization T z i is determined by the filling. Treating the pseudo-spin as a classical vector, that is, The order parameter in the large U limit calculated using the original Hubbard , which coincides with the classical spin approximation. Thus the BCS theory in the large U limit is the classical approximation of the effective spin model, which should be good when the frustration is weak As the DMFT might be biased by the choice of order parameters and the lack of long range correlation effects, we also apply the unbiased ED method to calculate the Drude weight, which is equivalent to the superfluid weight in the bulk limit for a gapped system Fig. Fig. In Fig. Below the critical interaction, the superfluid vanishes as expected and it grows rapidly as the interaction strength exceeds the critical value and then decreases after reaching a maximum. The total superfluid weight shows a nonmonotonic behavior for the flat as well as the dispersive bands. However, as shown in Fig. To conclude this section, our mean-field theory is in good agreement with the state of the art DMFT and ED. The temperature is T = 0.1t. Different from the zero temperature case, both the flat and dispersive bands supefluid weight show nonmonotonic behavior. However, a remarkable similarity between the finite and zero temperature cases is that, the geometric contribution is important for the flat bands. Away from the phase transition the mean-field results agree well with DMFT results. The advantage of the mean-field theory is that it provides important understanding of the superfluid weight in terms of the conventional and geometric contributions. We find that the geometric contribution is large and dominant or comparable to the conventional one for the flat band, while for the dispersive band the conventional contribution dominates. Therefore the concept of geometric contribution is important for a proper understanding of the superfluid properties of a (quasi-)flat band. Finally, we discuss the superfluid transition temperature in these models. The dashed lines in Fig. The superfluid weight gives the phase coherence energy scale and, in two dimensions, determines the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) temperature For the KMH and HH models studied in this article, the dispersive band has a higher transition temperature than the flat band for intermediate and strong interactions, and T BKT is maximized around U/t ≈ 4. This is not surprising since the dispersive band has larger superfluid weight than the flat band. However, in the weak coupling limit, the flat band has a higher critical temperature. In fact, one can see from the inserts in Fig. Our results confirm that flat bands indeed provide a way to improve the superfluid transition temperature in the weak to intermediate coupling regime. This is particularly important for real materials where the effective attractive interaction between electrons is expected to span this range of couplings. In this work, we investigate the superfluid properties of generic attractive Hubbard models defined on a lattice with complex orbital structure. We focus on the effects due to the multiband (multiorbital) nature of the system that are not present in a single-band lattice model, i.e. a model defined on a simple Bravais lattice. Our work is based on linear response theory which provides a convenient framework for calculating the superfluid weight and the foundation for addressing the superfluid properties of realistic systems. This approach is equivalent to the one used in Ref. In the mean-field BCS approximation, we obtain the In the weak coupling limit, T BCS ∝ U for the flat band (n < 1, blue) while it is exponentially small for the dispersive band (n > 1, red). In the strong coupling limit, T BCS ∝ U . The BKT temperature is nonmonotonic. In the weak coupling limit it behaves the same as T BCS and in the strong coupling limit it decreases with increasing U . The superfluid transition temperature is determined by T BKT and it is clearly shown that the flat band has a much higher transition temperature in the weak coupling limit. general result for the superfluid weight given in Eq. ( Linear response theory explains the cause behind this counterintuitive phenomenon in terms of the off-diagonal (interband) matrix elements of the current operator [Eq. The multiband effects on the superfluid properties that we find are interaction effects, since in the noninteracting limit all terms with off-diagonal matrix elements of the current operator disappear. Remarkably, the interband effects in the isolated band limit can be expressed solely in terms of the properties of the isolated band. Specifically, we find that they lead to a contibution proportional to the quantum metric, a band structure invariant obtained from the Bloch functions, both in the case with TRS and without TRS. We call this the geometric contribution to the superfluid weight. With respect to Ref. A physical interpretation of the connection between the superfluidity and geometry has started to emerge recently, at least in the TRS case The quantum metric also appears in the orbital magnetic susceptibility As an application of our theory we study the superfluid weight in the attractive KMH and HH models, confirming our BCS mean-field results using state of the art DMFT and ED methods. We focus on a specific set of hopping parameters such that both the case of a quasi-flat and a highly dispersive band can be studied by tuning the filling in the same models. For the flat band, the geometric contribution to the superfluid weight is important at both zero and finite temperature. Using our results for the superfluid weight we calculate the BKT temper-ature and find that the flat band indeed has higher transition temperature in the weak coupling limit. Our results could also be of immediate experimental interest, as the Haldane-Hubbard model has recently been realized in cold atomic gases experiments A very interesting topic for further research is the relevance of ours findings in the context of solid state systems. We have pointed out that the interplay of complex lattice geometry, band structure and interaction can produce qualitatively new effects on the superfluid properties that cannot be captured by single-band Hamiltonians such as a Hubbard model on a square lattice. As shown in Fig. The superfluid weight, which is related to the magnetic penetration depth, is a powerful probe of the microscopic properties of carriers of the supercurrent and is currently being intensively investigated in high-T c superconductors Without loss of generality, we take m to be the lowest band and write the dispersions of other bands as ε n = W n + ε m, where the band gaps W n are positive and W n >> |ε m -μ|, |∆|. Now we can perform a large W n expansion to simplify the superfluid weight. It is easy to verify that, for the conventional superfluid weight, the contribution from band n = m is of order 1/W 3 n and thus can be neglected. The geometric contribution containing the isolated band is We have used the approximation tanh (βE m /2)/E m ≈ 1/W m and the correction to this approximation is of order 1/W 2 m . For the strictly flat band, ε m = μ, the 1/W m correction in Eq. (B1) is negative. The remaining terms are (m, n = m) which are at least of order 1/W n . If all the gaps are of the same order, i.e., W n ∼ W and |W m -W n | << W , then Eq. (B2) is of order 1/W 3 . Therefore, in this case Eq. (B1) is exact up to order 1/W m , which is negative for the strictly flat band. Thus the lowest order result, Eq. ( Here we present a derivation of the geometric superfluid weight in the HH model and show that it is also related to the quantum metric in the isolated band limit. The BCS mean-field Hamiltonian for the HH model is T and the BdG Hamiltonian reads with ∆ intra = ∆ 1 -ĥ2 z is the intraband pairing and ∆ inter = ∆ ĥz is the interband pairing. The Pauli matrix s i acts in the two-dimensional space spanned by |d k (-|d * -k ) and |u k (|u * -k ) and τ i acts in particle-hole space. Note that γ = iI ⊗ τ y anticommutes with H while it commutes with H 2 = (h 0 -μ) 2 + ∆ 2 + |h| 2 + 2|h|E 0 P , where E 0 = (h 0 -μ) 2 + ∆ 2ĥ2 z , and whose eigenvalues are ±1. Now it is clear that the eigenvalues of the BdG Hamiltonian are ±E d and ±E u , where and Using the projection operators and the eigenvectors corresponding to E d and E u can be constructed as where the normalization factors are The eigenvectors corresponding to the negative eigenvalues are |ψ - d = γ|ψ + d and |ψ - u = γ|ψ + u . The superfluid weight can be calculated directly after obtaining the BdG wave functions. We are interested in the geometric contribution at zero temperature, given by The coefficients are and C 4 = (u dd v uu u uu v dd + u du v ud u ud v du ). We observe that u lh and u hl are smaller than the other coefficients because the bands |u |+ and |d |+ are decoupled up to first order in ∆. As a result, the terms containing u du or u ud can be dropped in the isolated band limit and Eq. (B13) can be simplified as The second term in the the right hand side comes from the interband pairing and is related to the quantum metric. This kind of contribution is absent in systems with TRS and uniform pairing since there is no band mixing in the quasiparticle states. In order to recover this term it is necessary to calculate the quasiparticle states |ψ ± s adiabatically connected to the isolated band up to first order in ∆ before taking the isolated band limit. The first term in Eq. (B14) comes from intraband pairing, and has the same origin as in the time reversal symmetric systems. However, TRS breaking induces an extra term ∝ -∂ μ ĥz ∂ ν ĥz /(1 -ĥ2 z ) that cancels the contribution of the quantum metric. Because of the cancellation, this term is small in TRS breaking systems, and therefore Eq. (B14) can be further simplified as In Fig. In this appendix we apply Eqs. ( ). Substituting these into Eqs. ( The factor of 2 counts the two Dirac points. The total superfluid weight is which coincides with Eq. ( Appendix D: Superfluid weight in a system with C6 symmetry In this appendix we prove that for a system with C 6 symmetry, the superfluid weight in an orthogonal basis is diagonal and proportional to the identity. Suppose the superfluid weight in a non-orthogonal primitive basis {e 1 , e 2 } (see Fig. In this appendix we provide some details and further results from our DMFT We evaluate the superfluid density in a straightforward manner by adding a small constant (in time and space) vector potential A ν to the model. This modifies the hopping amplitudes by multiplying them with a Peierls phase factor t ij → e -iA•(rj -ri) t ij . We then calculate the current as a function of A ν and determine the superfluid weight from the linear response formula j μ = D μν A ν for small A ν . Note that this procedure may seem contradictory, as a constant vector potential is gauge equivalent to a vanishing one, and thus should produce no current. In an exact calculation this is indeed true, provided that the vector potential is consistent with the periodic boundary conditions of the problem, i.e. A • L = 2πn, where L is a period of the lattice. For DMFT or mean-field theory, however, the single-unit-cell calculation implicitly imposes the constraint that the order parameter field ∆ = c i↑ c i↓ is uniform in space, which effectively breaks the gauge symmetry. Perhaps the easiest way to understand this is to perform a gauge transformation c iσ = exp(iA • r i )c iσ . (E1) In the primed variables the Hamiltonian does not have any Peierls phases, but the order parameter gains a position dependent phase twist, Thus we can see that we are in fact calculating the current response of the system to a phase twist of the order parameter. This is equivalent to the phase stiffness definition of the superfluid weight discussed in Appendix A, as the current is the first derivative of the free energy. In this way it is also easy to understand why the BCS meanfield calculation produces the same result for longitudinal and transverse gauge fields, as discussed in reference The expectation value of the current operator, or indeed any single particle operator O = ij M ij c † i c j , can be evaluated using the DMFT self-energy once the iteration has converged. In principle the expectation value can be expressed in terms of the Greens function G ij (τ ) = c i (τ )c † j (0) as where i and j index the orbitals of the whole lattice model. In practice we do not want to calculate the whole Greens function G(τ = 0 + ) in real space, and the trace has to be calculated in the Fourier transformed representation. The Green's function in frequency and momentum space is given by where T k is the noninteracting Bloch Hamiltonian (given by equation 7 with ∆ = 0) and Σ is the DMFT self-energy including the anomalous components. The expectation value of O is then given by ) where β is the inverse temperature, N is the number of k-points and M k is the k-space representation of M . To perform the frequency summation of the large frequency tail we perform a fitting procedure to find the lowest moments of the expansion of k Tr (M k G k (iω n )) in powers of (iω n ) -1 , and calculate the contribution from the tail analytically, as is commonly done with the Fourier transform of G itself. When dealing with almost flat bands it is not always easy to obtain a DMFT solution with a desired density. We alleviate this problem by tuning the chemical potential μ in the course of the iteration so that the sum of the chemical potential and the Hartree energy, μ h = μ + E h is always given by some predefined value. We find that tuning μ h instead of μ directly makes it easier to attain a specific density. Of course, one has to check that the chemical potential μ actually converges. We stress that this procedure is not a modification of the DMFT equations, but just a modified iterative method for their solution. In Fig. In the main text we compare the mean-field results of the superfluid weight against the Drude weight obtained from ED on a 32-site cluster. Since the cluster is large, we can only calculate at low and high fillings, corresponding to the bottom of the flat band and the top of the dispersive band. In this appendix we present our results for intermediate fillings, n = 1/3 and 5/3. We perform ED calculations on 18-and 24-site clusters that preserve the C 6 symmetry, see Fig. For the HH model H kin,↑ = H kin,↓ , while for the KMH model H kin,↑ and H kin,↓ are related by TRS. The kinetic energy is