We have analyzed two mechanisms proposed recently for superconductivity in doped SrTiO 3 -the plasmonmediated pairing and the potential of an instantaneous attraction between two electrons that owes its origin to the exchange by high-frequency optical phonons. The first approach seems to be self-consistent, but in a limited range of the dielectric constant. The direct instantaneous interaction between two electrons was ascribed to exchange by the band longitudinal (LO) phonons. The supposition was incorrect. The current paper shows that contributions into the pairing matrix element in a form of the net attraction come about only as the result of disorder. The experiment revealed the existence of the mobility edge in doped SrTiO 3 . Electrons occupying states below the mobility threshold are localized on the lattice defects and thereby are strongly coupled to the lattice vibrations. Emergent localized phonon modes attached to the defect is the inevitable corollary of such electron-lattice coupling. The virtual exchange by quantum of a local mode manifests itself as the effective attraction between two electrons in the conduction band. The total matrix element that is the sum over these processes increases with concentration and can overwhelm the Coulomb repulsion screened by the LO band phonons. That is, the role previously ascribed to the band LO phonons actually belongs to the localized phonon modes. Electronic properties of doped SrTiO 3 still remain poorly understood. In particular, strontium titanate displays the low-temperature superconductivity at the surprisingly low concentrations of doped electrons In this presentation we reconsider the two recently suggested mechanisms of superconductivity in doped strontium titanate: the plasmon-mediated pairing The paper is divided into two parts. We start with the analysis of possible phonon mechanisms. The plasmon mechanism Previously, it was speculated that the exchange by several LO phonons in SrTiO 3 can renormalize the Coulomb repulsion between the two conduction band electrons into an effective attractive interaction (see Eqs. The experimental discovery Missing in We suggest that the localized phonons take over the role conjectured in Before proceeding further, it is necessary to stipulate that although the current study is motivated by the peculiarities of superconductivity in doped SrTiO 3 , below one mostly concern oneself with the self-sufficient issue of superconductivity mediated by phonons localized on some strong defects. The latter point deserves a fuller explanation. The two interactions competing in the BCS phonon model are the direct Coulomb repulsion between two conduction band electrons and the retarded phonon mediated pairing attraction. In SrTiO 3 the Coulomb interaction remains repulsive. However, it has significantly weakened in clean strontium titanate being already screened by the band LO phonons (see The outstanding problem of finding the phonon spectrum of the periodic lattice with a defect, however, still awaits a general solution. The phonon spectrum is known only for few simple models (see, e.g., in Unlike with the phonons in clean SrTiO 3 possessing a momentum, the contributions of localized phonons come independently from different parts of the sample. The frequency of a localized mode lies outside (above) the phonon band of the crystalline SrTiO 3 . Having suggested that the role ascribed in Few, if any is known with certainty regarding the structure and strength of local defects produced, for instance, by a single oxygen vacancy in the oxygen-reduced SrTiO 3-y Recall that in the three-dimensional quantum-mechanical problems the bound states appear only in a strong enough attractive potential. The trapped electrons thereby are tightly coupled with the lattice. Defects are not uniformly distributed and the spectrum of localized vibrational modes in their vicinity can be different in different parts of the sample. Two electrons from the conduction band can exchange by a localized phonon. Leaping ahead, the virtual exchange by the quantum of such mode can play the significant role in superconductivity of doped SrTiO 3 . The sign of the corresponding matrix element is negative and the latter bears the character of an instantaneous interaction. Constrains imposed in the perfect crystal The total matrix element increases with the concentration of donors. There are no other small parameters in the problem. In clean SrTiO 3 interaction of the electrons with the band LO phonons has already significantly diminished the direct Coulomb electron-electron repulsion In that follows, we usually keep in mind a 3D cubic lattice of structureless atoms with a low concentration of the substitutional atoms as defects. A r r   is the matrix of the short range interactions between the atoms in the perfect lattice. Expression for the energy of the elastic deformations is: The summation in (1) runs over the positions of the atoms. The phonon spectrum of the regular lattice is defined by the equation: In the presence of a defect: where, as above, ˆ() nn A r r   is the matrix of elastic constants for the perfect lattice and ˆ( ; ) stands for the interactions between the defect at the site k r and the rest of the lattice. (3) analytically depends on the structure of the elastic matrix for the defect ˆ( ; ) The exact solutions are known only for few simple models (see e.g. The Hamiltonian for an electron moving in the potential of the lattice is: where () stands for the potential of the atoms of the perfect lattice, and ( ; is the potential of a defect ( j r -the position of the substitutional atom in the lattice). Electrons scatter on defects and on the lattice vibrations. The electron-phonon Hamiltonian has the form: Introduce the notation ˆ( | ( )) M q q  denotes the matrix element for scattering of an electron with the momentum k on the potential (5) with the transfer of the momentum q p k  accompanied by emitting or absorprtion one phonon with a frequency () q  . The wave functions of electrons are normalized on the volume  of the system. Rewriting In Eq. ( where ˆ() ur  is one of the three vector components of ˆ()  is the phonon frequency. Substituting (9) into Eq. ( The phonon-mediated pairing matrix element is of the second order in ˆ( | ( )) M q q Here is the energy of the initial state of two electrons; 1 ( ) ( ) are energies of the two intermediate states. After substitution of Eq. ( At low temperatures when one arrives to the expression: The parameter  in the canonic weak coupling expression for temperature of the superconducting transition: The dispersion in the phonon frequency was omitted 0 () q  ; the prefactor in Eq.( . Usually, the parameter  is not small. Note the dependence on N in the denominators in the expressions (10, 13): in Eq. ( N  comes about from the fact that both the electron wave functions and the plane wave in (9) extend over the whole space. The conservation law gives the factor 1 N  in Eq. ( In the presence of a defect one would expect, instead of the plane waves in Eq. ( where c is the concentration of defects. Return to superconductivity in strontium titanate. The dimensionless parameter  in the BCS-like Eq. ( 3 , let us stay longer on possible localized phonons in a polar crystal. At the choice of the lattice model for this problem one is to remember that both the polarizable lattice atoms and the polarizable defects possess the internal degrees of freedom. To the best of the author's knowledge, no attempts have been made to address the issue of the phonon spectrum of a defect in the lattice with several atoms per unit cell. Some of the qualitative results can be outlined as in Limit ourselves by a lattice with two atoms per unit cell and let the polarization be proportional to the relative displacement The polarizability of the lattice gives rise to the appearance of the macroscopic electrical fields () s Er and, in turn, to the new terms in the lattice energy (Here ( 1) / 4 is the polarizability at the fixed position of the atoms). In (18) e q is a charge and ( ) ( ) n e s n P r q u r  is the phenomenological expression for the polarization that is specific to a given material. For simplicity, consider () sn ur in (18) as a continuous function of the coordinate r . Rewriting (18) obtains: Note that there is the qualitative difference between the matrix elements of the electron-phonon interaction for the band and localized phonons. For the plane wave ( ) exp( ) In the case of a localized mode the polarization is non-zero only in a vicinity a of the defect. At 1 qa  ˆ( | ( )) / M q q e q   as in (23), and ˆ( | ( )) M q q ea   at 1 qa  . possesses a number of unique properties. Among them is the very large static dielectric constant that at helium temperatures reaches 25000 The temperature C T of the superconductivity transition in doped SrTiO 3 was calculated in the frameworks of the plasmon-mediated pairing concept. The physical idea underlying the model mn Sq is the electronic polarization: ) as the square of the "plasmon" frequency. After all substitutions, one finds: x  the plasmon frequency (27) is small compared to the Fermi energy and Eq. (28) allows the BCS-like interpretation as the sum of a "retarded" (that is, the plasmon-mediated) attraction and the repulsive Coulomb potentials. From the theory point of view, Eq. ( The Migdal-Eliashberg equations were solved in However, provided that at small enough concentrations 0  in the expression 22 0 (4 / ) eq  in front of Eq. ( In the logarithmic approximation  can obtained directly. In the equation for the gap function the product of the two Green functions is and integration over  one obtains 1 ln(1 ) 1 x x     (32) (Following Recall that at the derivation of the plasmon model Eq. (28) the static dielectric constant was assumed equal to that of clean strontium titanate 0 25000   . Substituting the hydrogenic Bohr radius From the above estimates, it becomes clear that the static dielectric constant 0  decreases with doping. The authors T -dependence is most remarkable feature among the experimental findings [1,8]. Assume that there is a sharp boundary at the mobility edge between the localized and delocalized electronic states. With the manifold of all localized electronic states being occupied, the spectrum of the localized phonon modes is not changing at the further doping. C T initially increases with the number of carriers in the conduction band, and decreases when accumulating charges screen the interactions between them. This naive mechanism , however, suggests the natural interpretation of maxima in the concentration dependence C T . In short, the supposition regarding the leading role of localized phonons in the mechanisms of superconductivity in doped SrTiO 3 is not contradictory to the experimental data. The exchange by the phonon modes localized on a three dimensional defect gives a contribution into the instantaneous attractive pairing potential. If this contribution into the total matrix element exceeds that of the screened Coulomb scattering, the superconductivity is due to this mechanism.