The influence of confinement on the topological phases of superfluid 3 He is studied using the torsional pendulum method. We focus on the phase transition between the chiral A-phase and the time-reversal-invariant B-phase, motivated by the prediction of a spatiallymodulated (stripe) phase at the A-B phase boundary. We confine superfluid 3 He to a single 1.08 μm thick nanofluidic cavity incorporated into a high-precision torsion pendulum, and map the phase diagram between 0.1 and 5.6 bar. We observe only small supercooling of the A-phase, in comparison to bulk or when confined in aerogel. This has a non-monotonic pressure dependence, suggesting that a new intrinsic B-phase nucleation mechanism operates under confinement, mediated by the putative stripe phase. Both the phase diagram and the relative superfluid fraction of the A and B phases, show that strong coupling is present at all pressures, with implications for the stability of the stripe phase. Superfluid We make the striking observation that the supercooling of the first order A-B transition is very small, far less than the considerable supercooling observed in bulk In practice the onset of superfluidity modifies the pairing interaction, for example pairing mediated by the exchange of spin-fluctuations. These strong-coupling effects stabilize the bulk A phase at high pressures. The B phase of superfluid We found the B phase to be completely excluded at low pressure and observed the A phase between the normal state and the B-phase above 3 bar. Guided by the results of previous work A consequence of moderate confinement is the prediction of a novel spatially modulated, or "stripe phase", intervening between the A and B phases Recently the existence, location and stability of the putative stripe phase have been shown to depend crucially on details of the strong coupling parameters. Experiment details: The 3 He was confined to a 1.08 μm deep cavity micro-machined in 1 mm thick silicon, capped with 1 mm thick sodium doped glass, anodically bonded We measure the resonant frequency, f, and the Quality factor, Q, of the torsion pendulum as a function of temperature. The 3 He in the cavity is fully coupled to the torsion pendulum above Tc. The superfluid fraction is determined from the increase in resonant frequency (after subtracting the temperature dependent background of the empty oscillator), arising from the decoupling of the superfluid below Tc. The dissipation ( ) was calculated by relating the observed amplitude at resonance to the drive voltage (after calibration at a fixed drive). Temperatures were measured using a melting curve thermometer The superfluid fractions measured while cooling (blue circles) and warming (red open triangles) for five pressures are plotted in Fig. The region near the first order AB transition is the focus of this paper. In summary we study: (i) the influence of the confinement on the equilibrium transition temperature, TBA observed on warming, with the transition broadened by pressure-induced bowing of the cavity (Fig. We describe the systematics of these data in turn, followed by a discussion. The warming transition TBA, determines the thermodynamic transition temperature, as confirmed by the lack of history dependence of this feature (Fig. At each pressure we identify the start and end temperature of the transition (see details in Supplementary note 1) determining the transition's width, ∆ / / . The increase in transition width with pressure, (Table The transition at TAB while cooling (blue circles Fig. The finite width of the BA transition observed on warming, attributed to cell bowing, implies that during this transition the AB interfaces in the cell are positioned such that ) is at the critical value (see Supplementary note 1). The surfaces of the cavity were polished in an attempt to eliminate pinning. To confirm the absence of pinning the experiment was warmed partially into the B→A transition region and then re-cooled, Fig. The ratio of the superfluid density in the A phase and the corresponding value in the B phase is precisely determined at B phase nucleation, TAB/Tc, Table We also note that the dissipation is greater in the B phase (Figs 3a-e) than in the A phase. In the bulk, the reverse is true. In bulk, the conventional homogeneous nucleation theory predicts the lifetime of the supercooled A phase to exceed the age of the universe Under confinement in our thin slab geometry we observe only very small supercooling, less than 0.03Tc. By contrast, in bulk with clean surfaces, the observed lifetime of the supercooled A state is exceedingly long at temperatures near the equilibrium AB transition (ie the B phase does not nucleate). Only by cooling to very low temperatures ( 0.25Tc, far below the equilibrium AB transition), is the transition to the B phase observed while holding the temperature fixed for several hours. Our experimental practice involves cooling at a steady rate through the supercooled state for several hours; if the "lifetime" of the supercooled A phase under confinement were the typical bulk value of an hour, we would expect a supercooling of  0.4Tc. The sample geometry of our cavity is particularly well suited to studies of B phase nucleation. Due to the influence of confinement on the relative stability of the A and B phases, the B phase nucleates in the most bowed region of the cell, as depicted in Fig. The smallness of the supercooling and the smallness of the sample volume, strongly suggest that the B-phase nucleation we observe under confinement is a new intrinsic phenomenon. We note that the AB transition in aerogel, by contrast, shows large supercooling However strong coupling corrections are predicted to strongly influence the stability of the equilibrium phase The calculated phase diagram The growth of the A phase from the B phase (Fig. The measured phase diagram, in comparison with the predicted phase diagram Due to bowing, the A-B interface will be oriented azimuthally, and hence parallel to the flow. Thus the putative striped phase would be located at this interface, parallel to the flow with expected minimal effect on the superfluid fraction in our experiment. The present set-up cannot rule out a thermodynamically stable stripe phase, The observed superfluid density of the A phase at TAB is greater than that of the B phase (for / see Table It is believed to be likely that first order phase transitions occurred in the early universe, may explain matter-antimatter asymmetry, and are important in inflation scenarios. According to standard nucleation theory the supercooled A phase lifetime in bulk superfluid should greatly exceed the lifetime of the universe, and this has prompted proposals for a number of extrinsic nucleation mechanisms. The fact that supercooling is virtually eliminated under confinement is striking. The notion that confinement significantly modifies the energy landscape, creating false vacua that promote B phase nucleation, via resonant tunneling, merits further study in the laboratory, which may impact on our understanding of these central questions in cosmology. Cell Construction: The 14 mm silicon disk that comprises the micromachined chamber to contain the The fabricated cavity height (1080 nm) is maintained only at the bonded points of attachment. The step height on the cavity was measured prior to bonding with a Tencor P10 profilometer and found to be 1080 nm. Roughness of the silicon cavity surface was measured using an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) to be less than 0.1 nm rms. The same measurement for the glass surface after polishing was seen to be less than 1 nm rms. Finite element analysis (Fig. The edge of the annular cell cavity retains features due to the fabrication process where small regions of a few μm width of A phase likely persist well below . These features are illustrated in Supplementary Fig. Coin silver (90% silver and 10% copper) was chosen as the alloy for the torsion pendulum because this material provides a high Q at low temperatures and has a relatively small temperature dependent frequency background. The resonant frequency of the mode we excited the pendulum at was about 1330 Hz and the quality factor was ~1.5  10 6 at mK temperatures. Below the superfluid transition, the superfluid fraction of the fluid in the cavity decouples from the pendulum, and a decrease in its period is observed. The ratio of the moment of inertia of the fluid in the cavity to the moment of inertia of pendulum head was ~6 parts in 10 6 . The frequency noise is about 2-4 parts in 10 9 giving us ample resolution to resolve the superfluid fraction ρs/ρ. Achieving this degree of frequency stability required a compromise between driving the pendulum at a large enough amplitude (to increase signal above ambient vibrational noise) and non-linearity of the pendulum's torsional mode. The superfluid fraction was determined from the frequency of the torsion pendulum, f(T), through the following expression: where Δf(T) is the difference between the measured frequency f and the frequency of the pendulum if all the fluid is fully locked ffull.. At Tc the viscous penetration depth of where is the density of 