The quantum entanglement and the probability of the dynamical Lamb effect for two qubits caused by non-adiabatic fast change of the boundary conditions are studied. The conditional concurrence of the qubits for each fixed number of created photons in a nonstationary cavity is obtained as a measure of the dynamical quantum entanglement due to the dynamical Lamb effect. We discuss the physical realization of the dynamical Lamb effect, based on superconducting qubits. The new direction in the quantum electrodynamics (QED), related to the optical properties of the cavity with the nonstationary boundary conditions, initiated studies of several interesting physical phenomena such as a dynamical Casimir effect (DCE) The fast changes of the boundary conditions can be achieved in superconducting circuits. The superconducting qubits play the role of atoms in an optical cavity, and the superconducting line plays the role of an optical cavity In this paper, we consider the physical realization to observe the quantum entanglement and the DLE for the artificial atoms, formed by superconducting qubits, constructed in a superconducting circuit based on Josephson junctions. We analyze superconducting qubits, coupled to a CPW terminated by a SQUID. Changing the magnetic flux through the SQUID parametrically modulates the boundary conditions of CPW. Ultrafast change of CPW boundary conditions results in the excitation of the superconducting qubit which is identical to the dynamical Lamb effect for an ordinary atom in a cavity with the nonstationary changing parameters. We focus on the physical realization of the DLE The paper is organized in the following way. In Sec. II, we study the dynamical Lamb effect for two qubits, coupled to an optical cavity with changing boundary conditions, and derive the probability of the DLE. In Sec. III, we analyze the quantum entanglement for two qubits caused by nonadiabatic fast change of the boundary conditions, and obtain the conditional concurrence for two qubits at fixed number of created photons in a nonstationary cavity. Finally, the discussion of the results and conclusions follow in Sec. IV. We consider two qubits, coupled to an optical cavity with changing boundary conditions. The Hamiltonian Ĥ of two qubits in a nonstationary cavity, assuming h = 1, is given by (the Hamiltonian of one qubit in a nonstationary cavity was presented in Ref. 7) where Ĥ is the Hamiltonian of a stationary cavity, defined as where Ĥ0 is the Hamiltonian of two qubits without qubit-photon interaction, which is given by Vtotal is the total Hamiltonian of the qubit-photon interaction given by Vtotal = λ j=1,2 In Eqs. ( It follows from Eq. ( where VRW A is the qubit-photon interaction in the rotating wave approximation (RWA) which does not change the number of the excitations in the system, and V is the term beyond the RWA, which can increase or decrease the number of the excitations in the system for two or four excitations, including the qubit and photon excitations: Since the DLE is related to the parametric excitation of the qubit, only V influences the DLE. The second term in Eq. ( Using Eqs. ( where n is the number of photons. Using Eqs. ( The second order with respect to qubit-photon coupling λ terms in Eqs. In the framework of the model, the total Lamb shift is the sum of the Lamb shifts of the individual qubits. The static Lamb shift is obtained by the second order perturbation theory, since it involves the creation and absorption of the virtual photons by the qubit described by the Feynman's diagram for the self-energy of the second order. The latter contains two vertexes for the qubit-photon coupling If the cavity resonance frequency is changed suddenly from ω 1 to ω 2 , the cavity photons can be created, and the qubits can get an excitation due to change of the parameters of the cavity. The amplitudes A n;01 = λω2 n; 01| 0; 00 λω1 . The amplitude A (L) n;11 for excitation of two qubits and creation of n cavity photons is given by The probabilities of DLE w where Note that excitation of one qubit is possible only with creation of one cavity photon. Let us estimate the probability of excitation of a single qubit due to the DLE by using the physical realization with the superconducting qubits, coupled to CPW. Following Ref. where A (L) 0;11 is the amplitude of excitation of two qubits without creation of cavity photons given by (L) 2;11 is the amplitude of excitation of two qubits with creation of two cavity photons given by A (L) 2;11 = λω2 2; 11| 0; 00 λω1 = - According to Eq. ( Let us mention that the probabilities of excitation of qubits are expressed in terms of the Lamb shifts. We estimate the probability of excitation of two qubits due to the DLE by using the physical realization with the superconducting qubits, coupled to CPW. Applying listed above parameters in Eq. ( Note that the probability of creation of two photons due to the dynamical Lamb effect in Eq. ( It is well-known that the possible measure of quantum entanglement of two qubits is the concurrence C as We define the conditional concurrence for each fixed number of created photons. For the case of absence of photons |0 ph , we have a = A 1;10 , a = 0, d = 0. In this case, the conditional concurrence for one photon C |1 is defined as Substituting Eq. ( Let us mention that the concurrence is expressed in terms of the variation of the Lamb shift. One can estimate the conditional concurrence for one created photon due to the DLE by using the physical realization with the superconducting qubits, coupled to CPW. Substituting used above parameters into Eq. ( For the case of creation two photons |2 ph , we have a = A (L) 2;00 , d = A (L) 2;11 , b = 0, c = 0. In this case, the conditional concurrence for two photons C |2 is defined as Substituting Eq. ( 2;00 = λω2 2; 00| 0; 00 λω1 = - into Eq. ( We estimate the conditional concurrence for two created photons due to the DLE by using the physical realization with the superconducting qubits, coupled to CPW. Applying previously used parameters in Eq. ( Let us mention, that if one of the qubits is in the exited state, while another one is in the ground state, and the qubits are in the state either |10 qub or |01 qub , there is only one photon in the system. We conclude that if both qubits are either in the ground state |00 qub or both qubits are in the excited state |11 qub , then the photon field in the system is entangled between the states with absence of photons |0 ph and two photons |2 ph . The probabilities of each photon state in the cases with both qubits in the ground |00 qub and excited |11 qub states are different. Thus, if both qubits are in the ground state |00 qub , the probability of two created photons in the system is given by A (L) 2;00 2 . The amplitude A (L) 2;00 is given by Eq. The superconducting circuits have the advantage of enabling the study of complex controllable quantum dynamics. This could lead to quantum simulations and on-chip studies of many-body physics. Two-qubit algorithms with a superconducting quantum processor were demonstrated in Ref. We evaluated the quantum entanglement and the probability of the DLE for two qubits, coupled to the optical cavity (or the superconducting line for superconducting realizations), caused by nonadiabatic fast change of the boundary conditions. We obtained the probability of the dynamical Lamb effect. According to Eq. ( The system with two qubits is characterized by their influence on each other and their quantum entanglement with each other and created Casimir photons due to the change of the boundary conditions. This effect is expected to play an important role in quantum technologies. The dynamical Lamb effect and quantum entanglement due to the change of cavity boundary conditions offer a new possibility of control of qubits and open new directions for quantum technologies. These phenomena related to the DLE can be observed at the different frequencies regions either for atoms or for semiconductor quantum dots in the optical cavity or for the superconducting qubits, coupled to the superconducting line. The model Hamiltonian, which we use in the present article, qualitatively describes the DLE for all three physical realizations.