The emerging field of phase-coherent caloritronics (from the Latin word "calor", i.e., heat) is based on the possibility to control heat currents using the phase difference of the superconducting order parameter. The goal is to design and implement thermal devices able to master energy transfer with a degree of accuracy approaching the one reached for charge transport by contemporary electronic components. This can be obtained by exploiting the macroscopic quantum coherence intrinsic to superconducting condensates, which manifests itself through the Josephson and the proximity effect. Here, we review recent experimental results obtained in the realization of heat interferometers and thermal rectifiers, and discuss a few proposals for exotic non-linear phase-coherent caloritronic devices, such as thermal transistors, solid-state memories, phase-coherent heat splitters, microwave refrigerators, thermal engines and heat valves. Besides being very attractive from the fundamental physics point of view, these systems are expected to have a vast impact on many cryogenic microcircuits requiring energy management, and possibly lay the first stone for the foundation of electronic thermal logic. In the last decades, the impressive evolution of modern electronics has reached a point where quantum effects and phase coherence are ordinarily exploited to study exotic phenomena at the nanoscale under controlled and adjustable conditions. Only very recently, instead, scientists have started to exploit the great potentialities offered by nanotechnology for the investigation and control of heat currents (the branch of science called "caloritronics"). Interesting advances in the understanding of fundamental properties of thermal transport have been obtained in experiments involving atomic or molecular junctions From the point of view of applications, the largest effort has been put into electronic and phononic thermometry or refrigeration The physical picture at the basis of phase-coherent caloritronics is represented schematically in Fig. The second approach, instead, is sketched in Fig. Last approach is sketched in Fig. in general the reservoirs are not in galvanic contact and the photonic heat current J e-phot (φ) is controlled by an intermediate superconducting circuit [for instance, a direct current superconducting quantum interference device (DC SQUID)] inductively or capacitively coupled to the reservoirs All the options listed above can be implemented in the framework of quasiequilibrium regime In the following sections, we shall analyze more deeply each different approach, reviewing the major experimental achievements and the existing proposals for novel caloritronic devices. Just three years after the prediction of the Josephson effect Equation 1 contains interesting information about the impact of the Josephson effect on thermal transport. First of all, J SIS consists of two components: the former accounts for the heat carried by quasiparticles and represents an incoherent flow of energy from the hot to the cold reservoir Figure The complementary demonstration of the phase-coherent nature of J int was obtained one year later, with the observation of a thermal diffraction pattern in an extended rectangular JJ Although these interferometers embody the simplest structures to obtain the experimental demonstration of the prediction by Maki and Griffin, they are not ideal systems to achieve the full control of J int . Indeed, unwanted structural asymmetries (for instance, a difference in the normal-state resistance of the JJs) can reduce severely the visibility of the oscillations of a conventional single-loop SQUID The most recent achievement in mastering J int is represented by a 0π phase-controllable thermal JJ. As depicted in Fig. Figure A realistic system able to detect NDTC is the thermal counterpart of a tunnel diode (as the one envisioned in Ref. The last structure we wish to present in this section is a hybrid thermal rectifier, a device that allows heat to flow preferentially in one direction. Even though the system is not phase-coherent, it proves the potential of superconducting hybrid circuits as one of the best platforms to manipulate heat currents. The structure (whose schematic is shown in Fig. As mentioned in the introduction, the second approach to phase-coherent caloritronics is based on the superconducting proximity effect For instance, in a SS'S JJ the proximity effect generates a phase-tunable minigap E g (φ) in the DOS of the weak-link that has a maximum for φ = 0 and vanishes for φ = π Figure We stress that, although not yet experimentally proven, the approach described in this section has the potential to be very effective thanks to the ability to vary the thermal conductance of the S'IN junction by several orders of magnitude, as shown in Figs. Last approach to obtain phase control of heat currents is through the transport of thermal photons, which becomes the dominant mechanism when the phononic and the electronic channels are frozen where Z 1,2 (ω) are the impedances of the N reservoirs, Z tot (ω) = Z 1 (ω) + Z 2 (ω) + Z c (ω) is the total series impedance of the circuit and Z c (ω) is the impedance of the coupling circuit. In the case depicted in Fig. One step beyond this experiment is based on the concept of a fully contactless photonic heat transistor The photonic method opens the way to the investigation and exploitation of non-galvanic thermal transport, which would lead to wireless electronic cooling and to the remote control of noise and decoherence in mesoscopic quantum circuits. Although its effectiveness is maximized in the case of N leads, it has been predicted that the photonic coupling between S leads could still produce a significant thermal flow (two orders of magnitude higher than that produced by the electron-phonon coupling) All the structures discussed above can be implemented by conventional nanofabrication techniques, i.e., electron beam lithography, shadow mask evaporation of metals and in-situ oxidation Phase-coherent caloritronics would offer many new possi-bilities to this field, as for instance the microwave Josephson refrigerator Even more interesting, Fig. Finally, phase-coherent caloritronics can shed light on several fundamental energy-and heat-related phenomena at the nanoscale, such as quantum thermodynamics 