Na 4 Ir 3 O 8 provides a material platform to study three-dimensional quantum spin liquids in the geometrically frustrated hyperkagome lattice of Ir 4+ ions. In this work, we consider quantum spin liquids on hyperkagome lattice for generic spin models, focusing on the effects of anisotropic spin interactions. In particular, we classify possible Z 2 and U(1) spin liquid states, following the projective symmetry group analysis in the slave-fermion representation. There are only three distinct Z 2 spin liquids, together with 2 different U(1) spin liquids. The nonsymmorphic space group symmetry of hyperkagome lattice plays a vital role in simplifying the classification, forbidding "π-flux" or "staggered-flux" phases in contrast to symmorphic space groups. We further prove that both U(1) states and one Z 2 state among all 3 are symmetry-protected gapless spin liquids, robust against any symmetry-preserving perturbations. Motivated by the "spin-freezing" behavior recently observed in Na 4 Ir 3 O 8 at low temperatures, we further investigate the nearest-neighbor spin model with dominant Heisenberg interaction subject to all possible anisotropic perturbations from spin-orbit couplings. We found a U(1) spin liquid ground state with spinon fermi surfaces is energetically favored over Z 2 states. Among all spin-orbit coupling terms, we show that only Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction can induce spin anisotropy in the ground state when perturbing from the isotropic Heisenberg limit. Our work paves the way for a systematic study of quantum spin liquids in various materials with a hyperkagome crystal structure. Quantum spin liquids are exotic states of matter that defy the traditional Landau's paradigm of symmetry breaking. They are featured by a disordered ground state that evades ordering down to zero temperature, and fractionalized excitations on top of it Early works of quantum spin liquids in Na 4 Ir 3 O 8 mainly focus on the spin-isotropic Heisenberg model due to the following observation: when strong spin-orbit coupling of 5d electrons in Ir outweights the crystal field, the resulting model consists of an effective J eff = 1/2 moment on each Ir ion, with dominant Heisenberg interactions over various small anisotropic interactions More recently, two experimental studies of muon spin relaxation (μSR) In addition to the progress of experiments, the hyperkagome lattice also draws theoretical attentions due to its nonsymmorphic space group symmetry -a space group operation combining translation by a fraction of the unit-cell and a point group operation, such as screw or glide operations. Recent works In view of these developments, we perform a systematic classification of symmetric Z 2 and U(1) spin liquids on hyperkagome lattice, using the projective symmetry group (PSG) analysis We further apply the above classification to study the possible spin liquid ground state in Na 4 Ir 3 O 8 with considerable spin-orbit couplings. Motivated by the μSR and NMR experi-ments mentioned earlier, we pay special attention to the effects of spin-anisotropic interactions, and investigate whether they induce spin-triplet couplings in the spin liquid state. For this purpose, we focus on a nearest-neighbor spin model that reflects the experimental signatures of Na 4 Ir 3 O 8 . As pointed out previously in Ref. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II we classify distinct Z 2 and U(1) spin liquids compatible with space group and time reversal symmetries of hyperkagome lattices, following PSG formalism We also briefly outline the contents of the Appendices. In Appendix A we describe the space group symmetry and compute its Z 2 extension in regard to the classification of Z 2 spin liquids. Next we classify symmetric Z 2 (see Appendix B) and U(1) (see Appendix C) spin liquids on hyperkagome lattice, and study their mean-field ansatz in Appendix D. central C 3 axis of the tetrahedron. Since the nearest neighbor (NN) bonds form a network of corner sharing regular triangles, hyperkagome lattice is not a bipartite lattice, giving rise to geometric frustrations for NN antiferromagnets on it. A pair of NN sites always come from different sublattices, and the relative locations of NN pairs are summarized in Table Now we look at point-group symmetry of the lattice. The hyperkagome lattice belongs to the space group P4 1 32 the space group is generated by a 2-fold rotation along ( 3 8 , 3 4x 2 , x 2 )-axis: a 3-fold rotation along (1, 1, 1)-axis: and a 4-fold non-symmorphic screw: i.e. a π/2 rotation along (x 1 , 1 4 , 1 2 )-axis followed by a fractional translation of ( 1 4 , 0, 0): Their actions on an arbitrary lattice site are summarized in Table Next we construct mean-field Hamiltonians of spin liquid states preserving the symmetries discussed in the previous section, using the slave fermion representation and associated projective symmetry group classification In the slave-fermion representation, we write the local spin Triangle 2 (2; -, 0, -) (3; 0, +, -) (6; +, 0, +) (12; +, -, 0) (1; +, 0, +) (3; +, +, 0) (9; 0, -, -) (10; -, -, 0) (1; 0, -, +) (2; -, -, 0) (4; 0, +, -) (5; +, 0, -) (3; 0, -, +) (5; +, -, 0) (8; -, 0, -) (9; -, +, 0) (3; -, 0, +) (4; -, +, 0) (6; 0, -, -) (7; +, 0, -) (1; -, 0, -) (5; 0, +, +) (12; 0, -, -) (7; +, +, 0) (8; +, +, 0) (11; 0, +, -) (5; -, 0, +) (6; -, -, 0) (4; +, 0, +) (7; -, -, 0) (11; -, 0, -) (9; 0, +, +) (2; 0, +, +) (10; -, 0, +) (4; +, -, 0) (8; 0, -, -) 10 (2; +, +, 0) (9; +, 0, -) (11; 0, -, +) (12; -, 0, +) 11 (7; 0, -, +) (8; +, 0, +) (10; 0, +, -) (12; -, +, 0) 12 (1; -, +, 0) (6; 0, +, +) (10; +, 0, -) (11; +, -, 0) operator at site i as where σ's are Pauli matrices, and the spinor Here i, j are site indices and α, β are spin indices. In the following we will always omit the spin indices to lighten notations. For the convenience of later analysis, we introduce where T = iσ y K is the time-reversal operator and K is complex conjugation. Then the spin operator can be rewritten as From the representation (10), we immediately see that an SU(2) rotation W i = e -iφ•τ/2 acting on the right (gauge rotation with Pauli matrices τ) rotates the spin operator S i by an angle θ. The invariance of physical spin operator S i under or written in a neat form invariant under S U(2) gauge rotations, Therefore in the constrained Hilbert space we have the gauge redundancy The slave fermion representation allows for a mean field decomposition of Hamiltonians describing spin-spin interaction without invoking magnetic ordering. The most general form of a mean field Hamiltonian is (see Appendix D 1 for expansions in terms of f -operators) where the mean field amplitudes are and b (0,x,y,z) i j , a (0,x,y,z) i j are real numbers serving as mean field parameters. The summation over sites i, j is omitted to lighten the notations. The Hermiticity of the Hamiltonian guarantees Eq. ( So for onsite terms we immediately have Note here the mean field Hamiltonian is split into singlet H 0 and triplet H x,y,z parts. The singlet part H 0 is invariant under S U(2) spin rotations as we can see from On the other hand, H x,y,z generically breaks continuous spin rotational symmetry. H z contains spin-dependent hopping ( . Each H A (A = x, y, z) contains four real parameters for each bond (i, j), and a general mean-field Hamiltonian H MF involves 16 real parameters for each bond. C. Classification of symmetric U(1) and Z 2 spin liquids Since symmetric spin liquids are described by projected superconductors of fermionic spinons in the slave fermion representation, it's crucial to understand how symmetry acts on the fermionic spinons Ψ i in In particular, fractionalized fermionic spinons may not form a linear representation of the symmetry group, instead they can transform projectively under symmetry operations We therefore classify the PSGs for symmetric Z 2 and U(1) spin liquids on hyperkagome lattice. We also construct their mean-field Hamiltonians where The detailed calculations can be found in Appendix B-C, while we summarize the PSG solutions in Table while the gauge rotations for 2-fold rotation G C 2 (r, s) ≡ g C 2 and 4-fold screw G S 4 (r, s) ≡ g S 4 have the same form of Meanwhile anti-unitary time reversal symmetry is implemented by with gauge rotation As shown in Appendix C there are 2 different U(1) spin liquids in the PSG classification, labeled as U1 0 and U1 1 states. They correspond to U(1)-uniform (U1 0 ) and U(1)-staggered (U1 1 ) phases studied in Ref. Meanwhile the solutions to PSG equations for symmetric Z 2 spin liquids must satisfy the following conditions (for details see Appendix B) and we find 5 gauge inequivalent solutions as listed in Table III. Among them, 2 unphysical solutions with g T = 1 are incompatible with spin-1/2 fermionic spinons (Kramers doublets), and always lead to vanishing mean-field ansatz. Therefore these 5 algebraic solutions only lead to 3 distinct symmetric Z 2 spin liquids on hyperkagome lattice: they are states 2(a), 2(b) and 2(c) in TABLE Before discussing physical properties of these spin liquids, we clarify the relation between the symmetric U(1) and Z 2 spin liquids on hyperkagome lattice. Quite generally, a Z 2 spin liquids can be viewed as a descendant of another U(1) spin liquid, by breaking the gauge group from U(1) down to Z 2 via the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. Such a continuous phase transition is driven by condensing the Cooper pairs of fermionic spinons in the slave fermion representation. In our case of hyperkagome spin liquids, each U(1) spin liquid hosts 2 such neighboring Z 2 states: U1 0 state ("U(1)-uniform" state in Ref. In this work we only classify symmetric Z 2 and U(1) spin liquids within the slave-fermion representation. There are other symmetric Z 2 and U(1) spin liquids on hyperkagome lattice beyond the description of slave-fermion representation, for example the Schwinger-boson states studied in Ref. A. Gapped vs. gapless states Since these spin liquids preserve all symmetries of the system, one significant feature of them is the presence/absence of a gap for low-energy excitations on top of their ground states. This issue can be fully determined with the knowledge of symmetry operations on fermionic spinons in these states, as we will show below. We start with symmetric Z 2 spin liquids, whose mean-field ansatz describes a superconductor of fermionic spinons. First of all, it's straightforward to show that an on-site singlet pairing term is allowed by both 2(a) and 2(c) states, which generally can lead to a gapped spinon spectrum. Therefore 2(a) and 2(c) states are generically gapped as shown in TABLE III. On the other hand, since each C 2 axis crosses a single site in each unit cell, such an on-site pairing is forbidden in 2(b) state by 2fold rotation associated with gauge rotation g C 2 = iτ 2 . Below we prove that mean-field Hamiltonian (15) must be gapless for state 2(b). In the Nambu basis of , mean-field ansatz (15) can be written and diagonalized in k-space as where Λ k is a 48 × 48 diagonal matrix describing band dispersions, and {Γ k } are the eigenmodes. Due to particle-hole symmetry in such a Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, we only fill half In our case of space group P4 1 32, non-symmorphic screw symmetry S 4 dictates that bands always appear in quadruplets that cannot be disentangled The other U(1) spin liquid labeled U1 1 state, on the other hand, have different implementations for C 2 and S 4 operations compared to U1 0 state. As shown in Appendix C, both C 2 and S 4 operations are followed by gauge rotation iτ 2 (up to a global U(1) gauge rotation e iφτ 3 ), corresponding to the particle-hole transformation f σ → f † σ on fermionic spinons. Regarding this, we can simply write down the mean-field Hamiltonian of U1 1 state in the Nambu basis, and exactly the same argument for Z 2 state 2(b) discussed previously proves the gaplessness of U1 1 state. Although the above analysis on 2(b) and U1 1 states is based on band structure of mean-field spinon Hamiltonian B. Mean-field spectrum of fermionic spinons TABLE III. Summary of 5 algebraic PSGs in slave fermion representation for symmetry group S G = P4 1 32 × Z T 2 on hyperkagome lattice. Only 3 of them with T 2 = η T = -1 are physical solutions with spin-1/2 fermionic spinons, leading to 3 distinct symmetric Z 2 spin liquids on hyperkaogme lattice: 2(a), 2(b), 2(c) states. These 3 symmetric Z 2 states are in the neighborhood of 2 symmetric U(1) spin liquids: U1 0 and U1 1 states. For details see Appendix B-C. 3. The bond-dependent mean-field amplitudes (t μ , t ν , t ρ ) for triplet terms in Table Due to space group symmetries, among all NN bonds, we only need to write down the mean-field amplitude u i j in one bond, and all the other bonds are generated by symmetry from condition (B5) for singlet terms, and (B18) for triplet terms. The details of symmetry constraints on mean-field amplitudes are analyzed in Appendix D and we present the results below. For unphysical PSG solutions 1(a) and 1(b) where g T = 1, we immediately see that time-reversal (B26) leads to the constraint u i j = -u i j for both singlet and triplet terms, hence no mean field realization in these cases. For physical Z 2 states 2(a,b,c) with g T = iτ 2 , we list the spin-singlet amplitudes in Table For further neighbouring bonds, similar analysis can be done using the PSG solutions in Table Below we analyze the mean-field dispersions of fermionic spinons, and especially the low-energy excitations near the nodal surfaces. To do so, we rewrite the mean-field Hamiltonian Making a Fourier transform into k-space, it will be a 48×48 matrix due to the 12 sublattice, 2 spin and 2 particle-hole indices. TABLE IV. Singlet mean-field amplitudes u (0) i j up to nearest neighbour (NN) bonds. Here τ i 's are Pauli matrices. The onsite terms are identical for all sites. The NN bonds are divided into two groups, where u (0) β denotes the bonds in the triangles (1,2,3), Cases Onsite up to nearest neighbour bonds. Here τ i 's are Pauli matrices. The onsite terms vanishes identically. Note from Equation ( We first discuss the S U(2) spin -invariant case with only singlet terms (Table and onsite terms 2(a): Similarly, case 2(b) also leads to a one-parameter family of Hamiltonians {H (2b) [φ]} with NN terms 2(b): and vanishing on-site terms due to symmetry constaints. For both 2(a) and 2(b) states, since the ratios of hopping and pairing amplitudes are the same in all NN bonds, one can always perform a global gauge rotation and eliminate e.g. the pairing (τ 1 ) term so that φ = s 1 = 0. These correspond to their root U(1) spin liquids with NN amplitudes only: U1 0 state (i.e. U(1)-uniform state in Ref. In comparison, the mean-field Hamiltonians of 2(a) case has the same (unit) hopping amplitudes on all NN bonds, while bonds in neighbouring triangles have opposite (unit) hopping amplitudes in case 2(b). Their spinon dispersions k are plotted by the blue lines in Fig. Finally in case 2(c), the NN hopping/pairing ratios are not the same on different bonds, and they are hence independent variables that cannot be fixed by a global gauge rotation. The spectrum of mean-field Hamiltonian {H (2c) [θ]} depends on the parameter θ ≡ arcsin(s 1 /s 3 ) in this case. In particular, in two limits where only hopping (θ = 0) or pairing (θ = π/2) terms FIG. are present, the Hamiltonian of state 2(c) reduces to those of 2(a) and 2(b) cases respectively, In the intermediate regime 0 < θ < π/2, case 2(c) describes a Z 2 spin liquid with both hopping and pairing terms, whose typical dispersion is illustrated in Fig. Now let's consider the effect of spin-orbit couplings which breaks spin rotational symmetry, and include the spin-triplet terms in the mean-field ansatz. The spin-triplet terms (Table V) involve much more parameters than singlet ones and contain far more features. Before focusing on a special class of symmetric spin liquids motivated by an anisotropic spin model describing Na 4 Ir 3 O 8 in section IV, here we discuss some general features of the anisotropic spin liquids in comparison to the singlet ones. For singlets terms, we choose the gauge so that s 1 = 0 for 2(a) and 2(b) cases as discussed earlier. For the NN triplet amplitudes (t x,y,z 1 , t x,y,z 3 ) on certain bond (TableV), one can choose a suitable spin quantization axis such that the only non-vanishing parameters are t z 1 , t x 3 , t y 3 , t z 3 for all the three cases 2(a,b,c). Then we can summarize the free parameters and the properties for the three states in the presence of spin anisotropy: • 2(a): On-site amplitudes ∆, μ, NN singlet amplitude s 3 and NN triplet amplitudes t z 1 , t x 3 , t y 3 , t z 3 . A Z 2 spin liquid can be realized as long as t z 1 0 i.e. with NN triplet pairing terms, otherwise it corresponds to a U(1) spin liquid U1 0 state. The NN triplet pairings can open up a gap on the spinon fermi surface. • 2(b): No on-site amplitudes allowed, NN singlet amplitude s 3 and NN triplet amplitudes t z 1 , t x 3 , t y 3 , t z 3 . Similarly, when t z 1 0 we realize a Z 2 spin liquid with NN triplet pairings; otherwise it is a U(1) spin liquid U1 1 state. The inclusion of triplet terms will change the linear Dirac-type dispersion in the singlet case, but generically can never open up a gap in the spinon spectrum. • 2(c): On-site amplitude μ, NN singlet amplitudes s 1 , s 3 and NN triplet amplitudes t z 1 , t x 3 , t y 3 , t z 3 . Generally 2(c) state is separated from 2(a) state in the phase diagram by an intermediate U(1) spin liquid U1 0 state, and from 2(b) state by an intermediate U1 1 state. In the absence of pairing terms i.e. s 1 = t z 1 = 0, the 2(c) state reduces to a symmetric U(1) spin liquid. This is the situation we will focus on in the next section. Generally for all three states, the inclusion of triplet terms will lift the spin degeneracy in spinon spectrum, splitting each spinon band into two bands. In particular, the 4-fold degenerate flat bands will become dispersive and non-degenerate. We found that state 2(b) always has a gapless spinon spectrum while states 2(a) and 2(c) can be gapped in certain parameter ranges, consistent with the general proof provided in section III A. Hence state 2(b) provides an interesting example of stable gapless Z 2 spin liquids As discussed in the introduction, we consider a Hamiltonian with a dominant NN Heisenberg term with various spinanisotropic perturbations The most general perturbation Hamiltonian can be decomposed into the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) term H D , Kitaev term H K , and symmetric exchange anisotropic (SEA) term where | may be much smaller than J, and A, B, C are Cartesian coordinates as before. Each term involves three independent interaction parameters on each bond i, j . Now we make use of the symmetry of hyperkagome lattice to relate interaction parameters in different bonds, especially the space group generated by 24 "point group" operations C ν 2 2 C ν 3 3 S ν 4 4 and 3 unit-cell translations. Since physical spins {S i } also rotate under point group operations in a spinorbit coupled system, we have the symmetry constraints on the physical Hamiltonian where O (U) are SO(3) matrices (B19) associated with point group operation U. Therefore we are left with totally 9 parameters {D A , K A , Γ A } for all NN couplings: In a mean-field analysis of the above spin model in slave fermion representation, each NN bond contribute the same energy due to symmetry and hence we will focus on one band, say the bond (2, 3) connecting sublattice No.2 and No.3 from now on. We make a further simplification in the discussion below that we only consider D z , K z , Γ z 0 on bond (2, 3), resulting in the following mean-field energy (see Appendix D 3) Such a simplification has been adopted in recent literatures Phase diagram for a dominant Heisenberg interaction (J ≡ 1) with perturbations of DM, Kitaev, and symmetric exchange anisotropy (SEA) types in mean-field energy We have performed variational calculation of the meanfield energy The variational energy of singlet state 2(c) for isotropic Heisenberg interactions had been calculated in Ref. To better understand the big difference between DM and other types of anisotropic interactions, below we analyze the mean-field energy and pairing amplitudes are where the time-reversal symmetry guarantees ρ s,x,y,z , ∆ s,x,y,z to be real numbers (see Appendix D 3 for details). Here (ρ x , ρ y , ρ z ) as well as (∆ x , ∆ y , ∆ z ) are chosen such that they rotate as SO(3) vectors under S U(2) spin rotations. These amplitudes are related to the mean-field parameters in Table IV-V through consistent mean-field equations, whose details can be found in Appendix D 3. The mean-field amplitudes for different NN bonds i, j are illustrated in Fig. From the expression Due to the important role of DM terms, we examine more carefully the spin liquid states in the presence of only Heisenberg and DM interactions. Again, for simplicity we assume an idealized crystal structure where only one DM term per bond is present, i.e. the model in In this work, we classify symmetric Z 2 and U(1) spin liquids on a hyperkagome lattice in the slave-fermion representation. Non-symmorphic space group provides strong symmetry constraints to spinon symmetry fractionalization on hyperkagome lattice, and we found only three Z 2 spin liquids and two U(1) spin liquids as shown in TABLE III. The small number of possible spin liquid states should greatly facilitate further analysis of their properties and more accurate calculations of energies in the future, such as a variational Monte-Carlo study of the Gutzwiller projected wavefunctions. We show that both U(1) states have a stable gapless spectrum protected by space group and time reversal symmetries Motivated by the recent experiments Finally, we point out that hyperkagome lattice structure is also found in the material PbCuTe 2 O 6 in recent experiments The classification of symmetric Z 2 spin liquids hosting fermionic spinon excitations on hyperkagome lattice is mathematically related to the central extension of the symmetry group S G, with a center A = Z 2 . Physically, fermionic spinons can transform projectively under symmetry operations due to their fractional statistics. Such a projective representation of symmetry group S G with A = Z 2 coefficient is classified by the 2nd cohomology group H 2 (S G, A) with the following short exact sequence Such a central extension was coined the "projective symmetry group" or PS G where R ( f ) g 1 labels the symmetry operation on a single fermionic spinon f , associated with element g 1 of the symmetry group. In our case of Z 2 spin liquids, the fusion group of the fermionic spinons is A = Z 2 due to the Z 2 fusion rule f × f = 1, leading to the Z 2 -valued phase factors {ω f ( g 1 , g 2 ) = ±1}. One can always modify the symmetry operation R ( f ) g by a local unitary transformation U ( f ) g that form a linear representation of S G, i.e. redefining R ( f ) g → U ( f ) g • R ( f ) g , which will not change the universality class and topological properties of the associated spin liquid phase. These "gauge transformations" {U ( f ) g | g ∈ S G}, however can modify the phase factors ω f ( g 1 , g 2 ) by (A18) A typical example of such gauge transformations compatible with the A = Z 2 fusion rule is simply a phase factor of U ( f ) g 1 = ±1. To classify distinct Z 2 extensions of the symmetry group, we look for different sets of phase factors ω f ( g 1 , g 2 ) that cannot related by any gauge transformations. In the following we compute the 2nd cohomology group H 2 (P4 1 32 × Z T 2 , Z 2 ) for our case of symmetric Z 2 spin liquids on hyperkagome lattice. First, notice that the whole multiplication table of symmetry group S G = 4 1 32 × Z T 2 can be generated by algebraic relations (A10)-(A16). Therefore we merely need to classify the Z 2 -valued phase factors ω's associated with each algebraic identity in (A10)-(A16), more specifically the gauge invariant ones. Two important consistent conditions for the Z 2 -valued phase factors are the associativity condition As is shown below, the non-symmorphic screw operation S 4 in symmetry group S G = P4 1 32 × Z T 2 provides a strong constraint on phase factors {ω( g 1 , g 2 ) = ±1| g i ∈ S G} ∈ H 2 (S G, Z 2 ). It significantly reduce the number of gauge inequivalent solutions and greatly simplify the calculation. First, we denote the Z 2 -valued phase factors associated with each algebraic identity in (A10)-(A16) as {Ω α = ±1}, where subscripts {α} are the same as the subscripts of {η α = ±1} in (B28)-(B50). This is chosen for the convenience of comparison between algebraic 2nd group cohomology described here, and physical PSG realizations in slave-fermion construction presented in Appendix B. In the following we briefly summarize the calculation of gauge-inequivalent solutions to {Ω α = ±1}. They are related to the phase factors {ω( g 1 , g 2 ) = ±1| g i ∈ S G} ∈ H 2 (S G, Z 2 ) in simple relations, for example Ω T = ω(T , T ) for the first algebraic identity in (A10). First of all, using gauge transformations {U ( f ) g = ±1| g ∈ S G} we can always fix the gauge so that This excludes a large class of Z 2 spin liquids known as "πflux phases", where spinons see a background field of π-flux per unit cell. We also have where the following relations are utilized Similarly by 2-fold rotation C 2 with relation (A24) we have and hence Ω 2x = Ω 2y = Ω 2z = 1. Using (A25) and Ω xy = 1 we can further show which also leads to Spin liquid states remain disordered and preserve the symmetry of the system. But due to the gauge redundancy Here U(i) means the site index i is changed to the transformed position U(i), and R U is the spin rotation accompanying the symmetry operation. Then we see where A = 0, x, y, z, and σ 0 = I is the identity matrix. We first look at H 0 where If UH 0 U † = H 0 , the (mean field) Hamiltonian is certainly invariant under symmetry operation U. However, the redundancy where G U (U(i)) denotes a local SU( the right hand side of (B4) is the same as H 0 , and UH 0 U † is equivalent to H 0 up to a gauge transform. The condition (B5) is often expressed as where (B6) is the projective symmetry satisfied by the mean field ansäts. Condition (B6) means that the mean field Hamiltonian H 0 only needs to satisfy a projective symmetry G U U(u i j ) = u i j if the physical Hamiltonian, expressed in terms of S i , satisfies a symmetry UH phys U † = H phys . Similar to U ∈SG, the operations G U U also form a group, dubbed projetive symmetry group (PSG). Next, we discuss the properties of the gauge transforms G U (i). A special case is when the symmetry operation U = e, the identity element, i.e. The gauge group G U (i) describes the low energy fluctuation of the spin liquid ground state, and different choices of G U (i) gives different types of spin liquid states. The G U (i)'s for various symmetry operations U are not independent, as the group product rules Therefore, the commutation rules for symmetry groups, i.e. Thus, once the IGG for G e (i) is chosen, the PSG for other symmetry operations U are constrained by the commutation rules. Solving the coupled equations (B12) for all combinations of SG gives all possible PSG. Two solutions to (B12) can be equivalent, because if G U (i) satisfy (B5) for u i j , we have where W i is an arbitrary SU(2) matrix. That means also satisfies (B5) for the ansäts W i u i j W † j . Since two ansäts differing by an SU(2) gauge transform are equivalent, we see that G U and GU given by (B14) are equivalent. That is, the PSG solutions G U (i) are also only defined up to a local SU(2) transform (B14). Now we look at the triplet terms H x,y,z that break spin rotation symmetry, i.e. in the presence of spin-orbit coupling. We similarly derive the projective symmetry condition satisfied by the triplet parts. First note that the SU(2) rotation can be mapped into SO(3) rotation, where O (U) is an SO(3) matrix representing the rotation by θ U in the SU(2) matrix R U = e -iθ U •σ/2 , and A, B = x, y, z are Cartesian indices. Then the triplet part of the mean field Hamiltonian has the transform property where the last line means gauge equivalence. To restore (projective) symmetry, we require or it can be written as Here we have used the property of orthogonal matrices clearly show that given the PSG, the singlet term is decoupled from the triplet terms, while all the three triplet terms are generally mixed in Equation (B18). For later uses, we summarize the SO(3) matrices corresponding to the C 2 , C 3 , S 4 rotations in a hyperkagome lattice: In the above derivation, we have only considered unitary symmetry operators U. Now we discuss time-reversal operator which is anti-unitary where K takes complex conjugation on complex number on its right, Ki = -iK. Written in terms of f -operators, That means Therefore, we have Following the convention in where in the last line we have used σ y σ * 0 σ y = I, σ y σ * x,y,z σ y = -σ x,y,z , and from Equation ( . Thus, for time-reversal, the projective symmetry condition for singlet and triplet terms in H MF are the same, An element in PSG is denoted as Corresponding to the SG, the constraints in PSG with IGG=Z 2 are where all of the η's take values ±1. Solving these coupled constraint equations will give all possible gauge inequivalent generators in PSG, which is the task in the next two sections. We first focus on the unit-cell dependence of the constraints (B28)-(B49). The constraints can be reduced by gauge choices: 1. Consider the gauge redundancy of multiplying each G with ±τ 0 , which is an element in IGG. Then if a generator shows up for odd number of times in the constraint equations, we can multiply the generator by -τ 0 to change the sign of the corresponding η's. That means we can use the gauge freedom of 2. Further, we can use the local S U(2) gauge redundancy Note here T i only relate the same sublattice sites in different unit cells. We will further use the local S U(2) gauge choices among different sublattices in the next section. 3. We further reduce the unit-cell part of the generators. Using the commutations between G T i and G C 2 , we have where g C 2 (s) is an SU(2) matrix depending only on sublattice sites s. The condition G 2 C 2 = η 2 gives the constraint (i.e. consider the pair of sites 2 ↔ 8) Next, we use the commutations between G T i and G S 4 and obtain where again g S 4 (s) is an SU(2) matrix depending only on sublattice s. So in sum, we have which greatly simplifed the further derivations. Finally, use the commutation between G C 3 , G T i , we have The condition G 3 C 3 = η 3 gives (i.e. consider the sites 1 → 7 → 9 → 1) 5. We solve the remaining unit-cell dependent part of the constraints. The condition (G C 3 G C 2 ) 2 = η 23 in (B47) gives (i.e. consider 1 ↔ 7) The condition (G S 4 G C 3 ) 2 = η 34 in (B48) gives (i.e. consider 1 → 12 → 11 → 9) These constraints: η 2x η 2y η 3z = 1, η 4x η 3z = 1, η 2y η 2z = 1, η 3y η 3z = 1, imply that the independent parameters are α 2 , α 3 , α 4 = ±1: and 6. Finally we look at those constraints related to timereversal. Use η T and η xT -η zT , we have In sum, the independent parameter is α 1 = η xT = η yT = η zT , and The spatial dependence of the generators are fully encoded in the parametrization in Equations (B58), (B68)-(B70), and (B72). The constraints are therefore reduced to We will solve the sublattice part in the next section. Before plugging in all the sublattice sites s to the above equations, we make a few simplifications. First, from 1 = g 4 (2)g 4 (10)g 4 (12)g 4 (1) = α 3 g 4 (1)g 4 (2)g 4 (10)g 4 And from η 24 = α 4 g 4 (8)g 2 (7)g 4 (1)g 2 (2) = α 2 g 4 (1)g 2 (2)g 4 (8)g 2 (B87) Now, we apply the local SU(2) gauge choice between different sublattices to reduce the constraints. Let U ∼ C 3 , S 4 , we can choose a proper gauge such that Then from Equations (B78) and (B79), we have Up to this point, we have used all of the SU(2) gauge redundancy. We have also solved Equation (B79) completely by specifying all G S 4 . Next we solve the remaining 9 constraints in (B73)-(B78) and (B74)-(B82) under the chosen gauge. a. Solving (B77), (B82), and a part of (B80) Now we focus on the following simplified conditions, First, from the equations for sites That means η 23 g 2 (7) = η 2 g 2 (1), η 2 g 2 (7) = η 23 g 2 ( So explicitly, we have the solution where τ i denotes n • τ for an arbitrary unit vector n, and λ 1 = ±1. Here n can be rotated due to SU(2) gauge redundancy. It is the relations between this direction and the other n for g C 3 , g S 4 that are gauge independent. So here we denote it as a general τ i and will only choose the gauge at the end. From the solutions for sites Further, α 2 η 2 = g 2 (4)g 2 (10) = g 2 (6) 2 gives These results completely solve the constraints concerning η 2 , η 24 in (B77) (B82). Now we note that λ 1 is just the overall ± sign for g C 2 (s), which is an element in IGG. This gauge choice will be fixed by Equation (B83) later as we have used the Z s freedom of G C 2 to set η 234 = 1 at the beginning. Also note that up to this point, we already have α 2 = α 3 = α 4 = +1, so and there is no spatial dependence. It simplifies the following analysis of the remaining sublattice-dependent equations. b. Solving (B78), (B81) Focus next on the relations We can directly read Then for η 34 = +1: where λ 2 = ±1. These results completely solve (B78) and (B81). Again, we will see λ 2 can be fixed uniquely by (B83). c. Solving (B80), (B83) Plug in the above results for g C 2 (s), g C 3 (s) to (B80), we find the additional constraint where τ i , τ j are used in g C 2 , g C 3 respectively. That means η 24 is not a free parameter. We can summarize the results obtained so far for g C 2 , g C 3 , g S 4 Case 1: Next, Equation (B83) can be simplified to and show that only Case 1 and Case 4 stand. Equations concerning other sites give the same constraints. d. Solving (B73), (B74), (B75) and (B76) for g T (s) The equations can be written explicitly as Equation (B118) means (A, B) = (1, 7), as expected. (a) For η T = +1, g T (s) = γ s , where γ s = ±1 depends on sublattice sites. From (B119) we have as there is no way to choose γ 1,7,9 such that η 3T = -1. Then we have Plug back to (B121), we see and all g T (s) are the same. Equation (B117) gives η 2T = +1. In sum, we can choose a gauge to set k , where γ s = ±1 can be further constrained by other equations. Here τ where ns is a unit vector along different directions for different sublattices. From (B118), use g C 3 (1, 7, 9) = 1, we have for g T (1, 7, 9), Then we similarly have η 3T = +1. Choose the gauge where τ k is one of the three Pauli matrices τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 . Use (B119), we have all the other g T (s): Here all of the g T (s) involve the same τ k . The relation between these τ k and the τ i , τ j used in g C 2 , g C 3 is specified by the conditions (B117) (B118). First we use any pair of sites in (B117), where the upper and lower row in the bracket stand for η 2 = +1 and η 2 = -1 respectively. Thus, Thus, the relative relation between the Pauli matrices used in g T (s) ∼ τ k and g C 2 (s) ∼ τ i is fixed. Then from (B118), where upper and lower row in the bracket stand for η 34 = +1 and η 34 = -1 respectively. So B135) Thus, the relative relation for the Pauli matrix used in g C 3 (s) ∼ τ j and g T (s) ∼ τ k is also fixed. We first summarize all of the results in the gauge used in previous sections, and then make gauge transforms to obtain better forms for the analysis of mean field ansäts. The states are specified by the Z 2 numbers η T , η 2T , η 4T , η 2 , η 34 , η 24 = ±1; they are not completely independent and only certain combinations are viable. There are totally 5 PSG solutions, labeled 1(a), 1(b) for η T = +1 and 2(a), 2(b), 2(c) for η T = -1. Choosing specific gauges for τ i , τ j , τ k used for g C 2 , g C 3 , g T , we have Note that there is no unit-cell dependence so all the g U 's are equal to G U 's. We would like to make gauge transforms Then we have the PSG solutions summarized in Table from constraints (B32)-(B37), by a proper gauge fixing. Therefore there are only two distinct spin-1/2 U(1) spin liquids with fermionic spinons on hyperkagome lattice, with symmetry operations with IGG={e iθτ 3 |0 ≤ θ < 2π} = U(1). We label them as "U1 n 4 " states. In the notation of Ref. It's instructive to understand the relation between the 2 symmetric U(1) states and the 3 symmetric Z 2 spin liquids classified in Appendix B. Quite generally, a Z 2 spin liquid can be obtained by breaking the U(1) gauge group in a U(1) spin liquid through the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. Specifically, which Z 2 spin liquid is connected to U1 0 (or U1 1 ) state via such a continuous phase transition induced by pairing (Higgs) terms? While this issue can be addressed by investigating their mean-field ansatz explicitly, here we identify the neighboring Z 2 states of each U(1) state from an algebraic viewpoint by looking at their projective symmetry operations. Once the IGG=U(1) is broken down to its subgroup IGG=Z 2 , the gauge rotation associated with each symmetry generator is fixed only up to a ±1 sign. In particular, each gauge rotation G g (r, s) in (C13) for U(1) states can be accompanied by an extra iτ 3 rotation in a neighboring Z 2 state. Simple algebra immediately leads to the results summarized in TABLE III: 2(a) and 2(c) states lie in the neighborhood of U1 0 state, while 2(b) and 2(c) states are in proximity to U1 1 state. In particular, both U(1) states can be driven into Z 2 state 2(c) by continuous phase transitions. The following are mean field Hamiltonians The PSG solutions are summarized in Table Firstly, note time-reversal T ({u That means the mean field amplitudes in all bonds must vanish. Thus, in the following we focus only on the η T = -1 case. Then G T (s; x, y, z) = g T (s) = iτ 2 , implying It means u i j = a i j τ 1 + b i j τ 3 . (D7) for both singlet and triplet terms. Secondly, we consider the constraints given by spatial symmetry operations. Let j = (0, 0, 0, 1), and i = (x, y, z, s) in u i j , where s = 1, 2, 3, 6, 12 involves only onsite and nearest neighbour amplitudes. As it turns out, the only symmetry operation that gives constraint is C 2 C 3 :(x, y, z, 1) → (-z, -y, -x, 1), (D8) (0, 0, 0, 1) → (0, 0, 0, 1) (D9) None of the other operations take the sublattices (s, 1) to either (s, 1) or (1, s). So the self-consistency only constrains the possible onsite terms and does not constrain the nearest neighbour terms. The reason is that there are 24 symmetry group elements connecting different sublattices; meanwhile, the hyperkagome lattice is made of corner-sharing triangles, so there are also exactly 4×12 2 = 24 different nearest neighbour bonds per unit cell. So 24 symmetry operation will take one nearest neighbour bond to 24 other different nearest neighbour bonds, and there is no remaining symmetry operation to give consistency constraints for N.N. bonds. (In comparison, there are 12 sublattice sites, and half of the symmetry operations give onsite consistency constraints). Then we have the PSG constraint for onsite amplitude u (0,1),(0,1) = g C 2 g C 3 (1)u (0,1),(0,1) (g C 2 g C 3 (1)) † = g C 2 u (0,1),(0,1) g † C 2 , (D10) where we have adopted the gauge in Table Written in terms of the slave fermions, the Heisenberg term becomes the DM terms d μ = e μ • (S i × S j ) become the Kitaev terms become the Γ terms γ μ = S ν i S ρ j + S ρ i S ν j (where μ, ν, ρ form a cyclic) become Next, we make the observation that we only need to compute the mean field energy on one bond for the spin liquid states, and all other bonds will yield the same energy. This is because the physical Hamiltonian on different bonds are related by the spin rotation R accompanying the symmetry operation U; meanwhile, the mean field ansats H A on different bonds are related by the same spin rotations R. Thus, computing the mean field energy in different bonds just correspond to computing the same energy with different quantization axes. Thus, we can conveniently choose to compute the bond connecting sublattices (m i = 2, n j = 3), The factor 2 comes from the fact that each site has 2 nearest neighbour bonds (without double counting). In the following we will focus on the bond (2, 3) and drop the sublattice indices. Also, due to translation symmetry we will neglect the unit cell indices i, j. Now we consider the mean field decomposition for the possible terms (D11)-(D20) in the spin model. Note that the mean field ansats respect such symmetry, which means the mean field decomposition have equivalent terms. From T ( f ↑ , f ↓ ) = ( f † ↓ ,f † ↑ ), we have Here Reρ 1 and Re∆ 1 are the singlet MF amplitudes, and others are triplet amplitudes. We can further separate the singlet and and the transverse Ising terms E Γ = -4Γ x (∆ x ∆ z -ρ z ρ y ) + 4Γ y (∆ y ∆ z -ρ z ρ x ) +4Γ z (∆ x ∆ y + ρ x ρ y ), (D30) we see that the singlet and triplet terms are completely decoupled. To evaluate the mean field amplitudes for states written in k-space, we note the unit-cell translational invariance and perform the Fourier transform, e ik(r i +δ m ) e -ik (r j +δ n ) f † mkμ f nk ν Here the Fourier transform convention is FIG. ) /s 3 on the strength of DM interaction for small D/J, as shown in Fig.6. The corresponding dispersion of the spin-anisotropic U(1) spin liquid U1 0 state at D/J = 0.2 is also shown in Fig.6. Compared with Fig.4(vi) we clearly see the splitting of bands due to spin-orbit coupling. In particular, the