We studied strong-coupling effect upon an isolated vortex in a two-dimensional chiral p-wave superconductor. We solved the Eilenberger equation for the quasiclassical Green's functions and the Éliashberg equation with single mode Einstein boson self-consistently. We calculated the free-energy of each obtained vortex, and found that a non-axisymmetric vortex metastably exists in some situation. The Migdal and Éliashberg theory of "strong-coupling superconductivity" Two-dimensional chiral p-wave superconductivity is considered to be realized in Sr 2 RuO 4 In the present paper, we calculated the self-consistent Éliashberg equation to study how the strong-coupling feature affects the vortex of a chiral p-wave superconductor microscopically. We also calculated the free-energies of the vortices and discuss its stability. In this study, we consider an isolated vortex in the two-dimensional spinless chiral p-wave superconductor with isotropic Fermi surface. We use quasiclassical theory where ε n = (2n+1)πk B T /h are the Matsubara frequencies, v F is a Fermi velocity, α denotes a direction of momentum on the Fermi surface such that k = k F (cos α, sin α), τi (i = 0, . . . 3) are the Pauli matrices, q is the elementary charge, c is the speed of light, A is the vector potential, and is the self-energy. The quasiclassical Green's function satisfies the normalization condition ǧ2 = -π 2 τ0 and its bulk value is To incorporate strong-coupling effect, we use Éliashberg equation to calculate the selfenergy Σ from the quasiclassical Green's function; where ε c is the cutoff of the Matsubara frequencies, N 0 is the density of states on the Fermi level, and . . . α denotes the average over the Fermi surface and is defined A(α) α = 2π 0 dαA(α)/(2π). We took 47 equally spaced points in the momentum space. We assume that the interaction between electrons v has the following form: where ω 0 is a characteristic frequency of a mediated boson, and C is a constant parameter. We set these parameters so that hω 0 = 3k B T c , where T c is the critical temperature of the superconductivity. We choose this value so that the strong-coupling effect is very large but not unrealistic where Tr is a trace over the Nambu space. We define λ 0 = (N 0 v 2 F q 2 c -2 ) -1/2 as a characteristic length of the electromagnetic entities. We set λ 0 /ξ 0 = 2.5 in this paper. To discuss the stability of the isolated vortices, we calculated the free-energy deviation from the normal state Ω sn with the following equation: where B = ∇ × A is the magnetic field, and ǧs is a solution of The above expression of Ω sn is a simple extension of the weak-coupling BCS one We numerically confirmed that the self-energy for Matsubara-frequencies Σ (iε n , α, r) can be decoupled as and thus we show only the r-dependent part Σ+ (r) and Σ-(r) in the following section. At sufficiently far from the vortex, only Σ+ or Σsurvives. Hereafter we assume that Σ+ is a dominant part of the self-energy and survives in the bulk. As we can see in To solve (1), we used so-called Riccati-parametrization method As for the anti-parallel vortices, we only obtained circular axisymmetric vortices for all temperature that we studied (T /T c = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5), regardless of the initial profiles; in this case, the strong-coupling effect just modifies the shape of the vortex. On the other hand, at moderately low temperatures, a non-axisymmetric solution emerges for parallel vortices, when the initial vortex sufficiently breaks the axisymmetry. Figure In Figure There are many studies of non-axisymmetric vortices in spin triplet superfluids or superconductors with an isotropic Fermi surface. However, many of them have targeted vortices in the superfluid 3 He-B Tokuyasu, et al. have studied two-dimensional chiral p-wave superconductor within the GL theory in the weak-to strong-coupling regimes In this study, we numerically found that a non-axisymmetric vortex metastably exists in strong-coupling chiral p-wave superconductors. This anomalous vortex is more stable than the axisymmetric parallel one at sufficiently low temperatures, but symmetric anti-parallel vortex is still most stable. The emergence of this anomalous vortex is a consequence of the strong-coupling effect because we did not obtain such a vortex with the conventional weakcoupling gap equation. To clarify the underlying energetics that makes the non-axisymmetric vortex metastable is an interesting issue. The total phase diagram of this system is also left as a future issue. With this parameter, the ratio of the energy gap to the critical temperature (2∆ /T c ) is about 5.6 at T = 0.02T c . For example, CeCoIn 5 exhibits such a large value (≈ 6)