The thermal dynamics of the two-dimensional Ising model and quantum dynamics of the onedimensional transverse-field Ising model (TFIM) are mapped to one another through the transfermatrix formalism. We show that the fermionised TFIM undergoes a Fermi-surface topologychanging Lifshitz transition at its critical point. We identify the degree of freedom which tracks the Lifshitz transition via changes in topological quantum numbers (e.g., Chern number, Berry phase etc.). An emergent SU (2) symmetry at criticality is observed to lead to a topological quantum number different from that which characterises the ordered phase. The topological transition is also understood via a spectral flow thought-experiment in a Thouless charge pump, revealing the bulk-boundary correspondence across the transition. The duality property of the phases and their entanglement content are studied, revealing a holographic relation with the entanglement at criticality. The effects of a non-zero longitudinal field and interactions that scatter across the singular Fermi surface are treated within the renormalisation group (RG) formalism. The analysis reveals that the critical point of the 1D TFIM and the 1D spin-1/2 Heisenberg chain are connected via a line of SU (2)-symmetric theories. We extend our analysis to show that the classical to quantum correspondence links the critical theories of Ising models in various dimensions holographically through the universal effective Hamiltonian that describes the Lifshitz transition of the 1D TFIM. We obtain in this way a unified perspective of transitions in Ising models that lie beyond the traditional Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson paradigm. We discuss the consequences of our results for similar topological transitions observed in classical spin models, topological insulators, superconductors and lattice gauge-field theories which are related to the Ising universality class. Phase transitions are the genesis of all emergent phenomena in many-body systems, and are characterised by discontinuous (and often singular) behaviour in various measurable quantities. Landau's remarkable insight was to define the notion of an order parameter 1 , a measurable quantity in terms of which the transition could be observed. A discontinuity in the order parameter across the transition is called a first-order transition, while discontinuities in its derivatives are collectively called continuous transitions (as the order parameter grows continuously from zero at the critical point towards a finite value in the ordered phase). The order parameter in a continuous transition arises from the spontaneous breaking of a symmetry enjoyed by the Hamiltonian describing the finite-temperature (T > 0) dynamics of the system (e.g., a spontaneous magnetisation below the critical temperature T = T c in a magnet). While it is easy to understand the appearance of a finite magnetisation in the presence of a non-zero polarising magnetic field h (thus breaking explicitly the symmetry of the Hamiltonian), the case of a spontaneous magnetisation is subtle. In order to see how magnetisation can arise in the absence of a field, we employ a stratagem commonly used in examples displaying spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB). This involves taking the thermodynamic limit while maintaining a small but finite field h, and taking the limit of a vanishing field (h → 0±) only after the thermodynamic limit has been reached. As noted in Ref.( Physical insight into the nature of the order-disorder transition of the 2D Ising model can also be gained from the early works of Peierls Various related issues arise in the exact solution of the 1D TFIM as well The two-dimensional (2D) Ising model is written as where J h and J v are horizontal and vertical Ising interaction strength respectively. They are taken to be positive numbers and the Ising phase possesses ferromagnetic ordering of the spins σ i,j on a two-dimensional lattice point denoted by label i and j (see Fig. where β = 1/k B T is inverse temperature and N is the total number of sites on the lattice. Tr is the trace over all the spin configurations. We will now derive the transfer matrix T for the 2D Ising model and show that it leads to the Hamiltonian for the transverse field Ising model (TFIM) in 1D with nearest neighbor interactions (also known as 1D quantum Ising model). 9,26,27 FIG. Let us consider a particular column (say i th column) on the 2D lattice. The spins are denoted as σ (i,1) , σ (i,2) • • • σ (i,M ) on that i th column. It is convenient to consider them all at a time by a single M component vector parameter as σ(i) . In this language the 2D classical ising model can be written as where the Ising interaction along the horizontal direction maintains its nature in terms of the column variable (i.e., the M component vector parameter σ(i) ). On the other hand, the Ising interaction in the vertical direction becomes a local (intra-spin) interaction in the column variables: σ(i) τ (i) , with τ (i) being the nearest-neighbour spin along the vertical. Now, the transfer matrix for this Hamiltonian can be written as where V 1 and V 2 are given by and we have used the relations The full transfer matrix is then found to be where we have defined As shown in the next subsection, this transfer matrix for a translational invariant system with periodic boundary conditions is solved using the Jordan-Wigner transformation, and then diagonalised using a Bogoliubov transformation. The diagonalised transfer matrix has a Bogoliubov-de Gennes quasiparticle-like spectrum 9 cosh( q ) = cosh (2βJ h ) cosh(2βJ h ) -sinh(2βJ h ) sinh(2βJ h ) cos(q) , (10) where the positive solution of q in the above equation is the eigenspectrum. The π-momentum mode of q i.e., q=π gives rise to a special condition, J h = J v , leading to the critical curve for the phase transition of the 2D classical Ising model denoted by with β c = 1/T c . This relation reveals that the critical temperature is a function of J v and J h , and is the Kramers-Wannier 12 relation for the anisotropic classical Ising model. At this point, an important connection can be made. The authors of Ref.( As shown above, the transfer matrix for the finitetemperature 2D Ising model can be mapped to the one dimensional transverse field Ising model (TFIM) where J is the Ising interaction strength, h is the transverse field with respect to the Ising direction and σ x N +1 = σ x 1 (periodic boundary conditions). It is important to note that this Hamiltonian has a Z 2 symmetry given by the non-local string operator which spans the system Further, we rewrite the Hamiltonian as The spin model can be transformed to bilinear fermionic problem by means of Jordan-Wigner transformation and the model Hamiltonian is written as This model is exactly solvable and one solves this by Fourier transforming to momentum space We can then diagonalise this Hamiltonian via a Bogoliubov transformation with tan(2θ k ) = J sin(k)/(J cos(k)+h) . This amounts to finding a suitable particle-hole symmetric Nambu basis It is worth noting that the TFIM problem conserves only fermion parity (being equivalent to the global Z 2 symmetry of the original spin problem) but does not conserve fermion number (evident from the presence of the pairing term). However, the k = 0 and k = ±π points are special as the Hamiltonian for these modes is diagonal in the occupation number basis (i.e., they conserve fermion number) and thus need to be taken account of separately The dispersion relation for this (p-wave) superconductor of spinless electrons in 1D is given as and the spectrum is plotted for different h/J values in Fig. (Color online.) Dispersion plot for the 1D TFIM eq.( gap closes at k = ±π points and near those points it closes linearly as ±(J -h). This is the special feature (Dirac like) of 1D TFIM which is due to the nature of fermionic quasiparticles, and thus the massless fermionic Dirac spectrum is visible at the critical point. Indeed, the massless Dirac points at k = ±π form a Kramers doublet, and signal an emergent time reversal symmetry at criticality. Near these points any small field (h) will open up a mass gap of the form Thus near the critical point we can write the effective Hamiltonian of the 1D massless Dirac Hamiltonian as 28 where ∆ = h -J and we have expanded the spectrum sin k ∼ k for small wavevectors in the neighbourhood of k = ±π in the second line (the continuum approximation). Thus, at the critical point we have ∆ = 0 and get the massless Dirac spectrum with Weyl points. It is also important to take note of the "π-mode" state at the Brillouin zone edge k = ±π: Note that this Hamiltonian for the π-mode is fermion number-conserving, i.e., it possesses the global U (1) symmetry of fermionic Hamiltonians that conserve fermion number, even if modes with wavevector 0 < k < π in the fermionised TFIM Hamiltonian do not. As we shall see later in section III, this U (1) symmetry of the π-mode Hamiltonian has topological consequences for the nature of the superconducting order achieved for ∆ < 0 (i.e., h < J). Indeed, it will be shown to correspond to the Z 2 topological invariant for the 1D TFIM given earlier, and we will also show that the breaking of this particular global U (1) symmetry is important in reaching a familiar (topologically trivial) superconducting state of matter. Clearly, the gapless spectrum at ∆ = 0 reveals a singular Fermi surface (the Dirac point at the Brillouin zone edge), and the sign of ∆ relates to the occupancy of this state. As we will see in a subsequent section, the occupancy of this state is intimately related to the topological properties of the phase of this model for J > h. It is also pertinent to recall that the linear dependence of the gap on ∆ corresponds to Onsager's result for the linear dependence of the free energy cost for generating a domain wall excitation in the 2D Ising model near criticality (the interface tension) on the reduced temperature 5 , as well as identifies the Kramers-Wannier condition for the selfduality of the model Finally, in order to explore the topological content of the π-mode in its fullest, it is important to stress that we can think of the Hamiltonian for this state, H π , as a two-level system or, equivalently, a spin-1/2 in an external generalised B-field B = ( hx x, 0, ∆ẑ) where hx and ∆ ≡ h -J are the longitudinal and transverse B-fields respectively of the TFIM. This can be implemented by transforming from a fermionic to a pseudospin-1/2 description using Then, the effective "qubit" Hamiltonian can (upto a constant) be written as with eigenvalues ± 0 = ± h2 x + ∆ 2 . It is easily seen, following Ref. Further, the Berry phase accrued under a cyclic adiabatic excursion of the Hilbert space is given by The Berry phase is γ 0 → 0 for ( hx = 0, ∆ ≥ 0), γ 0 → 2π for ( hx = 0, ∆ ≤ 0) and γ 0 → π for ( hx = 0, ∆ = 0). For ( hx = 0, ∆ = 0), i.e.. at the gapless point of the TFIM and with no longitudinal field, this Hamiltonian vanishes. However, the coherent state path-integral for this spin-1/2 state can be written in terms of a Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten (WZNW) term where we can use equn. (24) for the Hamiltonian H, and the topological WZNW term for S = S n is given by 25 and where (μ, ν) = (t, ρ), periodic boundary condition in time leads to n(β) = n(0) and ρ is an auxiliary coordinate ρ ∈ [0, 1]. The present problem has S = 1/2, and the coefficient of the WZNW term 4πS ≡ 2π = γ 0 (∆ < 0)-γ 0 (∆ > 0). For finite h, the Landau-Lifshitz equation of motion for the precession of a spin is obtained from the above action The above discussion reveals that the contribution of the π-mode to the partition function at the critical point (∆ = 0) is in terms of a phase purely topological in origin, i.e., the free energy for the π-mode at criticality contains an imaginary piece. Importantly, it reflects the emergent SU (2) symmetry at J = h (as can also be analogously noted for the case of a massless Dirac fermion spectrum). In sections III-V, we will observe that this emergent SU (2) symmetry of the π-mode theory has important consequences for the topological transition of the TFIM, as well as the topological properties of its ordered phase. Further, as shown in section VII, this π-mode theory is also identical to the effective quantum system obtained from the classical-quantum correspondence for the 1D Ising model, revealing the holographic nature of the correspondence for the 1D and 2D Ising models. We can now offer preliminary insight into the nature and stability of the critical point characterised by the emergent SU (2) symmetry of the π-mode. For this, we treat the longitudinal field ∆ in equation( with the eigenvalue equation It is easily seen from these two eigenvalue equations that there is an avoided level crossing at + (∆ = 0) = -(∆ = 0) + 2 hx . For σ < hx , -(∆ = 0) = 0 represents the minimum eigenvalue, while it becomes a maximum for σ > hx . Instead, for σ > hx , -has two new minima at ∆ = ±σ. A level-crossing is found for hx = 0 = ∆ (the case of the 1D TFIM), and the two new minima at ∆ = ±σ represent the self-trapping (or noise-induced stabilisation) of the πmode by the breaking of the SU (2) symmetry evident for the case of ∆ = 0. A similar analysis can be carried out for the case of ∆ = 0 and a Gaussian noise in the field hx , and similar results obtained. Indeed, in section VI, a more sophisticated RG analysis will be shown to reach the same conclusions. We have seen in a previous section that the 1D TFIM is connected to the p-wave superconducting spinless SC model (pWSC) in 1D via the Jordan-Wigner (JW) transformation. This transformation is non-local, reminiscent of the flux attachment useful in understanding the fractional quantum Hall effect. We begin here by recalling the Hamiltonian for the anisotropic 1D XY spin-1/2 model in a transverse field with periodic boundary con-ditions where the spin-space anisotropy δ ≥ 0. The cases of δ = 0 and δ = 1 correspond to the one-dimensional XX and Ising models in a transverse field respectively where W = e i π 2 N and Z = Π N l=1 σ z l . Clearly, as W and Z both commute with H XY , so does S. W defines a sensitivity to the total no. of spins N , e.g., for N = 4M and N = 4M +2, S = ±Z respectively, while for N = 4M +1 and N = 4M + 3, S = ±iZ respectively. Henceforth, we will assume N = 4M . We can see, therefore, that the consequences of this Z 2 symmetry will be felt for all 0 < δ ≤ 1. By carrying out a Jordan-Wigner transformation, we can write the Hamiltonian for the fermionized model as where J 1 = J and J 2 = δJ. Upon Fourier transforming this Hamiltonian as well as defining the spinor (c k c † -k ), we can write this Hamiltonian as 35 where d x (k) = -J 2 sin k and d z (k) = h + J 1 cos k , and where d x , d z have been written with k = ±π as the reference point. The energy-momentum dispersion relation is then and the wavefunctions for the positive and negative branches of the dispersion are given by respectively, where γ π = 1 - . Note that γ is adiabatically connected to the Berry phase γ 0 of the π-mode of the TFIM described earlier for J 1 = J 2 ≡ J, γ → γ 0 = π(1 -sgn(∆)) for k = π. Further, the critical point of the 1D TFIM for δ = 1 extends as a line of critical points for 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1 all the way to the 1D XX model at δ = 0. Precisely the same dispersion relation can also be obtained for the Su-Schriffer-Heeger model (SSH) model ) , where t is the nearest neighbour hopping amplitude and δt the strength of the dimerisation. This arises from the fact that both models are equivalent to the same generalised two-band lattice fermion Hamiltonian in 1D: the two bands can be represented using a fermionic spinor notation (the Nambu spinor for the pWSC and the two sublattices for the SSH model). The equivalence between the fermionised TFIM/pWSC and SSH models is easily seen to be: J ≡ (t -δt) , h ≡ (t + δt) , δt ≡ (h -J)/2 and the gap scale E gap = 4δt ≡ 2(h-J) . We shall see below that while the fermionised TFIM/pWSC captures a topological transition between topological and non-topological superconducting states of matter, the SSH model does so for a topological and non-topological insulating states of matter. A similar topological transition in a finite-sized Haldane-Fermi-Hubbard model was investigated numerically in Ref.( 37 ). A. Order parameters, critical exponents and the nature of criticality Thus, the 1D anisotropic XY, the 1D TFIM and the SSH model all possess the same Lifshitz topological quantum phase transition associated with a gap closing event. Given the wealth of results known for the two-band model, we can quantify the Lifshitz transition of the the fermionised TFIM/pWSC model via a Berry phase γ accrued for an adiabatic parallel transport carried out over the entire Brillouin zone for the case of a gapped disper- J1, J2 and h are hopping strength, pairing interaction strength and transverse field respectively. When J1 = J2, we have transverse field Ising model; when J2 = 0, but J1 = 0, we have instead the isotropic XY model or XX model with a transverse field. In the anisotropic XY limit (J1 = J2), the spectrum remains gapless for J1 = h even as J2 is varied. Inset: zoom of the gapless point. sion This identifies γ as the Berry connection, which leads to the non-trivial Berry phase γ when integrated over the full Brillouin zone. Similiarly, the Lifshitz transition can also be quantified in terms of a topological winding index Ω as As we are interested in h ≥ 0, the Berry phase γ and the winding no. Ω can also be directly related to the π-mode We will now show that the quantity (-1) Ω is also related to the Z 2 symmetry operator Z of the TFIM defined ear-lier. This can be done by rewriting equn. (31) as follows where S = N 2 and S z T ot = 1 2 N l=1 σ z l . Now, following Ref.( where N is the total no. of fermions that occupy the states in the dispersion spectrum of the fermionised TFIM/pWSC. Given that all states with k = 0, π are doubly occupied and the state with k = 0 is never occupied for h ≥ 0, we can reduce the operator Z to where c † π c π defines the occupancy of the state at k = π and Ω is the topological winding no. defined earlier. In this way, we find such that Ω = 0 gives S z T ot = S for h > J, and Ω = 1 gives S z T ot = S -1 for h < J . Both of these are special cases of the Oshikawa-Yamanaka-Affleck (OYA) criterion for obtaining ordered, gapped phases in spin-1/2 chain and ladder systems where n characterises the no. of degenerate ground states in the gapped phase, S and m are the maximum spin value and magnetisation respectively for a unit cell of the system. For any finite-sized 1D TFIM with periodic boundary conditions, we have n = 1 for h > J as well as h < J. That our result identifies the properties of a unit cell in the original OYA formulation with global quantities (m ≡ S z T ot and S = N/2) indicates the topological nature of the problem at hand. Thus, using the Berry phase γ and the winding index Ω, we can see the 1D TFIM undergoes a Lifshitz transition at h = J, from a topologically trivial phase for h > J to a topologically non-trivial phase for h < J. We note that a winding no. topological invariant has similarly been used to characterise topological phases and Lifshitz transitions in Ising models with extended (three-spin) interactions We can also relate Ferrell's observation where we have used the linearised (Dirac-like) dispersion in the second line. By writing ∆ ≡ (T -T C )/T C (the reduced temperature for the 2D Ising model), we obtain Onsager's result for the scaling form of the specific heat We comment here on the critical exponents associated with the Lifshitz transition. First, the manifest Lorentz invariance of the dispersion spectrum of the 1D TFIM at h = J (i.e., a vanishing Hamiltonian for the ]π-mode) gives us the dynamical critical exponent z = 1. Next, a logarithmic dependence of the specific heat on the gap scale (|h -J|) suggests that the critical exponent α = 0. Further, the correlation length ξ ∼ 1/|h -J| ν yields the critical exponent ν = 1. Both relations have been shown as related to properties of the π-mode theory. It is easily seen that these exponents satisfy the Josephson hyperscaling law: 2 -α = νd, with d = 2 being the spatial dimensionality of the classical Ising model (or the space-time dimensionality of the TFIM). The dynamical scaling law y = zν is also satisfied, where y = 1 is the gap exponent (∆ ∼ |h -J| y ) and also yields the divergence of relaxation timescales τ ∼ |h -J| -y (i.e., critical slowing down). While it is tempting to derive all other critical exponents via other scaling inequalities, we would like to clarify that by working at zero longitudinal field (h x = 0), we are able to connect only these exponents directly to the Lifshitz transition. Note that the topological underpinning of the log divergence of the specific heat is manifested by closing the spectral gap first (i.e., taking ∆ → 0, or correlation length ξ → ∞) while holding k finite. This is very different from the usual strategy in which continuous second order transitions are observed: take the thermodynamic limit (constituent no. N → ∞, system volume V → ∞ but density N/V fixed) first and then close the spectral gap (i.e. ∆ → 0, or correlation length ξ → ∞) next. Does this violate the Yang-Lee theorem, i. e., the requirement that the thermodynamic limit be taken for the existence of continuous transitions With reference to the problem at hand, the π-mode of the TFIM is an example of such a zero-dimensional QFT, and the vanishing of the fields ∆ and hx (i.e., ∆ = 0 ≡ h = J and hx = 0) give rise to the SU (2) topologically non-trivial WZNW theory for a spin-1/2. As mentioned above, the branch cut corresponds to the non-trivial homotopy group π 3 (SU ( As the physics of a level-crossing is associated with that of a first-order phase transition, the verification of the Josephson and dynamical scaling relations needs understanding. For this, we note that the non-local order parameter valid away from the critical point (the Z 2 topological invariant Ω) is completely different from that at criticality (the WZNW invariant W 0 associated with the emergent SU (2) symmetry). This signals the transition as falling outside the Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson paradigm, and shows that there can be critical exponents and scaling relations associated with such phase transitions as well. More insight will be available in section VI where the renormalisation group analysis of this transition is laid out. We can now also point out the important consequence of our results for transitions in topological insulators and superconductors. Following Refs. For the case of h z = 0, the mass gap is determined entirely by m and can be shown to vanish when det(m) = h2 x +h 2 y -|∆| 2 ≡ 0 . Again, the appearance of an emergent SU (2) symmetric massless Dirac spectrum at the transition is observed. Another example of a similar Lifshitz transition in a d = 2 system can be found in the anomalous Hall insulator with competing superconducting and ferromagnetic orders Indeed, Ref.( We have already seen that the ordered state is characterised by the Berry phase Γ and the topological winding index Ω. From its equivalence to the low-energy theory of the SSH model, we can also obtain several other results for the fermionised TFIM/pWSC model. The topologically non-trivial phase for J > h is doubly degenerate (in the thermodynamic limit) and separated from all other excited states by E gap . Further, it possesses fractionally charged excitations whose charge is given by where q is the elementary charge of the Dirac fermions. These fractionally charged excitations appear in the form of domain walls that separate sections of the two ground states in a given mixed ground state. The non-trivial charge polarisation obtained for the SSH model during one cycle of an applied modulated E-field corresponds to the adiabatic Thouless charge pump for the effective low-energy massive Dirac fermions of the pWSC model; this will be demonstrated in detail in a following section. Here, we provide the heuristic picture in terms of domain wall excitations in Fig.( In this way, we obtain a topological Chern no. defined by change in the Berry phase over a one time period (in units of π ) This indicates that the Lifshitz transition into a topologically non-trivial phase involves a change in this Chern no. C. Indeed, C corresponds to the pumping of a single electron across the ends of the system, but it can be written in terms of a product of the Atiyah-Singer topological index Given that the Atiyah-Singer index is associated with the spectral flow properties of massless Dirac fermions, the topol. trivial The pumping of a single fermion across the ends of a finite-sized system corresponds to the transfer of two domain walls from end to end in the following sequence: (i) we start with a system that has no end states (J < h) for time t < T /2, (ii) upon crossing the gap-closing at t = T /2, we create single ground state with two domain walls (J > h); these two deconfine and move out to the two ends of the system within a short time-interval : T ≤ t < T /2 + , (iii) for T /2 + ≤ t ≤ T -, we have a ground state with domain walls at the two ends (iv) within a short time-interval of the gap-closing at t = T (i.e., T -< t ≤ T ), the two domain walls come together (are confined), and (v) for t ≥ T , we are again in a ground state without any end states. (b) Gap as a function of time for the TFIM. above relation between C, n AS and Q reveals the importance of the critical point in the cyclic pumping process. As will be discussed in the next section, it is related to a hidden supersymmetry (SUSY) We can also show the existence of boundstates at the ends of an open TFIM chain (or the equivalent SSH model in the A-phase) by taking the continuum limit of the lattice Dirac Hamiltonian obtained from the fermionised TFIM/pWSC such that ξ → ∞ as |h -J| → 0 (for TFIM) and δt → 0 (for SSH). This shows the edge states merge with the bulk at the Lifshitz transition (J = h). Further, the existence of edge states for the fermionised TFIM/pWSC can also be demonstrated by a numerical computation of its bandstructure in the presence of a periodically timevarying gap (i.e., Dirac mass) function. This is shown in T ), J = 1.5 , the system is always in a topologically trivial phase and no edge states are seen. Middle: h = sin( 2πt T ), J = 4.5, the system is always in the ordered phase (or, topologically non-trivial phase) and we see only zero energy spectrum. Right: h = 2 sin( 2πt T ), J = 1.0, the system is periodically cycled between the topologically trivial (h > J) and topologically non-trivial (h < J) phases. We then observe edge states going from bulk to zero energy periodically with time. The connection between the π-mode and the nontrivial end states is found by noting that Pfeuty's end spin correlation for the TFIM 11 can be rewritten as This relation shows that an eigenstate of the bulk (the πmode eigenstate) connects the two end spins in the topologically non-trivial phase through a topological winding no. Ω (the bulk-boundary correspondence). Thus, a πmode energy/gap scale π ≡ ∆ = h-J that varies periodically in time will lead to a spectral flow process involving a periodic change of the end-to-end spin-spin correlation in time. This is the way in which a periodically changing end-to-end correlation leads to the Thouless charge pumping process discussed above. Further, as the Berry phase γ is related to Pfeuty's end-spin correlation, as well as the fact that the Chern no. C arises from a periodic excursion in time, we can identify a natural timescale for the time period T = β (where β = 1/k B T is the inverse temperature) from the Kubo-Martin-Schwinger (KMS) periodicity . We also comment briefly on the fact that the "bulk" correlation function σ x i σ x i+n has been computed in the limit n → ∞ and found to be This expression has been interpreted as the expectation value/thermal average of the square of the spontaneous magnetisation M 2 x in the ordered phase (even as M x = 0 due to the Ising symmetry σ x i → -σ x i ) While the π-mode Hamiltonian does not have a hx field (i.e., hx = 0 in equn.( x + ∆ 2 → 2| hx |. By writing the theory with open boundary conditions in terms of lattice Majorana fermions In the previous section, we have derived the effective 1D massive Dirac Hamiltonian which describes the passage through the critical point of the TFIM. Following Ref. We begin with the effective 1D Dirac Hamiltonian achieved from the critical point of the TFIM. When we put a time-periodic electric field, it acts like a second compactified dimension, as well as generates a timedependent spectral/Dirac mass gap where E is the electric field which will give the quasi time-periodicity T as E = 1/T . The Dirac wavefunction is now periodic in x-direction and quasiperiodic in time- with a zero-eigenvalue eigenfunction that has a Blochlike form by using a Bloch wavenumber n ∈ Z and a rescaled time lattice momentum in the compactified time direction as by the Poisson resummation method. The spinor wavefunctions in the helicity basis, |ψ ± , are given by |ψ . As we shall see below, the periodicity in k has the information of transport of charge around the effective Brillouin zone, and represents a topological charge We begin by recalling the Laughlin-Halperin gedanken Here, the 2D electron gas is placed on the surface of a cylinder (or the topologically equivalent Corbino disk) with the external B-field placed perpendicular everywhere to the surface (see Fig. where B = ∇ × A = B ẑ and in the Landau gauge A = (0, Bx, 0) or (-By, 0, 0) . This non-trivial commutation is responsible for the Chern number topological invariant (given by filling factor C) that characterizes the Landau levels. The adiabatic change in the time-dependent flux then tunes the motion of this 1D lattice of stripe wave functions in the form of a spectral flow mechanism (see adiabatic circuit of the Hilbert space where N e denotes the total no. of electrons, L x , L y are the spatial extents of the 2D system and σ 0 = e 2 /h is the conductance quantum. Alternatively, this can be thought of as carrying out a parallel transport gedanken in flux space through Π μ c = ∂H ∂αμ (θ μ indicates the two fluxes of the torus) over a full circuit. This is shown in Fig. As seen above, the quantised Hall conductivity of the IQHE is basically the adiabatic pumping of one charge for every Landau level below the chemical potential over a torus composed of two compactified spatial dimensions. As we will now see, the Thouless charge pump in a onedimensional system is the same over a torus of a compactified spatial dimension and a compactified time dimension (see Fig. (6)). The flux is changing in a periodic manner (i.e., generates an electric field) such that the charge is transferred in the x-direction. As the t-direction is compactified, this can be done by using a flux tagged within the cylinder, Φ x (t). Then any wavefunction that are extended is the t-direction will feel an E-field, and undergo spectral flow in the x-direction. As observed for the Landau problem earlier, this can be related to the non-trivial commutator defined on the compactified (x, t) 2-torus with Π . By defining a lengthscale l -2 E = eET cLy and a frequency scale ω E = eET mcLy , we can rewrite the commutator in a familiar fashion where E gap = ω E . Following our calculations for the Landau problem, we can see that this commutation relation leads to a non-trivial charge polarisation between the ends of the system in the spatial dimension Note that any such extended wavefunctions along the compactified t dimension are equivalent to the stripe wavefunction of the Laughlin cylinder in the y-direction (refer to Fig. ( Having recognised above that the space-time 2-torus as being equivalent to two compactified spatial dimensions, we will now demonstrate the importance of the non-trivial dynamics of massive 2D Dirac electrons on this topologically non-trivial manifold in determining the Chern no. related to the quantised Hall conductivity of the Landau problem as a realisation of the exact cancellation of anomalies between the edge and bulk of the system We start with the 2D Dirac Hamiltonian where we have a mass term that changes sign across a boundary This particular form of the equation emerges from the fact that we have chosen Landau gauge with A = (0, Bx, 0). The wavefunction in this gauge is the expected Gaussian in the x direction and a plane wave in the ydirection The Quantum Hall(QH) plane has a left and a right going edge current as shown in figure x 0 m(x )dx . Here is the cyclotron frequency and E F is the Fermi level. The state u 0 corresponds to one that is bound to the domain wall where the mass m goes through a zero where = -1 as m = 1 for x > 0 and vice-versa. F στ is the general covariant field tensor. The present problem has only the a non-zero E y component. The anomaly at the edge is a result of the charge fed from the bulk; this is the essence of the bulk-boundary correspondence This current leads to a flux which can be calculated by integrating over all the momenta The flux changes sign across x = 0 along with the mass m. For, x < 0, j(x) = -e 2 Ey 4π whereas for x > 0, j(x) = e 2 Ey 4π . The value of j goes to 0 at x = 0. There is no flow of charges across x = 0 and this tells us there is a domainwall like structure at x = 0 (see Fig. (7) (left panel)). The anomaly cancellation is easily observed when we calculate the current change across x = 0 i.e. In a more standard notation, we can write this as which is identical to that found at the edge. This calculation gives the same result irrespective of whether it is computed between the edges or across the two sides of the domain wall The Hall conductance can then be calculated Note that the fact that the Hall conductance σ xy is quantized in units of σ 0 = e 2 /h is actually of topological origin. Indeed, σ xy /σ 0 = C, where C = 1 is being assumed for the lowest Landau level in this calculation. We know that ν is a Chern index and now, we have identified this topological index as a property of the domain wall. This calculation shown here also reveals the bulk-boundary connection of this domain wall to the edge states. In this way, we can see that the Atiyah-Singer index topological quantum number for the edge states 82 is twice the Chern index C of the domain wall. This is basically the relation shown earlier in equation (55). Further, following Ref.( This anomaly is carried forward to the bulk and then to the other edge. The domain wall at x = 0 acts like a capacitor with no net charge flowing through it. As soon as the charge from the lower part(x < 0) hits the domain wall, the upper part(x > 0) receives the charge from the domain wall (as shown in Fig. (7) (left panel)). This domain wall is a requirement for chirality flip and hence cannot be affected by any local disorder. Indeed, from this calculation, it is clear that only non-local scattering events between the two edge-states can affect the topologically protected stability of the domain wall and the IQHE. The opposite directionality of the currents is a hallmark of the Quantum Hall effect and this requires a domain wall structure. Our finding of the domain wall gives evidence for the conjecture in Ref.( In order to complete our discussion of the holography at the heart of the spectral flow process on the 2-torus, we will now show that the Chern no. C for the Thouless charge pumping in the 1D TFIM can be obtained purely from the π-mode Hamiltonian, Eq.( where p φ is the angular momentum of the POC, σ z (with eigenvalues ±1) is mapped onto p φ (σ z ≡ p φ ), the gap ) and the moment of inertia of the particle I = 1 for the fermionised 1D TFIM. The Hilbert space here corresponds to that belonging to the p φ operator, |n = (1/ √ L) e inφ , where the winding quantum no. n is quantised (n ∈ Z) due to singlevaluedness of |n and L is the perimeter of the circle. This Hilbert space is a sub-space of the full Hilbert space of the 1D TFIM. In this way, we can see that the tracking of the Lifshitz transition about ∆ = 0 (i.e., the degeneracy of the two levels) corresponds to the level-crossing of the eigenvalues ±1 of p φ in the POC for Φ = 0. We can now define rotation by azimuthal angle δφ on the circle via the operator T δφ = e i p φ δφ and "flux-insertion" operator U = e i Φ Φ 0 φ . Then, we can show that As before, this leads to a Berry phase γ defined by taking a closed circuit on the circle δφ = 2π which encloses the flux Φ γ can be visualised as arising from the non-commutation of the T δφ and U operations on the Hilbert space |n . As the operation U twists the boundary condition on |n (from periodic boundary condition for Φ = 0 to antiperiodic for Φ = Φ 0 ), γ measures the geometric phase collected by an adiabatic close-circuit excursion of the Hilbert space by the U and T (real-space rotation) operations. This is made evident by rewriting γ as a boundary term obtained by integrating over a total derivative with respect to δφ where the trace Tr φ is taken over the complete Hilbert space |n T -1 |n n|T . In this way, we can see that the Berry connection is given by |n(Φ) ≡ U |n , and the Berry phase is a line integral taken over the Berry connection. For a quantised flux Φ = Φ 0 , the Berry phase γ becomes the quantised Chern number C = 1. Indeed, by carrying out a Hopf map for the Berry flux equivalent to A φ , this Chern number for Φ = Φ 0 can be shown to be equivalent to the Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten term for a single spin-1/2 given earlier in eq.( Then, taking a derivative of this Hamiltonian with re-spect to τ gives where we have used the relations ) , we can rewrite the above as where J Φ is the persistent current obtained by fluxinsertion/applying twisted boundary conditions to the Hilbert space. Thus, by tuning the flux in time adiabatically, we are modifying the Hamiltonian H(Φ(τ )) through a set of continuous unitary transformations (CUT) U (Φ(τ )). Indeed, this is a special case of the CUT formalism Thus, the Chern number C of the Thouless charge pump can be considered as the quantity that is conserved even as the topological invariant Z ≡ sgn(∆) = sgn(Φ/Φ 0 ) is changed in value between 1 and -1 during the adiabatic CUT-RG evolution. As mentioned in the last section, the mapping of the π-mode Hamiltonian onto that of a POC reveals a supersymmetry (SUSY) of the theory at criticality ∆ ≡ Φ/Φ 0 = 0 As noted in Ref.( It is well-known that the 1D TFIM can be written in terms of dual order and disorder spin/pseudospin operators (see, for instance, Refs. The Lifshitz transition, however, takes place when ∆ = 0, such that sgn(∆) ≡ Z is ill-defined. Instead, the emergent SU (2) symmetry of the π-mode characterises the TFIM critical point (known to be self-dual in terms of the order and disorder spin/pseudospin operators). The observation that the topological order parameter Z changes abruptly across the transition, together with the finding that an altogether different topological order parameter characterises the critical point itself, suggest that the transition cannot belong to the Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson paradigm. We will confirm this from a RG analysis in the next section. As shown in another section, the same transition is also observed for the 1D Ising model at T = 0. This is seen to arise simply from the fact that the π-mode of the fermionised TFIM is precisely the same theory as that obtained from the classical-quantum correspondence for the 1D Ising model, and reveals the holographic nature of the correspondence for the 1D and 2D Ising models. Further, it is interesting to note that a similar quantum phase transition was found in Ref.( where | → ⊗N denotes all N spins pointing along the +x direction in spin space, and so on. The ground state wavefunction at a finite h < J includes a finite number of domain wall excitations that involve pairs of spin-flip excitations on the GHZ states given above such that they do not change the topological number Z. These are the lattice fermions (c i , c † i ) we studied via the JW transformation in section III, and which obey boundary conditions given by 40 Note that these excitations are very different in nature from the bosonic spin-wave excitations above a broken symmetry ferromagnetic ground state with all spins aligned. In this way, we see that the robustness of the topologically non-trivial state for h < J to local quantum fluctuations (arising from the transverse field h) is lost only when a change in boundary conditions is felt by the ground state across the Lifshitz transition at J = h. These two ground states are, however, degenerate in the thermodynamic limit for J > h (as also observed in subsection III B). There exists no term in the Hamiltonian, however, to take the system from one ground state to the other; instead, an external push is needed for this. Thus, for J > h, the system is naturally in the PBC ground state, even though the APBC ground state is degenerate with it. Both these ground states are separated from all others by a finite spectral gap (as obtained from the BdG quasiparticle dispersion). These ground states can also be distinguished in terms of edge states as follows. The PBC and APBC ground states can be constructed in terms of the bonding and antibonding combinations of the two completely aligned ferromagnetic states in the z direction in spin space. These are Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger (GHZ) states Further, it is shown in Ref.( where the direct-product state |φ ≡ | φ ⊗N corresponds to all N spins pointing along a direction ( ) in the XY plane with angle φ with respect to the y-axis, and N is a normalisation constant. Thus, the Z topological invariant partitions the Bloch wavefunctions into two sets with winding no. n = odd and n = even respectively. The ground state in the topologically non-trivial phase is given by |ψ n=1 , i.e. with a non-trivial winding no. n = 1, with the GHZ ground state |-for the 1D TFIM obtained by fixing φ = π/2 (the + x-axis). The authors of Ref.( Ôj = 0 a 1 0 j (96) acts on the j-th spin, with 0 < a < 1 (such that the local transformation is invertible). Clearly, Ô † j Ôj < I, where I is the 2 × 2 unit matrix. By acting with this gSL operation on the GHZ states |± , we obtain a product state as N → ∞ Similarly, the action of the gSL transformation acts on the j-th spin, with 0 < b < 1 such that In this way, we can see that the entanglement lowering action of a gSL transformation is equivalent to putting in a field that breaks this symmetry. Further, this can only be achieved by overcoming the spectral gap associated with the BdG quasiparticle spectrum of the fermionised TFIM/pWSC and, as discussed earlier in section III, replacing it with a gap that does not possess the topological invariant Z. This is precisely the role played by the hx field in the π-mode Hamiltonian (which suppresses the topological degrees of freedom in the system), and is the pathway to the Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson paradigm. Finally, as the critical point of the TFIM is SU (2) symmetric, the ground state must involve the superposition of GHZ states defined in terms of every possible quantisation axes on the Bloch sphere. This is a SU (2)-symmetric SPT state. While the entanglement content of the ground state of the 1D TFIM and its change across the phase transition has been probed using various measures of entanglement (see Ref.( where γ is given by equn. (39). Then, S 0 = 2 ln 2 for γ(∆ < 0) = π (the ordered phase of the 1D TFIM) and S 0 = 0 for γ(∆ > 0) = 0 (the disordered state). Importantly, the same results can also be found from a dual Berry phase γ Dual (which is related to the dual Z 2 topological order parameter defined with respect the disordered ground state) 101 : such that γ Dual (∆ > 0) = -π and γ Dual (∆ < 0) = -2π. This allows us to define the Chern number topological index coefficient N c of the WZNW term in the action for the π-mode at criticality (equn.( i.e., N c ≡ 2S = 1 for spin S = 1/2. This is yet another display of the fact that the emergent SU (2)-symmetric critical point is described by a non-local topological order parameter different from the non-local (and dualityrelated) Berry phase order parameters which describe the two phases on either side We are now in a position to compute the non-local entanglement content of the state at criticality. This can be seen simply from a consideration of the occupancy of the π-mode. When viewed from a particle-hole viewpoint, the π-mode is occupied by a hole for ∆ > 0, while it is occupied by a particle for ∆ < 0. A time-dependent unitary transformation that changes ∆ (see equn.( Hence, ρ (∆ = 0) yields no additional entanglement entropy over and above the lower-bound S 0 computed above in equn.(101). However, for the particle-hole symmetric critical point ∆ = 0, Z ≡ sgn(∆) is ill-defined and the π-mode occupancy has equal contributions from particle and hole, i.e., the many-body state possesses equalamplitude linear combinations of particle and hole for the π-mode. Clearly, this will lead to a reduced densitymatrix for the π-mode with equal weightage for particle and hole sectors (i.e., a mixed state) yielding an entanglement entropy at criticality Thus, we find a sudden jump in the entanglement entropy lower-bound ∆S 0 across the transition, and the lower bound at criticality (S c (∆ = 0)) being the average of the lower bounds on either side The state at criticality is maximally mixed, as seen from the purity (Tr(ρ 2 c )) where d = 2 corresponds to the dimensionality of the π-mode Hilbert space. This leads immediately to an additional measure of the entanglement at criticality, the concurrence C Crit. 102 The gapless spectrum about the singular Fermi surface at criticality is linked to the emergent particle-hole symmetry/SU (2) symmetry of ρc , i.e., N c is related to the central charge c of the associated conformal field theory (CFT) of the 1D TFIM Thus, following Ref.( where a is a microscopic cut-off lengthscale (e.g., the lattice spacing). This relation indicates that S l (N c = 1) = (1/6) ln(l/a) 103 arises from the contribution of the 0dimensional singular Fermi surface (the point-singularity of the Dirac spectrum) in momentum space. Importantly, the singular nature associated with a vanishing Hamiltonian for the π-mode at ∆ = 0 (criticality) manifests itself in the fact that unitary operations like equn.( The duality transformation for the 1D TFIM has a consequence which extends to higher dimensions: the theory written in terms of the disorder operators corresponds to the Ising lattice gauge field theory Consider a generalised 1D TFIM Hamiltonian: While there exists an exact solution for the case of h z = J and h x = 0 105 , with an E 8 symmetry of the bound states in the spectrum, we will develop the T = 0 phase diagram from a scaling or renormalisation group (RG) analysis. Note that for h x >> h z = J, we have unique symmetrybroken product states which are field-aligned. In order to understand the Lifshitz transition in the TFIM better, we now carry out a renormalisation group (RG) analysis as follows. It is important to note right at the outset that our RG differs from the Abelian bosonisation route taken in Refs.( 106,107 ). The authors of those works employed the duality which maps two disconnected 1D TFIM chains onto the 1D XY chain where the field U is an element of the SU (2) group defining a map from S 2 to S 3 . The coupling g of the WZNW theory accommodates SU (2) symmetric interactions between the underlying Dirac fermions which can, in principle, lead to a mass gap for this WNZW theory. That such a mass gap is not generated was, indeed, the startling conclusion reached by Witten. He found that this was due to the presence of the non-trivial topological Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten (WZNW) term of this theory given by: This topological WZNW term Γ is defined in by the area traced out by the field U which encloses the volume S 325 . Witten showed that the topological coupling k affects the RG flow of the coupling g in this WZNW theory 108 This RG equation shows the existence of a non-trivial stable fixed point at g * = 4π/k. Put together with the fact that at this value of g * , the theory can be written using the non-Abelian bosonisation formalism in terms of free bosons which satisfy a SU (2) k Kac-Moody current algebra, Witten conjectured that the WZNW theory must have an exact fixed point at g * . Using conformal field theoretic methods, this was shown to be correct by Knizhnik and Zamolodchikov 109 . In this way, we identify the SU (2) k=1 WZNW theory with coupling g * = 4π as the correct universal low-energy theory appropriate for 1D spinless Dirac fermions with zero mass. Remarkably, this identification links the fermionic theory at the critical point of the 1D TFIM with that for the critical Heisenberg spin-1/2 chain under RG. As mentioned earlier, this is the result of the underlying Lorentz invariance and SU (2) symmetry in both theories, and reflected in the fact that the critical exponents of bulk spin-spin correlation functions in both theories is determined completely by these properties , where a = (1, 2, 3), σ = (1, 2) corresponds to the two Dirac flavours with wavevectors near k = ±π and τ a are the three Pauli matrices. The RG equation for g 1 is Thus, we can see that the case of a symmetry-preserving perturbation corresponds to the coupling g 1 > 0: here, g 1 is marginally irrelevant and can neither break the SU (2) symmetry dynamically, nor open a gap in the spectrum. In this way, we find that the stable Witten fixed point g * = 4π as the 1D Heisenberg spin-1/2 chain theory and the critical fixed point with g = 0 as the unstable 1D TFIM model at criticality (J = h) possessing emergent SU (2) symmetry. The entire RG flow from g = 0 to g = g * is SU (2) symmetric. We now assess the dynamical role played in the scaling theory by external magnetic fields in the TFIM along the transverse and longitudinal directions (h z , h x ). Given the SU (2)-symmetric nature of the Witten fixed point (g = g * ) and TFIM (g = 0) theories, and that the (h z , h x ) perturbations break this SU (2) symmetry explicitly, the analysis for both can be carried out in precisely the same way and similar conclusions reached. Thus, we analyse below only the longitudinal field h x . Following Affleck 111 , it is convenient to consider here the role played by topological excitations through the sine-Gordon version of the WZNW theory reached via Abelian bosonisation (this is equivalent to the 1+1D O(3) NLSM Lagrangian): (118) Here, φ is the scalar field encoding the Neèl order, g is the phase stiffness parameter/NLSM coupling, n is the vorticity of the topological excitations in the field φ, q n is the charge of the topological excitation and γ n the fugacity for an instanton excitation with vorticity n, and and m x is the magnetisation conjugate to the transverse field h x . The topological angle is Θ = S -m x 112 , where S = 1/2 corresponds to the case of gapless 1D Dirac electrons. We note that we have earlier identified a similar relation between a topological quantity (Ω), S and a magnetisation in equn. (49). There too, it signalled a Lifshitz transition. The difference between these two relations stems from the fact that the magnetisation in equn. (49) changed by an integer value, making Ω integer-valued as well. On the other hand, the magnetisation m x is continuous in nature, and thus so is Θ. This is the principal difference between a Berry phase-like quantity (Θ) and a integer-valued topological invariant (Ω): quantised values of the former correspond to the latter. The first term in the action corresponds to the cost of generating collective excitations, the second and third the cost of topological excitations and the fourth the effect of an explicit symmetry-breaking h x -field (through the magnetisation m x ). The bare value of the instanton fugacity can be computed using standard instanton techniques In this way, we can see that while these instanton excitations are RG relevant (the coupling γ 1 has a scaling dimension g < 1/2), it is suppressed via a destructive interference mechanism for 2πΘ = π and thus unable to open a gap in the spectrum 111 . From the identification of the topological angle Θ = S -m x 112 , we can perform a RG analysis of the sine-Gordon model for m x = 0. First, we can see immediately that the destructive interference mechanism no longer suppresses the instanton tunnel coupling γ 1 for m x = 0: The RG equation for g, γ 1 and the magnetisation m x is given as 110,113 where J 0 and J 1 are Bessel functions that arise from the use of sharp cut-off functions while implementing the RG transformations 110 . The first two RG equations are of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) type In this way, we can put together the RG phase diagram as shown in Fig. (8) below. The phase diagram has three axes in the WZNW coupling g, the transverse magnetisation m z and the longitudinal magnetisation m x . The SU (2)-symmetric tricritical TFIM theory (with a SU (2) SPT ground state) lies at the origin (m x = 0, m z = 2/π, g = 0), while the SU (2)-symmetric Witten saddle fixed point (corresponding to an algebraic spin liquid) lies at (m x = 0, m z = 2/π, g = g * ) (i.e., on the coupling g axis at the critical value g = g * ). All non SU (2)-symmetric RG flows lead away from the coupling g axis and towards stable fixed points on the m z and m x axis at (m x , m z , g) = (±1, 0, 0), (0, 0, 0) and (0, 1, 0). We note in passing that the topology of this RG phase diagram is qualitatively similar to that obtained for the 2D Ising model at finite-T from an RG analysis 2 . An important difference, however, is that while the RG flow along the temperature/coupling axis (vertical) axis for the 2D Ising model shows the critical point to be unstable in all directions and involves a second-order transition (with critical exponents belonging to the Ising univerality class), the Witten fixed point is stable on the SU (2)-symmetric coupling g (vertical) axis for the 1D TFIM and involves an infinite-order transition belonging to the WZNW universality class. All flows along the field axes in both cases are qualitatively similar (i.e., with respect to topology of the phase diagram) as they are always first-order transitions. In this way, we can see that the Lifshitz transition observed in the RG phase diagram of the TFIM lies on the saddle surface between two first-order transitions, and cannot be described as a Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson-type transition. Indeed, the RG phase diagram obtained is the characteristic to those obtained very generally in gauge-field theories with a θvacuum structure We have discussed in section II the equivalence between the criticality observed in a T = 0 quantum Hamiltonian and the (Euclidean) finite-T transfer matrix of its 2D statistical mechanical counterpart. Based on this, we are led to conjecture that our findings for the T = 0 RG phase diagram of the 1D TFIM offer new insight on the nature of the finite-T criticality of the 2D Ising model. Our results suggest that the transition at zero-field (i.e., h x = 0 = h z ) belongs to the WZNW universality class and involves the change in a topological Chern number (i.e., a real-space non-local order parameter) across a critical point with an enhanced SU (2) symmetry. On the other hand, the transitions for non-zero fields are first-order in nature as they involve the explicit breaking of the SU (2) symmetry, and involve the deconfinement of vortices that change the magnetisations m x and m z away from the critical values. The nature of the vortices (and the phases their condensation results in) are different for transverse field h z > h * z ≡ J and h z < h * z : the former case correspond to the disorder operators (quantum paramagnet) and the latter to the order operators (quantum ferromagnet) of the duality transformation for the TFIM The emergent SU (2) symmetry of the π-mode theory at criticality (essentially the physics of a single spin-1/2 with vanishing external fields) is responsible for the same emergent non-Abelian symmetry in the RG phase diagram of the full problem. Does the same emergent SU (2) symmetry continue to appear at criticality for higher dimensional TFIM theories as well? Is it related to the π-mode degree of freedom? We present some answers in Section VII. Finally, it remains an open challenge to find the 2D SU (2)-symmetric finite-T theory whose dynamics and criticality are equivalent to that of the theory of the SU (2)-symmetric Heisenberg spin-1/2 1D chain at the Witten fixed point. It is known that the correspondence leads to a theory with non-positive Boltzmann weights for some configurations (i.e., with a complex classical Hamiltonian). Such a complex classical (Euclidean) Hamiltonian likely contains an imaginary term which is of topological origin. A likely candidate is the WZNW term identified for the π-mode of the TFIM at criticality in section II. It would be interesting to see whether our approach can inspire methods that would allow for the identification and analysis of such a finite-temperature statistical mechanical model. The Ginzburg-Landau-Wilson approach to Ising models in various dimensions helped in establishing the idea of universality: continuous transitions can be grouped by critical exponents that depend only on the (spontaneously broken) symmetry of the model and the spatial dimensionality. In this section, we will investigate whether the concept of universality continues to hold for topological transitions in Ising models. We will also question whether there exist relations that link topological transitions of Ising models in different dimensions. A. The T = 0 phase transition of the 1D Ising model The periodic one-dimensional ferromagnetic nearest neighbor Ising model 8 (for convenience and without loss of generality) can be written as where i is the site index, and σ i is classical spin on site i which can take values ±1. J is Ising interaction strength and h is external field acting uniformly on each site. One can write the action (S) and path integral (Z) respectively as S = βH and Z = conf e -S , where β is the inverse temperature. The partition function or the path integral can be written as trace over N th power (N being the total number of sites in the classical spin chain) of the transfer matrix T . The row and columns of transfer matrix are spin configurations for the neighbouring two spins. Here one most critical concept is coming. We consider that axis of the lattice is the time axis of the quantum mechanics problem. This is where the correspondence between classical to quantum mechanics lies. Thus transfer matrix carries information from one time to next time interval, and hence this is time evolution operator for the quantum mechanics problem . So the partition function is defined as Z = Tr T N , where the transfer matrix is In matrix form where K = βJ and h = βh. The eigenvalues of the transfer matrix are given by and the free energy density is Thus, while there is no non-analyticity in f for any T > 0, a non-analyticity is found in the lim T → 0. It is important to note that this non-analytic behaviour found as T → 0 or K → ∞ does not need the thermodynamic limit N → ∞ to be taken 2 . This non-analyticity in f for h = 0 coincides with a degeneracy of the eigenvalues of the T -matrix lim and a divergence of the correlation length The order parameter for the transition at T = 0 is given by the magnetisation In order to understand the topological nature of this T = 0 phase transition, we will compute the T = 0 effective quantum problem onto which the thermal partition function of the 1D Ising model is mapped. Starting with the transfer matrix given above in equn.(124), we take the limit when the classical lattice points are closely spaced or the time evolution of the quantum system is smooth/continuous or time grid is very small. Thus βJ is large compared to βh. The classical Ising chain is on a periodic lattice, and thus we have N number of motif which give N number of transfer matrices to make the full partition function. Thus a single transfer matrix can be written as e βh e -2βJ e -2βJ e β-h Dropping the constant factor e βJ and expanding the e βh term T ∼ 1 + βh e -2βJ e -2βJ 1 -βh where we have equated the T -matrix to a propagator of an effective two-level system/quantum mechanical spin in the presence of external fields over a Euclidean time τ . The Hamiltonian for this spin system is given by where the external fields are h z = h/τ ≡ βh/τ, λ = e -2K /τ . The eigenvalues of this Hamiltonian are ± 0 = ± h 2 z + λ 2 . For h = 0, K → ∞ (i.e., T → 0), we can relate the magnetisation m of the 1D Ising model to the Berry phase of this spin-1/2 system under a cyclic adiabatic excursion of the Hilbert space The Berry phase is γ 0 → 0 for h z > 0, m = 1 and γ 0 → 2π for h z < 0, m = -1. The Hamiltonian vanishes at the critical point given by h z = 0, λ = 0. However, the coherent state path-integral for this spin-1/2 state can be written in terms of a Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten (WZNW) term This finding has some important consequences. First, following the classic review by Kogut on spin systems and lattice gauge theories The equivalence stated above leads to the consequence that this Ising gauge theory cannot have an ordered state at any T > 0. Second, from Ref.( Ising models involving interactions between each spin and every other spin in the system can be considered as increasing the range of the Ising interaction from its usual nearest-neighbour to infinity. In order to maintain the extensivity of the free energy, it is important to scale the Ising exchange coupling (J) by the total no. of spins (N ), i.e., J → J = J/N . Given that the coordination number of the interaction scales with N , these models have been usually regarded as exemplifying the exactness of the mean-field approach to phase transitions in the limit of infinite spatial dimensionality d → ∞ 120,121 . In keeping with the spirit of the present work, we will investigate the transition in this model in order to probe the existence of Lifshitz transitions that correspond to level-crossing events. We begin by considering a system of non-interacting Ising spins placed on the vertices of a d-dimensional hypercubic lattice, but which is placed in a spatially uniform, time-independent field h as well as a spatially uniform field but slowly fluctuating field and where the field X has a Gaussian probability distribution P (X ) ∝ e -βX 2 /2 J with a width J and β = 1/k B T . Integrating out this slowly fluctuating Gaussian random field X from the partition function leads to an effective all-neighbour interaction J being generated among the Ising spins 32 where Sz = i s z i is the effective large spin governing the dynamics of the system. It is easily seen that ( Sz ) 2 = i,j s z i s z j -N s 2 , N being the total no. of spins. Thus, the effective Hamiltonian we have at hand is This is a ferromagnetic infinte-range Ising Hamiltonian in a field. It can be easily shown that this model is equivalent to the Lipkin-Meshkov-Glick (LMG) model with an antiferromagnetic exchange 122 where Sα = 1 2 N l=1 σ α l , J > 0 and γ is the spinspace anisotropy. The Hamiltonian H ef f in equn.( For the case of an even no. of spins, H ef f is easily seen to be minimised by Sz = (N/2, -N/2 + 2m) for the critical field h * = m J, where m = p/2 and p ∈ Z, 0 ≤ |p| ≤ N . Using equn. (49), we can see that the topological winding no. Ω = S -Sz changes in value from Ω = 0 (for h → h * -) to Ω = N -2m (for h → h * +). In this way, we can see that the Lifshitz phase transition at h = 0 = m involves a change in the ground state from a topologically trivial ground state with Ω = 0 for h → 0-to a topologically non-trivial ground state with Ω = N for h → 0+. As h is further increased towards positive values, there exists a sequence of excited state Lifshitz transitions corresponding to level-crossing events at various values of h * where the Ω = 0 state becomes degenerate with the Ω = N -2m state. Any departure from h * = 0 can be described by an effective Hamiltonian written in terms of the degenerate two-level subspace (characterised by a spin-1/2 variable Σ) similar to that encountered earlier in equn. (24) : where h here describes the departure from h * = 0. Interestingly, this Hamiltonian can also be mapped onto the particle on a circle model (equn.( We can now also analyse the LMG model with 2N spins and with ferromagnetic exchange 123,124 by the transformations J(= J/2N ) → -J and h → -h (without loss of generality) in equn.( In this way, we can conclude that the nature of the transition in the infinite-range Ising models is identical to that observed for the nearest-neighbour Ising model in d = 1, 2: a level-crossing with an emergent SU (2) symmetry and a topological (WZNW) order parameter at criticality. A final word on infinite-range Ising models. While such models may appear to be somewhat artificial in nature, they have been shown to appear quite ubiquitously in several models of quantum magnetism and superconductivity As shown in Ref. where J 1 and J 2 are the real-space anisotropy along x and y direction respectively, δ corresponds to the spin-space anisotropy, h is the transverse field and (i, j) denotes sites on the 2D square lattice. This model simplifies to various other models upon tuning the parameters J 1 , J 2 and δ. For instance, δ = 1 and J 1 = J 2 corresponds to the 2D TFIM. For J 2 = 0, it becomes anisotropic 1D XY model with transverse field, while for J 2 = 0 and δ = 1, it is the 1D TFIM. Does this 2D model possess a symmetry-related topological invariant as found in the equivalent 1D model (see equn.( where, the j=1,2,•Lx σ z i,j and i=1,2,•Ly σ z i,j non-local operators correspond to Wilson loop operators of the 2D Ising quantum lattice gauge theory that span the system in the x and y directions respectively and, similarly, σ y r σ y r+ δ , σ z r σ z r+ δ = 0 . Indeed, it appears that such a Z 2 topological invariant can be similarly defined for an anisotropic XY model in d-spatial dimensions, and that it will commute with the Hamiltonian. As shown explicitly for the 1D case, this has the important consequence that the ordered ground state will be a U (1) SPT Bloch state |ψ n=1 for 0 < δ < 1 (equn.( While the Jordan-Wigner transformation had helped obtain an exact solution of the 1D TFIM, transforming Eq.( With this in mind, we undertake the AFA for the model given in Eq.( where is the string operator 133 . We can write the spin Hamil-tonian in terns of fermionic variable as follows The staggered site-dependent flux phase (corresponding to half-flux quantum in every plaquette) has the form The choice of a staggered flux phase Upon Fourier transforming the fermionic operators and by working in the particle-hole (Nambu) basis, we can write the bilinear Hamiltonian for the 2D TFIM problem. Finally, we can once again diagonalize the Fourier-transformed Hamiltonian via a Bogoliubov transformation to obtain four distinct quasiparticle dispersion relations The dispersion relations are plotted in Fig. (9). These dispersion relations are found to be independent of the precise value of the staggered flux, i.e., a C-S flux different from the half flux-quantum per plaquette assumed earlier. This shows that the AFA yields dispersion relations that are sensitive to the effects of the global boundarycondition changing flux, but not to the effects of the local C-S flux. However, as we will see below, this is sufficient in providing insight into the topological nature of the transition. The effective Dirac Hamiltonian which will give us same quasiparticle spectrum as Eq.(154 -155), can be written as where In order to clarify the change in a topological quantum number across these transitions, we now calculate a topo- where π is the standard parity operator defines as π † xπ = -x , π † pπ = -p, and α i , β are as defined earlier. Thus, the full parity operator satisfies where Γ 1 = (k x , k y ) is a point on the 2D B.Z. and K is a reciprocal lattice vector. Thus, the full parity operation at the four time reversal invariant momenta (Γ * 1 = (0, 0), (0, π), (π, 0), (π, π)) is given by δ where the |ψ 1 is ground state of the Hamiltonian Eq.( where A and B have been defined earlier, and P changes the momentum index by a negative sign. In this way, we obtain We thus calculate the Fu-Kane topological invariant 140 at these TRS points as where Ω is a topological number. From this relation, it can be easily seen that there exist Lifshitz transitions (critical Weyl semimetals (Weyl SM)) that separate topologically trivial superconducting phases with Ω = 0 and topologically non-trivial (triplet pairing) superconducting phases with Ω = 1 at h * = δJ 1 + J 2 as well as h * = -(δJ 1 + J 2 ). Further, there is another Lifshitz transition between the two phases with Ω = 1 at h * = δJ 1 -J 2 . For the case of the 2D TFIM (J 1 = J 2 ≡ J, δ = 1), these are transitions at h * = ±2J and h * = 0 respectively. The former corresponds to the finite-temperature critical point of the 3D Ising model, while the latter to a quantum critical Weyl stripe metal (WStM) phase described in detail below. These transitions are shown in Fig. (11) below. It is important to note that all three Lifshitz transitions are Lorentz invariant, i.e., possess dynamical exponent z = 1 and an emergent SU (2) symmetry at the transition (associated with massless Dirac fermions) where the topological quantum no. Ω is ill-defined. All of this is common to the transition we have studied earlier for the 1D TFIM, as well as appears to be in agreement with the nature of the transition in the 3D Ising model conjectured in Ref.( where we have taken δ = 1 and J 1 = J 2 in equn. (141). From the relation for the specific heat C(T ) ∼ constant |T -T c | α , the log form of C(T ) again gives us α = 0. In the absence of an exact solution for the 2D TFIM, we rely on a comparison with the values of the critical field h * = 3.04J and exponents (α = 0.134, ν = 0.622 = y, z = 1) obtained from various numerical approaches. We begin by summarising our main findings. To begin with, in section II, by noting the fact that the Bogoliubov transformation for the π-mode in the quasiparticle eigenspectrum of the Jordan-Wigner fermionised 1D TFIM diverges at criticality, we identified that the linear gap-closing of the massive Dirac spectrum can be tracked via an effective Hamiltonian for this mode. This is the Hamiltonian of a single qubit in the presence of a field. In sections III, IV and V, various topological quantum nos. that characterise the Fermi-surface topologychanging Lifshitz transition are then computed from this effective Hamiltonian. Importantly, the vanishing effective Hamiltonian indicates a non-trivial topological quantum number called Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten term arising form the SU(2) nature of the massless Dirac spectrum at the critical point of the 1D TFIM. The ordered phase is characterised by a non-local fermion-parity topological invariant related to a Z 2 symmetry operation of the original spin problem. In this way, the algebraic divergences observed in the neighbourhood of a continuous transition in the GLW paradigm are replaced here by holographic relations (e.g., equns.( The effects of a non-zero longitudinal field and interactions that scatter across the singular Fermi surface are treated within the renormalisation group (RG) formalism in section VI, revealing a rich phase diagram in Fig. (8). The analysis shows that the critical point of the 1D TFIM can be destabilised by hedgehog topological excitations and flow under RG to the SU (2)-symmetric WZNW theory for the 1D spin-1/2 Heisenberg chain. Similarly, the flow from the WZNW theory to the finite magnetisation theories in the presence of non-zero longitudinal and transverse fields is caused by RG flows arising from meron topological excitations. In section VII, we extend these ideas to various other Ising and related lattice gauge models. We show that the classical to quantum correspondence links the critical theories of Ising models in various dimensions holographically through the universal effective Hamiltonian that describes the Lifshitz transition of the 1D TFIM. For instance, the 2D transversefield Ising model is shown to possess a Z 2 symmetry similar to the 1D model. Via a Jordan-Wigner fermionisation in 2D, we show that the fermionic model possess a topological fermion-parity index equivalent to the Z 2 invariant of the original spin model. We show the existence of a Weyl-semimetal Lifshitz transition between the ordered phase (topological superconductor) and the disordered phase (non-Topological SC) in the 2D TFIM. This critical theory is connected to that of the 1D TFIM through a line of critical points, confirming their holographic relation. This also reveals the topological nature of the transition in the 3D Ising model and the 2D quantum Ising lattice gauge theory. We also find another novel Lifshitz transition of the 2D TFIM between two topological SC phases involving a gapless Weyl stripe metal. In the same manner, the T = 0 topological transition of the 1D classical Ising model leads to similar conclusions for the 2D classical Ising lattice gauge theory, the Kitaev toric code and the Wen plaquette model. It is important to note that we have, thus far, not found any evidence for the existence of critical dimensions that can limit the validity of these statements. Our results for the quantum Ising models can be translated to their classical counterparts via the T -matrix formalism. First, they reveal that topological features are common to both quantum and classical Ising transitions and suggest ways in which macroscopic symmetryprotected topological quantum phenomena can be manifested in classical contexts. Certainly, the effects of dissipative environments as well as external influences that may spoil these topological features need a careful study. We do find, however, that dissipation from an Ohmic environment could instead secure the topological properties. Importantly, our discussions of the pathways that lead from the Lifshitz transitions discussed in the present work to the second-order transitions of the GLW paradigm suggest that the latter could be an experimentally observed reality emergent from the former. The notion of universality for such Lifshitz transitions in Ising models relates simply to the fact that they should possess (i) Lorentz invariance (i.e., dynamical exponent z = 1) and (ii) an emergent SU (2) symmetry, irrespective of dimensionality. We find that some critical exponents and scaling relations do exist for such non-GLW transitions. However, non-local order parameters, sensitivity to boundary conditions and holographic relations between topological quantities at the transition, the ordered and disordered phases are equally important. It will be interesting to investigate whether such transitions exist in other symmetry groups as well Finally, what are the experimental signatures of such Lifshitz transitions in the classical model? Given that the Jordan-Wigner fermions of the TFIM correspond to domain wall excitations in the classical problem, we expect to observe spanning clusters precisely at criticality, i.e., domain walls that span the system from end to end and whose sensitivity to boundary conditions signals the topological transition. This is visualised in Fig. (12). It would be interesting to realise an equivalent of the Thouless charge pumping experiment as well. We expect that this should correspond to the periodic appearance and disappearance of such spanning domain walls as the critical point is crossed periodically and adiabatically. However, it is crucial that such an experiment be carried out in the absence of a longitudinal field that breaks the Ising symmetry, as well as any external influences that may quench the dynamics of the topological degrees of freedom in the bulk as well as the boundaries. It is to be expected that any success in such directions will spur further activity in the understanding of transitions that lie beyond the traditional GLW paradigm.