Recently, noncentrosymmetric superconductor BiPd has attracted considerable research interest due to the possibility of hosting topological superconductivity. Here we report a systematic high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and spin-resolved ARPES study of the normal state electronic and spin properties of BiPd. Our experimental results show the presence of a surface state at higher-binding energy with the location of Dirac point at around 700 meV below the Fermi level. The detailed photon energy, temperature-dependent and spin-resolved ARPES measurements complemented by our first-principles calculations demonstrate the existence of the spin polarized surface states at high-binding energy. The absence of such spin-polarized surface states near the Fermi level negates the possibility of a topological superconducting behavior on the surface. Our direct experimental observation of spin-polarized surface states in BiPd provides critical information that will guide the future search for topological superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric materials. Recently, noncentrosymmetric (NCS) superconductors (SCs) have attracted considerable research interest due to the possibility that they host several exotic states [1][2][3]. The lack of inversion symmetry creates an asymmetric potential gradient, which may split the electron bands by lifting the spin degeneracy, allowing hybrid-pairing of spin-singlet and spin-triplet states within the same orbital channel [1,[3][4][5]. Furthermore, with the advent of topological insulators A NCS system provides a good platform to look for exotic states such as the Weyl semimetal in TaAs In this paper, we report the experimental observation of spin-polarized surface states in the NCS material BiPd using ARPES and spin-resolved ARPES. Our experimental results show the presence of a surface state at higher-binding energy, with the Dirac node located at around 700 meV below the Fermi level. Furthermore, the Dirac node located at around 650 meV below the Fermi level is also observed for different surface cleaving, providing direct evidence for the noncentrosymmetic crystal structure presented in BiPd. Our measurements suggest that the observed states may be topological in nature. Our results are further supported by our first-principles calculations. The absence of spin-polarized surface states near the Fermi level of BiPd negates the possibility that this system might host topological superconductivity on the surface. Crystal structure and sample characterization. The crystal structure of BiPd at low temperatures (< 210 • C) has a monoclinic unit cell with a = 5.63 Å, b = 10.66 Å, c = 5.68 Å, α = γ = 90 • , and β = 101 • with the b axis being as its unique axis (see Fig. Figure Electronic structure of BiPd. We study the overall electronic structure of BiPd using ARPES. Figure Figure On increasing the binding energy, the size of the pocket decreases and eventually shrinks to a point (the Dirac point) near E B ∼ 700 meV (Fig. To reveal the nature of the states observed in BiPd, we performed photon energy and temperature-dependent ARPES, as well as spin-resolved ARPES measurements which are further complemented by calculations. Figure To test the robustness of the surface state observed in BiPd, we have performed a temperature-dependent measurement as shown in Fig. NCS electronic signature. To better understand the electronic structure observed with ARPES, we perform first-principles calculations of the bulk band structure (Supplementary Figure Since the calculations were made for slab geometry, the obtained band structure always involves bands from two surfaces, one on the top and the other on the bottom of the slab. Experimentally, one can only measure one surface (corresponding to either top or bottom surface of the slab geometry) at a time. In principle, it should be possible to measure either the top or bottom surface on the two sample pieces based on the cleaving. Therefore, depending on whether the cleaved surface is a top or bottom one, the location of the Dirac point energy is predicted to be different. Experimentally, the location of the Dirac point energy is found to be different based on the cleaving either the top or the bottom surface, in agreement with our calculations. Actually, we experimentally observed the different Dirac point energy for top and bottom surface cleaving. For the top surface the Dirac point is ∼ 700 meV, while for the bottom surface cleaving Dirac point is ∼ 650 meV from the Fermi level (Supplementary Figure To further understand the nature of the observed Dirac-like band, we measured the in-plane spin polarization or spin-texture properties of BiPd. Spin-resolved ARPES measurements were performed on the top-cleaved surface of BiPd. Two spin-resolved energydispersive curves (EDCs) are shown at momenta of ∼ ± 0.1 on the opposite sides of the Dirac-like dispersion. The blue dash lines on the ARPES dispersion map shown in Fig. The spin-resolved EDCs and corresponding net spin polarization are shown in Fig. The experimental realization of the topological insulator phase in a NCS crystal structure is an object of intense research. Such a system may be utilized in testing several proposed exotic phenomena, such as crystalline-surface-dependent topological electronic states, pyroelectricity, and natural topological p-n junctions We note that BiPd consists of many bands near the Dirac-like states, which makes this system very complicated with no global band gap in the normal state. The topology in BiPd is not well defined like in Bi 2 Se 3 . In ARPES experiments, the samples were cleaved and measured in an ultrahigh vacuum environment that kept its surface clean during the measurements. The surface cleaving generates surface potential due to the surface charges, which may develop a large effective pressure along the b (perpendicular to the surface, see Fig. BiPd is a superconductor below T c ∼ 3.7 K. Since the spin polarized surface state is located at high binding energy, it negates the topological superconductivity behavior on the surface at its native Fermi level. However, by electrical gating or surface deposition, the Fermi level can be tuned near the Dirac surface state, which provides an opportunity to realize the topological superconductivity in this noncentrosymmetic material. Crystal growth and characterization. Single crystals of BiPd were grown by a modified Bridgman method as described elsewhere Synchrotron-based ARPES measurements of the electronic structure were performed at the Advanced Light Source (ALS), Berkeley at Beamline 10.0.1 and Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) at Beamline 5-4 both equipped with a high efficiency R4000 electron analyzer. The energy resolution was set to be better than 20 meV for the measurements with the synchrotron beamline. The angular resolution was set to be better than 0.2 • for all synchrotron measurements. Samples were cleaved in situ and measured at 10 -80 K in a vacuum better than 10 -10 torr. They were found to be very stable and without degradation for the typical measurement period of 20 hours. Spin-resolved ARPES measurements. Spin-resolved ARPES measurements were performed at the ESPRESSO end station installed at Beamline-9B of the Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center (HiSOR), Hiroshima, Japan, equipped with state-of-the-art very low-energy electron diffraction (VLEED) spin detectors utilizing preoxidized Fe(001)-p( First-principles calculations. The first-principles calculations were based on the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) surface, with a vacuum thickness larger than 20 Å. top or bottom surface on the two sample pieces based on the cleaving. Therefore, depending on whether the cleaved surface is a top or bottom one, the location of the Dirac point energy is predicted to be different. To approach both the top and bottom surfaces, we cleaved multiple samples and measured in identical experimental conditions such as sample temperature, photon energy, and the light polarization etc. Experimentally, the location of the Dirac point energy is observed to be different based on the cleaving of either the top or bottom surface, which is consistent with our calculations. We observed a different Dirac point energy for the top and bottom surfaces, based on the cleaving. For the top surface, the Dirac point is located at about 700 meV from the Fermi level, whereas the Dirac point is located at about 650 meV from the Fermi level for the bottom surface (see Fig. 