A microelectromechanical oscillator with a gap of 1.25 μm was immersed in superfluid 3 He-B and cooled below 250 μK at various pressures. Mechanical resonances of its shear motion were measured at various levels of driving force. The oscillator enters into a nonlinear regime above a certain threshold velocity. The damping increases rapidly in the nonlinear region and eventually prevents the velocity of the oscillator from increasing beyond the critical velocity which is much lower than the Landau critical velocity. We propose that this peculiar nonlinear behavior stems from the escape of quasiparticles from the surface bound states into the bulk fluid. Superfluidity is associated phenomenologically with dissipationless flow of fluid, although its physical implications are more profound. It is a common phenomenon occurring in all classes of quantum gases and fluids, whether they are charged or neutral, bosonic or fermionic. Consider a uniform superfluid at zero temperature flowing through a narrow channel. As the velocity increases gradually, the flow becomes dissipative above a threshold velocity due to the energy loss in generating excitations in the layers of fluid close to the walls 1 . Landau first recognized this mechanism and derived the so-called Landau critical velocity, v L = min{E(p)/p}. Here, E(p) represents the dispersion of the excitation. Those excitations are phonons in Bose-Einstein Condensation of cold atoms, rotons in superfluid Superfluid 3 He, a prime example of unconventional Cooper pairing, may present a rather unique complication in this respect. Pair-breaking by scattering from any type of disorder or impurity is an exceptional feature of unconventional pairing with a non-zero angular momentum In this Letter, we report an unusually low critical velocity in 3 He-B above which a massive amount of quasiparticles are generated. We believe that this behavior is directly related to the microscopic structure of SABS near a diffusive boundary, and consistent with our recent report on the anomalous low temperature dependence of the damping of the MEMS oscillator In this work we employed a mechanical oscillator which was developed specifically to investigate the phenomena related to the surface states in a confined geometry The MEMS device used in this measurement has a 2 μm thickness mobile plate with 200 μm lateral size. The plate is suspended above the substrate by four serpentine springs, maintaining a gap of 1.25 μm. When the device is submerged in a fluid, a film is formed inside the gap, while the bulk fluid is in direct contact with the top surface of the plate. The details of the measurement technique can be found elsewhere In this experiment two methods were adopted for the measurements of the MEMS in fluid. One is the frequency sweep where a spectrum is obtained by sweeping the driving frequency through the resonance (≈ 20 kHz) of the shear mode with a fixed excitation. The other is the excitation sweep where the driving force is stepped upwards and downwards while the frequency is kept at the resonance where the driving force balances out the damping force. Using this method a velocity-force relation can be acquired. The MEMS device was cooled in liquid In the normal fluid or superfluid, with a low driving force, the damping force is proportional to the velocity of the MEMS plate. Therefore, the damping coefficient is independent of the velocity, and the spectra at various excitations can be normalized to a universal curve 2031 . However, when the driving force exceeds a threshold value in the superfluid, the velocity of the MEMS starts to deviate from the linear behavior. An excess damping emerges, and the MEMS-superfluid system enters a nonlinear regime where unusual behavior is observed. Figure The nonlinearity observed in superfluid Figure Multiple studies have performed similar measurements using vibrating wires and quartz tuning forks, but observed a rather different behavior. Many of their oscillators experienced reduction of damping before the appearance of excess damping, in other words, bending upward rather than downward in the velocity-force plot shown in Fig 2 The excess damping force, F ex , can be separated from the total damping force, F t = F th + F ex (see Fig. The Landau critical velocity of a moving object should be determined by the maximum relative flow velocity, v max , near the surface of the object. For an incompressible potential flow, v max = αv ob where v ob is the velocity of the moving object in the laboratory frame with a geometrical factor α. For a cylindrical object moving in the perpendicular direction to its symmetry axis, a reasonable model for a vibrating wire, v max = 2v ob at the top and bottom edge of the circular cross section. In contrast, for an ideal thin plate in the shear motion, α = 1. A simple application of this fact would give v c = v L /α. However, Lambert made an intriguing proposal recognizing that the gapless surface states would be subjected to a flow of v max Our observation, v c < v L /10 at f ≈ 20 kHz, cannot be fully explained by the mechanism described above. We do not believe that the massive loss of oscillator energy is related to vortices or other topological objects 42 , either. There was no noticeable hysteresis in the velocity-force measurement 43 ; the multiple cooldowns produced practically identical results; the oscillator always recovered to the state before the intentional local heating, which would have disrupted the topological defects and objects. We speculate that the unusually low critical velocity is directly related to the microscopic structure of the SABS. For a diffusive boundary, which is the case for this work, the surface states have an almost flat density of states (DOS) mid-gap band Theory predicts that the mini gap, ∆ -∆ * , shrinks quickly to zero and the low energy spectrum turns into a Dirac cone en route to the fully specular boundary In conclusion, using a MEMS oscillator in superfluid 3 He we obtained an unusually low critical velocity v c ≈ 0.08v L for all pressures studied. We propose that this peculiar nonlinear behavior is directly related to the microscopic structure of the SABS near a diffusive boundary. We would like to acknowledge Peter Hirschfeld, Anton Vorontsov, and Errki Thuneberg for helpful discussions, and the Lancaster Low Temperature group for providing custom-made quartz tuning forks used in this work. This