We solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations self-consistently for the d-wave order parameter in nanoscale d-wave systems with [110] surfaces and show that spontaneous time-reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking occurs at low temperatures due to a spontaneously induced complex order parameter of extended s-wave symmetry. The Andreev surface bound states, which are protected by a onedimensional (1D) topological invariant in the presence of TRS, are gapped by the emergence of this new order parameter. The extended s-wave order parameter is localized within a narrow region near the surfaces, which is consistent with the fact that topological protection of the gapless Andreev surface states is characterized by the 1D topological invariant. In this TRS-breaking phase, not only is the complex order parameter induced, but also the d-wave order parameter itself becomes complex. Furthermore, the disappearance of topological protection brings about novel vortex phenomena near the surfaces. We show that vortex-antivortex pairs are formed in the extended s-wave order parameter along the surfaces if the side length of a nanoisland or the width of an infinitely long nanoribbon is relatively large. Symmetry is at the heart of both high-energy and condensed matter physics. Symmetry breaking underlies not only mass in our universe, but also superconductivity in metals. Symmetry classifies topological materials Gapless surface states can become gapped when the corresponding symmetry is broken. The surface states in a topological insulator acquire a gap as a result of spontaneous or non-spontaneous breaking of TRS Vorontsov has proposed that films of a d-wave superconductor at low temperatures can exhibit unusual superconducting phases due to transverse confinement, with TRS or continuous translational symmetry broken spontaneously In this work, by solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations To summarize, spontaneous disappearance of topological protection occurs in a d x 2 -y 2 -wave nanoisland with [110] surfaces as a second-order phase transition, leading to the gapped surface excitation originating from the formation of extended s-wave Cooper pairs near the surfaces. This is an example of a spontaneously induced order parameter being behind the breaking of the symmetry that would otherwise protect the gapless surface states. Furthermore, the disappearance of topological protection brings about novel vortex phenomena near the surfaces. We show that vortex-antivortex pairs are formed along the surfaces of a d x 2 -y 2 -wave nanoisland when the side length is relatively long. The phase winding occurs in the extended s-wave order parameter, where there is a 2π phase winding around each vortex or antivortex. It is shown in Supplemental Material [18] that the disappearance of zero-energy surface states due to spontaneous TRS breaking can be understood in terms of the fundamental group We consider the tight-binding model Hamiltonian H = H BCS + H fab . Here the generalized Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) Hamiltonian for d-wave superconductivity is , where c † iσ creates the electron with spin σ at site i and μ denotes the chemical potential. The hopping is restricted within nearest-neighbor sites for simplicity. We use the unit system with = k B = 1. The Hamiltonian for the fabrication potential H fab is written as H fab = i,σ V i c † iσ c iσ , where the potential V i = 0 (500t) inside (outside) the nanoisland. One can diagonalize H to solve the BdG equations expressed as Here where N is the number of lattice sites, V ij denotes the pairing interaction, and f (x) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. For the results presented below, the chemical potential is fixed to be μ = -1.5t and the pairing interaction is nonzero only between nearest-neighbor sites, V ij ≡ U = -2t, so that the resulting order parameter is purely of the d x 2 -y 2wave symmetry. The order parameter at site i is given in terms of the d-wave mean fields by with ∆ ±ê,i = ∆(r i , r i ± ê), where x and ŷ denote the unit vectors in the square lattice. Considering two-dimensional systems, we assume that the field penetration depth λ is infinity. We use pure d-wave mean fields with randomly-distributed phases as the initial guess for our self-consistent calculation. The BdG equations ( and the BdG matrix ĤBdG on the left-hand side (LHS) of Eq. ( To find the true ground state on the mean-field level, once self-consistency has been achieved, we calculate the thermodynamic potential given as We obtain all the eigenvalues E γ by means of the Sakurai-Sugiura (SS) method becomes nonzero along the surfaces. This order parameter is complex and results in the state having gapped Andreev bound states and lower energy than that of the pure d-wave phase with gapless surface excitation. A complex order parameter produces currents and thus breaks TRS (see discussion in relation to topology in Sec. S6 [18]). Figure Figure which is equivalent to the internal energy. Here θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. Equation ( Thus, the gapped phase can become the ground state. In a d x 2 -y 2 -wave nanoisland, the flat band is spontaneously split as the extended swave order parameter emerges globally along the surfaces below T cs . We propose that our findings are rather universal and that an unconventional superconductor with gapless surface states such as p x -wave superconductors Although we have focused on the chemical potential μ = -1.5t and the d-wave pairing interaction U = -2t in presenting our results, we have found the second-order phase transition to the spontaneous TRS-broken phase with the induced s -wave order for a wide range of μ and U . To address the question as to whether spontaneous TRS breaking happens only in nanoislands due to quantum confinement or it is a generic feature of the [110] surface, we have also performed self-consistent calcula-tion for nanoribbons, which have infinitely long [110] surfaces, but a finite width in the perpendicular direction. We have found that the second-order phase transition to the TRS-broken phase where the s -wave order is induced along the surface is generic to In conclusion, we have shown by solving the BdG equations self-consistently for nanoscale d-wave systems that spontaneous emergence of new order results in gapping of the zero-energy surface states by breaking the underlying symmetry. We have found that not only is the induced order parameter complex, but also the d-wave order parameter itself becomes complex in the phase with broken TRS. The gapped surface states on [110] surfaces in the TRS-broken phase of a d-wave superconductor can be detected by surface-sensitive probes, and the Andreev bound states in vortex-antivortex pairs in the induced extended s-wave condensate can be distinguished from the gapless surface states in the TRS-preserving phase by measuring the concurrent magnetic field with nanoscale SQUIDs By introducing the Wigner representation expressed as where R ≡ (r i + r j )/2, the gap equation can be rewritten as The pairing function φ d(s) (k) is given as with the lattice constant a. Thus, ] in the long-wavelength limit. We show that the extended s-wave order parameter is induced only along a [110] surface. We consider a triangular nanoisland with the fabrication potential V (x, y) = 500t in the region, with the open boundary conditions on a 48 × 48 square lattice. Here the origin is located at the center of the system. This shape includes both [100] and [110] surfaces. Figure Let us consider the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations with single-orbital normal electrons and spin-singlet Cooper pairs in 2D momentum space. The BdG Hamiltonian is a 4 × 4 Hermitian matrix, H(k). The wave vector k is restricted to be in the first Brillouin zone. The time-reversal transformation is a 4 × 4 anti-unitary matrix, T = iσ y K, where σ y is the y-component of the Pauli matrices in spin space, and K is the complex conjugation operator, (the identity matrix in Nambu space is hidden). In the definition of T , we take a basis representation in which the global constant phase of the pairing potential is zero. Time-reversal symmetry implies that T -1 H(k)T = H(-k). When the normal part of H(k) is diagonal in spin space, H(k) is of a block diagonal form, where each block is a 2 × 2 Hermitian matrix. Since one can find that the two blocks are not independent of each other, examining the eigenvalue problem in one block is sufficient for clarifying the topological character of our system where (k) is real, whereas ∆(k) is complex. We also assume that (k) = |∆(k)| for any k; this assumption is reasonable for typical superconducting systems. A straightforward calculation shows that H(k) is invariant with respect to the time-reversal transformation if and only if ∆(k) is real. Now, we focus on the reduced Hamiltonian. The ground state (i.e., the occupied band) of the system is well-defined with respect to any k whenever the spectral gap, 2 (k) 2 + |∆(k)| 2 , is not closed Let us consider the fundamental group A more detailed feature of the zero-energy bound states (e.g., dispersion relation) can be found by a one-dimensional topological number with a single variable α(k). The variable α(k) is defined in the range 0 ≤ α(k) ≤ π, where -ψ(k) is identical to ψ(k) for π ≤ α(k) ≤ 2π. Thus, the eigenvector ψ(k) is equivalent to a circle defined by (cos 2α(k), sin 2α(k)). We consider the momentum k = (k x , k y ). By fixing the y component k y = k 0 y , the range of the variable k y ) in momentum space does not cross the nodes, the winding number associated with π 1 (S 1 ) is regarded as a one-dimensional topological invariant. According to Ref. where (±k 0 x , k 0 y ) denote the intersection points between the integration path with the fixed k 0 y and the Fermi surface. Thus, if the gap function ∆(k) satisfies then the one-dimensional topological invariant is finite and the zero-energy bound states exist because of the bulk-edge correspondence. Varying k 0 y in the range with no gap closing, we can obtain the surface dispersion relation of the zero-energy bound states In a pure d x 2 -y 2 superconductor, the gap function is expressed as If the Fermi surface is not too small and the d x 2 -y 2 component is larger than the extended s-wave one (r < 0.5), there are always zero-energy bound states on the [110] surface. Finally, we have studied whether the order parameters with p x -and p y -wave symmetry as defined by ∆ px,i = (∆ x,i -∆ -x,i )/2, (S20) ∆ py,i = (∆ ŷ,i -∆ -ŷ,i the surfaces within a range narrower than the regions where the extended s -wave order is induced, although right on the surfaces it can be comparable to |∆ s ,i |. Most significantly, however, no fundamental change occurs in |∆ px,i | and |∆ py,i | as the temperature is lowered from above (T = 0.03t) to below (T = 0.02t) the TRS-breaking transition temperature. Therefore, we conclude that the p x -and p y -wave order parameters induced close to the surfaces are not related to the spontaneous breaking of TRS.