We report the influence on the superconducting critical temperature T c in doped SrTiO 3 of the substitution of the natural 16 O atoms by the heavier isotope 18 O. We observe that for a wide range of doping this substitution causes a strong (∼ 50%) enhancement of T c . Also the magnetic critical field H c2 is increased by a factor ∼ 2. Such a strong impact on T c and H c2 , with a sign opposite to conventional superconductors, is unprecedented. The observed effect could be the consequence of strong coupling of the doped electrons to lattice vibrations (phonons), a notion which finds support in numerous optical and photo-emission studies. The unusually large size of the observed isotope effect supports a recent model for superconductivity in these materials based on strong coupling to the ferroelectric soft modes of SrTiO 3 . transition. The error bar is estimated as the temperature range over which the derivative dρ(T )/dT changes. Fig. The BCS weak coupling limit gives an isotope coefficient α = -d(ln T c )/d(ln M) = 0.5 (where M is the oxygen isotope mass), corresponding to a T c shift of -5% as opposed to approximately +50% in the data presented here. The first main observation is therefore that, contrary to most superconducting materials, the isotope coefficient in SrTiO 3 is negative. In some other rare cases α < 0 has been observed: the pure uranium (α = -2.2) From the measurement of the electrical resistivity at the superconducting transition in magnetic field, we could estimate the upper critical field H c2 (T ) and the effect that the isotope substitution can have on it. These results are summarized in Fig. We measured the resistivity under a magnetic field in both orientations perpendicular to the current (with the current always in the same direction in the ab-plane of the crystal). Both measurements provide the same result, thus ruling out any possible surface effect on the superconducting behavior. The lowermost panel of Fig. There are three infrared active modes in SrTiO 3 , having transverse frequencies 67, 21 and 2 meV and Fröhlich coupling constants α ep = 1.6, 0.45 and 0.02, respectively (see Table The corresponding expressions for the isotope coefficient are detailed in Eqs. The fact that in SrTiO 3 the experimental isotope coefficients α ∼ -10 and β ∼ -19 are still considerably larger than expected from aforementioned band-renormalization, calls for deeper theoretical analysis of the electronic structure and the effective polaron-polaron interactions in these materials. A possible clue comes from the recent theoretical study by Edge et al. Following Kedem et al. where α ep is the electron-phonon coupling constant, ω s a vibrational energy scale, M c the mass at the critical point and zν the critical exponent of the system having the mean-field value zν = 0.5. For harmonic modes α 2 ep ∝ M -1/2 , which leads to a mass independent λ = α 2 ep /ω s since also ω s ∝ M -1/2 . Following the description of Edge et al. the effect of doping is to increase M c , which for the relevant doping range (> 10 19 cm -3 ) falls above the mass of 18 O. Consequently at these doping levels there is no ferroelectric instability (corresponding to a zero in the denominator) for any (partial or complete) 18 O isotope substitution. Yet, according to Eq. ( (1) and ( We have studied the critical temperature T c and the upper critical field H c2 of partially (35 %) 18 O isotope substituted doped SrTiO 3 . We observe a strong (factor ∼ 1.5) enhancement of T c and (factor ∼ 2) of H c2 . Both the sign and the size of these two effects are unusual, and indicate that the superconductivity is not of the conventional BCS variety. The effect may be the consequence of a combination of two effects: polaronic band-narrowing and coupling to soft phonons responsible for the ferroelectric instability in these materials. For the present study, we chose SrTiO 3 samples from various sources and different morphologies: commercial crystals of pure SrTiO 3 , commonly purchased as substrates for thin film deposition by MTI Corp.; superconducting crystals of Nb-doped SrTiO 3 , with a Nb:Ti nominal ratio ranging from 0.001 to 0.05, from CrysTech; home-processed ceramic samples of SrTiO 3 obtained from binary reaction between the binary oxide components. The isotope substitution of 18 O for 16 O in crystalline samples was achieved following a procedure similar to that reported by Itoh et al. Based on the amount of oxygen in the sample (between 5 • 10 -5 and 6.5 • 10 -5 mol), and the volume of the quartz tubes (between 12 and 15 cm 3 ), and assuming that equilibrium has been reached at the end of each of the 3 consecutive annealing steps, the expected value of 18 O substitution would be between 99.4 and 99.9%. As a matter of fact, the procedure followed for substituting the isotope 18 O for 16 O was only partially effective and did not allow full isotope substitution. The actual amount of oxygen isotope substitution proved to be ∼35 %, as directly measured by three independent and complementary experimental techniques described in the following. In the ceramic samples the isotope substitution was obtained by first oxidizing the pure metals Sr and Ti in pure 18 O 2 atmosphere, then reacting Sr 18 O and Ti 18 O 2 to form SrTi 18 O 3 . Processing of ceramic samples was highly time-consuming and costly, and yielded only a small amount of SrTi 18 O 3 ; however, this was a crucial reference for the calibration and optimization of the 18 O substitution in the crystalline samples. The isotope-substituted samples from the various sources were then subjected to reduction treatments (10 -7 mbar at 1000 • -1350 • C) in order to create oxygen vacancies and tune the doping of charge carriers. For each doping level of each 18 O-substituted sample, a twin 16 O-sample (either crystal or ceramic) was subjected to the same annealing conditions and reduction treatments, at the same time and in the same furnace. By virtue of this twintreatment a complete range of SrTi 16 O 3 /SrTi 18 O 3 twin samples was obtained. This is the optimal procedure to limit ambiguities due to sample processing when comparing the physical properties of the 16 O-and 18 O-samples. For the study of the superconducting behavior of SrTi 18 O 3 through transport measurements in a dilution fridge, only oxygen-reduced single crystals of SrTiO 3 were used. These samples, as well as their processing conditions are reported in Table The amount of 18 O/ 16 O substitution is commonly estimated from the mass uptake of the sample We want to know how much 18 O actually substitutes for 16 O under the processing conditions used, and check wether the response of the material is that expected for the isotopesubstituted 18 O-oxide. We pursued this goal by three different techniques: mass spectroscopy, thermogravimetry and infrared optical spectroscopy. Mass spectrometry was performed on selected pieces of crystals and ceramic samples in the Stable Isotope Laboratory at the University of Lausanne. These measurements confirmed that oxygen has been substituted throughout the bulk of the material, and indicated that the amount of 18 O in the (ceramic and crystalline) samples is about 35 %. The results of this analysis are summarized in Table The isotope substitution is expected to affect the phonon modes, whose frequency shift can be measured by either infrared (IR) or Raman spectroscopy. If the reduced mass of an IR vibrational mode is that of the oxygen atoms, and assuming that everything else (lattice parameter, atomic positions, zero-point fluctuations) remains the same upon isotope substitution, the softening for a complete substitution of 16 O by 18 O would be given by ω( 18 O)/ω( 16 O)= 16/18, which corresponds to a red-shift of about 6%. The IR reflectivity of the pristine and substituted samples, measured in a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer, is shown in Fig. The red-shift of the phonon mode is found to be of the same magnitude in ceramic samples as in crystals, the former having being processed by oxidation of metal elements in pure 18 O 2 , and confirms well the amount of substitution measured by the mass spectrometry and thermogravimetry. One would expect complete isotope substitution in ceramic samples. However, the reaction treatment to form SrTi 18 O 3 from Sr 18 O and Ti 18 O 2 is done in SiO 2 reactors at high temperature, thus bringing it down to the same high temperature environment as used for crystalline samples. This leads us to suspect that part of the oxygen of the quartz tubes participates in the equilibrium. This could be a surface layer, or a small fraction of less stable bonded oxygen. After the 18 O-substitution, n-type charge carriers were introduced by creating oxygen vacancies through vacuum annealing. This is a widely used procedure, long known as being successful in tuning the carrier density and the conductivity of SrTiO 3-y . The two samples treated under flux of 16 O 2 for the characterization by thermogravimetry (MTI-1 and MTI-4) are used to study the physical properties after back-substitution. Fig. Isotope effect on T c , H c2 , υ F and λ due to polaronic band-narrowing Due to the anti-adiabatic conditions, the expression for T c in the relevant doping range reads with * F = F m/m * the Fermi temperature of the polaron Fermi-liquid. Since The upper critical field in the clean limit is from which we readily obtain for the isotope coefficient of the upper critical field Another parameter showing isotope effect is the Fermi-velocity, for which This can in principle be measured with high resolution angular resolved photo-emission. The isotope effect of the London penetration depth is described by which can in principle be measured using μSR. For SrTiO 3 the polaron mass renormalization m * /m is of intermediate strength . Sample identifier, oxygen isotope, annealing temperature, annealing time, charge carrier density measured from the Hall constant and residual resistance ratio (RRR=R(300 K)/(R(4 K))