In unconventional superconductors, understanding the form of the pairing interaction is the primary goal. In this regard, Raman spectroscopy is a very useful tool, as it identifies the ground state and also the subleading pairing channels by probing collective modes. Here we propose a general theory for multiband Raman response and identify new features in the spectrum that can provide a robust test for a pairing theory. We identify multiple Bardasis-Schrieffer type collective modes and connect the weights of these modes to the sub-leading gap structures within a microscopic pairing theory. The conclusions are completely general, and we apply our approach to interpret the B1g Raman scattering in hole-doped BaFe2As2. Introduction: Fe-based superconductors (FeSC) appear to display s-wave pairing, with an order parameter that may change sign between Fermi surface (FS) pockets In this Letter, we provide a scheme to calculate the Raman-response within a microscopic pairing theory, using the same microscopic interactions that lead to pair-ing, and point out several details of the Raman-spectrum that were either not expected or not explained before. In particular, we show that in crystalline systems multiple BS modes exist and appear with a characteristic weight in the spectrum. We believe that such a theory is necessary to accurately calculate the observed Raman intensity. In fact, every subleading pairing channel leads to a BS mode (there may be multiple resonances). In crystalline systems with unconventional electronic structure, there can be an interplay of several orthogonal form-factors in the subleading channel as well. This aspect, which can strongly influence the shape of the Raman spectrum, appears to have been neglected until now. Theoretically, the solution to the linearized gap equation for a variety of materials Here we present a general scheme to compute the Raman scattering intensity for a multiband model, including vertex corrections. We then apply the general formulation to two specific cases and illustrate all of the points discussed above. The advantage of this formalism lies in the fact that it is valid for any ground-state with any number of bands and it accounts for all collective modes through the vertex corrections, which removes the singularity of the Raman response at twice the gap edge. Multiband Raman response in the B 1g channel: The intensity of the Raman response in a multiband sys- tem, in the non-resonant response limit, in the B 1g channel can be expressed as , where ρ R a , in the non-resonant limit, is well approximated by the "Raman density" in the B 1g channel: Here Ω and q correspond to the shift in frequency and wavevector of the incident light. In metals, q ≪ k F , the Fermi wave vector, and will be set to zero in this work. We evaluate the above expression in the SC state using the summation scheme outlined in Fig. This is the momentum dependent form of the interactions as modeled, e.g. in Ref. , c -k,↓,2 , ...), where 1, 2... are the various bands. The interaction is recast as The explicit form of the interaction vertex is listed in the supplementary material(SM). Then, we need to evaluate (2π) 2 ; s a is the band selector of the form diag (0, ..., 1, 0, ...) (1 at the a th location); σ 1,2,3 are Pauli matrices in Nambu space; Ĝ is the bare Greens' function in Nambu space with elements Ĝa = [iω n σ 0 -ǫ a k σ 3 -∆ k,a σ 1 ] -1 for band a; γ a k is expanded as t f t k c t a , where {f k } is a set of orthogonal functions within the B 1g sector; U nm ab is the projection matrix element of U αβγδ for harmonics n, m for the interaction between bands a and b and M is a matrix that accounts for transformation to Nambu space (see SM). All matrices are 2N × 2N , where N is the number of bands and 2 is the Nambu space dimension. To proceed, it is necessary to introduce the other Nambu components: Γ R b i with i = 1, 2 in addition to i = 3, the solution for which is constructed as ji , where the matrix K t,ab ji is found after substituting for Γ R b i in Eq. 1. The response Π RR is then given by , where (3) Here [U pp,ph ] is the coupling matrix in nambu⊗band⊗harmonic space and K and [c] are matrices in nambu⊗band space, but a vector in harmonic space (see SM for examples); The subscript pp and ph for [U ] stand for its pairing and density channel projections. Further, [σ i ] a ≡ σ i ⊗ s a and Π is the same as Π but without the M -M matrices. The collective modes are contained in the poles of K. While in general K is 4 × 4 in Nambu space, the singlet ground state which preserves time reversal symmetry decouples this into two 2 × 2 blocks: spin-amplitude and phase-density sectors. Since the BS modes are in the phase sector, we only deal with this 2 × 2 subspace in this work. The advantage of this formalism is that the Raman response is computed for a microscopic model where it is dressed by the same interactions that led to pairing. The microscopic problem provides the relevant number of harmonics H that effect the pairing problem and this approach to calculate Raman response then calls for computing the numbers Π nm (n, m ∈ {1, ...H}) and carrying out a matrix inversion. Connection to collective modes: It is well known that the collective modes in the sub-leading channel couple to the Raman response Our formalism naturally provides answers to such questions. The poles of Raman response (Eq. 2) are contained in poles of The collective mode in a general multiband superconductor, can be found, e.g. using the formalism in Ref. -1 . Thus it is clear that, in general, the poles are not the same. However, if the interaction in the density channel is weak ([U ph ] → 0), then one can show that in the pairing interaction sector, Π → -Π and we restore the collective mode result. This was also pointed out in Ref. First we consider a Γ centered pocket, together with an swave BCS like ground state for the system with the order parameter ∆ where , zeroes of which correspond to peaks in the Raman spectrum. A simple exercise (FS stands for projection on the Fermi surface). The response then takes the form -Π 22 . (5) Here Π 22 = 2 Us -2νF (Ω), where ν is the density of states at the FS and . The BS modes are solutions to νF (Ω) = -1 Ũ1,2 Us . These BS modes are weighted by c1,2 . Note that the weight of the BS mode goes to zero as it softens Relevance to (Ba,K)Fe 2 As 2 : We now wish to apply this new understanding of the Raman spectrum to the overdoped region of BaKFe 2 As 2 . It is well known In summary, we have provided a proof of principle method for using the details of the Raman spectrum, together with theory, to learn the details of the pairing interaction in an unconventional superconductor. The calculation of the response with the full momentum structure of the interaction is outside the scope of this letter and will be considered in a more detailed future study. This formalism is readily generalizable to any ground-state symmetry and any number of bands. We have identified several features that help to better understand the Raman spectrum: a) there can be multiple Bardasis-Schrieffer modes in an s-wave superconductor; b) the overlap of the gap structure with the bare Raman vertex γ k determines the weights of the modes c) incorporating the vertex corrections, we find that the 2∆ feature is suppressed and exists only due to the residual harmonics of the Raman vertex γ k that are not involved in pairing. Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful for useful discussions with L. Benfatto, A. Chubukov, D. Einzel, and D. Scalapino. PJH was supported by US Department of Energy grant DE-FG02-05ER46236. The RPA calculations were conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility. PJH's work was performed in part at the Aspen Center for Physics, which is supported by National Science Foundation grant PHY-1066293. Here we present the full structure of the interaction terms U αβγδ used in this work. As far as the multiband pairing problem is concerned, H int has the following terms corresponding to intraband interactions and interband interactions. Momentum conservation (unless there are identically overlapping Fermi-surfaces) leads to only intraband and pairwise interband interactions. For every band a, we have interaction terms corresponding to interacting with itself and another band b. The complete breakdown is given as: where understood to act on the a -b subspace. In the above matrices P, N , the inner-most dimension corresponds to the nambu space which is 2 × 2 in our problem due to spin-rotational invariance. The band space is N × N and thus the interaction vertex is a juxtaposition of two 2N × 2N matrices as shown below in an example for the 2 band case. In this example, U 3 is the interband interaction and U 4,5 are the intra-band interactions. They take the form: The notation U ab M ab • M ab is short for terms precisely of the type shown in ( The self consistent equation for K that we get after plugging in the form of Γ R b i in to Eq. ( It is useful to note that ] and zero otherwise. Thus a → g in Eq. 11. Also due to diagonal-in-band structure of G, c → b. This leads to the matrix form: . The where [U ] ′ s are 4 × 4 matrices (2N = 4 for this case) given by (each block is a 2 × 2 matrix), In Eq. 12, the U 4,5 terms can be written as The first term is what usually occurs in the pairing problem. The second terms is the density channel contribution. This is decomposition of an interaction into U pp and U ph components. In the usual 'pairing-interaction' approximation, one drops this contribution. Then we finally get where [U] know takes the form of the pairing kernel: This is the form presented in the examples in the main text. All the elements are k, k ′ dependent. They are then decomposed into harmonics. This is a digression from the main theme of the Letter (which is to compute the Raman response), but we wish to show that multiple BS modes is not a feature of Raman but intrinsic to the superconductor. Thus, in this section, we find the collectives independent of the selectivity effects of the Raman vertex. Since the Bardasis-Schreiffer modes do not couple to charge fluctuations directly, we might as well find the collective modes in the d-sector for a neutral superconductor. This can immediately found using the result from Ref. The other ingredients for BS modes are T = T c solutions for the d-wave sector and T = 0 solutions for the s-wave sector. For the d-sector, the usual procedure results in the following gap equation: where it is assumed that . This clearly gives one d-wave solution. This then leads to one solution of the mode equation and thus one BS mode. But now, lets pick the following form of the interaction We then get the following matrix equation for T c (l ∼ ln Λ/T d c : Here T d c refers to the T c that would have resulted in the absence of the s-wave channel) Here the smaller case symbols are dimensionless couplings obtained after multiplying the upper case symbols by the DOS m/2π. There are two possible values of T c given by (u d < 0 for d-channel to be attractive) For the s-sector at T = 0, we get The L is the same as in Eq. 17. The mode equation 16, now reads In fact, P 22 = P 66 ≡ P . All other elements of [P ] are zero. Note that this equation is the same as the eigen value equation in Eq. 21. Thus the BS collective modes are given by P = -2l ± . These roots are exactly the same as the solutions to D = 0 in the main text. Here we provide the details of the straightforward algebra to calculate the Raman response for the 3 pocket model described in the main text. At T = 0 we have the following for the ground state of the system (same notation and parameters in the main text): where Λ is a pairing cut-off energy. For the choice of density of states made in the main text, we get the ground state to be ∆ h = -∆ e = ∆ > 0 and L e,h = ln 2Λ ∆ . To get to the B 1g sector, it is necessary to define the harmonics f n k . These belong to the following set: {±1, cos 2θ, cos 6θ, ...}. It is understood that '±1' is applicable only to off-Γ point pockets (electron pockets in this case). In this sense, the d-wave gap structure, in the harmonic expansion, takes the form h cos 2θ + ... ∆ e1 (θ) = ∆ (1) e * 1 + ∆ (2) e cos 2θ + ... ∆ e2 (θ) = -∆ (1) e * 1 + ∆ (2) e cos 2θ + ... Of course, for the choice of interactions in the main text, ∆ e1,e2 = 0. Switching to the notation in the main text ∆ (2) h → ∆ h and ∆ ν e ∆ e2 l, and where we understand that symmetry requirements require ∆ e1 = -∆ e2 = ∆ e . There are two solutions to the above problem: ∆ h = 0, ∆ e = 0 with the T c given by l = 1/u (hh) d and ∆ h = 0, ∆ e = 0 with the T c given by l = 2/u (e1e2) d . We thus expect two BS modes and we will now see how this is shown using the formula in the main text. We need the poles of the K matrix which involves [U ] and [ Π -Π]. We will have only two harmonics in the interaction, but assume that the γ k matrix requires 3 harmonics (whatever the third harmonic may be). Thus matrix [U ] in this problem is: where A 2×2 ≡ A1 2×2 . As a reminder, the space is nambu⊗band⊗harmonic. A note on how to get [U ] from pairing U k, k ′ : We ignore the Nambu space for now ([U ] ∝ 1 2×2 in that space). The other entries U nm ab (with dimension If a and b are the same bands, then we sum over all pairs of pockets to get U aa . For example, the d-wave pairing matrix for the electron pockets is The relevant eigenvector is e T = (1, -1)/ √ 2. The [U ] matrix is just 1 × 1 because the FS harmonic this problem is using is {1} form the set {1, cos2θ, ...}. The the [U pp ] component is e T U p e = u -v. Thus if there is only interpocket interaction it is -v. This explains the above structure for e ] 0 0 0 0 0 0 [P e ] 0 0 0 0 0 0 [P where [P a ] is a 2 × 2 matrix for the n th harmonic channel for band a and is of the form The coefficient matrix [c] is given by: Using the above expressions, it is easy to evaluate that Here The differencs between the hole and electron pocket expressions are due to the multiplicity of 2 for the electron pockets. It is easy to see for the case discussed in the main text that Π nn,h/e ij = Π ij . To see the result in the main text, we relabel c 1,e , c 2,h → c e , c h and (c 3,h ) 2 + (c 3,e ) 2 → (c o ) 2 . Here we wish to look at a case of BS modes in a two band model where the pockets are centered around the Γ-point. We will look at only the cos 2θ harmonic but include all inter and intra band interactions in the d-and s-channels. Then using the general formula for the Raman response, we get where For brevity, it will be useful to define Then, This leads to Π There are several things to note here: Thus with the exception of the lone Ṽd term in the numerator of Π RR , there is no sensitivity to s± vs s + + (which is decided by the sign of V s ). • If we set all the d-wave interactions equal to s-wave interactions, then we arrive at the "Leggett mode scenario". • The BS mode loses weight as it softens. In fact, for 1band case, the Raman response is zero at the softening of the BS mode (the s + id transition). Here we first switch off the interband d-wave component V d . The above expression for the Raman response reduces to Anlayzing Eq. 45 tells us • If V d = 0 (in the presence of U 1d,2d interactions), each pole corresponds to a potential BS mode (depends on the interaction). Each solution in T c will give a BS mode. • -Ũ2s + Ṽs ∆ 2 /∆ 1 = l 1 and -Ũ1s + Ṽs ∆ 1 /∆ 2 = l 1 > 0. So the mode frequencies are given by(Matsubara frequencies) Ω 2 1 = -2 Ũ2d -2l 1 = -2/U 2d -2l 1 . We see that the parameters we need to get the BS modes are T = T c for d-wave and T = 0 for s-wave. • No distinction can be drawn between s± vs s + +. We now introduce the interband d-wave interaction. Lets introduce the abbreviations: Lets re-write the response in the condensed notation: • The only term sensitive to s± vs s + + is in the spectral weight in the linear in Ṽd term. • Introducing V d causes damping of the mode between 2∆ 1 and 2∆ 2 . Thus there can be two true collective modes, or only one true collective mode and one resonance per attractive subdominant channel. • Introducing V d causes level repulsion between the modes. As it is increased, one mode is pushed towards zero and the other towards the 2∆ of the larger gap. • Increasing V d , one solution to T c -equation vanishes when V 2 d = U 1d U 2d . But before the second solution is lost, the leading solution softens. • Thus if U 1d = 0 = U 2d , then we seem to get 1 mode and possibly one resonance. • It is easy to see that a BS mode will soften when A 1 A 2 = 4 Ṽ 2 d . And the weight of the BS mode goes to zero. To see level repulsion: write 2F The two different signs indicate that the modes repel each other. In general, the lower mode softens and the upper mode goes towards the respective 2∆. Softening seems to happen before one of the solutions expire. The results of the RPA calculations presented in Figs. 