We measured dispersive spin excitations in SmFeAsO, parent compound of SmFeAsO 1-x F x one of the highest temperature superconductors of Fe pnictides (T C ≈55 K). We determine the magnetic excitations to disperse with a bandwidth energy of ca 170 meV at (0.47, 0) and (0.34, 0.34), which merges into the elastic line approaching the Γ point. Comparing our results with other parent Fe pnictides, we show the importance of structural parameters for the magnetic excitation spectrum, with small modifications of the tetrahedron angles and As height strongly affecting the magnetism. Since the discovery of high temperature superconductivity (SC) The effect of magnetism on the electronic structure has been measured by Angle Resolved Photo-Emission Spectroscopy (ARPES) through the detection of a kink in the band structure 1111 crystals are known for naturally cleaving polarly which makes the interpretation of surface sensitive spectroscopic data (such as ARPES) difficult because of the mixing of surface states with bulk states In this Letter, we report on the measurement of high energy spin excitations in SmFeAsO, line for every spectrum. The total fitting is depicted as red solid line. At low q // a fitting is unreliable, so no fitting is attempted. a parent compound of the 1111 series. We identify dispersing magnetic excitations ranging up to an energy of 170 meV at (0.47, 0 r.l.u.) which merge into the elastic line at the Γ point. Similar behavior is detected along the diagonal direction, where spin excitations disperse to 160-170 meV at (0.34, 0.34 r.l.u.) and decrease in energy moving towards the Γ point. The spin excitations bandwidth has a value similar to BaFe 2 As 2 (≈190 meV) but higher than NaFeAs (≈150 meV). We correlate the bandwidth of magnetic excitations with the structure of the FeAs 4 tetrahedron, in particular the height of As respect to the Fe layer (h F eAs ). The detection of high energy spin excitations in this parent compound confirms that magnetic excitations are universal within the parent Fe pnictides. Single crystals of SmFeAsO have been grown by the flux method, using NaAs, SmAs, The samples were mounted with the ab plane perpendicular to the scattering plane and the c axis lying in it (sketch in Fig. We measured Fe L 2,3 XAS spectra for the two crystallographic orientations at 15 • incidence angle and π polarization. The XAS along (0, 0)→(1, 1) (not displayed) is analogue to the (0, 0)→(1,0) direction. The spectrum is composed of a broad peak centered at 707 eV, typical of metallic systems containing Fe In Fig. On the low energy side of the RIXS spectra at (0.47, 0) and (0.34, 0.34), we observe a peak emerging from the background having an energy of 170 meV as illustrated in Fig. At low values of q // , we do not attempt any fitting procedure because of the high overlap between the elastic and the magnetic peak. However, we believe that an estimation of a rough energy range is still possible. In Fig. Figure In conclusion, we measured the spin excitations spectrum of SmFeAsO, parent compound of the 1111 series, bypassing the polar cleaving problem. Comparison with other parent Fe pnictides, measured in the same experimental configuration, show that the bandwidth of spin waves is slightly renormalized to lower values in SmFeAsO compared to BaFe 2 As 2 but higher than NaFeAs. Here, we have illustrated how the structure, in particular h F eAs , influences the magnetic properties of Fe pnictides possibly triggering most of the modifications. We claim that, if such structural modifications can affect the magnetism and bandwidth, then