We present two magnetometry-based methods suitable for assessing gradients in the critical temperature and hence the composition of multifilamentary superconductors: AC magnetometry and Scanning Hall Probe Microscopy. The novelty of the former technique lies in the iterative evaluation procedure we developed, whereas the strength of the latter is the direct visualization of the temperature dependent penetration of a magnetic field into the superconductor. Using the example of a PIT Nb3Sn wire, we demonstrate the application of these techniques, and compare the respective results to each other and to EDX measurements of the Sn distribution within the sub-elements of the wire. While superconducting materials are usually characterized in terms of their critical temperature T c , the reality is that technical superconductors often exhibit a T c distribution rather than a single value. In the following we will focus on Nb 3 Sn multifilamentary conductors, in particular PIT (powder-in-tube) wires, for two reasons. First, in this material the critical temperature exhibits a strong dependence on stoichiometry, and such wires are prone to compositional gradients due to their production method, which makes them an ideal model system. The production of PIT Nb 3 Sn wires starts with tubes made of Nb (or Nb alloyed with e.g. Ta), which are filled with a powder consisting mostly of NbSn 2 . These tubes are optionally sheathed with a diffusion barrier, and stacked inside a Cu matrix. Mechanical deformation of this billet eventually yields the final unreacted wire. The actual A-15 phase is obtained by applying a heat treatment, leading to a solid state diffusion reaction in which -after the formation of some intermediate phasestubular Nb 3 Sn sub-elements are formed. The wire examined in this work is a state-of-the-art Ta-alloyed PIT Nb 3 Sn wire produced by Bruker EAS. It contains 192 sub-elements, some of which are depicted in the cross-sectional SEM image shown in Figure The spatial variation of the Sn concentration within sub-elements of the wire was examined by means of Energy-Dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis using a Quanta 250 FEG Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Since this is an established technique for analyzing chemical compositions, we use the EDX data to assess the quality of the results obtained from the magnetometry-based techniques described in the following. This comparison is presented in section III. Due to the facts that sub-elements of PIT Nb 3 Sn wires have a higher Sn content on the inside, and that the critical temperature of Nb 3 Sn increases monotonically with β, the sub-elements are "magnetically transparent". That means with increasing temperature a magnetic field applied parallel to the wire will penetrate a sub-element from the barrier towards the core, thus allowing to probe the radial T c distribution. While the measurement principle is similar to that used by Hawes et al. quite some time ago (cf. Ref. 1), our evaluation procedure is much more elaborate. It is based on the following assumptions: • The sub-elements inside the sample are parallel tubes with circular cross sections. • All sub-elements are identical in terms of geometry and composition. • Each sub-element exhibits a monotonic radial Sn gradient with the highest value on the inside, but no azimuthal Sn content variation. If these assumptions are valid, it is sufficient to simulate a single sub-element by changing its radial T c distribution until the computed magnetic moment as a function of temperature matches the experimental data divided by the number of sub-elements. This is done by performing the following steps (a flowchart of the operations carried out by the evaluation software is provided as supplementary material): 1. Sub-divide the sub-element into N concentric shells of equal thickness, and assign an initial T c value to each shell. 2. Outer shell loop: increment shell index i, i.e. go through all shells from the outside of the subelement towards the inside. 3. Inner shell loop: increment shell index k ∈ [i+1, N ], i.e. go through all shells deeper inside than shell i. 4. Calculate the magnetic penetration depth of each shell assuming the temperature equals the T c value of shell i. from Meißner screening in the shells using the penetration depth calculated for each of them. 6. Adjust the T c value of shell i by finding the temperature at which the computed magnetic moment intersects the experimentally determined m(T ) curve. 7. Continue the iteration process (step 2 et seq.) until the changes are negligible. The initial T c values of the shells are chosen using the same procedure employed in step 6. This is accomplished using magnetic moments equally spaced between the value directly after the transition of the Nb barrier and the minimum non-zero absolute value, as indicated by the horizontal lines on the left-hand side of Figure The algorithm uses the two-fluid model expression for the temperature dependence of the magnetic penetration depth: We chose the literature value of 124 nm for the zerotemperature penetration depth λ(0). where λ( r) is calculated using Equation 1 with a local T c ( r). For the calculation of the local critical temperature as a function of the local Sn content β we use the following equation published by Godeke in Ref. 7: The values of the parameters in this equation given in the above cited publication were determined by fits to data obtained from binary Nb 3 Sn, whereas the wire we examined is Ta-doped for B c2 optimization. At this concentration the Ta can be expected to increase T c by ∼ 0.3 K, which is in good agreement with the maximum value of slightly more than 18.3 K appearing in our measurements. In the above equation the subscripts denote shell indices, which increase from the outside towards the inside, and d is the shell thickness. The current density j k in shell k follows from Maxwell's equation ∇ × H = j, and the shell current can be obtained by integrating over the cross section perpendicular to j, yielding where L is the sample length. With this shell current the total magnetic moment of the simulated sub-element can be expressed as a sum over the moments of the individual circular current loops, using the shell radii r k : This magnetic moment, which corresponds to Meißner screening by all shells with indices higher than i, is used to adjust the critical temperature of shell i. Intersections of the thus obtained magnetic moments with the experimental m(T ) curve are computed by means of linear interpolation between the data points to obtain new shell T c values. This process continues until the relative change of the magnetic moments between two consecutive iteration steps drops below a certain value. A criterion of 0.5% was found to be a reasonable choice, since smaller values do not have any discernible effect on the resulting T c distribution. The evolution of the computed magnetic moments corresponding to different values of i in Equation 6 is indicated by the horizontal lines in Figure Figure A reliable way to obtain the actual T c histogram (but not the radial T c distribution, since the method does not offer spatial resolution) is the use of calorimetry combined with a deconvolution procedure. At this point it is important to note that the length scale over which the respective experimental technique averages is the magnetic penetration depth λ in the case of magnetometry, but it is the coherence length ξ in calorimetry measurements. Hence, it stands to reason that the calorimetry method "sees" details inside of grains, which cannot be discerned by means of magnetometry. There is experimental evidence suggesting that Nb 3 Sn grains inside multifilamentary wires can exhibit a significant variation of the Sn content from the surface towards the center. To address this problem, we implemented the computation of an effective penetration depth which takes such variations into account (Equations ( Scanning a Hall probe across the surface of a superconductor allows creating a magnetic field map, from which information on the current flow inside the sample can be inferred, e.g. by means of inversion of the Biot-Savart law. Our self-built Scanning Hall Probe Microscopy (SHPM) system offers a spatial resolution of ∼ 1 μm, and a scan range of 3 × 3 mm 2 . It is operated inside a helium flow cryostat, thus enabling measurements covering a wide temperature range. A detailed description of the set-up as well as examples of its performance can be found in Ref. 17. In this work we used our SHPM system to directly visualize the penetration of a magnetic field into the subelements of a wire sample in the Meißner state. For that purpose a slice with a thickness of approx. 10 μm was cut from the sample previously examined using the AC magnetometry method. The surface facing the Hall probe was polished, then the disk was fixed on the sample platform of the SHPM system using vacuum grease, and cooled down in a flow cryostat. After the temperature had stabilized at the desired value, a magnetic field of 1 mT (or 0.3 mT in the case of the highest measurement temperature) was applied parallel to the sub-elements. A scan covering an area of 180 × 180 μm 2 was then taken as close to the surface as possible (∼ 1 μm distance). This procedure was performed over the same region of the wire at the temperature values 6 K, 10 K, 16 K, 17 K, and 17.8 K. The scan taken at a temperature of 17 K is depicted in Figure While SHPM is a lot more laborious and timeconsuming than the AC magnetometry method, it offers the advantage of being free from assumptions regarding the geometry of the superconductor. Structures with the highest T c on the outside, or even with non-monotonic T c distributions, can in principle also be assessed with SHPM by field-cooling the sample in an applied field greater than H c1 (T ), and measuring the remanent field after switching off the applied field. Another benefit lies in the ability to examine individual sub-elements, thus facilitating the investigation of differences between them (e.g. comparing the sub-elements close to the wire center to the ones near the surface, which are often deformed in the process of wire production). As mentioned in the beginning of section II A, we performed EDX examinations on the wire sample in order to have a reference to which the magnetometry-based methods described in this work can be compared. To make this comparison possible, the radial T c distribution obtained from the AC magnetometry method (intragranular Sn gradient of 1.5% assumed, as suggested by a comparison with calorimetry data) was converted to a Sn distribution using the inverse function of Equation Figure In Ref. 18 Tarantini et al. report the presence of disconnected grains with critical temperature values extending up to 18.7 K in a PIT wire very similar to the one studied in this work. The AC magnetometry method is not sensitive to grains which do not form a percolative path around the sub-element core (a "shell", as we named it in section II A), hence the absence of such high T c values in Figure In this paper we described two magnetometry-based methods for assessing composition gradients in multifilamentary superconductors, and demonstrated their suitability for examining PIT Nb 3 Sn wires by comparing the results with EDX measurements of the Sn distribution within the sub-elements. Although the experimental pro-cedure used in the AC magnetometry method is not new, our approach is novel in terms of the iterative evaluation procedure we developed. It is a relatively quick and easy technique for assessing T c gradients, which appears to produce reliable results. To our knowledge the other method we discussed, Scanning Hall Probe Microscopy, had hitherto not been used to assess the homogeneity of multifilamentary wires. While it is a lot slower and more challenging than the use of a SQUID magnetometer, it offers the direct visualization of magnetic screening, without the need for assumptions regarding the geometry. PIT wires are simple in that their sub-elements exhibit a monotonic radial Sn gradient, whereas Internal Tin wires can develop two Sn concentration gradients: a global gradient stemming from the outward diffusion of the Sn core, and a local gradient arising from Sn diffusion into the individual filaments inside the bundles. The intra-granular Sn gradient we inferred from the discrepancy between the histograms obtained from the AC magnetometry method and from calorimetry should -although backed up by literature -be experimentally confirmed. We plan to investigate the Sn distribution within individual grains of the wire discussed in this work by means of EDX measurements using a Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope. In addition to that, examinations involving different wire types, and an investigation of the effects of A-15 inhomogeneities on the critical current density are envisaged. A better understanding of the diffusion and phase formation processes in Nb 3 Sn can probably lead to advances in wire performance. We are confident that the characterization techniques discussed in this work can contribute to this development.