We investigate thermoelectric properties of a ferromagnet-superconductor hybrid structure with Rashba spin-orbit interaction and delta function potential barrier at the interfacial layer. The exponential rise of thermal conductance with temperature manifests a cross-over temperature scale separating two opposite behaviors of it with the change of polarization in the ferromagnet whereas the inclusion of interfacial Rashba spin-orbit field results in a non-monotonic behavior of it with the strength of Rashba field. We employ scattering matrix approach to determine the amplitudes of all the scattering processes possible at the interface to explain the thermoelectric properties of the device. We examine Seebeck effect and show that higher thermopower can be achieved when the polarization of the ferromagnet tends towards the half-metallic limit. It can be enhanced even for lower polarization in presence of the finite potential barrier. In presence of interfacial Rashba spinorbit interaction, Seebeck coefficient rises with the increase of barrier strength and polarization at weak or moderate interfacial Rashba field. From the application perspective, we compute the figure of merit and show that zT ∼ 4 -5 with higher polarization of the ferromagnet both in absence and presence of weak or moderate Rashba spin-orbit interaction along with the scalar potential barrier. In comparison to the metallic and semiconducting material, the thermoelectric effects are strongly suppressed in superconductors Recently, superconducting hybrid structures, especially ferromagnet-superconductor (FS) junctions, have attracted a lot of research interests due to the dramatic boosts of thermoelectric effects in them In order to investigate the thermoelectric properties of a material or hybrid junction it is customary to derive the thermal conductance (TC) or thermal current gen-erated by the temperature gradient The prospects of FS junction, as far as thermoelectric property is concerned, depend on the new ingredients to manipulate the spin dependent particle-hole symmetry. The latter has been implemented using external magnetic field Study of interfacial spin-orbit coupling effect on transport phenomena has become a topic of intense research interest during past few decades due to the spin manipulation The aspect of thermal transport in FS hybrid junction incorporating the role of interfacial spin-orbit interaction has not been studied in detail so far in case of ordinary ferromagnet. A few groups have performed their research in this direction in graphene The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe our model and the theoretical background. We discuss our results for thermal conductance, thermopower and Figure of merit in Sec. III. Finally, we summarise and conclude in Sec. IV. We consider a model comprising of a ferromagnet F (z > 0) and a s-wave superconductor S (z < 0) hybrid structure as shown in Fig. where the single-particle Hamiltonian for the electron is given by, Similarly, for hole the Hamiltonian reads Ĥh = σ2 Ĥ * e σ2 . The excitations of the electrons with effective mass m are measured with respect to the chemical potential μ. We set m = 1 and μ = 0 throughout our calculation. The interfacial barrier is described by the Hamiltonian Ĥint = (V d σ0 + ω • σ)δ(z) Depending on the incoming electron energy there are four scattering processes possible at the FS interface. For electron with a particular spin, say σ, there can be normal reflection (NR), Andreev reflection (AR), tunneling as electron like (TE) or hole like (TH) quasi-particles. In addition to these phenomena there may be spin-flip scattering processes due to the interfacial spin-orbit field. Accordingly, we can have spin-flip counter parts of the above-mentioned four scattering processes namely, spinflip NR (SNR), spin-flip AR (SAR), spin-flip TE (STE) and spin-flip TH (STH) The solution of the BdG equations for the F-region, describing electrons and holes with spin σ, can be written as e ik e σ z ψ e σ + r e σ,σ e -ik e σ z ψ e σ + r h σ,σ e ik e σ z ψ h σ +r e σ,-σ e -ik e -σ z ψ e -σ + r e σ,-σ e ik e -σ z ψ e where is the electron (hole)-like wave vector. σ may be ±1 depending on whether the spin is parallel or anti-parallel to the vector m. k F and k || are the Fermi and inplane wave vector, respectively. The spinors for the electron-like and hole-like quasi-particles are respectively Here, r e(h) σ,σ corresponds to the amplitude of normal (Andreev) reflection from the FS interface. σ and σ are the spin states for the incident and reflected electron or hole depending on the spin-conserving or spin-flipping process. Similarly, inside the superconducting region the solutions for the electron-like and hole like quasiparticles read 32 where the z-components of the quasi-particle wave vectors can be expressed as, q e(h) We set the Fermi wave vector in both the F and S-regions to be the same i.e., q F = k F 32 . Note that, we have written only the z component of the wave functions. In the x -y plane the wave vector is conserved giving rise to the planar wave function as, Ψ σ (r) = Ψ σ (z)e i(kxx+kyy) where k x and k y are the components of k || . Here, t e(h) σ,σ denotes the amplitude of spin-conserving or spin-flipping transmitted electron (hole) like quasi-particles in the S region. We obtain the reflection and transmission amplitudes using the boundary conditions as, where ζ = diag(1, 1, -1, -1). We describe our results in terms of the dimensionless barrier strength Z = V d m 2 k F , RSOI strength λ rso = 2mλ In presence of thermal gradient across the junction with no applied bias voltage, the electronic contribution to the thermal conductance, (see appendix A for details), in terms of the scattering processes is given by where the NR and AR probability can be defined as R -σ | 2 ] satisfying the current conservation. Here, the integration with respect to k || is performed over the entire plane x -y of the interface. It is convenient to define a dimensionless wave vector k = k || /k F and compute the integration in terms of it while calculating the TC. The Boltzmann constant is denoted by k B . T is scaled by T c , which is the critical temperature of the conventional singlet superconductor. Within the linear response regime, we obtain the expression for the thermopower or SkC in unit of k B /e as follows where the thermoelectric coefficient α and the electrical conductance G, in unit of G 0 (e 2 /h), are represented as, and Here α is expressed in unit of G 0 k B T /e (≡ k B eT /h). In terms of SkC, electrical conductance and thermal conductance, the FOM zT is given by, where After applying the temperature difference between the two sides of the junction we obtain thermal current which essentially develops a voltage difference between them following the Peltier effect. This causes a correction to the thermal conductance as well. We consider such correction while defining the FOM of the system as every material manifesting Seebeck effect must exhibit the Peltier effect In this section we present our numerical results for TC , SkC and FOM of the ferromagnet-superconductor junction, both in absence and presence of interfacial RSOI, in three different sub-sections. We discuss our results in terms of the scattering processes that occur at the interface of the FS hybrid structure and various parameters of the system. In this subsection we discuss the effect of polarization and RSOI, both in absence and presence of finite scalar barrier, on the behavior of the TC throughout the temperature regime from low to high. In Fig. However, the rate of increase of κ completely depends on the polarization P of the ferromagnet. Gradual tunability of the polarization P does not ensure any monotonic behavior of the TC. It depends on both the temper- ature and barrier strength. To illustrate this, we discuss the scenarios for different values of Z one by one. When Z = 0, the rate of increase of κ is very slow with the increase of polarization for a particular value of T /T c (see Fig. Therefore, the effect of polarization of the ferromagnet cannot be uniquely determined. The behavior of TC with polarization changes depending on the temperature and the barrier strength as well. So far, we have not discussed about the orientation of the magnetization. We present all of our results for θ = π/2 and φ = 0. Very recently, Högl et al. have revealed the fact that electronic conductance shows an anisotropy with the rotation of the magnetization m 32 . However, in case of thermal transport, contributions from all the energy values are taken into consideration. There-fore, with the change of m there is no appreciable change in TC as all contributions due to different orientations of m are averaged out during integration over the energy (see Eq.( Here we incorporate RSOI at the interface of the FS junction. The behavior of the TC with the polarization and temperature in presence of RSOI remain qualitatively similar to that in absence of RSOI. We refer to Appendix B for more details manifesting this qualitative similarity. On the other hand, the magnitude of κ may increase or decrease in presence of RSOI. It completely depends on the strength of RSOI as well as the strength of the barrier at the interface. For illustration, we present in Fig. Comparing magnitudes of κ as shown in four figures of Fig. If we further increase Z, κ maintains its non-monotonic behavior with the rise of RSOI strength. However, the maxima moves towards the higher value of λ rso . To illus-trate this, we refer to Fig. Note that, we present our results of κ as a function of λ rso for T /T c = 0.7. If we consider the low temperature regime, particularly lower than the cross-over value T x , we expect similar non-monotonic behavior of the TC with RSOI strength. There will be only one change in the nature of κ. Following the discussion in the previous subsection, at a particular RSOI strength κ will rise with the increase of P when temperature is lower than the cross-over value. However, for very low temperature such as T /T c ∼ 0.1, the amount of change in magnitude of the TC is vanishingly small. In this sub-section we study the phenomenon of Seebeck effect which is a direct measure of the local thermoelectric response. The behavior of SkC as a function of temperature and RSOI for different values of P and Z are presented. All the results, we have presented here, correspond to the particular orientation of the magneti- zation vector as mentioned in the previous sub-section. We divide our discussion in two different parts in order to highlight the effect of polarization of the ferromagnet and the effect of the interfacial RSOI on thermopower as follows. Effect of polarization and barrier in absence of RSOI In Fig. Note that, our results does not imply that the SkC approaches unity in the limit of zero RSOI and zero polarization. All these values are as small as in agreement with those found in the existing literature. We present a quantitative comparison in Appendix C. In this sub-subsection, we investigate what happens to SkC when RSOI is taken into account at the interfacial layer, both in absence and presence of finite scalar barrier at the junction. To understand the role of RSOI, we illustrate the behavior of SkC (S) with respect to RSOI (λ rso ) for a fixed value of temperature T /T c = 0.5 in Fig. In order to understand the efficiency of our FS junction as a thermoelectric material, we explore the behavior of FOM both in presence and absence of RSOI at the interface. We discuss the role of polarization when we vary the FOM with temperature in absence of RSOI at the junction i.e., λ rso = 0 as follows. In Fig. In presence of finite interfacial RSOI, the behavior of zT with temperature is quite similar to that in absence of Rashba. A discussion on this issue can be found in Appendix B. However, the magnitude of zT depends on the strength of RSOI both in absence and presence of Z. We demonstrate the behavior of zT as a function of λ rso in Fig. In absence of any barrier (Z = 0) and for low polarization of the ferromagnet, zT rises with the enhancement of λ rso almost linearly as shown in Fig. The main result of our article is that we have obtained large values of the thermoelectric coefficient in presence of a scalar barrier and/or Rashba spin-orbit interaction (RSOI) at the interface when polarization of the ferromagnet tends towards the half-metallic limit. Note that, the maximum value of zT appears at a temperature scale which is well below the critical temperature of the superconductor. The physical reason behind such large values of the thermoelectric coefficients can be attributed to the interplay between scalar barrier strength, RSOI strength at the interface, polarization of the ferromagnet and quasiparticle tunneling, either spin-conserving or spinflipping, through the interfacial barrier. Enhancement of thermoelectric coefficient due to the quasiparticle tunneling has been already established in literature but they involve either spin-split superconductor or spin-active interface 2 corresponding to spin-dependent phase-shift Therefore, we can say that FOM can be enhanced by increasing any one of the parameters, i.e., polarization, barrier strength and temperature keeping the other two fixed both in absence and presence of RSOI at the interfacial layer of our FS junction. Note that, all these phenomena are true for weak or moderate Rashba interaction. To summarise, in this article, we have explored thermoelectric properties of a ferromagnet-superconductor junction driven by a thermal gradient. At the interfacial layer, we have incorporated RSOI along with scalar potential barrier. We have analyzed our results for the thermal conductance, Seebeck coefficient and figure of merit as a function of temperature, polarization of the ferromagnet and RSOI strength. Thermal conductance κ exhibits exponential rise with temperature following the fully developed gap feature. We have observed a cross-over temperature T x separating the two different regimes corresponding to opposite behaviors of κ with the polarization of the ferromagnet. Below the cross-over temperature, κ increases with the increase of polarization, whereas for all the temperatures above the crossover temperature it decreases with polarization. This phenomenon is true both in absence and presence of barrier strength. With the increase of barrier strength the cross-over temperature moves towards the higher temperature value. Inclusion of interfacial Rashba spin-orbit field causes reduction of thermal conductance due to the appearance of spin-flipped SAR process, in absence of any barrier. On the other hand, interfacial RSOI can enhance the TC in presence of finite barrier due to the interplay of both of them. We have obtained a non-monotonic behavior of the thermal conductance κ as we vary the interfacial RSOI strength. The maxima of κ moves towards the critical temperature T c with the enhancement of barrier strength Z. Throughout the manuscript we have considered only the electronic contribution to the TC neglecting the contribution due to phonons which is a valid approximation for very small temperature gradient. We have investigated the Seebeck coefficient in absence and presence of interfacial RSOI and scalar barrier. It can be enhanced by using ferromagnet with higher polarization and by increasing the temperature (below the critical temperature T c ) as well. A non-linear behavior of the SkC with the temperature can be obtained in presence of barrier potential at the junction. Whereas presence of RSOI can reduce or enhance it depending on the barrier strength. For low barrier strength, SkC increases with the increase of polarization. However, an exactly opposite behavior is observed when barrier strength be-comes high. To quantify thermoelectric power efficiency of the FS structure, we compute the figure of merit zT both in presence and absence of RSOI and scalar potential barrier. We show that the FOM can be enhanced to more than 1 by setting the polarization of the ferromagnet very high (towards the half-metallic limit). It can further be enhanced by considering finite potential barrier at the junction. In particular, the higher the barrier strength the higher the FOM turns out to be while inclusion of RSOI can reduce it for low barrier strength. For higher barrier strength, value of zT can again be more than 1 (zT ∼ 4 -5) depending on the polarization of the ferromagnet. These phenomena are valid for weak Rashba spin-orbit interaction. Presence of strong RSOI can highly reduce it irrespective of the strength of the barrier potential. As far as the practical realization of our model is concerned, it may be possible to fabricate such a FS hybrid structure by growing thin layers of a spin singlet superconductor (e.g. Nb material) and a ferromagnetic insulator (EuO) In conclusion, we have shown the possibility of obtaining enhanced thermoelectric properties of a FS hybrid structure in presence of finite barrier and interfacial RSOI. In the context of thermal transport, the idea of exploring interfacial RSOI in FS junction is unique. The enhancement of the thermoelectric properties caused by the interplay of RSOI along with potential barrier at the interface of the heterostructure and the polarization of the ferromagnet elevate the potential of the FS structure as a thermoelectric. The proposed set-up, within the experimentally achievable parameter regime, may be utilized in thermoelectric devices. the normalization constant is given by I 0 = N (0)ev F A. Similarly, if we consider only the bias instead of the temperature gradient we obtain the expression for current as, From Eq.(A6) we obtain the mathematical expression of electrical conductance or the well-known BTK formula for the electrical conductance After performing the wave vector integration we can get back Eq.( On the other hand, thermal conductance can be defined as the heat current flowing across the junction per unit temperature difference and given by In our case additional summation for the electron spin as well as an integration over the wave vector parallel to the interface have to be taken into account following Ref. 32 as written in the expression of normalized thermal conductance κ in Eq.( Following the route of electrical and thermal conductance, we perform the summation over spin and integration over wave vector to obtain the exact form of the thermoelectric coefficient as provided in Eq.( In open circuit condition (I = 0), the induced voltage per unit temperature gradient or the so-called Seebeck coefficient can be found in terms of L 12 and L 22 It is measured in the unit of k B /e (V/K). Note that, we can obtain Eq. ( In Fig. The behavior of FOM with temperature in presence of RSOI (λ rso = 2) is shown in Fig. 