We study theoretically the dynamics of a Shiba state forming around precessing classical spin in an s-wave superconductor. Utilizing a rotating wave description for the precessing magnetic impurity, we find the resulting Shiba bound state quasi-energy and the spatial extension of the Shiba wavefunction. We show that such a precession pertains to dc charge and spin currents flowing through a normal STM tip tunnel coupled to the superconductor in the vicinity of the impurity. We calculate these currents and find that they strongly depend on the magnetic impurity precession frequency, precession angle, and on the position of the Shiba energy level in the superconducting gap. The resulting charge current is found to be proportional to the difference between the electron and hole wavefunctions of the Shiba state, being a direct measure for such an asymmetry. By dynamically driving the impurity one can infer the spin dependence of the Shiba states in the absence of a spin-polarized STM tip. Magnetic impurities inserted in s-wave superconductors can bind in-gap, spin-polarized electrons, in the socalled localized Shiba states 1 . While these states have been predicted more than four decades ago There have been a lot of theoretical Such studies did not address the out-of-equilibrium physics associated with the dynamics of the magnetic impurities. Magnetization dynamics is at the core of various effects in ferromagnets, such as, for example, the spin pumping and the spin-transfer torque, which allows to create and transfer the spin degree of freedom between different systems. It allows to visualize both the equilib-rium, but more importantly, the out-of-equilibrium properties of a magnetic system. It is thus of crucial importance to analyze the interplay of magnetization dynamics and the Shiba physics in superconductors. In this paper we study the magnetization dynamics of a single magnetic impurity in an s-wave superconductor, the buiding block of a Shiba impurity band. The precession of the impurity gives rise to a dynamical Shiba state that drives both an electrical and spin current through an STM tip in its proximity. We calculate these currents, and show that such a method allows to spectroscopically address the Shiba impurity and its dynamics. The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II we introduce the setup and the model Hamiltonian of the dynamical Shiba states, in the presence of the STM tip. In Sec. III we develop the rotating wave approximation (RWA) of the model and describe the resulting dynamical Shiba states. Here we also investigate the (quasi-)energy spectrum and the time-dependent wave functions. In Sec. IV we switch on the coupling to the STM tip and analyze the charge and spin transport pertaining to the precessing magnetic moment through a normal STM tip. We analyze both the closed circuit (finite current, no voltage), as well as the open circuit (zero current, finite voltage) circuits. Finally, in Sec. V we end up with conclusions and some outlook on possible extensions for a chain of Shiba impurities. In this section we introduce the system and the model Hamiltonian. In Fig. The Hamiltonian describing the superconductor in the presence of the magnetic impurity, the STM tip, and its coupling to the superconductor, respectively, is given as: where , with μ S(T ) the chemical potential in the superconductor (STM tip), ∆ s is the s-wave pairing in the superconductor, J is the exchange coupling between the classical spin S(t) = S 0 (sin θ sin 2bt, sin θ cos 2bt, cos θ) and the electrons in the superconductor, with S 0 and θ being the magnitude and the angle between the z axis and the classical spin S, respectively. Also, T is the hoping strength between the STM tip and the superconductor, 2b the magnetic impurity precession frequency, and ψ Sσ (r) [ψ T σ (r)] and ψ † Sσ (r) [ψ † T σ (r)] are the annihilation (creation) operators for electrons at position r and spin σ in the superconductor and the STM tip, respectively. Note that τ = (τ x , τ y , τ z ) and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are Pauli matrices that act in the Nambu and spin space, respectively. We mention that in general the magnetic impurity generates also a scalar potential, besides the magnetic exchange coupling. For the time being and for the clarity of the description, we disregard such a contribution, and we will discuss its effects (which turn out to be crucial) later in the section about the electronic transport. In the following, we analyze the above Hamiltonian in the absence of the coupling to the STM tip, thus only considering the precessing impurity. The solution for the static Shiba impurity is well known. There are many works that describe the static Shiba impurity state, both their spectrum and wave function in various dimensions For that, we perform the following time-dependent transformation of the total Hamiltonian: where we choose U (t) = exp (iσ z bt). This transformation pertains to the following changes in Eq. ( where j = S, T and Φ ∈ [0, 2π), while all the other terms stay the same under this transformation. In a nutshell, in the rotating frame the precessing spin becomes static and points along a direction defined in Eq. ( Next we solve the spectrum of the Shiba state in the rotating frame. A natural way to proceed is by calculating the retarded Green's function of the superconductor in the presence of the impurity, and extracting the Shiba energy from its poles 1 . This can be found from the Dyson equation: where G 0 (ω) is the bare Green function of the superconductor for frequency ω and at r = 0 in the presence of the fictitious magnetic field b, and which reads: Here, ν 0 is the density of states of the superconductor in the normal state at the Fermi level. Note that in the limit b → 0 we recover the usual Green's function of a superconductor at position r = 0 1 . While we can now invert Eq. ( which highlights the non-linear behavior of the Shiba energy as a function of the driving b. This becomes exactly E S (0) for α → 1, which implies no dependence on the driving frequency. Moreover, we can infer the full θ dependence of the Shiba energy for the case α = 1: (8) Instead of utilizing exact solutions (simple in a few cases), it is instructive to extract approximate Shiba energies valid in the limit δ 1, and α ≈ 1 (the so-called deep Shiba limit). Then, as showed in Appendix A, the Shiba states Green's function becomes: with E S (b, θ) S + b cos θ being the Shiba energy in the rotating frame. The correction to the energy of the Shiba state is of the order δ 2 , while the neglected entries of the matrix G S (ω) are of the order δ sin θ/α, and they also lead to more complicated spin-mixing terms. In Appendix A we present the leading order corrections to the matrix G S (ω). Here u and v are the electron and hole components, respectively, of the Shiba state wave function, and σ = S•σ/|S|, i.e. the spin projection along the magnetic impurity. In the case of purely magnetic scattering u = v = 1/ √ 2, but in general u = v if scalar scattering is taken into account Physically, the above solution corresponds to a magnetic impurity in a superconductor and subject to an external magnetic field B = b cos θ along the magnetic impurity direction. In the δ 1 limit the transverse component of the fictitious magnetic field is suppressed and can be neglected, much in the same way such components are ineffective in a usual ferromagnet For completeness, we also discuss briefly the positiondependent wave-function of the driven Shiba state and, for simplicity, we focus on a two-dimensional superconductor. At r = 0, this is given by φS (0) = (u, 0, v, 0) T . From this, we can readily find the r dependence of the Shiba wave-functions as follows where with: Above, K 0 (x) is the Bessel function of second kind, and Detailed derivation of these expressions is left for the Appendix B. These expressions allow to extract the full wave function of the dynamical Shiba states, or to perform the small expansion b in order to extract approximate expressions for the electron and hole components at a distance r from the impurity, which in turn would allow, as described in the next section, to calculate currents detected at that distance. In the previous section we calculated the spectral properties of the dynamical Shiba state forming around a precessing magnetic moment. Here we address the electronic transport between the dynamically formed Shiba state and an STM tip brought into its proximity. We will derive both the charge and spin currents flowing through the STM tip due to the magnetic precession at r = 0. The generalization r = 0 is straightforward by utilizing the results in the previous section. We will consider two cases: the closed and open circuits, which in turn will give a finite current in the absence of a voltage and a finite voltage in the absence of a current, respectively. The charge and spin current operators are defined as follows: where we utilized the following substitutions: N T = k,σ c † T kσ c T kσ for the number of electrons, and for the total number of spins in the STM tip, respectively. In order to calculate the average current, we utilize the non-equilibrium Green's function technique, and for details on the calculations we refer the reader to the Refs. [37] and [40]. The expression for the charge current reads: while the spin current I s (t) is found by substituting the first τ z with σ. Above, Ĝ< ij (t , t) = i ψ † i (t)ψ j (t ) , is the lesser Green's function in the Nambu ⊗ spin space (4 × 4 matrix), with i, j = S, T . Note that (ψ i ) T ≡ (ψ † i↑ , ψ † i↓ , ψ i↓ , -ψ i↑ ). We are thus left with the task of calculating the Ĝ< ij (t , t) at t = t . While this is a timedependent problem, by switching to the rotating frame, we can proceed to calculate the transport quantities as for the time-independent case. In the frequency domain, the following relations hold where G <,r,a S (ω) g <,r,a T (ω) are the lesser, retarded and advanced Green's functions of the superconductor (STM tip). Using these relations, and rearranging the terms accordingly, we obtain the following well-known expression for the current Thus, we need only the lesser and greater Green's functions of the superconductor and the tip respectively. Since we are interested in the transport through the ingap Shiba state, we will utilize only the Green's function of this state, and not the whole superconductor. Moreover, for the transport to occur, we need to account for various processes that give rise to a finite lifetime of the Shiba state, such as photon, or phonon-assisted relaxation (or excitation) into the gaped continuum of states, and due to the coupling to the tip where Γ tot = Γ e + Γ h + Γ ph , with Γ e(h) = 2πν 0 T 2 u 2 (v 2 ), Γ ph is the intrinsic width of the Shiba state (due to photons or phonons, for example), n τ σ (ω) = n F (ω-τ V -σb), with τ, σ = ±1 are the Fermi distribution functions in the STM tip for electrons (τ = 1) and holes (τ = -1) with a given spin σ, while V is the applied, or the induced voltage in the combined system. Moreover, We mention that G > S (ω) can be found simply by substituting all Fermi functions by n F → -1 + n F in the above expression. Note that the spin direction quantization is different in the two systems: the Shiba state is defined along the magnetization m(0), while the fictitious biases in the STM tip are defined along the z direction. The α = a, r, >, < Green's function of the STM tip in the Shiba spin basis can be written as being the Green's function of the STM tip in the z spin basis, with gα T,σ (ω) the components of the Green's function of a bare Fermi gas at position r = 0. Putting everything together in the expression for the current, we obtain I c = I s c + I a c , with which describe the single particle and the Andreev reflection induced charge currents respectively. In Fig. In the closed circuit instead, the voltage is zero, but there is a dc charge current flowing. In this case, n τ σ ≡ n σ , which implies I a c ≡ 0 and I s c ∝ (Γ e -Γ h ). This means that for a current to flow in the presence of magnetization precession the electron and hole components of the Shiba state must be different. Such a difference arises naturally if one assumes, besides the spin scattering, the Only the I s c contributes to the current. The current is a measure of the presence of the Shiba impurity and highlights its position. For the plots we assumed S = 0.1, 0.1, 0.3, and 0.4. Inset: the current as a function of θ for b = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3. All energies are expressed in terms of the superconducting gap ∆s, and I0 = (e/ ∆s)Γ ph (Γe + Γ h ), while we assumed (Γe -Γ h )/(Γe + Γ h ) = 0.6 presence of a scalar potential too, as mentioned already in the previous section. This is in contrast to the usual voltage probed Shiba state, where such an asymmetry is not required, and the current is proportional to u 2 (v 2 ) for voltages V = s (V =s ). In Fig. In the case of a static impurity that is voltage probed by an STM tip, one defines the differential conductance of the system G = dI/dV . Similarly, in the present case one can define a differential magnetoconductance as G b (b, θ) = dI c /db, which at zero temperature acquires the following simple form: the induced voltage in the circuit, which is depicted in the main plot in Fig. We can also evaluate the spin current pertaining to the magnetization dynamics, and we only assume the z component. which vanishes for vanishing θ or b. The efficiency of spin injection from the precessing magnetic impurity can be quantified by a spin magnetoconductivity, G s (b, θ) = dI z /db, which differs from the charge counterpart only in the change Γ e -Γ h → Γ e + Γ h . We thus refer to the previous results on the charge current with the aformentioned substitution. Note that for the spin current to flow, there is no need for particle-hole asymmetry in the Shiba wave function, in contrast to charge. In this paper we studied the dynamics of a magnetic impurity in an s-wave superconductor, and its manifestations in the tunneling current through an STM tip. We found that in leading order in the precession frequency b (as compared to the bulk superconductor gap ∆ s ), the main effect of the precession is to give rise to a shift of the Shiba levels by b cos θ, while the bulk gap is reduced We found that such a precession manifests itself in an current flow that can be detected by an STM tip. Utilizing the non-equilibrium Green's function technique, we calculated both the charge and spin currents flowing into the STM tip, and found that it gives a direct measure of the presence of the Shiba state. Moreover, in analogy with the voltage biased systems, where one defines the differential conductance as measure of the presence of in-gap Shiba states, here we defined a differential magnetoconductance, G b = dI c /db, that reflects the resolution of the magnetization precession into a voltage bias. We found that this quantity reveals the Shiba state level, and that it vanishes for frequencies much larger than the superconducting gap. As opposed to static STM measurement, where the system is voltage biased, the asymmetry between the electron and hole components of the Shiba state is crucial: no current is flowing for a perfectly symmetric particle-hole Shiba state and this could be utilized to extract such an asymmetry, as well as to reveal the relevance of the spin degree of freedom. Our study was conducted assuming the precession of the magnetic moment was imposed externally by the magnetic fields of a nearby microwave cavity. An extension of our theory could be done by accounting for the dynamics of the magnetic moment in a self-consistent manner, for example by utilizing the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation in the presence of the superconducting condensate. That, one hand, will describe the combined dynamics, while on the other hand, would allow one to extract the influence of the Shiba state on the magnetization dynamics itself, which could be probed by the nearby microwave cavity. Finally, an extension of the time-dependent problem to a chain of Shiba impurities should allow to study the interplay between the magnetization dynamics and the emergence of in-gap topological superconductivity, or the so-called Shiba bands while G > S (ω) is found by simply substituting all the Fermi-Dirac functions above as follows: n F → -1 + n F (ω). By utilizing the above expression, along with that for g α T (ω), and inserting these into Eqs. (19), we can easily obtain the expression for the charge current showed in Eq. (24).