Computing the electric eddy currents in non-linear materials, such as superconductors, is not straightforward. The design of superconducting magnets and power applications needs electromagnetic computer modeling, being in many cases a three-dimensional (3D) problem. Since 3D problems require high computing times, novel time-efficient modeling tools are highly desirable. This article presents a novel computing modeling method based on a variational principle. The self-programmed implementation uses an original minimization method, which divides the sample into sectors. This speeds-up the computations with no loss of accuracy, while enabling efficient parallelization. This method could also be applied to model transients in linear materials or networks of non-linear electrical elements. As example, we analyze the magnetization currents of a cubic superconductor. This 3D situation remains unknown, in spite of the fact that it is often met in material characterization and bulk applications. We found that below the penetration field and in part of the sample, current flux lines are not rectangular and significantly bend in the direction parallel to the applied field. In conclusion, the presented numerical method is able to time-efficiently solve fully 3D situations without loss of accuracy. Electrical eddy currents appear in conductors under varying magnetic fields, including the case of wires under alternating currents (AC) of sufficiently high frequency. In certain materials, such as superconductors, the resistivity is highly non-linear, an hence computing their response is not straightforward already in the quasi-magnetostatic situation Superconductors have been applied to magnet technology for decades and are promising for power applications, such as cables, fault-current limiters, transformers, generators, motors and levitations systems. An important issue of the design of these applications is the electromagnetic response under slowly changing magnetic fields or currents, usually for frequencies below 1 kHz. This design can only be done with computer modeling. In many cases, the situation of study is essentially a three dimensional (3D) problem Regarding material science, the magnetization currents in many situations is 3D, such as bulks shaped as rectanglar prisms, multi-granular samples, and multi-filamentary tapes with a conducting matrix. 3D modelling may also enlighten macroscopic flux cutting effects in the force-free configuration There are several published 3D modelling results for the finite-element method (FEM) in the following formulations: H [4-10], A -φ The DoF can be greatly reduced by methods taking the current density as state variable, since only the sample volume is taken into account. For mathematically 2D problems, this has been done by the variational method in J formulation A possible variational method in 3D is very promising. The variational method in the Minimum Electro-Magnetic Entropy Production (MEMEP) implementation has been shown to be highly time efficient, presenting computing times scaling with only power 2 of the number of elements and being able to solve problems in 2D with up to half million DoF in the superconductor Independently on the numerical method, the magnetization currents in rectangular prisms of finite thickness remains mostly unknown, being a cube a particular case of this shape. Infinite rectangular prisms in the CSM were analytically solved in This article presents a time-efficient 3D modeling tool based on a variational principle. This modeling tool for non-linear conductors is also efficient to compute transients in linear materials. It could also be easily adapted to modeling the response of networks of many non-linear electrical elements, such as diodes. As a computation example, we analyze a cubic bulk superconductor. We present the model in section 2. Section 2.2 details the deduction of a 3D variational principle in the T formulation, which avoids spending DoF in the air and does not require solving the scalar potential or the charge density. The formalism also allows transport currents, in addition to the applied magnetic field. Although here we take an isotropic E(J) relation into account, the method also allows anisotropic E(J) relations, such as that for the force-free situation Part of the results of this work have been presented in international conferences in 2015 and 2016 In this section, we present the physical assumptions (section 2.1), the variational principle (section 2.2) and several aspects regarding the numerical method and implementation (sections 2.3-2.7). Although the numerical method is valid for any vector E(J) relation of the material, either isotropic or not, in this work we consider an isotropic power law as where E c is an arbitrary constant, usually 10 -4 V/m, J c is the critical current density, and n is the power-law exponent. The limit of n → ∞ corresponds to the isotropic critical-state model (CSM), which assumes a multi-valued E(J) relation, such as that of the CSM (see figure allowing any value of |E| for |J| = J c and being E parallel to J. In general, J c and n in (1) depend on the magnetic field where J c0 , B 0 and m are constants. Although in this work we focus on isotropic E(J) relations, the method is also suitable for E(J) relations with non-parallel E and J. There are two kinds of anisotropic E(J) relations. The simplest is a material with internal preferential directions of higher J c , which can be characterized by a resistivity tensor ρ 0 (J), so that Another situation is the E(J, B) relation that describes force-free effects, where J c is higher in the B direction. For that case, we may use the E(J, B) relation proposed by Badia and Lopez The computed examples in this article are for uniform applied magnetic fields, B a ; although the presented variational principle is also valid for transport currents. We consider that the applied field follows the z direction (figure where B a is such that B a = B a e z , and e y , e z are the unit vectors in the y and z directions, respectively. In this section, we present a 3D variational principle where the computation is done in the superconductor (or conductor) volume only, excluding the surrounding air. Compared to previous functionals, we do not require the scalar potential or the charge density in order to find the current density Let consider that the material follows a certain non-linear vector E(J) relation. By now, we assume that E(J) is differentiable to the second order (sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2). Later, we will show that the deduction is also valid if E(J) is multi-valued, such as in the CSM (section 2.2.3). The goal is to find a functional such that we can obtain J by minimizing that functional. For a given electrostatic potential φ and Coulomb's gauge for the vector potential, the current density follows where A[J] is the vector potential in Coulomb's gauge created by J, being As shown in where V is the sample volume; dV and dV ′ are the volume differentials relative to r and r ′ , respectively; J 0 is the current density at time t 0 ; ∆J ′ ≡ ∆J(r ′ ); A[∆J] is the vector potential created by ∆J in Coulomb's gauge; and the dissipation factor U (J) is defined as which is uniquely defined because ∇ J × E(J) = 0 for any physical E(J) Next, we show that the physical ∆J is an extreme of the functional where ǫ is an arbitrary parameter with small value and g(r) is any arbitrary function with continuous second derivatives except at the sample surface and vanishes outside the sample. Naturally, g(r) should be non-zero at least at one point within the sample. Since functional (9) contains a double volume integral, we cannot find the variation by applying the usual Euler equations but equations (A.22), deduced in the appendix. Thence, we obtain the variation At the extreme of the functional δL[∆J]=0 for any g(r), and hence the expression within the paranthesis in which is the time discretized form of equation In the following, we proof that the extreme is a minimum and that the minimum is unique. This is guaranteed if we obtain a general formula for δ 2 L in Appendix A. Applying (A.26) to (9) yields where ρ is the differential resistivity tensor, with matrix elements ρ ij ≡ ∂E i /∂J j . From irreversible thermodynamic principles, the differential resistivity is positive definite, and hence gρ(J 0 + ∆J)g ≥ 0 for any g and ∆J. The first term of ( The main problem with this functional, equation ( results in a physical Euler equation, the second variation vanishes, δ 2 L[φ] = 0, for any φ, and hence φ cannot be obtained as the minimizing L. A solution to decouple J and φ is the following. For samples subjected to an applied magnetic field only, without transport current, all current flux lines close within the conductor. Therefore, we can always consider J as magnetization currents from an effective magnetization T, such that (see section 5.8 of In this way, we ensure condition Since the effective magnetization T vanishes outside the sample, the net current I is entirely due to where S is any surface that contains the cross-section of the conductor. In this way, we can find J by taking J t as a given parameter that follows where ∆J t is the variation of the transport current density between two time steps, ∆T is such that ∆J = ∇ × ∆T + ∆J t ,, and ∆A t and A[∇ × ∆T] are the vector potential generated by ∆J t and ∇ × ∆T, respectively. In equation where S i and S o are the wire cross-sections where the transport current gets in and out, respectively. Taking S i and S o as equipotentials, the integral becomes ∆φI, where ∆φ is the voltage drop. In any case, since the term in being this a central result of the article. In the equation above, we expanded the integral in A[∇ × ∆T] at the second step, ∇ ′ × is the curl in the r ′ frame, and ∆T ′ ≡ ∆T(r ′ ). By vector analysis and taking into account that T vanishes outside the sample, we obtain the following alternative formulation where ∆B t and B[∆T] are the magnetic field generated by ∆J t and ∇ × ∆T, being the latter defined as where n ≡ (rr ′ )/|rr ′ |. Minimizing this functional in any of its fomulations, The extremal condition δL[∆T] = 0 is fulfilled for any g(r), if and only if Taking into account that the change of magnetic field is ∆B = B[∆T] + ∆B a + ∆B t , the equation above is the discretized form of Faraday's law For this new functional, we can check again that the extreme is a minimum and it is unique by analyzing δ 2 L[∆T]. By applying equation (A.26) to Although this reasoning assumes that the E(J) relation is differentiable up to second order, we can also apply the deduction above to the CSM. The reason is that we can approximate the CSM by the continuous E(J) relation of ( with a very large ρ, which has the physical interpretation of the normal-state resistivity allowing any value of |E| between 0 and ρ|J| for |J| = J c (see figure In this article, we minimize the functional in the form of equation The numerical method divides the sample into cells shaped as rectangular prisms (figure For thin films, we take only one cell in the sample thickness. This results in averaging all electromagnetic quantities over the thickness, although the current still flows within the sample volume. Since at the surface the parallel component of T vanishes, T has only z component. More details on how to evaluate the relevant quantities from T in this discretization, such as J, A and the functional are included in Appendix B. As explained there, using uniform mesh allows to drastically reduce the size of the interaction matrices, minimizing computer memory requirements. After increasing the time by ∆t, the applied vector potential changes by ∆A a (or the transport current density increases by ∆J t , if present), which causes a change in T, ∆T. This ∆T is found by minimizing functional The basic minimization method is in algorithm 2. First, we consider the change in L[∆T] due to a change v in the s component of ∆T at edge i, ∆T si . By considering a positive v, this change of the functional, dL si+ , is evaluated at all edges. Afterwards, we also make the same evaluation but for a negative change, -|v|, resulting in a functional change dL si-. Next, the algorithm chooses the edge where adding or removing |v| to ∆T decreases the most the functional and sets the change in ∆T there. The process is repeated until changing ∆T at any edge increases the functional instead of decreasing it. The change in the functional, dL si , depends only on the self-interaction energy of each edge, the vector potential at the intersecting surfaces to the edge omitting the change in ∆T si , and the modified U at the neighboring cells (see Appendix B). After finding the minimal edge and setting the change in ∆T si ; ∆J, U and ∆A are updated at the neighboring surfaces, neighboring cells, and all surfaces, respectively. This greatly accelerates the evaluation of dL si at the following steps because these quantities do not need to be calculated at each evaluation of dL si , enabling computing complexity of only second order in the number of cells. For a magnetic-field dependent J c , the program finds a self-consistent solution by iteration (not shown in the algorithms). After finding ∆T and its corresponding ∆J = ∇ × ∆T, the magnetic field is evaluated at the cells. Next, ∆T is found again by minimization and the process is repeated until the change in ∆T between two iterations is below a certain tolerance. In order to avoid oscillations, we apply a damping factor in the change of ∆T after each iteration. When the routine converges for a given change in ∆T , |v|, this |v| is divided by 10 and the whole process is repeated again (algorithm 1). This reduction in |v| is repeated until this value is below a certain pre-set tolerance. In this way, setting a tolerance 10 times stricter requires only twice (or less) computing time, achieving logarithmic complexity with respect to the tolerance. A general problem of 3D computations is the high number of degrees of freedom (DoF) required to achieve sufficiently accurate results. For instance, the calculations for the bulk sample in section 4.1 use as many as 68921 cells, corresponding to 216972 DoF. This high number of DoF results in very long computing time. Here, we present a method to reduce the computing time without loss of accuracy. Similarly to The time, t, evolution algorithm allows any time division, which is determined by the function "time(k)" being k the time step. The slanted statement in blue could be either the basic minimization method of algorithm 2 or the iterative parallel routine in figure \* Time evolution algorithm * \ T si := 0 for all edges s, i; Initialize J t and J at all surfaces; t := 0; for k = 1 to n time do T 0si := T si at all edges s, i; J 0sj := J sj at all surfaces s, j; t ini := t; t := time(k) ; ∆t := t -t ini ; Update ∆J t at all surfaces; Update ∆A a and ∆A t at all edges; ∆T si := 0 for all edges s, i; v := 10v initial ; repeat v := v/10; Find ∆T si for all s and i by minimization and given minimum change v; until v ≤ v final T si := T 0si + ∆T si for all edges s, i; Update J at all surfaces; Post-process; end for Algorithm 2 The basic minimization routine to find the change in T between two time steps, ∆T si , at all edges i of type s scales only as the square of the total number of edges. * For the iterative parallel routine, the update of ∆A is done only in the surfaces of a single sector. 1. The sample volume is divided into sectors, overlapping by a layer of one cell thickness (figure After setting an increase in ∆T in one edge in the basic minimization routine, ∆A due to this increase is only updated within its own sector. 4. The solutions of each sector are merged into a single "parent" object. Only ∆T at the edges within the sector volume are copied to the parent object, since the edges on the sector surface overlap with the neighboring sector. In this way, all edges are modified in each iteration except those at the whole sample interface, where ∆T (and T) are kept as zero. A damping factor is applied in order to avoid oscillations. 5. After merging, ∆J, ∆A and U are updated in the whole parent object. This enables long-range magnetic interaction between sectors. 6. The values of ∆T, ∆J, ∆A and U are copied from the parent object to the sectors. 7. The process from step (3) to ( The advantages of the division into sectors are two-fold. First, the routine can be efficiently parallelized, essential for multi-core processors and computer clusters. Second, the magnetic field created by one sector decreases at least as power 2 with the distance, with increasing power for multipole contributions of increasing order. This causes that coarse solutions in one sector generate sufficiently accurate magnetic fields in another distant sector, limiting both the number of iterations and the computing time of each iteration. Since the computing time scales as power 2 of the DoF, the computing time of one iteration for m sectors is 1/m of that of the whole object. For example, dividing the volume into 1000 sectors, a problem requiring around 10 iterations will reduce the computing time by roughly factor 100. The computing time is optimized if the computation is done first for a coarse tolerance and we repeat the whole process by decreasing it by factor 10, repeating the process until we reach the goal tolerance. For magnetic-field dependent parameters in the E(J) relation, we do not need to apply the iterations mentioned in section 2.4 when solving each sector separately. The reason is that the whole process is already iterative, being B evaluated at each iteration (figure In this work, we implemented the parallel minimization routine in C++ using the OpenMP protocol. Figure With the division into sectors, symmetries can be taken into account straightforwardly. The effective magnetization T is computed in one eighth of the rectangular prism or one fourth of the 2D rectangle. When importing to the parent object, T is copied from the computed region to the rest of the sample. The update of A is made on the whole body. In this way, the computing time can be reduced by 1/8 and 1/4 for rectangular prisms and films, respectively. The computing time of the cube (216972 DoF) in figure The average magnetization M is defined as the total magnetic moment m per unit sample volume V as M = m/V . The magnetic moment is We evaluate the integral in (32) by assuming r × J uniform in the cells and taking the values at the cells center, being J interpolated there. The local instantaneous AC loss is E • J For our discretization, E(J) • J is assumed uniform within the cells and, again, we take J as the interpolated value. This section tests the model with analytical limits. First, we compare our model with Halse's analytical formula for an infinite strip Here, we consider a long thin strip, such as that in figure 6a. Our computations assume constant J c dependence and isotropic power law with n-factor 1000. The analytical formula is based on the CSM, and hence we use a very high n-factor to approach the smooth E(J) relation as much as possible to that of the CSM. The sinusoidal applied field B a is parallel to the z axis with amplitude 20 mT and frequency 50 Hz. The dimensions of the computed sample, width × length × thickness, are 4 × 12 × 10 -3 mm 3 . The total number of cells is 34347, distributed as 107 × 321 × 1. The critical current density is J c = 2.72 • 10 10 A/m 2 , which is similar to that of common commercial tapes. The formula for the current density in a long strip at the initial magnetization stage, from zero applied field to the peak, is and The other parameters are the thickness d, the width w, and the applied magnetic field H a = B a /μ 0 . The screening current at the peak of applied field is shown on figure We also test MEMEP for the magnetization of a thin disk, such as that of figure where a = R cosh Ha H d In figure We also compare the results for the hysteresis loop. The analytical formula Figure respectively. The initial curve is with The two remaining functions for decreasing and increasing applied magnetic fields, respectively, are where H m is the amplitude of the applied magnetic field. The comparison of the previous analytical formulas and the model is at figure 11. The model agrees very well with the analytical limit. The model uses 80 time steps per cycle. This section presents the current density for a cube of side w. We consider both constant J c and Kim-like J c (B) dependence. For all cases, we consider a power-law exponent of 100. The high power-law exponent ensures that the solution is representative of the CSM. Here we analyze in detail a cubic bulk sample with applied field perpendicular to one side, as in the sketch in figure The magnetization current density at the peak of applied field for n = 100 is at figures 13 and 14. The main screening currents are flowing in closed loops perpendicular to the applied field (figures 13abc). The highest penetration depth is at the top and bottom (figure Up to now, the current penetration is qualitatively similar to cylinders The presence of the non-zero J z component contrasts with earlier predictions in Here, we assume a J c (B) dependence according to Kim's formula, with constants J c0 = 10 8 A/m 2 and B 0 =20 mT. We consider a cube with the same geometry and AC applied magnetic field as the previous one for constant J c . We take a power-law exponent of 100. Figure This article presented a novel formulation of a variational principle for 3D modeling of non-linear eddy currents, such as those present in superconductors. As example, we analyzed a cube under uniform applied magnetic field. The variational principle, which enables to reduce the computation volume to the sample, takes the effective magnetization T as state variable in order that the magnetization current density is ∇ × T. This formulation is also valid if the sample is submitted to a transport current, in addition to the applied magnetic field. We have shown that the physical solution minimizes the functional and that the minimum is unique. Our implementation uses an original time-efficient minimization method. The computing time is enhanced by dividing the sample volume into sectors and solving all sectors iteratively with no loss of accuracy. This routine has also been efficiently parallelized. Tests with thin films and cylinders showed perfect agreement with existing analytical formulas. We computed and analyzed J of a superconducting cube under uniform applied magnetic field. We found both non-zero component of the current density parallel to the applied field and non-square current paths close to the top and bottom of the sample. The cause of both phenomena is the self-field, disappearing for applied fields well above the penetration field. Although the results are for a power-law E(J) relation, these phenomena will also be present for the Critical State Model (CSM), which can be explained by the fact that any |J| such that |J| ≤ J c is allowed, instead of only |J| = J c or 0. In conclusion, the presented variational method is able to model fully 3D situations for any vector E(J) relation, being promising to describe force-free effects or coupling currents in multi-filamentary wires or tapes. The implementation in C++ with OpenMP is time efficient and requires low computer memory. Future work will be dedicated to adapt the parallel routine to the MPI protocol for computer clusters, as well as taking anisotropic E(J) relations with force-free effects. where f (ui) ≡ ∂f /∂u i and f (u (α) i ) ≡ ∂f /∂u (α) i and we used Einstein's notation for the summation; for example, i . Next, we integrate (A.5) by parts. For this purpose, we use that ∂ and we apply the generalized divergence theorem for an n-vector field with components where {n α } are the components of the normal vector to the surface in n -1 dimensions, ∂Ω, that encloses the volume Ω and dS n-1 is the surface differential. Since f vanishes at the infinite, ∂Ω dS n-1 n α f (u (α) i ) g i also vanishes, and hence and the condition δL = 0 follows for any {g i }, if and only if which are the Euler PDE of the functional. The condition δL = 0 only imposes that the functional is extremal. As seen from equations (A.2-A.4), the extreme is a minimum when the second variation is positive there, δ 2 L > 0, for any {g i }. When δ 2 L > 0 also applies for any functions {u i }, whether they are extremal or not, the minimum is unique. where f (uiuj ) ≡ ∂ 2 f /(∂u i ∂u j ), and similarly for f (u (α) i u (β) j ) and f (uiu (β) j ) . Many phenomena in physics require variational principles from functionals containing double integrals of the n-volume, as those in this article. The general form of these functionals is where u ′ i is the same function as u i but with variables {r ′ α } instead of {r α }, α . Similar to functionals with single volume integrals, the variation from (A.3) becomes After integrating by parts, . (A. which is the case of our functionals in ( and the Euler PDE corresponding to δL = 0 for any arbitrary function For functionals with a combination of single and double integrals as i }) Taking this into account, the functional in where V α is the volume of cell α, N is the total number of cells, U α is defined as U α ≡ U (J(r α )), r α is the center of cell α, J(r α ) is the interpolated current density obtained by (B. For example, in uniform mesh and edges following the z axis, so that p = z, c αzj takes the form where the cell indexes i 1 , i 2 , i 3 , i 4 relative to edge zj are defined as in figure B.19, l x and l y are the cells size in the x and y directions, respectively, and e x and e y are the unit vectors in the x and y directions, respectively. Quantity ∆F pj in (B.12) is proportional to the magnetic flux density B = ∇ × A at edge pj. In order to evaluate the dissipation function for a B-dependent critical current density [or any E(J, B)], we compute the average magnetic flux density at any cell α created by our discretized J in (B.1), resulting in where e s is the unit vector in the direction of axis s. For uniform rectangular mesh, the interaction matrix of the vector potential in (B.5), a sij , can be drastically reduced. For this case, we can label each ssurface by three independent indexes (i x ,i y ,i z ) instead of a global index i. Then, the interaction matrix elements a sij can be labeled as a sixiy izjxjyjz . Thanks to the regular rectangular mesh, the interaction matrix obeys the discrete translation symmetry a sixiy izjxjyjz = a s111|jx-ix+1||jy-iy+1||jz -iz+1| ≡ a s111kxkykz . (B.18) Since k x , k y , k z are between 1 and n sx ,n sy ,n sz , respectively, being the latter the number of s-surfaces in the x, y, z directions, respectively, there are only n sx n sy n sz independent matrix entries, while in the complete matrix for the ssurfaces thre are as many as (n sx n sy n sz ) 2 entries. Then, for an object with n x × n y × n z cells in the x, y, z directions, respectively, we reduce the total interaction matrix from [(n x + 1)n y n z ] 2 + [n x (n y + 1)n z ] 2 + [n x n y (n z + 1)] 2 entries to only (n x + 1)n y n z + n x (n y + 1)n z + n x n y (n z + 1), being the total number of surfaces. For a cube of n x = n y = n z = 41, we reduce the RAM memory from around 117 Gb (estimated) to 1.7 Mb. A similar reduction can be achieved with the interaction matrices for the magnetic field. For this kind of reduction, the cells do not need to be necessarily cubic. In this work, we approximate the interaction matrices a sij and d αsj in (B.5) and (B.17 where r si and r sj are the center position of surfaces si and sj, respectively, and the volume integral expands over the rectangular prism with base S si and height corresponding to the segment in the s direction joining the center of neighboring cells. This integral is analytical for any rectangular prism, although we do not include the expression here for space reasons. The expression for a cube is very simple, which can be found from that of a uniformly charged cube , where L i is the side of the cube associated to surface i. For d αsj , we take This approach is effective for cubic mesh in 3D or square mesh for thin films, as that in this article. For elements elongated in one direction, these matrices are integrated numerically by dividing each element into smaller sub-elements and using the equations above for the sub-elements. si+ ; Find edge i -of type s where adding -|v| to ∆T si produces the smallest dL si-; if dL si+ < dL si-then dL s := dL si+ ; h s := |v|; i s := i + ; else dL s := dL si-; h s := -|v|; i s := i -; end if if dL s < dL then dL := dL s ; h min := h s ; s min := s; i min := i s ; sminimin := ∆T sminimin + h min ; Update ∆J at neighbouring surfaces of edge i min of type s min ; Update U at neighbouring cells of edge i min of type s min ; Update ∆A at all surfaces * ; si := k∆T si + (1 -k)∆T p,si in all edges s, i Update ∆J, ∆A, U , B everywhere Copy all fields to sectors max |∆T si -∆T p,si | ≤ tol End yes no In this article, we do not take magnetic materials into account, and hence the magnetic field and magnetic flux density are proportional H = B/μ 0 being μ 0 the void permeability.In the text, we use "magnetic field" to refer to both the magnetic field and magnetic flux density.