We study two-dimensional noncentrosymmetric nodal superconductors under Zeeman field and clarify the field angle dependence of topological properties. It has been shown that the nodal excitation acquires an excitation gap due to the Zeeman field perpendicular to anti-symmetric spin-orbit coupling, and then gapful topological superconductivity is realized 1 . We show that the system undergoes gapful-gapless transition against tilting of the field. The gapless phase remains to show a finite band gap and unusual Majorana edge states in between the bulk bands. The Majorana edge states naturally propagate in a same direction between oppositely-oriented edges. We elucidate relations of such unidirectional Majorana edge states with chiral edge states in the gapful topological superconducting phase and previously studied Majorana flat bands at zero Zeeman field. A compact formula of topological invariants characterizing the edge states is given. The gapfulgapless topological phase transition and associated evolution of Majorana states are demonstrated in a model for D +p-wave superconductivity. Experimental realization in recently fabricated cuprate heterostructures and heavy fermion thin films is discussed. Topological superconductivity is one of the fascinating topics in modern condensed matter physics. Recently, a scenario for realizing gapful topological superconductors (TSCs) was proposed: 1,17 Twodimensional (2D) nodal noncentrosymmetric SCs are gapped under the Zeeman field perpendicular to the momentum-dependent spin polarization axis by ASOC. They become 2D strong TSCs of symmetry class D In this paper, we study the topological phase transitions in the tilted Zeeman field and clarify the topological nature of each superconducting phase. First, we show the gapful-gapless transition in the bulk energy spec-trum by tilting the Zeeman field. The stability of the gapful phase against a considerable tilting angle is revealed. Second, three kinds of topological edge states associated with topological phase transitions are elucidated: (1) Majorana flat bands in the absence of Zeeman field The outline of this paper is as follows: In Sec. II, we calculate the energy spectrum of generic nodal noncentrosymmetric SCs under the low Zeeman field and illustrate the gapful-gapless transition in the tilted field. In Sec. III, we demonstrate the gapful-gapless transition in D + p-wave superconductivity. In Sec. IV, a unified view of topological phase transitions and associated topological edge states is given. In Secs. IV A and IV B, we review Majorana flat bands and chiral Majorana edge states, respectively. In Sec. IV C, we show the emergence of unidirectional Majorana edge states from Majorana flat bands. These results are illustrated by the model for D + pwave superconductivity. In Sec. V, the generality of the method for realizing unidirectional Majorana edge states is clarified. It is shown that we can choose a boundary direction hosting Majorana flat bands in noncentrosymmetric nodal SCs, regardless of the pairing symmetry of superconductivity. Then, the applied Zeeman field real-izes unidirectional Majorana edge states. Finally, we give a brief summary of the paper in Sec. VI. Heterostructures of high-temperature cuprate SCs and heavy fermion SCs are discussed as a platform of the topologically nontrivial gapful and gapless phases. First, we introduce a general model for noncentrosymmetric SCs and discuss the excitation spectrum. We adopt a Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian where is the superconducting gap function. ξ(k) is the kinetic energy of electrons measured from a chemical potential μ, g(k) is the g vector of ASOC, and H is the Zeeman field. The scalar order parameter of the spin-singlet component is denoted by ψ(k), while d(k) is the vector order parameter of spin-triplet one. Both ψ(k) and d(k) take finite value because of the parity-mixing due to inversionsymmetry breaking. where E ± (k) ≡ ξ(k) ± αg(k) = 0 gives the two Fermi surfaces (FSs) split by ASOC. g(k) ≡ |g(k)| and ĝ(k) ≡ g(k)/g(k) are amplitude and direction of the g vector, respectively. Here the argument of (2) and (3) that the cooperation of inversion-symmetry breaking and time-reversalsymmetry breaking effectively realizes chiral superconductivity. The imaginary part of the gap function μ B H • ĝ × d/αg is given by the scalar product of the Zeeman field, g vector of ASOC, and vector order parameter. In order to see the effects of ASOC and the Zeeman field, let us focus on the low energy spectrum. The nodal point k 0 at H = 0 is given by E ± (k 0 ) = ψ(k 0 ) ± d(k 0 ) • ĝ(k 0 ) = 0, leading to the massless Dirac cone illustrated in Fig. Note that both inversion-symmetry breaking and timereversal-symmetry breaking are essential for the shift of the Dirac spectrum from E = 0. Otherwise, the BdG Hamiltonian has a symmetric spectrum with respect to E = 0, and then the center of the Dirac cones is pinned to E = 0. For an intuitive understanding of this point, we show schematic figures in Fig. So far we have not assumed any specific symmetry of superconductivity. In this section, we demonstrate the gapful-gapless transition illustrated in Sec. II through the analysis of a model for D + p-wave superconductivity. The critical angle of the Zeeman field for the gapful-gapless transition is estimated, and the stability of the gapful TSCs against experimentally unavoidable field-angle fluctuations is shown. We consider a 2D D + p-wave SC, taking In the absence of the Zeeman field, the bulk spectrum has eight excitation nodes at intersections of the diagonal directions k x = ±k y and the two FSs split by the ASOC [Fig. Since the model includes the Rashba-type ASOC, the perpendicular direction defined by Fig. For the Zeeman field tilted from the perpendicular direction, the paramagnetic term in Eqs. (2) and (3) shifts the Dirac cones, and the mass term reduces to The competition between those two terms determines the gapful-gapless transition. The global excitation gap ∆E is obtained as = max 0, min Equation ( In the following part of this paper, we investigate the edge states in noncentrosymmetric SCs described by the Hamiltonian given by Eq. (1). In particular, we clarify the relationship between a variety of topological edge states under zero and low Zeeman fields. A unified view on the Majorana flat band, chiral Majorana edge state, and unidirectional Majorana edge state is discussed. First, we review the well-known Majorana flat bands in the time-reversal symmetric nodal SCs where Γ is a chiral operator and the chiral symmetry of H BdG is expressed as: The chiral symmetry is obtained by combining particlehole symmetry with time-reversal symmetry. Below, we show a compact formula for the winding number W (k x ). Note that the winding number is antisymmetric with respect to k x , because of the time-reversal symmetry In particular, the winding number vanishes at timereversal-invariant momenta. Thus, we obtain W (-π) = 0, when the bulk spectrum at k x = -π is gapful. In previous studies, Refs. 24 and 25, the winding number has been estimated by numerical calculations or by using a formula requiring us to trace sign changes of the energy and order parameter along the k y line. However, the winding number can be obtained by a more compact formula: all we have to do is to calculate the "winding number of nodes." In the absence of the Zeeman field, nodal points are indeed protected by the winding number defined in a similar form, 26 where C ± (k 0 ) is a sufficiently small loop running anticlockwise around the nodal point k 0 on the FS of the E ± band. The winding number of nodes given by Eq. ( where k is a coordinate taken parallel to the E ± FS viewing the E ± > 0 region in the right-hand side, Now the winding number W (k x ) can be evaluated by counting the winding number of nodes. The periodicity of the BZ allows us to form a loop by combining the integration line k x = kx with the line k x = -π. Thus, we obtain = (±,k0); encircled where the summation is taken over the nodes encircled by the loop, that is, nodes in the domain -π < k x < kx . Equation ( To show the usefulness of the formula, we consider the d x 2 -y 2 superconductivity with the gap function ψ(k) = |ψ 0 |(cos k x -cos k y ) and the Rashba-type ASOC in Eq. (10). Nodes on diagonal axes are characterized by the winding number +1 or -1, as shown in Fig. Now the winding number W (k x ) is evaluated from the formula (26). In the d x 2 -y 2 -wave SC, nodes with winding number ±1 form a pair on a line along the k y axis. Therefore, contributions to W (k x ) are completely canceled out. Thus, we obtain W (k x ) = 0. In accordance with the bulk-edge correspondence, the edge state does not appear on the (010) edge as shown in Fig. The situation is totally different on the (1 10) edge. To analyze the topological edge state, let us change the crystal translation vectors as and wave numbers in the bulk are represented as Only k a is a good quantum number for the ribbon-shaped boundary condition. The winding number W (k a ) is defined in the same way as Eq. ( which is consistent with the result for d xy + p-wave superconductivity, Summarizing, the time-reversal-invariant nodal noncentrosymmetric SCs are weak TSCs characterized by the 1D winding number of class AIII. The Majorana flat band may appear in the edge state, depending on the boundary direction. The condition for the Majorana flat band is immediately understood by the compact formula for the winding number given by Eq. ( Now we turn to the time-reversal-symmetry-broken state by the Zeeman field. As we have already mentioned in Sec. II, the energy spectrum is gapful under the condition given by Eq. (7). Gapful SCs without time-reversal symmetry belong to the symmetry class D, and thus the topological invariant is the Chern number defined by 40 where ij is the completely antisymmetric tensor, |u n (k) is the Bloch wave function of quasiparticles, and P is the set for occupied bands: The analytic formula for the Chern number has been obtained in Ref. 1: under the conditions given by Eqs. (4)- (6). The system under consideration can be regarded as a set of massive Dirac cones as illustrated in Fig. In the previous study we have shown that the Chern number is finite in most of the spin-singlet-dominant SCs. 1 Then, the chiral Majorana edge states appear regardless of the boundary direction. For instance, our numerical result for the D + p-wave superconductivity shows chiral edge modes on both (010) and ( When the Zeeman field is tilted from the perpendicular direction illustrated in Fig. Here, hole bands mean the lower N bands, provided the BdG Hamiltonian is a 2N × 2N matrix. In the present case, N = 2. We call ν the band Chern number. In Eq. ( The band Chern number characterizes unidirectional Majorana edge states in the gapless phase. They are unidirectional in the sense that edge states in oppositely oriented edges have the same chirality. Indeed, we can see that unidirectional Majorana edge states naturally appear under tilted Zeeman field. Let us consider a boundary which hosts Majorana flat bands in the absence of Zeeman field [Fig. An important difference from the chiral Majorana edge states is that the existence of unidirectional Majorana edge states depends on the boundary direction. The boundary hosting the unidirectional Majorana edge states is almost the same as that for the Majorana flat bands. For example, let us consider a boundary direction hosting a Dirac spectrum around which several Dirac cones in the bulk are overlapped and the 1D winding number given by Eq. ( The transition between the Majorana flat bands, the chiral Majorana edge states, and the unidirectional edge states presented above is quite general for noncentrosymmetric spin-singlet SCs with a nodal gap. Actually, the above discussion assumes only the presence of Majorana flat bands in the absence of the Zeeman field, and the Majorana flat bands generally exist in nodal noncentrosymmetric SCs when we choose appropriate boundary directions, as shown in Sec. V. Next, we illustrate the appearance of unidirectional Majorana edge states in the model for D + p-wave superconductivity, given by Eqs. ( First, we show the bulk energy spectrum in Figs. Figures It should be noted that the edge current of unidirectional edge states is not conserved within themselves. However, the gapless bulk states compensate the edge current and the total current may be conserved, as pointed out in Ref. 27. For this reason, unidirectional Majorana edge states are unique to gapless topological superconducting phases. So far, we have analyzed properties of unidirectional Majorana edge states for the azimuths angle of the Zeeman field φ = 3π/4. In general, edge states depend on φ. Figure Related to the topological phase transition, we comment on the case of the parallel Zeeman field θ = π/2 illustrated in Fig. Finally, we comment on previous studies of unidirectional edge states In this section, we clarify the generality of our scenario for unidirectional Majorana edge states. In the previous section, the appearance of unidirectional Majorana edge states has been discussed based on the existence of Majorana flat bands in the absence of the Zeeman field. The nodal d-wave superconductivity has been dealt with as an example. However, the existence of Majorana flat bands and unidirectional Majorana edge states may still be unclear for other pairing symmetry. In the following, we prove that we can always find boundary directions hosting Majorana flat bands in noncentrosymmetric nodal superconductivity, irrespective of the pairing symmetry. Then, the discussion parallel to Sec. IV C brings about the conclusion that unidirectional Majorana edge states are ubiquitous in noncentrosymmetric nodal SCs under Zeeman field. First, we discuss boundary directions hosting Majorana flat bands. The key idea for choosing the boundary is quite simple: we can always choose an axis k a on the reciprocal lattice space so that all the point nodes in the first Brillouin zone are projected onto different points on the k a axis. It has been shown that each of the nodes is protected by the winding number given by Eq. ( The connection of Majorana flat bands and chiral Majorana edge states in Fig. An advantage of considering FBBs is that all the Dirac cones are not overlapped in the surface BZ. This makes a sharp contrast to the (1 10) surface in the D + p-wave superconductivity, where four point nodes in the bulk are overlapped at k a = 0. At the bulk nodal point k 0 , the mass term and paramagnetic shift of the Dirac spectrum are governed by a single vector ĝ(k 0 ). Thus, bandoverlapping leading to the disappearance of edge states such as Fig. Then, the paramagnetic shift of the two Dirac cones is in the opposite direction. Thus, unidirectional Majorana edge states generally appear on FBBs. An exceptional case is the D 3h and C 3h point group symmetry, where the g vector is parallel to the z axis in the whole Brillouin zone. Then, an additional condition, ĝ(k 1 ) = -ĝ(k 2 ), has to be satisfied for the opposite paramagnetic shift. Thus, Majorana flat bands, chiral Majorana edge states, unidirectional Majorana edge states, and topological phase transitions between these phases are ubiquitous phenomena in noncentrosymmetric nodal SCs. We summarize the results obtained in this paper. We have studied noncentrosymmetric time-reversal symmetric 2D nodal SCs and have examined the topological superconductivity caused by the broken time-reversal symmetry due to a low Zeeman field. The gapful-gapless transition in the bulk spectrum against tilting of the field has been elucidated. The gapful phase is a strong topological superconductor of class D in the large parameter range. The critical Zeeman-field angle is estimated to be about θ = 6 • for high-T c cuprate SCs. This result reveals the stability of the paramagnetically induced gapful topological superconductivity reported previously We clarified the topological edge states in the gapful and gapless states. In the absence of the Zeeman field, Majorana flat bands may appear on a boundary of certain direction. We proposed a compact formula for calculating the winding number protecting the flat bands. In the perpendicular Zeeman field, chiral Majorana edge states appear in the gap of the bulk spectrum, regardless of the boundary direction. In the gapless phase under the tilted Zeeman field, the Chern number is ill-defined. However, the well-defined band Chern number characterizes the topologically nontrivial properties. The nontrivial band Chern number specifies unidirectional Majorana edge states on the boundary avoiding the overlapping of bulk bands. The condition for such boundary directions has been discussed. Unidirectional Majorana edge states propagate in the same direction on both sides of the edges. These topological phases and topological edge states have been demonstrated by analyzing the model for D + p-wave SCs. It is stressed that the results obtained in this paper are applicable to almost all of the spin-singletdominant noncentrosymmetric 2D nodal SCs. In particular, heterostructures of high-T c cuprate SCs and ferromagnets Note: Recently, we noticed a related paper A. Daido and Y. Yanase, Phys. Rev. B 94, 054519 (2016). X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1057 (2011). M. Sato and S. Fujimoto, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 85, 072001 (2016). M. Sato and Y. Ando, ArXiv e-prints (2016), arXiv:1608.03395 [cond-mat.supr-con].