After more than a decade, direct observation of the odd frequency triplet pairing state in superconducting hybrid structures remains elusive. We propose an experimentally feasible setup that can unambiguously reveal the zero energy peak due to proximity-induced equal spin superconducting triplet correlations. We theoretically investigate a two dimensional Josephson junction in the diffusive regime. The nanostructure consists of a normal metal sandwiched between two ferromagnetic layers with spiral magnetization patterns. By applying an external magnetic field perpendicular to the junction plane, vortices nucleate in the normal metal. The calculated energy and spatially resolved density of states, along with the pair potential, reveal that remarkably, only triplet Cooper pairs survive in the vortex cores. These isolated odd frequency triplet correlations result in well defined zero energy peaks in the local density of states that can be identified through tunneling spectroscopy experiments. Moreover, the diffusive regime considered here rules out the possibility of Andreev bound states in the vortex core as contributors to the zero energy peaks. Introduction. In analogy to the pairing mechanism in 3 He, spin triplet Cooper pairing was predicted to coexist with spin singlet correlations in hybrid structures consisting of s-wave superconductors (S) and inhomogeneous ferromagnets (IFMs) The first experimental observation of nonmagnetic proximity induced vortices recently occurred in two dimensional normal metal (N) Josephson junctions In this paper, we study the diffusive S-Ho/N/Ho-S Josephson junction structure shown in Fig. Results and Discussions. It is now firmly established that the electronic properties of a diffusive hybrid superconducting structure can be described by the Usadel equation within the quasiclassical framework where D represents the diffusion constant in the N and S regions and ε is the quasiparticle energy measured from the Fermi level. We normalize all lengths by the superconducting coherence length, ξ S = D/|∆ 0 |, energies by the superconducting gap at zero temperature, |∆ 0 |, and adopt natural units where = k B = 1. The Green function Ĝ(ε, R) is composed of the advanced, G A (ε, R), retarded, G R (ε, R), and Keldysh, G K (ε, R), propagators, which carry the complete physical information of the system considered. In the presence of an external magnetic field, H = (0, 0, H z ), directed perpendicular to the junction plane, the derivatives can be replaced by their covariants, i.e. ∇ = ∇ -[ieAρ z , ...]. Here A is the vector potential associated with the external field H. In equilibrium, as considered throughout the paper, the advanced and Keldysh propagators can be expressed via the Retarded Green function. In this case, one can show that where k B is the Boltzmann constant, and the system temperature is denoted by T . Therefore, it suffices to focus on the retarded Green function, and then eventually construct the total propagator using the simple relations above. One useful limit for F/S structures is the so-called low proximity limit. This limit permits linearization of the Green function, yielding a linear set of differential equations that are in general coupled In establishing a numerically stable algorithm in the full proximity limit, we use the so-called Riccati parametrization For compactness, we have defined k ≡ x and k ≡ y for the spatial coordinates so that ∂ k,k ≡ ∂ x + ∂ y . We have also employed the Coulomb gauge, so that ∇ • A = 0. We consider a realistic situation where the junctions are well described by a tunneling process where ζ is the ratio of the barrier resistance to the resistivity of the normal layer, and the components of the retarded superconducting bulk solution Next, to generate spin-1 triplet correlations and have them occupy the N region, several practical ways can be considered To determine the signatures of various proximity induced superconducting correlations, we calculate the singlet pair potential U pair : and the local density of states: where N 0 is the density of states per spin at the Fermi level and λ is the pairing interaction constant. To begin, we present the local DOS and pair potential in Fig. It is known that vortices in clean superconductors can host bound states that are separated in energy by an amount ∼ ∆ 2 /ε F Conclusions. To summarize, motivated by recent experimental progress related to the proximity induced vortices 