We study possible applications of high critical temperature nodal superconductors for the search for Majorana bound states in the DIII class. We propose a microscopic analysis of the proximity effect induced by d-wave superconductors on a semiconductor wire with strong spin-orbit coupling. We characterize the induced superconductivity on the wire employing a numerical self-consistent tight-binding Bogoliubov-De-Gennes approach, and analytical considerations on the Green's funtion. The order parameter induced on the wire, the pair correlation function and the renormalization of the Fermi points are analyzed in detail, as well as the topological phase diagram in the case of weak coupling. We highlight optimal Hamiltonian parameters to access the non trivial topological phase which could display time-reversal invariant Majorana doublets at the boundaries of the wire. After the theoretical proposal by High critical temperature superconductors (HTS) have been proposed as a key building block to experimentally produce MBSs, since the high critical temperature may induce a robust superconductivity by proximity effect Theoretical literature on TRITS mainly focuses on (i) intrinsic superconductivity, or (ii) proximity induced superconductivity. In the first case, the topological phase diagram and the prediction of Majorana states at the boundaries are analyzed upon changing the experimental conditions (geometry, spin-orbit coupling, gate potential, disorder, symmetry of the order parameter) In this paper we present a detailed study of the physics of semiconductor nanowires in the presence of Rashba spin-orbit coupling The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the model Hamiltonian in real and momentum spaces, and we describe our numerical and analytical computational methods. In section III we discuss our results. In particular, in section IIIA, using the expression of the selfenergy calculated before, we show the main difference between the induced gap by nodal and conventional superconductors. In section IIIB we carefully analyze the peculiarities of the excitation spectrum and the pair correlation function induced on the wire by a nodal superconductor. In Sec. IIIC we discuss criteria for the formation of Majorana bound states and show a topological phase diagram in a topological weak regime. In Sec. IIID we focus on the role of spin-orbit coupling on the induced pair correlation functions. In Sec. IV we summarize the results and compare with the existing literature. Our model system is formed by a semiconducting nanowire with strong spin-orbit interaction lying onto a d x 2 -y 2 superconductor. Because of its layered structure, here we model a typical d-wave superconductor as a twodimensional material in the x -y plane, ignoring the coupling between the underlying planes where H s describes the 2D superconductor, H w describes the 1D wire and H T expresses the coupling between the two. Following Scalapino where x, y are the elementary displacement. Here and in the following we set the lattice spacing a = 1. The first two terms describe the chemical potential μ s and the hopping t s between nearest neighbours electron sites, while the pairing term corresponds to a d x 2 -y 2 combination of singlets between the l th lattice site and its four nearest neighbours of the 2D square lattice. In what follows all the energies are calculated in units of t s , except where defined otherwise. The order parameter for d-wave superconductivity is defined as where the singlet pairing amplitude on a bond is described by The order parameters are determined self-consistently from the resolution of the TBBDG equations, whereas the pair potential V d is kept at a fixed value. In Eq. (2) d-wave superconductivity is considered. As a reference, we will compare our proximity superconductivity with that induced by a s-wave superconductor, with order parameter ∆ 0 (l) = -V 0 F l,l . The bulk superconductor is investigated by Fouriertransforming Eq. (2) to k-space. By defining k = (k x , k y ), the Hamiltonian of the superconductor is written as where The pair correlation function in k-space reads and the d-wave order parameter is where N k is the number of k-points and the sum is over the first Brillouin zone. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( For the numerical simulations, we fix the parameters in such a way to obtain a given reference electron density at the end of the self-consistent calculation. We choose a value V d = 1.5 for the d-wave pair interaction, which is consistent with the parameter used in Ref. 48. In Fig. The semiconducting nanowire is described by the following Hamiltonian: + ıα <i,j> σσ where α accounts for the spin-orbit coupling of Rashba type In particular, is the extended next-nearestneighbor s component. The opportunity of introducing the definition in Eq. ( The coupling between the wire and the superconductor is given by a simple hopping Hamiltonian: The hopping happens in the z direction and involves d electrons, belonging to the wire, and c electrons, belonging to the superconductor, and is supposed to be spin independent. A. Computational method In the description of the whole system, periodic boundary conditions are assumed along the x direction. The unit cell is composed by a strip, as it is reported in Fig. It is convenient to introduce the Nambu notation to write the Hamiltonian. The field operators for the superconductor are defined as ψ s jk = (c jk↑ , c jk↓ , c † j-k↑ , c † j-k↓ ), where j = 0 . . . N -1 labels the superconductor sites in the unit cell, and k is the k vector along x. We introduce the field operator , for the wire. The Hamiltonian is therefore written as where ξ s k = -μ s -2 cos(k), ξ w k = -μ w -2t w cos(k), and τx , τy and τz are the Nambu matrices. The singlet pair correlation function is defined for the superconductor as (12) For each superconductor site the d-wave pairing is calculated as ) Starting from an initial guess of the order parameter, the Hamiltonian of the whole system is diagonalized, the dwave pair correlation function is calculated at each site and k-value, and the value of the order parameter is updated in the Hamiltonian, that is diagonalized again. The procedure is iterated until the self-consistency is obtained at each site. Once the self-consistent solutions are obtained, the pair correlation function induced on the wire is calculated in k-space as and in real space, at all order of neighbors (l=0,1,2 . . . ), it is In particular, l = 0 and l = 1 refer to the local and extended s wave contributions of the pairing induced in the wire. The selfconsistent results reported in the following have been performed using N = 200 sites in the unit cell, and a 256 k-points grid in the Brillouin zone. After the selfconsistent solution is found, the band structure and the pair correlation functions are calculated on a finer k-point mesh. As the hopping of Eq. 10 is supposed to be spin independent, we can calculate the selfenergy induced in the nanowire within a restricted basis The full partition function can be written as a fermionic path-integral with We have where β = 1/k B T and ω n are the Fermionic Matsubara frequencies. Similarly (21) Moreover, the contribution to the action due to the tunneling Hamiltonian H T reads, In order to obtain an effective action S e w for the wire, we integrate out the superconductor's degrees of freedom to obtain the effective action: where we have introduced the Matsubara Green's function of the superconductor Ĝs kx,ky (ıω) = ıω -ξ s kx,ky τz -∆ kx,ky τx The added term in Eq. 23, appears as a self-energy in the wire effective Hamiltonian: (25) This is clearly independent of the spin-orbit coupling and the chemical potential of the wire. Starting from the selfenergy, the Matsubara and retarded Green's functions of the wire can be calculated. In the Appendix, the expressions for the analytical continuation of the Green's function and the density of the states are given. In the case ∆ 0 = t s , we can calculate exactly the selfenergy of Eq.( The path-integral approach described in the previous section allows us to write down an analytic expression for the self-energy, that accounts for an effective interaction of the superconductor on the wire. The Matsubara selfenergy, reported in Eq. (25), can be numerically computed for given sets of parameters (μ s , μ w , t T , ∆). In order to simplify the notation, we write the self-energy in a compact form as Σ(ıω, k x ) = (-ıωA -B τz + C τx ), where A, B and C can be numerically estimated from Eq. ( where Z = 1/(1 + A) is the renormalization factor, and The renormalization induces a displacement of the wire's Fermi level (via the B term of the self-energy) and the formation of a superconducting gap by proximity effect (∆ ind ). In the case of s-wave superconductivity, we have C = A∆ 0 , and we formally recover the induced gap ∆ ind = (1 -Z)∆ 0 reported in Ref. 41. In order to give a numerical estimation of the induced superconducting gap, we compute the A, B and C components of the self-energy in the static approximation (ω=0). In Fig. The left panel of Fig. Thus, we need to compute the retarded self-energy that can be done by substituting ıω → ω + ı0 + in the Matsubara expression of Eq.( The same can be done also in our selfconsistent numerical tight-binding approach, after a projection of the Hamiltonian spectrum onto the wire states. Projection is, sometimes, demanding, thus we resort to our analytical densitiy of states in the following. The results are, of course, in agreement, when selfconsistency is ignored. Here we plot curves obtained using the Green's function of Eq. 27. FIG. In Fig. Conventional d-wave superconductors present coherence peaks at ω ∼ ∆ d , there is no gap in the excitation spectrum, and subgap states manifest in a linear behavior of the density of states for ω < ∆ d , and it is exactly zero only at the Fermi level. Proximity induced superconductivity in the wire, inherits all these properties, as clear from the plots in Fig. Fine tuning of the chemical potential of the wire with respect to the one of the superconductor, e.g. by gating the structure, can allow us to improve proximity effect. Indeed, at fixed t T and ∆ 0 , we show that for our choice of the parameters, away from half filling (at μ w = 1) the distance of the coherence peaks and the depletion of the subgap region show that a more robust superconductivity is induced in the wire with respect to μ w = 0. We now move to our self-consistent TBBDG calculations. In Fig. Following 29, the wire is in its topological phase if the pairing amplitude is negative in an odd number of Fermi points within k x ∈ [0, π]. Therefore it is crucial to determine the relative position of the Fermi points of the wire with respect to the superconductor nodal point. The nodal point k N of the superconductor, defined as the kpoint in the folded 1D Brillouin zone where the gap is zero (see Fig. The nodal point is thus k N = arccos(-μ s /4t s ). In the self-consistent scheme, the value of the chemical potential μ s -0.3 corresponds to k N 1.49. It is reported in Fig. The solutions of the above equation in the [0, π] interval are reported in Fig. Looking at Fig. Within the present work we take t w = t s = 1, therefore the Fermi point of the wire coincides with the nodal point when μ w = μ s /2. In self-consistent calculations we fix μ s = -0.3, and we find that k F is located at k N when The inclusion of spin-orbit coupling in the wire splits the Fermi point into two points k 1 and k 2 , and their relation with k N leads to three possible scenarios: as it is schematically shown in Fig. In Fig. The pair correlation function induced on the wire, F (w) , has been computed as a function of k x , in the [0, π] interval, for several values of μ w , and the results are illustrated in Fig. A non trivial phase is expected when the induced pairing is negative on an odd number of Fermi points Figure In the limit |μ s | 4t s , a 4α width for the non trivial topological region is found, in agreement with Ref. 29, where a nodal superconductivity originating from a s ± superconductor is hypotheisized. Upon increasing the coupling t T between the wire and the superconductor, there is a transition from weak to strong coupling regime. The parameter t T has a key importance, since it can be experimentally modified by a suitable engineering of the interface between the intrinsic superconductor and the wire, leading to a possible technological realization of TRITS. Thus we perform self-consistent TBBDG calculations of the band structure and the induced pair correlation function, upon increasing t T . The results are illustrated in Fig. The weak coupling regime leads to negligible effects on the position of the Fermi points, while, in strong coupling regime the Fermi points might be significantly displaced by proximity effect. In the middle panels of Fig. Local, F (w) 0 , and extended, F (w) 1 , s-wave components of the induced pair correlation function have been calculated as a function of μ w , and the results are shown in Fig. The phase diagram, reported in Fig. In the strong coupling regime, the phase diagram is not that simple to be accessed, as there is a substantial shift of the Fermi points with respect to the uncoupled systems and different approaches based on the full Green's function of the systems have to be adopted, which are far from the purposes of this paper 54 . We here compute the pair correlation function at the Fermi points of the isolated wire (k 1 , k 2 ). The results are shown in Fig. 2) The spin-orbit coupling makes the correlation weaker with respect to the results without spin-orbit coupling. 3) Once the Rashba interaction is switched on, the curves with different spin-orbit couplings are identical, apart from a rigid shift of Fermi points. This is even more evident in the lower panels, where the induced pair correlation is shown as a function of the k-vector. All the curves match perfectly one to the other, to indicate that the unique role of the spin-orbit coupling consists of a rigid shift. 4) F (w) (k F ) changes the sign at the superconductor nodal point k N (Fig. The superconductivity induced on a wire by proximity effect has been analyzed in detail, with the implementation of a self-consistent tight-binding code for the resolution of the Bogoliubov de Gennes Hamiltonian, complemented with the calculation of self-energy and Green's function using a path-integral approach. The TBBDG scheme allowed us to study the whole system (superconductor+wire), and to compare it either to the isolated wire or the bare substrate. We observe some interesting features emerging from our analysis. In the weak coupling regime the Fermi points of the wire are only poorly shifted with respect to the case of an isolated wire. Following Ref. 28 the system is in a non trivial topological phase when the induced pairing is negative on an odd number of Fermi points. Since spinorbit coupling has the only effect to split the Fermi points of the wire, it is easy to verify whether the criterion is satisfied, or not. This leads us to a simple, analytic, expression determining the topological phase diagram of the system as a function of the chemical potentials of the superconductor and the wire, and the spin-orbit coupling interaction α, as reported in Eq. 34. Pair correlations induced on the wire, consist of localized functions centered at the Fermi points in the momentum space. This corresponds to real-space superconducting correlations extended to many neighbors, as shown in lower panels of Fig. At stronger coupling the pair correlation functions get broadened in the k-space, and the wire Fermi points get displaced with respect to the isolated wire, and eventually proliferate. This makes the study of the topological phase diagram more involved, and it will be the subject of further studies 54 . To conclude, HTS are likely to be good candidates for TRITS, but the experimental conditions have to be carefully chosen, in order to maximize the induced superconductivity by proximity effect. In contrast to swave superconductors, d-wave superconductors have the required features for generating Majorana modes without the introduction of external magnetic fields, and this could open the way to new experimental realizations of Majorana states. After a straightforward integration of Eq. 25 Similarly, one can compute the self-energy for an arbitrary value of ∆ 0 . The calculation is slightly more involved but nevertheless the result can be presented in a closed form. Let us introduce the following functions: When ω 2 < 16∆ 2 0 cos(k x ) 2 /(1 + ∆ 2 0 ) the roots v 1 and v 2 are complex and the self-energy is given by where the matrices α = -ω 1 + 2 cos(k x )(τ z + ∆ 0 τx ) , and β = 2τ z -2∆ 0 τx , have been introduced. For ω 2 ≥ 16∆ 2 0 cos(k x ) 2 /(1 + ∆ 2 0 ), using again the relation in Eq.(A2) we obtain for the real part of the self energy: (A6) For the imaginary part of the self-energy we have