We study the fermionic boundary modes (Andreev bound states) in a time-reversal invariant onedimensional superconductor. In the presence of a substrate, spatial inversion symmetry is broken and the electronic properties are strongly affected by an antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling. We assume an arbitrary even number of nondegenerate bands crossing the Fermi level. We show that there is only one possible pairing symmetry in one dimension, an analog of s-wave pairing. The zero-energy Andreev bound states are present if the sign of the gap function in an odd number of bands is different from all other bands. One-dimensional (1D) topological superconductors have recently attracted a lot of attention, primarily in the context of searching for topologically-driven physics, in particular, the Majorana quasiparticles, in condensed matter systems. In this paper, we study superconductivity in a metallic quantum wire on a substrate, in the absence of an external magnetic field or any other TR symmetry breaking * e-mail: kirill.samokhin@brocku.ca mechanism. The pairing interaction can be either intrinsic to the wire or extrinsic, i.e., induced by the substrate. In contrast to the previous works, we do not limit ourselves to any particular models of the SO coupling and the superconducting pairing. Our goal is to find the spectrum of the fermionic states localized near the end of the wire, known as the Andreev bound states (ABS), in the most general setup, assuming only the point-group and TR invariance. Due to the lack of inversion symmetry, the electrons in the wire are affected by the antisymmetric SO coupling and form nondegenerate 1D bands. We consider an arbitrary number N of such bands crossing the Fermi level (N can be shown to be even), and present a complete symmetry analysis of the SO coupling and the superconducting gap structure, in Secs. II and III, respectively. In Secs. IV and V, we calculate the ABS spectrum using the semiclassical approach, with the boundary conditions formulated in terms of the scattering matrix. Throughout the paper we use the units in which = k B = 1, neglecting, in particular, the difference between the quasiparticle momentum and wave vector. We consider a quasi-1D electron gas, which can be created, for instance, by applying a gate voltage in the y direction to 2D electrons on a xy-plane substrate. Thus, the 3D potential U (x, y, z) affecting the electrons is assumed to be periodic or constant in x direction, but confining in both y and z directions. This system is TR invariant in the normal state but lacks an inversion center, because the substrate breaks the z → -z mirror reflection symmetry. The momentum space is onedimensional, labelled by the wave vector k = k x x, which takes values in the first Brillouin zone (BZ): -π/d < k x ≤ π/d, where d is the period of the 1D lattice. In addition to the TR symmetry, the system is also invariant under the crystallographic point operations. In contrast to higher-dimensional noncentrosymmetric systems, The energies are counted from the chemical potential and the difference between the latter and the Fermi energy ǫ F is neglected. Since the bands are nondegenerate, the TR action on the Bloch states can be written as 16 where t n (k x ) is a phase factor. Recall that the TR operator for spin-1/2 particles is K = iσ 2 K 0 , where σ2 is the Pauli matrix and K 0 is complex conjugation. Since K 2 = -1 and, on the other hand, , we obtain: Note that t n (k x ) is not gauge invariant: under a rotation of the phases of the band states, |k x , n → e iθn(kx) |k x , n , one has Therefore, the TR phase factors cannot appear in any observable quantity. To illustrate the pecularities of the electronic band structure in noncentrosymmetric 1D systems with the SO coupling, one can use the following Hamiltonian: This is the 1D version of the well-known Rashba model, see Refs. 9, 10, and the references therein. The first term, with ǫ 0 (k x ) = ǫ 0 (-k x ), describes a twofold degenerate band in the absence of antisymmetric SO coupling. While the momentum space is 1D, the spin space is still 3D, so that the antisymmetric SO coupling is described by the 3D pseudovector γ(k x ), which is real, odd in k x due to the TR symmetry, periodic in the reciprocal space, and also invariant under the point group operations, that is gγ(g -1 k x ) = γ(k x ) for all elements g of the point group. One has to remember that mirror reflections act differently on polar vectors, such as k = k x x and pseudovectors, such as γ. We have In this way, one obtains that the simplest expression for the Rashba SO coupling in 1D, taking into account the lattice periodicity, is for all five point groups, with a given in the second column of Table The Rashba SO coupling results in the lifting of the pseudospin band degeneracy almost everywhere in the BZ. Diagonalizing Eq. ( where the band index λ = ± is called the helicity. The corresponding eigenstates can be chosen, for instance, in the following form: Substituting these expressions in Eq. ( Note that one can make t λ (k x ) real and equal to sgn k x by a suitable gauge transformation of the eigenstates, see Eq. ( We assume that there are N nondegenerate bands crossing the Fermi level and participating in superconductivity. According to Appendix A, N is an even number. The 1D "Fermi surface" is given by a set of 2N Fermi wave vectors ±k F,n , which are the roots of the equations ξ n (k x ) = 0, as illustrated in Fig. The Hamiltonian is constructed using the basis of the exact band states |k x , n , which include all effects of the lattice potential and the SO coupling. In the mean-field approximation we have The first term here describes noninteracting quasiparticles in the nondegenerate bands, while the second term represents the intraband pairing between the states |k x , n and K|k x , n . The electron creation operator in the time-reversed state K|k x , n is defined as where we used Eq. ( ). Substituting Eq. ( therefore the pairing in the band representation is necessarily even in momentum. The gap functions ∆ n (k x ) have simple transformation properties under the point group and TR operations. Indeed, consider the action of an element g of the point group on the Bloch states: g|k x , n = e iφ kx ,n (g) |gk x , n , where φ kx,n (g) is a phase. It is straightforward to show that, due to the commutation of g and K, we have g(ĉ ĉ † gkx,n , therefore the gap function transforms as a scalar field, i.e., ∆ n (k x ) → ∆ n (g -1 k x ). As a consequence, the Cooper pairing in 1D is always conventional ("s-wave") in the sense that, due to the property (11), the gap functions are invariant under all the point group operations, g = σ x , σ y , or σ x σ y : Regarding the TR operation, it follows from Eq. (10) and the antiunitarity of time reversal that it is equivalent to the complex conjugation, i.e., ∆ n (k x ) → ∆ * n (k x ). Finally, under an arbitrary rotation of the Bloch state phases, |k x , n → e iθn(kx) |k x , n , the gap functions remain invariant. In a BCS-type model, the gap functions are nonzero only in the vicinity of the Fermi level, where their k xdependence can be neglected. Therefore, the superconducting state can be described by a set of complex order parameters ∆ 1 , ..., ∆ N , one per each pair of the Fermi points. The bulk quasiparticle spectrum in the nth band obtained from Eq. ( While the Bogoliubov quasiparticles in the bulk are gapped, there might exist subgap states bound to the ends of the wire. Let us consider a half-infinite superconductor at x ≥ 0. To make analytical progress, we neglect self-consistency and assume that the order parameters ∆ 1 , ..., ∆ N do not depend on x. The quasiparticle wave function in the nth band is an electron-hole spinor, which can be represented in the semiclassical, or Andreev, 17 approximation as e irkF,nx ψ n,r (x), where r = ± characterizes the direction of the Fermi wave vector rk F,n (which is not the same as the direction of propagation, see below). The Andreev envelope function ψ n,r varies slowly on the scale of the Fermi wavelength k -1 F,n and satisfies the following equation: Here v n,r = (∂ξ n /∂k x )| kx=rkF,n is the group velocity and ) is the gap function affecting the quasiparticles near the Fermi point rk F,n in the nth band. Note that v n,-= -v n,+ and |v n,± | ≡ v F,n . We focus on the ABS localized near x = 0. The corresponding solution of Eq. ( , and C is a coefficient. The Andreev approximation breaks down near the boundary of the system due to a rapid variation of the lattice potential, which causes elastic transitions between the states corresponding to different rk F,n . The general solution for the Bogoliubov quasiparticle wave function in the bulk is given by a linear combination of 2N semiclassical expressions corresponding to all possible Fermi wave vectors: The bound state energy, which has to be inside the bulk gaps, i.e., |E| < |∆ n | for all n, is found using the boundary conditions at x = 0. Depending on the sign of the group velocity, the Fermi wave vectors are classified as either incident, for which v n,r < 0, or reflected, for which v n,r > 0. We denote the former k in 1 , ..., k in N and the latter k out 1 , ..., k out N , so that k in n = -k F,n sgn v n,+ and k out n = k F,n sgn v n,+ , see Fig. The coefficients S nm form a unitary N × N matrix (S matrix), which is an electron-hole scalar, determined by the microscopic details of the boundary scattering at the Fermi level in the normal state. The Andreev amplitudes in Eq. ( with Inserting Eq. ( where Min = diag (α in 1 , ..., α in N ), and Mout = diag (α out 1 , ..., α out N ). The degeneracy of the ABS energy E is equal to the dimension of the kernel of the N × N matrix Ŵ (E). The surface ABS have been extensively studied in other superconductors, such as high-T c cuprates. In the rest of the paper we focus on the TR invariant superconducting states, in which the gap functions can be chosen to be real, with the phases taking just two values, either 0 or π. In this case, one has Without any loss of generality we assume that the first N + bands have positive gap functions, while the remaining N -= N -N + bands have negative gap functions. It is sufficient to consider 0 ≤ N + ≤ N/2 (recall that N is even), because at N/2 < N + ≤ N one can flip the signs of all gap functions by a gauge transformation. The scattering matrix can be represented in the block form as follows: where Rss ′ is a N s × N s ′ matrix (s, s ′ = ±). From Eq. ( where m+ (E) = diag (α 1 , ..., α N+ ) and m-(E) = diag (α N++1 , ..., α N ). The solution of the ABS energy equation ( To find the number N 0 of the ABS zero modes, we put E = 0 in Eq. ( Therefore, In general, since there is no reason for the blocks of the S matrix to have zero eigenvalues, we have dim(ker R++ ) = dim(ker R--) = 0 and N 0 = 0. However, there are some cases in which zero eigenvalues are required by the TR symmetry and the unitarity of the scattering matrix. In order to understand the constraints imposed on the S matrix by the TR invariance of the normal state, we express the wave function of normal electrons away from the boundary as a superposition of N incident and N reflected states: where |k ≡ |k, n is a shorthand notation for the spinor Bloch state corresponding to the Fermi wave vector k = k in n or k out n . The scattering matrix is defined by Applying the TR operation to the wave function ( Note how the "in"-and "out"-states are interchanged by time reversal. If the bulk Hamiltonian is TR invariant and the boundary is nonmagnetic, then one can expect the same S-matrix relations between the incident and reflected states in |Ψ and K|Ψ , therefore Comparing Eqs. ( The TR phase factors depend on the phase choice for the Bloch states, see Eq. ( Then it follows from Eq. ( This means, in particular, that S nn = 0, i.e., the backscattering of quasiparticles into the same band is forbidden by the TR symmetry. This last conclusion is also confirmed by the dimensional reduction of the S matrix for the 2D Rashba model. has unit norm and is a zero mode of R--. Therefore, if N + = 1, then dim(ker R++ ) = dim(ker R--) = 1 and N 0 = 2. If N + is an even number, then zero modes are not required by the unitarity and TR invariance of the S matrix. However, if N + is odd, then both R++ and R-are odd-dimensional antisymmetric matrices and, therefore, have at least one zero eigenvalue each. Thus, we come to the conclusion that the non-accidental zero-energy ABS exist only if the gap sign in an odd number of bands is different from all other bands. Namely, The zero-mode wave functions for N + = 1 are discussed in Sec. V A. In the case of just two nondegenerate bands with N + = N -= 1, Eq. ( The result ( The states with N + odd are Z 2 -nontrivial and should have a pair of the ABS zero modes, in agreement with Eq. ( The wave function of the ABS zero modes is obtained from Eqs. ( where κ n = |∆ n |/v F,n . It follows from the boundary conditions (15) that the amplitudes of the reflected states are given by B n = m S nm A m , while the amplitudes of the incident states satisfy two decoupled equations, separately in the positive-gap and the negative-gap bands: where A + = (A 1 , ..., A N+ ) ⊤ and A - = (A N++1 , ..., A N ) ⊤ . For N + = 1, we have R++ = 0 and the first equation in Eq. ( which describes a twofold degenerate zero-energy state. Using Eq. ( Superconducting quantum wires are intrinsically noncentrosymmetric, due to the breaking of the up-down reflection symmetry by the substrate. The antisymmetric SO coupling splits the Bloch bands almost everywhere, except the center and the boundaries of the 1D Brillouin zone. The form ("direction") of the SO coupling depends on the presence or absence of additional mirror reflection symmetries of the quasi-1D confining potential. In a TR invariant normal state, the 1D Fermi surface consists of an even number N of symmetrical Fermi-point pairs. If the SO band splitting is sufficiently large, then the interband Cooper pairing is suppressed and the superconductivity is characterized by N intraband gap functions ∆ n . These gap functions describe the pairing of quasiparticles in the time-reversed states in the same band, are even in momentum and invariant under all point group operations. Since superconductivity is a Fermi-surface phenomenon, one can focus on the quasiparticle properties near the Fermi points and use the semiclassical formalism based on the Andreev equations and the S-matrix boundconditions. In this way, one can make a considerable progress in the general multiband case and obtain some model-independent results. Assuming a TR invariant superconducting state, we found that there is a pair of the zero-energy Andreev modes (Majorana quasiparticles) at the end of the wire only if the gap sign in an odd number of bands is different from all other bands. always come in pairs, ±k F,n . It is easy to see that, barsome exceptional values of the chemical potential, at which either ξ n (0) = 0 or ξ n (π/d) = 0, the total number of the pairs of the Fermi points is even, see also Ref. 30. This last statement is no longer true if the TR symmetry is broken in the normal state, e.g., by an external magnetic field, which can lift the band degeneracies at the TR invariant momenta.