in different aspects of mesoscopic physics and statistical mechanics. Topological insulators are new class of materials which are characterized by a bulk band gap like ordinary band insulator but have protected conducting states on their edge or surface. These states emerge out due to the combination of spin-orbit coupling and time reversal symmetry. Also these states are insensitive to scattering by non-magnetic impurities. A two-dimensional (2D) topological insulator has one dimensional (1D) edge states in which the spin-momentum locking of the electrons gives rise to quantum spin Hall effect. A three-dimensional (3D) topological insulator supports novel spin-polarized 2D Dirac fermions on its surface. These topological insulator materials have been theoretically predicted and experimentally observed in a variety of 2D and 3D systems, including HgTe quantum wells, BiSb alloys, and Bi 2 Te 3 , Bi 2 Se 3 crystals. Moreover, proximity induced superconductivity in these systems can lead to a state that supports zero energy Majorana fermion and the phase is known as topological superconductors. In this article, the basic idea of topological insulators and topological superconductors are presented along with their experimental developement. In condensed matter systems, atoms with their electrons can form many different states of matter, such as crystalline solids, magnets and superconductors. Those states can be classified by the concept of symmetry breaking. For the above mentioned examples, translational, rotational and guage symmetries respectively, are spontaneously broken. Before 1980, principle of broken symmetry was the key concept for the classification of states of matter. The discovery of quantum Hall effect (QHE) in 1980 In recent times, a new class of topological states has emerged, called quantum spin hall (QSH) phase or topological insulator (TI) In QH effect, a strong magnetic field is applied perpendicular to a 2D electron gas in a semiconductor. Here magnetic field breaks the TR symmetry. At low temperatures and high magnetic fields, the electrons flow along the edges of the 2D sample. In Fig. We already mention that SOC i.e. coupling between spin and orbital motion is a relativistic effect most pronounced in heavy ele-ments (elements with large Lande g-factor). Although all materials have SOC, only few of them turns out to be topological insulators. Here we discuss a general mechanism for finding TI The typical band dispersion of a 2D TI is shown in Fig. The signature of 2D TI was observed in a recent experiment i.e. the system is in the topological phase, conductance appears to be quantized (2e 2 /h) as the two edge states of TI act as two conducting 1D channels contributing e 2 /h each. In contrast, when d < d c , conductance comes out to be vanishingly small akin to trivial band insulator. Here we briefly discuss the phenomenology of 3D TI Berry's phase is a geometrical phase acquired by the wave-function of a quantum particle, subjected to a Hamiltonian depending on slowly varying (adiabatic) time dependent parameters. k k x y E E F From materials point of view, bismuth telluride (Bi 2 Te 3 ), bismuth selenide (Bi 2 Se 3 ) are examples of 3D TI. These materials has been investigated experimentally using angle resolved photo emission spectroscopy (ARPES) method Topological insulators, discussed above, are not superconductor by themselves. However, superconductivity can be induced in them via a process called "proximity effect". In this process, if a non-superconducting material is kept in close contact to a bulk superconductor, then superconducting correlation can tunnel through the non-superconducting material upto a certain length scale depending on the dimension of the system and interface of the two kind of materials. Fu and Kane in their seminal work The underlying mechanism behind the emergence of MF in 3D TSC is rather a complex subject and we refer to Refs. The first toy model, for the realization of MF in 1D, was put forwarded by Kitaev in Ref. Kitaev's chain can be realized in a 1D nanowire (NW) made of semiconductor with strong SOC. The basic idea came from two independent seminal works of Oreg-Refael-VonOppen After setting up the basic architecture required for our purpose, now we discuss how the MFs emerge in the NW. The red and blue curves in Fig. Next, we introduce the proximity induced pairing potential ∆. Hence, the gap at zero momentum i.e. k = 0 decreases with the enhancement of ∆ and closes completely when B ≥ ∆ 2 + μ 2 . In this situation, the NW enters into the topological superconducting phase. Now if we focus on the "spinless" regime and project away the upper unoccupied band, then an effective intraband pwave pairing mediated by ∆ appears, which connects smoothly to the phenomena demonstrated before by the Kitaev's toy model. Since the NW is in the topological superconducting phase, a pair of MFs emerge localized at the wire's ends (see Fig. Very recently, the signature of MFs has been experimentally observed by Mourik et al. i.e. strong SOC. Niobium nitride (NbN 2 ) is used as a bulk superconductor induce superconductivity in the NW. The signature of MFs is revealed via the transport measurements. When the external magnetic field, applied parallel to the NW, satisfies the criterion B = ∆ 2 + μ 2 , zero energy Majorana bound states appear at the wire's ends. The tunneling conductance shows a large peak (quantized to 2e 2 /h in ideal conditions) at zero-bias when the Majorana mode is present and no peak when it is absent. Such zero-bias peak can be interpreted as an experimental evidence for the Majorana zero mode. In this article, we have provided a pedagogical introduction to the exciting field of topological insulator, topological superconductor and Majorana Fermions in condensed matter systems. We emphasize that a 2D TI has 1D helical edge states exhibiting QSH effect. A 3D TI supports 2D surface sates which forms a single Dirac cone. We also discuss that these systems can enter into a topological superconducting phase supporting Majorana Fermions at the vortex core. Finally, we illustrate that topological superconducting phase can also be realized in a 1D nanowire with strong POPULAR ARTICLE SOC and proximity coupled to ordinary s-wave superconductor. In the topological superconducting phase, two non-local Majorana zero modes appear at the two ends of the NW. The zero bias peak, appeared in the tunneling conductance signal, reveals the experimental signature of MFs. In TI systems, one of the recent interest is to understand the effects of electron-electron interaction in them. A TI with strong Coulomb interaction is called a "fractional topological insulator" which is one of the current topics of research in this direction. Interface between TI and other non-topological materials is also a subject of modern interest. In the context of MF, the smoking gun signal of Majorana zero mode is still lacking. Further experimental investigations is needed to explore their physical properties in detail. Moreover, there will also be a need for additional theoretical research works to understand the experimental findings. The final goal is of course to be able to control and manipulate quantum information stored in Majorana-based qubit systems, that can be implemented for topological quantum computation.