In this Supplement we provide additional information on the evaluation of the ARPES spectra using a two-dimensional fit of the measured spectral function, depending on the energy and momentum. ARPES measures the energy (E) and momentum (k) dependent spectral function A(E, k) multiplied by a transition matrix element, the Fermi function, and a resolution function where k is the bare particle energy, Σ(E, k) is the real part and Σ(E, k) is the imaginary part of the selfenergy. For a weakly correlated electron liquid, i.e., when Σ(E, k) is much smaller compared to the binding energy, the maxima of the spectral function (the dispersion) are determined by the equation In the case when Σ(E, k) = -λE as in a Fermi liquid close to the chemical potential and when Σ(E, k) is independent of the momentum, the dispersion follows E = k /(1 + λ). Introducing Z = 1/(1 + λ) = m/m * , defines the renormalization constant Z, which is a measure of the the coherent fraction of the spectral function relative to the total spectral weight. This relation also determines the mass enhancement of the quasi-particles m * /m. With increasing coupling constant λ or with increasing effective mass enhancement the maximum of the spectral function is shifted to lower binding energy. To determine the coherent part of the self-energy in weakly interacting systems, the bare particle energy is replaced by v k k where v k is the bare particle dispersion. In this way the spectral function at constant energy (which is called a momentum distribution curve MDC) is a Lorentzian and the maximum of this Lorentzian determines the renormalized dispersion * = /(1 + λ). The full width at half maximum W multiplied by the bare particle velocity determines the life time broadening or the scattering rate Γ = 2 Σ. This type of evaluation is strictly applicable only for weakly correlated systems and a linear bare particle dispersion. There are, however, numerous examples in the literature where this method was also applied for highly correlated materials and a non-linear dispersion. In a second common evaluation method the MDCs are fitted by Lorentzians and Γ(E) is derived by multiplying the width in momentum space with the renormalized velocity. We will show below that also this evaluation method is exact only in particular cases. In this section we develop a new method for the evaluation of the imaginary part of the self-energy for highly correlated systems and a non-linear dispersion. Furthermore we discuss the errors which may appear when the traditional methods are used. We propose to evaluate the measured spectrum by performing a two-dimensional fit using Eq First we test the method using a calculated spectrum, using the self-energy function from a "marginal" Fermi liquid in which the coherent part of the spectral weight approaches zero (Z = 0), a concept originally devised to phenomenologically describe the normal state of the cuprate superconductors. One assumes that the scattering rates at low energy are much higher compared to a normal Fermi liquid due to strong correlation effects and/or nesting. The self-energy is given by [3] where u = max(|E|, kT ), kT is the thermal energy, λ M F is a coupling constant, and E c is an ultraviolet cutoff energy. At low temperatures the imaginary part of the self-energy is linear in energy. The Σ is no longer linear in energy as in a Fermi liquid and one has to solve Eq. (2) numerically to derive the dispersion. In the calculations we use the very high coupling constant λ M F = 1.4 corresponding to a slope β = 2.2 of Σ(E) vs. E. The high coupling constant was used to demonstrate the difference between the new evaluation method and the standard evaluation method using the Lorentzian width and multiplying it with the renormalized velocity. In the calculation we also used a parabolic bare particle dispersion and a cutoff energy of E c = 1.5 eV. The calculated spectral function together with the dispersion derived from Eq. ( As shown previously As shown in Fig. In Fig Next we illustrate the new method by showing the detailed evaluation of real ARPES data. We select the spectral function of the inner hole pocket of K x Ba 1-x Fe 2 As 2 x = 0.4 shown in Fig. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is used to study the scattering rates of charge carriers from the hole pockets near Γ in the iron-based high-Tc hole doped superconductors KxBa1-xFe2As2 x = 0.4 and KxEu1-xFe2As2 x = 0.55 and the electron doped compound Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 x = 0.075. The scattering rate for any given band is found to depend linearly on energy, indicating a non-Fermi liquid regime. The scattering rates in the hole-doped compound are considerably larger than those in the electron-doped compounds. In the hole-doped systems the scattering rate of the charge carriers of the inner hole pocket is about three times bigger than the binding energy indicating that the spectral weight is heavily incoherent. The strength of the scattering rates and the difference between electron and hole doped compounds signals the importance of Hund's exchange coupling for correlation effects in these iron-based high-Tc superconductors. The experimental results are in qualitative agreement with theoretical calculations in the framework of combined density functional dynamical mean-field theory. Introduction. Originally iron-based superconductors (FeSC) ARPES is a suitable method to obtain information on the strength of correlation effects since it delivers the energy (E) and momentum (k) dependent self-energy function Σ(E, k) from which one can derive the mass enhancement and the scattering rate of the charge carriers due to many-body effects There are numerous experimental studies on the mass enhancement in FeSCs using various methods which apparently support the strong influence of correlation effects, in particular related to Hund's exchange interaction. A recent compilation of such data was published in Ref. Recently, ARPES studies of electron doped FeSCs on the scattering rate or the lifetime broadening Γ(E), equal to twice the imaginary part of the self-energy Σ(E), have been presented by several groups an incoherent behavior at higher temperatures when the lifetime broadening Γ exceeds the binding energy of the charge carriers. Therefore, experimental work is needed to investigate the nature of the bad metallic phase, to identify the intermediate regime, to check the theoretical predictions and to analyze the energy-dependence of the scattering rates. In this contribution we use ARPES to study the scattering rates in the hole doped "122" ferropnictides K x Ba 1-x Fe 2 As 2 and K x Eu 1-x Fe 2 As 2 and compare the results with those derived from our previous ARPES experiments Experimental. Single crystals were grown using the self-flux technique and characterized by transport and thermal properties measurements Theoretical. We have performed combined density functional dynamical mean field theory ("DFT+DMFT") calculations We have chosen the Local Density Approximation (LDA) to the exchange-correlation functional, and Hubbard and Hund's interactions obtained from the constrained random phase approximation (cRPA) Results. In the present contribution we focus on the scattering rates of charge carriers from hole pockets and in particular from the inner hole pocket. The reason for this is that in the previous studies of electrondoped and P substituted compounds, Γ(E) was found to be strongest for the inner hole pocket Similar ARPES experiments were performed at T =1 K on the slightly overdoped compound Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 x = 0.075 (T c = 22 K) for the inner two hole pockets near Γ which were already presented in previous publica- tions We have analyzed the ARPES data by a new method using a two-dimensional fit of the measured spectral function A(E, k) In this way we obtain Σ(E, k) for the two inner hole pockets of K x Ba 1-x Fe 2 As 2 x = 0.4 and Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 x = 0.075, depicted in Fig. Discussion. The linear-in-energy increase of Σ(E) signals no evidence for a coupling to bosonic excitations. If e.g. phonons would determine Σ, a step like increase should be observed at the phonon energies close to 40 meV On the basis of phase space arguments it is easy to understand that due to the Pauli principle, in a normal Fermi liquid the scattering rate should be proportional to E 2 Generally the validity of the quasiparticle description was defined in the following way The difference between the scattering rate of the inner hole pocket and the middle hole pocket has been predicted by theoretical calculations To obtain deeper insights into the nature of the non-Fermi liquid regime in the present case and to derive an at least semi-quantitative comparison of the experimental results with theory we have performed calculations in the framework of DFT+DMFT. The results are consistent with the expectation of a highly doping-dependent incoherent state Results for the calculated Σ(E) are presented in Fig. Summary. Our study of the scattering rate of the charge carriers from the two inner hole pockets in holedoped and electron-doped iron-based superconductors reveal a non-Fermi-liquid behavior in a large energy range. The incoherence of the charge carriers increases when going from the electron to the hole doped systems. The present experimental results underline the importance of Hund's exchange interaction for the correlation effects in hole doped FeSCs with a 3d count close to five. The comparison with DFT+DMFT calculations yields almost quantitative agreement for the hole-doped compound. Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research Dresden, Helmholtzstr. 20, D-01069 Dresden, Germany 2 Max Planck Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, D-01187 Dresden, Germany 3 Institut für Festkörperphysik, Technische Universität Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany