The relation of topological insulators and superconductors and the field of nonlinear dynamics is widely unexplored. To address this subject, we adopt the linear coupling geometry of the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model, a paradigmatic example for a topological insulator, and render it nonlinearly in the context of superconducting circuits. As a consequence, the system exhibits topologicallyenforced bifurcations as a function of the topological control parameter, which finally gives rise to chaotic dynamics, separating phases which exhibit clear topological features. Prominent examples are the integer quantum-Hall effect, chiral edge bands or topologically-protected Majorana fermions However, in actual physical systems nonlinearities are omnipresent, either desired or not. They give rise to outstanding and various effects as bifurcations, synchronization and chaos appearing in different kinds of fields reaching from cold atoms, biology, chemistry to superconducting circuits One of the simplest models exhibiting topological effects is the celebrated Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model We demonstrate that the nonlinearly-rendered SSH model exhibits topologically-enforced bifurcations which lead to chaotic dynamics. Our analysis is based on an effective coupling potential and refers to the number of fix points of two specific topologically distinct limiting cases which are depicted in Fig In the literature, the effect of nonlinearities due to interactions are mostly considered in the context of ground- * georg@itp.tu-berlin.de state properties of topological systems The system. We consider a one-dimensional system of N nonlinearly coupled nodes as sketched in Fig. arXiv:1611.01467v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 4 Nov 2016 where the nonlinearity enters via the function These EoM can be modeled by a system of superconducting islands coupled by inductively shunted Josephson junctions as sketched in Fig. The position-dependent couplings possess an alternating structure and read where 2α is the difference of two subsequent couplings. Thus, the system exhibits the same coupling geometry as the SSH model The EoM are designed in such a way, that in the linear case δ = 0, the spectrum of the modes reproduce the properties of the standard SSH model, which exhibit a topological phase transition at α = 0 This quantity is proportional to the current flowing from node n through the resistance R to the ground and is therefore experimentally accessible We always choose φ n (t = 0) = 0 as initial state. In panels (a) and (b), we show the time evolution after an (a) Current ∆I1 = I1(t) -I bulk (t) in units of t0/R flowing from node n = 1 through the resistance R to the ground in the linear system δ = 0. Parameters are α = -0.4t0 (non-trivial, solid) and α = 0.2 t0 (trivial, dashed), R = 0.02 t0Ω and N = 200. T drive = 2π/Ω denotes the driving period, where Ω = √ 2t0. (b) as in (a) but for δ = 0.95. In this case, the system exhibits chaos. (c) Pn(Ω) in units of (t0/R) 2 in Eq. ( initial transient phase in order to make sure that we have approached the corresponding attractor. To obtain a clearer understanding, we depict the difference ∆I n (t) = I n (t) -I bulk (t), where I bulk (t) denotes the bulk current. This is the time-periodic current under a periodic boundary condition φ N +1 = φ n and reads I bulk (t) = Im φ 0 Ωe iΩt with φ 0 = I ac /Ω(iR -Ω) For the parameters in panels (a), the time evolution exhibits a harmonic oscillation. Due to the subtraction of the bulk current, the oscillation at node n = 1 for α = 0.2 (trivial phase) vanishes nearly completely, while the oscillation amplitude is extremely large for α = -0.4 (non-trivial phase). To further analyze this dynamics, we consider the position-dependent power spectral density For long times, the dynamics of the linear system displays harmonic oscillations with frequency Ω of the external driving. For this reason, we depict P n (Ω) in Fig. Here we observe an alternating pattern of finite and almost zero power as a function of n. Thereby, the power is finite on odd (even) nodes in the non-trivial (trivial) phase. This is a typical topological feature of the linear model for n = 1 as a function of δ. We observe, that starting from δ = 0, the power rapidly decreases. This happens, as the driving frequency Ω is no more in resonance with the boundary mode of the linear system, which is modified due to the nonlinearity δ. For δ = 0, P n,tot and P n (Ω) coincide, as the time evolution is harmonic with frequency Ω. This situation can be observed for a broad range of δ values. In a region around δ ≈ 1, both quantities strongly deviate and we find chaos. We are interested in this region, so that we concentrate on δ = 0.95 in the remainder of this Letter. Order parameter. A useful quantity which gives insight into the dynamics of the system is given by which we introduce as an order parameter for the phase diagram in Fig. . There we depict χ as function of α and I ac , where we observe several regions among which we find periodic and chaotic dynamics. If the system synchronizes with the external driving then P n,tot ≈ P n (Ω) and χ = 1. Contrary, for chaotic dynamics, the power distributes over many modes, so that χ ≈ 0, as can be seen in Fig. Topological character. The chaotic dynamics in regions B 2 and C is qualitatively different. To see this, we consider the following quantity In the linear system, ∆ = 1 and ∆ = -1 in the non-trivial and trivial phase, respectively (compare with Fig. Time-independent effective equations. To gain more insight, we derive time-independent nonlinear equations that capture the underlying processes. We observe that the time evolution of φ n in the regular regimes χ ≈ 1 is essentially given by a harmonic oscillation up to a small correction ∆ n (t). Accordingly, we split the time evolution as ( The dynamics in zeroth order of ∆ n is thus determined by the amplitudes a n . After inserting ansatz (9) into the EoM (1), we perform a Fourier analysis. In doing so, we obtain a set of nonlinear equations [31] with which determine the amplitudes a n . Here J 1 (x) denotes the first-order Bessel function. The G n can be considered as generalized force functionals in Fourier space and V ef f (x) as an effective coupling potential. The latter is depicted in Fig. instead of finding a root of G n = 0 and check if the minimum of G is a root of Fix-point analysis. The outcome of the fix-point analysis of ( To understand this, we first investigate the limiting cases α = ±t 0 in more detail. For α = t 0 , the system consists of N/2 decoupled dimers, as sketched in Fig. In the case α = -t 0 , we have N/2 -1 decoupled dimers and two isolated nodes at the ends of the chain as sketched in Fig. To illustrate this, we included in Fig. The middle fix point corresponds to a stable attractor of the system. When we lower α, the stable attractor vanishes in a bifurcation, and the unstable fix point remains (panel for α = 0.2t 0 ). Consequently, there is no stable periodic attractor, so that the dynamics gets chaotic. By further decreasing α, the remaining root can either become stable so we enter again in a regular regime, or stays unstable, which finally results in the chaotic phase B 2 . Discussion. Our investigations reveal interesting effects appearing in the nonlinearly-rendered SSH model. The time evolution exhibits period dynamics, quasiperiodicity and even chaos. By introducing the order parameter ∆ quantifying the topological character of the dynamics, we found that there are two types of chaotic dynamics, only one of which is indicated clearly by ∆. In the other chaotic region, the time evolution surprisingly still exhibits the topological features of the linear model. We emphasize, that the order parameters ∆ and χ are experimentally accessible by measuring the current of the first two nodes n = 1, 2 only. This could be possible with similar experimentally techniques as in Ref. Moreover, based on a Fourier analysis of the EoM, we have identified the reason for the chaotic region separating the two areas with distinct topological character ∆ = ±1. Comparing the structure of the fix points of the two topological limiting cases, we found that it is not possible to smoothly transform one into the other without a bifurcation. Thereby, the previously stable fix point vanishes, which gives rise to chaos. This is in strong analogy to the topology of the linear system, where the presence and absence of topologically-protected boundary modes is also apparent from a consideration of the topological limiting cases. Despite of this analogy, it is not possible to apply the topological concepts known from the linear model, namely the winding number Finally, we emphasize that due to their topological origin, our findings do not depend on details of the system. The topological-enforced bifurcations appear also, e.g., with different kind of dissipation or for δ = 1. The latter case is particularly important as such kind of Josephson junction arrays are used to fix the voltage standard Kirchhoff's first law states that all currents flowing into a node sum up to zero. For the circuit in Fig. where I n and I n;C denote the current flowing through the resistance and the capacity, respectively and where V n is the voltage of node n with regard to the ground. Additionally, we have defined the external current I ext (t). The currents coming from node n ± 1 denoted as I n;± read where η ± = n mod 2 + δ 1,∓1 . Inserting this into Eq. ( Finally, we choose the external driving to be Here we provide more details concerning the derivation of the effective equations and the calculation of the reconstructed phase diagram. We insert the ansatz Eq. ( which is exact up to first order in ∆ n . As explained in the Letter, we omit here the term proportional to sin(Ωt) as this has anyway a minor influence on the dynamics since R is small. We require that all terms proportional to cos(Ωt) vanish, which gives us Eq. In this differential equation the variables ∆ n appear only linearly. The terms proportional to δ in the first and second line constitute a periodic driving. This driving can lead to an exponential growth of the variables ∆ n as a function of time. In the reconstruction phase diagram, we thereby denote the root of G n = 0 in Eq. ( In this section, we derive an exact expression for the periodic dynamics of the linear system for δ = 0 in the long-time limit. For the sake of simplicity, we consider the semi-infinite system, so that we can resort to the so-called transfer-matrix method. To enable a better analytical treatment, we complexify the EoM by replacing cos Ωt by e iΩt and use the ansatz φ n = φ n,0 e iΩt . In doing so, the EoM get time independent and read -Ω 2 φ n,0 = t n,n+1 (φ n+1,0 -φ n,0 ) + t n,n-1 (φ n-1,0 -φ n,0 ) -iΩRφ n,0 + I ac . ( In order to get rid of the inhomogeneity, we transform the equation by φ n,0 -φ 0 = t1 (φ n+1,0 -φ 0 -φ n,0 + φ 0 ) + t2 (φ n-1,0 -φ 0 -φ n,0 + φ 0 ) , where φ 0 is the solution of the translationally-invariant system with periodic boundary condition φ n+1 = φ 1 , which reads φ 0 = I ac Ω(iR -Ω) Finally we define the new coordinates ξ n,0 = φ n,0 -φ 0 , so that the equation to solve now reads ξ n,0 = tn,n+1 (ξ n+10 -ξ n,0 ) + tn,n-1 (ξ n-1,0 -ξ n,0 ) This is now in an appropriate form to apply the transfer-matrix method. To propagate the mode function from one node n to the next one n + 1, we can use the relation and A = (t n,n+1 + t n,n-1 ) + Ω(iR -Ω). Defining t 1 ≡ t 0 + α and t 2 ≡ t 0 -α, it is not hard to see that for even n ξ n+1,0 ξ n,0 = (M) where