Under various conditions of the growth process, when the presumably unconventional superconductor Sr2RuO4 (SRO) contains micro-inclusions of Ru metal, the superconducting critical temperature increases significantly. An STEM study shows a sharp interface geometry which allows crystals of SRO and of Ru-metal to grow side by side by forming a commensurate superlattice structure at the interface. In an attempt to shed light as to why this happens, we investigated the atomic structure and electronic properties of the interface between the oxide and the metal micro-inclusions using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Our results support the observed structure indicating that it is energetically favored over other types of Ru-metal/SRO interfaces. We find that a t2g-eg orbital mixing occurs at the interface with significantly enhanced magnetic moments. Based on our findings, we argue that an inclusion mediated interlayer coupling reduces phase fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter which could explain the observed enhancement of the superconducting critical temperature in SRO samples containing micro-inclusions. The superconducting state of Sr 2 RuO 4 (SRO) has been intensively studied 1 since its discovery in 1994 The electronic properties have been studied by a number of methods which are summarized in Ref. 1, including the local density approximation (LDA) method In more recent studies, superconductivity in bulk SRO is found to be enhanced under uniaxial 001 The unexpected enhancement of T c from 1.5 K to al-most 3 K, when micro-sized ruthenium metal inclusions are embedded inside SRO in the eutectic system during crystal growth STEM images of a representative interface were presented in Ref. 27 and in the present paper with higher resolution as shown in Fig. In the lowest energy interface the Ru-metal grows its arXiv:1611.07130v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 22 Nov 2016 first layer commensurate with the SRO interface at a wavelength which nearly corresponds to eleven Ru metal atoms for every two periods of the SRO crystal along its own c axis. Therefore, the inclusions connect RuO 2 planes through a commensurate interface which is almost perfectly ordered at the atomic scale. We show that this interface is stable against phase separation and it is more stable than other conceivable interfaces between SRO and Ru-metal. A spin polarized GGA calculation yields significant magnetic moments of the Ru atoms in the SRO phase near the interface. Our study establishes a clear picture of the stable Ru-Sr 2 RuO 4 interface which is important in understanding the unconventional "3-K" phase. We also argue that our findings, that the Ru inclusions form a nearly atomically perfect interface with the SRO crystal, imply the emergence of a significant interlayer coupling which could give rise to reduction of phase fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter characterizing the various RuO 2 planes. This is expected to lead to an enhancement of the superconducting critical temperature as observed in the SRO crystals with Ru inclusions. The paper is structured as follows. In Sec. II, we present the computational details of our DFT calculations of the observed interface structure and stability consideration of various terminations. In Sec. III, we analyze STEM observations based on the DFT-based calculations and also discuss our detailed results obtained from these calculations. In Sec. IV, we discuss the possible causes of increased T c based on our findings. Last, in Sec. V, we highlight our conclusions and the implications of this work. The platelet inclusions are the result of excess Ru (more RuO 2 in the mixture than needed to make stoichiometric SRO) in the initial mixture. We will show by means of DFT calculations that the interface seen in our STEM images is low enough in energy to be preferable than macroscopic phase separation of SRO and Ru metal. In addition, we will show that other related interfaces are energetically higher than the one shown in Fig. First, we notice in Fig. STEM image provides great information on the interface structure but leaves an ambiguity on any oxygen atom near the interface and the Ru atom positions in the SRO [010] direction which is perpendicular to the STEM field of view. This is the first item to address by means of our DFT calculations, the technical details of which are discussed later. By examining various possibilities, we find that in their optimum positions, the Ru pair columns bridge diagonal oxygen atoms of the terminating SRO layer. On one side of the interface these Ru pair columns form a similar type bond to oxygen atoms as the 1.95 Å Ru-O bond in the rutile phase of RuO 2 , and on the other side they have an hcp Ru metal environment. This arrangement leaves the meandering SRO termination layer unchanged subject to ionic relaxations, and is consistent with the experimental image in Fig. The implementation of the observed structure by DFT calculation ideally requires at least eleven bulk unit cells of the hcp Ru metal phase commensurate with two conventional bulk unit cells of the SRO along the SRO [001] axis, and at least six bulk unit cells of the hcp Ru commensurate with four bulk units cells of the SRO along the SRO [010] direction. Such a supercell proved computationally unfeasible, particularly due to the large number of ruthenium atoms. Instead, to keep the supercell size reasonable, we used a supercell geometry with a stretched unit cell length of 13.52 Å along the SRO [001] direction and double the SRO bulk unit cell length in the SRO [010] direction. In this reduced supercell containing 128 atoms, shown in Fig. First, we find that the energy needed for breaking apart the interface of our reduced structure to create the two constituent slabs -SRO with [100] surfaces and Ru metal with [001] surfaces (Fig. Second, we compare the energy of our reduced structure to the energy of a similar supercell but with flat SRO [100] -Ru [001] interface (shown in Fig. The reduced geometry suffers from artificial planar compression of its Ru metal phase and uniaxial strain of its SRO phase but it accommodates the interface Ru pair columns in the grooves created by the terminating hcp Ru layer. By sliding the Ru metal phase across the interface in Fig. The maximum cost of misalignment of the interface Ru pair columns is 4.49 eV, less than the cost of stretching and compressing the constituent phases. It follows that in any interface between the SRO (100) surface and Ru (001) surface, meandering Ru interface columns with the experimentally observed periodicity is the most stable structure. As a final part of our stability argument, we consider the possibility that there can be other types of interfaces without these interface Ru columns which are more stable that ours. In particular, the (001) surface of SRO can be cleaved with a terminating SrO or RuO 2 layer and its interface with a ruthenium hcp layer can be conceived. We show in Fig. Lastly, the following question arises. Since we find that the observed interface lowers the energy with respect to bulk SRO and a semi-infinite Ru metal, why the system does not try to create more such interfaces and instead it grows mesoscopic size inclusions. Indeed, our findings indicate that the lowest energy state of such a system of SRO with excess Ru metal should be a state with a high density of such interfaces separated by a microscopic-size length. However, the combined system was created under non-equilibrium conditions of the eutectic mixture which do not allow for the system to search for a global lowest energy state. First, at a relatively short-time scale the free energy is only locally minimized and, then, the system freezes in a macroscopic state of domains which require an overwhelmingly large amount of time to find the state which is the global minimum. More specifically, once a few layers of Ru metal have grown, it becomes locally energetically favorable for more Ru atoms from the excess of Ru, to attach themselves to those existing Ru metal layer. Forming another interface which combines a simultaneous and coherent arrangement of many atoms is a much slower process (i.e., a low entropy state) than simply adding to the existing Ru metal layer an additional single Ru atom. This means that the path to the actual ground state is "narrow" and requires a very slow process and, as a result, the system gets stuck in other metastable local free-energy minima. Thus, although a high density of such interfaces is preferred by taking into consideration just the energy of the system, the meandering termination layer of SRO with intact RuO 2 octahedra and interface Ru columns are long-range phenomena generally suppressed by the large entropy present in the high temperature eutectic mixture. Spin-GGA computations were performed using planewave basis set (cutoff of 540 eV) with the projected augmented wave methodology 29 used to describe the wavefunctions of the electrons as implemented in the VASP package Our computed geometry (Fig. In the interface Ru atom columns, there are two different types of RuO 2 bonds in each pair. One has bond angle close to 90 • and Ru-O bond length close to the planar Ru-O(1) bond length, whereas the other has bond angle ∼ 115 • and Ru-O bond length ∼ 1.83 Å. Both Ru atoms lack the planar square lattice coordination and are expected to have different orbital structure compared to those in SRO. Indeed, we find significant t 2g -e g mixing in each of them. Figure The observation that the "3-K" superconductivity is unconventional with the presence of a hysteresis loop Superconductivity is believed to arise from pairing within the RuO 2 layers. The interlayer coupling between RuO 2 planes is very weak which is expected to lead to large amplitude phase fluctuations of the order parameter as is the case of the Cuprate superconductivity In the case where inclusions are present, a remarkably ordered interface geometry between tetragonal unconventional superconductor Sr 2 RuO 4 and hexagonal closed pack metal Ru has been discovered as illustrated in both our STEM images of Fig. It has been shown experimentally A remarkably ordered interface geometry between tetragonal unconventional superconductor Sr 2 RuO 4 and hexagonal closed pack metal Ru formed as metallic inclusions during the growth process of the superconductor has been revealed by STEM studies and has been investigated and understood in the present paper using DFT. The heterojunction is characterized by regular columns of Ru pairs in the SRO [001] direction and clean octahedra terminations of the ruthenate oxide. Using DFT, we have correctly reproduced the experimental structure including the positions of interface oxygen atoms and along directions hidden to any STEM study and investigated the electronic structure of the interface. We have found rotated octahedra, modified Ru d-orbitals and enhanced magnetic moments near the interface in the SRO phase. Application of GGA to magnetism should be taken with caution since it does not correctly account for correlations, but given the proximity to Stoner instability, it is possible that the interface is in or energetically very close to a ferromagnetic ground state. Our study provides a possible explanation of the enhancement of the superconducting T C when Ru metal inclusions are present. We find that these inclusions form microscopically well-ordered interfaces and structure. The interfaces acts as "ladder" which couple the superconducting order parameter of a large number of RuO 2 SRO layers over a micrometer-size length. These inclusions should lead to an interlayer coupling which can significantly reduce the superconducting order parameter phase fluctuations, thereby increasing the superconducting critical temperature. This observation opens up exciting prospects when a similar growth process is applied to the case of the cuprate superconductors. If these inclusions introduce an interlayer Josephson-Junction type coupling, we should expect a significant enhancement of the superconductivity critical temperature. This work was supported in part by the U.S. National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, which is partially funded by the NSF DMR-1157490 and the State of Florida. A. P. Mackenzie and Y. Maeno, Rev. Mod. Phys.