We build a holographic model for the pairing fluctuation pseudogap phase in fermionic high temperature superconductivity/superfluidity based on the BCS-BEC crossover scenario. The pseudogap originates from incoherent Cooper pairing and has been observed in recent cold atom experiments. The strength of Cooper pairing and hence the BCS-BEC crossover is controlled by an effective 4-Fermi interaction and we argue that the doubletrace deformation for charged scalar operator is a close analog in large N field theories. We employ the double-trace deformed Abelian Higgs model of holographic superconductors and propose that the incoherent fluctuations of the charged scalar in the bulk is the holographic dual of the fluctuating Cooper pairs. Using a Madelung transformation and the velocitypotential formalism, we develop a quantum fluid dynamics as an effective theory for these bulk fluctuations. The new fluid dynamics takes care of the boundary conditions required by AdS/CFT and encodes the vacuum polarization effect in curved spacetime. The pseudogap in conductivity can be related to the plasma oscillation of this bulk fluid. Since its discovery less than two decades ago, the AdS/CFT correspondence One of the driving forces behind AdS/CMT is to develop effective field theory descriptions for the phenomena of high temperature superconductivity and superfluidity. In the simplest setup, the pure charged AdS black hole geometry is dual to the gapless normal phase at high temperature The aforementioned story is a familiar one to holographic model builders; however, it is not the whole story of the pseudogap in high temperature superconductivity and superfluidity. In this paper we want to turn our attention to another pseudogap phenomenon that is similar yet distinct from the cuprate one. Recall that fermionic high temperature superfluidity has also been realized and observed in ultra-cold atomic systems since 2004 In fact, the pairing fluctuation pseudogap in the BCS-BEC crossover is an example of a family of phenomena that could exist in many quantum field theories, where fluctuations play a crucial role. It offers a broad and generic paradigm and can fit into many field theories of different microscopic details. As holography is viewed to be a generic framework for studying strongly interacting quantum field theories, it is already interesting enough to ask the question on a purely theoretical ground how holography can incorporate this paradigm into it, regardless of its applications on experimental phenomenology. This is another motivation of ours to initiate this project. Another issue involving the holographic study of high temperature superconductivity is the identification of the second axis of the phase diagram. Unlike conventional fermionic superconductivity and superfluidity, whose phase diagrams are usually one-dimensional and labeled by the normalized temperature T /T F (whereas in holography T F is usually replaced by the chemical potential or appropriate power of the charge density), high temperature superconductivity has two-dimensional phase diagrams. The second axis is an external tunable knob in the experiments: doping for cuprates and scattering length for cold atoms. There is no consensus in holography how these shall be realized in the bulk theory. In this paper, we propose to use a double-trace deformation This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we will give an introduction to the experimental observations of the pseudogap in cold atom systems and the pairing fluctuation theory in the BCS-BEC crossover scenario, and discuss what they imply for holographic model building. In Section 3, we set up the Abelian Higgs model of holographic superconductivity with a double-trace deformation, review the basics in a slightly different perspective and discuss how this model will be extended without adding a new bulk field to generate the pairing pseudogap phase. Sections 4 and 5 consist of two steps that transform the conceptual ideas developed in Section 3 into a practically calculable model based on fluid dynamics. Section 6 focuses on the bulk dynamics of the hydrostatic configuration which we propose corresponds to the ground state of the pseudogap. Section 7 discusses bulk dynamics of charges and how the pseudogap in AC conductivity can be related to the oscillations of these charges. Section 8 consists of a summary and comments. Notation: d is the spacetime dimension of the field theory, hence the bulk has d + 1 dimensions. M, N denote the bulk spacetime indices. μ, ν denote the boundary spacetime indices. I, J denote bulk spatial indices while i, j boundary spatial indices. We also use the notation v to denote the boundary spatial vector with components v i . We choose the general ansatz for the metric to be and near the boundary, the asymptotic AdS metric takes the form where z ∈ [ , z h ] is the radial coordinate, R the AdS radius, → 0 the location of the boundary and z h the location of the horizon. The stress tensor and charge current operators are defined as In this section we give a pedagogical introduction to the experimental facts and theoretical ideas of the BCS-BEC crossover scenario, focusing on physics closely related to the pairing fluctuation pseudogap. For readers interested in more details, we recommend the reviews In experiments, a pseudogap is defined as a gradual depletion of the density of state of the elementary fermions near the Fermi surface at a temperature above T c , the onset temperature of superconductivity or superfluidity. It can be directly measured by scattering of the elementary fermions out of the system using techniques such as angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) in condensed matter Conventional superconductivity and superfluidity in systems of fermions and bosons are described by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory We can summarize the BCS-BEC crossover scenario in the following. It describes a system of elementary fermions with tunable attractive interaction. The fermions pair into bosons. The energy scale associated with pairing is the binding energy, which corresponds to an onset temperature T * . Below this temperature, the pairs start to form and the binding energy manifests itself as an energy gap in the system which can be directly detected in experiments by scattering the fermions off the system. Once the paired bosons are formed, they can occupy both the ground state and excited states, labeled by different momenta. As the temperature keeps lowering, the paired bosons tend to populate more lower energy states. Eventually at some critical temperature T c , the Bose-Einstein condensation of the boson pairs takes place and the ground state is macroscopically occupied: a coherence starts to form. The pairing temperature T * shall never be lower than the condensation temperature T c : this is simply the statement that the bosons have to form first before they condense. One limiting case is T * = T c , i.e. the pairs condense as soon as they form -this is the BCS limit. The other limiting case is T * T c , where the pairs have already formed even at room temperature which make it looks like we start with bosons -this is the BEC limit. In between these two limit, there is a large regime where the two temperatures are comparable but not equal. This is the regime of unconventional superconductivity and superfluidity for which the BCS-BEC crossover scenario is proposed. Figure As can be seen from Figure Charge Configuration Field Theory Holography where the numbers in the is a huge coherent pairing state whose phase at different positions is well synchronized. When the excited pair states are populated, it corresponds to exciting Goldstone bosons of this condensate to randomize the phase and destroy its coherence at larger scales. This phase decoherence restores the U (1) symmetry that otherwise would be broken by the condensate. Now the non-vanishing expectation value cc (where c is the field operator for the elementary fermions) of the fermion pairs goes back to zero at large scales. This is "incoherent Cooper pairing". In field theories, these two perspectives are almost instantaneously equivalent. However, in holography, the second perspective of phase decoherence of the condensate has a more straightforward bulk realization which is the direction that we will pursue in this paper. The first viewpoint based on fermion pairing is more obscure in holography because the elementary fermions in field theory usually do not have an explicit bulk counterpart. It is mathematically viable to study pairing in the bulk, which has in fact been done A key feature of the physical picture that we have just described is that there is no competing order or hidden symmetry breaking in the BCS-BEC crossover scenario. The pseudogap parameter and the superconducting gap parameter share the same microscopic origin and the same symmetry. The only obvious difference is that the latter is complex and the former is real because its phase is washed out by phase decoherence. This will be an important guiding principle in our holographic model building. Trying to generate more complicated classical background configurations by introducing additional bulk fields other than the original one that produces the superconducting condensate is equivalent to modeling competing orders in the field theories (see for example Before directly jumping into holographic model building, it is instructive to have a look at field theoretical approaches to the pairing fluctuation pseudogap. Here in alignment with the condensed matter literature, we will adopt the notation that c and c † denote fermionic operators and b and b † bosonic operators. The field theoretical approaches in condensed matter and cold atom physics usually start with the Hamiltonian H = H 0 +H int . Here H 0 is the Hamiltonian for free elementary fermions (electrons in condensed matter physics and fermionic atoms in cold atom physics): we will not specify its specific form since we will eventually pass to a dual holographic description. For us, we can view H 0 as denoting a general class of field theories (especially CFTs) which have the standard holographic dual description. H int takes the following single-channel form in momentum space (2.1) Here c σ and c † σ are the field operators of the elementary fermions in the system with spin index σ =↑, ↓. This type of 4-Fermi interaction shall be viewed as an IR effective operator that deforms the original field theory given by H 0 . It is generated from some more fundamental interactions between the fermions in the microscopic theory by interacting out the UV degrees of freedom. For example, for conventional BCS type superconductors, the fundamental interaction between fermions is the phonon, and by integrating it out, we end up with effective interactions between fermions of the above form. Thus the form of the interaction potential V ( k, k ) is related to microscopic physics, such as the momentum cutoff (spatial range) of the interaction, which will serve as a UV cutoff of this low energy effective description. where φ( k) is normalized to be dimensionless, and its Fourier transform is denoted as φ( x). Define the following operator 3) The physical meaning of b † ( x) is to create a pair of elementary fermions whose center-of-mass is located at x. φ( r) is the relative wave-function of this pair in its center-of-mass frame. In the context of fermionic superconductivity and superfluidity, b † is the creation operator of Cooper pairs and the form of φ( r) is determined by the symmetry of pairing, i.e. s-, p-or dwave. We will assume s-wave symmetry so φ( r) = δ d-1 ( r). Now the interaction Hamiltonian in position space can be simply written as The interaction Hamiltonian looks just like a chemical potential term for Cooper pairs, with the interaction strength λ playing the role of chemical potential. From high energy theory's point of view, we can view the operator b as a charged scalar single-trace operator of low conformal dimension (possibly equal or close to that of elementary fermion bilinears) in the undeformed field theory specified by H 0 , and is dual to a charged bulk scalar in the holographic theory. The interaction H int is then a double-trace deformation, similar to that studied in the context of AdS/CFT correspondence in In BCS-BEC crossover, the λ ∼ 0 regime corresponds to the BCS limit, where the interaction is weak. As we tune λ to approach λ c , we enter the unitary regime where the renormalized interaction is strongest. Later we will see fluctuations are also strongest in this regime. As we keep tuning λ to pass the unitary regime, the bound state between fermions are tighter and tighter and they dimerize. As λ → -∞ we are entering the other asymptotic regime opposite to the BCS limit -the BEC limit. Although the strength of the bare coupling |λ| is even greater than |λ c | here, the renormalized (residual) interaction between dimers becomes weaker. Thus this is also a weak coupling regime. The coupling λ is dimensionful and its scale is set by an UV energy scale which is related to the range of the interaction potential V , or equivalently a momentum cutoff in φ( k). In AdS/CFT, this UV cutoff is related to the location of the boundary. For us, the boundary is located at z = , where is a small length scale. Thus -1 is proportional to the UV cutoff energy scale, or we can say itself is related to the small range of the contact potential (assuming the interaction potential V is s-wave), which is in fact usually the smallest length scale in cold atom problems. We can define a dimensionless coupling λ by dividing λ with appropriate power of this UV cutoff. The critical value of the coupling λ c is also set by this UV cutoff. The main modern approaches to the pairing fluctuation problem of BCS-BEC crossover in condensed matter and atomic physic are diagrammatic approaches. We refer readers interested in the diagrammatic approaches to the reviews Let S 0 [c] denote the action of the undeformed field theory specified by H 0 in the above. The elementary quantum fields are c σ and c † σ (which we will just write as c for simplicity), among others which we do not write explicitly, and their path integrals are collectively denoted as ́Dc. The generating functional Z 0 and effective action Γ 0 for this undeformed theory are where b shall be viewed as a composite operator defined by (2.3), and J b is the source coupled to it. Of course there can be other sources coupled to other operators. We will not write them explicitly. Now we add the interaction term H int given by (2.4) with coupling parameter λ to deform the original field theory. We will call this field theory specified by the full Hamiltonian H = H 0 + H int the deformed field theory. This deformation corresponds to adding the following interaction action to the action S 0 [c]. The deformed generating functional Z λ and effective action Γ λ is To manipulate this path integral, we employ the standard trick of Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation where υ and υ † are the Hubbard-Stratonovich auxiliary fields. A 1/λ coefficient in front of the path integral has been dropped since it will not have any physical consequence. Then the generating functional becomes The path integral over c can now be formally performed by using the definition of the undeformed effective action (2.6), which yields This last equation establishes a formal relation between the effective actions of the undeformed and deformed theories. It also serves as the starting point of our holographic model building. It is valid for field theories considered in both condensed matter and high energy theories whose interactions have a similar structure as what we have just discussed. Thus this formula is the bridge that allows us to travel back and forth between the realm of non-relativistic field theories in condensed matter and cold atom physics and that of conformal field theories and holography in high energy physics. Although the path integral over the auxiliary field υ can not be done exactly, this formula is the starting point of many theoretical studies using different approximations to extract physical information from it. It has been studied in To proceed from (2.9), we write υ = ῡ + δυ, where ῡ is the saddle point value and δυ is the fluctuation around the saddle point. The connected n-point correlation functions of operator b are given by functional derivatives of the effective action Γ λ [J b ] with respect to J b . Since we only want to illustrate the general structures of the path integral, for simplicity, we will ignore details of the ordering of operators and assume 2-point functions bb and b † b † are vanishing or negligible. The saddle points of (2.9) are given by the condition This saddle point condition is a self-consistent equation for ῡ since it appears in both terms. On the other hand, we can directly take the functional derivative of (2.9) and then use this saddle point condition to simplify it, and we obtain where the subscripts emphasize that b here is both a function of coupling λ and source J b , i.e. the non-equilibrium one-point function of the deformed theory. The superscript "sadd" stands for "saddle point". In the latter case we have a superconducting phase with a broken U (1) symmetry, which describes the evolution of the condensate from BCS limit to BEC limit as one tunes the coupling λ. Here we have either a broken U (1) symmetry (i.e. b = 0) or trivial phase (i.e. υ = 0), but there is no room for the pairing fluctuation pseudogap phase, which corresponds to unbroken U (1) symmetry (i.e. b = 0) and non-trivial gapped phase (i.e. υ = 0). As the pseudogap is related to fluctuations of the condensate and the saddle point approximation is a perfect mean field theory which suppresses all fluctuations, we have to go beyond the saddle points. Later we will see precisely the same thing happens in the holographic dual theory as well. We now look at the Gaussian fluctuations around the saddle points. The effective action (2.9) up to quadratic orders in δυ can be written as Γ ] the contribution from Gaussian fluctuations that we are going to investigate now. To proceed, first we combine the saddle point condition (2.10) and the one-point function Taking one more functional derivative of it and using where we have used the definition of the two point function Using the above relation, Gaussian fluctuation part of the effective action can be expressed in term of the saddle point 2-point function as Notice here we use ̃dd xd d x to emphasize that the integral is actually non-local since δυ and δυ † are not at the same point and the two-point function G sadd bb † [J b ; λ] is also a non-local function depending on two different locations. The integral can be localized in momentum space, and it can also be written formally as a functional determinant: but these are mathematical details that are not relevant here. A quantitative evaluation of (2.13) is hard and is not what we will pursue here. However, from its structure we can see when the fluctuations are important. Recall that the renormalization of coupling λ yields three different regimes of distinct characters, we will discuss what happens to the Gaussian fluctuations in these three regimes respectively. • BCS limit: λ → 0. This is the weak coupling limit and the deformation (2.4) can be treated perturbatively. It can be shown that G sadd bb † [J b ; λ] does not depend on λ in a too singular way, then the denominator in (2.13) vanishes as λ → 0. Now the exponential factor is highly oscillatory and its major contribution to the path integral of δυ comes from the region where δυ = 0. This means the Gaussian fluctuation is highly suppressed and the saddle point approximation is a pretty good one. This is in fact what we expect for the BCS limit since it is a perfect mean field theory. • BEC limit: λ → -∞. In this regime, G sadd bb † [J b ; λ] can be calculated after a little algebra under certain simplification (for example, in • Unitarity: λ ∼ λ c . This is the regime where scattering length diverges and the pair 2-point function approaches its pole Now the denominator of (2.13) diverges, and the path integral does not suppress the fluctuations at all. Hence the fluctuations reach maximum and calculations obtained from the saddle point approximation may not be reliable at all. This regime is experimentally the most interesting one and theoretically the hardest. In any case, when the fluctuation δυ is non-trivial, it will nullify the proportionality relation between υ and b . Recall (2.11) is only a special case for υ = ῡ and b when δυ is completely absent. In cases when δυ is non-trivial, δυ or υ does not even have a unique fixed value in the effective action. In the path-integral sense, it is really a superposition of infinitely many configurations with different values of υ. Each individual configuration with a specific non-vanishing value of υ breaks the U (1) symmetry, but the superposition of all these configurations restores the U (1) symmetry. This gives rise to a new phase where b = 0 but υ is non-trivial in the effective action (2.9), and the effective action will not equal to the undeformed gapless effective action (2.6). It can describe a phase of unbroken U (1) symmetry with a pseudogap parameter generated by the superposition of non-vanishing υ configurations (in some sense, a non-trivial "average" υ). This suggests how the pseudogap phase arises from the path integral formalism. 3 Double-Trace Deformed Holography: Going beyond Saddle Points Now we go back to the path integral formula of the effective action (2.9), and seek to proceed in a completely different direction than has previously been explored in the BCS-BEC crossover literature: the holography. Along the line of what we have been doing so far, the whole holographic structure can be viewed as a second and fancier Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation for the path integral in (2.9), whose purpose is to help to integrate out the first Hubbard-Stratonovich auxiliary field υ exactly! The spirit of the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation is to linearize a non-linear interaction term, and thus to facilitate path integrals over the original quantum fields. Recall that the reason why we introduce the original Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation with υ is to decouple the double-trace deformation (2.4) from being quadratic in b to being linear in b, and then we know how to formally perform the path integral for c with linear b using the formula (2.6). We end up with (2.9). From the mathematical point of view, this is simply a change of integration variables. The gain is c has been integrated out exactly, and the price we pay is to introduce another path integral over υ, which we do not know how to carry out rigorously because Γ 0 [J b + υ] depends on υ in a very complicated way. Recall the coefficients of Γ 0 's Taylor expansion at each order are the corresponding n-point functions, thus Γ 0 [J b + υ] contains all non-negative powers of υ in general. We only know how to perform the path integral over υ in (2.9) rigorously if we can write Γ 0 [J b + υ] in a way that is at most quadratic in υ. In this sense, we need to introduce a second Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, and the one that does the magic is holography! We now write down the bulk action as a holographic Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation for the effective action Γ 0 [J b ] defined in (2.6), which is in fact the Abelian Higgs model of a holographic superconductor. According to the standard AdS/CFT dictionary, a charged scalar operator b of charge q φ and conformal dimension ∆ + is dual to a charged scalar φ in the holographic bulk. The effective action can be written as a path integral of φ in the bulk manifold M where we will denote the radial coordinate by z and z = is the location of the boundary. Here we only write down the bulk scalar part explicitly. Notice that the way we write down the above equation means that we treat the dynamics of φ in the bulk as a full quantum field theory in curved spacetime. Of course the bulk dynamics involves other fields, particularly the bulk metric g M N and a Maxwell gauge field A M under which φ is charged. For brevity we will not write down their actions and path integrals explicitly because they do not participate in what will be discussed in the rest of this paper. The actions appearing in the above bulk path integral have the following form where R is the AdS radius, D M = ∇ M -iq φ A M is the gauge covariant derivative, ∇ M is the general relativistic covariant derivative in curved spacetime, ∂M is the boundary of M and γ is the determinant of the induced metric at the boundary ∂M. ∆ ct and ∆ sc are dimensionless constants. What we really want to emphasize in this note is the term given in (3.4), the boundary action S sc which is both linear and quadratic in the source J b . It is this term that does the magic of the second Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation that we advertised earlier. The first term in (3.4) which is linear in J b was used in where S bulk remains the same as in (3.2) and the boundary terms now read Here the new coefficients ∆ ct (λ, ) and ∆ sc (λ, ) are Recall that earlier we have said that -1 is related to the UV momentum cutoff of the interaction potential V in the field theory. We see introducing the double-trace deformation only changes the coefficients of the boundary terms from ∆ ct and ∆ sc to ∆ ct (λ, ) and ∆ sc (λ, ), while no other holographic structure is changed. The above expressions are the starting point of the holographic construction for pseudogap phase. They not only let us recover some well known results at classical level such as the mixed boundary condition first introduced in Varying the bulk action (3.2) yields the bulk equation of motion (EOM) for φ, the Klein-Gordon equation, together with a boundary term. Combining this boundary term with the variations of (3.3) and (3.4), and setting the coefficient of the variation at the boundary to vanish, we obtain a general expression for the boundary condition Here we use the notation φ to denote the bulk solution of φ that satisfies its classical EOM, i.e. the saddle point value of φ, in the same sense of how we use ῡ to denote saddle point value for υ in the previous section. From now on, we will mostly work in momentum space where k μ denote the momentum in the time and transverse spatial directions and k 2 = k μ k μ . The two independent solutions of φ near the asymptotic AdS boundary are where I ±ν are the modified Bessel functions. Plugging this equation into (3.11), using z∂ z I ν (z) = νI ν (z) + zI ν+1 (z) where the second term zI ν+1 (z) can be ignored for small z, and we have Notice that to arrive at the above relation, we have only assumed 1, but not any relation between λ and . Using the boundary condition Plug in (3.12) and (3.13), the on-shell effective action for the deformed theory in position space is By taking functional derivative with respect to J b , the expectation value of the scalar operator b is At this moment we want to pause to make some comments on subtleties hidden in the above calculation. For the expression of Γ0 [J b ] given in (3.14), if ν < 1, the term written explicitly there is the only non-vanishing term in the limit → 0. However, if ν 1, there will be additional finite or divergent terms coming from O k 2 2-2ν . Such terms are actually quadratic in J b and come in positive integer powers of k 2 . Thus they contribute some additional terms to 2-point functions which are analytic in k 2 , i.e. contact terms. Contact terms in momentum space, whether finite or divergent in , arise naturally from the Fourier transform of position space correlation functions which involve negative powers of distance. They usually do not contain any interesting physical information, thus we can simply ignore them. They can be removed by adding additional boundary terms to (3.13) is the double-trace deformed boundary condition. Together with (3.15), they can be written as It is conventional to set ∆ ct = ∆ + ) These reproduce the familiar mixed boundary conditions first presented in which relates our bulk field φ viewed as a second Hubbard-Stratonovich field to the first Hubbard-Stratonovich field υ. For hunting for the pseudogap phase, the current holographic result suffers the same problem as we discussed below (2.11): it produces only two distinct phases: the gapless normal phase with unbroken U (1) symmetry and the superconducting phase with a broken U (1) symmetry. After setting J b = 0, both φ -and φ + , and thus the classical solution of the bulk field φ, are proportional to b . When b = 0, the U (1) symmetry is broken and we must have a non-trivial φ in the bulk: this is the superconducting phase studied in For the pseudogap phase to be realized in holography, what we expect is that the bulk scalar φ shall behave non-trivially in the bulk, similarly to how it behaves as charged hair in the classical holographic superconductor models. This will allow φ to carry a finite amount of charges and energy-stress outside the black hole horizon. This charged matter of φ will leave its imprint as a pseudogap in the field theory correlation functions of stress tensor and charge current, since these correlators are calculated from the perturbations of the metric and gauge field in the bulk. This is similar to the story that has been well studied in holographic superconductor models. Meanwhile, we do not want this non-trivial profile of φ to contribute to b , but this is forbidden at the saddle point level by the mixed boundary condition we have just derived because of the coherence of the classical dynamics. The tie between the nontrivial φ and non-vanishing b can only be broken and washed out by incoherent quantum fluctuations. Thus φ shall be in a superposition of incoherent states, as opposed to a coherent state of condensate. Macroscopically, it behaves like a normal fluid, as summarized in Table Strictly speaking, when we are considering effects due to bulk fluctuations, we are going away from the classical level into the quantum regime in the bulk. For top-down AdS/CFT, we are moving away from N = ∞ limit Our strategy of singling out φ's fluctuation is only justified a posteriori. The logic is completely bottom-up and may only work for the phenomenon of pairing fluctuation pseudogap that we want to study. In the standard top-down narratives of AdS/CFT correspondence, such as the duality between N = 4 SYM theory with gauge group SU (N ) and type IIB superstring theory in AdS 5 × S 5 background If the N = ∞ limit is uplifted, all the bulk fields will enter the quantum regime simultaneously, and it is not consistent to include only some of them in a calculation while to ignore the others. There are special cases where all quantum fluctuations can be calculated (for example in Actually the fact that all bulk couplings are equal in the above example is really an artifact due to the high symmetries of this particular field theory. Although this may be common in other known top-down duality, this can hardly be a generic case. For holographic duals of more realistic field theories (if they exist and can be derived), it is very possible that the bulk couplings will have a hierarchy that allows a consistent quantum treatment for only part of the bulk fields in certain regimes of interest. Now imagine if we can schematically integrate out the other bulk fields before discussing the dynamics of φ, what will the resulting effective action for φ look like? Recall that we start with a local quadratic action for φ in (3.2). In the absence of the hierarchy, as in the N = 4 SYM case, we will end up with a highly non-local effective action for φ. This is the case that we assume will not happen to us in the bottom-up model. What is likely to happen is that there is a hierarchy of couplings, which results in the fact that the effective action for φ is gapped and can be expanded as a Taylor series. At the quadratic order, this only causes a renormalization of the kinetic and mass couplings. At higher order, it induces effective self-interactions for φ (such as a |φ| 4 term) via loop effects. At the phenomenological level, we can reproduce this effect simply by adding non-linear interactions to (3.2) while still keeping other fields classical, and treating the existing parameters as the renormalized ones. Of course now the coefficient of the |φ| 4 term will have to be set by hand rather than computed from first principle. A non-vanishing |φ| 4 vertex in the bulk will generate nonvanishing 4-point functions for the Cooper pair operators b and b † in the field theory. In BCS-BEC crossover scenario, this represents a non-vanishing residual interaction between Cooper pairs. Similarly, higher powers of |φ| 2 induce higher n-point functions of b and b † . If the former case of a non-local action of φ takes place, it implies in the field theory, all higher n-point functions of the Cooper pairs are not negligible and they add up non-perturbatively in the effective action. Physically, this means the residual interaction, and the residue of the residual interaction etc, of the Cooper pairs are all strong, which will trigger a chain reaction of dimerizations of Cooper pairs. This is an instability of the system and implies the effective degrees of freedom is no longer the Cooper pairs, but some other operators with large charges and high dimensions. This case goes beyond the BCS-BEC crossover scenario, thus will not be considered here. This is an argument we provide from the phenomenological perspective for only treating φ as a quantum field. A second fact which helps to single out the quantum fluctuations of φ is that we identify the external knob for the crossover with the double-trace deformation of the scalar operator b. Turning on this double-trace deformation puts the field φ in a unique position compared to other bulk fields. Upon correctly normalizing the double-trace coupling λ, the quantum fluctuation of φ can be enhanced and elevated out from all other quantum fluctuations. This agrees with the BCS-BEC crossover scenario. In the BCS limit which corresponds to turning off the double-trace deformation, we have a perfect mean field theory with highly suppressed fluctuations. This implies in the holographic dual, we should expect that φ will sit back at its saddle points when the double-trace deformation is off. Only a non-vanishing doubletrace deformation will kick φ out of its saddle points. What is really important here is the difference between the presence and absence of the double-trace deformation. This is similar to the logic of Now even for the field φ away from its saddle points, we will not treat it fully quantum mechanically. For example, integrating out φ will also induce bulk vertices for other fields, or make their action non-local. We will not be interested in describing such effects. The single quantum effect of φ most relevant to us is its phase decoherence. At scales that are macroscopically small but microscopically large, the phase of the quantum states of φ are random. This can be viewed as a depletion of the coherent condensate by exciting Goldstone bosons. The excitations of Goldstone bosons wash out the phase coherence partially or fully at distances much longer than the typical wavelengths of the excitations, resulting in a reduction of coherent length. This is dual to the incoherent Cooper pairing in the field theory. The effect of phase decoherence due to thermal fluctuations has been demonstrated in To be more specific, let us write down the mode expansion of φ in the bulk and second quantize it φ(x) = φ0 (x) + j>0 φj (x). (3.19) Here we add "ˆ" to all second quantized operators. "0" labels the ground state and positive "j" labels excited states. We do not need to know the specific form of each mode for our purpose. Recall that φ is a bosonic field. A bosonic field can condense on its ground state. Once this happens, there will be a macroscopic population in the ground state and it forms a coherent many-body wave function. Typically in the study of BEC, we can macroscopically treat the ground state wavefunction as a classical field satisfying certain classical EOM, such as the Gross-Pitaevskii equation Whether ∇ M θ(x) is vanishing or not depends on the macroscopic motion of the fluid, but ∇ M φe (x) ∇ M φe (x) = 0 because the phase factor averages to zero. Although the phase decoherence cannot be used to evaluate the path integral (3.6), it can determine which terms in (3.6) will vanish after performing the path integral and thus helps us to simplify and decouple the effective action into two separate parts. To see this, let us write φ = φ + φ e in (3.6) and change the path integral variable from φ to φ e . φ is just the condensate field. φ e is the new functional variable in the path integral corresponding to the second quantized operator φe discussed above, and it eventually becomes φe (x) after the path integral is done, thus we can think φ e in the path integral integrand satisfies the relation where S bulk [φ], S λ ct [φ; ] and Γλ [J b ] are given by (3.2), (3.7) and (3.14) respectively. Notice we should have written φ e as the path integral variable in the second equation, but since it is a dummy variable, we are free to rename it φ. The above two equations are the first key result in our holographic model building. First, the fact that Γ flct λ does not depend on the source J b is precisely what we need for constructing the pseudogap phase: the fluctuations can develop non-trivial profiles in the bulk to gap the correlation functions, but will not give a non-vanishing expectation value for b (if the condensate part is vanishing), because they do not couple to J b . The fluctuations will never break the U (1) symmetry. Γ flct λ contributes only to the zero-point function, i.e. the free energy. In this sense, it is the vacuum polarization, and its value (whether finite or infinite) will not enter any physical observable defined via correlation functions; it is just an overall factor that always get canceled in the calculation of connected correlation functions. Secondly, there is a match of gap parameters in the duality. In the superconducting phase, the bulk profile of φ is the holographic dual of the superconducting gap parameter in the field theory, and both of them are complex, with amplitude and phase parts. On the contrary, in the pseudogap phase, the phase of the fluctuations φ e is washed out by phase decoherence and does not have a well-defined value, but its amplitude is still non-vanishing and well defined (this is what we called ψ(x) earlier). It is this amplitude that is dual to the pseudogap parameter in the pairing fluctuation theory of BCS-BEC crossover The remaining question is how to perform the path integral of φ in Γ flct λ given by The idea of using fluid as an effective description for incoherent fluctuations are not new in the context of holography. This idea has been applied to study bulk fermions in Fermi-Dirac statistics in flat spacetime. However, this classical formalism can not be directly applied to our case by just replacing the fermionic constituents with the corresponding bosonic ones. The purely classical fluid dynamics must be now upgraded to include certain quantum effects in curved spacetime to make it work in the holographic context that we are interested in, for the following reasons. • Negative mass square. Our boson fluid is charged. There is a local chemical potential, typically non-vanishing in the bulk, to control its charge density. According to Bose statistics, this chemical potential shall lie between the particle-hole (i.e. anti-particle) mass gap. In flat spacetime, this mass gap is just the mass of the charged scalar, whose mass square is always positive. However, in holography, the scalar mass squared can be slightly negative as long as is above the Breitenlohner-Freedman (BF) bound • Boundary condition. The parameter that controls the strength of fluctuations in the field theory is the double-trace deformation, which serves as the external tunable knob in the phase diagram of BCS-BEC crossover. It enters into the dual holographic dynamics only through boundary conditions. This is both true at the classical level and beyond, because the double-trace coupling λ only appears in boundary actions (3.7) and (3.8), thus does not directly modify bulk dynamics. To get physically sensible results, our fluid must be sensitive to the boundary condition of the scalar field. For classical fluid dynamics, it is not clear how this can be implemented in a manifest and unique way. This is the second hint for a quantum fluid (or at least a modification of classical fluid dynamics). • Anisotropy of stress tensor. For a classical perfect fluid, the transverse spatial components and the radial component of the stress tensor are equal: T i i = T z z (no sum in i). This is built-in in the constituent relation of the stress tensor. On the contrary, the renormalized stress tensors in curved spacetime such as a black hole background usually do not have this isotropy. This can be seen by direct calculations, for example in • Stability near horizon. In the absence of a black hole, even in highly curved spacetime, classical fluid dynamics can still yield a star-like stable solution. It may have large deviation from the correct physical solution due to ignorance of quantum effects, but at least we have a solution. However, things change in the presence of a black hole. Near the horizon, a classical bosonic fluid can not enjoy any hydrostatic configuration unless its stress tensor diverges. This is even true for extremally charge fluids. This is because the Bose statistics requires the chemical potential of a bosonic fluid to lie between its particle-hole mass gap, which constrains the electric force to be always smaller than the gravitational force. The microscopic origin of these quantum effects can be traced to the "normal ordering" of the field operators in curved spacetime if we directly perform the path integral of φ in (3.6), as discussed in • Perfect: only the zeroth order terms in hydrodynamic expansion will be considered. The dynamics has a Lagrangian formalism. There is no dissipation. • Thermal: the fluid has a non-vanishing entropy density, or equivalently there is some kind of notion of local temperature conjugate to the local entropy density. The entropy density shall be viewed as a well defined local observable, but the local temperature we will introduce is more a mathematical construction rather than a physical observable that can be read off from a thermometer carried by a certain observer, except perhaps in the asymptotic region. The presence of entropy and temperature is a major difference of our incoherent fluid dynamics from that of superfluid dynamics. • Equilibrium: the fluid is locally at equilibrium. No entropy is produced anywhere, i.e. the divergence of the entropy current vanishes everywhere. Meanwhile, the black hole at the quantum level can be viewed as a thermal reservoir at Hawking temperature, and the fluid is in thermal equilibrium with the black hole. • Hydrostatic: this is defined in a static geometry which admits a time-like Killing vector in the region that we are interested in (i.e. outside the horizon). The fluid velocity is normalized and parallel to the future-directed time-like Killing vector everywhere, and all physical observables are translationally invariant along the Killing time direction. For AdS-Reissner-Nordström black hole, the Killing time is just the Poincar?chwarzschild time t, and the above statement means all physical observables are independent of t. From the perspective of quantum field theory in curved spacetime, this is a Hartle-Hawking type state The quantum aspect of the fluid is mainly related to the renormalization due to vacuum polarization (i.e. Casimir effect) in curved spacetime • The mass square of the scalar field is renormalized and shifted in curved spacetime from a negative value to a non-negative one, and it is the latter that appears in the fluid's EOS as a mass gap in Bose statistics. • The stress tensor and charge current are also renormalized in curved spacetime. The renormalized ones are conserved and regular everywhere outside and at the black hole horizon • The local EOS acquires a coherent quantum correction part due to vacuum polarization. In this note, we will develop a Lagrangian formalism that encode all the above features. Most of these features will be manifest in the development of our formalism, except for the last two points regarding the regularity at the horizon and quantum correction to the EOS. We will discuss these two points in more details in the follow-up paper It is hard to derive fluid dynamics in a mathematically rigorous way from microscopic theories. However, there are certain procedures that can guide us and offer enough physical insights along the way. Since our quantum fluid dynamics is more complicated than standard perfect fluid dynamics, it is easier and more secure to work at the action level rather than at the EOM level. Fortunately, for a perfect fluid without dissipation, an action principle is possible. For us, there will be two major steps to go from the microscopic theory specified by We introduce the Madelung transformation where ψ(x) and θ(x) are both real functions. Now we have separated the complex scalar field φ(x) into its amplitude part ψ(x) and a uni-modular part φ(x). 7 We require ψ(x) to satisfy the following Klein-Gordon equation in the bulk: where ∇ 2 ≡ g M N ∇ M ∇ N . Given a radial profile ψ(x), the above equation can be viewed as a definition for the effective mass m ψ (x), which is a local function, not a constant. In fact, in the literature, there is another name for the mass square m 2 ψ : it is called the quantum potential, or Bohm potential, defined up to a proportionality constant as 8 We can see this quantum potential is nothing but the mass square m 2 ψ according to the radial profile equation (4.2). This quantum potential always appears after Madelung transformation (4.1) of a scalar equation (Schrödinger/Gross-Pitaevskii equation or Klein-Gordon equation) as a consequence of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle Notice for the uni-modular part, For the bulk action (3.2), using the Madelung transformation (4.1), integrating by parts the kinetic term of ψ and using ψ's EOM (4.2), the action can be written as 7 Throughout this note, we will add " ̃" to all quantities that are directly related to or derived from the uni-modular part φ(x). 8 In the literature the term |φ| 2 is usually written as √ n where n has the meaning of number density in non-relativistic cases. From this action, we see that the bulk action of the uni-modular field φ is very similar to that of the original field φ, with two differences: (i) there is an overall factor of ψ 2 ; (ii) the effective mass square m2 is shifted as Typically, in a fluid description, macroscopic quantities such as the entropy density and the pressure of the fluid, are related at the microscopic level to the incoherent phase fluctuations of the quantum field, i.e. the field φ here. We will think of the incoherent fluid as an effective description of the φ part, while the amplitude ψ is a radial profile that satisfies classical dynamics given by (4.2). We will view the mass m as an effective mass gap between particles and antiparticles in this fluid. From this perspective, such a mass squared shall always be positive m2 0. (4.7) This is a physical requirement we will impose on the fluid dynamics. On the contrary, in holography the original mass square of the scalar m 2 φ is usually chosen to be negative. If one views this m 2 φ directly as the mass square related to the particle-antiparticle gap in the fluid, it will be meaningless. The way to reconcile this contradiction is through the mass shift (4.6): due to the radial profile ψ and its EOM (4.2) which are both non-trivial in curved spacetime, m 2 ψ will be non-trivial and it shifts the negative value of m 2 φ to the non-negative value of m2 . i.e. up to a constant zero-point energy -m 2 φ , m2 is just the quantum potential U Q . This agrees with what we have discussed earlier that the quantum potential has no classical counterpart, because it is related to the mass renormalization which is a pure quantum field theory effect. To incorporate EOM (4.2) into the transformed action, we introduce a Lagrange multiplier χ to put the transformed action off-shell, and rewrite it as following The bulk charge current is From now on we will add "flct" to the current and stress tensor to remind us that this is only the fluctuation part. There is also a condensate part which we will omit most of the time. This is justified for the linear scalar field we are considering because the condensate and the fluctuation parts decouple at the effective action level. The above relation is similar to eq. ( which satisfies the usual normalization condition for velocity u 2 = -1. Notice for normal fluid ξ 2 < 0. μ h has the dimension of energy. Its physical meaning is enthalpy per charge, which will be clear later. In the rest of this section, we will view μ h and u M as independent (of metric) and physical variables, instead of ξ M . The correctly normalized charge density ρ can then be read off using ρ = -u M J flct M as this is in fact the same as eq. (2.9) in We now define the rescaled charge density (rescaled by the radial profile ψ) associated with the phase fluctuations as ρ and the corresponding rescaled charge current JM flct is Here such that the combination κ f ψ/κ φ is dimensionless. In AdS/CFT, we can choose κ f to be set by the length scale of the AdS radius R. But the choice does not really matter, because κ f , κ φ and R will completely drop off all the EOMs in their dimensionless version. Now the expression for the " ̃" part takes the standard perfect fluid form. Using the transformed action (4.9), we can derive the stress tensor of the fluctuation by taking functional derivatives with respect to the metric. The stress tensor of the fluctuation can be split into two parts -the part resulting from the incoherent phase and that from the amplitude: The first line of the action (4.9) gives the phase part: We can now identify the rescaled incoherent phase part of the stress tensor T M N phase as ) where the energy density εphase and pressure p are Notice the above relations implies the following constraint and the lower bound corresponds to εphase -p when μ h m. The second line of (4.9) gives the amplitude part of the stress tensor where we have defined the short-hand notation ∂ M ≡ g M N ∂ N . Now using the expression for p and u 2 = -1, the on-shell bulk action can be written as This is an on-shell action for the fluid. The difference from the usual fluid action in flat spacetime is the appearance of radial profile function ψ 2 in the bulk action. From now on, we will view (or propose) this action, together with EOM (4.2), as our first principle for the fluid dynamics. It is this action and EOM that we will pass on to further calculations. Notice that the boundary term shall not be forgotten; it will play a crucial role in getting boundary conditions for the fluid later. To incorporate the EOM (4.2) into the action by a Lagrange multiplier χ, we obtain the partially off-shell fluid action which is the fluid version of (4.9). From now on, m ψ shall be understood as a short hand notation for the relation (4.6). The variations of the action with respect to ψ and χ are In the above expression, the first two lines give the bulk EOMs for ψ and χ respectively; the last line will yield two independent boundary conditions for ψ and χ when the other boundary term for ψ given in (3.7) is included. The action we have obtained in (4.23) is still not the final version that can be used in actual calculation, because for the pressure p, we have not identified what its field variables are. In grand canonical ensemble, we shall view p as a function of temperature T , chemical potential μ and effective mass m. The functional relation between them is the EOS: p = p T , μ, m . Even so, at this moment we still do not obtain the correct EOMs by varying T , μ and m because the action for the p part is still on-shell. To arrive at the full off-shell action which can correctly produce a set of EOMs that are physically meaningful, we will use the socalled velocity-potential representation of a perfect fluid We now introduce velocity-potentials for the off-shell action (4.23), which is our quantum extension of the example given in (A.5). The full off-shell action is Here the functional form of p T , μ, m will be given by the EOS. We will discuss its form for our quantum fluid in the follow-up paper (5.2) The above two equations form the complete off-shell action for the quantum fluid in the bulk. In the rest of this section, we will show what dynamics they produce. First, variations of η, s, ρ, T , μ, θ s , θ and θ m yield the following equations Varying ς, we have two solutions We will call the solution on the left the quantum branch and the right the classical branch. The former is the one we are mainly interested in. The variation with respect to m gives . Multiply it by u M , and using the above EOMs, we have . We define the thermal energy density of the incoherent fluid ε via the thermodynamic relation ε + p = T s + μρ, ( i.e. ε shall really be viewed as a short-hand notation for T s + μρ -p. Using (5.12), we have In ) (5.17) Here we can see the physical meaning of μ h is enthalpy per charge. In fluid dynamics, it plays the analogous role of mass in Newtonian dynamics. In the first equation for ∂ M θ , if we consider the (super-)fluid dynamics for the condensate instead, we will only have the ∂ M θ term appearing on the right; the second term proportional to s is a major difference between a coherent (super-)fluid (which has vanishing entropy density) and an incoherent thermal fluid. The third term with ς is a consequence of the mass renormalization effect. Using (4.24), the variation of χ and ψ in the bulk yield the following equations for them The ratio of the two profile fields satisfies the following differential equation It is more convenient to view the ratio of χ/ψ rather than χ itself as an independent field. This is especially helpful when taking some limit or discussing the dynamics in asymptotic regions. Furthermore, if we view √ ψχ and ψ/χ rather than ψ and χ as independent fields, then their EOMs read Although these equations look more complicated than the previous equations for ψ and χ, they will be more useful when discussing bulk dynamics because in the following we will see the boundary conditions are naturally written in terms of √ ψχ and ψ/χ, rather than ψ and χ. When deriving the above EOMs, we have generated a few boundary terms by integration by parts. We now collect all the boundary terms in the variation of the full off-shell action: To make sure the whole equation vanishes, all three lines must vanish separately. The vanishing of the last line implies u z z= = 0. (5.23) This is nothing but a statement that the fluid can not flow through the boundary, i.e. bulk flow streamlines near the boundary must be tangential to the boundary. Vanishing of the second line yields (ψ -χ) Vanishing of the first line yields which, under the help of (5.24), can be written as If we replace √ ψχ in this boundary condition by the amplitude of the condensate field |φ 0 |, it is the same as the boundary condition for the condensate in the absence of the source. In quantum field theory in curved spacetime, an important quantity for calculating the renormalized stress tensor is the vacuum polarization φ † (x)φ(x) Using the full off-shell action (5.1), we have Putting it on-shell using (5.12), we have . (5.26) Thus we see in the quantum branch, the quantity √ ψχ is nothing but the amplitude of φ † φ , very much like | φ| in the condensate case. In the condensate case, the amplitude of the vacuum polarization | φ| is the holographic dual of the superconducting gap parameter of the field theory. In the same sense, √ ψχ is the bulk dual of the pseudogap parameter: the pseudogap exists when √ ψχ is non-trivial. It is more useful to view the product and ratio quantities √ ψχ and ψ/χ, rather than the individual fields ψ and χ, as independent fields in the bulk analysis, because the former two have more explicit physical meanings, as well as neater boundary conditions (5.25) and (5.24). By taking functional derivative of the off-shell action (5.1) with respect to g M N and A M , and using the EOMs, the on-shell stress tensor and charge current are Here we replace the subscript "flct" used in previous sections by "fluid" to emphasize these are results from the fluid description, but they are the same quantities. Here we see, due to the presence of ψ and χ, the second line of T M N fluid introduces some anisotropic deviation from the standard isotropic perfect fluid form of the first line. The pressure along the radial direction and that along the transverse directions are different. Such anisotropy has been seen in quantum field theory calculations of the renormalized stress tensor, for example, that of the Hartle-Hawking vacuum of Schwarzschild geometry and η has the meaning of enthalpy density η = εphase + p. Notice that for the incoherent phase part, the enthalpy density is still the sum of the energy density εphase and the pressure p of the incoherent fluid, but the former is different from the thermal energy density ε just computed from the EOS in the quantum branch: there is an additional contribution to the total energy density in the form of m2 -m 2 φ mς given by (5.12), due to the fact that m is not a constant but a local field. This is a consequence of the mass renormalization effect; or equivalently, it can be viewed as the part of Casimir energy density due to the quantum potential U Q discussed earlier. We now show that the EOMs lead to the conservation of stress tensor, under a certain condition, so as to agree with what is expected from the Bianchi identity for the Einstein equation. To complete the circle, we have to add the Maxwell sector. where M and e A is the coupling constant of the Maxwell sector. The Maxwell equation reads The Maxwell field's contribution to the stress tensor is Using [∇ P , ∇ N ] A Q = -R M QP N A M , the cyclic identities R M N P Q + R M QN P + R M P QN = 0 and F P Q R M N P Q + 2R M P QN = 0 and the Maxwell equation, we can show (5.30) From the fluid (scalar fluctuation) part, using ψ and χ's EOMs, we have (5.31) Using the last two equations and T matter The conservation of stress tensor requires the right hand side to vanish, which yields where we have defined the fluid's enthalpy current ηM ≡ ηu M and the time derivative in local inertial frame d/dτ ≡ u M ∇ M . This equation is the covariant form of a generalized version of the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff (TOV) equation. In static AdS black hole background, the hydrostatic fluid velocity takes the following form and all quantities except the velocity-potentials are functions of z only. We assume A I = 0 and the metric is diagonal. First of all, in hydrostatic configuration, the bulk EOMs ∇ M ψ 2 su M = 0, ∇ M ψ 2 ρu M = 0 and ∇ M ψ 2 m2 -m 2 φ ςu M = 0 are all trivially satisfied. Thus the entropy and charge currents are identically conserved. From (5.4) and (5.5), we can write Here we will assume we are in the quantum branch where m = u M ∂ M θ m . If we are in the classical branch where m = m φ , the last equation for θ m will become irrelevant. Then To ensure u I = 0 so as to be self-consistent, the three {. . .} in the above equations must vanish separately: The last two equations are not really relevant, but the first equation is highly non-trivial. Equivalently, for the first equation, we can say that we have a non-trivial bulk EOM from where the enthalpy density η is given by If we are in the m = m φ classical branch, we will just have the equation instead of (6.3). Since this is just a special case of (6.3), we will not mention this case separately in the following. We now show that the above equation ( Now if we compare this equation with (6.3), we find they are almost the same except for the first terms on the right hand side. Thus for consistency, we shall require which means the z-dependence in the EOS takes the following form p(z) = p T (z), μ(z), m(z), h α . Here we only consider the quantum branch m = u M ∂ M θ m . We now collect all non-trivial bulk EOMs for hydrostatic configurations in the following. EOMs for ψ and χ are The TOV equation for static fluid with u z = 0 reads where . (6.9) In the above equations the functional forms of all X(z) = X T (z), μ(z), m(z), h α where X = ε, p, ρ are all given by the EOS and h α are some additional constant parameters in the EOS. Here the TOV equation (6.8) plays the role of Newton's second law in the fluid dynamics: the enthalpy density η is the analog of mass; -∂ z log -g tt (z) is the gravitational acceleration (positive when pointing inward); ∂ z p is the buoyant force, the thermal force that maintains the balance of a star in astrophysics; the term involving ρ is the electric force (this term is positive when the force is repulsive and points outward); the last term involving derivative of m2 is the quantum force due to mass renormalization effect that we mentioned earlier: what is behind the z-derivative is precisely the quantum potential U Q . The fluid will contribute to bulk Einstein and Maxwell equations through its stress tensor and charge current. The non-vanishing component of the fluid's charge current is The non-vanishing components of the fluid's stress tensor are: 12 where i index is not summed in the above expression. We have seen that due to isotropy in the transverse spatial directions, the stress tensor has only three independent diagonal components: the temporal, the radial and the transverse ones that are listed explicitly in the above equations. A slightly different but also useful parametrization of the stress tensor is given by the following three linear combinations of the above components. The first one is the trace of the stress tensor: The second one can be viewed as a measurement of anisotropy between temporal direction and spatial directions, and is related to the enthalpy density (notice there is no sum of i in the following) The third one is the measurement of anisotropy between radial direction and transverse spatial directions (no sum of i) and this is a pure quantum effect due to vacuum polarization. Now we have a set of EOMs, including (6.6), (6.7) and (6.8). Let us count how many degrees of freedom we have and what corresponding boundary conditions we have to impose. • The independent components of Einstein equation, which are not listed explicitly here, completely determine all the metric components when appropriate boundary/horizon conditions are imposed. So does the Maxwell equation to the gauge field. Thus in the following, for the purpose of counting degrees of freedom alone, we will think of the metric and gauge field as already fixed. • The boundary condition u z z= = 0 is already satisfied by the hydrostatic ansatz. • The EOMs for both ψ(z) and χ(z), (6.6) and (6.7), are second order differential equations, which determine them up to two integration constants for each. We shall impose the following four boundary conditions to fix them: Here the two conditions at the boundary are from (5.25) and • For the fluid part, we are left with a single TOV equation This can be viewed as a horizon condition that fixes the integration constant of the TOV equation. In some cases, this can be viewed as a statement of setting the temperature of the fluid in certain frame to the Hawking temperature (for example, in Obviously, from the last entry of the above counting, we see that the fluid part of the dynamics is not completely deterministic so far, because we have used up all the non-trivial equations but still have two undetermined functions μ(z) and m(z). To completely determine the dynamics, we need to supply two more bulk equations. In fact, it is a well known fact that if the EOS is more-than-one-dimensional (i.e. depends on more than one local function: three for our case), the fluid dynamics is not fully deterministic and additional EOMs have to be supplied from elsewhere, by some models or by going to more microscopic levels such as the kinetic theory or even quantum field theory. We will discuss one of the two additional equations in the next section by considering charge dynamics, which determines μ(z). The discussion of the second equation will be left to the follow-up paper So far, our fluid dynamics applies to both charged and neutral fluids. In this section, we discuss some aspects of the dynamics that is only relevant to charged fluids, and show where the pairing fluctuation pseudogap in BCS-BEC crossover can arise in this bulk fluid picture. In this subsection, we supply one more bulk EOM to determine the ratio μ/ T for the charged fluid. First, we want to impose the following physical requirement: the electric force experienced by the bulk fluid always points outward toward the boundary, i.e. the second term on the right hand side of the TOV equation (6.8) is positive everywhere outside the horizon. This implies ρA t 0. This is simply a statement that the charge of the fluid outside the horizon is everywhere the same as the the charge of the black hole. This is a very physical assumption since any local charge density of the opposite sign will not be stable and will be neutralized by the opposite sign charge density around it, and a global charge density of opposite sign will be more likely to be eaten up by the black hole and hence it is less stable than the charge density of the same sign. In terms of the dual field theory language, this is simply the fact that an incoherent Cooper pair carries a charge of the same sign as that of the elementary fermion (because the former is made of a pair of the latter). Notice the sign of ρ is proportional to the sign of μ, while independent of the sign of q φ . The main idea here is the approximation widely used in many different contexts of physics: in equilibrium configurations, the local chemical potential is determined by the local gauge field associated with the same gauge symmetry, i.e. μ will be determined by A M . In flat spacetime, this can be simply expressed as μ = A t . The corresponding curved spacetime version in our notation is sometimes written as in the literature. It has been used, for example, for holographic electron stars in where σ is the conductivity. This term is dissipative in nature and contributes to entropy production, thus for equilibrium configurations, it shall vanish identically. This yields a gauge invariant condition In fact, this equation can be derived using the Boltzmann-Vlasov equation in curved spacetime It can be directly integrated to give the solution where z 0 is a constant that can be chosen to be either z h or depending on where we want to impose the boundary condition. In flat spacetime when g tt = -1 and T is constant, this solution reduces to the relation μ = A t . Now the TOV equation (6.8) can be written as Now we look at a set of small linear perturbations in the bulk. We look at the vectorial sector which includes small variations of u x (t, z), A x (t, z), g tx (t, z) and g zx (t, z), where x is one of the transverse spatial directions. These set of fields decouple from perturbations of other bulk fields at linear level due to the SO(d -1) rotational symmetry in the transverse spatial directions. We want to show how the pseudogap in the longitudinal AC conductivity of the dual field theory can be related to the bulk plasma oscillation of the incoherent fluid. We will work in the gauge g zx = 0. The Einstein and Maxwell equations take the covariant forms The zx-component of the Einstein equations is The x-component of the Maxwell equation is where g ⊥ (z) = 1/g ⊥ (z). Using the previous two equations to cancel u x and g tx in the above equation and Fourier transforming t to frequency ω, we have We now define a new field variable and a new radial coordinate (the tortoise coordinate) For the new radial coordinate, we have where T H is the Hawking temperature. Then (7.7) can be written as a one-dimensional Schrödinger equation where the potentials are ) (7.14) Near the boundary, it is reasonable to assume that ψ 2 ρ falls off fast enough, i.e. the fluid does not have a high charge density near the boundary. Then V fluid does not change the nearboundary behavior and is subleading to ω 2 . Equivalently, we have (7.10) near the boundary reads where √ rH Near the horizon, ψ and ρ are regular. We have which are all vanishing near the horizon and subleading to ω 2 . Then (7.10) near the horizon reads ∂ 2 ∂r 2 + ω 2 A = 0, which has solutions A r→∞ = α -(ω)e iωr + α + (ω)e -iωr . (7.17) α -is the mode falling into the horizon and α + the one coming out of horizon. We shall eliminate the outgoing mode by setting It is well known, particularly for d = 3 up to numeric factors and factors of the AdS radius R. Particularly, the real part is proportional to the real transmission coefficient T (ω) The potential V gauge is produced by the backreaction to the metric, which is negligible in the probe limit e A → ∞. V grav is identically zero when d = 3. In the following, we will focus on the simpler case of d = 3, This ω * is a rough estimation of the pairing fluctuation pseudogap. (7.10) defined a onedimensional problem of a photon scattering off a charged plasma with potential V. If ω > ω * , the photon can go through the plasma with little damping, and the conductivity is large. If ω < ω * , inside the potential V, the photon's local frequency (in the WKB approximation) is imaginary and its probability density decays. The smaller ω is, the stronger the decay is, and the smaller the conductivity is. Thus across the region where ω ∼ ω * , the behavior of the AC conductivity σ(ω) will change qualitatively. This shows ω * can be an estimation of the pseudogap. A physical picture emerging from this bulk analysis is the following. As the incoherent charged fluid is free to move and backreacts to the electric field, it can be viewed as a plasma, much like the electron gas in metals. Measuring AC conductivity in the dual field theory is like shining a beam of light through this bulk plasma from the boundary and seeing how much it can get through to the other side (the horizon). We know that the plasma will oscillate under the driving of this external AC electric field, and it also has an intrinsic frequency, the plasma frequency ω plasma , which is proportional to the charge to mass ratio (ρ 2 /η in our case) of the plasma. Let us think of metals as a familiar example. When the light has higher frequency than ω plasma , metals are essentially transparent to light. On the contrary, if the frequency is lower than ω plasma , the light is quickly damped inside metals and reflected: this is why metals appear shiny under visible lights. What happens in the bulk is very similar. Our ω * is essentially the plasma frequency of the incoherent fluid, and the pseudogap in AC conductivity is related to damping due to plasma oscillation in the holographic bulk. This shows how the incoherent charged fluid in the bulk is capable of producing a pseudogap in the AC conductivity of the dual field theory. Of course, a more accurate analysis on the pseudogap and how soft or hard it is has to rely on numeric calculations. In this paper we constructed a holographic model for the pseudogap phase in high temperature superfluidity. This phenomenon is predicted by the BCS-BEC crossover scenario and subsequently observed in recent cold atom experiments. In this phase there exists a gap in the system but the U (1) symmetry is not broken nor is superfluidity developed. Unlike the pseudogap phase in cuprate superconductivity, which has been largely attributed to competing orders and can be modeled in holography by introducing more bulk fields which develop their own condensates, the pseudogap we study here originates from incoherent Cooper pairing and defies the introduction of any other order and additional bulk field. Using the Abelian Higgs model of holographic superconductors as an example, we propose that the pseudogap is realized in the bulk as the incoherent fluctuations of the charged scalar. The fluctuations deplete the condensate, form a non-trivial bulk profile like a normal fluid while still preserving the U (1) symmetry in the field theory via phase decoherence effect. We develop an upgraded version of perfect fluid dynamics to serve as an effective theory for these bulk fluctuations. It includes a pair of real radial profile functions ψ and χ which serve a triple role: (1) they inherit the boundary conditions from the scalar; (2) they encode the renormalization effect due to curved spacetime and shifts the negative mass square of the scalar field to a nonnegative value; and (3) their combination √ ψχ is related to the real pseudogap parameter, much like the profile of the bulk condensate is dual to the superconducting order parameter. The pseudogap energy is related to the plasma oscillation of this bulk fluid. We suggest that the scalar double-trace deformation in AdS/CFT can be used as the holographic counterpart of the phenomenological 4-fermi interaction used in condensed matter field theories which serves as the external knob in the theory of BCS-BEC crossover to control the strength of Cooper pairing. Both of them shall be viewed as low energy effective operators slightly irrelevant in the IR, which are generated by the RG flow from the UV. The deformed and undeformed effective actions are related by a general relation given by (2.9) via a path integral over the Hubbard-Stratonovich auxiliary field. The holographic duality can be viewed as a second Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation allowing one to integrate out the previous auxiliary field completely. It is the presence of the double-trace deformation that elevates the effect of fluctuations and enhances the existence of pseudogap. In this paper, we have built up a holographic framework and written down the bulk dynamics. To actually solve the model, an EOS for the bulk fluid has to be supplied. The form of EOS cannot take classical WKB form as previously employed in holographic electron stars. The typical wavelength of the fluid is comparable to the geometric scales and the EOS receives non-negligible quantum corrections due to the renormalization effect in curved spacetime. This is crucial for getting regular hydrostatic solutions for bosonic matter in the presence of a black hole. Moreover, since our fluid EOS is three-dimensional, while so far we have only written down two EOMs for them (the TOV equation and the chemical potential equation), an additional EOM has to be supplied. These issues will be discussed in a follow-up paper In the current model, the bulk scalar is linear and we have been focusing on the fluctuations of this scalar alone. It is interesting to see how our fluid dynamics will be modified by non-linear effects such as a self-interaction of the scalar. Such non-linear terms can be either part of the full bulk action or an effective description of terms generated via loop effects. Phenomenologically they are related to the residual interactions of Cooper pairs. It may be useful to study the fluctuations of other bulk fields, such as the U (1) gauge field, in a similar fashion. This might be either interesting on its own for exploring new phases, or as a necessary part of our current model for consistency and completeness. We will leave the discussions on these topics for the future. We hope the model and methods presented in this paper can serve as a holographic paradigm for studying phases involving fluctuations in strongly coupled quantum field theories. This equation tells us that the two velocity-potentials θ s and θ are responsible for the configurations of the velocity field, hence they get their names. Using this equation, one can further develop a Hamiltonian description for the fluid from the action (A.5), as discussed in Section 3 of From the above equation, we can also see through the Taub current that we defined earlier in (4.4) and ξ M = μ h u M that 1 q φ ∂ M θ = ∂ M θ -s ρ ∂ M θ s , (A.12) where s/ρ is entropy per charge. In the first equation above, we see q -1 φ ∂ M θ differs from the purely gauge part ∂ M θ only when s/ρ (i.e. entropy per charge) is non vanishing. For condensate, which is a pure state, it always has vanishing entropy density: s = 0. For fluctuations/excitations, due to decoherence at finite temperature, it always has s = 0, thus -(s/ρ)∂ M θ s contributes to ∂ M θ . This term is the difference between condensate and excitations in a fluid description. The EOMs obtained by varying θ and θ s are first order differential equations: ∇ M su M = 0, (A.14) ∇ M ρu M = 0. (A.15) These are just the conservation of entropy current and charge current. The entropy current is conserved here because we are dealing with perfect fluid and in this case no dissipation is allowed in relativistic fluid dynamics. 16 Since we have viewed θ and θ s as Lagrangian coordinates and they do not appear directly in the action, but only through their derivatives in (A.2) and (A.3), the above conservation equations can be viewed as a consequence of the translational invariance of the fluid action (A.5) in the space of these Lagrangian coordinates. For a detailed discussion, see Section 2.2 in Taking functional derivatives of (A.5) with respect to g M N and A M , we obtain the off-shell expressions for stress tensor and current. T M N = ηu M u N + g M N p + 1 2 η u 2 + 1 , J M = ρu M . 16 See footnote 8 in Such a solution will not satisfy the boundary condition (6.17 using u t = 1/ √ -g tt . The above analysis is pure mathematics, it does not tell us when the m = m φ classical branch is dynamically preferred. Physically we can expect this will happen, or the two branches will become almost degenerate, when the typical wavelength (energy) of the quantum modes of the scalar field is much smaller (higher) than the typical length (energy) scale set by the curvature of the geometry, i.e. in the WKB limit. This is the regime when for the scattering between the scalar field and gravitons, the energy of the scalar is much larger than the momentum transfer in the scattering. The scalar is hard and its mass renormalization due to the loop corrections of graviton and gauge field is negligible. This mass renormalization due to scattering with gravitons (and possibly the gauge field as well) is the main underlying microscopic origin of the locally varying m and non-trivial ψ in the quantum branch m = u M ∂ M θ m . Thus when the typical energy scale of the fluid (i.e. scalar fluctuations) is much higher than that of the geometry, the potential becomes vary shallow and the geometry becomes almost flat to the fluid, thus ψ becomes trivial and m m φ . Now quantum effects such as the vacuum polarization are negligible and the fluid is almost classical. In this case the EOS also depends only on T , μ and m as can be calculated using standard thermal ensembles in flat spacetime, and does not depend on additional dimensionful parameters related to the geometry, since these parameters only enter the EOS through quantum corrections. Here we assume the gapless normal phase at non-vanishing temperature is dual to a non-extremal AdS-Reissner-Nordström black hole. At low temperature, there are alternative scenarios such as the holographic electron star model A similar example is the 4-Fermi interaction for β-decay, which is a low energy effective description of the microscopic weak interaction. Its interaction strength (analog of our V ( k, k ) here) is set by the W boson mass. A major difference between the literature of double-trace deformations in high energy physics and that of 4-Fermi interactions in condensed matter and atomic physics is that the former are usually studied in vacuum and the latter always at finite density and temperature. The subscripts "ct" and "sc" in ∆ct and ∆sc stand for "counter term" and "source". For a more thoughtful discussion on holographic realizations of normal Fermi-liquid type phases, see the Introduction section of Even for fermionic fluids, if the chemical potential lies in this range, then hydrostatic configurations can not be achieved outside a black hole either The idea of introducing a radial profile function was employed in Here we add a subscript " phase " to the energy density because it is different from the energy density ε that will appear later. εphase is the total perfect fluid energy density defined as uM uN T M N phase . Later we will define ε through the thermodynamic relation ε + p = T s + μρ, which only accounts for part of εphase . For simplicity, we ignore the condensate part of the scalar field. Adding it does not change any conclusion we will reach. For example, for free charged particles in flat spacetime, for small chemical potential, we have ρ ∼ q 2 φ μ. In general, q -1 φ ρ is proportional to an odd function of q φ μ. A more detailed discussion on the near-boundary behavior will be presented in For d = 4, there is an additional ω factor appearing in the above expressions for σ(ω), and the potential Vgrav is divergent near the boundary, both facts making the analysis of the qualitative behavior of AC conductivity using the scattering analogy less intuitive.