We present the results of numerical study of the phase dynamics of the DC-SQUID with topologically trivial and nontrivial barriers. In our calculations we take into account two components of supperconducting current, Cooper pairs (2π-periodic) and Majorana fermions (4π-periodic) currents. Magnetic field dependence of return current is presented. The qualitative behavior of this dependence is explained. We show that in case of two component superconducting current the periodicity of magnetic field dependence of return current displaced by Cooper pairs and Majorana fermion ratio over the magnetic field. This effect makes possible the experimental determination of ratio of Cooper pairs and Majorana fermions currents. The Majorana fermions 1 are attracting considerable interest in large part because of their application in quantum computers. Majorana fermions are predicted to exist in Josephson junctions with topologically nontrivial barriers The DC-SQUIDs with the nontrivial barriers are expected to be used as a real quantum gates In a recent work In this work the results of numerical investigations of the phase dynamics of DC-SQUIDs are presented. Simulations are performed for the SQUID with the topologically trivial and nontrivial barriers, and for the case where Josephson current takes into account both components. The analysis of calculated current-voltage characteristics for the DC-SQUIDs are carried out. Also, we study the magnetic field dependence of return current for different parameters of the model, and demonstrate a possibility of the determination of ratio of Cooper pairs and Majorana fermions. Let us consider DC-SQUID with topologically nontrivial barriers. The presence of Majorana fermions leads to the single electron tunneling and doubles the period of phase difference of the order parameter. Therefore, within a resistively capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model (taking into account the existence of Majorana fermions) is sufficient to replace 2e by e and φ by φ/2 in the corresponding term of the system of equations. Thus, for both cases, the Josephson relation in the nontrivial case is not changed, i.e., where φ and V are the phase difference and voltage across JJ, respectively. The sum of currents for each JJ of DC-SQUID can be written as the following where C is a capacitance, R is a resistance and I c is a critical current of JJ, α is the ratio of the Cooper pairs and Majorana fermions currents through the junction, and I 1,2 are the currents through JJs of DC-SQUID and their sum equal to the external current I = I 1 + I 2 . We note that the ratio parameter α has been introduced first by Veldhorst with coauthors 8 . We have modified the model by introducing of ratio parameter α for the expression of magnetic flux, while the authors of Ref 8 introduced it only for the expression of superconducting current. In the presence of the external magnetic field, the magnetic flux through circuit is quantized where Φ 0 = h/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. The total flux Φ t through DC-SQUID is determined by the expression where Φ e is the value of magnetic flux, created by the external magnetic field, L is inductance of superconducting wires. Using Josephson relation (1), expressions for currents (2), magnetic field quantization condition (3), and expression for the total flux through DC-SQUID (4), we can write the system of equations that describes the dynamics of DC-SQUID in normalized units where /Φ 0 is normalized external magnetic flux. In the system of equations ( The capacitance of the Josephson junction and the inductance of the superconducting wires in the DC-SQUID form an oscillatory circuit with frequency ω r , determined with expression (6). When the condition ω J = mω r (m is integer number) is satisfied, the branches appear in the IV-curve, their origin is associated with the resonance of Josephson and electromagnetic oscillations 11 In our calculations we assume that β c = 10 and β L = 1. The Bias current increases from I 0 = 0.1 till I max = 2.3 and further reduces to zero by step of ∆I = 0.0005. At each fixed value of the bias current, the system of differential equations ( Let us first discuss the phase dynamics of the DC-SQUID with trivial barriers, i.e. the case with α = 1 in the equation ( In order to perform a detailed analysis of the influence of external magnetic field on the return current, we have calculated its dependence on magnetic field presented in Fig. Let us now analyze minimums of I r (φ e ). In case of φ e = 0, the resonance branch does not occur (see Fig. In conclusion, the peculiarities of the phase dynamics of DC-SQUID with trivial and nontrivial barriers have been studied numerically. The detailed analysis of effect of the magnetic field on the return current I r (φ e ) in the IVcharacteristic of DC-SQUID has been carried out. We have shown that the maximum of magnetic field dependence of return current I r (φ e ) corresponds to the case when transition of IV-curve from resistive to the superconducting state takes place through the main resonance branch. The performed analysis demonstrates two type of minimums in I r (φ e ) dependence. One of them corresponds to the case when transition from resistive to the superconducting state takes place through the subharmonic resonance branch. Another one occurs when transition happens without resonance (nonresonant minimum). In case of two components of superconducting current, a nonresonant minimum shifts along the magnetic field to the value, which corresponds to the value of parameter α determining the ratio of the Cooper pairs and Majorana fermions currents. We assume that it may be used for the experimental determination of this currents ratio.