The magnetic field is shown to affect significantly non-equilibrium quasiparticle (QP) distributions under conditions of inverse proximity effect on the remarkable example of a single-electron hybrid turnstile. This effect suppresses the gap in the superconducting leads in the vicinity of turnstile junctions with a Coulomb blockaded island, thus, trapping hot QPs in this region. Applied magnetic field creates additional QP traps in the form of vortices or regions with reduced superconducting gap in the leads resulting in release of QPs away from junctions. We present clear experimental evidence of such interplay of the inverse proximity effect and a magnetic field revealing itself in the superconducting gap enhancement in a magnetic field as well as in significant improvement of the turnstile characteristics. The observed interplay of the inverse proximity effect and external magnetic field, and its theoretical explanation in the context of QP overheating are important for various superconducting and hybrid nanoelectronic devices, which find applications in quantum computation, photon detection and quantum metrology. Proximity effect which induces superconducting correlations into a normal-metal conductor at the interface between a superconductor and a normal-metal conductor has been widely explored and plays an important role in the physics of superconductors Reducing the superconducting gap the inverse proximity effect provides a physical mechanism responsible for the formation of the traps for the nonequilibrium quasiparticles (QPs) known to affect the performance of many superconducting devices such as X-ray detectors In this Letter we address an intriguing possibility to diminish the effect of the QP traps formed due to the inverse proximity phenomenon using the competition in QP confinement between these traps and the ones formed in the presence of an applied magnetic field. This interplay between different trapping mechanisms and resulting redistribution of the nonequilibrium QPs is a rather general phenomenon interesting both as a manifestation of fundamental properties of superconducting correlations and as a trick useful for applications. The interplay mentioned above reveals itself in a nontrivial counter-intuitive consequence: the superconducting gap at the interfaces appears to increase with the increase in magnetic field. Both the inhomogeneous gap profile and its sensitivity to magnetic field can have applications to the superconducting or hybrid devices where several superconductors with different gap values are usually used To observe the interplay between the magnetic field and inverse proximity effect experimentally we study the charge transport through a hybrid turnstile The SINIS samples are fabricated with the standard electron-beam lithography and shadow evaporation technique All measurements are performed in dilution refrigerators at a base temperature T 0 around 100 mK in the the measurement setup, schematics of which is shown in Fig. The sample parameter values R T , E C , and ∆ 0 have been extracted from the I -V characteristics using standard numerical simulation based on the Fermi's golden rule and the master equation Starting with a zero magnetic field we observe that the turnstile current for highly resistive sample H with R T ∼ 9R Q (black dots in Fig. As expected, a weak magnetic field applied perpendicular to the substrate has almost no effect on the turnstile current in sample H (color dots in Fig. Our quantitative theoretical description is based on the idea schematically shown in Fig. with a numerical prefactor C(A g ) ∼ 1 determined by the wave-form and the amplitude A g of the RF gate voltage; (iii) The temperature T (x) = T J , the gap ∆ J (H, x) = ∆ J (H), and the normalized QP number N qp (x) in the proximitized region, 0 < x < , are constant [32]; (iv) Most of the dissipated heat IV 2 QS goes to the leads and keeps N-island close to the equilibrium. Due to the lead geometry the stationary temperature profile T (x) is determined by the solution of the onedimensional approximation of the heat diffusion equation with the following boundary conditions at the junctions, Here T 0 is the phonon bath temperature, κ S (T (x), x) ∼ e 2 ρnT e -∆ H (x)/kBT is the thermal conductivity of the superconductor, A is the junction area, ρ n = 30 nΩm is the normal state resistivity of the superconductor with the superconducting gap just behind the junctions ∆ = ∆ H ( ) and the resistance R H [w(x)] of the lead normalized to the sheet resistance being a functional of the lead width profile w(x) [21]. In the limit of small excess current δI ef one can neglect its contribution to the heat flux rate QS ef V /2 and due to the exponential sensitivity of the left-hand side of Eq. (4) to T J , one can disregard polynomial T J -dependence in the righthand side. As a result, the excess current normalized to the ideal current value ef can be analytically estimated as follows Due to the smallness of the term in square brackets the ratio ∆ J (H)/∆ plays a significant role in the magneticfield dependence of δI/(ef ). The H-dependence of the terms in brackets is taken into account through the geometrical factor R H which varies from R 0 35 to R H 20 at H = 10 mT [21] due to the vortex penetration into superconducting leads The theoretical values of the excess current shown in Fig. The only subtle point not covered by the developed theoretical model is the 13 % increase of the superconducting gap at the junctions ∆ J (H)/∆ J (0) at weak magnetic fields. Instead, the theory takes the magnetic field dependence of the gap from the experimental data and shows its evident relation with the excess current. This gap increase may originate from the enhancement of the order parameter related to the hot quasiparticle density through self-consistency equation. Another possible reason of the increase of ∆ J (H)/∆ J (0) is the absence of the H-mediated superfluid velocity in the dead end of the superconducting lead close to the junctions. Indeed, in the absence of the superfluid velocity the depairing parameter is negligible and both the gap and the order parameter are immune to the field. To conclude, we study single electron pumping in the SINIS turnstile affected simultaneously by the inverse proximity effect and magnetic field. In the samples with a low junction resistance a puzzling magnetic-field dependence of the turnstile current and non-monotonic magnetic-field profile of the superconducting gap at the junctions are observed, while in the high-resistive sample such effects are absent. This puzzle is resolved by the theoretical modeling taking into account both the inverse proximity effect leading to the quasiparticle trapping at the junctions and the overheating of the superconducting leads by hot quasiparticles resulting in the excess current. Perpendicular magnetic field releases hot quasiparticles from the proximitized region by suppressing of the superconductivity away from the junctions and simultaneously weakening the proximity effect. The SINIS devices are fabricated on a thermally oxidized SiO 2 wafer using electron-beam lithography and metal deposition including angle evaporation. Before the final fabrication step in which the SINIS structures were formed, the wafer went through several processing steps to prepare bonding pads and a ground plane. Each chip contains Ti(5 nm)/Au(95 nm) bonding pads and a Ti(5 nm)/Au(50 nm) ground plane that has a slot to accommodate an RF line. The RF line was extended to the center of the chip with a 30 nm-thick and 200 nmwide Au strip. The whole wafer was then covered by a layer of SiO 2 using spin-on glass which was patterned to open the contact pads. Finally, we fabricate the SINIS turnstiles using a tri-layer resist structure (copolymer resist (400 nm)/Ge(20 nm)/PMMA resist (50 nm)) which is formed by electron beam lithography and dry etching. SINIS devices are connected to the bonding pads by Al leads stretching from the chip center to the bonding pads above the ground plane, thus a large capacitance is formed between the DC leads and the ground plane protecting sensitive SINIS pumps from the electromagnetic noise penetrating into the sample package. Al/AlO x /Cu tunnel junctions of the SINIS pumps are formed by the overlap of 18 nm-thick Al leads and 30 nm-thick Cu island deposited in the e-gun evaporator at different angles through a suspended Ge mask formed by electron-beam lithography and dry etching. Aluminum oxide layer on the surface of the deposited Al film is grown by letting pure oxygen or Ar + O 2 mixture into the sample chamber. The tunnel junction resistance is controlled by varying the oxygen/argon pressure and oxidation time. The normal metal island is capacitively coupled to the RF bottom gate electrode, isolated from the island by the SiO 2 layer. To optimize the bias voltage for the turnstile operation, we measured the I -V characteristic at the gate-open state (offset charge of the island is 0.5) for the estimation of superconducting gap ∆ and applied the bias voltage V SD = ∆. In this experiment, we use two different setups for oxidation and sample characterization (setup 1 and setup 2). Sample H and sample L are fabricated and measured in setup 1. Aluminum was oxidized under static conditions. (A small amount of gas is introduced into the vacuum chamber). The oxidation conditions are 40 s under 37.5 mTorr of pure oxygen for sample H, and 2 minutes under 97 mTorr Ar + O 2 (1 %) for sample L. The measurement is performed in a homemade dilution refrigerator whose base temperature is around 100 mK. The sourcedrain voltage (V SD ) between the superconducting leads is applied using a commercial voltage source (SIM928), and the current is measured with a room-temperature current amplifier (DDPCA 300 from Femto) calibrated by a standard resistor and a calibrated voltage source in the Metrology Institute of Finland (MIKES). The DC signals (V SD and V g ) are filtered with Thermocoax cables, and the RF line has a -20 dB attenuator at 4.2 K, thermalized in the helium bath, and a -20 dB attenuator at room temperature. Sample R is fabricated and measured in setup 2. Aluminum was oxidized in a continuous gas flow regime at a constant gas pressure maintained by an automatic pressure regulator. The oxidation condition is 2 minutes under 30 mTorr Ar + O 2 (10 %). The measurement is performed in a commercial dilution refrigerator (Oxford Instruments Kelvinox 100) whose base temperature is also about 100 mK. The voltage source and the current amplifier are same as those in setup 1. Calibration of the current amplifier is done in the Japanese Metrological Institute (AIST). The DC signals (V SD and V g ) are filtered with Thermocoax cables and Cu powder filters, and the RF line has a low pass filter (Mini-Circuits VLFX-1350), a Cu powder filter and a -40 dB attenuator at room temperature. In this section we verify whether the excess current δI = I -ef in the turnstile regime of a superconducting hybrid single-electron transistor (SET), both of NISIN kind with the superconducting (S) island and of SINIS kind with the normal metal (N) island, is dominated by the quasiparticle contribution to the tunneling rates From the theoretical side as shown in Supplementary Note 6 of where the overheating of S-parts is taken into account by the values of the superconducting gap ∆ J and the electronic temperature T J at the superconducting side close to the junction with the resistance R T . A certain form of the numerical coefficient C(A g ) ∼ 1 considered, e.g., in Other contributions to δI such as Andreev tunneling, cotunneling, and Cooper-pair-electron cotunneling either do not depend on the drive amplitude, or their A g -dependence cannot be factorized as in Eq. ( Therefore to verify the dominant character of the quasiparticle contribution to the excess current experimentally we normalized the magnetic field dependent data δI(H, A g ) for different A g values to its zero field value δI(0, A g ), see Fig. Here we first verify the assumption (iii) of the main text and then give the details of the solution of the heat balance equation within the assumptions (i-iv) mentioned in the main text and of the calculation of the normalized resistance R H [w(x)] for a certain space profile of the lead width w(x) of the considered samples, see Fig. Starting with heat balance equation ( where Q and A = • d S are the heat flow rate and the cross-sectional area of the S lead at x = . As a result the heat diffusion equation at 0 < x < takes the form We consider the heat injection to be concentrated at one end x = 0, but as we show below the concrete space distribution of the heat injection does not matter. Indeed, assuming the constant lead width in the region x < one can find that for k B T (x) ∆ J the quasiparticle number is linear decaying with coordinate In most of the cases the second term is negligible provided the x < L T , therefore the assumption (iii) of the main text N qp N qp (0) and T (x < ) T J is valid. To solve the heat balance equation ( According to with the unit diffusion coefficient and the weakly spatial dependent electron-phonon relaxation length L -2 T = e 2 ρ n k B ΣT 4 (x)/2∆ H (x). Separating the prefactor proportional to the heat injection source QS one can write the solution of this equation in terms of the resistance R H [w(x)] normalized to the sheet resistance depending on the lead width profile w(x). This normalized resistance R H [w(x)] is the sum of terms l k /w k and α -1 ln(w k+1 /w k ) of one-and twodimensional Green's functions of the Laplace equation for the kth lead part of the length l k with constant width w(x) = w k-1 and the linearly increasing one w(x) = w k-1 + δx k (w k -w k-1 )/l k , respectively. Here the coordinate δx k = x -x k is shifted to be in the range 0 < δx k < l k in the kth lead part and the opening angle is determined by 2 tan α = (w k -w k-1 )/l k . The lead geometry of the considered samples shown in Fig. l1 δx 0 , 0 < δx 0 < l 1 w 1 + w2-w1 l2 δx 1 , 0 < δx 1 < l 2 w 2 + w3-w2 l3 δx 2 , 0 < δx 2 < l 3 w 3 , 0 < δx 3 Taking the value estimates from the SEM micrographs 50 nm, w 1 275 nm, w 2 842 nm, w 3 8.4 μm, l 1 2.85 μm, l 2 2.4 μm, l 3 28 μm and using the estimate L 2 T = R T 2 dS ρn 2kBT π∆ (5 μm) 2 from To estimate R H at finite magnetic field one should take into account the penetration of vortices into the lead at distances x > x c where the S leads are already rather wide to let the first vortex to enter w(x c ) ∼ Φ 0 /πH Taking this into account we estimate R H at magnetic field H 10 mT, when the critical width for the first vortex entry w(x c ) Φ 0 /πH 250 nm leads to the keeping of the first term in sum in Eq. ( Samples H and L are fabricated and measured in setup 1, while sample R is fabricated and measured in setup 2. (See Supplemental Material for details [21].)