We present a general method for constructing effective field theories for non-relativistic superfluids, generalizing the previous approaches of Greiter, Witten, and Wilczek, and Son and Wingate to the case of several superfluids in solution. We investigate transport in mixtures with broken parity and find a parity odd "Hall drag" in the presence of independent motion as well as a pinning of mass, charge, and energy to sites of nonzero relative velocity. Both effects have a simple geometric interpretation in terms of the signed volumes and directed areas of various sub-complexes of a "velocity polyhedron": the convex hull formed by the endpoints of the velocity vectors of a superfluid mixture. We also provide a simple quasi-one-dimensional model that exhibits non-zero Hall drag. Effective field theory (EFT) is a powerful tool for studying the dynamics of dense, strongly coupled matter, where a microscopic description is intractable. In this approach, one writes down an effective action principle for the degrees of freedom that remain at low energies and matches the predictions of this theory against experiment order by order in a momentum expansion. The true predictive power of an EFT lies in the symmetries it possesses, which constrain the space of action principles, so that in practice experimental results may be fit to relatively few parameters. An EFT for superconductivity was proposed a number of years ago by Greiter, Witten, and Wilczek. The physics of this statement is that one expects that for non-relativistic theories, momentum is carried entirely by the transport of matter. They concluded that to lowest order in a derivative expansion, the most general EFT consistent with this principle is determined by a single function of a single variable In equilibrium, p(μ) is the thermodynamic pressure as a function of the chemical potential. Here m is the mass of the superconducting order parameter, φ is its phase, and D μ φ = ∂ μ φ + qA μ . The fact that the low energy dynamics may be entirely characterized by a single function of a single variable demonstrates the power of Galilean symmetry and the utility of the effective action approach. The theory (2) was pushed to higher order in derivatives by Son and Wingate, who were interested in the nextto-leading order (NLO) physics of the unitary Fermi gas. However, both of these approaches can be unwieldy. For instance, the constraint (1) amounts to a non-linear PDE for the Lagrangian as a function of the fields. While an explicit solution was found to lowest order in derivatives of those fields, this approach is intractable at higher orders as the order of the PDE increases. Non-relativistic general coordinate invariance is a major improvement in this regard and has seen a number of condensend matter applications, More seriously, both methods are intrinsically single constituent in nature: the condition (1) relies on this quite explicitly, while non-relativistic general coordinate invariance was motivated as a symmetry of microscopic single constituent actions and does not hold when fields of multiple distinct charge-to-mass ratios are included. On the other hand, multiconstituent superfluid condensates are of great experimental and theoretical Galilean invariance also admits a "pinning" of mass, charge, and energy to relative velocity, which one may think of as the renormalization of these quantities due to a velocity dependent interaction. For example, among other effects. Here Vol 234 is the volume of the 2-simplex that spans the endpoints of the velocity vectors of the three superfluids 2, 3, and 4. When Vol 234 is nonzero, f leads to a buildup of charge proportional to that of the first superfluid. In higher dimensions, these effects have natural geometric interpretations in terms of the signed volumes and directed areas of certain sub-complexes of the convex hull defined by the endpoints of the fluid velocity vectors. For the general expressions, see equations ( We conclude in section V with a simple quasi-one-dimensional model which exhibits non-trivial Hall drag and compute c H in mean field theory. In this section we recount an efficient method for generating Galilean invariant action principles. This method is essentially an adaptation of pseudo-Riemannian geometry to the Galilean case. We begin with the Galilean group Gal(d), where d is the spatial dimension. This is the matrix group where R a b is a rotation matrix and k a is the relative velocity between Galilean frames. This is simply the action of Galilean transformations on inertial coordinates (t x i ) T . Note however that Gal(d) will be acting as an internal symmetry throughout, since no natural notion of inertial coordinates exists in the curved case. In this paper we shall follow the approach of Son and many subsequent works in formulating the theory on curved spacetime. This is both a convenient means to make the spacetime symmetries of the theory manifest and an efficient way to encode transport, since a generic spacetime provides the theorist with a suite of knobs to turn to study response. The velocity v A = (1 v a ) T of a particle transforms under this, the vector, representation. There are however natural objects in non-relativistic physics that are neither Galilean vectors nor singlets. Consider for instance the (d + 2)-dimensional column vector where ρ is the mass density, p a the momentum density, and the energy density. The well-known transformation laws for momentum and energy may be summarized in the matrix This forms a representation of Gal(d) called the extended representation. In contrast to the relativistic case then, in which momentum and energy are naturally collected into a (d + 1)-vector p μ , in a Galilean covariant theory, mass, energy, and momentum are naturally collected into the (d + 2)-vector p I . The natural derivative operator on massive non-relativistic fields ψ is not of the form D μ , familiar from relativistic theories, but is also valued in the extended representation as one might guess from the above example by the correspondence Like the energy-momentum (d + 2)-vector given above, one of the components of this derivative operator is tied to the mass For our purposes, the mass m of a non-relativistic field is its representation under U (1) M transformations 40 ψ → e imα ψ. Invariance under U (1) M ensures the existence of a conserved mass current ρ μ , common to non-relativistic theories. The derivative operator ( The point of this construction is one may now obtain Galilean invariant action principles straightforwardly by contracting indices with invariant tensors. For the vector representation these are The former tensor is called the internal clock-form and provides a non-relativistic theory with an absolute notion of space and time 41 while the latter serves as a spatial metric. The extended representation admits a higher dimensional version of these invariants Indeed, the invariants ( which the reader may check is itself a Galilean invariant. Importantly, the extended representation of Gal(d) admits an inverse metric g IJ of Lorentzian signature. We shall denote its inverse by g IJ and use it to raise an lower indices in the usual way. Also note that the form (10) of the extended derivative operator may be stated in the invariant way Finally, note that since the defining representation of Gal(d) is a subgroup of SL(d + 1) and the extended representation of SL(d + 2), they also admit the parity and time reversal breaking invariants where we have chosen 0 As an illustration of this approach, the Schrödinger action may be written where |e| = det(e A μ ) is the volume element. In this work we are principally concerned with the currents present in any non-relativistic theory and their response. These currents are most easily defined in a vielbein formalism which we recount here. Since this has been discussed at great length elsewhere, we refer the reader to our references for details. which contains a spacetime coframe e A μ = Π A I e I μ in its first d components. The final component is the mass gauge field alluded to in section II B and transforms as such a μ → a μ + ∇ μ α under (11). It is the star of Newton-Cartan geometry and is the manner in which it encodes Newtonian gravitational effects, where we have also chosen to couple to a background electromagnetic potential A μ with charge q. The currents are then defined as The extended-valued tensor τ μ I encodes the flow of mass, energy, and stress. In a particular Galilean frame its components have the following interpretation 43 where is the energy density, ρ the mass density, i and ρ i their associated currents, and T i a the stress tensor. When all indices are converted to the same type using the vielbein, the stress tensor is symmetric on-shell by Ward identities. We now turn to the problem studied by Greiter, Witten, and Wilczek, that of a single component charged superfluid at T = 0. The only degree of freedom remaining at low temperatures is a single superfluid phase φ. It is a simple matter to determine how the covariant derivative operator acts on a phase ψ = e -iφ |ψ| where Here e μ A is the inverse vielbein, A μ the electromagnetic vector potential, and a μ the mass gauge field. In what follows we will often work with the "extended velocity" of the condensate and its projection A. Effective Action Due to the shift symmetry φ → φ+c, the phase must always enter the action with derivatives. The natural Galilean covariant action to lowest order in derivatives is then with an arbitrary function p, generalizing (2) to curved space. It would be interesting to carry out this analysis to higher orders, generalizing the work of Son and Wingate 2 beyond NLO. For this work, we are considering backgrounds that are small deviations from flat spacetime with no applied electromagnetic field. That is, our power counting scheme is so that additional, background dependent terms do not enter at lowest order. The superfluid velocity D I φ may however be large. It now should be clear how to generalize to arbitrary superfluid mixtures. The natural set of Galilean invariants we may form from a collection of phases φ i with masses m i and charges q i is There is also a single additional set of invariants which must be considered for completeness, however, they do not lead to any distinct effects, so we relegate consideration of them to appendix A. The lowest order EFT is then What transport does this encode? Using the variation (19) as well as δ|e| = |e|Π μ I δe I μ , we find that Primed summations denote a sum over all independent components of the tensor structures appearing in the summand, here, i < j. n μ i is the Noether current generated by the symmetry φ i → φ i + c. n i and ρ are then interpreted as the number density of the ith species and the total mass density respectively. c d ij is a phenomenon unique to the multiconstituent case which we will have more to say on in a moment. In the above, we have defined We refer to the matrix as the number matrix. To understand this better, let's write down these formulas in the more familiar component form of ( , where we have defined the energy per particle μ i = D 0 φ i (this is the same as the chemical potential in the homogeneous case). This decomposition has an obvious interpretation: the fluid of density n i carries mass m i , charge q i , and energy μ i per particle in the direction v a i . The fluid has pressure p and the standard kinetic contribution to the stress is fixed by Galilean invariance. The coefficients c d ij are the drag coefficients. In the presence of a relative velocity of the ith and jth superfluids, they lead to a force per unit area directed along the relative velocity vector, the standard definition of the drag coefficient in hydrodynamics. which are trivially satisfied with static and homogeneous densities n i and velocities v μ i , regardless of their relative orientations. In particular, superfluid drag does not introduce dissipation in a superfluid mixture with independent motions. This holds regardless of microscopic dynamics and in particular applies as well in the presence of the parity odd generalizations to drag that we will consider in the rest of this paper. In the presence of superfluid drag, the mass, energy, and charge currents are not simple weighted sums of the number current, but there is rather additional transport induced by the mutual interactions of the superfluids. This phenomenon was incorporated into the hydrodynamic description of condensate mixtures by Andreev and Bashkin, The sound velocities may be obtained from the equations of motion ∇ μ n μ i = 0 at the linearized level with S ij defined in (31) and δS ij = S ij,kl δμ kl . This result will not be altered by considerations in subsequent sections except to alter the expression for S ij in equation (A8). In the single component case (25) one may check that this reduces to the familiar result The principle results of this paper concern parity and time-reversal breaking transport. This would be relevant in the presence of a background magnetic field, or say, in mixtures of chiral molecules. The first example we consider is a parity odd version of the drag coefficients considered in section III B. For simplicity we begin in 2 + 1 dimensions in a tripartite mixture φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 . We may then form an additional P and T breaking scalar where Note that this invariant requires the presence of at least three condensates, and the generalization to the case of more than three condensates should be clear. As in the parity invariant case, there is an additional set of scalars that can be constructed that leads to the same effect, which for simplicity of presentation we relegate to appendix C. The pressure is then a function of the new variable λ in addition to μ ij and the currents are those found in (29), plus and cyclic permutations for the other n μ i . The general formula with an arbitrary number of condensates may be found in equation (C10). Here These may be computed using the variations (C4). In a fixed "lab frame" ( where the ellipses indicate cyclic permutations. We have symmetrized the stress by hand, since we know that local rotation invariance implies on-shell symmetry of the stress tensor. This behavior generalizes naturally to higher dimensions and any number of condensates. For each condensate i, one forms all (d -1)-simplices whose corners are determined by the velocity vectors of any d other condensates i 1 , . . . , i d . The Hall drag then drags the ith condensate along the directed area Area a i1•••i d of this simplex where This procedure is illustrated in figure Note that there is an interesting interplay between dimensionality and the number of overlapping condensates necessary to realize this effect: it only exists when the number of condensates exceeds the spatial dimensionality of the system. For instance in the (3 + 1)-dimensional case relevant in most experiments, one requires at least 4. There is a single additional set of parity odd scalars one may construct. Again specializing to 2 + 1 dimensions, but now in the presence of 4 condensates, this is and the effective action is As we shall see, this invariant pins charge, energy, and particle number to sites of relative velocity, in addition to other effects. In other words, ξ encodes a velocity dependent interaction that alters the effective mass, charge, and chemical potential so that these densities are not simple weighted sums of n i with their bare values m i , q i , μ i . In covariant form, this induces transport and cyclic permutations to obtain the other n μ i 's, where μJKL = Π μ I IJKL and For the general formula, see (C14). Expressing this in the lab frame (21), we find where We see that f induces charge and number transport perpendicular to relative velocity as the Hall drag does, however, the magnitude of the effect is proportional to the bare energies per particle μ i . Moreover, as previously mentioned, f pins additional charge, energy, and particle number to sites of relative velocity. This procedure is pictured in figure Similarly to find the currents, select any two condensates i, j, and form all (d -1)-simplices whose corners are the endpoints of velocity vectors from any d other condensates i 1 , . . . , i d . The current is proportional to Area a i1•••i d , weighted by the anti-symmetrized ratios involving the μ i 's found above. This is illustrated in figure V The utility of an effective action approach is that it bypasses an often intractable microscopic description and allows one to directly write down the most general low energy theory consistent with the symmetries of a problem. However, it is nonetheless instructive to have a microscopic model of the phenomena we've described. We thus conclude with a simple example of a weakly-coupled model that exhibits nonzero Hall drag. To keep things simple, we will consider the (1 + 1)-dimensional case, where a Hall drag may be obtained in the presence of a bipartite mixture. FIG. Our characterization of the Hall drag in 1 + 1 dimensions is somewhat degenerate since there are no directions perpendicular to the relative velocity. However, the formulas (42) still hold formally with Area a i1 → 2, as one may check from the general expressions (C10). We then see that c H to persistent currents whenever two condensates have overlapping density. In a finite system this will lead to buildup of mass, charge, and energy at the edges of a system with overlapping condensates. (1+1)-dimensional condensation is famously forbidden for translationally invariant systems. However, experimental realizations invariably involve a trapping potential that modifies the density of states sufficiently to circumvent the usual arguments where N is the number of atoms and ω is the trapping frequency in the soft direction. We may formally consider the limit where N is very large and ω very small with finite T c and so recover the approximately translationally invariant problem. The quasi-one-dimensional problem may be treated as the mean field theory of a three-dimensional system with weak contact interactions in a highly anharmonic trap. It has been argued by variational techniques, supported by numerical evidence, that the effective one-dimensional dynamics is that of a Gross-Pitaevski-like equation with a non-polynomial potential V (|ψ| 2 ). We have introduced a velocity dependent interaction a that will lead to Hall drag and which is marginal in mean field theory. It is consistent with the symmetries of the problem, as one may see by writting the Lagrangian in a manifestly Galilean invariant form Perhaps a more familiar way of seeing Galilean invariance is to consider the interaction potential between two particles in a single-particle quantum mechanics picture. In a two particle quantum mechanics picture, the field theory (53) involves an interaction potential which is Galilean invariant since it references only the relative velocities of the two particles. While we do not currently have a proposal on how this can be done, it would be interesting to try to engineer such an interaction in future cold atom experiments. In the condensed phase ψ i = e -iφi √ n i , this reads where for this section we are denoting μ i = D t φ i -1 2mi D x φ i D x φ i . The Gross-Pitaevski equations (GPEs) that follow from varying n i then read This is the usual form of the equation determining the condensate density in a potential well as a function of the chemical potentials, but now the shape of the well depends on the relative velocities of the condensates. Plugging in μ 1 and μ 2 , we find as a function of the condensate densities and λ The pressure is however a function of the chemical potentials p(μ 1 , μ 2 , λ), so we have Differentiating the GPEs (57) with respect to λ also gives Plugging these into ∂p ∂λ then gives a Hall drag proportional to the product of the mass densities In this work we have demonstrated a general procedure to construct EFT's for Galilean invariant superfluid mixtures to any order in a momentum expansion. We have carried out the construction to lowest order and found agreement with the results of Greiter, Witten, and Wilczek 1 in the single component case. It would also be interesting to look at the next order to confirm agreement with Son and Wingate 2 as well as to investigate what new transport is allowed at this order in the presence of multiple condensates, particularly for atoms at unitarity. At lowest order, we have found two new parity odd transport coefficients, the Hall drag, and a pinning of mass, charge, and energy to relative velocity, both of which give rise to currents that have simple geometric interpretations in terms of the volumes and areas of various simplices. Both terms require a sufficient number of condensates to be realized that depends on the spatial dimensionality. We have also furnished a weak coupling example in one spatial dimension that exhibits Hall drag. It would be interesting to try to engineer such an interaction in cold atom traps, however, these effects should generically exist in highly dense mixtures with broken P and T and should be observable in experiment. In this paper we have assumed only Galilean invariance and particle number conservation. However, cold atom mixtures can be created in the lab with a variety of (approximate) flavor symmetries by condensing multiple hyperfine states of a single isotope. See 27 for a review of these so called "fictitious spinor" condensates. It would be interesting to see how these further constrain transport. True spinor condensates are also experimentally accessible (see where We see that as with ν ijkl , the new coefficients χ i1•••i 2d , only alter the formula for the transport coefficients in terms of the equation of state and do not induce transport not already included in the λ i0•••i d 's. To work the manifestly covariant form (C10) into the component form (42) found in the main text, we need the formula To prove this, write where 1 i d is the N -component object whose entries are all 1 and we have often used the total antisymmetry of c H i0•••i d . In the first equality we have used the antisymmetry of c H to replace velocities with relative velocities. However, we cannot do this for free in the final velocity factor since v c i d does not appear anywhere. We perform this replacement and cancel off the additional contribution in the second line. In the third line we expand out the final term and commute around i k indices using the total antisymmetry of c H . The final term on the RHS is of the same structure as the LHS. We thus obtain (C12). For completeness, we also include the covariant form of the currents induced by the f coefficients where