We optimize the design of NbN nanowire superconducting single photon detectors, using the recently discovered position dependent detection efficiency in these devices. This optimized design of meandering wire NbN detectors maximizes absorption at positions where photon detection is most efficient by altering the field distribution across the wire. In order to calculate the response of the detectors with different geometries, we use a monotonic local detection efficiency from a nanowire and optical absorption distribution via finite-different-time-domain simulations. The calculations predict a trade-off between average absorption and absorption at the edge, leading to a predicted optimal wire width close to 100 nm for 1550 nm wavelength, which drops to 50 nm wire width for 600 nm wavelength. The absorption at the edges can be enhanced by depositing a silicon nanowire on top of the superconducting nanowire, which improves both the total absorption efficiency as well as the internal detection efficiency of meandering wire structures. The proposed structure can be integrated in a relatively simple cavity structure to reach absorption efficiencies of 97% for perpendicular and 85% for parallel polarization. Thin and narrow superconducting nanowires to which a bias current is applied can be used to detect single photons To optimize optical absorption in these superconducting single photon detectors (SSPDs), a meandering nanowire geometry embedded inside an optical cavity is preferred A compromise between detection efficiency and speed needs to be found, which seems to be set by the material of the nanowire. We have reported a linear relation between a threshold current and photon energies for 150 nm wide NbN nanodetectors Our recent experimental results In this article, we present novel designs of SSPDs where the absorption and internal detection efficiency are optimized simultaneously. These design considerations become important when the internal efficiency is less than 100%. In this regime the IDE depends on position and the total device IDE can be optimized by tuning the electric field distribution. A known limitation of (meandering) wires is that the detection efficiency depends on the polarization of the incident light Detailed measurements of the polarization dependent response of both meandering wires We performed a study of a NbN nanodetector as a function of both wavelength and polarization of the incident light and employed detector tomography to separate the optical absorption efficiency (η) from the internal detection efficiency (IDE). A numerical calculation of the wavelength and polarization dependent absorption profile, together with the local detection efficiency LDE(x, I b ) determines the response of the detector. We find This model can be summarized as follows. The internal detection efficiency IDE(I b ) depends on the bias current I b and can be calculated from the absorption profile A ⊥, (x) and the local detection efficiency LDE(x, I b ) where η is the average optical absorption over the wire The internal response of an SSPD depends on photon energy and device bias current, and for a constant photon energy, the response increases exponentially as a function of bias current and saturates above a threshold current. Following Ref. where I * = 0.65 μA is taken as a wavelength independent current scale that can be extracted from experiments by fitting the internal detection efficiency IDE as a function of I b in Ref. where I c is the device critical current and E is the photon energy. The absorption profile depends on the wavelength of the incident radiation and has to be obtained through numerical computation. The ∼ 4 nm thick NbN film is much thinner than the skin depth of the relevant wavelength range. Hence, the absorption distribution is uniform over the thickness of the film and is a function of position x across the nanowire only. We used a commercial finite-difference-time-domain method (FullWave package, RSoft where w is the width of the wire, P total is the power density of illumination incident on the wire, P abs (x) is the absorbed power density as a function of position x across the wire width, ω is the angular frequency of the incident light, ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, t = 4.35 nm is the thickness of the NbN film obtained from ellipsometry measurements, and |E ⊥, (x, y) 2 | is the (polarization dependent) electric field intensity in the wire. It should be noted that the model put forward here contains a number of approximations and assumptions to capture the strong decrease in detection efficiency in the center of the wire with a minimum number of parameters. We use the exponential dependence of the LDE given by Eq. 3 in combination with a wavelength independent I * to capture the relevant details for NbN nanowires. The functional dependence of the LDE is not universal and results on amorphous superconducting nanowires We use the simple model with fewer free parameters and define the response through the function γ(x), which is the only unknown. This function can be obtained through a numerical inversion procedure where we use the value of γ(x) sampled at 9 positions across the wire as fit parameters. Details of this procedure can be found in Ref. To avoid these numerical issues we use the original data and procedures from Ref. Figure We compute the internal detection efficiency of differently designed SSPDs and visualize this by plotting the total detector response as a function of the optical absorption. Detectors that reach 100% internal detection efficiency can always be designed for high energy photons and bias currents close to the material critical current density. Instead we are interested in the transition regime where the detectors become inefficient due to a combination of low bias current and/or low photon energy. In this regime the performance of the detectors can be improved by design of the SSPD and its surroundings. Such designs extend the sensitivity of SSPDs towards infrared wavelengths without compromising other device parameters such as response time and jitter. In practice, the regime of less than 100% detection efficiency is reached for photon detection at 1550 nm with NbN meandering wire detectors that cannot be biased to the material critical current density due to fabrication imperfections and bends in the wire We first calculate the response of SSPDs with a constant wire width w = 150 nm while varying the distance between the wires. We use finite-difference-timedomain (FDTD, FullWave package, RSoft Figure As can be seen in the figure, the internal detection efficiency of meandering wires is proportional to the fill fraction f , defined as the ratio of wire width w over the pitch p. Numerical calculations of the absorption profile of the various structures indeed show that the absorption distribution A ⊥, (x) is nearly identical to that of an isolated wire, resulting in an average absorption η that is proportional to f Figure For parallel polarization (solid symbols), the absorption distribution across the wire is almost uniform and the average absorption η is determined by the value of f and the datapoints form a vertical line in the figure . The difference between the data points reflects the change in internal detection efficiency as a function of wire width w. The data for perpendicularly polarized light for a constant fill fraction f and increasing w (direction of the arrow in Fig. With increasing wire width, the average of LDE(x) decreases, but is compensated by an increase of the average absorption η, as shown in the inset of Fig. The calculations for a wavelength of 600 nm show a qualitatively different behavior with calculations done for nanowire widths set to 5 nm, 10 nm, 20 nm, 30 nm, 50 nm, 70 nm, 90 nm, 110 nm, 130 nm and 150 nm. Surprisingly the optimum wire width is only 50 nm and the internal efficiency shows a rapid rather than a gradual drop for wider wires. The inset in Fig. To take advantage of the higher efficiency at the edges of NbN nanowires, structures need to be designed that direct the absorption to these edges. Here we give an example of a dielectric structure that enhances edge absorption and enhances device performance. We limit ourselves to simple designs based on a patterned layer of silicon or GaAs on top and in between the nanowires so that the structure may be fabricated with current state-of-the-art nanotechnology. The suppressed absorption for perpendicular polarization at the edges is caused by the boundary conditions and the large mismatch between the dielectric constants of the vacuum and the NbN wire Figure Table I contains a quantitative comparison of the average absorption η, the IDE and the relative change in these numbers when comparing the original NbN meandering wire structure with the enhanced structure with the silicon wire. Results are included for both polarizations for detectors biased at the same bias current of 0.9 I c . The larger energy of the 1000 nm photons causes the IDE to increase by a factor 2 when comparing to the 1550 nm result, reflecting the linear exchange between photon energy and bias current. We are interested in the relative change in the detection efficiency η and the IDE, which is small (less than 6%) for parallel polarization at 1550 nm wavelength. This reflects the fact that the change in field distribution for parallel polarization is minimal. Comparing to the results for 1000 nm wavelength we see that the overall absorption η is lowered by 20% for parallel polarization while the IDE is slightly decreased by 1.4%. The field distribution is nearly uniform for parallel polarization and is, to a good approximation, independent of wavelength. The field distribution is significantly changed for perpendicular polarization and leads to a 70% increase in the absorption accompanied by a 32% increase in IDE. The optical absorption and device performance may be further enhanced if the design of the detector layer can be integrated inside an optical cavity. We calculated the absorption distribution for a wavelength of 1550 nm using a relatively simple design of a cavity with a single, 100 nm thick, Ag mirror layer (n = 0.51 + 10.71i @ 1550 nm) beneath a 124 nm thick SiO spacer layer (n = 1.90 @ 1550 nm Interestingly, these numbers are remarkably robust against a change of wavelength indicating a spectrally broadband performance of the structure. Table We have repeated the calculations using a best matching sigmoidal function for the LDE to verify that the numbers given in best match is obtained by matching the slope and value of the function at the bias current where 50% efficiency is reached. The calculated IDE is higher for both polarizations and detector designs when using the sigmoidal function. The relative change in IDE is unchanged for parallel polarization while the relative enhancement for perpendicular polarization is reduced to 23% for 1550 nm and 21% for 1000 nm. Further research is needed to better understand and quantify the function describing the LDE of NbN nanowires and we remind the reader that the detection efficiency as a function of bias current for NbN detectors is not consistent with the sigmoidal TABLE I. The average absorption and detector response for a bare meandering wire compared to the enhanced structure. Calculations are done for a meander with w =150 nm wires and a pitch p = 300 nm. For both wavelengths the detector is biased at a current of 0.9 Ic. λ Original Enhanced ∆ ⊥ ⊥ ⊥ 1550 nm η 0.15 0.20 0.26 0.19 70% -5.6% 1550 nm IDE 0.32 0.44 0.43 0.44 32% 0% 1000 nm η 0.16 0.16 0.27 0.13 66% -20% 1000 nm IDE 0.61 0.74 0.81 0.73 33% -1.4% function reported for amorphous superconductors We have shown that the design of meandering wire SSPDs can be optimized for detection of a particular wavelength by optimizing the IDE. This is a direct consequence of the measured local detection efficiency The optimum width of a NbN nanowire that maximizes the detector response depends on wavelength and varies from 100 nm for 1550 nm wavelength to 50 nm wide wires for 600 nm wavelength. Absorption of wires that are much more narrow than the wavelength is inefficient for incident light that is polarized with the Efield perpendicular to the wire. The optimum width is a compromise between maximizing the total absorption while keeping the IDE high by avoiding absorption in the center of the wire. For shorter wavelengths this balance shifts to a width that is approximately twice the size of the edge and the design maximizes the IDE with the overall absorption being more or less independent of width for both polarizations for wider wires. The IDE can be enhanced significantly by placing a dielectric nanowire on top of the superconducting nanowire. We demonstrate a coarsely optimized structure using a 50 nm wide and 30 nm thick silicon wire on top of a 150 nm wide NbN nanowire. The wider NbN nanowire is easier to fabricate and reduces the detector response time by lowering the kinetic inductance compared to more narrow wires. For the optimal design both the absorption efficiency and the IDE are increase by 70% and 32%, respectively. Calculations for 1000 nm wavelength show that the enhancement is a broadband effect. More complex designs, not necessarily limited to the use of dielectrics, can be envisaged that enhance device performance further or that resonantly enhance the IDE for a particular wavelength or wavelength range 