Non-centrosymmetric superconductor Re 6 Zr has attracted much interest, for its possible unconventional superconducting state with time reversal symmetry broken. Here we report the 185/187 Re nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) measurements on Re 6 Zr (T c = 6.72 K) and the isostructural compounds Re 27 Zr 5 (T c = 6.53 K) and Re 24 Zr 5 (T c = 5.00 K). The nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 shows a coherence peak below T c and decreases exponentially at low temperatures in all three samples. The superconducting gap ∆ derived from the 1/T 1 data is 2∆ = 3.58 k B T c , 3.55 k B T c , and 3.51 k B T c for Re 6 Zr ,Re 27 Zr 5 , and Re 24 Zr 5 , respectively, which is close to the value of 3.53 k B T c expected for weak-coupling superconductivity. These data suggest conventional s-wave superconductivity with a fully-opened gap in this series of compounds. Superconductors with broken symmetries, such as broken time-reversal symmetry In superconductors with an inversion center in the crystal structure, either an even-parity spin-singlet or an odd-parity spin-triplet superconducting state is realized. However, in noncentrosymmetric superconductors, a parity-mixed superconducting state is allowed and an antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC) interaction is induced Recently, more novel properties were reported in some non-centrosymmetric superconductors. For example, a small internal magnetic field was detected below T c in noncentrosymmetric LaNiC 2 , which was interpreted as due to a breaking of time reversal symmetry in the superconducting state 1 , although a relation between the breaking of inversion symmetry and time reversal symmetry is unclear. Non-centrosymmetric Re 6 Zr is a new candidate of time reversal symmetry-breaking superconductor. Re 6 Zr has an α-Mn type cubic crystal structure with space group I 43m The result was ascribed to broken time reversal symmetry in the superconducting state. It is known that a chiral p-wave state or a chiral d-wave state can produce a tiny internal magnetic field In order to investigate the gap structure, we performed the nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) measurements on Re 6 Zr, and the iso-structural compounds Re 27 Zr 5 and Re 24 Zr 5 . These compounds have an α-Mn type crystal structure but with different superconducting transition temperatures, with Re 24 Zr 5 being stoichiometric. The NQR measurement performed at zero magnetic field is one of the most powerful methods for the study of the superconducting gap symmetry. We find that all the three compounds show the superconducting properties consistent with a conventional BCS gap symmetry. The polycrystalline samples of Re 6 Zr, Re 27 Zr 5 , and Re 24 Zr 5 in this study were synthesized by the arc-melting method. The Re (99.99%) and Zr (99.9%) were arc-melted under an argon atmosphere. The difference of mass before and after the melting was less then 1% for all samples. The melted ingots were crushed into powders for X-Ray diffraction (XRD) and NQR measurements. The Cu K α radiation is used for the XRD measurements. The T c was determined by measuring the ac susceptibility using the in situ NQR coil. A standard phase-coherent pulsed NMR spectrometer was used to collect data. The nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate was measured by using a single saturation pulse. The spin echo was observed with a sequence of π/2 pulse (4 μs) -30 μs -π pulse (8 μs). Figure In the ac susceptibility for Re 24 Zr 5 , a small shoulder can be seen around T c , which is likely attributable to the sample inhomogeneity. Similar result has been reported in the Nb-Re systems The Re-to-Zr ratio is 82.8 : 17.2 for the stoichiometric Re 24 Zr 5 , which is quite close to the limit to obtain a single phase. On the other hand, the Re-to-Zr ratio is 84.4 : 15.6 for Re 27 Zr 5 and 85.7 : 14.3 for Re 6 Zr. As seen in Fig. Figure Here ν Q and η are defined as with ∂ 2 V ∂α 2 (α = x, y, z) being the electric field gradient at the position of the nucleus. In the simulations, a Gaussian function exp {-(f /2δ) 2 } is convoluted, where f is the frequency and δ is related to the full width at half maximum (F W HM) of the transition line as F W HM = 2δ 2 ln(2). The ν Q and η were treated as parameters. The intensity ratio of each peak depends on η. With the parameters listed in Table Re 24 Zr 5 : where M 0 is the nuclear magnetization in the thermal equilibrium and M(t) is the nuclear magnetization at a time t after the saturating pulse. We have confirmed that T 1 measured at the ±3/2 ↔ ±5/2 transition gives the same value. The recovery curve can be fitted with a single T 1 component below and above T c , which indicates that macroscopic phase separation in the sample is small. As seen in the figure, 1/T 1 varies in proportion to the temperature (T ) above T c for all samples, as expected for conventional metals, indicating no electron-electron interaction. Below T c , 1/T 1 shows a coherence peak (Hebel-Slichter peak) expected for an s-wave superconducting state. The 1/T 1S in the superconducting state is expressed as where 1/T 1N is the relaxation rate in the normal state, N S (E) is the superconducting density of states (DOS), f (E) is the Fermi distribution function and C = 1 + ∆ 2 EE ′ is the coherence factor. To perform the calculation of eq. ( 