Impurities in superconductors and their induced bound states are important both for engineering novel states such as Majorana zero-energy modes and for probing bulk properties of the superconducting state. The high-temperature cuprates offer a clear advantage in a much larger superconducting order parameter, but the nodal energy spectrum of a pure d-wave superconductor only allows virtual bound states. Fully gapped d-wave superconducting states have however been proposed in several cuprate systems thanks to subdominant order parameters producing d + is-or d + id ′ -wave superconducting states. Here we study both magnetic and potential impurities in these fully gapped d-wave superconductors. Using analytical T-matrix and complementary numerical tight-binding lattice calculations, we show that magnetic and potential impurities behave fundamentally different in d + is-and d + id ′ -wave superconductors. In a d + is-wave superconductor, there are no bound states for potential impurities, while a magnetic impurity produces one pair of bound states, with a zero-energy level crossing at a finite scattering strength. On the other hand, a d + id ′ -wave symmetry always give rise to two pairs of bound states and only produce a reachable zero-energy level crossing if the normal state has a strong particle-hole asymmetry. It is well-established that a single magnetic impurity induces so-called Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) bound states inside the energy gap of conventional s-wave superconductors. In this work we establish the properties of both potential and magnetic impurities in these two fully gapped d-wave superconductors. More specifically, we investigate the intra-gap bound states due to potential and magnetic impurities using both an analytic continuum T-matrix formulation and numerical tight-binding lattice calculations. We show that impurities create entirely different bound states in d + is-wave and chiral d + id ′ -wave superconductors, despite both being fully gapped and with a dominant parent d-wave state. These distinct behaviours of single impurities have direct consequences as to the possibility of utilizing d-wave superconductors for producing Majorana zero-energy modes in magnetic wires or islands constructed out of collections of single impurities. Moreover, in spite of being only localized imperfections to the lattice structure, we find that impurities are very suitable for probing and differentiate the symmetry of the superconducting state. This is in sharp contrast to the virtual bound states in pure d-wave states, which persist even above the superconducting transition temperature and consequently, can not be considered to be a good probe of the symmetry of the superconducting state. For the chiral d + id ′ -wave state we find a very different behaviour. Here both potential and magnetic impurities induce two pairs of bound states. For superconductors with a particle-hole symmetric normal state, the bound states are two-fold degenerate and there is no level crossings for any finite coupling. Instead, it is only in the unitary scattering limit (U c → ∞) that the bound states approach the middle of the gap. Doping the normal state away from particle-hole symmetry, the degeneracy is lifted for a magnetic impurity but not for a potential impurity. Moreover, for finite doping there is now a zero-energy level crossing, but for low doping it occurs only at very large scattering strengths. Self-consistent calculations for a single impurity in a d + id ′ -wave superconductor finds a first-order phase transition at the level crossing, but no local phase shifts either the dominant and subdominant order parameters. Considering that recent experiments have demonstrated access to adjustable magnetic scattering strengths U mag , 9 magnetic impurities offer a very intriguing way to clearly distinguish between the chiral d + id ′ -wave state and the likewise time-reversal symmetry breaking but topologically trivial d + is-wave state. Impurity-induced bound states only exist in d-wave superconductors with a fully gapped energy spectrum. Introducing a subdominant superconducting order parameter will achieve this, since it very generally align with a complex π/2 phase relative to the dominant d-wave state. Here we consider a two-dimensional (2D) d x 2 -y 2 -wave superconducting state with a complex subdominant order parameter such that the order parameter takes the form of More specifically, we treat the two most likely candidates: d x 2 -y 2 + is-and d x 2 -y 2 + id xy -wave symmetries. In order to achieve a good analytical understanding of the effect of impurities we here first perform T-matrix calculations. Later, we confirm and extend these results by also performing self-consistent tight-binding lattice calculations. The Hamiltonian in presence of a single impurity (magnetic and/or potential) reads (using h = 1) where we use the Nambu space spinor ψ T k = ( c k↑ c k↓ c † -k↑ c † -k↓ ). Here U pot and U mag are the potential and magnetic scattering matrix elements induced by the impurity, while the kinetic energy is ξ (k). The exact form of ξ (k) is unimportant as we can linearise the spectrum around the Fermi level, setting ξ (k) ≈ v F (kk F ). with the energy spectrum , where we have defined F i (ω) as Here ρ = k F /(2πv F ) is the density of states of the 2D free electron gas at the Fermi level. The above result is for a particle-hole symmetric normal state, but this symmetry is often broken in reality. We use the chemical potential μ to measure the degree of particle-hole symmetry breaking in the energy spectrum, thus leaving the case μ = 0 to represent full particle-hole symmetry. Considering a small deviation from particle-hole symmetry, such that μ/Λ ≪ 1 where Λ is the energy integration cut-off, the summation of the bare Green's function also contains the term F 3 τ 3 σ 0 . Up to first order in μ/Λ we find F 3 = 2ρ μ/Λ, 27 while it is straightforward to show that in this limit F 0 , F 1 , and F 2 remain unchanged from the particle-hole symmetric case. First, we consider the d x 2 -y 2 +is state where the order parameter is of the form ∆(φ ) = ∆ d cos(2φ )+i∆ s . In this case F 1 (ω) = 0, due to the periodicity of the cosine function and the subdominant order parameter ∆ s not depending on φ . Then, in the limit of μ = 0, the bound states can be found as the solutions to Since we are interested in real bound states, we only look for solutions ω ∈ R. Further, to make sure that the bound states are isolated from the continuum spectrum of the superconducting quasiparticles, we limit ourselves to solutions that lie inside the gap, i.e. ω ∈ [-∆ 2 , ∆ 2 ]. For a purely potential impurity we find no bound states, while for a purely magnetic impurity there is one pair of solutions that do not depend on the sign of U mag . In order to find the bound state energies for a magnetic impurity we rephrase F 0 (ω) and F 2 (ω) in terms of the complete elliptic integral of the first kind K, 28 resulting in where we have defined Ũmag = πρU mag , ∆ = ∆ d /∆ s , and ω = ω/∆ s . For ∆ = 0, we naturally recover the YSR bound states found in a conventional s-wave superconductor: ω = ±(1 -Ũ2 mag )/(1 + Ũ2 mag ). which, as seen in Figure If we now break the electron-hole symmetry of the normal state, i.e. assume μ = 0, the bound states are instead found as the solution of It is clear that also in this case, for a purely potential impurity there are no real roots and consequently, potential impurities never induces any bound states in a d + is-wave superconductor. Moreover, the modifications of the bound state spectrum induced by a magnetic impurity is of the order (μ/Λ) 2 and the change to the critical coupling is also of the same order of magnitude and thus negligible. ) and because of the periodicity of cos(2φ ) and sin(2φ ), all off-diagonal terms in the summation of the bare Green's function vanish. Left for a particle-hole symmetric normal state spectrum (μ = 0) is then only In this case the bound states are found as the solutions to Very interestingly, pure potential or pure magnetic impurities in a chiral d-wave superconductor lead to exactly the same pairs of intra-gap bound states as shown in Figure If the particle-hole symmetry of the normal states is broken, here by setting μ = 0, then the summation over the bare Green's function also contains F 3 τ 3 σ 0 , where, up to first order in μ/Λ, F 3 = 2ρ μ/Λ. The influence of this new term on the bound states is much more pronounced for the chiral d-wave state compared to the d + is-wave state. For a potential impurity the bound states energies are still two-fold degenerate, but a non-zero μ shifts the energy of the bound states in the unitary limit, as is illustrated in Figure For the purpose of the forthcoming self-consistent numerical calculation, we mention already here that even at half-filling, the energy degeneracy can still be lifted by adding a small amount of extended s-wave superconductivity to the chiral d-wave. More precisely, if the order parameter takes the form ∆(k) = ∆ d cos(2φ ) + i∆ d ′ sin(2φ ) + ∆ s ′ , where ∆ s ′ is k-independent, the energy degeneracy for magnetic impurity bound states is lifted, while the bound states remain degenerate for a potential impurity. Therefore, the degeneracy of the bound states in the presence of a magnetic impurity in a chiral d-wave superconductor is very fragile and can very easily be lifted. We now turn to discuss the results obtained from tight-binding lattice calculations. In all calculations we use a generic finitesize square lattice in which we consider a single impurity located at the middle site. Again we consider both a d + is-and chiral d + id ′ -wave superconductor. The effective Hamiltonian for the 2D superconducting host with an impurity with both potential and magnetic scattering elements located at R is Here i = (i x , i y ) represents a site in the square lattice, with the lattice spacing a set to be 1. The dominant d-wave order exists on nearest neighbour bonds, while the subdominant s-wave order is an on-site parameter and the d ′ -wave order reigns on next nearest neighbour bonds. For the self-consistent calculations (see below) we do not a priori assume any symmetries or conditions for any of these three order parameters. However, in calculations with constant order parameters throughout the sample, i.e. non-self-consistent calculations, we enforce the d-wave order by setting ∆ d ((i x , i y ), (i x ± 1, i y )) = -∆ d ((i x , i y ), (i x , i y ± 1)) for all sites, i.e. the order parameter on y-directed bonds are equal in magnitude but with opposite sign compared to the order parameter on x-directed bonds. Likewise, the d ′ -wave state has opposite signs on bonds in the ±(x + y) direction compared to in the ±(xy) direction. We also by hand enforce the subdominant order parameter (s or d ′ ) to be purely imaginary in the non-self-consistent calculations. We solve Eq. ( Above we simply assumed constant order parameters and enforced the correct condensate symmetries. Now we allow the condensate to appropriately respond to the impurity through a proper self-consistent calculation. Since the superconductor symmetry is important for the properties of the bound states, this is the most accurate way to ensure a correct solution. In these self-consistent calculations we only assume a finite and constant pair potential V in each pairing channel and calculate the order parameter(s) explicitly everywhere in the lattice. For a d-wave state we use the self-consistent condition ∆ d (i, j) = -V d c i↓ c j↑c i↑ c j↓ , where i, j are nearest neighbour sites. In the self-consistent calculation we start by guessing a value for ∆ d on each bond, solve Eq. ( We take the initial guess for the subdominant order parameter to be purely imaginary but through the self-consistency loop it is free to acquire a real component as well. Likewise, we emphasize that ∆ d on x-and y-directed bonds are treated fully independent and the same applies to the d ′ -wave state. Thus, we have not a priori assumed any symmetry for any of the pairing states. In the calculations we use V d /t = 1.7, V s /t = 1.7 for d + is-wave state and V d /t = 1.8 , V d ′ /t = 1.7 for chiral d-wave state, but the results are not sensitive to these particular values. We also set μ/t = -1 for the most general case and to avoid the van Hove singularity at half-filling. We mainly use a 51 × 51 lattice, with similar results obtained with a 31 × 31 lattice, which guarantees that the result are not sensitive to the lattice size. Using the self-consistently calculated order parameters, we extract the LDOS at and close to the impurity site for both d + is-and d + id ′ -wave states in the presence of either magnetic or potential impurities. The self-consistent tight-binding lattice calculations reveal that the results obtained for fixed order parameters are still largely valid. However, important effects appear around the critical scattering strength in the self-consistent calculations. Starting with the d + is-wave state, the selfconsistent results show that the intra-gap localized bound states from a magnetic impurity behave largely in a similar way to their non-self-consistent counterpart as seen in Figure For the case of a magnetic impurity in a chiral d-wave superconductor, there is only a level crossing for one pair of bound states as seen in Figure In this work we have investigated impurity-induced bound states in fully gapped d-wave superconductors. The main results are summarized in Table The main difference between the continuum and discrete calculation is that in the former we neglect the radial dependence of the order parameter in reciprocal space while in the latter, we keep both the radial and angular dependence. Therefore, the discrete summation over the full tight-binding model gives us a more relevant solution to compare with the finite-size numerical calculations . . Flatté, M. E. & Byers, J. M. Local electronic structure of a single magnetic impurity in a superconductor 78, 3761 (1997). 32. Weiße, A., Wellein, G., Alvermann, A. & Fehske, H. The kernel polynomial method. Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 275-306 (2006). 33. Covaci, L., Peeters, F. M. & Berciu, M. Efficient numerical approach to inhomogeneous superconductivity: the Chebyshev-Bogoliubov-de Gennes method. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 167006 (2010). 34. Björnson, K. & Black-Schaffer, A. M. Majorana fermions at odd junctions in a wire network of ferromagnetic impurities. Phys. Rev. B 94, 100501(R) (2016).