Micron size superconducting quantum interference devices (μ-SQUID) of lead (Pb), for probing nano-magnetism, were fabricated and characterized. In order to get continuous Pb films with small grain size, Pb was thermally evaporated on a liquid nitrogen cooled Si substrate. Pb was sandwiched between two thin Cr layers for improved adhesion and protection. The SQUID pattern was made by e-beam lithography with Pb lift-off after deposition. The current-voltage characteristics of these devices show a critical current, which exhibits the expected SQUID oscillations with magnetic field, and two re-trapping currents. As a result these devices have hysteresis at low temperatures, which disappears just below the critical temperature. A superconducting weak link (WL) based micron-or nanometer-size superconducting quantum interference device (μ-or nano-SQUID) is the most suitable probe for nano-magnetism with demonstrated applications in single nano-particle magnetometry A number of elemental superconducting materials have been used for fabricating μ-SQUIDs with the most common being Nb. However, good quality Nb films require deposition in UHV conditions and Nb superconductivity readily degrades in the lift-off process due to the presence of soft polymer in the vicinity. Special lift-off methods for Nb involving multi-layer lithography have been successfully demonstrated In this paper, we report on SC WL devices and μ-SQUIDs of lead (Pb), with T C = 7.2 K. The devices were fabricated using electron beam lithography followed by Cr (5nm)/Pb (40nm)/Cr (8nm) deposition on liquid nitrogen cooled Si substrate and lift-off. Pb was sandwiched between two Cr layers for improved adhesion and protection. For ease of comparison and understanding we used similar design as our previously studied Nb devices The device fabrication involved three steps, namely, 1) Electron beam lithography (EBL) of PMMA (M W = 950 k) resist on a Si substrate in the desired pattern, 2) resistive thermal evaporation of Cr/Pb/Cr tri-layer on the patterned substrate 3) lift-off using acetone. For EBL we coated 4% of 950 k PMMA (in anisole) as resist on Si substrate at 4000 rpm giving a thickness of ∼ 200 nm. The PMMA was cured and exposed with 20 kV and 100 pA e-beam in a Zeiss electron microscope (Model: MA15 with LaB 6 filament) interfaced with a Nabity writer. The optimal exposure dose was found to be 170 μC/cm 2 after experimenting over 130 to 200 μC/cm 2 range with Cr/Au films. For successful device fabrication, continuous Pb films with grain-size much smaller than the smallest-size features of the pattern are essential. Pb forms disconnected large grains or islands (see fig. Electrical transport measurements down to 1.3 K temperature of these devices were done in a closed cycle Herefrigerator in four probe configuration. Indium press contacts were used to make connections with Pb contact pads. The devices were characterized using homemade voltage controlled current source and voltage amplifier interfaced with a data acquisition card. A LabView program was used for the measurements. The resistance of the WL device as a function of temperature in fig. Figure As seen in fig. The wide leads in our device are much longer than l th = κt/α [10] representing a length scale over which the temperature relaxes. Here κ is the thermal conductivity, t is film thickness and α is the interface heat loss coefficient. Thus if the lead length l ≫ l th we can assume the leads to be semi-infinite for finding the re-trapping (or thermal-instability) current as I r = w 2α(T c -T b )/R We have also fitted the variation of I C , I r1 and I r2 of the WL device with bath temperature as shown in fig. We have also characterized these devices after storage in ambient conditions and found the shelf-life to be between two and three months, which is long enough to be useful for probing nano-magnetism. On the other hand the fabrication is not so involved and thus such devices can be easily made in less than two days time. In order to use these for probing nano-magnetism, some more optimizations and studies are needed. In particular, we would like to reduce I C values by using WLs of smaller cross-section area and also of reduced length to get close to ideal behavior. This should also help in getting wider temperature range of hysteresis free operation, which can also be achieved by putting a normal metal shunt in the close vicinity In conclusion, we have presented a complete process for fabricating Pb based superconducting weak link devices and μ-SQUIDs using electron lithography and thermal evaporation technique. The devices show expected IVCs and I C oscillations with magnetic field.