Condensed matter systems undergoing second order transition away from the critical fluctuation region are usually described sufficiently well by the mean field approximation. The critical fluctuation region, determined by the Ginzburg criterion, |T/T c -1| ≪ Gi, is narrow even in high T c superconductors and has universal features well captured by the renormalization group method. However recent experiments on magnetization, conductivity and Nernst effect suggest that fluctuations effects are large in a wider region both above and below T c . In particular some "pseudogap" phenomena and strong renormalization of the mean field critical temperature T m f can be interpreted as strong fluctuations effects that are nonperturbative (cannot be accounted for by "gaussian fluctuations"). The physics in a broader region therefore requires more accurate approach. Self consistent methods are generally "non -conserving" in the sense that the Ward identities are not obeyed. This is especially detrimental in the symmetry broken phase where, for example, Goldstone bosons become massive. Covariant gaussian approximation remedies these problems. The Green's functions obey all the Ward identities and describe the fluctuations much better. The results for the order parameter correlator and magnetic penetration depth of the Ginzburg -Landau model of superconductivity are compared with both Monte Carlo simulations and experiments in high T c cuprates. Many -body systems at nonzero temperature exhibit a host of physical phenomena triggered by strong thermal fluctuations The universality was established in the critical fluctuation region, where physics is determined by several critical exponents well captured by the renormalization group approach to the GL φ 4 theory The GL approach in terms of the order parameter however is in fact widely and successfully used for description of the fluctuations outside the critical region Recent experiments on magnetization It has been noted over the years that despite the anticipated breakdown of the universality far beyond the critical fluctuation region strong fluctuations are still well captured by the interacting φ 4 GL theory In this paper we show that a special uniquely defined variant of the mean field approximation, the covariant gaussian approximation (CGA) around the spontaneous symmetry broken state satisfies this requirement. The approximation is conserving in that it preserves the symmetry properties of the correlators of the order parameter characterizing the ordered phase. The CGA Green's functions obey all the Ward identities and describe the fluctuations much better. The results for the two and four point correlators of the Ginzburg -Landau model are compared with Monte Carlo simulations and experiments in superconductors. The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 the covariant gaussian approximation in the symmetry broken phase is developed using the simplest toy model: the one dimensional spin chain equivalent mathematically to the double well anharmonic oscillator in quantum mechanics. The Dyson -Schwinger (DS) equations method is used and results for the two and four point correlators are compared with direct numerical calculations, Monte Carlo (MC) simulations as well as perturbation theory. In section 3 we apply CGA to the O (2) invariant model and show how the corresponding Ward identities are derived. In section 4 the cluster Monte Carlo method appropriate for the calculation inside the symmetry broken phase is briefly described. The correlator of the order parameter of isotropic GL model in 3D is calculated with CGA. In section 5 we derive the expression for the magnetic penetration depth of an anisotropic superconductor and compare the CGA results with direct MC simulations and experimental data on penetration depth of several high T c cuprates and discuss the results. Conclusions are given in section 6. To present the approximation scheme we will make use of the simplest nontrivial model: statistical physics of a one dimensional classical chain that is equivalent to the quantum mechanics of the anharmonic oscillator. Our starting point therefore will be the following free energy as a function of a single component order parameter (equivalently Euclidean (Matsubara) action of an anharmonic oscillator): The dimensionless coefficient ω, proportional to temperature T in statistical physics of classical chain or to in quantum anharmonic oscillator, determines the strength of the (thermal or quantum) fluctuations. The normalization of the order parameter field φ (x) and the position x is such that ω is dimensionless (proportional to √ Gi where Gi is the Ginzburg number The n-body correlator, the main object of interest in the present paper, is defined by This full n-body correlator can be conveniently written Here the order parameter average is denoted by the "classical field" φ (x) ≡ φ (x) and the two -body cumulant Γ (x, y) is the inverse in the matrix sense to the connected correlator Similarly the three -body connected correlator is expressed via cumulants as From the functional integral in the presence of source J (x), one can derive the equation of state (ES), the first of the infinite set of coupled DS equations for connected correlators : To simplify the expression, we will set ω = 1 from now on. This always can be achieved by rescaling in 1D system since there are no ultraviolet (UV) or infrared (IR) divergences. The parameter ω will be reinstated when we need to use it to count the order of "loop expansion". The second DS equation is the functional derivative of the equation of state, The infinite set of equations is not useful unless a way to decouple higher order equations is proposed. The simplest one is the classical approximation. The classical approximation consists of neglecting the two and three body correlators in the equation of state, Eq. so that the second and higher equations are decoupled from the first. Then the "minimization equation", that is just the on-shell is solved. For a < 0 there are typically several solutions of this equation. Restricting ourselves to the translational invariant ones (namely excluding kinks), one has Despite the fact that we know there is no spontaneous symmetry breaking in d = 1, a rather precise approximation scheme for a Z 2 invariant quantity emerges when one of the two "would be" symmetry broken solutions, say φ (x) = +v, is considered in the intermediate steps. Note that despite the fact that the minimization principle involved only the one -body cumulant, φ (x), one can still calculate the higher cumulants within the classical approximation. These are given by functional derivatives of the source J (x) with respect to φ (x) in truncated ES Eq.( The cumulants beyond the fourth order vanish within this approximation. The full correlator, a quantity invariant under the Z 2 , in this approximation is: The matrix inversion of as usual is performed in Fourier space, φ k = k e -ikx φ (x). Here the mass is m 2 = 2v 2 . Therefore the full correlator in momentum space is just It can be corrected to "one loop" by calculating the "tadpole" diagram and takes the form where the fluctuation parameter ω has been reinstated. Returning to the configuration space, one has This is compared in Figure Figure The minimization equation Eq.( on the set of coherent states wave functions (become functionals in higher dimensional models): The parameter g, square of the width of the gaussian wave function, is arbitrary but fixed. The expectation value of energy is minimized with respect to the shift φ. This leads to the translational invariant form of the classical equation Eq.( In principle one can do better. Variationally one can optimize not just the shift of the gaussian wave function, but also the width g. Optimization of the energy Eq.( We will see these two equations coincide with the "two -body" truncation of the DS equations for J (x) = 0 under the assumption of translational invariance. Instead of truncating out the two-body and higher cumulant, like in the classical approximation, one can truncate the DS set of equations starting from the three-body cumulant. Of course the approximation becomes more complicated. Indeed let us truncate the two lowest order DS equations, Eq.( and the last two terms of the second DS equation, Eq.( Here the superscript "tr" indicates that the correlators satisfy the approximated truncated equations instead of the exact ones. In the naive gaussian variational principle approach so that the minimization equations for J = 0 take the form and One already recognizes in Eq.( By summing over all momenta k one obtains Taking the square of this equation one arrives at Eq.( where the subscript "s" stands for "symmetric". Accordingly the connected correlator is In the symmetric phase it coincides with the full 2-body correlator and is given in Figure The would be broken solution can be written as with g a satisfying another cubic equation Here the subscript "a" stands for "asymmetric". The solution exists only in the double well for a < -(3/2) 5/3 ≈ -1.966. The correlator in this case has a mass The order parameter correlator takes the form This is shown as a brown dashed dot line in Figure In the classical approximation truncation of the DS equation means that the off shell (nonzero J (x)) equation of state is modified. The higher cumulants are obtained by differentiation of the source with respect to the shift φ (x). One can try the same strategy within the gaussian approximation. In the next section, while considering a more complicated O (2) invariant model, we will focus on an advantage of this approach: it preserves the Ward identities of linearly represented symmetries of the system. Now we concentrate on technicalities of the calculation. For convenience we reprint here the first and second truncated DS equations, and The truncated correlator G tr (x, y) should be considered as a functional of φ (x) that is determined by the above two equations with the condition As in the case of classical approximation, the "true" correlator is derived by taking derivative of the shift equation Eq.(37), In contrast Γ tr should be viewed as a variational parameter only. The first term is just Γ tr (x, y), while the second term is the "chain correction" and it can be calculated by differentiation of the identity Eq.( Multiplying from the left by the matrix G tr ,one obtains Taking derivative of the gap equation, Eq.( Thus the chain equation becomes Note that this equation is linear in the chain function C and can be conveniently solved by iteration. The problem is that the number of unknowns is very large. However there are two observations that greatly reduce the complexity. First the argument z is the same on both the right and left hand side and therefore is just a parameter. The second is that the right hand side of the equation depends only on C(z|v, v) with two last arguments identical. Consequently one can first solve the particular case of y = x: This particular chain is in fact the only quantity we need in order to calculate the "covariant" correction to the correlator in Eq.(40): We will not need temporarily the chain function for arbitrary arguments. Using the translation invariance, one sees the function depends on just one variable: It obeys In momentum space the linear equation becomes algebraic for one variable only, which can be easily solved as Here the "fish" diagram is Substituting this into the expression for the cumulant correction in the momentum space, one gets The order parameter correlator in CGA finally is where As an exact statement and reliable simulations, Figure Generally cumulants are collected in the so called effective action The question arises whether the CGA cumulants defined in the previous subsection can be obtained in the way from an approximated effective action. The answer is yes. Although due to its complexity the action is of little use in actual computation and the DS equations truncation method is far superior. However it will be useful conceptually in the next section to discuss the symmetry properties of the approximation that are of crucial importance in applications. As we have seen already the minimization equations shared by the naive gaussian approximation and CGA are equivalent to minimization of the expectation value of Hamiltonian, Eq.( and each matrix element of the correlator, G (x, y), should be understood as a functional of the order parameter φ (x) determined by the minimization equation δA/δG = 0. Traces and logarithm are also understood in the matrix sense. Let us truncate this infinite series to the terms explicitly written in Eq.(57). The minimization condition becomes just the gap equation, Eq.( and vanish if the gap equation is obeyed. The first functional derivative of A e f f with respect to φ (x) reproduces J (x) of the truncated shift equation, that coincides with Eq.( In this section we focus on the preservation of all the symmetry properties of correlators within CGA. These properties are crucially important for making an approximation useful. The issue is obviously crucial when the symmetry is spontaneously broken since the low energy properties are determined by the Goldstone bosons We demonstrate here that the CGA corrections to the naive gaussian correlators are just enough to make the full correlators consistent with the Ward identities. This allows one in particular to take into account accurately the Goldstone bosons. In addition the "charge conserving" To this end it will be more instructive to consider a continuous symmetry rather than the discrete symmetry Z 2 , since we would like to involve the GB. The model possessing the simplest continuous symmetry, O (2), has the following free energy: where a = 1, 2. We use two real fields, although very often a complex field is employed. The dimensionality d will be kept arbitrary for the time being. The O(2) invariance is expressed in a functional form as independence of the effective action under the transformation, for any angle θ. Here R ab (θ) is the global symmetry rotation matrix. The infinitesimal transformation, using the chain rule relates this to the ES: Functional derivatives of this equation with respect to φ a (r) generate all the Ward identities expressing the symmetry. The first two are The first equation on shell gives the Goldstone theorem. Indeed taking φ 1 = φ, φ 2 = 0 in momentum space it reads Here we use two quite different arguments to demonstrate that CGA obeys the Ward identities. The first is to prove Eq.( and the gap equation takes the form ) φ e (r 1 ) + ωG ee tr (r 1 , r 1 ) Substituting Eq.(66) into the functional Ward identity, Eq.(63), one obtains: r -∇ 2 φ a (r) + a + φ e (r) φ e (r) + ωG ee tr (r, r) φ a (r) + 2ωG ae tr (r, r) φ e (r) The second term in the curly brackets vanishes identically, while the first vanishes after integration by parts, The only nontrivial term therefore is the last one, To show that this term also vanishes, let us multiply the gap equation Eq.( -∇ 2 r 1 + a + (φ e (r 1 )) 2 + ωG ee tr (r 1 , r 1 ) G ac tr (r 1 , r) + 2ω φ a (r 1 ) φ b (r 1 ) + G ab tr (r 1 , r 1 ) G bc tr (r 1 , r) = δ ac δ (r 1 -r) . ( Multiply this by ε ac , summing over a, c and taking r = r 1 at the end. Thus, the scalar equation simplifies due to symmetry G ac tr (r, r) = G ca tr (r, r) into The last term vanishes since G ab tr (r, r) G bc tr (r, r) is symmetric under a ↔ c. Finally integrating over r 1 , the first term vanishes as a full derivative and we arrive at Eq.( The second method to demonstrate the Ward identities utilizes the known effective potential within the CGA, given in the previous section, Eq.(57). A general observation is that it is written covariantly as an O (2) scalar and in addition the CGA off shell minimization equations are covariant, namely J a and φ a are O (2) vectors, while G ab tr is a tensor. This was what originally motivated the term "CGA" The covariance proof of CGA can be extended to any symmetry linearly represented in the free energy and to statistical physics and (relativistic or not) many -body system involving fermionic, gauge field as long as the representation of the symmetry is linear or the truncation is covariant. The proof of Ward identities is rather formal. As an example, let us see explicitly the O (2) invariant model in dimension d = 3. The shift and gap equations in momentum space for the asymmetric order parameter along the direction 1, φ 1 = φ, φ 2 = 0, are Due to remaining Z 2 symmetry φ 2 → -φ 2 , the "mixed" correlator G 12 tr vanishes and the diagonal components of the cumulant take the form, This leads to the following set of algebraic equations for the two masses and φ: The UV cutoff Λ can be absorbed into the renormalized coupling The solution that exists only for a r < 0.03935ω 2 is given in Appendix C (a symmetric solution, φ = 0, that exists for all values of a r > 0 is also given there). The conclusion is that G ab tr is massive, namely does not have zero modes. However, as explained in the previous section, the naive gaussian correlator G ab tr is not the CGA correlator. The later is given by the derivative of Eq.(66), The first term on the right hand side of the above equation is just the inverse to G ab tr , while the second term gives the correction ∆Γ ab (x, y) containing the following chain function It is calculated from the chain equation in momentum space for the relevant quantity c c|ab k with the same Fourier transform defined as in section 2, Here the explicit expression for the "fish" integral, is listed in Appendix C. The only nonzero components of c c|ab k are: Substituting this into the expression of the cumulant correction in the momentum space one gets for zero momentum the mass of Goldstone mode: Therefore the GB reappears in CGA. Similarly more complicated correlators can be calculated and other Ward identities like Eq.(64b) can be explicitly checked. The O (2) invariant order parameter correlator in the symmetry broken phase within CGA is The contributions for the full CGA expressions containing the correction are the same as in d = 1. The explicit expression for P (k) is rather bulky and is not presented here. The integrals similar to those in 1D were analytically calculated, as shown in Appendix C. For comparison, the perturbation theory starting from an asymmetric classical solution up to one loop, is The delta function part of order parameter correlator should be included, when we consider the coordinate space counterpart of Eq.( It is compared with the one loop result in the coordinate space, in Figure To estimate the precision of the CGA, we performed a Monte Carlo simulation of the scalar model on a cubic lattice of size N. The corresponding action is where i is the discrete position and α is the unit vector along the three axes. With O(2) symmetry, the summation over b = 1, 2 is implicitly assumed. This model has already been precisely simulated by several groups The standard Metropolis algorithm is usually inefficient in the broken phase because of the large autocorrelation of the samples. The autocorrelation however can be reduced to a large extent by combining the Metropolis algorithm with the cluster algorithm. This is done by embedding the Ising variables into the Ψ 4 model with O(2) symmetry and using Wolff's single-cluster flipping method For measurements sample size of N = 30 with periodic boundary condition is used. In order to compare with analytic calculations, the bare parameter a used in the lattice model Eq.( is equated up to order ω with the same quantity calculated in the continuum model Eq.(87) at a particular position, like (N/2, 0, 0) . In Figure In this section we employ the CGA method to calculate the magnetic penetration depth of a type-II superconductor and compare it with both MC simulations and experiments. Let us first recall the derivation of the magnetic penetration depth within the GL approach. Fluctuating magnetic field minimally coupled to the order parameter of a superconductor (represented by a complex field, Ψ (r) = φ 1 (r)+iφ 2 (r), in the present context) is contained in the following anisotropic 3D Ginzburg Landau model: Here D ≡ ∇ + i2πA/Φ 0 is the covariant derivative and T m f is the mean -field phase transition temperature. Here we have assumed that the (bare) coefficient of |Ψ| 2 is linear in temperature, while other coefficients are temperature independent. This approximation is reasonable in a rather wide range of temperatures around T c for high temperature superconductors There are two basic scales, the magnetic penetration depth and the coherence length. The zero temperature magnetic penetration depth is ) and together with the ab-plane coherence length, ξ 2 = 2 /(2m * αT m f ), it defines a dimensionless parameter κ = λ 0 /ξ, which is much larger than unity for a typical type-II superconductors. In anisotropic superconductors, like the high T c cuprates, the ratio γ 2 = m * c /m * is large and an additional coherence length scale along the c axis, , one writes the Boltzmann factor at temperature T as where Here two dimensionless parameters were introduced. One observes that complexity of the anisotropy is shifted to the kinetic term of the vector field. To derive mesoscopically the macroscopic electrodynamics of the fluctuating superconductor including the abplane magnetic penetration depth (or, in the language of field theory the inverse photon mass), one expands the effective action of the photon field to the order of A 2 , and then calculates the averages over the order parameter field Ψ within the Ψ 4 isotropic GL model as in the previous sections. For large κ the expression coincides with the leading order in expansion in κ -2 . Here is the Noether current density of the O (2) symmetry defined in the pure Ψ 4 model. Its connected correlator can be decomposed into the transversal and the longitudinal parts, The corresponding coefficient functions, χ T and χ L , depend on k 2 only. The term q |Ψ q | 2 in the effective action Eq.( The magnetic penetration depth for magnetic field along the z direction, B z k = ik x A y k -ik y A x k , is now derived through the classical equation of motion, i.e. taking derivatives of the effective action with respect to A μ k . Using the Coulomb gauge, Therefore the ab-plane AC penetration depth in a homogeneous relatively large sample is The remaining work is to calculate the above quantity within the global O(2) GL model. In this subsection we calculate the penetration depth Eq.(100) using CGA. First let us decompose the order parameter into its real and imaginary parts Ψ (r) = φ 1 (r) + iφ 2 (r), so that all the quantities are calculated with CGA in the 3D O(2) model as in previous sections. As explained above the only quantity needed is the current-current correlator that using real fields takes the form: The notation AB|CD c in the above equation means one of A, B should be connected to one of C, D. This quantity therefore contains terms of three and four point connected correlators like φ 1 k-p φ 2 p φ 1 -k-q c and φ 1 k-p φ 2 p φ 1 -k-q φ 2 q c . Calculation of these terms requires high order cumulants and within CGA is a combination of the "triangle" and "box" integrals of gaussian truncated Green functions (for an example, see Appendix B, where it was given for the 1D Z 2 model). The calculations of these terms are cumbersome in the 3D case. On the other hand they are believed to give rise to only high order corrections. Therefore we simply ignore all these contributions and approximate the current correlator as where . With this approximation the penetration depth is given by where the momentum integral in the above equation vanishes in the small k limit. The magnetic penetration depth calculated this way is therefore proportional to φ 2 . Using reasonable values of ω and a r the above result is in good agreement with MC simulation and the experimental results on various high temperature superconductors. The current-current correlator is simulated in the coordinate space for different values of ω and a. In order to compare with the CGA results in the momentum space Eq.(103), finite Fourier transform of the correlators on the lattice is performed. The penetration depth, or the superfluid density, at finite momentum For each parameter a, the corresponding a r for the continuum model is the same as that in Figure is then extracted from the simulated current correlator. In Figure There exists a large amount of experimental data on temperature dependence of magnetic penetration depth in high T c superconductors. Most effective experimental methods include the microwave surface impedance measurement In Figure compares reasonably well with experiments for value of UV momentum cutoff of order Λ = 0.25/ξ, deduced from the fluctuation diamagnetism Another feature is the downward curvature of the inverse magnetic penetration depth within a temperature range below the critical point that is much wider than the critical region. This is possibly a non -universal phenomenon caused by strong thermal fluctuations. Given experimentally measured critical temperature T c , the dimensionless thermal fluctuation strength parameter ω (ωT c /T , proportional to the square root of Ginzburg number Gi) is the only parameter used to fit the experimental data. For Bi 2 S r 2 CaCu 2 O 8 the resulting value is ω = 1 (corresponding to Gi = 0.013), while for Y Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ and T l 2 Ba 2 CuO 6+y one gets ω = 0.5 (Gi = 0.0032) and ω = 0.54 (Gi = 0.0037) respectively. One observes that the downward cusp, while absent in the mean field result is described reasonably well by CGA. Note however that all the three materials are marginally three dimensional, and the use of the anisotropic 3D GL, Eq.( To summarize, we have developed a non -perturbative method to account for the strong thermal fluctuations within phenomenological Ginzburg -Landau approach. The approximation can be broadly described as a systematic correction of the Hartree -Fock type of mean field description of condensed matter systems undergoing second order transition. The correction to any correlator (one or two -body considered in the paper) makes the approximation "covariant", i. e. it obeys all the Ward identities of the relevant symmetry. The development of such an improvement scheme is motivated by recent experimental realization (in magnetization, conductivity and Nernst effect) that the fluctuation effects are strong in a much wider region both above and below T c than the narrow (even in high T c superconductors) critical fluctuation region (determined by the Ginzburg criterion, |T/T c -1| ≪ Gi), and the theoretical requirement of a conserving approximation for calculating quantities that hinge on the symmetry like the magnetic penetration depth in superconductors. We have demonstrated how all the physical consequences of the symmetry like the Goldstone theorem and gauge invariance of the current correlator (that enters the calculation of the magnetic penetration depth) are restored in the CGA. The method was tested on solvable one -dimensional models and by comparison with direct Monte Carlo simulation of realistic 3D model. It turns out that the covariant gaussian approximation captures correctly the excitation branches in addition to the modes described by the mean field approximation. This is clearly demonstrated by calculation of the four -field correlators in a toy model. We have performed the Monte Carlo simulations of the magnetic penetration depth in the symmetry broken phase of the 3D Ginzburg -Landau model. It compares well with CGA in the range accessible for the MC evaluation. The experimental measurements of the temperature dependence of penetration depth in high T c cuprates including the downward curvature induced by strong fluctuations is well captured by the CGA calculations. Recently it has been demonstrated that several new monolayer 2D materials like FeS e on S T O substrate Then the discussion of the fluctuations effects in transport can be quantitatively addressed. Moreover, it is well known that strong magnetic field enhances the thermal fluctuations, and magnetic field and vortex physics can also be easily incorporated using the CGA. Here again the superscript "tr" of Γ tr where "• • • " contains all the terms we have already encountered in section 2. This chain equation for C 4 is analogous to Eq.( Here the Fourier transform is defined as C 4 (y, z|x, x) = p,q c 4 p,q e ip(y-z) e iq(y-x) , (B.8) and t p,q is the "triangle" integral t p,q = k g tr k g tr p-k g tr q+k . (B.9) Substituting Eq.(B.7) and Eq.( Γ 3 p,q = 6φ + 3 c p+q + c -q + φc 4 p,q . (B.10) The derivation of Γ 4 is similar but far more complicated. Except for the above mentioned chain functions, one would also need a higher order chain, C 5 (y, z, u|x, x) ≡ δ 2 G tr (x, x) δφ (y) δφ (z) δφ (u) = p,q,k c 5 p,q,k e ip(y-z) e iq(y-u) e ik(y-x) , (B.11) which is a complicated function of "fish", "triangle" and even "box" integrals, b p,q,k = l g tr l g tr p+l g tr p+q+l g tr p+q+k+l . (B.12) The expression in terms of these integrals is rather bulky and will not be presented here. The final expression for Γ 4 in terms of chain functions is The delta function part comes from disconnected diagrams and the three and four -point connected correlation functions can be expressed via the two -point connected correlator and the cumulants derived above. The results for k 0 (that arise from the "would be" broken phase solution of the minimization equations) and that arise from the symmetric one are compared in Figure 