We present a theory of parametric mixing within the coplanar waveguide (CPW) of a superconducting nonlinear kinetic-inductance traveling-wave (KIT) amplifier engineered with periodic dispersion loadings. This is done by first developing a metamaterial band theory of the dispersionengineered KIT using a Floquet-Bloch construction and then applying it to the description of mixing of the nonlinear RF traveling waves. Our theory allows us to calculate signal gain vs. signal frequency in the presence of a frequency stop gap, based solely on loading design. We present results for both three-wave mixing (3WM), with applied DC bias, and four-wave mixing (4WM), without DC. Our theory predicts an intrinsic and deterministic origin to undulations of 4WM signal gain with signal frequency, apart from extrinsic sources, such as impedance mismatch, and shows that such undulations are absent from 3WM signal gain achievable with DC. Our theory is extensible to amplifiers based on Josephson junctions in a lumped LC transmission line (TWPA). Superconducting amplifiers with wide frequency bandwidth, high dynamic range, and low noise are used in both quantum computing 1 and photon-detector 2 research. They have utility to measure large arrays of quantum-limited frequency-multiplexed microwave superconducting resonators, with recent strides made using nonlinear amplifiers based on Josephson junctions. KIT devices have been fabricated from superconducting TiN and NbTiN films on Si. Geometries such as a double spiral and a meandering line have been used to create very long KIT CPWs, on chips of area ∼ 4 cm 2 . At low temperature, traveling RF waves, consisting of a strong pump of fixed frequency ω P and a smaller-amplitude signal of adjustable frequency ω S , input to one port of the CPW, undergo degenerate 4WM along the direction x of the CPW due to the Kerr-like nonlinear kinetic inductance per unit length, L(x, t), of the underlying superconducting film, viz. where L o (x) is the linear kinetic inductance per unit length, made dependent on x to account for engineered loadings, I(x, t) is the total time-dependent electrical current of the mixing waveforms, and I * is a constant scaling factor. within the waveguide. The model assumes perfect impedance matching between end nodes of the CPW, although in practice high inductance of the thin lines can lead to mismatch, making it difficult to obtain a smooth transfer function, S 21 , on output. The solution of Eqs. ( In 4WM of pump, signal, and idler within nonlinear optical fibers, the electromagnetic fields are described by plane waves. Signal gain arises on output by satisfying the three criteria of (i) energy conservation, i.e., ω S + ω 3 = 2ω P ; (ii) linear momentum conservation, i.e., the respective plane-wave wavenumbers satisfy k S + k 3 ∼ = 2k P ; and (iii) overall phase matching of the constituent waveforms. In the last criterion, phase matching is tunable by adjusting the input power of the pump, which alters the extent of self-phase modulation of the waveforms, as well as the cross-phase modulation between them. A quantifiable theory of KIT operation, which addresses the magnitude and bandwidth of parametric signal gain without introduction of ad hoc fitting parameters, must account for the reduced translational symmetry imposed by periodic loadings. For example, in the linear limit, where L(x, t) ∼ = L o (x), with T o , a solution of the voltage and current of Eqs. (2) and ( where V k (x) and I k (x) are Floquet-Bloch coefficients periodic in o . This construction introduces a Bloch wavenumber k, analogous to the wavenumber of a plane wave, but unique to the first of an infinite number of one-dimensional Brillouin zones. Any other wavenumber may be reduced to one within the first Brillouin zone by translation via a reciprocal lattice vector 2πn/ o , where n is an integer. Application of the Floquet-Bloch equation to the study of elementary excitations in the bulk of solid materials is well known, where the arrangement of atoms on a periodic lattice dictates solutions of the form of Eq. ( Thus, there exists a center region (R + 1)/2 that may be defined as a non-loading region, with alternating loading and non-loading regions to either side, with the total number of regions R always an odd number. We then model C(x) and L o (x) of a unit cell (0 where x r and ∆x r are the starting position and length of region r, respectively, and Θ(x) is the conventional Heaviside step function. The definition in Eq. ( To first approximation it is reasonable to model the waveguide as straight, with tens to thousands of repeated unit cells along the length. As mentioned, application of a DC bias, I DC , to the KIT amplifier can induce 3WM processes, as well as additional 4WM processes. summarizes the six parametric scattering processes that occur with onset of I DC . Only the degenerate 4WM process of ω S + ω 3 = 2ω P (bright red), when I DC = 0, and 3WM process of ω S + ω 1 = ω P (cyan), when I DC > 0, contribute to broadband signal gain since only these processes achieve momentum conservation: over a broad range of signal frequencies near the bottom of the amplifier dispersion-frequency manifold. To see this for the case of I DC > 0, one can make a simple estimate of the total momentum of each of the six scattering processes as a function of ω S , using the unloaded dispersion frequency Ω(k) = v g k. Conservation of energy for the six parametric processes is assumed as in Fig. 2(b) involves unloaded dispersion frequencies, there are technically no gaps in its manifold, and the magnitude of the group velocity is the same in each dispersion-frequency band. This is not the case in reality, but is useful for the present discussion. For the case of the 3WM scattering process of ω S +ω 1 = ω P , we have and Hence, assuming a pump tone placed near the first stop gap, momentum is conserved for this process across the range of signal frequencies ω S that lie within the first dispersion-frequency band. As another example, consider the 4WM process of ω S + ω 3 = ω 1 + ω 2 , where we note ω 1 ∼ = v g k 1 and In particular, we have k 2 ∼ = 2k P -ω 2 /v g , and also Thus, the total momentum in this case is Fig. To understand the behavior of parametric multiwave mixing, let us define the current of the amplifier as I(x, t) = I DC + I RF (x), where I RF (x, t) is the total current of all RF waveforms: pump, signal, and three idler products. Substituting this expression into Eq. (1) we have a nonlinear kinetic inductance given by where the term proportional to I DC /I * is associated with the three 3WM processes of Fig. Noting the energy of kinetic inductance per unit length: E I (x, t) = L(x, t) I RF (x, t) 2 /2, as RF input power increases from zero with DC bias applied, it is the 3WM processes that activate first, generating the three idler products. Only after RF input power is increased further, beyond a threshold of amplitude I RF (x, t) ∼ 2I DC , do the three 4WM processes begin to dominate, with the two additional 4WM processes arising secondarily, after 3WM processes have generated the new idlers ω 1 and ω 2 . When I DC > 0 and ω P is situated just above the first stop gap, one finds the 3WM process of ω S + ω 1 = ω P initiates broadband signal gain centered about half the pump frequency, i.e., ω S ∼ = ω 1 ∼ = ω P /2. Because the energy of 3WM contributions is one integer exponent less in the RF current amplitude than 4WM contributions, it takes less pump input power to operate the amplifier in this 3WM mode. However, if the input power is increased too high, the amplitude of traveling-wave current will increase beyond the I RF (x, t) ∼ 2I DC threshold, allowing 4WM to dominate and thus wash out the effect of 3WM broadband gain. In particular, incidental momentum conservation of the 4WM process of ω S + ω 3 = ω 1 + ω 2 , as approximated in Fig. C. Nonlinear Forward-Traveling Waves and the Floquet-Bloch Supermode Periodic loadings create stop gaps in the dispersion-frequency spectrum of the KIT amplifier, but they also modify the group velocity of RF traveling waves as they propagate along the CPW. In our theory we assume the dispersive propagation is monochromatic, such that, for example, an RF signal of frequency ω S injected into the amplifier can be matched to a specific dispersion frequency of the amplifier, as in Fig. where V n (k S ) and I n (k S ) are Fourier coefficients. On the other hand, if the input power is sufficiently high, or the waveguide length is long enough, then L(x, t) becomes nonlinear due to its dependence on the total current, and therefore Eq. ( n (x). This nonlinear Floquet-Bloch forward-traveling-wave solution is then of the form where the slowly varying coefficients satisfy the condition Additionally, as we shall show in the development of the theory, the coefficients V (S) n (x) and I (S) n (x) can be further written as superpositions of the dispersion-frequency band states at k S . In this later expansion, the nonlinear Floquet-Bloch forward-traveling-wave solution of Eq. ( In the preceding remarks we introduced several important concepts: (i) KIT amplifiers are engineered with periodic loadings to create frequency stops to inhibit higher pump harmonics, as well as to modify dispersion characteristics of RF traveling waves. The loading design is incorporated into our theory. (ii) Periodic loadings reduce the translational symmetry of the amplifier, which necessitates introduction of a band structure of dispersion frequencies and the Bloch wavenumber of a first Brillouin zone, as in Fig (iii) The criteria for parametric amplification is altered by the reduced translational symmetry: momentum conservation must be expressed in terms of Bloch wavenumbers and overall phase matching between parametrically mixing waveforms must include dispersion-frequency bands with varying group velocities. Our theory incorporates these modified criteria. (iv) In our theory nonlinear, parametrically-mixing RF forward-traveling waves may be expressed as Floquet-Bloch supermodes constructed from slowly-varying superpositions of dispersion-frequency band states. As these dispersive forward-traveling waves propagate along the CPW, the evolution of the components of their respective superpositions defines the phase matching between them. (v) In this way our theory allows us to calculate the magnitude and bandwidth of parametric signal gain directly from the loading design, without need to introduce ad hoc fitting parameters. In what follows we first derive the metamaterial band theory of the KIT amplifier and use it as a basis for the theory of parametric multiwave mixing of nonlinear traveling waves. We then present results of calculations using a specific even-symmetry loading design for a KIT amplifier. The parameters of our model are those of Eq. ( We consider a KIT amplifier with engineered dispersion loadings as in Fig. Like L o (x) and C(x), the Bloch amplitudes V k (x), I k (x) of Eq. ( where n , which are elements of matrix inverses corresponding to C n and L on , respectively. These may be written explicitly as from which one may easily show If we now substitute Eq. (4) for I(x, t) and V (x, t) in Eqs. ( where we have introduced a non-Hermitian dispersion matrix with elements given by Diagonalization of the matrix of Eq. ( Since the above dispersion matrix is non-Hermitian, we must introduce left, u n (k), and right, e n (k), eigenvectors and express the diagonalization formally as Here α refers to a band index, of which there are an infinite number at each value of k. For orthonormality and completeness we define which presupposes the existence of a non-unitary similarity transformation diagonalizing Eq. ( These relations are consistent with reciprocity of linear waveform propagation in either direction of the waveguide. Appendix B shows how one may apply Eq. ( where we have introduced coefficients Note that D n ({C r } , {L r }) is just Eq. ( For the remainder of our discussion we adopt a specific convention for labeling the bands α of the KIT amplifier. Figure and In this way the mapping of extended to reduced zone follows as Ω(k + 2πα/ o ) = Ω α (k), for any loading design. The red and green dashed lines show several examples of mapping, involving the wavenumbers ±q of the reduced zone. This labeling convention is useful to the understanding of the effect of a loading design on parametric mixing. If dispersion loadings of the KIT are engineered to inhibit formation of pump harmonics and shock waves then we may confine our solution of Eqs. ( as in Eq. ( Equations ( n (x). The steps of derivation are similar to those we outlined for the linear limit, with the caveat that we may also leverage the canonical transformation implied by Eqs. ( where the dimensionless current amplitudes A (μ) α (x) also are slowly varying in x, in the manner of Eq. (26). Equation (29) expresses the fact that, although an initial boundary condition may be imposed on the slowly-varying amplitude at x = 0, the effect of dispersion will cause the waveform to hybridize with other states of k μ as it evolves in x along the waveguide. These assumptions regarding the form of our solution hold as long as the traveling wave propagates adiabatically along the waveguide. With application of the canonical transformation, solution of the current I(x, t), in particular, follows by solving an infinite set of coupled differential equations involving amplitudes A (μ) α (x), expressed in terms of eigenvalues and vectors of our band theory. Appendix C gives a general derivation of the coupled equations. Our focus will be restricted to dynamics of the six mixing processes of Fig. (1) which measure the extent of momentum conservation for each process, respectively. Hence, defining A DC = I DC /I * , we have directly from Eq. (C10) the coupled subset of pump, signal, and idler amplitude equations given by (1, P ,P,1) α,α ,α ,α A (P ) (1, S,S,1) α (x) + 2f (2, P ,P, (2, S,S,2) In the above equations we have defined μ = -μ and k -μ = -k μ , as introduced in Appendix C. Boundary conditions corresponding to injected pump and signal may be expressed as , where ĀP and ĀS are constants defined by the RF input power. For the idler products we set Ā1 = Ā2 = Ā3 = 0. The mixing coefficients f , and f (μ,μ ,μ ,μ ) α,α ,α ,α of the above coupled equations are given by Eqs. (C11) through (C13), respectively. These are the hybridizing coefficients the nonlinear 3WM coefficients and the nonlinear 4WM coefficients where, from Eq. (C9), we also have Note that the mixing coefficients depend on a matrix of elements Λ n,n (k) defined in Eq. (C7). Similar to the derivation in Appendix B for the dispersion matrix D n,n (k) of Eq. (23), we may write Λ n,n (k) as appropriate for a unit cell of even symmetry. As can be deduced from Eqs. ( The limiting forms of the mixing coefficients are comparable to textbook formulations of plane-wave parametric mixing, provided comparisons are made in the limit k μ o 1, as mentioned earlier. As a last topic of theory discussion we note the five types of parametric scattering processes implied by Eqs. (36) through (40). n (k) left and right eigenvectors, respectively 3wm , ∆β 3WM phase factors 4wm , ∆β of Eq. ( , which has the no-loading limit given by Eq. (48). As in the case of 4WM scattering these 3WM processes are multichannel contributors to 3WM signal gain, dependent on the loading design. Table I summarizes mathematical symbols used in our description of the theory. Several important observations arise from our theory: (i) A metamaterial band theory of the KIT amplifier follows from engineered periodic loadings. The band theory is obtained via diagonalization of the non-Hermitian dispersion matrix of Eq. ( (ii) The band theory, via Eq. ( (iii) Dimensionless amplitudes A (μ) α (x) of parametrically mixing supermodes satisfy a set of coupled, nonlinear first-order differential equations, not unlike those derived in simple treatments of parametric mixing. (iv) The mixing coefficients f , and f (μ,μ ,μ ,μ ) α,α ,α ,α that enter these coupled equations are calculated solely from knowledge of the KIT band theory, i.e., the engineered loading design. We now turn to a discussion of the results of calculations of forward-traveling waves and the signal gain that ensues from their parametric mixing. We present numerical computations using an example loading design of even symmetry consisting of R = 7 regions, as in Fig. Figure k), denoted by the blue, orange, green, and red curves, respectively. The inset depicts the vicinity of the first stop gap at higher resolution. Table Having solved for the metamaterial band structure of the KIT amplifier we now explore the nonlinear regime of its operation in the presence of these bands. This includes calculating the mixing coefficients f , and f (μ,μ ,μ ,μ ) α,α ,α ,α of Eqs. (41) through (43) using this very band structure. We will first consider the effect of engineered loadings on a single pump tone as it propagates down the waveguide. We then turn to the results of calculations of signal gain, both with and without applied DC. We consider the effect of engineered frequency dispersion on a single forward-traveling pump tone injected into the CPW of Fig. α,α (A DC ) A α =α P (x) = 0, then we may approximate the solution of Eq. (50) as α P ,α P (A DC ) + f (P, P ,P,P ) α P ,α P ,α P ,α P P o x δ α,α P . This approximation illustrates self modulation of the pump, where, in the absence of loadings, via Eqs. ( The sum of k P + 2πα P / o is the extended-zone wavenumber, and the modulation is proportional to both the DC and RF input powers, resembling a plane-wave solution. Figure -1 (x), corresponding to the second dispersion-frequency band, as a function of x/ T , are similar to those of A (P ) 0 (x), except for an overall phase difference of 180 • . At P o = 0.01, the maxima of higher-band amplitudes are no greater than 1% of those of the first two bands, so the supermode traveling wave is well approximated by just the first two bands. We have shown results of calculations of amplitude for a single nonlinear forward-traveling wave as it propagates along the waveguide of the KIT in the presence of the engineered loadings of Table For the loading design of Table (3) α (0) = 0. We specifically solved the zero-DC forms of Eqs. ( The pump frequency was fixed to the bottom of the first stop gap, with α P = 0 and k P = 1225 m -1 . The frequency ω S of the injected signal was varied and the gain was calculated at each value of ω S . As ω S was incremented it was matched to either the first band (α S = 0) or the second band (α S = -1), depending on whether ω S was below or above the stop gap. If ω S fell within the gap then calculation of signal gain was skipped, with gain reported as zero, since k S is indeterminate in this case. The frequency of the 4WM idler, ω 3 = 2ω P -ω S , was matched to the band structure in a manner similar to the pump and signal, with k 3 obtained from the matching band of index α 3 . Figure Using Eqs. ( Figure As P o increases, Fig. What is most striking about the 4WM signal gain depicted in Fig. As we saw in Fig. Experimental results reported in Fig. Recall that if a DC bias is applied to the KIT amplifier then, in addition to the degenerate 4WM process of the zero-DC case, mixing of injected pump and signal results in five new parametric processes, as sketched in Fig. As we did for the zero-DC 4WM signal gain, we calculated the 3WM signal gain for the loading design of Table and f 3 = 2f P -f S were defined with initial amplitudes of zero. Again, P o serves as a relative measure of the RF input power, which we varied as we calculated signal gain as a function of f S using Eq. (53). Figure In Fig. If pump frequency is moved to a position below the gap then the condition of ideal 3WM phase matching diminishes, with gain profile collapsing from the center of the band. If pump frequency is moved above f P ∼ = 8.144 GHz, to f P = 9.0 GHz, then the 3WM signal gain all but disappears. However, at f P = 9.0 GHz (red curve), we see the emergence of a broadband 4WM gain profile about this value of pump frequency, albeit depressed within its center. Note the smoothness of 4WM signal gain in this particular case; this occurs because the pump, signal, and 4WM idler frequencies are all now matched to the same second dispersion-frequency band. To facilitate understanding of the underlying physics of broadband 3WM signal gain in the presence of engineered dispersion we derived a two-band approximation in Appendix D. The approximation applies to an undepleted pump, with f P near the first stop gap, and with P o sufficiently small for broadband 3WM to occur. It tends to underestimate the magnitude and breadth of gain, particularly if f P is positioned away from the gap, but it provides insight into the underlying mechanism of the parametric gain. In the approximation we assume amplitudes of signal and idler traveling waves can be represented via the lowest dispersion-frequency band, i.e., α = 0, and we allow f P to be positioned to either side of the first stop gap, treating the pump traveling wave as a superposition involving the first two bands, i.e., α = 0, -1. From Eqs. (D4) and (D5), the amplitudes of the two components of the pump traveling wave are then of the form with canonical phase coefficients given by Eq. (D6) as The canonical phase coefficients embody both self-phase modulation (SPM) of pump components, via f (P ) 0,0 (A DC ) and f (P ) -1,-1 (A DC ), and cross-phase modulation (XPM) between components, via f (P ) 0,-1 (A DC ) and f (P ) -1,0 (A DC ). The mixing coefficients f (P ) 0,-1 (A DC ) and f (P ) -1,0 (A DC ) convey the strength of hybridization of the supermode traveling wave between the two bands as it propagates down the waveguide. Our approximation therefore simplifies the supermode representation of the pump traveling wave to just the two most significant components, adequate for P o 1. Because the pump is comprised of these two component waveforms, there are then two criteria for phase matching of pump with signal and idler. From Eq. (D12) the relevant phase relationships may be defined as each of which depends on (i) momentum conservation, in terms of Bloch wavenumbers, (ii) SPM of both signal and idler, matched to the same lowest-lying band, and (iii) a canonical pump phase coefficient, φ + (A DC ), which contains both SPM and inter-band XPM of the pump components. As either of φ ± (A DC ) tends to zero a corresponding channel of signal gain may arise. From Eq. (D22), the gain coefficient of each of the two channels may be expressed as where, via Eq. (D11), we defined canonical nonlinear mixing coefficients f (μ,ν,P ) which are real-valued for the loading design of Table where, via Eq. (D26), we have defined pseudo dimensionless amplitudes f (1, S,P ) Note that if the two channels of Eq. ( If hybridization is very weak, i.e., f (1) 3wm tend to be collectively positive in Eq. ( The underlying physics can be explained as follows. In the supermode representation the injected traveling wave is hybridized by the dispersive property of the loadings, made increasing so by applied DC, for example. A pump traveling wave with frequency just below the gap takes on an additional component corresponding to the excited band state at k p of the second dispersion-frequency band, with occupancy of this excited state at x proportional to . One then has XPM induced between the two superposed components of the wave, which in turn creates a strong, broadband condition of phase matching, i.e., φ + (A DC ) ∼ = 0. This condition of phase matching persists whether the pump frequency is just below or just above the gap, with optimal phase matching occurring just above the gap. In contrast, if the pump frequency is set well below the first stop gap, such that the pump traveling wave can be described by just one component, with amplitude A (P ) 0 (x) ∼ = A (P ) 0 (P o , A DC ) e if (P ) 0,0 (A DC ) x , then in analogy with Eq. (57), the phase matching condition in this case is which is the no-hybridization limit of φ + (A DC ). For the loading design of Table In Fig. Nevertheless, as we saw in Fig. (i) Dispersion-frequency bands of the KIT amplifier may be calculated from knowledge of loading design, which creates stop gaps between bands and group velocities that differ between bands, as shown in Fig. (ii) A forward-traveling current of the KIT amplifier may be represented by a superposition of these dispersion-frequency band states, as in Eq. ( Intrinsic undulations are a general consequence of 4WM in the presence of engineered dispersion because, on average, group velocity cannot remain invariant from band to band as one progresses upward through the dispersion-frequency manifold. The issue may be mitigated by (i) the choice of nonlinear traveling-wave parametric amplifier, (ii) a design of loadings that minimizes the size of stop gaps, (iii) reduction of waveguide length, (iv) minimization of required RF input power, or (v) application of a DC bias, as described below. One can model the amplifier using the present framework to establish the extent of intrinsic undulations and then compare these to Fourier analysis of the length scales in the signal gain of the actual amplifier. Assuming traveling waves of frequencies adjacent to the first stop gap, if intrinsic undulations are mitigated to a single channel of contribution then the length scale of undulations should be the order of the stop-gap size. In the case of the KIT amplifier of Table A second conclusion of our analysis of the KIT amplifier is that we can mitigate the issue of intrinsic signal-gain undulation by applying a DC bias, thereby leveraging 3WM signal gain on either side of the center of the resulting band. Incidental 4WM features present in the center of the 3WM band may be addressed by any of the methods mentioned above, although removal of these incidental features is not essential to operation of the amplifier. The 3WM signal gain is achievable at an order of magnitude less RF input power than 4WM signal amplification, albeit with reduced gain when compared to 4WM. Because the injected signal and 3WM idler are matched to the same first dispersion-frequency band, as in Fig 7(b), phase matching remains robust as signal frequency is varied, with the result that 3WM signal gain is a very smooth function of signal frequency. Caveats to utilization of 3WM signal amplification include the limited range of input powers and waveguide lengths permitted, due to the continual presence of 4WM processes, which tend to dominate at higher signal amplitude. A last point of our analysis is that we showed how dispersion engineering generates 3WM signal gain. In our presentation of results we developed an analytical approximation of the 3WM signal, given by the two-channel form of Eq. (60). We showed how phase matching arises in the + channel of this approximation via φ + (A DC ) ∼ = 0, where φ + (A DC ) is given by Eqs. ( Photonic metamaterials of the micro scale and smaller that exhibit strongly-correlated behavior continue to be an interesting and exploitable realm of quantum physics. We hope that our theoretical framework can help to build better amplifiers and also stimulate new avenues of research. Bal. This work is property of the US Government and not subject to copyright. where Θ(x) is a step function given by Θ Similarly, in Eq. (A6), weighing also the magnitude of φ, we have the intermediate step Differentiating with respect to φ then taking the limit as φ → 0 we arrive at Substituting Eq. ( Then exploiting the symmetry of the unit cell, as described above, we obtain after some algebra the real-valued coefficients The sums of this expression may be further simplified to With the aid of Appendix A, if we then substitute Eq. (B3) into Eq. ( (1) n,n (α, β) and S n,n (α, β) defined in Eqs. (A1) and (A2), we obtain Substituting the summation evaluations given by Eqs. (A7) and (A10) we arrive at where we have used the fact that Θ 2 with Θ(r 1 -r 2 ) defined as in Eq. (A8). Explicitly evaluating Θ(r 1 -r 2 ) in the expression of D n,n (k) above we obtain After some manipulation of sums, the above expression of D n,n (k) may be written more succinctly as where we have defined coefficients Equations (B8) and (B9) express an element of the dispersion matrix appropriate for an arbitrary loading design. of the current given by Via Eq. ( to ∼ 0.1% error in the ten lowest-lying dispersion-frequency bands. To evaluate the coupled amplitude equations of Eqs. (