Single flux quantum (SFQ) circuits form a natural neuromorphic technology with SFQ pulses and superconducting transmission lines simulating action potentials and axons, respectively. Here we present a new component, magnetic Josephson junctions, that have a tunablility and reconfigurability that was lacking from previous SFQ neuromorphic circuits. The nanoscale magnetic structure acts as a tunable synaptic constituent that modifies the junction critical current. These circuits can operate near the thermal limit where stochastic firing of the neurons is an essential component of the technology. This technology has the ability to create complex neural systems with greater than 10 21 neural firings per second with approximately 1 W dissipation. Single flux quantum (SFQ) logic While SFQ logic circuits require a high degree of device uniformity, this constraint is greatly relaxed for neuromorphic circuits. Further, SFQ logic requires precise timing and clock distribution, at frequencies of 10 GHz and above, which can be very challenging, while neuromorphic SFQ is asynchronous (although strongly correlated). Finally, SFQ circuits usually require significant bias currents, typically 100 μA per device, which can lead to a prohibitively large total current when device counts are on the order of 10 9 . Stochastic SFQ works very close to equilibrium and does not require significant bias currents. A standard circuit model of a Josephson junction is shown in Fig. Magnetic Josephson junctions have recently received a lot of attention due to their potential use as compact nonvolatile memory elements in SFQ circuits. It has been shown that by changing the magnetic state of a spin valve incorporated into a Josephson junction, one can modulate both the amplitude and phase of the supercurrent. The lower the blocking temperature, the easier the magnetic clusters are to switch, with a tradeoff of loss of thermal stability. The switching energy for a magnetic cluster is given approximately by E s ≈ ln(t m /t a ) k B T B , where t m is a measurement time, and t a is an attempt time. For a blocking temperature of 30 K, E s ≈ 70 meV. The cluster moment can be estimated from Langevin fits to moment versus field curves above the blocking temperature. These fits give the cluster moments of a few Bohr magnetons to several hundred Bohr magnetons, depending on the annealing conditions. A key element of these junctions is that the ratio of the switching energy to the angular momentum of the clusters is close to the ratio of energy to angular momentum of an electron, indicating that efficient energy and angular momentum transfer can occur. To develop complex neural circuits, it is essential to have a device model that can be incorporated into large scale circuit simulations. We have modified existing Verilog A models of a standard Josephson junction to accommodate an internal magnetic order parameter. Fig. Here we ignore the dependence of the phase on the magnetic order parameter, δ(m) = constant, and only allow the critical current to vary. As with the spin valve Josephson junctions, the critical current is maximized in the state with unaligned spins and minimized in the state with spins aligned. The temperature is a critical experimental parameter that can simultaneously scale all critical currents to allow evaluation of the performance with different levels of resting state activity. At present, this model is not validated by experimental data. It represents the simplest dependence of I c on m to allow simulations to determine the utility of such a device in complex neural circuits. Given this device model, the performance of devices and circuits can be modeled with SPICE as shown in Fig. We have introduced nanocluster magnetic Josephson junctions as a potential synaptic component for SFQ neural circuits. We have demonstrated that in the stochastic limit the spiking behavior can be made very sensitive to small changes in critical currents that can be obtained by changing the magnetic structures in magnetic Josephson junctions. We have shown that operating in the stochastic limit can achieve much lower power and eliminate the need for large total bias currents. Finally, we have introduced stochastic circuit models that can be used in large scale SPICE simulations of SFQ neural circuits. We thank the IARPA C3 program for providing inspiration and guidance for this work. 