We report a microscopic model wherein the unconventional superconductivity emerges from an incoherent 'Cooper-pair glass' state. Driven by the pair-pair interaction, a new type of quasi-Bose phase transition is at work. The interaction leads to the unconventional coupling of the quasiparticles to excited pair states, or 'super-quasiparticles', with a non-retarded energydependent gap. The model describes quantitatively the quasiparticle excitation spectra of both cuprates and pnictides, including the universal 'peak-dip-hump' signatures, and for the pseudogap phase above Tc. The results show that instantaneous pair-pair interactions account for the SC condensation without a collective mode. Despite its wide applications, the BCS theory Microscopic measurements reveal an unconventional quasiparticle (QP) dispersion, the 'peak-dip-hump' structure In this letter, these questions are addressed within the Fig. pair-pair interaction model (PPI). We show that the main unconventional features of high-T c SC can be understood p-1 arXiv:1612.02268v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 9 Dec 2016 in a microscopic theory wherein incoherent pairs in the Cooper-glass state interact to form the coherent superconducting state. As a result of this novel PPI, the quasiparticles become coupled to the excited pair states (see Fig. The results point to a universal mechanism in high-T c driven by the interaction between pairs, giving key physical quantities such as the condensation energy and elementary excitations, as a function of temperature and doping. In particular, the 'peak-dip-hump' originates from instantaneous electron interactions, thus discarding a bosonic mode as its origin in these materials. where the first term H 0 describes the normal metal phase, and the second term is the pairing hamiltonian: Here b i † k creates the ith pair state as composites of two fermions : b i k = a i -k↓ a i k↑ , and of binding energy ∆ i k . The first two terms H P G = H 0 + H pair describe a non-superconducting state, a Cooper-pair glass having no global phase, formed by the superposition of pairs in random states. SC coherence is achieved due to the pairpair interaction term giving rise to the characteristic DOS (Fig. where β i,j k,k are the coupling coefficients, which we later tie to β c , the SC order parameter. Cooper-pair glass state. The accumulated results of photoemission where ∆ 0 and σ 0 are the average gap and the half-width, respectively. In the spinor notation: ãi k = (a i k↑ , a i † -k↓ ), the equation of motion is : i is the effective matrix : The latter is diagonal in the quasiparticle basis : γi , leading to : , where σ z is the standard Pauli matrix. In the continuum limit the spectral function A P G (k, E) acquires a significant width As a result of the pair distribution, the coherence peaks in the DOS are absent (blue curve, Fig. k , H int ] to the equation of motion, we obtain : Obviously, without pairing (∆ i = 0), electrons are uncoupled from holes, reflecting the normal state. To the contrary, the second (anomalous) terms in resulting in the equation of motion : in which the two Γ-matrix coefficients are : and J = 0 1 1 0 . These equations display coupling coefficients depending on different states (k, k ) and different pairs (i, j), where two are spin aligned , Γ(↑↑), and two are spin reversed, Γ(↑↓). The vertex amplitudes imply instantaneous electron/hole interactions, all inherent to the super-anomalous term of Fig. which follows directly from It is important to stress that the eigenvalues (E i k ) depend on the modified gap function; their dispersion is : Fig. , which we note is first order in β. Using the Λ i k transformation, the equations of motion (9) can now be written in terms of QP operators : As a result of the PPI, the second term of the full equation of motion To illustrate the effect of the coupling we focus on the case where, for wave vectors k and k , only two quasiparticles of energy E i k and E j k become degenerate (higher degeneracies are possible) and the exact operators satisfy : i In the bi-spinor basis γj k = (γ j k , γj † k ), a new object of dimension 4 in the a μ fermions, the secular equation is obtained : with L i,j a matrix of dimension 4 : The analogy with the lowest order pairing matrix H i P G , Eq. ( where the explicit QP-QP coupling ∼ β 4 Γ 4 , appearing on the r.h.s., is assumed to be small but finite. The exact eigenstates E ex kk correspond to a new superquasiparticle, (γ i k , γj k ), and thus to the quadron (∆ i k , ∆ j k ). While the E i k are to first order in the PPI ∝ β, the coupling involved in the super-quasiparticle is to higher order in β Γ. Since the latter is small, the coupling of the quasiparticles γi k and γj k need only be considered at the degeneracy point : while otherwise, E Superconducting gap function. The SC ground state can be derived from the mean-field expression where i = c indicates pairs of the condensate and ∆ k,0 = < ∆ i k >. As in our previous work Refs. , where g k takes into account the d-wave pairing. The crucial point is that all the pairs ∆ j k are degenerate in the condensate. The gap equation ( where k > is the meanfield condensate pair-pair interaction and N oc , the number of pairs (N oc 1). Since the mean-field parameter β c is proportional to N oc (T ), as a result of the quasi-Bose transition, the second term represents the condensation energy. As the temperature rises, it gradually decreases and finally vanishes at T c , contrary to the spectral gap A key aspect of the problem is that the gap function ∆ c k in equation ( where both ∆ k,0 and β k are assumed independent of k . Recalling equation ( We thus have an energy dependent and self-consistent equation for the gap function which leads to a strictly nonhyperbolic QP dispersion and, most significantly, gives rise Table , where E dip is the dip position. to the dip in the spectral function (Fig. Comparaison with experiments. The instantaneous interactions in the hamiltonian imply that the DOS can be calculated with no retardation effects in the Green's function. If no quasiparticle lifetime effect is invoked, at T = 0, the DOS for the d-wave condensate can be calculated by the standard formulae using ∂ k ∂E k : where N n (E F ) is the normal DOS at the Fermi energy. The SC DOS is thus proportional to the derivative of the gap function dE k . The controlling parameters are thus the pair-pair interaction β c and the condensate pair number, N oc , but the distribution P 0 (E k ) plays an essential role. Since the derivative has two extrema, the first one reinforces the QP coherence peaks, giving them an unconventional wide shape, while the second extremum produces the dip Among the cuprates, the tunneling characteristics of BiSrCaCuO (2212) or BiSrCaCuO (2203) have been the most clearly established (see The parameters of the fits are given in Table We find that E dip -∆ p 2β c , where β c 2k B T c follows the SC dome but without the collective mode scenario. Rather, it emerges from the novel QP-pair vertex inherent to the super-anomalous term of the equation of motion We propose a scenario for high-T c superconductors wherein the initial incoherent state is the Cooper-pair glass, whose properties explain the observed pseudogap and Fermi-arc phenomena in agreement with both tunneling The theory gives for the first time the correct temperature and doping dependence of the quasiparticles in the SC to PG transition. It reproduces quantitatively the experimental spectra of both pnictides and cuprates, including the peak-dip-hump structure, and attributes a common meaning to the fundamental parameters. In conclusion, these features are not due to the coupling to a bosonic mode, but rather emerge from instantaneous all-electron interactions.