We developed a minimum gradient based method to track ridge features in 2D image plot, which is a typical data representation in many momentum resolved spectroscopy experiments. Through both analytic formulation and numerical simulation, we compare this new method with existing DC (distribution curve) based and higher order derivative based analyses. We find that the new method has good noise resilience and enhanced contrast especially for weak intensity features, meanwhile preserves the quantitative local maxima information from the raw image. An algorithm is proposed to extract 1D ridge dispersion from the 2D image plot, whose quantitative application to angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements on high temperature superconductors is demonstrated. 2D image plot is one of the most commonly used data representation formats in many physical researches, widely utilized in techniques like scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) For example, in a typical energy-momentum (ω -k) map from ARPES measurement, the spectral intensity can be described as I 0 (k, ω) in Eq. ( Here A(k, ω) is the single particle spectral function that contains the critical information of the electron bare band dispersion (k) and self energy Σ(k, ω) in Eq. (2). F D(ω) is the electronic Fermi-Drac distribution modulating the intensity's energy distribution (Eq. ( M (k) is the single electron dipole transition matrix element modulating the intensity's momentum distribution. R(k, ω) is the instrument energy-momentum resolution function. g in n (k, ω) and g ex n (k, ω) represent the intrinsic (sample surface vibration, phosphor screen roughness) and extrinsic (CCD sensor, electrical circuit) experimental noise respectively. In order to extract the band dispersion and self energy, three techniques have been most frequently usedmomentum/energy distribution curve (MDC/EDC) fitting method, second derivative method MDC/EDC fitting first slices the 2D image into an array of 1D (constant energy or momentum) curves, then based on assumed self energy functional form (Eq. ( To qualitatively sharpen the image plot, higher order derivative based methods have been employed to provide an enhanced visual guide. Second derivative method applies two consecutive derivatives of the spectral intensity along either ω axis (for slowly dispersing flat bands) or k axis (for rapidly dispersing vertical bands). After this process, single peak feature in intensity plot is usually turned into one enhanced central valley with two weaker satellite peaks; and neighboring peak features are usually better separated due to the boosted sharpness. The peak can be sharpened to 53% of the original width for peaks with Gaussian profiles, and 33% for those with Lorentzian profiles. However, this method bears two sig- minimum gradient 1 0/0 (no noise) 0.012/0.018 (3% noise) f (3) 0 (ω) = 0 and I (1) 0 (ω) = 0 on the same domain of definition (Fig. Recently, a maximum curvature method is proposed to tackle the aforementioned difficulties. The different signal enhancing approaches can also be compared in the image's frequency domain (Fig. To improve the noise resilience and preserve the quantitative analyzability of the raw data, we propose a first order approach based on the minimum gradient distribution of the 2D function. Since the maxima of A(k, ω) are achieved by zeroing the (ω -(k) -ReΣ(k, ω)) 2 term on the denominator, this minimum gradient method captures the peak position thus the renormalized dispersion (k) + ReΣ(k, ω) by definition. A comparison among the above methods are listed in Table In this work, we describe the principles of this minimum gradient algorithm and compare the results with existing methods. Then the application to cuprate superconductor and multiband iron-based superconductor systems are demonstrated. We also propose a minimal model to extract 1D ridge features from the renormalized 2D minimum gradient map, and at last discuss its parameter stability. For a second order differentiable bi-variable function I 0 (k, ω), its local extremum (k 0 , ω 0 ) must satisfy: Equivalently, the modulus of its gradient vector G 2D = (∂ k I 0 , ∂ ω I 0 ) reaches zero at all of its maxima, minima and saddle points. Therefore the 2D map of ||G 2D || -1 should diverge at and only at the local extrema of I 0 (k, ω). However, real experiments are always corrupted by noise g n . It should be noted that for low photon/electron count experiments, Poisson distribution should be used to describe the noise instead. From Eqn. (1) the total noise contribution can be expressed as: where for simplicity we model both noise and resolution function with Gaussian profile. The intrinsic noise standard deviation σ in is often proportional to the incident light intensity, and σ ex for extrinsic noise is determined by the instrument setup. On the other hand, the instrument resolution convolution g in n (σ in ) ⊗ R(σ r ) acts as a Gaussian low pass filter to the intrinsic noise, which quenches the intrinsic noise to σ in /(2 √ πσ r ). Therefore the total noise from Eqn. ( Upon difference quotient with the step size of δ along either axis, g n (σ) propagates as below if we assume energy-momentum (k, ω) independent 2D noise: where ∂ m k stands for m th derivative along k direction. It is obvious that m th order differentiation acts as a high pass filter, boosting the noise standard deviation by 2 δ m times. The minimum gradient method incarnates the simple spirit of this first order derivative approach. To mitigate the measurement noise in practice, we introduce the 'redundant gradient vector' G = (g N , g N E , g E , g SE , g S , g SW , g W , g N W ), where the redundancy comes from the 8 partial gradient components along the cardinal and intercardinal directions. Fig. In the infinitesimal step limit (∆k) 2 + (∆ω) 2 → 0, the discrete 2D map of I 0 (k, ω) becomes differentiable thus satisfying: Here in Eq. ( which is nothing but twice that of the 2-component gradient vector. This means that for 'intrinsic signal' there are only 2 degrees of freedom among all the 8 components such that they 'coherently' add up. In the mean time, this 8-direction average also enforces robustness when dealing with either very flat or very steep dispersion, because in this case the differential angle can at most be 22.5°away from the normal of the dispersion slope. Moreover, due to the independent distribution of the noise g n (σ) in (k, ω) plane, Eqn. (11) effectively performs a spacial average of all 8 independently distributed gaussian noise. To get a rough estimate of the noise level in ||G(k, ω)||, we can approximate the total noise by looking at a completely noise dominated scenario, where g N I 0 . In this case, with ξ = 1 for simplicity, the total noise will be: where g n N,E,S,W ∼ g n 2 ∆ω σ , and ∆ω σ . The modulus of the noise's gradient vector ||G n || follows a probability distribution very close to the 8-degree-of-freedom chi-squared distribution. But due to the inequivalence of noise variances along cardinal and intercardional directions, numerical calculation is needed to reveal the combined variance to be ∼ 1.26 σ ∆ω . The variance of ||G n || -1 for the inverted modulus map becomes ∼ 0.07 σ ∆ω -1 . To discuss signal to noise ratio, the signal enhancement as a function of the orders of derivatives also needs to be quantified. In real experiments, the noise propagation is sensitive to the inter-pixel step size δ, where the higher order derivative methods completely rely on the differentiation to increase the signal strength and filter out slow varying background. While there is no universal functional form that captures all the physical quantities being measured, in most cases the signal of interest does not vary drastically on pixel-to-pixel level. In general, as most high pass filters will do, higher order derivative based methods tend to enhance existing sharp features more, and wash out slow varying signals amid drastically enhanced noise. If the derivative is overdone, the sharpened signal will merge with the enhanced noise in the image frequency domain, which practically makes it impossible to identify features. We find the minimum gradient method a good balance between the two aforementioned aspects. Fig. To check the algorithms' robustness in noise corrupted spectrum, we apply Gaussian noise (σ ∼ 3% of maximum spectral signal intensity) to the pristine simulated spectrum and compare the before-and-after performance for the (1) raw spectrum (2) minimum gradient method (3) maximum curvature method (4) second derivative method. Fig. For the pristine spectra, second derivative method enhances the intense feature (ω >-0.05 eV) significantly, but it fails to capture the dispersion with weaker intensity below ω ∼ -0.05 eV. Additionally, due to the strong intensity modulation along ω direction from the Fermi-Dirac distribution F D(ω) (Eq. 4), an artificial back-bending feature is generated close to ω = 0, which could potentially confuse the physical interpretation in energy gap related discussion. In contrast, both minimum gradient method (Fig. However, the three methods show very different noise resilience when the raw data contains a small amount of noise. The signal processed with the maximum curvature method (Fig. To compare more quantitatively, we plot the energy and momentum distribution curves at -0.444 Å-1 (EDC, Fig. By taking the difference between Fig. To test and compare the performance among the aforementioned methods in real systems, we carry out the analyses in ARPES data on monolayer FeSe superconducting film (Fig. Fig. Fig. In order to facilitate further quantitative analysis, we propose a way to extract the 1D dispersion curve from the 2D image map. Fig. To test the stability of the free threshold parameter, we intentionally loosen the domain selection requirement by lowering the threshold from 10 to 4. As indicated in Fig. One caveat for the minimum gradient algorithm is the potential false detection of intensity minima. In the process of gradient vector modulus ||G|| minimization, intensity valleys are indistinguishable from intensity ridges. This issue is in part alleviated by weighing the reciprocal of the gradient vector modulus with the raw spectral intensity I 0 . This can be more aggressively resolved by multiplying a weighing factor that scales with magnitude of the local Hessian determinant, such that local minima are further suppressed. However, this process would require second order derivatives, and will inevitably lead to similarly increased noise level as other higher order derivative based methods would encounter. Put in a broader scope, the minimum gradient method here is similar in spirit to the Kirsch operator In this manuscript, we carry out comprehensive comparison among popular 2D image sharpening algorithms in physical research, from the perspectives of both the image's primary domain and frequency domain. A minimum gradient based method is proposed to balance the signal to noise performance and the image sharpness. This method is shown to be robust against noise, and is known to moderately preserve weak intensity feature. It is also mathematically exact in determining the inten-sity maxima position. These traits are particularly helpful to quickly reveal subtle features in real-time spectra acquisition, which usually requires involved thus timeconsuming data processing for more quantitative analysis. 