We study the superconducting instability and the resulting superconducting states in a twodimensional repulsive Fermi gas with Rashba spin-orbit coupling at low electron density (namely the Fermi energy EF is lower than the energy ER of the Dirac point induced by Rashba coupling). We find that superconductivity is enhanced as the dimensionless Fermi energy F ( F ≡ EF /ER) decreases, due to the following two reasons. First, the density of states at F increases as 1/ √ F . Second, the particle-hole bubble becomes more anisotropic, resulting in an increasing effective attraction. The superconducting state is always in the total angular momentum jz = +2 (or jz = -2) channel with Chern number C = 4 (or C = -4), breaking time reversal symmetry spontaneously. Although a putative Leggett mode is expected due to the two-gap nature of the superconductivity, we find that it is always damped. More importantly, once a sufficiently large Zeeman coupling is applied to the superconducting state, the Chern number can be tuned to be ±1 and Majorana zero modes exist in the vortex cores. Despite an effect originating from relativity, spin-orbit coupling (SOC) has found its way into nonrelativistic physics. In condensed matter physics, novel systems with SOC playing a significant role are found recently, such as topological insulators Here, we study a 2D repulsive gas with Rashba SOC at low density. The single-particle Hamiltonian is where m is the effective mass, α R characterizes the strength of Rashba SOC, σ's components are Pauli matrices, and n is the direction normal to the 2D system. By a unitary transformation to helicity basis, one finds the dispersion where λ = ±1 is the helicity and k R = mα R is the Rashba momentum. (We have shifted the energy by k 2 R /(2m), which will be compensated by the shift of the Fermi energy.) The spin degeneracy is lifted, resulting in two bands touching at a Dirac point. In this system, the competition between the three energy scales -the Fermi energy E F , Coulomb repulsion and the "Rashba energy" E R = k 2 R /(2m) -determines the system's phases. We define the dimensionless Fermi energy by F = E F /E R . By "low density", we refer to the regime 0 < F < 1, as shown in Fig. or -1, corresponding to the outer and inner Fermi surface, respectively. Note that the two Fermi surfaces have the same helicity λ = 1. The DOS at the Fermi surface is , where ν 0 = m/(2π). It is likely that superconductivity is further enhanced, since the total DOS increases with decreasing F as N tot ∼ 1/ √ F . In addition, we wonder what a topological change of the Fermi surfaces may bring about to the dielectric functions, which can give rise to the attraction in nonzero j z channels. The enhancement of conventional superconductivity in attractive Rashba gases at low density has been studied in Ref. Renormalization group approach. We study the system with onsite repulsive interactions, the interacting Hamiltonian of which is where u is positive. Before proceeding, we need to clarify the parameter regime we are studying -the weakcoupling limit. The potential energy per particle is where n(r) ≡ n is the uniform density of the gas. The average kinetic energy per particle is where the Fermi energy can be expressed as E F = (n 2 π 2 )/(4m 2 E R ). In the weak-coupling limit, E pot E kin , implying un E F , or equivalently uN tot 1. As E F approaches 0, N tot diverges, but we still keep uN tot 1. The interacting Hamiltonian in the helicity basis reads where a kμ is the annihilation operator in the helicity basis and θ k is the angle of k. Following the weakcoupling renormalization group (RG) approach developed in where β = 1/(k B T ) and a's and a * 's are Grassmann numbers. We have focused on the Cooper channel, the couplings of which are the only (marginally) relevant ones where Since Cooper pairs are expected to form between electrons near the Fermi surfaces, k and k are restricted to be at Fermi surface μ and λ, respectively. Straightforward calculations show that Π(k, k ) can be written in the form where Λ μλ ( F , cos φ) is a real function that depends on the dimensionless Fermi energy F , but not on E F and E R independently. Then the renormalized coupling appearing in Eq.( where ++ and Λ (S) --connect with the same functions at F → 1 + calculated in Ref. (2) V -- V ++ (2) FIG. Up to the fourth order of u, there is only one term that satisfies two conditions: (i) being finite in nonzero angular momentum channel; and (ii) having a logarithmic divergence ln(A/Ω), which may give rise to an instability. This term is shown in Fig. Defining the dimensionless bare coupling g and the dimensionless renormalized , we find the RG flow equation where " * " is the matrix multiplication, and the bare couplings have been replaced by the renormalized couplings. The solution is u 2 ν 0 2 FIG. The scale of the superconducting transition temperature is given by the largest energy at which the renormalized coupling diverges where j z0 is chosen in such a way that, at a given F , g is the most negative among all the g (jz) ± 's. We find that as long as F < 1, |j z0 | ≡ 2, although it increases in general with F when F > 1 Topological phase diagram. A recent theme in condensed matter physics is to search for Majorana fermions in various systems As discussed in Ref. where ∆ t and ∆ s are the triplet and singlet pairing strength, respectively, and θ k is the angle between k and k x -axis. To search for Majorana fermions, instead of solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations in the presence of vortices, we apply an index theorem proved in To have an odd C, we apply a Zeeman field h z Since now the Hamiltonian breaks time reversal symmetry, the two states with j z = ±2 have different energies. As pointed in where In the above, N λ 's are the density of states, g μλ ∼ V μλ , and where n λ is the total particle number in band λ, and λ = 1, 2 labels the outer and inner band. Note that the second term in Eq.( Discussion and conclusion. The superconductivity in repulsive systems was first studied by Kohn and Luttinger In conclusion, we have investigated the superconducting instability of a 2D Rashba gas with repulsive interaction at low density, in the weak-coupling limit. As the density decreases, the superconducting transition temperature increases significantly. The superconducting state is always in j z = 2 channel. When a Zeeman field is applied, the state can have an odd Chern number, and hence Majorana zero modes are supported. Although Leggett mode does not exist due to the specific parameters, we expect it to appear in other spin-orbit coupled superconductors because of the two-gap nature. In the main text, we have found that the superconducting state of a 2D repulsive Rashba gas at low density breaks time reversal symmetry, and the Cooper pair has a total angular momentum j z = 2. In the superconducting state, we replace the full interaction with its projection onto j z = 2 channel, and get the following Hamiltonian: where μλ . We apply path integral formalism to study the collective modes of this system, following Ref. where Now we go back to real space where the operator ψ λ can be separated into modulus and phase variables, so that the phase fluctuations are convenient to study. Since we were only considering the Cooper channel and the total incoming and outgoing momenta are 0, when Fourier transforming to real space, we need to allow a finite total momentum q, i.e. The phase e iθ k = kx+iky k F μ in real space transforms to -i ∂x+i∂y k F μ and ξ kλ transforms to where in the second term, the symbol "| |" means the amplitude of a vector, but leaves its (complex) coefficient untouched. Then Introducing Nambu spinors the action becomes Here τ i are Pauli matrices and τ ± = 1 2 (τ 1 ± iτ 2 ), and 1/k F μ k F λ is absorbed into g μλ . We multiply the "fat identity" DΦ * DΦe -SΦ to the partition function Z, where then we have a new action describing the pairing field Φ, Note that the bosonic field Φ in one band now couples not only to the fermionic field Ψ in the same band, but also to that in the other band. We can make a linear transformation to avoid this. From now on, we change our notation: we use 1 and 2 to label the outer Fermi surface and inner Fermi surface, respectively, instead of +1 and -1. The inverse transformation is then the first term in S pair becomes μλ where ). (S22) Therefore, the pairing action can be written as and the partition function becomes Z = DΨ † DΨD∆ * D∆e -S0-Spair . We introduce the modulus-phase variables as follows: and use the real field ∆ to denote |∆|. Then It is straight forward to show that the action in terms of modulus-phase variables is Integrating out neutral fermions Υ λ , we obtain Z = ∆ λ D∆ λ Dθ λ e -S ef f {∆ λ ,θ λ } , with the effective action where the Green's function is with Now that the modulus and phase variables are separated, we can go to frequency-momentum space by the Fourier transform where ω n = (2n + 1) π β and Ω n = 2n π β . We fix ∆ λ 's to the value derived by the saddle point approximation, since we only consider the phase fluctuations. Then the terms ∆ 2 λ g λλ can be dropped, and the Josephson term is expanded to second order of θ λ : We write other terms of the action in two parts S 0 + S θ , with S θ including the dynamics of θ λ while S 0 not; and S θ has a first order term and a second order term: Treating S θ as a perturbation, we have the cumulant expansion where the average is with respect to S 0 and S e is the effective action for θ λ . We will keep S e to the second order of θ λ . The common factor 1 2 in S 0 and S θ can be omitted, since it gives a constant term in S e . It is easy to see S The trace is where n λ at T = 0 is the total electron number in band λ. Then We keep up to quadratic terms of θ λ , so If α R = 0, this corresponds to the case of two-band p + ip superconductors, where in which we have defined with v F λα (k) = ∂ξ λ (k)/∂k α | k=k F λ , and Now we need to evaluate the 16 correlation functions. Using it is straightforward to do the Matsubara sum, where ξ + = ξ k+K,λ , ξ -= ξ kλ , and the same for E ± . Then Similarly, and β ω l λ π 13 (iΩ n , K; iω l , k) + λ π 31 (iΩ n , K; iω l , k) β ω l λ π 23 (iΩ n , K; iω l , k) + λ π 32 (iΩ n , K; iω l , k) So far we have not included long range Coulomb interaction in our calculations, and in this sense we are considering a "neutral superconductor." At zero temperature, in the hydrodynamic limit, Ω n = 0, K → 0, then if i = j, 1 β ω l λ π ij (0, 0; iω l , k) + λ π ji (0, 0; iω l , k) = 0 (S84) and 1 β ω l λ π 00 (0, 0; iω l , k) = 0. (S85) Thus only three correlation functions are nonzero in the hydrodynamic limit: λ Π ii (0, 0)'s for i = 1, 2, 3. λ Π 11 (0, 0) = λ Π 22 (0, 0) = -1 2 (S87) where N λ is the density of states of band λ at the Fermi energy, and A is the cutoff. ∆ λ can be expressed in terms of N λ , A and g μλ from the gap equations, which should be derived by saddle point approximation. Combining all the results, we have the effective action for θ λ in the hydrodynamic limit, Ωn,K 8|g 12 |∆ 1 ∆ 2 g 11 g 22 -g 2 (θ 1 (iΩ n , K) -θ 2 (iΩ n , K))(θ 1 (-iΩ n , -K) -θ 2 (-iΩ n , -K)) where c λ is the velocity of the Bogoliubov-Anderson-Goldstone mode in band λ for p + ip superconductors. Note that the second term does not appear in s-wave superconductors. For quadratic dispersion, in 2D,