Devices that achieve nonreciprocal microwave transmission are ubiquitous in radar and radiofrequency communication systems, and commonly rely on magnetically biased ferrite materials. Such devices are also indispensable in the readout chains of superconducting quantum circuits as they protect sensitive quantum systems from the noise emitted by readout electronics. Since ferrite-based nonreciprocal devices are bulky, lossy, and require large magnetic fields, there has been significant interest in magnetic-field-free on-chip alternatives, such as those recently implemented using Josephson junctions. Here we realise reconfigurable nonreciprocal transmission between two microwave modes using purely optomechanical interactions in a superconducting electromechanical circuit. We analyse the transmission as well as the noise properties of this nonreciprocal circuit. The scheme relies on the interference in two mechanical modes that mediate coupling between microwave cavities. Finally, we show how quantum-limited circulators can be realized with the same principle. The technology can be built on-chip without any external magnetic field, and is hence fully compatible with superconducting quantum circuits. All-optomechanically-mediated nonreciprocity demonstrated here can also be extended to implement directional amplifiers, and it forms the basis towards realising topological states of light and sound. Nonreciprocal devices, such as isolators, circulators, and directional amplifiers, exhibit altered transmission characteristics if the input and output channels are interchanged. They are essential to several applications in signal processing and communication, as they protect devices from interfering signals As an alternative to ferrite-based nonreciprocal technologies, several approaches have been pursued towards nonreciprocal microwave chip-scale devices. Firstly, the modulation in time of the parametric couplings between modes of a network can simulate rotation about an axis, creating an artificial magnetic field Here, in contrast, we describe a scheme to attain reconfigurable nonreciprocal transmission without a need for any direct coherent coupling between input and output modes, using purely optomechanical interactions FIG. ciprocal process. In fact, due to the finite quality factor of the intermediary mechanical modes, both conversion paths between the electromagnetic modes are partly dissipative in nature. Nonreciprocity is in this case only possible by breaking the symmetry between the two dissipative coupling pathways. We describe the mechanism in detail below, shedding some light on the essential ingredients for nonreciprocity using this approach. We first theoretically model our system to reveal how nonreciprocity arises. We consider two microwave modes (described by their annihilation operators â1 , â2 ) having resonance frequencies ω c,1 , ω c,2 and dissipation rates κ 1 , κ 2 , which are coupled to two mechanical modes (described by the annihilation operators b1 , b2 ) having resonance frequencies Ω 1 , Ω 2 and dissipation rates Γ m,1 , Γ m,2 (fig. â † i âi ( bj + b † j ) (in units where h = 1), where g 0,ij designates the vacuum optomechanical coupling strength of the i th microwave mode to the j th mechanical mode. Four microwave tones are applied, close to each of the two lower sidebands of the two microwave modes, with detunings of ∆ 11 = ∆ 21 = -Ω 1 -δ and ∆ 12 = ∆ 22 = -Ω 2 + δ (fig. where âi and bj are redefined to be the quantum fluctuations around the linearised mean fields. Here g ij = g 0,ij √ n ij are the field-enhanced optomechanical coupling strengths, where n ij is the contribution to the mean intracavity photon number due to the drive with detuning ∆ ij . Although in principle each coupling is complex, without loss of generality we can take all to be real except the one between â2 and b2 with a complex phase φ. We start by considering frequency conversion through a single mechanical mode. Neglecting the noise terms, the field exiting the cavity â2 is given by â2,out = S 21 â1,in + S 22 â2,in , which defines the scattering matrix S ij . For a single mechanical pathway, setting g 12 = g 22 = 0 and δ = 0, the scattering matrix between input and output mode becomes where κ ex,1 , κ ex,2 denote the external coupling rates of the microwave modes to the feedline, and the (multiphoton) cooperativity for each mode pair is defined as ). Conversion occurs within the modified mechanical response over an increased bandwidth Γ eff,1 = Γ m,1 (1 + C 11 + C 21 ). This scenario, where a mechanical oscillator mediates frequency conversion between electromagnetic modes, has recently been demonstrated in the limit of large cooperativities C 11 = C 21 1. We next describe nonreciprocal transmission of the full system with both mechanical modes. We consider the ratio of transmission amplitudes given by with the mechanical susceptibilities defined as χ -1 by a phase, it can be eliminated by a redefinition of either â1 or â2 We study the conditions for isolation, when backward transmission S 12 vanishes while forward transmission S 21 is non-zero. A finite offset 2δ between the mechanical conversion windows causes an intrinsic phase shift for a signal on resonance (ω = 0) travelling one path compared to the other, as it falls either on the red or the blue side of each mechanical resonance. The coupling phase φ is then adjusted to cancel propagation in the backward direction S 12 (fig. The corresponding terms of the denominator will have a different relative phase, and the signal will add constructively instead, in the forward direction (fig. for a cooperativity C = 1/2 + 2δ 2 /Γ 2 m . As in the case for a single mechanical pathway in eq. ( We experimentally realise this nonreciprocal scheme using a superconducting circuit optomechanical system in which mechanical motion is capacitively coupled to a multi-mode microwave circuit We utilise the fundamental and second order radially symmetric (0, 2) modes of the capacitor's mechanically compliant top plate The amount of reciprocity that occurs in this process is quantified and measured by the ratio of forward to backward conversion |S 21 /S 12 | 2 . Figure coupling strengths. To compare the experiment to theory we use a model that takes into account the cross-damping and an increased effective mechanical dissipation of the fundamental mode. The model is compared to the experimental data in fig. From a technological standpoint, it does not suffice for an isolator to have the required transmission properties; since its purpose is to protect the input from any noise propagating in the backward direction, the isolator's own noise emission is relevant. We therefore return to the theoretical description of the ideal symmetric case and derive the noise properties expected from the device, in the limit of overcoupled cavities (κ ex,i ≈ κ i ). In the forward direction and on resonance, the emitted noise amounts to N fw (0) = 1/2 + (n m,1 + nm,2 )/(4C), where nm,j is the thermal occupation of each mechanical mode. In the limit of low insertion loss and large cooperativity, the added noise becomes negligible in the forward direction. More relevant for the purpose of using an isolator to protect sensitive quantum apparatus is the noise emitted in the backward direction, given by N bw (0) = 1/2 + (n m,1 + nm,2 )/2. Here the noise is directly commensurate with the occupation of the mechanics which can be of hundreds of quanta even at cryogenic millikelvin temperatures, due to the low mechanical frequencies. This is a direct consequence of isolation without reflection, since it prevents fluctuations from either cavity to emerge in the backward direction. In order to preserve the commutation relations of the bosonic output modes, the fluctuations consequently have to originate from the mechanical modes. A practical low-noise design therefore requires a scheme to externally cool the mechanical modes, e.g. via sideband cooling using an additional auxiliary microwave mode. The origin of this noise asymmetry can be understood as noise interference. The thermal fluctuations of one mechanical oscillator are converted to microwave noise in each cavity through two paths, illustrated in fig. In conclusion, we described and experimentally demonstrated a new scheme for reconfigurable nonreciprocal transmission in the microwave domain using a superconducting optomechanical circuit. This scheme is based purely on optomechanical couplings, thus it alleviates the need for coherent microwave cavity-cavity (or direct phonon-phonon) interactions, and significantly facilitates the experimental realisation, in contrast to recently used approaches of optomechanical nonreciprocity in the optical domain in , b1,in , b2,in ) T and u out = (â 1,out , â2,out , â(0) 1,out , â(0) 2,out , b1,out , b2,out ) T , where âi,in/out are the input-output modes of the external microwave feedline and â(0) i,in/out are those corresponding to internal dissipation. The matrix M reads where the cavity dissipation rates are the sum of external and internal dissipation rates, i.e. κ 1 = κ ex,1 + κ 0,1 and κ 2 = κ ex,2 + κ 0,2 , and the matrix L reads Using the input-output relations for a one-sided cavity we can solve the input-output problem in the Fourier domain with the scattering matrix Eliminating the mechanical degrees of freedom from the equations of motion (A6) we obtain where we introduced the mechanical susceptibilities χ -1 Inverting the matrix in equation (A12) and exploiting the input-output relation (A9), we obtain equation (3) of the main manuscript Note that the expressions in the nominator and denominator in (A13) are equal to the matrix elements coupling the two electromagnetic modes in (A12) which are the sum of the two (complex) amplitudes for the two dissipative optomechanical pathways. Equation (A13) is used to generate Fig. For identical mechanical decay rates Γ m,1 = Γ m,2 = Γ m and identical cooperativities κiΓm,j we find that the transmission 2 → 1 vanishes on resonance ω = 0, i.e. For a given δ, maximal transmission in the opposite direction 1 → 2 is then obtained for and given by Microwave transmission of the nonreciprocal electromechanical device in each direction for different values of the cooperativity C, derived from eq. (A11) for the case of symmetric mechanical modes (Γm,1 = Γm,2 = Γm). The detuning δ and the phase φ are set for maximal transmission according to eq. (A15). As the cooperativity is increased, the overall bandwidth of the frequency conversion increases to Γ eff , however the bandwidth of nonreciprocal transmission stays constant and is on the order of the intrinsic mechanical damping rate Γm. This illustrates the fact that the intrinsic dissipation of the mechanical oscillator is the underlying resource for the nonreciprocity. We see that for δ Γ m the optimal cooperativity C → ∞ and |S 21 (0)| 2 → 1. Thus, we see that in this limit the electromagnetic scattering matrix of our system becomes that of an ideal isolator, i.e. S 11 = S 12 = S 22 = 0 and The full scattering matrix S ij of (A11) is used in fig. A.1 to show optimal transmission in each direction for the symmetric case, with different values of the cooperativity. As the cooperativity increases, the overall bandwidth of conversion increases to Γ eff , but the nonreciprocal bandwidth stays constant. This can be seen in the ratio S 12 (ω)/S 21 (ω) in (A13) that depends only on the bare mechanical susceptibilities χ 1 (ω) and χ 2 (ω). For unequal decay rates Γ m,1 = Γ m,2 , but equal effective decay rates of the mechanical modes Γ eff,j = Γ m,j (1 ). For unequal decay rates Γ m,1 = Γ m,2 , but matched cooperativities C jk = C, we find nonreciprocity for Γ+ 2δ = tan φ 2 , but at ω = -Γ-δ Γ+ . χ -1 c,1 (ω) where we defined the cavity susceptibility χ -1 c,i (ω) = κ i /2 -iω and the susceptibility of the coupled system of modes â1 , b1 , χ â1 b1 (ω). We turn to the other two modes, the ones that we are actually interested in. For those, we have a similar equation, which can be obtained from interchanging 1 ↔ 2 Eliminating the modes â1 , b1 with eq. (C2), we arrive at In the second line, we have formulated the equation in terms of the susceptibilities of the two subsystems (â 1 , b1 ) and (â 2 , b2 ). This equation is a bit complicated, but we note that the coupling between â2 and b2 is Analogously, changing the indices referring to the cavity, we obtain the coupling between â1 and b2 The coupling phase φ p appears as the relative phase between indirect and direct coupling path, as for the microwave signal transmission. Equations (C5) and (C6) demonstrate that the transmission of noise from the mechanical resonators to the microwave cavities is subject to interference, which ultimately leads to the difference in noise emitted in the forward versus the backward direction. In a second picture, we can also understand the mechanical noise interference in terms of the nonreciprocity in the scattering matrix for the microwave modes. In order to do so, we solve the equations of motion for the mechanical resonators (given in eq. (A6)), which leads to bj We obtain equations that only relate the cavities where We can think of mechanical noise as coloured and correlated noise in the optical inputs. That is, consider the replacement The effective noise ĉi,in is both coloured ĉ † 1,in (ω)ĉ 1,in (ω ) = δ(ω + ω )n 1,eff and correlated ĉ † 1,in (ω)ĉ 2,in (ω ) = 0. Using the input-output relation âout = âin -√ κâ, the cavity output is given by â1 where in the last step we have identified the 2-by-2 optical scattering matrix S(ω) that relates the cavity inputs to the outputs âi,out (ω) = j S ij (ω)â j,in (ω). The fact that eq. (C11) contains mechanical noise as well, but can be written entirely in terms of the optical scattering matrix constitutes the central result here. Since the two effective input noises ĉi,in are coloured and correlated, they can interfere. Most importantly, we can consider what happens when the circuit is impedance matched to the signal and perfectly isolating. We choose the detunings δ 1 = Γ m,1 δ/2, δ 2 = -Γ m,2 δ/2, for some dimensionless parameter δ. For simplicity, let us choose all cooperativities to be equal C = C ij . For δ 2 = 2C -1 (impedance matching), the optical scattering matrix of the isolator is (up to some irrelevant phase) The cavity output on resonance is As C → ∞, T → 1 and φ p = arccos(1 -1/C) → 0, such that the second cavity does not receive any noise, which is due to an interference of ĉ1,in with ĉ2,in . In the backward direction, no interference can take place, since cavity 2 is isolated from cavity 1. As a consequence, the number of noise quanta emerging from cavity 1 on resonance is N bw = (n m,1 + nm,2 + 1)/2. Appendix D: Theoretical background: optomechanical circulator We consider three microwave modes (described by their annihilation operators â1 , â2 , â3 ) with resonance frequencies ω c,1 , ω c,2 , ω c,3 and dissipation rates κ 1 , κ 2 , κ 3 . These three microwave modes are coupled to two mechanical modes (described by the annihilation operators b1 , b2 ) with resonance frequencies Ω 1 , Ω 2 and dissipation rates Γ m,1 and Γ m,2 . The optomechanical coupling strengths g ij are taken to be real and we write out three phases (φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 ). Each loop has a relevant phase which is a linear combination of those previous phases. The three cavities are driven with two microwave tones each. These six tones are close to the lower motional sidebands, with detunings of From the Hamiltonian (D1), we derive the equations of motion for our system in their matrix form (A6) with u = (â 1 , â2 , â3 , b1 , b2 ) T , u in = (â 1,in , â2,in , â3,in , â(0) 1,in , â(0) 2,in , â(0) 3,in , b1,in , b2,in ) T and u out = (â 1,out , â2,out , â3,out , â(0) 1,out , â(0) 2,out , â(0) 3,out , b1,out , b2,out ) T . The M matrix reads Using the input-output relation (A9) and the matrix form of the equations of motion (A6), we can compute the scattering matrix S(ω) similarly to (A11). We arbitrarily choose to suppress the propagation in the clockwise direction, i.e. S 12 (0) = 0, S 23 (0) = 0, and S 31 (0) = 0. To enforce this suppression to occur on resonance (ω = 0) , δ 1 scales with Γ m,1 and δ 2 with Γ m,2 , i.e. δ 1 = αΓ m,1 and δ 2 = βΓ m,2 . The set of equations corresponding to S 12 (0) = S 23 (0) = S 31 (0) = 0 is given by      -2iα -2iβe i(φ1-φ2) -C(1 -e i(φ1-φ3) -e i(φ3-φ2) + e i(φ1-φ2) ) -(1 + e i(φ1-φ2) ) = 0 -2iα -2iβe i(φ2-φ3) -C(1 -e i(φ2-φ1) -e i(φ1-φ3) + e i(φ2-φ3) ) -(1 + e i(φ2-φ3) ) = 0 -2iα -2iβe i(φ3-φ1) -C(1 -e i(φ3-φ2) -e i(φ2-φ1) + e i(φ3-φ1) ) -(1 + e i(φ3-φ1) ) = 0 (D4) Analysing this set of equations, we see that only two phases are independent. Setting φ 1 = 2π/3, φ 2 = -2π/3 and φ 3 = 0 leads to a set of fully degenerated equations. If α = -β, C contains an imaginary part leading to complex coupling strengths but we assumed them to be real. Also, C has to be positive (such that g ij ∈ R) and non-zero (else g ij = 0). The lower bound for β is given by We find that, in the case of overcoupled cavities κ i ≈ κ ex,i , the transmission approaches unity with increasing cooperativity. The symmetrised output noise spectra is computed as in B. In the limit of overcoupled cavities, κ i ≈ κ ex,i , the noise emitted on resonance at each port is given by N = 1 2 + 3C (3C + 1) 2 (n m,1 + nm,2 ) (D9) with 0 < C < min (κ i /Γ j ). In the limit of large cooperativity, the noise contribution from the mechanical oscillators is entirely suppressed, leaving only vacuum noise of half a quantum.