In this paper, a microscopic theory of magnetic-interaction-induced pairing in superconductivity of high temperature superconductors (HTSC) was developed on the basis of four idealized assumptions: (1) only a small number of electrons(or holes) are involved in superconductivity, and its density is nδ 2 ; (2) magnetic interactions between electron spins lead to superconductivity; (3) there are different electronic states, i.e., the on-site doublyoccupied electrons forming anti-ferromagnetic insulator states, the off-site doubly-occupied electrons forming superconducting states, the singly-occupied (spin up or down) electrons forming normal states and the empty states; (4) the average kinetic energy of electrons (or holes) complies with the equipartition theorem of energy. Based on these assumptions, an approximate effective Hamiltonian was suggested. A parabolic relation between T C and the doping concentration δ was found and thus the phase diagram for HTSC has been explained. It was also found that, T C is related to the anti-ferromagnetic interaction energy J (or critical magnetic field B C ) and the degrees of freedom of electrons i. The T C values are thus calculated from this theory to be 92.8K for YBa2Cu3O6.15, 40.3K for La2CuO4, and 58K for SmOFeAs, which are in good agreement with the experimental results of 92K, 40K, and 54K, respectively. It was estimated that, T C in the slab HTSC is higher than that in the bulk, and T C for SmOFeAs can be up to 116K. In 1911, Onnes found near zero resistance in mercury at 4.2K In 1986, Bednorz and Müller found T C around 30K in the Ba-La-Cu-O system Obviously, the BCS theory cannot be applied to explain superconductivity in HTSC since it gives an upper limit of T C at around 40K. So far, several microscopic models were suggested to account for high-Tc superconductivity, such as the RVB theory, Hubbard model, and t-J model. The RVB theory for HTSC was proposed by Anderson in 1987 We will first introduce four idealized assumptions about this theory. (1) Only a small number of electrons near the Fermi surface contribute to superconductivity in HTSC, and there are three types of electrons: the localized electrons n L , normal conductive electrons n n and superconducting electrons n S , and thus n = n L + n n + n S (n is the electron density). The density of superconducting electrons n S is δ times the carrier density which is nδ, i.e., n S = nδ 2 , and n n = nδ -nδ 2 . And then n L = n -nδ is the density of the localized electrons. (2) Magnetic interactions between electron spins lead to Cooper pairs near the Fermi surface, and give rise to superconductivity; and all other kinds of interactions between the superconducting electrons can be neglected. This magnetic interaction energy is exactly the condensed energy which is given by the sum of the bonding energy of the Cooper pairs, i.e., n S ∆. An external magnetic field can destroy this magnetic interaction, break up Cooper pairs, and transform the superconducting states into normal states. Therefore, the maximum value of the condensed energy density equals the maximum energy density of the external magnetic field B C 2 2μ 0 ⁄ . (3) There are different electronic states in HTSC, i.e., the on-site doubly-occupied, off-site doubly-occupied, singly-occupied (spin up or down) and empty states. Only the off-site doubly-occupied electrons can form the superconducting states (or Cooper pairs), while those on-site doubly-occupied electrons form the anti-ferromagnetic insulator states, and the singly-occupied (spin up or down) electrons form the normal states. All other possible physical states are neglected. (4) The average kinetic energy of electrons (or holes) in HTSC complies with the equipartition theorem of energy. Based on the above theorem, the average kinetic energy of electrons is ik B T 2 ⁄ (i = 1,2,3 ⋯ ) , where i is the electronic degrees of freedom, and the maximum value of it is ik B T C 2 ⁄ . An increase in temperature can break up Cooper pairs, and thus destroy superconductivity. Therefore, the bonding energy of a Cooper pair is equal to 2∆= ik B T C , and the superconducting energy gap is given by ∆= ik B T C 2 ⁄ . In HTSC, Tc is approximately proportional to ∆ with a relation of ∆= 4.8k B T C 2 ⁄ . An approximate effective Hamiltonian to describe magnetic-interaction-induced superconductivity in HTSC will be presented based on the assumptions above. All the electrons can be classified into three types: the localized electrons, normal conductive electrons and superconducting electrons. First, the localized electrons with a density of n L = n -nδ are the doubly-occupied electrons on the same lattice sites (on-sites) without any kinetic energy. The corresponding Hamiltonian can be written as (1) There are a strong Coulomb interaction U and an anti-ferromagnetic interaction J for these localized electrons that make undoped copper oxides in the anti-ferromagnetic insulator states. Second, the normal conductive electrons with a density of n n = nδ -nδ 2 are those of the singly-occupied (spin up or down) electrons without any correlation on the different lattice sites. These electrons only have the kinetic energy without any potential energy, and the corresponding Hamiltonian is given by H II = t ∑ (C i↑ + C i↑ + C j↓ + C j↓ ) i,j . ( where t is the electron kinetic energy. The normal conductive electrons can be considered as free electrons, and they make doped-insulators metallic-like behaviour. Third, the superconducting electrons with a density of n S = nδ 2 consist of the correlated doubly-occupied electrons on the different lattice sites (off-sites). The Cooper pair has the kinetic energy 2t and anti-ferromagnetic interaction potential J, and thus the corresponding Hamiltonian can be expressed by the off-site pairing operators with b ij + = (C i↑ + C j↓ + -C i↓ + C j↑ + ) √2 ⁄ These Hamiltonians in Eq.( Next we will derive a formula of Tc in HTSC based on the above model. There are superconducting, normal conductive and localized electrons in HTSC, and only a small amount of electrons contributes to superconductivity. The number of superconducting electrons is maximum at T = 0K, but still significantly less than the total number of carriers in HTSC. The maximum density of superconducting electrons is n S,max = nδ opt 2 ≠ nδ opt . These superconducting electrons combine into Cooper pairs via magnetic interactions, and the formation of bound states will lower the energy of the system, leading to the superconducting states. With increasing temperature (or external magnetic field), this magnetic interaction in Cooper pairs will be destroyed, leading to a decrease of the number of superconducting electrons. While the temperature of the system increases to T C (or the external magnetic field reaches to B C ), all the Cooper pairs will be broken up and the number of superconducting electrons drops to zero. The energy density in a superconducting system is given by the sum of the electronic potential, the kinetic energy, and the energy of the external magnetic field If E ≤ 0, HTSC will be in the superconducting states, and thus we get B ≤ √2μ 0 n S,max ∆= B C at T = 0K (or T ≤ (2∆ ik B ⁄ ) = T C at B = 0T). This is the critical magnetic field B C (or the critical temperature T C ). The condensed energy density in HTSC is maximum at T = 0K and it equals the maximum energy density of the external magnetic field, i.e., We can thus obtain the relation among T C , the doping concentration δ and the critical magnetic field B C and the electron degrees of freedom i The formula of T C in Eq. ( Based on the above assumptions that the average kinetic energy of all the electrons follows the energy equipartition theorem, the total energy density is E T = nik B T C 2 ⁄ . At δ = δ opt = (2t -U + J) 2J ⁄ , the maximum energy density can be obtained from Eq.( Then the maximum value of T C is The relation between T C and the doping concentration δ can be derived from Eq.s ( At U = 0.9865J, t = 0.15325J, the optimal doping concentration is δ opt = (2t -U -J) 2J ⁄ = 0.16, then Eq.( Eq.( At δ = δ opt = t J ⁄ , T C in Eq.( And the relation between T C and the doping concentration δ in Eq.( At the optimal doping δ opt = t J = 0.16 ⁄ , Eq.( The T C values calculated from Eq.( Based on four idealized assumptions we proposed a microscopic theory of magnetic-interactioninduced pairing in superconductivity of HTSC. An effective Hamiltonian to describe HTSC was suggested; and a parabolic relation between T C and the doping concentration δ was derived and the results can be used to explain the phase diagram for HTSC. It was found that, T C is correlated to the anti-ferromagnetic interaction energy J ( or critical magnetic field B C ) and the freedom degrees of electrons i . It was thus calculated that T C is 92.8K for YBa2Cu3O6.15, 40.3K for La2CuO4, and 58K for SmOFeAs, which are in good agreement with the experimental values. It was estimated that, T C in the slab HTSC is higher than that in the bulk, and T C for SmOFeAs can be up to 116K.