Light-element compounds hold great promise of high critical temperature superconductivity judging from the theoretical perspective. Hydrogen-rich material, benzene, is such a kind of candidate but also an organic compound. A series of first-principles calculations are performed on the electronic structures, dynamics properties, and electron-phonon interactions of solid benzene at high pressures. Benzene is found to be dynamically stable in the pressure range of 180 -200 GPa and to exhibit superconductivity with a maximum transition temperature of 20 K at 195 GPa. The phonon modes of carbon atoms are identified to mainly contribute to the electron-phonon interactions driving this superconductivity. The predicted superconductivity in this simplest pristine hydrocarbon shows a common feature in aromatic hydrocarbons and also makes it a bridge to organic and hydrogen-rich superconductors. Exploring new materials with high critical temperature (T c ) superconductivity is one attractive field in modern condensed matter physics. Although there has been no specific method to guide the search for superconductors, the light elements or their bearing compounds such as hydrogen and hydrogen-rich materials are believed to be promising candidates. The basis of the latter is mainly from Ashcroft's theoretical viewpoint that hydrogen dominant metallic alloys can reduce the metallization pressure to the scope of the experiment and become the potential candidates of high-T c superconductors In addition, organic based compounds were also sug-gested as candidates of high temperature or room temperature superconductors In this work, we choose benzene (C 6 H 6 ), a hybrid of the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon and a hydrogen-rich material, to explore superconductivity at high pressures. Solid C 6 H 6 was previously predicted to enter a metallic state at pressures above 180 GPa To study the structural and electronic properties of solid C 6 H 6 , we employed the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) For solid C 6 H 6 , it has well-known that the pressure can change its morphology and structure and lead to a series of phase transitions As a comparison and a check on accuracy, we start our investigation by looking at the first solid phase of benzene with P bca symmetry. Our optimized crystal constants are respectively a = 7.041 Å, b = 8.903 Å and c = 6.357 Å at zero temperature, which are 3-6% less than experimental values at 78 K For this metallic phase of C 6 H 6 , our calculated phonon dispersion [Fig. Further understanding the dynamical properties of C 6 H 6 under pressure, we compared it with typical hydrogen-rich materials and organic compounds. For SiH 4 , the material exists in form of multifold-coordinated silicon hydride at 200 GPa Based on electronic and phonon properties above, the electron-phonon coupling λ(ω), logarithmic average phonon frequency ω log and the Eliashberg phonon spectral function α 2 F (ω) have been investigated to explore the possible superconductivity of C 6 H 6 . From the α 2 F (ω) and λ(ω) shown in Fig. By analyzing superconductivity, we find that the total λ of K 3 picene In conclusion, with the aim of exploring superconductivity in a compound containing only carbon and hydrogen, we have studied electronic structures, dynamics properties, and electron-phonon interactions of C 6 H 6 at high pressures. We revealed that C 6 H 6 is superconducting in the pressure range of 180 -200 GPa, which is another evidence of that the system containing benzene rings must be superconducting. T c was found to gradually increase with the increase of pressure, reaching 20 K at 195 GPa. Differing from the H-dominated materials, the phonon vibrations of C atom mainly contribute to the electron-phonon coupling. The T c higher than that of Kdoped benzene, phenanthrene and picene mainly comes from the larger ω log induced by pressure. The prediction of superconductivity in C 6 H 6 under pressure will call for experimental testing and the comparison of effects from the electron-phonon coupling and the electronic correlation in such a light element material. 