We report on an investigation of the redistribution of interlayer coherence in the trilayer cuprate Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10. The experiment is performed under the same apical-oxygen phonon excitation discussed in the past for the bilayer cuprate YBa2Cu3O6.5. In Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10, we observe a similar spectral weight loss at the transverse plasma mode resonance seen in YBa2Cu3O6.5. However, this feature is not accompanied by light-enhanced interlayer coherence that was seen in YBa2Cu3O6+x, for which the transverse plasma mode is observed at equilibrium even in the normal state. These new observations offer new experimental perspective in the context of the physics of light-enhanced interlayer coupling in various cuprates. Superconducting-like c-axis coherence has been found in various cuprate superconductors after optical excitation at specific phonon resonances. For single-layer compounds like La1.675Eu0.2Sr0.125CuO4, the excitation of an in-plane Cu-O stretching phonon was shown to enhance c-axis coherent coupling Importantly, a plasma mode appeared at approximately the same frequency (~65 cm -1 ) as that seen in the superconducting state of the optimally doped single layer cuprate La1.84Sr0.16CuO4. The transient c-axis coherence in La1.675Eu0.2Sr0.125CuO4 was observed up to the charge-ordering temperature and was interpreted as a sign of light-induced superconductivity Similarly, in the bilayer cuprate YBa2Cu3O6.6, for which hole doping is also near 1/8, excitation of the apical oxygen phonon resulted in a strengthened interlayer superconducting coupling below the equilibrium transition temperature (Tc = 61 K), and in the appearance of a plasma resonance above Tc More difficult to understand are the results at lower doping levels, in YBa2Cu3O6.5 and YBa2Cu3O6.45, for which the light-induced plasma edge appeared at even higher temperatures, even above the equilibrium charge ordering temperature. Light induced interlayer coupling was detected up to temperatures that are in fact rather reminiscent of the equilibrium pseudogap (T*). Further experimental work in YBa2Cu3O6.5 has associated the appearance of a low frequency inter-bilayer plasma mode with a partial melting of the intra-bilayer plasmon at high frequency, as if 'coherence' were transferred from the CuO2 bilayer to the inter-bilayer region of the unit cell Hence, the physics of such light-induced superconductivity appears to be more general than optical melting of stripes. This notion was further confirmed by the observation of a related transient superconducting-like phase in the organic material K3C60 All these experimental observations are now the basis for a number of theoretical interpretations of the light-stabilized superconductivity in cuprates, including transient suppression of competing order Here, we extend our analysis to another non-charge ordered, multilayer cuprate, a useful comparison for the data in YBa2Cu3O6.5. We study the response of trilayer Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10 (underdoped, with midpoint Tc = 99 K and  Tc =10 K), under similar driving. We report a transient high-frequency spectral weight loss at the transverse plasma mode. However, in this compound the inter-trilayer coherence was not enhanced at any temperature and the response at the transverse plasma mode disappeared immediately above the superconducting transition temperature. Different scenarios are analyzed to rationalize this observation. In Figure Previous studies have shown that the doping level is not homogeneous in these three planes, with the outer CuO2 planes being more doped The c-axis equilibrium reflectivity of both samples is shown in Figure The broadband c-axis optical conductivity and energy loss functions, measured for both samples at equilibrium, are reported in Figure In Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10, a single apical oxygen phonon is observed at 575 cm -1 (Fig. Analogous modes of non-phononic character are also found in the energy loss function of both YBa2Cu3O6.5 and Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10 at ~500 cm -1 and ~550 cm -1 , respectively (Fig. The physics of longitudinal and transverse plasmons can be understood by considering multilayer cuprates as stack of Josephson junctions, with Cooper pairs tunneling between neighboring CuO2 layers. In the bilayer case (YBa2Cu3O6.5), one can think of two Josephson junctions in one unit cell: An intra-bilayer junction between closely spaced planes and an inter-bilayer junction (Fig. In trilayer Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10, the physics of longitudinal and transverse plasma modes is similar to that described above. Indeed, despite the larger unit cell, one can think of the trilayer block composed of three equally spaced CuO2 planes as a single Josephson junction. The tunneling dynamics is that of a single mode, with the charge in the middle CuO2 plane not changing significantly in an infrared field Within the Josephson superlattice model, the transverse plasma frequency is defined by ω T 2 = (d 2 ω Jp1 2 + d 1 ω Jp2 2 )/(d 1 + d 2 ), where d1 and d2 are the thickness of the inter-and intra-bi(tri)layer junctions, respectively, and Jp1 and Jp2 are the corresponding longitudinal Josephson plasma frequencies. For our pump-probe experiments, we used mid-infrared pulses centered at 15 m (667 cm -1 ) and polarized along the direction perpendicular to the CuO2 planes to drive the apical oxygen phonons. The excitation pulses were generated by difference-frequency mixing in an optical parametric amplifier, with a 300 fs pulse duration and 4 mJ/cm 2 pump fluence. To probe the transient optical properties, we used broadband THz pulses generated by laser-ionized gas plasma GaSe crystal With this technique, we could directly determine the reflected THz field for different pump-probe time delays t after photo-excitation. By separately modulating mid-infrared pump and THz probe and simultaneously recording the signals using two lock-in amplifiers, we retrieved both the pump-induced THz field change ∆E ̃(ω, t) and the stationary THz field E ̃(ω, t) . The complex reflection coefficient of the photo-excited sample, r̃′(ω, t), was calculated using the relation where r̃0(ω) is the equilibrium complex reflection coefficient obtained from steady-state optical spectroscopy. In order to take into account the pump-probe penetration depth mismatch, we used a multi-layer model The pump-induced changes to the real part of the optical conductivity, σ 1 (ω, t), measured in the superconducting state (T < Tc), are plotted for both samples in Fig. These data suggest that for both cuprates pumping the apical oxygen phonon results in a weakening of the intra-bi(tri)layer Josephson coupling. The color plots in Fig. In contrast with these findings, Figure Note that the distance between the closely spaced CuO2 planes in YBa2Cu3O6.5 and Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10 are similar, while the inter-bilayer separation is significantly shorter than the inter-trilayer separation (8.4 Å vs. 12 Å) However, we should also notice that the trilayer structure differs from the bilayer one in many other respects, for example, the inequivalent CuO2 planes and the absence of chain oxygen. The transient structural rearrangements reported for YBa2Cu3O6.5 