The massless fermions of a Weyl semimetal come in two species of opposite chirality, in two cones of the band structure. As a consequence, the current j induced in one Weyl cone by a magnetic field B (the chiral magnetic effect, CME) is cancelled in equilibrium by an opposite current in the other cone. Here we show that superconductivity offers a way to avoid this cancellation, by means of a flux bias that gaps out a Weyl cone jointly with its particle-hole conjugate. The remaining gapless Weyl cone and its particle-hole conjugate represent a single fermionic species, with renormalized charge e * and a single chirality ± set by the sign of the flux bias. As a consequence, the CME is no longer cancelled in equilibrium but appears as a supercurrent response ∂j/∂B = ±(e * e/h 2 )μ along the magnetic field at chemical potential μ. Introduction -Massless spin-1/2 particles, socalled Weyl fermions, remain unobserved as elementary particles, but they have now been realized as quasiparticles in a variety of crystals known as Weyl semimetals Here we present a method by which single-cone physics may be accessed in a superconducting Weyl semimetal, allowing for observation of the CME in equilibrium. The geometry is shown in Fig. We stress that the CME in a superconductor is not in violation of thermodynamics, which only demands a vanishing heat current in equilibrium. Indeed, in previous work on magnetically induced currents Pathway to single-cone physics -We first explain the mechanism by which a superconductor provides access to single-cone physics. A pair of Weyl cones at momenta ±k 0 of opposite chirality has Hamiltonian where k • σ = k x σ x + k y σ y + k z σ z is the sum over Pauli matrices acting on the spinor operators ψ and φ of lefthanded and right-handed Weyl fermions. The Fermi velocity is v F and we set ≡ 1 (but keep h in the formula for the CME). If H would be the Bogoliubov-De Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian of a superconductor, particle-hole symmetry would require that φ k = σ y ψ † -k . With the help of the matrix identity σ y σ α σ y = -σ * α and the anticommutator ψσ * α ψ † = -ψ † σ α ψ we rewrite Eq. ( producing a single-cone Hamiltonian. If we then, hypothetically, impose a magnetic field B = ∇ × A via k → k -eA, the zeroth Landau level carries a current density j = (e/h) 2 μB in an energy interval μ. This is the chiral anomaly of an unpaired Weyl cone Model Hamiltonian of a Weyl superconductor -As a minimal model for single-cone physics we consider the BdG Hamiltonian This is a tight-binding model on a simple cubic lattice (lattice constant a 0 ≡ 1, nearest-neighbor hopping energy t 0 ≡ 1, electron charge +e). The Pauli matrices τ α and σ α , with α ∈ {x, y, z}, act respectively on the orbital and spin degree of freedom. (The corresponding unit matrices are τ 0 and σ 0 .) Time-reversal symmetry is broken by a magnetization β in the z-direction, μ is the chemical potential, A the vector potential, and ∆ 0 is the s-wave pair potential. The single-electron Hamiltonian H 0 in the upper-left block of H is the four-band model The two pairs of particle-hole conjugate Weyl cones are centered at (0, 0, K ± ) and (0, 0, -K ± ), with We have assumed Λ, K ± 1, so the Weyl cones are near the center of the Brillouin zone. A cone is gapped when K ± becomes imaginary, hence the N = 1 phase is entered with increasing Λ > 0 when This is the regime in which we can observe the CME of an unpaired Weyl cone, as we will show in the following. Magnetic response of a unpaired Weyl cone -We assume that the slab is thinner than the London penetration depth, so that we can impose an unscreened magnetic field B z in the z-direction [44]. The vector potential including the flux bias is A = (0, xB z , Λ/e). To explain in the simplest terms how single-cone physics emerges we linearize in k and A and set m 0 = 0, so the mass term m k can be ignored. (All nonlinearities will be fully included later on The Hamiltonian ( where the Pauli matrix ν α acts on the particle-hole degree of freedom. If we choose the k z -dependent angle θ k such that The charge color scale of the band structure is as in Fig. the gapless particle-hole conjugate Weyl points at where k = (0, 0, K + ) + δk, v = (1, 1, -κ), q 0 = κ, q = (κe, κe, e/κ), and Eq. ( The renormalization of v does not enter because the CME is independent of the Fermi velocity. One can understand why the product e * e appears rather than the more intuitive (e * ) 2 , by noticing that ∂j z /∂B z changes sign upon inversion of the momentum -hence only odd powers of κ ∝ K + are permitted. Consistency of a nonzero equilibrium electrical current and vanishing particle current -For thermodynamic consistency, to avoid heat transport at zero temperature, the CME should not produce a particle current in the superconductor. The flow of charge e * particles in the z-direction should therefore be cancelled by a chargeneutral counterflow. This counterflow is provided by the surface Fermi arc, as illustrated in Fig. Numerical simulation -We have tested these analytical considerations in a numerical simulation of the model Hamiltonian (3), in the slab geometry of Fig. where Θ(E) is the unit step function and the prefactor of 1/2 takes care of a double counting in the BdG Hamiltonian H. The eigenvalues E nm (k z ) of H are labeled by a pair of mode indices n, m for motion in the x-y plane transverse to the current. In Fig. Extensions -We mention extension of our findings that may help to observe the equilibrium CME in an experiment. A first extension is to smaller flux biases in the N = 2 regime, when two pairs of charge-conjugate FIG. 4. Data points: numerical calculation of the equilibrium supercurrent in the flux-biased circuit of Fig. so the CME can be observed without fully gapping out one pair of cones. A second extension is to a current-biased, rather than flux-biased circuit, with the applied magnetic field B y perpendicular to the current bias j 0 in the z-direction. The current bias then drives the Weyl superconductor into the N = 1 phase via the vector potential component A z = μ 0 λ 2 j 0 ≡ Λ/e, with λ the London penetration depth A third extension concerns the inclusion of disorder. Our analysis is simplified by the assumption of a clean slab, without disorder. We expect that the chirality of the zeroth Landau level will protect the equilibrium CME from degradation by impurity scattering, in much the same way as the nonequilibrium CME is protected. Conclusion -We have shown how the chiral anomaly of an unpaired Weyl cone can be accessed in equilibrium in a superconducting Weyl semimetal. A flux bias drives the system in a state with a single charge-conjugate pair of Weyl cones, that responds to an applied magnetic field as a single species of Weyl fermions. The cancellation of the chiral magnetic effect (CME) for left-handed and right-handed Weyl fermions is removed, resulting in an equilibrium current along the field lines. The predicted size of the induced current is the same as that of the nonequilibrium CME, up to a charge renormalization of order unity, and since that dynamical effect has been observed In closing we note that the chiral anomaly in a crystal was originally proposed [45] Details of the calculation of the charge renormalization factor, including all nonlinearities in k and A, are given in App. A of the Supplemental Material. [46] The chirality χ of a Weyl cone determines the sign of the dispersion of the zeroth Landau level in a magnetic field: sign (dE/dkz) = χ sign (Bz). In the flux-biased Weyl superconductor χ = -sign Λ, as one can see in Fig. [47] A more formal derivation of the effective charge formula In Fig. To make contact with the single-cone Hamiltonian (8) from the main text, we seek the charge and velocity renormalization near the Weyl point at K. The current and charge operators (A12) and (A13) enter into the effective Hamiltonian (A7) as We have linearized in the momentum δk = k -K and vector potential A and we have used the fact that From Eq. ( For the parameter values of Fig. (1 ± U b ) ψ(±W/2) = 0, (B2) for the transformed wave function ψ For later use we note that the two matrices U 0 = ν z τ z σ y and U b commute, so they can be jointly diagonalized. Each matrix has eigenvalues ±1, we seek the eigenspace where both eigenvalues have same sign. The two orthonormal eigenvectors u 1 and u 2 with eigenvalue -1 are given by The eigenspace with eigenvalue +1 of U 0 and U b is spanned by u 3 = ν 0 τ 0 σ z u 1 and u 4 = ν 0 τ 0 σ z u 2 . For M -< β < M + there is only one pair of gapless Weyl cones, so there is a single low-energy surface state connecting them. We assume that W is sufficiently large that we can treat the two surfaces at x = ±W/2 independently. Let us consider the surface state ψ at x = W/2. It should be a solution of H ψ = E ψ that decays for x → -∞ and that satisfies the boundary condition We first solve this matching problem to zeroth order in μ, when the Hamiltonian (A5) reduces to We linearize in k x = -i∂/∂x and obtain the solution of H0 ψ = E 0 ψ in the form For E 0 = -sin k y the solution (B6) that decays for δx → -∞ is an eigenvector of U 0 = ν z τ z σ y with eigenvalue -1: To satisfy the boundary condition at ) is a superposition of the eigenvectors u 1 and u 2 in Eq. (B4). This results in up to an overall normalization constant. We now add to the zeroth order energy E 0 = -sin k y the contribution δE μ from the chemical potential in first order perturbation theory, Two of the three μ-dependent terms in δ H mix the ν = ±1 bands in the bulk. The small parameter that governs the ν-band mixing is δ mix = (β -M -)/(β + M + ). If we neglect this mixing and project both ψ and H onto the ν = -1 band, we have simply In the same way we include to first order the contribution δE B from the magnetic field with vector potential where we have projected ψ and y onto the ν = -1 band and taken the large-W limit of the expectation value. Collecting results we thus obtain the dispersion relation E surface (k y , k z ) for the surface Fermi arc, This is for the surface at x = W/2. For the opposite surface at x = -W/2 we should substitute k y → -k y . From Eq. (B13) we calculate the expectation values of the charge Q and the electrical current j z of the surface state, the same on both surfaces. The Fermi arc transports no charge in the z-direction -up to corrections of order δ mix from the band mixing. The approximately neutral current in a Fermi arc explains why the calculation of the CME including only the chiral Landau level in the bulk agrees so well with the numerics in Fig. In Figs. The equilibrium supercurrent is not a Fermi surface property, but contains contributions over a range of energies E = E nm (k z ) > 0 even in the limit that the temperature T goes to zero. For the CME we seek a contribution to I z that is linear in the chemical potential μ, measured relative to the Weyl points. As we will now show, the derivative ∂I/∂μ in the limit μ → 0 has predominantly Fermi-surface (on-shell) contributions, which at T = 0 can be written as a sum over propagating modes at the Fermi energy E = 0. Using particle-hole symmetry (relating states at energy ±E carrying opposite current ±∂E/∂A z ) we rewrite Eq. (C1) as an integral over all states of positive and negative energies, weighted by the Fermi function The derivative of the energy in Eq. (C2) gives the expectation value of the electrical current operator j z = -∂H/∂A z in the state with energy E, according to the Hellmann-Feynman theorem. Two other expectation values that we need are those of the velocity operator v z = ∂H/∂k z and the charge operator Q = -e∂H/∂μ, given by We take the derivative with respect to μ of Eq. (C2): At low temperatures, when -f (E) → δ(E) becomes a delta function, the on-shell contribution J on-shell involves only Fermi surface properties. It is helpful to rewrite it as a sum over modes at the Fermi energy. For that purpose we replace the integration over k z by an energy integration weighted with the density of states: (C9) This equation may be written in a more suggestive form by defining a vector charge which may be different from the average (scalar) charge Q 0 ≡ Q E because the average of the product of charge and velocity may differ from the product of the averages.(For example, the coherent superposition of a rightmoving electron and a left-moving hole has zero average charge and zero average velocity, but nonzero average electrical current.) We finally arrive at At zero temperature a sum over modes remains, where we have restored the units of = h/2π. The subscript n, m labels the mode indices of a propagating mode in the z-direction at the Fermi energy (E = 0). We evaluate Eq. (C12) for the effective Hamiltonian (A20) in the zeroth Landau level near the Weyl point at K and its charge-conjugate at -K. The two Weyl points have opposite sign of both the scalar charge Q 0 = -e cos θ and the vector charge Q z = -e/ cos θ, and the same sign v z = χ (sign B z ), so their contributions add. The Landau level degeneracy is (C15) This confirms Eq. ( 