Heat treatment is critically important to the performance of Nb3Sn superconducting strands. For very large Nb3Sn magnet coils, such as the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) Central Solenoid (CS) coils, heat treatment carries risk of temperature and time excursion, which may result in performance degradation. Therefore, it is prudent to study the effect of possible excursion on Nb3Sn performance. In this study, Nb3Sn strands used for ITER CS coils are heat treated at different temperatures for different times. Their critical current, residual resistance ratio and hysteresis losses are measured. It is found that in the range we studied, critical current and hysteresis losses do not change significantly. Residual resistance ratio, however, decreases with increasing heat treatment temperature and time. This is attributed to the diffusion of metallic elements from the plated Cr layer to the copper stabilizer. Based on a model of metallic elements diffusion, a numerical code is developed to predict residual resistance ratio as a function of heat treatment temperature and time. Nb3Sn strand is a composite of Cu, pure Nb, and Sn or Sn containing components, which requires a reaction heat treatment to form A15 phase of superconducting Nb3Sn. Obviously the superconducting properties of a Nb3Sn strand is strongly influenced by heat treatment schedule. In a heat treatment, Nb3Sn reaction is limited by diffusion of Sn to Nb filaments The Central Solenoids (CS) of the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) are wound by Nb3Sn cable-in-conduit conductors and need to be heat treated after coil-winding In order to minimize the risk of coil performance degradation, therefore, it is prudent to study the effect of heat treatment temperature and time excursion from the optimized heat treatment schedule. Moreover, it has been reported that Residual Resistance Ratio (RRR) of Cr plated ITER strands decrease with increasing heat treatment time Nevertheless, despite of continuing efforts of past decades by a number of research groups, a complete understanding of this phenomenon and ability of predicting strand RRR by its heat treatment schedule are still lacking. In this paper, we studied the effect of heat treatment temperature and time excursion on Nb3Sn critical current (Ic) and RRR. Our discussion is focused on the prediction of RRR of Cr plated strands based on its heat treatment schedule. The Nb3Sn strands used in this study are made by Japan Superconductor Technology Inc. (JASTEC) and Kiswire Advanced Technology (KAT). JASTEC and KAT strands are made by bronze and internal-tin route respectively. Both are Cr plated with nominal diameters of 0.82 mm and copper/non-Cu ratio of 1. Figure For this study, heat treatments were divided into two steps as listed in Table After heat treatment, samples were tested for Ic,, hysteresis losses (Qhyst) and RRR. Ic were measured at 4.2 K in 11, 12, and 13 T magnetic fields; a criterion of 10 μV/m was used to determine Ic. RRR is defined as the resistance ratio between 273 K and 20 K. Qhyst during ± 3 T field sweep were measured by a vibrating sample magnetometer at 4.22 K. For most heat treatment temperature and time combinations, multiple samples were heat treated and tested. In these cases, average property values are presented in this paper. More details of measurement techniques can be found in Where t is heat treatment time, Ic0, A, and a time constant τ are fitting parameters. The best fit of τ = 12 h suggests a relatively rapid reaction process. This exponential approach to an asymptotic level, as described by equation ( Figure Since hysteresis losses of a superconducting strand (Qhyst) is proportional to its magnetization, and its magnetization is proportional to its Ic, Qhyst is directly linked to Ic. Therefore, it is expected that Qhyst It is known that RRR of Cr plated strands decreases with increasing heat treatment time As for the effect of step-two heat treatment, RRR of JASTEC samples is plotted against heat treatment temperature and time and in figure x from Cr/Cu interface and at time t can be calculated by a complementary error function Where C0 is the initial Cr concentration at the Cr/Cu interface which, in this case, equals the solubility of Cr in Cu at the heat treatment temperature, D is the diffusion coefficient which follows an Arrhenius equation, Where D0 is a constant, Ea is an activation energy, and k is Boltzmann constant. For calculation of resistivity of contaminated copper, the resistivity ρ can be related to low level impurities concentration C(x, t) by Matthiessen's rule, Where ρ0 is the resistivity of pure copper at a certain temperature, α is a constant which represents resistivity-increase per atomic percent of impurity. In RRR calculation, for convenience we consider Nb3Sn strand as Cu stabilizer region and non-Cu core region connected in a parallel circuit. So RRR can be calculated by, Where KCu-20K and KCu-273K are conductances of Cu stabilizer at 20 and 273 K respectively. KCore-20K and KCore-273K are conductances of the non-Cu core at 20 and 273 K respectively, which can be measured experimentally. Using equations ( Where D is a function of temperature follows equation ( We developed a Microsoft Excel VBA code based on ( Solubility of Cr in Cu, C0, has considerable uncertainty according to a critical review by Chakrabarti and Lauphlin In the following, we discuss the significance of the values of free parameters Initial Cu RRR, D0 and E0. For simplicity, the value of initial Cu RRR takes into account the effect of step-one heat treatment which is therefore not calculated separately. When the fitted initial Cu RRR of 540 is used to calculate the RRR of the strand, which includes both Cu and non-Cu regions, a strand RRR of 347 is obtained. This is in a reasonable agreement with the RRR measured after step-one heat treatment as shown in figure It is evident that the diffusion coefficients obtained in this work is significantly higher than those in For example, Ni is completely soluble in Cu at Nb3Sn heat treatment temperatures, and its diffusion coefficient in Cu In order to demonstrate the validity of our RRR calculation code, a few additional sets of RRR versus heat treatment time data are plotted in figure Heat treatment sensitivity of JASTEC and KAT strands for ITER CS coils are studied by measuring Ic, Qhyst and RRR of samples heat treated at various temperatures and times. We found that moderate variation in temperature and time of the step-two heat treatment does not significantly change Ic. In the case of JASTEC strand, after the step-one heat treatment, samples already have about 75% of its maximum Ic. RRR decreases with increasing heat treatment temperature and time due to the diffusion of contaminants from Cr layer into the Cu stabilizer. The RRR of a Cr plated Nb3Sn strand can be predicted by a Cr diffusion model as demonstrated by our calculation in this paper. Figure * (4.2 K) rise in the beginning of step-two heat treatment indicates a quick increase in Sn content of A15, in addition to the increase in A15 layer thickness. It should be noted that, although minor under reaction does not cause significant Ic degradation, it might cause considerable Ic strain * *Data from the references are extrapolated values.