This article reviews the status of current research on the 112-phase of pnictides. The 112-phase has gained augmented attention due to the recent discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in Ca1-xLaxFeAs2 with a maximum critical temperature Tc ∼ 47 K upon Sb substitution. The structural, magnetic, and electronic properties of Ca1-xLaxFeAs2 bear some similarities with other superconducting pnictide phases, however, the different valence states of the pnictogen and the presence of a metallic spacer layer are unique features of the 112-system. Low-temperature superconductivity which coexists with antiferromagnetic order was observed in transition metal (Ni, Pd) deficient 112-compounds like CeNixBi2, LaPdxBi2, LaPdxSb2, LaNixSb2. Besides superconductivity, the presence of naturally occurring anisotropic Dirac Fermionic states were observed in the layered 112-compounds SrMnBi2, CaMnBi2, LaAgBi2 which are of significant interest for future nanoelectronics as an alternative to graphene. In these compounds, the linear energy dispersion resulted in a high magnetoresistance that stayed unsaturated even at the highest applied magnetic fields. Here, we describe various 112-type materials systems combining experimental results and theoretical predictions to stimulate further research on this less well-known member of the pnictide family. The discovery of superconductivity in the pnictide family of superconductors LaOFeP Although there are several structurally different phases of pnictides, they all contain a common Fe-pnictogen (P n) layer in a tetrahedral arrangement that is separated by blocking layers. The composition of the blocking layer is believed to affect the superconducting properties A prediction of the existence of a 112-type pnictide phase was made by Shim et al. Superconductivity in the 112-type pnictide was first reported in the CeT M P n 2 (T M = transition metal, P n = pnictogen) family of intermetallic compounds with T N ∼ 5 K although several heavy-fermion superconductors with layered tetragonal structures were known earlier Interest in the 112-system has grown considerably after the discovery of a high T c of 34 K in Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 In the past two years, research interest again increased for Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 Similar to the other pnictide systems, primarily three techniques are used for bulk sample preparation of 112pnictides The parent compound CaFeAs 2 has not yet been synthesised, but incorporation of a small amount of La in place of Ca Polycrystalline samples were synthesised using solid state reaction inside a high-pressure cell Single crystal synthesis of CeNi x Bi 2 Initial reports on 112-type pnictide systems were made on RENi x Bi 2 In the stoichiometrically deficient Ni x Bi layer (analogous to the FeAs layer in LaFeAsO), Bi(1) forms a distorted tetrahedron in a trivalent charge state due to Coulomb attraction. This forces the other Bi(2) ion in a charge state of -1 to occupy a narrower space with a shorter Bi-Bi bond-length to form a square net layer as illustrated in Fig. x )(Fe 2+ As 3-)As -•xe -with excess charge injected inside the FeAs layer x )(Fe 2+ As 3-)F -• xe - where F -forms a square network. In this way, the 112-Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 structure can be related to 1111-CaFeAsF, although the chemical bondings in the spacer layers are not the same in both cases. For CaFeAsF, the CaF layer is made of strong ionic bonds while CaAs layers in Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 consists of zig-zag As chains of covalent bonds weakly coupled to the adjacent Ca layers. For this reason, the interlayer distance between FeAs planes in 112-Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 (∼ 10.35 Å) Recently Joseph et al. Alternative claims have been made that instead of c are inferred from ρ by the onset and the offset of the supercondu = 346 K, which is almost twice as much as that for BaFe 2 As 2 , Our study of Co substitution on Fe sites results in a new family of superconductors, where bulk SC takes place in a dome like region with a maximum T c of 20 K (Fig. CaFeAs 2 Density functional theory (DFT) band structure analysis of fully stoichiometric LaPdBi 2 revealed the almost equal contribution of all constituent atoms near the Fermi level, except for Pd which has a much higher dominance. Changing the Pd content in CePd x Bi 2 affects the Fermi surface topology significantly and in the presence of significant Pd vacancies, Fermi surface nesting can be avoided. This suppresses any kind of charge density wave (CDW) in the Bi square net layer which allows the superconducting state to stabilise The density of states of two hypothetical 112structures BaFeAs 2 and BaFeSb 2 The band dispersion in Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 showed considerable 2D character contributed mostly by the As layers. In the non-magnetic calculation, four hole-like bands (around Γ(0, 0) point) and two electron-like bands (around M (π, π) point) were found from the band structure analysis (see Fig. Nagai et al. The inset of Fig. The solid line in Fig. CeNi 0.8 Bi 2 has the same crystal structure as the socalled 1111 system which has a maximum T c of about 55 K among iron-based high-T c superconductors. Theoretical studies on an iron-based high-T c superconductor point out that magnetic fluctuation arising from a nesting between Fermi surfaces at and M points in an unfolded Brillioun zone is an origin of the superconductivity. 18-21 Experimentally, strong correlations between the high-T c superconductivity and the spin fluctuation are observed in an iron-based high-T c superconductor. The inelastic neutron scattering measurements on LaFeAsO 1-x F x with x = 0.057, 0.082, and 0.157, show that the spin fluctuation observed in the samples with x = 0.057 and 0.082, whose T c are about 30 K, almost disappears in the sample with x = 0.157 in which the high-T c superconductivity is almost suppressed. 22 On the other hand, the superconductivity may appear without magnetic fluctuation in CeNi 0.8 Bi 2 , because Ni is nonmagnetic and the 214512-4 FIG. The layered compound CePd x Bi 2 is a Kondo-lattice AFM which is metallic above 75 K, and exhibits below 75 K a strong interplay between Kondo and crystal field effects (CEF) Weiss law χ = C/(Tθ c ) revealed a Curie Temperature θ c = -1.5 K and an effective magnetic moment μ eff = 2.86μ B /Ce atom which is of similar value as for a free Ce 3+ ion indicating the localised nature of the Cemoments in CePd x Bi 2 . The negative θ c supports the existence of AFM ordering of the Ce-atoms at higher temperatures The ground state of the Ce-based intermetallic compound CeNi x Bi 2 is governed by the interplay between RKKY and Kondo interactions. The Kondo interaction strength is determined by the level of hybridisation between the Ce-4f and conduction electrons favoring a nonmagnetic ground state while the long range magnetically ordered state is preferred by the RKKY interaction This work was supported by the Funding Program for World-Leading Innovative R&D on Science and Technology (FIRST), Japan. We thank Dr. S. Shamoto, Dr. K. Kodama, and Dr. S. Wakimoto (JAER) for powder neutron diffraction measurements. order antiferromagnetically with the easy magnetisation axis along the c-direction with a saturated magnetic moment of 1.71μ B as T → 0 K. Superconductivity is induced in CeNiBi 2 via Ni-deficiency similar to the oxygen deficiency in the 1111-system CeNi x Bi 2 is a type-II superconductor (T c = 4.2 K) The in-plane resistivity of Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 with x = 0.16 goes through a superconducting transition at 36 K Replacing As by a small amount of isovalent substitutional elements like P and Sb enhanced T c further Further enhancement of T c was possible with a higher level of Sb substitution in Ca 1-x La x Fe(As 1-y Sb y ) 2 (x = 0.12, y = 0.1) to 47 K In Sb-substituted Ca 1-x RE x Fe(As 1-y Sb y ) 2 , there is a general trend of T c enhancement and improvement of the superconducting properties In summary, Co or Ni co-doped (Ca, RE)112 have been synthesized for RE = La-Gd and their superconducting properties were investigated. Co or Ni co-doping improved superconducting properties of all (Ca, RE)112 samples. T c s exceeding 30 K were observed in Co-co-doped (Ca, RE)112 (RE = La-Sm) in spite of direct TM doping to Fe site. T c was found to decrease with a decrease in ionic radii of RE 3+ except for Ce and Eu doped samples. In the case of (Ca, Ce In polycrystalline Ca 1-x RE x FeAs 2 , superconductivity was observed with a T c of 22.7 K, 24.6 K, 17.9 K, 23.2 K, 13.2 K and 22.8 K for La-, Pr-, Nd-, Sm-, Euand Gd-doped systems respectively, except for the Cedoped system In the RE-substituted material Ca 1-x RE x FeAs 2 , transition metal (T M )-co-doping indicates the direct substitution of the Fe atoms by Co-atoms which has been studied for T M = Co, Ni, Mn Large diamagnetic screening was observed in the Coco-doped (Ca, La)-112-system indicating the presence of bulk superconductivity In Ca 1-x RE x (Fe 1-y T M y )As 2 (T M = Co, Ni), T c increased with increasing ionic radii for all RE elements except for Ce and Eu. d Fe-Fe went through a similar trend with ionic radii which is comparable to the trend observed earlier in the T M -free (Ca,RE)112-system The lower critical fields (H c1 ) for CeNi x Bi 2 , LaNi x Bi 2 , NdNi x Bi 2 , YNi x Bi 2 are 65 G, 90 G, 55 G and 67 G respectively Application of external pressure can be useful for the suppression of the AFM ground state and stabilisation of superconductivity in Fe-based superconductors without introducing substitutional elements or impurities. For Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 , Zhou et al. Dirac materials like graphene The tetragonal unit cell of these materials (space group I4/mmm) is constituted by Mn-Bi (2) layers (analogous to the FeP n layers) which are separated by Sr/Bi (1) layers (Fig. Unlike graphene with a negligible spin-orbit coupled (SOC) band gap It was thought earlier that the antiferromagnetic ordering of the Mn-atoms for the cases of (Sr/Ca/Eu)MnBi 2 is crucial for the anisotropic behavior, but this has been ruled out after the observation of a Dirac cone like structure close to E F along the Γ -M direction in LaAgBi 2 For the case of SrMnBi 2 and CaMnBi 2 , Mn- FIG. 17: In-plane X-ray (φ) scan of LaNixBi2 grown on MgO substrate and (inset) RHEED image taken along the (110) direction of MgO after deposition High-quality thin films of pnictide compounds will be important for applications, however, they can also do as an useful alternative to those materials where single crys- tals are still unavailable. Single crystalline phases of pnictide superconductors were grown using MBE and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) showing that thin film techniques are useful for stabilising pnictide compounds (including metastable materials) by using growth kinetics and substrate induced epitaxial strain which is difficult to realize in bulk form. Superconducting films of 122 and 1111phases of pnictides were grown successfully using PLD The first single-phase superconducting thin film of the 112-phase has been LaNi x Bi 2 grown by MBE Copyright 2015 by American Physics Society. A list of samples investigated in thin film form along with their growth parameters is shown in Tab. I. For all these materials, the out-of-plane X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (see Fig. The T c was obtained from four probe resistivity measurements where a sharp superconducting transition was observed. At room temperature, all the films had a resistivity in the range of 100 μΩcm. Between 5 K and 30 K, the resistivity shows metallic behavior that can be fitted using a quadratic temperature dependence ρ(T ) = ρ 0 + AT 2 , and from 30 K tp 300 K, the ρ(T ) vs. T dependence is mostly linear. The small residual resistivity ratio The superconducting phase has been found to depend on the stoichiometric variation of its constituting elements. For LaPd x Sb 2 within a ±5% variation of the optimal Sb concentration, T c stayed almost unaffected, while for larger variations superconductivity vanished associated with a sharp decline in crystallinity. However, for variation in Pd concentration T c showed a broad domeshaped behaviour around the mean-value where highest T c is observed as shown in Fig. In this review, we have summarised the investigation of superconductivity and Dirac fermions in 112type pnictides. The existence of naturally occurring anisotropic Dirac Cones in the intermetallic 112structure makes them interesting for possible application in nanoelectronics as an alternative to graphene while the large magnetoresistance could be of interest for spintronics. The discovery of high-T c superconductivity in Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 In general, Sb doping helps increasing the in-plane lattice constants. A larger sized pnictogen results in a T c enhancement with increased superconducting volume fraction for various RE-doped Ca 1-x RE x FeAs 2 with the so far highest T c of 47 K. measurements suggested a conventional s-wave type of pairing symmetry in the 112-phase, although a small amount of T M doping seems to improve the superconducting properties in some cases. The moderate level of anisotropy in the 112phase Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 lies in between the 1111 and 122type pnictide systems, while the upper critical field is significantly higher than for other pnictide phases with comparable critical current density. This makes it interesting from an application perspective as J c can reach 10 6 A/cm 2 over a large magnetic field range which sounds promising for the fabrication of superconducting tapes and Josephson junctions 