We study superconductors with n-fold rotational invariance both in the presence and in the absence of spin-orbit interactions. More specifically, we classify the non-interacting Hamiltonians by defining a series of Z-numbers for the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) symmetry classes of the Altland-Zimbauer classification of random matrices in 1D, 2D, and 3D in the presence of discrete rotational invariance. Our analysis emphasizes the important role played by the angular momentum of the Cooper pairs in the system: for pairings of nonzero angular momentum, the rotation symmetry may be represented projectively, and a projective representation of rotation symmetry may have anomalous properties, including the anti-commutation with the time-reversal symmetry. In 1D and 3D, we show how an n-fold axis enhances the topological classification and give additional topological numbers; in 2D, we establish a relation between the Chern number (in class D and CI) and the eigenvalues of rotation symmetry at high-symmetry points. For each nontrivial class in 3D, we write down a minimal effective theory for the surface Majorana states. Condensed matter physics has, in recent years, been partly focused on the search for new materials that harbor topological states. A topological state is a gapped many-body state that cannot be adiabatically connected to the atomic limit while preserving a certain symmetry group, and yet cannot be associated with any local order parameter. In place of order parameters, topological numbers, a global quantity contributed to by all the electrons in system, distinguish a topological state from a trivial one. Initial efforts have focused on the elucidation of topological states whose existence and global properties are stabilized by the presence of time-reversal symmetry (TRS). This search has led to the examination of a plethora of 2D From theoretical point of view, the discussion of topological materials beyond those that preserve TRS took a significant step forward when the Heusler class of materials were predicted as topological candidates One can further consider the case where particle number is no longer conserved -that is, the case of superconductors, represented by a Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian. Ref. [62-64] studied the topological classifications of fully gapped superconductors in all dimensions both in the presence and absence of timereversal symmetry and spin-rotation symmetry. This initial work has been followed by further research into topological phases in superconductors containing various symmetries such as: TRS superconductors In this work we study topological superconductors that possess C n rotational symmetry with and without spinorbital interactions, and ask if the presence of C n symmetry can stabilize additional topological crystalline superconductors. We also explore how the C n symmetry places constraints on the invariants of the original BdG classes. We ask this question broadly by considering the behavior of each of the 4 distinct Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) symmetry classes, namely class C, D, CI and DIII, of random matrices from the Altland and Zimbauer (AZ) The AZ classification of single particle Hamiltonians 76 is based on the transformation properties of the single particle Hamiltonian under two local symmetries, namely, particle-hole symmetry (PHS, or P ) and timereversal symmetry (TRS, or T ), and their composition which is called chiral symmetry. A non-interacting Hamiltonian here refers to a Hamiltonian that only has quadratic couplings among the creation and annihilation operators (in the second quantized form), and can be put into a matrix, H, in the orbital basis (or Nambu basis when charge is not conserved) in the first quantized form. The two local antiunitary symmetries are, given a basis, represented by KT and KP , where T, P are unitary matrices and K complex conjugation. A Hamiltonian H is said to have T if and only if [KT, H] = 0 and have P if and only if {KP, H} = 0. We remark that these formulas apply in the first quantized form, where all operators are represented by matrices, while in the second quantized form, where operators are expanded in terms of fermion annihilation and creation operators, both P and T should commute with H, and P becomes a unitary operator. Hereafter, we use hatted symbols for second quantized operators, and non-hatted ones for their first quantized forms.When both P and T are present, we can define S = KP * KT = P * * T such that {S, H} = 0, and we say the system has chiral symmetry S. However, there are cases where S is a symmetry, i.e., {S, H} = 0, while neither KP nor KT is a symmetry. Now we consider a local unitary symmetry added to the system, represented by some unitary matrix L, which generically satisfies [L, H] = 0. ( Therefore the Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized into sectors spanned by eigenvectors of L, namely, where s is the number of eigenvalues of L, and r 1,...,l the eigenvalues; in sector r i , the basis vectors are eigenstates of L with eigenvalue r i . For each sector, we can classify each H ri according to its transformation under time-reversal, particle-hole and chiral symmetries. Physically, time-reversal and particle-hole symmetries commute with all spatial symmetries, and let us assume that [KT , L] = [KP , L] = 0. However, one is reminded that generally [KT , H ri ] = 0 and [KP , H ri ] = 0. This is because if r i / ∈ Real, KP or KT sends the state to another sector with eigenvalue r * i . However the chiral symmetry, represented by a unitary matrix, preserves the block structure of H. Based on this discussion, we come to a simple conclusion: for any r ∈ Real, the Hamiltonian H r inherits the particle-hole, time-reversal and chiral symmetries the system may have, thus having the same topological classification as that found Ref. [62-64]. On the other hand, if r / ∈ Real, H r only inherits the chiral symmetry of the system, should the system possess chiral symmetry, while the time-reversal and particle-hole symmetries relate H r to H r * . Due to this relation, the topological invariants for H r and H r * will be shown to be either the same or opposite, depending on S and the symmetry class of the Hamiltonian. Therefore, a local unitary symmetry in general enhances the topological classifications, as now the full system is labeled by all the quantum numbers from each sector (if r ∈ Real) and each pair of sectors (if r / ∈ Real), rather than the single Z or Z 2 number for the entire Hamiltonian H. A point group, or specifically rotational, symmetry is in general not a local symmetry, as it changes the position of an electron. The only exceptions are mirror reflection in a 2D system when then mirror plane and the system are coplanar, and the rotation in a 1D system when the rotation axis coincides with the system. Nonetheless, for single particle Hamiltonians with translational symmetry, there are always some sub-manifolds in the k-space that are invariant under a point group symmetry. For example, in a 3D simple cubic lattice, the tight-binding Hamiltonian H(k x , k y , k z ) in k-space is invariant under mirror reflection M xy : z → -z when k z = 0 or k z = π; and it is invariant under the fourfold rotation about the z-axis C 4 : (x, y, z) → (-y, x, z), if (k x , k y ) = (0, 0) or (π, π), where the lattice constant is taken to be unity, a ≡ 1. For an invariant sub-manifold, the point group symmetry becomes a local symmetry, and hence, we can use the general scheme described above, i.e., classifying the sectors labeled by the eigenvalues of L, to find the classification and the corresponding invariants of the Hamiltonian on the sub-manifold. The set of quantum numbers defined on all these invariant sub-manifolds characterize a general topological crystalline insulator or superconductor. It is this method that we will be using to classify superconductors with rotation symmetry within the context of this work. We should note, however, that this characterization is incomplete and there exist interesting exceptions Having clarified the role of rotational symmetries in general Hamiltonians, it is important to mark the difference between spinless and spinful systems. As superconductors are, naturally, electronic systems and their constituent electrons are elementary particles with spin one-half, this distinction does not refer to the spin state of an electron. For our purposes, the term 'spinless' simply refers to the unbroken SU(2) spin rotation symmetry, while the term 'spinful' indicates its absence. When the spin-orbit interaction is ignored, an SU(2) invariant Hamiltonian can be block-diagonalized into two parts, namely those of spin up and the spin down parts, while both the TRS and PHS can be composed with a spinrotation about a specific directional axis (say, y-axis) so as to not change the spin state, thus acting within each block. This signifies that the symmetries of the whole system completely pass to each of the respective spin sectors, and it is therefore sufficient to study any one of the two independent 'spinless' Hamiltonians to understand the properties of the system as a whole. However, this is not quite the complete picture of the proper physics. One needs to take caution in that since PHS and TRS are now combined with a spin rotation, their squares change sign, resulting in KT 2 = -KP 2 = 1. This becomes a vital distinction and is needed when we discuss rotational symmetries. A full rotation of an electron gives a -1 factor to the wavefunctions due to the inherent π Berry's phase. This points to the fact that for a general electronic system, we have C n n = -1 where C n is the rotation operator of an n-fold rotation. When SU(2) is present, the rotation symmetry can be redefined as a rotation of both spin and space followed by a spin rotation in the opposite direction. In such a case, we have C n n = 1. Physically this means that in the absence of SOC, a rotation symmetry only operates on the spatial degrees of freedom, leaving the spin part unchanged. Within the context of operators, the terms 'spinless' and 'spinful' indicate C n n = KT 2 = -KP 2 = 1 and -1, respectively. We are interested in discussing the properties of meanfield superconducting systems, and hence we must understand how the previously discussed rotational symmetries manifest themselves in a Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian. The second-quantized form of a BdG Hamiltonian reads: where where a, b are composed indices labeling the site, orbital and spin in a lattice system. In an n-fold rotation invariant system, we require that [ Ĉn , Ĥ0 ] = 0, (5) and Using the fact that Ĉn n = ±1 for spinless and spinful systems respectively in conjunction with Eq.( and if we combine Ûm with Ĉn , from Eq. 5, we have Therefore, we may define Ĉn,m ≡ Ĉn Ûm as a symmetry of the system. In a translation invariant system, we have where C n,m is the first quantized matrix representation of Ĉn,m in the Nambu basis. The significance of Eq.( where F = 0, 1 for spinless and spinful fermions, respectively. Therefore, when m ∈ odd, C n,m is like a spinless (spinful) rotation in a spinful (spinless) system. Mathematically, when m ∈ odd, Eq. (10) indicates that C n,m and KP form a projective representation of the group generated by C n and P , a fact that we rigorously prove in Appendix A. D. Time-reversal symmetry and projective representation of the group generated by Cn and T In this paper we also consider superconductors with TRS. Naturally, TRS implies that Using Eq.( and However, since [ Ĉn , T ] = 0, the m which satisfies both Eq.( If m = 0, Ĉn,m is the same as Ĉn and also commutes with time-reversal. When m = n/2, which is only possible if n ∈ even, the commutation relation between Ĉn,n/2 and T is where KT is the matrix representation of T where K is complex conjugation. Eq.( We now proceed to 1D, and some quasi-1D systems, where the rotation along an axis parallel to the system is a symmetry represented by a matrix C n,m satisfying the commutation relation, It should be noted that in one dimension, there is no crystallographic constraint on n, and therefore n ∈ Z + (positive integers). As we classify the respective gapped superconductors with rotational symmetries in 1D below, we separate the discussions into two distinct sections: one in which the total angular momentum of the Cooper pair is zero (m = 0) and one where the angular momentum is non-zero (m = 0). Momentum (m = 0) Most generic of BdG Hamiltonians, which belong to class D in the AZ classification table, have preserved particle-hole symmetry, which is represented by KP in the Nambu basis, where K is the complex conjugate and P is a unitary matrix. Physically, we have P 2 = 1 for an electron, which leads to (KP ) 2 = P P * = 1, ( Since PHS changes electrons to holes and vice versa, it anti-commutes with the first quantized Hamiltonian and the momentum operator. This means that it sends one single particle state to another with opposite energy and momentum; symbolically we have or In addition to this, PHS commutes with the rotation symmetry as In the basis spanned by eigenstates of C n , (φ 1 , φ 2 , ...) T , we have where I dr is a d r -by-d r identity matrix and d r is the degeneracy of the eigenvalue r. Using Eq.( where P r and Q r are unitary matrices. This indicates that the PHS operator leaves unchanged the eigenspace of the rotation matrix, C n , with a real eigenvalue, but maps the eigenspace with a complex eigenvalue to its complex conjugate. Using Eq.( and for r / ∈ Real, we have According to the AZ classification, H r (k) belongs to class D if r ∈ Real and to class A (i.e., no symmetry because PHS relates r to r * ) if r / ∈ Real, while H r (k) ⊕ H r * (k) again belongs to class D. In 1D, class D has a Z 2 classification whereas class A is trivial. Therefore, each H r∈Real possesses its own Z 2 -index. Therefore, the question that remains to be answered is can for an open chain there must be a single Majorana mode at each end In addition to PHS, which is shared by all superconductors, we consider the presence of TRS, corresponding to class DIII in the AZ classification. In the Nambu basis, TRS is represented by KT , where T is a unitary matrix. For spinful electron, we have The action of TRS reverses the momentum of an electron without changing its energy, or symbolically, TRS also commutes with all spatial symmetries. Specifically, In the basis spanned by the eigenvectors of C n , we have the following block-diagonalization of where T r and R r are unitary matrices and T r is antisymmetric from Eq.( and for each r / ∈ Real . From Eq.( which indicates that H r / ∈Real (k) belongs to the chiral class AIII. Although a real sector H r∈Real also has chiral symmetry defined as S r = P r T r , one cannot use this symmetry for classification, as the topological invariants protected by S r are constrained to certain numbers, zero in this case, by the individual PHS or TRS symmetry. Class AIII in 1D has a Z number, so each sector with complex r has a Z number denoted by z as a result of which the number of independent Z numbers is determined by one-half the number of complex eigenvalues of C n . Eq.( Finally, let us consider spinless electrons, or equivalently, adding spin-SU(2) symmetry. We can follow all the steps above to find the classifications, keeping in mind the distinction that for spinless electrons, we have Using nearly identical calculations to those presented in this section, we may derive the following additional results: (i) Without TRS, any H r (r) with real r and any H r (k) ⊕ H r * (k) with complex r belong to class C and have a trivial classification. (ii) Additionally, without TRS, any H r (k) with complex r belongs to class A and also has a trivial classification. (iii) With TRS, any H r (r) with real r and any H r (k) ⊕ H r * (k) with complex r belong to class CI, which has a trivial classification in 1D (iv) In the presence of TRS, any H r (k) with complex r belongs to class AIII, having a Z classification, under the constraint as outlined in Eq. (32). Therefore in class CI, for n ∈ even, there are (n -2)/2 integers to specify the topological state and for n ∈ odd there are (n -1)/2 integers, corresponding to the number of conjugate pairs of complex eigenvalues of C n,m . When the angular momentum of the Cooper pair is considered, namely when m = 0, C n must be replaced by C n,m as the rotation symmetry of the system. In the Nambu basis, it is represented by where τ z is the Pauli matrix in the particle-hole indices due to U m . We understand that PHS commutes with C n,m because (i) PHS commutes with C n and (ii) it anticommutes with both i and τ z , or Comparing Eq.( . (iii) For m ∈ even and n ∈ odd, r may take -1 but not +1, and . (iv) Finally, for m, n ∈ odd, r may take the value of +1 but not -1, and 2 . The Z 2 -index for the full Hamiltonian, neglecting rotation symmetry, is the same as the sum of the Z 2 -indices corresponding to each sector with a real eigenvalue of C n,m . Now we consider adding TRS to the system. In Sec.II D we have shown that the only nonzero m that is compatible with TRS is m = n/2 when n ∈ even. In this case, C n,n/2 and KT anti-commute, i.e., Eq. (36) indicates that TRS maps a state with C n,m eigenvalue r to a state with eigenvalue -r * . We note that in this case time-reversal operator anti-commutes with C n,m from Eq.( When n = 4k (k being a non-negative integer) and the general eigenvalue of C n,m is r s = e i2π(s+1/2)/n (s being a non-negative integer), then under PHS the r s -sector and the r n-s-1 -sector are mapped to each other while, at the same time, under TRS, the r s -sector and the r n/2-s-1 -sector are mapped to each other. Therefore, H rs ⊕ H r n/2+s (note that r n/2+s = -r s in this case) belongs to class AIII , thereby having a Z-index. (Since , the direct sum is invariant under the composite symmetry.) However, this Z-number must vanish and this can be shown by contradiction. Suppose this Z number is z > 0, then on the edge there are z states that are eigenvectors of P * T having eigenvalue +i, such that P * T in the Hilbert space spanned by the zero modes is iI, where I is the identity matrix the dimension of which is the number of zero modes. Then we assume that the rotation symmetry C n,m be represented by some matrix R, and we have [R, P * T ] = 0 contradicting Eq. (35,36). Considering the second case, n = 4k -2, we know that the general eigenvalue of C n,n/2 is r s = e 2sπ/n . Under PHS, the r s -sector and the r n-s sectors are mapped to each other with the exceptions of s = n/2 and s = n, where r = -1 and r = +1, respectively. As in the previous case, under TRS, the r s -sector and the r n/ Finally, we consider adding SU(2) symmetry. With PHS and SU(2) the full Hamiltonian is in class C, having (KP ) 2 = -1 as the only symmetry. In this case, all sectors of the Hamiltonian belong either to class C or to class A, both being trivial. When we include TRS along with PHS and SU(2), we again need to separately consider the two cases above with regards to the rotational symmetry of the given system. We first consider the case for n = 4k in which a generic eigenvalue of C n,n/2 is r s = e 2sπ/n . Under PHS, the r s -sector and the r n-s sectors are mapped to each other with the exceptions of s = n/2 and s = n. Further, under the application of TRS, the r s -sector and the r n/2-ssector are mapped to each other, with the exceptions of s = n/4 and s = 3n/4, where r s -sector is mapped to itself. Therefore, for s = n/4, n/2, 3n/4, n, the Hamiltonian H (rs) ⊕ H (r n/2+s ) belongs to class AIII and is characterized by a vanishing Z-index. Similarly, the sectors corresponding to H (+1) ⊕ H (-1) and H (+i) ⊕ H (-i) belong to class CI, and possess only a trivial classification resulting in an overall classification for the system that is trivial. For the case corresponding to rotational symmetries satisfying n = 4k -2, we have eigenvalue of r s = e i2π(s+1/2)/n . As before, under PHS, the r ssector and the r n-s-1 -sector are mapped to each other, and the application of TRS maps the r s -sector and the r n/2-s-1 -sector to one another, with the exception of s = (n/2 -1)/2. Therefore, for s = (n/2 -1)/2, (n/2 + 1)/2, the Hamiltonian H rs ⊕H r n/2+s belongs to class AIII, having a Z-classification but with vanishing Z-index, while H (+i) ⊕ H (-i) belongs to class CI, having trivial classification. Accordingly, the overall classification is again trivial. In Table Z n/2 DIII, (m = n/2) 0 0 Z2 indicates that for the given system the classification is trivial. With our discussion of gapped 1D superconductors with rotation symmetries complete, we focus our attention in this section on the study of 2D gapped superconductors without TRS (class D and class C)in the presence of C n,m invariance, where the rotation axis is assumed to be the axis perpendicular to the system. Lattice periodicity is compatible with rotation symmetry only when n = 2, 3, 4, 6 To begin our analysis, let us first consider the continuum limit with full SO(2) symmetry. In this limit, the angular momentum of the Cooper pair, m, can take any integer. We choose to work in an orbital basis in which the generator of the rotation operator Ĵ is diagonalized. Therefore, in the Nambu basis, we have where τ z is the Pauli matrix acting on the particle-hole index and j α is the angular momentum of the α-th electronic orbital. The second quantized form of Ĵ is given by Ĵ = i=1,...,N orb where φ i is the annihilation operator of angular momentum j i . Under rotation through θ via the application of the rotation operator, we have or its infinitesimal version Furthermore, we also know where Q c † α c α is the total charge. Using Eq. ( where Ĵm ≡ Ĵm 2 α (1 -2c † α c α ). In the Nambu basis, Ĵm is represented by Since Ĵ commutes with the normal part, Ĥ0 of the Hamiltonian, using Eq.( where k ± = k x ±ik y . In the 2D continuum k-space, k = 0 and k = ∞ are the only two points that are invariant under rotation. At these points we have where we have implicitly assumed that H(∞) is well defined. Each state of H(0) or H(∞) is also an eigenstate of Jm of eigenvalue j i m (i denoting the occupied bands in the BdG Hamiltonian). In Appendix C, we prove a general relation between the Chern number and all j m 's at k = 0 and k = ∞: If one considers the gapped BdG Hamiltonian to be the same as that of an insulator with accidental particle-hole symmetry, Eq.( -(j Nocc(K)+1 (K) + ... where N occ and N unocc are the number of occupied and unoccupied bands, respectively. Substituting Eq.( The physical meaning of Eq.( where ζ m , θ m , ξ m , η m are the product of all eigenvalues of C 2,m , C 3,m , C 4,m and C 6,m at corresponding highsymmetry points on the lower half BdG bands, respectively. In the weak coupling limit, they again reduce to expressions that only involve the eigenvalues of C ñ, the occupation number at each high-symmetry point and the angular momentum of the Cooper pair (mod n). To be specific, and the definition of high-symmetry points is given in Fig. If m = 0, then we have (since C 2 2 = -1) = (-1) Nocc(Γ)+Nocc(M1)+Nocc(M2)+Nocc(M3) In Eq.( We move on to discuss the partial topological classification of 3D gapped superconductors with rotation symmetries. In a 3D lattice, crystallographic constraint dictates that n = 2, 3, 4, 6 and within a C n invariant lattice system, there are discrete lines in the 3D BZ that are invariant under C ñ>1 where ñ is a factor of n. Therefore, in order to classify 3D gapped superconducting systems, we can apply the classification of 1D superconductors with C ñ invariance to these sub-manifolds, and the set of quantum numbers of all C ñ-invariant lines gives the enhanced classification of the 3D system. We notice that for ñ = 2, 4, and 6 all three local symmetries we have discussed in the text, namely time-reversal, particle-hole and spin rotation, of the 3D system are also preserved on the C ñ invariant lines. The same applies to the line that includes Γ when n = 3. In Fig. n,m , where we should note that TRS is only possible for m = 0 and m = n/2. To see this, we note that each generic vertical line is labeled by its momentum perpendicular to the rotation axis, k, and under either T , P or C n/2 n,m , this momentum is mapped to -k, but under P or T the momentum is mapped back to k, while sending the momentum along the line to its opposite value. Using the commutation relations similar in form to those used in Eq. ( Eq.( The sectors with r = ±ω and r = ±ω are invariant under S = KP * KT and are mapped to each other under KP or KT . Therefore each of them is in class AIII, which has a Z-index, and the two indices are related to each other by either KP or KT , therefore, the overall classification becomes Z 2 . We move on to discuss the classifications of other highsymmetry lines. The high-symmetry lines are separated in k-space, but their quantum numbers are not independent of each other in a fully gapped 3D superconductor. This is because the special lines can be adiabatically connected to each other by an interpolation consisting of a series of generic lines which are not invariant under rotations or time-reversal. In Fig. For our first example, we consider a class D Hamiltonian with C 2,1 -invariance. At the high-symmetry lines in BZ, ΓZ projecting to Γ, XU projecting to M1 , Y T projecting to M2 and SR projecting to M3 in the surface BZ [see Fig. 2 ( Γ, M1,2,3 ), there is no Majorana mode after adding the mass; and if z 2 ( Γ, M1,2,3 ), the total number of zero energy Majorana modes at a high-symmetry point projection is one (nonzero), and it remains at zero energy as one moves away from a high-symmetry point to a generic point k due to PHS and C 2 , forming a flat band in the whole SBZ. Hence the constraint between z 2 ( k) (the Z 2 invariant for a generic line) and z (±) 2 ( Γ, M1,2,3 ) is found to be z 2 ( k) = z (+1) ( Γ, M1,2,3 ) + z (-1) ( Γ, M1,2,3 ). Our second, more intricate, example concerns a Hamiltonian in class DIII with C 3,0 -symmetry. For HK or H K , the index is Z 3 , one integer for each of the three eigenspaces of C 3 . This integer index (for HK or for H K ) equals the number of Majorana modes with corresponding eigenvalue of +i of the chiral operator minus the number of -i Majorana modes in each sector at K, K [see Fig. In 3D superconductors with time-reversal symmetry, classes CI and DIII, there is a Z-classification without the existence of any additional symmetry. This Z-index cannot be uniquely determined by the set of the above indices given by high-symmetry lines. This can be understood easily from the perspective of surface states: the invariants defined on high-symmetry lines are only related to the number and chirality of Majorana cones at high symmetry points in the surface Brillouin zone, while there can be protected Majorana cones away from these high-symmetry points. From this perspective, it is natural that the total chirality (a topological index) can be determined by the invariants on high-symmetry lines up to a multiple of n, because any Majorana cone centered at a generic k on the surface must coexist with the other n -1 Majorana cones of the same chirality due to the C n symmetry. On the surface, topologically non-trivial superconductors have protected surface Majorana cones containing Majorana modes that have a specific chirality. As we have mentioned previously, these Majorana cones may or may not appear at high-symmetry points in the surface BZ, and yet in either case, the specific k • p form of each cone is subject to constraints placed by symmetries. In this subsection, we study the constraints on these surface Majorana cones placed by the presence of rotational symmetries. In general, for the rotation symmetry to be relevant, we require that the surface is invariant under C n . In most cases, the generic form of a surface Majorana cones reads The symmetries place constraints on the form of d 0,x,y,z (k) and it is our goal to find these constraints in the presence of various symmetries including C n,m , TRS and SU (2). As before, we are interested in studying two separate situations: (i) generic k 0 within the surface BZ and (ii) k 0 at high-symmetry points within the surface BZ. If there is no symmetry other than C n and PHS, then there is no constraint on the form of h(q) for n ∈ odd, (6, 2), (6, 4) 0 0 0 N/A 0 None C (6, 1), (6, 3), (6, 5) ( Γ, M , X) = z2( k) D (6, 0), (6, 2), (6, 4) 0 0 0 N/A 0 None D (6, 1), (6, 3), (6, 5) The complete classification of 1D vertical lines in the BZ of a 3D superconductor with Cn,m-invariance. The column k contains the classification for a generic line in the bulk. All other columns except the last contain the classification of highsymmetry lines that project to high-symmetry points in the surface BZ. In the last column, we list the constraints between the invariants on these lines placed by a full superconducting gap in the 3D BZ. Within the table, '0' indicates a trivial entry while 'N/A' indicates that the particular constraints considered in a particular tabular entry are not applicable. and a Majorana cone is not protected. Yet for n ∈ even, P as defined in Eq.( In the k • p basis, P is represented by and corresponding to situations of P 2 = ∓1, respectively. Substituting Eq.( respectively. Therefore, if m ∈ even, we have KP 2 = -1 and the constraint Eq.( Beyond this, we consider the addition of TRS in an effort to understand the manner in which the constraints change. The symmetries, in this case, of h(q) are KP and KT if n ∈ even or only the chiral symmetry, S = KP * KT if n ∈ odd. For n ∈ odd, h(q) for a generic point q in the surface BZ belongs to class AIII. For the symmetry representation, we choose S = σ z , which leads to the constraint d 0 = d z = 0. For n ∈ even, using Eqs.(57), we know that: (i) if m ∈ even, then h(q) belongs to class CI, where P = (iσ y ) and T = I and (ii) if m ∈ odd, h(q) belongs to class BDI, where P = σ x and T = I. Then by using P h(q)P -1 = -h * (q), we find the constraints that for m ∈ even, d 0 = d y = 0 and for m ∈ odd, then d 0 = d x = d y = 0. When two out of four d i 's are required to vanish, then the resultant co-dimension is zero, and a Majorana cone, if exists, is locally stable within the surface BZ. Furthermore, when three out of four d i 's are required to vanish by the symmetry constraints, then the co-dimension is -1 and there is a nodal (Majorana) line in the surface bands. In all the discussion above, we have implicitly assumed that the vertical line which projects to a generic point is always trivial. In the case where a generic vertical line is nontrivial, there will be Majorana flat bands on the surface. By following this identical methodology, one can sweep out each of the separate permutations of symmetry constraints to derive effective theories around a generic point in the surface BZ, the results of which we summarize in Table Additional constraints on the effective k•p theory apply if k 0 is invariant under rotation, in other words k 0 is at a high-symmetry point within the surface BZ. As we have noted earlier, these high-symmetry points within the surface BZ may be either a two-, three-, four-or six-fold invariant points. While our goal is to provide a complete classification for the effective surface theories of gapped 3D superconductors when the selected line within the surface BZ lies at a high-symmetry point, in what follows we address three specific situations in detail for (n, m) = (2, 0), (n, m) = (2, 1) and (n, m) = (4, 2). We provide the complete results for arbitrary (n, m) listed in Table For (n, m) = (2, 0), there are four high-symmetry points in the surface BZ: Γ and M1,2,3 , each of which is C 2 -invariant. Therefore the analysis is the same for all four high-symmetry points. In class C, we utilize KP 2 = -1 and C 2 2,0 = 1, in which case we have P = (iσ y ) and C 2,0 = σ 0 . This shows that a mass term mσ x,y,z can be added to the surface theory so that it is gapped. Considering a class D system, using P 2 = 1 and C 2 2,0 = -1, we have P = σ x and C 2 = iσ z , therefore, in this case, we may also have a mass term mσ z in the theory, effectively gapping the system again. In class CI, in addition to C 2,0 and KP , represented by the same matrices as in class C, we have T = I, so once again mass terms such as mσ x,z can be added, and the theory is gapped. However, in class DIII, we have T = (iσ y ) and the resultant theory is massless with the lowest order expansion being h(k x , k y ) = A ij k i σ j where i, j = x, y, typical of a Majorana cone. We proceed to discuss the case in which (n, m) = (2, 1). Considering class C, we use the fact that KP 2 = C 2,1 = -1 in conjunction with P = (iσ y ) and C 2,1 = iσ z , thereby allowing a mass term mσ z that results in the formation of a gap in the surface BZ. Moving to class D, we take advantage of KP 2 = C 2 2,1 = 1, where we have P = σ x and C 2,1 = I, or C 2,1 = σ x , which correspond to the cases where the two bands have the same and the opposite C 2,1 eigenvalues respectively. With the case of C 2,1 = I, mass term mσ z may be added, however, for C 2,1 = σ x , mass terms are disallowed and the resultant lowest order surface theory is a linear term (vk x +wk y )σ y , which indicates a nodal line in the SBZ passing through the high-symmetry point. This is consistent with the previous result that for (n ∈ even, m ∈ odd), the effective theory around a generic point exhibits nodal lines in class C. With class CI, we have: P = iσ y , T = σ x and C 2,1 = iσ x where we have used [KP, C 2,1 ] = {KT, C 2,1 } = 0. In this case, a mass term m 1 σ x + m 2 σ y can be added that naturally gaps the effective surface theory. Lastly, in class DIII, we have P = σ x , T = K = iσ y and C 2,1 = σ z . The mass terms in class DIII are disallowed and the lowest order terms allowable in the surface theory are in the form ij A ij k i σ j , which represents a Majorana cone. We note that there are several cases where a simple two-band model cannot adequately describe the symmetry groups. Put another way, this indicates that the symmetry group does not have any 2D irreducible representation. These cases are: (i) a class DIII Hamiltonian with (n, m) = (4, 2) (ii) a class CI Hamiltonian with (n, m) = (6, 3) and (iii) a class CI Hamiltonian with (n, m) = (6, 3), where in each case the smallest representation is four-dimensional. As an example, let us discuss class DIII with (n, m) = (4, 2); the other cases can be similarly discussed. Suppose we have one state in the C 4,2 = e iπ/4 -sector, then TRS takes it to the -e -iπ/4sector [using {T, C 4,2 } = 0 from Eq.( The effective theories on the surface in the vicinity of a C2-invariant point in the surface BZ for 3D gapped superconductors constrained by the presence of Cn,m symmetries and in the presence of particle-hole symmetry, time-reversal symmetry or S, the combination of particle-hole symmetry and time-reversal symmetry. An entry of 'N/A' indicates that the particular constraints considered in a particular tabular entry are not applicable. In conclusion, we have examined the topological properties of the Bogoliubov -de Gennes Hamiltonians from the Altland-Zimbauer classification scheme corresponding to gapped topological superconductors in one, two and three spatial dimensions in the presence of rotational symmetry. In 1D, we complete the classification by blockdiagonalizing the Hamiltonian into sectors labeled by rotation eigenvalues, and finding the topological index, Z or Z 2 or trivial, for each sector. The role played by the angular momentum of the Cooper pairs is emphasized: it generally leads to a nontrivial projective representation of rotation symmetry, where anomalous commutation relations include C 2 n = (-1) F and the anti-commutation between the time-reversal and the rotation. In 2D, we explicitly proved the relation between the Chern number and the rotation eigenvalues at high-symmetry points, and showed that in the weak-coupling limit, the contribution breaks down to two parts. One part is from the normal state band structure the other part is from the angular momentum of the Cooper pairs. In 3D, we found the bulk topological invariants for all rotational symmetries, linearly and projectively represented, defined on high-symmetry lines and generic lines; we correspondingly found the relevant surface theories for both generic and high-symmetry points in the surface Brillouin zone. where P n,i is the projection operator onto the occupied states at the i-th point of the n-th segment. Since P (∞) is well defined, we have that when |k 1 | = |k 2 | → ∞, we have P 2,i = P 2,j , or U 2 = P 2,1 . ( Therefore Then we notice that where R(θ) is the rotation operator through θ, and that lim |k1|→∞ R(δθ)U 0k1 R(-δθ) = e ij(0)δθ U 0k1 e -ij(∞)δθ . From all above equations and using U 0k1 U k10 = 1, we have = (j(0) -j(∞))δθ. The last equality uses the fact that for very small δθ, the integral must also be very small, so the integer part is zero. The C ∞ symmetry, the Berry's curvature is also rotationally invariant, so C = 1 2π dk 2 F (k, θ) = j(0) -j(∞). (11) 