Superconductivity in novel bismuth-sulphur superconductors has attracted large research efforts, both experimental and theoretical, but a consensus on the nature of superconductivity in these materials has yet to be reached. Using density functional theory for superconductors, we study the electron-phonon pairing mechanism in LaO0.5F0.5BiS2. We first confirm the presence of a commensurate charge density wave instability, in accordance with previous studies. Using a recently developed integration scheme for the electron-phonon coupling, we found that its strength is much lower than previously calculated, due to improved density of state calculations. We finally conclude that conventional phonon-mediated pairing cannot explain the high superconducting transition temperatures observed in this material. Superconductivity was discovered in two layered materials sharing the same layer of bismuth and sulphur atoms Interest in this family of superconductors was sparked by the theoretical prediction of the presence of a charge density wave instability in La(O,F)BiS 2 La(O,F)BiS 2 diplays a large range of superconducting transition temperatures between 2.5 and 11.5 K The evolution of La(O,F)BiS 2 under pressure has been measured for both AP and HP samples. T c in AP samples exhibit a sharp increase under pressure from around 3 K to around 9.5 K at 0.7 GPa Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) was performed on La(O,F)BiS 2 , Ce(O,F)BiS 2 and Nd(O,F)BiS 2 Ab-initio calculations outputted large electron-phonon couplings, between 0.8 and 0.85 Electronic structures, dynamical matrices and electron-phonon coupling coefficients were calculated using norm-conserving pseudopotentials and a plane wave basis set as implemented in quantum espresso We employed the exchange-correlation potential implemented by Perdew and Zunger based on the local density approximation We used density functional theory for superconductors to calculate superconducting transition temperatures (T c ) from first principles It consists in solving self-consistently the gap equation: where n and n ′ run over bands, k and k ′ over crystal momentum, β is the inverse temperature, ∆ nk is the superconducting gap function, and where ǫ nk is the Kohn-Sham one-particle energy and μ is the chemical potential for the normal state. In subsequent calculations, μ is approximated to the Fermi level for the normal state E F , where the temperature dependence is ignored. Z and K are exchange-correlation kernels. Z represents the mass renormalisation of the normal-state band structure due to phonon exchange, while K = K ph + K el represents electron-phonon and electron-electron interactions. This gap equation is derived by using an extended version of the standard finite-temperature densityfunctional procedure The kernels of the gap equation, defined by the previous procedure as functional derivatives of terms of the grand canonical potential, are derived perturbatively using many-body theory The electronic kernel K el is calculated using the frequency-dependent dielectric function We calculated the phonon dispersion in the tetragonal unit cell using density functional perturbation theory on a sampling of the Brillouin zone of 4 × 4 × 2 q-points with quantum espresso. Hereafter we refer to the phonon wave number by q. The obtained dispersion features a structural instability which extends all along the Γ-M line, matching previous studies. In order to test the robustness of this instability, both FIG. to other approximations and to the inclusion spin-orbit coupling, we recalculated this dispersion using an allelectron calculation with and without spin-orbit coupling, and a q-grid of 2 × 2 × 1 points. This yielded two dispersions, which are similar, with a slightly reduced depth of the imaginary frequencies from -20 meV to -14 meV. This confirms that this instability is robust. We obtained the fully relaxed structure by using a unit cell of dimensions √ 2a × √ 2a where a is the unit cell parameter of the tetragonal structure. For convenience we call this new crystal structure the √ 2 × √ 2 structure. We calculated the phonon dispersion in this √ 2 × √ 2 structure (Figure The effect of electron-phonon coupling on conventional superconductivity is well represented by the Eliashberg function where ω is the frequency, n and n ′ run over electronic bands, ν over phononic bands, k and q over the Brillouin zone, and g are the electron-phonon coupling coefficients. Integrating the Eliashberg function over frequency gives the electron-phonon coupling factor λ: FIG. The characteristic phonon frequency ω ln is defined by: The effects of the electron-phonon coupling on T c are well quantified by the McMillan-Allen-Dynes formula where μ * is an adjustable pseudopotential parameter representing the effective electron-electron Coulomb repulsion suppressing the pairing instability In practice, the integration of equation 1 is carried out by approximating the singular delta function by a smeared function δ such as the Hermite-Gaussian The magnitude of the error is well quantified by examining the electronic density of states N (E) = nk δ(Eǫ nk ). We define Ñ as the density of states calculated using this smearing scheme. Here and hereafter, the functions and values with tilde denote the ones calculated with the smearing scheme. Equation a very dense k-point grid and the tetrahedron integration method, which we refer to as the "exact" N (E F ) hereafter. We found that Ñ ( ẼF ) differs from the exact value by approximately 20% at the Gaussian width 0.5 eV, which is within a standard range of the width. Moreover, we found slowly convergent behaviour for widths lower than 0.1 eV. Notably, the values of Ñ ( ẼF ) are systematically larger than the exact one, indicating that α2 F can suffer from systematic overestimation in this material. In order to mitigate the above-mentioned overestimation we modified the α 2 F formula in practice, following recent technical developments The numerator is replaced to the exact N (E F ) 2 since it corresponds to the dense k and q-points limit. Note that regardless of the k-point density, this modified formula gives us the exact value in the limit where the electronphonon coupling coefficients g are independent of n, n ′ , k and q. With this formula, as shown in figure We confirmed these results by calculating α 2 F with the optimized tetrahedron method Moreover, the values obtained with the 4 × 4 × 2 q-point mesh match closely the values obtained by integrating α 2 F resc in the limit of small smearing (Figure We calculated the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of LaO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 using density functional theory for superconductors It is interesting to compare this result to the output of the McMillan-Allen-Dynes formula The value of T c calculated here are very distant from all the values of T c measured in this compound, which are between 2.5 and 11.5 K We calculated phonon frequencies in the original unit cell of LaO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 , using two different approximations and spin-orbit coupling, and found a structural instability close to the M point of the Brillouin zone. This confirms previous findings The electron-phonon coupling was calculated in a relaxed √ 2 × √ 2 structure using the standard smearing integration scheme and obtained values for λ with a strong smearing width dependence (Figure We then used a cutting-edge rescaling technique Finally, using the Eliashberg function calculated using the tetrahedron method, we calculated T c using density functional theory for superconductors 