We have performed an angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy study of BaCr2As2, which has the same crystal structure as BaFe2As2, a parent compound of Fe-based superconductors. We determine the Fermi surface of this material and its band dispersion over 5 eV of binding energy. Very moderate band renormalization (1.35) is observed for only two bands. We attribute this small renormalization to enhanced direct exchange as compared to Fe in BaFe2As2, and to a larger contribution of the eg orbitals in the composition of the bands forming the Fermi surface, leading to an effective valence count that is reduced by Fe d -As p hybridization. The electronic correlations are widely believed to play a major role for unconventional superconductivity in the Fe-based superconductors Here we present an ARPES study of BaCr 2 As 2 . Despite evidence for a surface state, the Fermi surface (FS) is very similar to the one expected from local density approximation (LDA) calculations. We find that while most bands are not renormalized, two bands near the Fermi energy (E F ) are renormalized by a factor 1.35, which is much smaller than reported theoretically. We show that unlike in BaFe 2 As 2 , the spectral weight at E F in BaCr 2 As 2 is significantly contaminated by e g orbitals and that direct exchange between Fe neighboring atoms play a more significant role. From our experimental results and analysis, we conclude that although there are obvious similarities between BaCr 2 As 2 and BaFe 2 As 2 , the analogy between these two compounds cannot be pushed too far. High-quality single crystals of BaCr 2 As 2 were grown by the self-flux method In Figs. The orbital projections of the calculated band dispersions are shown in Fig. The experimental sections of FS displayed in Figs. Our analysis shows that the α, β and γ sections of FS cover respectively 7.4 %, 34.5% and 63.3% of the 2Cr/unit-cell BZ (dashed red squares in Fig. In Figs. The agreement between experiments and calculations is rather good over 4.5 eV and most bands would need only small energy shifts to match the ARPES intensity plot. While the s polarization configuration favors the observation of states with odd symmetry or with z-oriented orbitals such as d z 2 or p z , the p polarization configuration favors even symmetry states. Accordingly, the γ (d xy ) band is more intense under s polarization. The experimental results also indicate that the β and α bands have dominant odd and even symmetries, respectively. The most obvious difference between the calculations and the experimental results is the presence of the band labeled ζ 2 in Fig. As mentioned above, the unrenormalized LDA calculations are in good agreement with the experimental data. Even the α band, near E F , is well reproduced by the unrenormalized LDA calculations. However, the situation is not as good for the β and γ bands. As we show in Fig. We now try to understand why the 122 structure leads to superconductivity with a high superconducting transition temperature (T c ) for Fe-based compounds, whereas no superconductivity is reported for their Cr-based counterparts. The strength of the electronic correlations, which we show in this work to be very different in these two systems, may play an important role. Possible superconductivity was predicted for 3d n fillings somewhere between n = 4 and n = 5 The difference in the magnetic ordering of BaFe 2 As 2 and BaCr 2 As 2 hides another important property of their respective electronic structures. Although it is known that the exchange interactions between next nearest Fe neighbors (super-exchange J 2 ) is determinant in shaping the magnetic structure of the Fe-based superconductors With that respect, BaFe 2 As 2 and BaCr 2 As 2 are very different. Finally, one might speculate that the enhanced dp-hybridization leads to an effectively reduced d-electron count in BaCr 2 As 2 , which would then be consistent with a correlation strength comparable to the d 7 compound BaCo 2 As 2 . A similar mechanism was indeed discussed in Ref. In summary, we performed an ARPES study of BaCr 2 As 2 that indicates good consistency with LDA calculations in the antiferromagnetic state. A renormalization factor of 1.35 is observed for only two bands, indicating that BaCr 2 As 2 is much less correlated than BaFe 2 As 2 . Our analysis suggests a stronger weight of the e g orbitals at E F , which may be responsible for the observed asymmetry with respect to half 3d shell filling.