We report the synthesis and characterization of the novel silicide LaFeSiH displaying superconductivity with onset at 11 K. We find that this pnictogen-free compound is isostructural to LaFeAsO, with a similar low-temperature tetragonal to orthorhombic distortion. Using density functional theory we show that this system is also a multiband metal in which the orthorhombic distortion is likely related to single-stripe antiferromagnetic order. Electrical resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measurements reveal that these features occur side-by-side with superconductivity, which is suppressed by external pressure. Iron-based superconductors (Fe-based SCs) provide an unprecedented playground for the investigation of high-T c superconductivity. These systems belong to a huge family of compounds and recurrently display the following key features (see e.g. The search for novel Fe-based SC has been naturally extended to systems in which the FeX layer contains group IV elements, in particular the non-toxic Ge. Thus, MgFeGe for example has been identified as isostructural and isoelectronic to the LiFeAs compound but displaying no superconductivity Crystal structure.-We synthesized the silicide hydride LaFeSiH as described in the Supplemental Material, and singled out two micrometric single crystals (s1 and s2) from two powder samples (p1 and p2). The compound is stable in air, and its room-temperature crystal structure corresponds to the tetragonal space group P 4/nmm with the structural parameters shown in Table We also determined the low-temperature crystal structure by performing additional x-ray synchrotron experiments at 15 K. The refinement of the corresponding structure revealed a low-temperature phase of LaFeSiH with space group symmetry Cmme. The structural parameters of this phase are in Table Electronic and magnetic structure.-We first computed the electronic structure of LaFeSiH assuming a non-magnetic ground state (see Supplemental Material for details). We took the experimental low-temperature structural parameters as input. However, since the orthorhombic distortion is very small, we averaged the a and b parameters and considered an effective tetragonal structure. In Fig. Crystal and magnetic structure under pressure.-Next, we study the orthorhombic low-temperature structure of the system under external pressure. In Fig. In order to elucidate the nature of the high-pressure state we performed additional DFT calculations as a function of pressure for the aforementioned magnetic configurations. In these calculations, the single-stripe AFM state was always found to be the lowest-energy state. In Fig. In order to elucidate the nature of the high-pressure state we performed additional DFT calculations as a function of pressure for the aforementioned magnetic configurations. In these calculations, the single-stripe AFM state was always found to be the lowest-energy state. In Fig. 17 T and the zero-temperature correlation length ξ(0 4.3 nm. Note that the LaFeSiH T c cannot be explained in terms of conventional electron-phonon mediated superconductivity since it requires an unphysical μ * = 0 Coulomb pseudopotential In addition, we used the the powder sample p1 to determine the onset of superconductivity as a function of pressure from similar measurements [see Fig. We note that the ferromagnetic signal in our powders sets in at a much higher temperature {T FM = 1044 K for α-Fe . Energy difference with respect to the nonmagnetic state and Fe magnetic moments for various magnetic configurations obtained from DFT calculations.