We consider the Josephson effect through a thin spin-orbit coupled layer in the presence of an exchange field h, and discover a set of supercurrent vortices appearing in the system which can be controllably moved around in the system by varying either the direction of h, the strength |h|, the spin-orbit coupling magnitude α via a gate voltage, or the phase difference. We refer to this phenomenon as a supercurrent vortex pinball effect and show that its origin is the spin polarization of the triplet Cooper pairs induced in the system. The supercurrent vortices are shown to arise from what resembles a Cooper pair-induced inverse Edelstein effect. The proximity effect endows otherwise nonsuperconducting materials with superconducting properties, and thus offers an interesting arena to explore how quantum coherence is manifested in unusual physical environments. One of the most actively pursued setups includes so-called Josephson junctions where a material is able to sustain a supercurrent via proximity to two host superconductors. In the presence of a magnetic exchange field h, the Cooper pairs that leak from the superconductors oscillate between the conventional singlet spin state and the opposite-spin triplet state 1 . If the exchange field is spatially varying, or the system contains spin-orbit coupling, the triplet Cooper pairs may rotate between different triplet states where the electron spins are parallel, making tunable superconducting spin transport possible In this paper, we consider a spin-orbit coupled superconducting hybrid which is found to display novel, inherently two-dimensional, physical phenomena which are hidden in effective one-dimensional models. Specifically, we examine a thin film of a non-superconducting material with spin-orbit coupling sandwiched between two superconductors and discover a set of supercurrent vortices appearing in the system which can be controllably moved around by varying either the direction of h, the strength |h|, the spin-orbit coupling magnitude α via a gate voltage or the phase difference. We refer to this phenomenon as a supercurrent vortex pinball effect and show that its origin is the spin polarization of the triplet Cooper pairs induced in the system. The supercurrent vortices arise from what is reminiscent of a Cooper pair-induced inverse Edelstein effect. A top view sketch of the geometry is given in Fig. where D is the diffusion constant, ε is the quasiparticle energy, ρ3 = diag(+1, +1, -1, -1), and σ = diag(σ, σ * ) where σ is a vector of Pauli matrices. Furthermore, ĝ = ĝ(x, y, ε) is the retarded, quasiclassical 4 × 4 Green function matrix, defined as where the . . . operation means complex conjugation and ε → (-ε). The 2 × 2-matrix g is the conventional Green function, which includes the spin degree of freedom, whereas the anomalous Green function f takes into account the presence of superconducting correlations. Spin-orbit coupling is introduced via the covariant derivative ∇ĝ = ∇ĝ -ı Â, ĝ , with Here, we consider Rashba spin-orbit coupling, as generated by a symmetry breaking in the thickness direction (z-axis), for which one gets where α is the strength of the spin-orbit coupling, and e j is a unit vector in direction j. We consider low-transparancy interfaces, which are described by the Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions 23 The phenomenological constant ζ is a measure of the interface resistance (we use ζ = 3 in what follows, corresponding to a realistic low-transparency interface), and the indices {L, R} refer to Green functions on the left and right side of the interface, respectively. Inelastic scattering is accounted for by letting ε → ε + ıδ where δ/∆ = 0.01. The superconductors are assumed to be large enough to be approximated as bulk, and therefore appear only in the boundary conditions at x = ±L/2. For the transversal interfaces to vacuum, the boundary conditions reduce to ∇ĝ = 0. To demonstrate the inverse Edelstein effect originating from the triplet Cooper pairs, we first consider the charge current density which in equilibrium is defined as: with J 0 = N 0 eD/2, where the constant N 0 is the density of states at the Fermi level and β = 1/k B T . The temperature T is constant and equal to 1 ‰ of the critical temperature of the superconductors. By inserting the above expression for ĝ into Eq. 5, it is seen that the current density only depends on the anomalous Green function f . Furthermore, f can be split into a contribution from the singlet component f s and the triplet component where I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. The current density can then be written as with J I = J s -J x -J y -J z being the conventional current contribution from the individual singlet and triplet components, which in turn are given as for k ∈ {s, x, y, z}. The current J I is present also in the absence of spin-orbit coupling. With spin-orbit coupling, however, one gets an additional contribution from J tt , which we find to be: It is observed that while J I is a linear combination of currents from each of the four components of f , J tt is generated by interference between the triplet components. Importantly, the cross product in Eq. 9 determines the spin polarization direction of a general triplet Cooper pair state, as is wellknown from the d-vector formalism used in early works on liquid 3 He For the system shown in Fig. The effect is clearly seen in Fig. Fig. A key point is that the existence of the vortices are found to depend on the strength h = |h| of the exchange field. When examining the current passing between the superconductors for increasing exchange field, a decaying oscillatory pattern is found where, for certain values of h, the current flows in the opposite direction. This is known as a π-junction It turns out that for an in-plane exchange field, the current is reduced rapidly enough with increasing h for vortices to remain present once they first appear. This can be seen in Fig. Interestingly, the location of the vortices also changes as the exchange field is increased. The insets of Fig. In the study of a 1D Josephson junction with spin-orbit coupling, it was recently discovered that the critical current varies greatly with the direction of an applied exchange field, even creating 0-π transitions We also determine how the strength of the spin-orbit coupling affects the vortices. Tuning of the Rashba parameter α can be achieved experimentally in a 2DEG by means of a gate voltage Finally, we investigate the effect of varying the phase difference φ between the superconducting leads. In Figs. 4e and 4f is shown the current density distribution for select values of φ for an exchange field of strength h/∆ = 1.0 applied at an angle of θ = 45 • and a spin-orbit coupling strength of αL = 1.0. It can be seen that the phase difference provides yet another means of enacting control over the vortices, with both their presence and location influenced. The two vortices translate vertically in opposite directions as the phase difference is increased. It is noted that the total current has a typical sinusoidal behavior, and that the current is zero for φ = 0. Due to the complexity of the numerical problem, we have here focused on a particular system with a specific set of parameters which we believe to be experimentally relevant. However, the results can be generalized based on the current findings. For larger exchange fields (but not so large as to destroy the superconducting proximity effect) one can expect that the presence of vortices becomes more common, as the total current is gradually suppressed. Increasing the distance between the superconductors is also known to generate 0-π transitions, around which one may expect vortices. The presence and location of the vortices may also be influenced by the width of the system, as is the case for flux induced vortices In an experimental setup, a slight misalignment in the orientation of an in-plane field will introduce an out-of-plane component which in turn generates an orbital effect that cannot in general be neglected. To investigate the degree to which this effect influences the current distribution, we have solved the system with an applied external flux A. This produces an additional current contribution, given as We use the Coulomb gauge, and define the vector potential as A = -B ⊥ ye x , where e x is a unit vector pointing in the x-direction and B ⊥ is the out-of-plane component of the magnetic field. The flux passing through the system is then given by Φ = B ⊥ L 2 . In Figure To investigate whether spin-orbit vortices will be completely obscured by a small deviation from the in-plane orientation of the magnetic field in an experimental setting, we estimate an effective magnetic field from the exchange field via the Zeeman effect; B eff = 2 μ B g h, where μ B is the Bohr magneton. We assume that the superconductors are niobium, for which the superconducting energy gap is given as ∆ 1.5 meV, and the diffusive coherence length is ξ 15 nm. For a normal metal, where the g-factor is given as g 2, an exchange field strength of |h| = ∆ is produced by a magnetic field of B eff 26 T. This magnitude is not intended as an experimentally feasible field, but is used here to show that even for huge external fields, the supercurrent vortex pattern predicted here remains robust toward an accidental out-of-plane field component. In some doped semiconductors, which are more relevant as candidate materials for the spin-orbit coupled region in the present study, the g-factor can be significantly higher, bringing the required field down to a more tractable level of order ∼ 1-2 T 31 . To estimate the outof-plane component we use an angle equal to a realistic orientational uncertainty We have investigated two dimensional Josephson junctions with spin-orbit coupling, and find that vortices appear in the current density. The presence and location of these vortices may be tuned by varying either the exchange field strength, its direction, the strength of the spin-orbit coupling, or the phase difference. This "supercurrent vortex pinball effect" has its origin in the spin polarization of the triplet Cooper pairs induced in the system, and thus arises from what may be interpreted as a Cooper pair-induced inverse Edelstein effect. FIG. 1. A top view sketch of the 2D Josephson junction, which is oriented in the xy-plane. A. I. Buzdin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 935 (2005).