We present the results of electrical transport measurements of La1.85Sr0.15Cu1-yNiyO4 thin singlecrystal films at magnetic fields up to 9 T. Adding Ni impurity with strong Coulomb scattering potential to slightly underdoped cuprate makes the signs of resistivity saturation at ρsat visible in the measurement temperature window up to 350 K. Employing the parallel-resistor formalism reveals that ρsat is consistent with classical Ioffe-Regel-Mott limit and changes with carrier concentration n as ρsat ∝ 1/ √ n. Thermopower measurements show that Ni tends to localize mobile carriers, decreasing their effective concentration as n ∼ = 0.15 -y. The classical unmodified Kohler's rule is fulfilled for magnetoresistance in the nonsuperconducting part of the phase diagram when applied to the ideal branch in the parallel-resistor model. Increasing evidence for well-defined quasiparticles in underdoped cuprates seems to corroborate a view that they are normal metals, only with small Fermi surface. Fermi-Dirac statistic underlying the quantum oscillations On the other hand, in cuprates with significant disorder manifested by large residual resistivity ρ res , pure T 2 resistivity dependence has not been reported so far as for Bi 2 Sr 2 CuO 6+δ In contrast to overdoped cuprates where large cylindrical Fermi surface yields a carrier density n=p+1 (p being doping level) In this paper we report transport and thermopower measurements on slightly underdoped x=0.15 LSCO with added Ni impurity. The obtained ρ sat corresponds to the classical value for small Fermi surface and changes as 1/ √ n. The Fermi-liquid quasiparticle picture holds in the nonsuperconducting part of the phase diagram, as revealed by ρ ∝ T 2 dependence and classical Kohler's rule for magnetoresistance, both hidden under the large resistivity of the system. The 4-point transport measurements were carried out on the c-axis aligned single-crystal films grown on isostructural LaSrAlO 4 substrate by the laser ablation method from the polycrystalline targets Figure The Ni-induced residual resistivity, calculated as 1/ρ res =1/ρ sat +1/a 0 , accelerates with y such that at large y substantially exceeds s-wave scattering unitarity limit ∆ρ res =( /e 2 )(y/n)d for n=0.15=const, depicted as thin solid line in Fig. Ni doping increases the positive Seebeck coefficient S, as can be seen in Fig. At region of interest corresponding to high T , the asymmetrical narrow-band model works very well. The obtained asymmetry factor b = -(0.06-0.08), although very small, is essential for good fits. The ratio F of n to the total number od states n DOS is slightly above halffilling (0.51-0.53) and thus consistent with the sign of S and in good agrement with literature data for x=0.15 LSCO Having established the effective mobile carrier concentration n ∼ = 0.15 -y, we can revert to Fig. In Fig. The precise location of the large-to-small Fermi surface transition on the phase diagram of cuprates is still under debate. In the bismuth-based family, the expected linear relationship between n estimated from T C and from Luttinger count is obtained only assuming large surface from overdoped specimens down to p ∼ =0.145 inclusive The T -linear coefficient in Eq. ( After using the parallel-resistor formalism in the zerofield transport description, we will employ it to analysis of magnetoresistance in the sections below. In the strongly overdoped cuprates magnetoresistance obeys Kohler's rule ) T/(m cm)] At the lowest temperatures down to 2 K, all nonsuperconducting samples exhibit large and negative inplane (I ab) magnetoresistance, both in the transverse (TMR, B⊥ab) and longitudinal (LMR, B ab) configuration [TMR(B=9T)≈ 5×10 -2 at 2 K] Clearly, Kohler's rule in La 1.85 Sr 0.15 Cu 1-y Ni y O 4 is violated when applied directly to the measured OMR of the specimen [inset to Fig. The OMR analysis reveals that Kohler's rule in nonsuperconducting specimens is fulfilled in the ideal branch of the parallel-resistor model where the influence of the shunt ρ sat is eliminated [Fig. Concluding, the signs of resistivity saturation both at the value ρ IRM and with n-dependence from Boltzmann theory reflect metallic-like character of transport despite small volume of Fermi surface and strong disorder in underdoped LSCO. A fully quantum-mechanical explanation of saturation is still lacking The known huge increase of ρ in LSCO outside our T -measurement window means the breakdown of quasiparticle description. At lower T , the transport in La 1.85 Sr 0.15 Cu 1-y Ni y O 4 has a coherent description in the framework of Fermi-liquid theory, where Kohler's rule is derived under single-relaxation-time approximation with the assumption of small τ -anisotropy over Fermi surface In summary, the typical for normal metals parallel-resistor formalism, employed for analysis of La 1.85 Sr 0.15 Cu 1-y Ni y O 4 transport, reveals resistivity saturation at the value expected from Boltzmann theory for the small Fermi surface and fulfilment of unmodified Kohler's rule in the nonsuperconducting part of the phase diagram.