A quantitative vortex-fluid model for flux-flow resistivity ρ and Nernst signal e N in hightemperature superconductors (HTSC) is proposed. Two kinds of vortices, magnetic and thermal, are considered, and the damping viscosity η is modeled by extending the Bardeen-Stephen model to include the contributions of flux pinning at low temperature and in weak magnetic fields, and vortex-vortex collisions in strong magnetic fields. Remarkably accurate descriptions for both Nernst signal of six samples and flux flow resistivity are achieved over a wide range of temperature T and magnetic field B. A discrepancy of three orders of magnitude between data and Anderson's model of Nernst signal is pointed out and revised using experimental values of η from magnetoresistance. Furthermore, a two-step procedure is developed to reliably extract, from the Nernst signal, a set of physical parameters characterizing the vortex dynamics, which yields predictions of local superfluid density n s , the Kosterlitz coefficient b of thermal vortices, and upper critical field and temperature. Application of the model and systematic measurement of relevant physical quantities from Nernst signal in other HTSC samples are discussed. It is well known that transport properties are powerful tools to address the pseudogap problem in HTSC Generally speaking, there are three microscopic components in HTSC, namely coherent (or condensed) Cooper pairs, fluctuating Cooper pairs and quasiparticles. In a transport experiment, these components are driven to form three macroscopic currents, i.e., vortex fluid, normal current of fluctuating pairs and quasiparticle current. Consequently, three theoretical approaches can be identified, depending on the component to emphasize, namely phase-fluctuations approach, Gaussian (i.e., amplitude)-fluctuations approach and quasiparticle approach. According to phase-fluctuations scenario, a spin-charge locking mechanism in pseudogap state leads to vortex formation Note that the original theory of vortex scenario was intensely challenged by others. Scenario of Gaussian fluctuations is another candidate for discussing the origin of Nernst signal above T c . It is analyzed by Ussishkin et al. in low fields The quasiparticle approach is stimulated by recent discovery of density-wave order in various samples In our view, the long standing controversy of Nernst effect in HTSC originates from an oversimplification of the matter, i.e., insisting on finding a simple and single origin. In fact, HTSC provides a complicated physical environment where there are interplays between several interacting components, in addition to imperfect lattice and external fields. What one needs is a comprehensive theory synthesizing the three currents, with quantitative descrip- It is widely recognized that vortex fluid is a vital component in multiple regimes of the H -T phase diagram in HTSC In order to resolve this controversy, we note that in the vortex dynamics view, both Nernst effect and flux-flow resistivity originate from the phase slippage induced by vortex currents Note that our quantitative vortex-fluid model is phenomenological, and describes an integrated picture of phase and amplitude fluctuations, while some effect of quasiparticles (e.g. dissipation in the core) is also taken into account. In previous studies, vortex motions are believed to originate only from phase fluctuations It is known that the BKT phase transition which is found in superfluid helium films also occurs in quasi-2D thin superconducting films and cuprates superconductors In the experiment of flux-flow resistivity as schematically described in Fig. where η is the damping viscosity per unit length and v φ is the drifting velocity of vortices. Vortex flow generates a phase slippage In Eq. ( Generally speaking, damping viscosity η involves several mechanisms, which are difficult to calculate from the first principle. Phenomenological consideration seems to be the only promising way at this stage of the knowledge. We assume that each single vortex is a circular supercurrent surrounding a normal core, which is similar to the Bardeen and Stephen picture for local superconductor where η 0 , η v and η pin are the contribution of impurity scattering, vortex-vortex collision and pinning, respectively. The crucial difference between HTSC and conventional SC is that η for HTSC is different in different phase space of T and B. Specifically, in a conventional and clean superconductor, vortex moves nearly independently so that the impurity scattering is dominant, while in a HTSC, vortex-vortex collisions are more important in a wide range of parameter space due to much higher vortex density under small coherence length (see Sec. II A 2). HTSC is widely believed to be a doped Mott insulator it can be expressed as η 0 = H c2 φ 0 /ρ res c 2 where ρ res is residual resistivity due to impurity scattering. First, we discuss the regime below T c where thermal vortices are absent. The independent vortex assumption is valid in low fields but inappropriate in high fields in HTSC. For cuprates superconductors, H c2 are in the range of 10 ∼100 T. When the sample is tested in high fields (say B=10 T), the distance between vortex cores l B = Φ 0 /B becomes of the order of 100 Å, which is much smaller than the penetration depth λ ∼ 1000 Å. For a single vortex, the circular supercurrent j s survives outside the core at the length scale of λ so that there is a huge overlap of the supercurrent of adjacent vortices. This may induce collisions to enhance the damping. In this process, vortices collide with each other, which leads to a transformation from circular supercurrents to fluctuating Cooper pairs and quasiparticles, and then the motions of the two products are damped by collisions with lattice (impurity and phonon). When only two-body collisions are considered, the collision rate is linearly proportional to the vortex density, thus a linear B dependence of η v can be expected, where ρ 0 is a characteristic resistivity describing the damping strength due to a single process of two-body collision. Since vortex-vortex collisions dominate in most regime of HTSC phase diagram, ρ 0 is good parameter to quantify damping viscosity η. Express η 0 in terms of ρ 0 , we obtain where B 0 = H c2 ρ 0 /ρ res is the effective fields to describe the damping strength of impurity scattering relative to vortex-vortex collision. Pinning effect introduces modification to the transport of a vortex fluid In a pinned vortex fluid, the Lorentz force is balanced by the pinning and damping force, The pinning force can be expressed in an equivalent form f pin = η pin v φ , where η pin is the effective viscosity. Since pinning and vortex-vortex collisions both works at inter-vortex distance, their joint effect can be modeled by a multiplicative factor Γ, such that η v + η pin = Γη v . The value of Γ must satisfy two limiting conditions. First, at high temperature and strong fields where the pinning effect vanishes, Γ is equal to 1. At low temperature and weak field regime, it is the thermal assisted flux flow (TAFF) described by the classic exponential , where U pl is the plastic deformation energy In summary, the resistivity of pinned vortex fluid below T c is The B and T dependence of U pl may vary with materials, and even with samples So, it should be parameterized. In this work, we will follow Geshkenbein et al. In experiments of BSCCO, this typical magnetic field where t = T v /T -1. Above T c , the total density of thermal vortices, n T = 2n -, can be determined by vortex correlation length ξ + as n T = ξ -2 + , where ξ + represents the characteristic scale beyond which thermal vortices begin to unbind In literature, this temperature dependence was verified in the critical regime near T c and b is found to be non-universal where B l represents the high-temperature limit of B T . At this limit, cores of adjacent thermal vortices overlap with each other, i.e., correlation length of thermal vortices is equal to the coherence length ξ + = ξ. In a special situation when b ≪ 1, B T saturates quickly to B l at T > T c , so that the critical state is immediately reached near T c , then where H ′ c2 is the upper critical field at T = T c . In this paper, we use this approximation to achieve the comparison between theoretical predictions and experimental data. Taking the contribution of thermal vortices into consideration above T c , the total damping viscosity can be written as Here, we have replaced B in Eq. ( B. Comparison to experiment TABLE I. Material parameters in Eq. ( Step Recently, in-plane magnetoresistance of oxygen-controlled Bi-2212 single crystals was measured by Usui et al. In order to verify the integrated model Eq. ( This determination is not a pure mathematical fitting, but by a procedure with careful and thorough physical analysis, which ensure their reliability. The main idea can be summarized as follows. First, a rough estimate (RE) is conducted using asymptotical analysis at large and small limits of T and B where only one or two parameters are relevant and easily identifiable on the curves according to their physical meaning. Then, a fine tuning (FT) process searches for optimal parameters around the RE values, which minimizes the errors between a set of predictions and data. At the FT step, precise parameter values and its uncertainties are obtained, see Table Let's discuss further in detail the reliability of each parameter determination. First, the upper critical temperature T v is the onset temperature of short-range coherence and thermal vortices, when decreasing the temperature. In the vortex-fluid model, it indicates the temperature, beyond which the magnetoresistance collapses and Nernst signal vanishes. Using the data of Usui et al., T v =112 K is obtained in RE and corrected to 104 K in FT, and the two values are very close. Applying this procedure to other data of OP Bi-2212, we find T v is nearly constant for all samples. For example, according to an examination of the magnetoresistance data and Nernst signal measured by Ri et al. B 0 is the contribution from the quasiparticles scattering(inside vortex core) by defects. In the RE, we propose to determine B 0 at T = T c where the vortex-vortex collisions and pinning effect have minimum effects. Obviously, the reliability of the procedure depends on whether sufficient data of ρ vs H near the minimum location are available. Presently, only data at H = 0.5 and 1 T are used to perform the RE, and the result is B 0 = 4 T. Then, B 0 is found to be 0.4±0.4 T in the FT. This difference is rather significant, i.e., the reliability of the determination of B 0 in this sample is not good, which is attributed to two factors. First, the data are scarce. Second, B 0 is too small. A reliable determination is possible when sufficient data of ρ vs H are available in the sample where the scattering between individual vortex and defects is strong. B p is the parameter to determine pinning strength, and thus can be independently determined with data in TAFF regime. In the RE procedure, B p = 30.8 T is obtained, while B p = 89 ± 34 T is obtained after applying the FT method. This big difference is attributed to both the measurement error and the uncertainty of the model. Firstly, ρ is exponentially small in the TAFF regime, so its measurement has a low signal to noise ratio. This significantly affects the FT procedure, which requires a significant error sensitivity to work. Secondly, T v (112 K) in RE is overestimated compared to T v (104 K) in FT, which, according to Eq. ( As shown in Fig. Furthermore, the deviations between data and prediction at low field (H = 0.5 T) below T c reveal another defect of Geshkenbein et al.'s model, namely an overestimate of vortex deformation length l 0 by the inter-vortex distance l B in Eq. This can by expressed by a bridge function , where B ′ = 0.39 T is chosen to satisfy l 0 = 370 Å. Applying the revised l 0 in the model, the fitting at H = 0.5 T become very precise, which will also be reported elsewhere. In the determination of B l , we assume that the high-T limit of thermal vortex density is as dense as magnetic vortices at H ′ c2 . To validate this assumption, one feasible idea is to analyze the thermal vortices density in the numerical simulation. In the simulation using the TDGL Physically, H tends to suppress the pair dissolving energy, thus favor the dissociation of vortex-antivortex pair, similar to the electrostatic induction in which external electric field induces a separation of negative and positive charge b is the unique parameter to determine the T dependence of thermal vortex activation. And, the value b = 0.42 is obtained in the RE, and 0.56±0.11 in the FT; both are close. The validity of this result can be further confirmed by applying the classic procedure Follow the usual procedure, we fit the data of ρ in zero field for Bi 2.1 Sr 1.9 CaCu 2 O 8+δ This model is well verified by the data in zero field in Fig. Note that Martin et al. and nearly optimal doped sample, where b is much smaller than our results in Usui et al.'s sample. Since smaller b represents a stronger activation of thermal vortices, this enables us to speculate that the low dimension effect (i.e., strong fluctuations) may strengthen the thermal vortex activation. In order to validate this idea, it is intriguing to arrange a set of samples with different thicknesses, and our formula will be useful to quantify the thickness dependence, through the variation of b. In summary, the magnetoresistance measured by Usui Thermal force should be balanced by damping force due to energy dissipation, which, when vortices move in uniform velocity v φ , is Thermal diffusion and the transport velocity is the same for vortices and anti-vortices as they have the same thermodynamic properties (with only different angular momentum), as illustrated in Fig. Nernst signal. This yields E = -BS φ ∇T /ηc. Define Nernst signal to be e N = E/(-∇T ), then A. Model and formalism S φ and η are the two key quantities to describe Nernst effect. The origin of the former still presents some controversies In other words, the key assumption in the present work is that, in the vortex fluid, the energy of ordered motions (e.g. E k , the kinetic energy of supercurrents around the core) equals the energy of disordered motions (e.g. U φ = T S φ , encompassing the energy of random motions of the vortex core and of quasiparticles inside the core). Thus, our balance argument yields Note that we neglect the ordered motions inside the vortex core, which is consistent to the cheap vortices scenario proposed by Lee et al. Anderson claimed that magnetic vortices do not experience Kosterlitz-Thouless screening, and so the velocity field retains the entire 1/r structure until reaching the magnetic length l B . This is similar to the Gauss theorem for charge. Therefore, the kinetic energy can be obtained by an integration from vortex core size ξ to l = l B / √ 2π ( √ 2π is the structure factor), where n * s = n s /2 is the local density of Cooper pairs, m * = 2m c (m c is the effective mass of the hole carrier), v sc = /(m * r) is the superfluid velocity around the core. For simplicity, m c can be assumed as electron mass m e , thus the transport entropy per unit length is where C 1 = π 2 /8m e = 4.76 × 10 -28 cm 4 gs -2 , c 0 is the c-axis lattice constant. Furthermore, same damping mechanisms of vortex are responsible for Nernst effect and flux flow, thus the analytic model of η in Eq. ( where is a T -dependent characteristic signal. Note that, since we take the same η as in magneticresistance experiments, an estimate of the thermal electrical coefficient α xy = e N /ρ is given by where This formula offers a tool to test model of S φ , a topic which has attracted much attentions in the literature Substituting this into Eq. ( Above T c , Anderson assumed that thermal vortices dominate in n v so that n v is nearly Bindependent. Therefore this formula predicts a hill profile with large slopes in low fields and linear decrease to zero at B ≈ H c2 . These characteristics agree qualitatively well with the general shape of e N vs B. gs -1 cm -1 , but the magneticresistance experiment yields ρ ≈ 0.1 mΩcm, from which one gets η = 2 × 10 -8 gs -1 cm -1 for B = 1 T with Eq. ( There are also two minor problems in Anderson's model. First, the scattering between vortex and lattice was neglected in η, so a divergence is present in low fields at and below T c as e N ∝ ln(H c2 /B). Second, e N varies monotonically with T , so that it cannot describe the non-monotonic behavior of e N from high to low temperature. In conclusion, Anderson's model needs to be revised in order to form a realistic model of viscous vortex fluid. In this paper, substituting the damping viscosity model Eq. ( In order to predict the magnitude of signal, n s should be specified. In Sec. II A 4, we have mentioned that the local superfluid density n s vanishes at T v . Here, we make a further assumption that n s decays linearly from n s0 at zero temperature to zero at T v , thus, Then, e T in Eq. ( e c is a sample-dependent characteristic signal, which can be used to estimate the magnitude. In the magnitude estimate with Eq. ( However, the method to determine the parameters is still the same, a two-step approach The accurate agreements between the predictions and data are shown in Fig. where RMSE=0.152 μVK -1 . This is considered to be remarkable, supporting the validity of 20K in UD Bi-2201), which is often identified as quasiparticle signal this vortex-fluid model and the reliability of the parameter values. These parameter values allow us to predict several important physical quantities such as superfluid density, upper critical magnetic field and temperature. In the following, we will show that most parameters (especially, T v , H c2 and B p ) can be reliably determined from the experimental data. As discussed in the last section of magnetoresistence, T v can also be determined for the Nernst signal reliably. According to the data of most samples, T v can be determined roughly from the vanishing point of the peak from the curves near zero, and then subjected to a fine tuning. For example, in OP Bi-2201, the values of T v from RE and FT are also very close (with a deviation of 8.5%, see, Table The contribution to η of vortex-vortex collisions and pinning effect is characterized by Thus, the values of T v /T c and B p dominate the determination of B 0 . In OP and OD Bi-2201, UD Bi-2201 and UD Bi-2212, T v /T c > 2, thus f min is big. Therefore, B 0 ≈ 0 is found in these systems. In contrast, in OP and OD Bi-2212, B 0 is comparable to f min (5.6 in OP and 2.4 in OD sample), thus B 0 is determined to be a finite value 19.8 T and 3.2 T, respectively. In the present model, B p reveals itself as the melting field H m according to Eq. ( Eq. ( where c 0 = 24.6 Åfor Bi-2201, 30.9 Åfor Bi-2212. In order to extract n s , ρ 0 should be estimated. Since ρ for the Nernst samples is not available in literature, ρ 0 needs to be estimated from ρ of other (similar) samples with the same T c s. According to Eq. ( n s of six samples in Bi-2201 and Bi-2212 obtained from Eq. ( There are two distinct features: a nearly linear temperature dependence in most T regime below T v and a finite n s above T c . The linear T dependence of n s at low temperature has been widely observed in HTSC The errors of n s are small for most data. It is noteworthy that in the BCS theory, the decrease of n s with T describes the depairing effect due to thermal fluctuations. It is intriguing to question whether the observed linear T dependence here is indeed resulted from dephasing due to thermal fluctuations and how it can be derived quantitatively. It is important to note that the T dependence of n s determined from e N seems to be universal. As shown in Fig. Meanwhile, an anomalous decrease at low temperature (see Fig. Despite all these effects, the observed universality is impressive. It indicates that the linear T dependence of n s is robust. In addition, the n s presently derived from e N signal is reliable. Furthermore, the vanishing of n s at T v but not T c is very indicative of the nature of the pseudogap. Anderson proposed that the n s derived from e N above T c is the local superfluid density which flows within interstitial puddles between vortex cores which is supposedly different from global superfluid density. The latter, when measured in penetration depth An interesting quantity which attracts a wide attention is the upper critical field H c2 Using the method introduced in Sec. A 2, T dependence of H c2 is determined and shown in Fig. where The results for UD Bi-2212 Since the quasiparticle contribution in Bi-2212 is very small, the determination of H c2 is more precise than in Bi-2201. In Fig. A interesting behavior is the approximately linear decrease near T c in OP Bi-2212. This is very similar as the case in electron doped cuprates Nd 2-x Ce x CuO 4 It is worthwhile to discuss a special H c2 at T c , denoted by H ′ c2 , which reveals a major feature of HTSC, different from conventional linear dependence H c2 ∼ (T c -T ), vanishing at T c . In the RE (linear extrapolation in high fields) in Bi-2212, H ′ c2 decreases from 137±23 T, 52±2.1 T to 43±3.3 T as the doping increases, close to the results of Wang et al. A significant outcome is the demonstration of the ability to extract the values of eight parameters, with a two-step procedure, from the experimental data of magnetoresistance and Nernst effect, despite the complicated analytic form. The current model is readily applicable to analyze any new layered or two dimensional superconductor. Once the magnetoresistance ρ and Nernst signal e N data of a new sample are available, the rough estimate can be conducted first using asymptotic analysis at large and small limits of T and B. Note that for electron-doped cuprates, some UD hole-doped cuprates Step one, intuitively estimate the upper critical temperature T v and characteristic resistivity ρ from (or saturated) ρ. Step two, carry a analysis of the maximum e N signal with Eq. ( Sometimes, linear regime of e N in strong fields is not measured (e.g., for Fe 1+y Te 0.6 Se 0.4 Step four, use the data at low T of ρ (or e N ) (with significant pinning effect) to determine B p with Eq. (A2) (or Eq. (A9)). Step five, determine B 0 from the linear field dependence of ρ or e N in low fields at T c . Step six, determine the Kosterlitz coefficient b from the sharp increase near T c of ρ in zero field with Eq. ( It is interesting that the newly derived parameter values allow new predictions of the local superfluid density within interstitial puddles between vortex cores, which reveals a universally linear T dependence below T v . These results raise new questions related to transport properties in HTSC. For example, how to explain the origin of the linear T dependence of local superfluid density, especially above T c ? The difference between local (i.e., microscopic) superfluid density from Nernst signal and the global (i.e., macroscopic) superfluid density from conventional penetration depth needs further clarification; the latter is an average over phase fluctuations The most important construction in our vortex-fluid model is Eq. ( More interestingly, the discrepancy of Anderson's model suggests the existence of anomalous transport of vortices in HTSC beyond mere quantum and thermal fluctuations. In classic fluid, vortex motions often display chaotic behavior, so exhibiting enhanced dissipation and momentum transport. What is the nature of the transport in the vortex fluid in HTSC, and whether a turbulent-like behavior emerges in the vortex entanglement (in the presence of pinning)? Is the strengthened damping viscosity generated by complicated interactions between vortices and with pinning centers, which creates a turbulence involving multiple scales? There may be exotic answer to these two interesting questions. In previous studies, vortex motions are believed to originate only from phase fluctuations when amplitude is frozen, implying that amplitude fluctuations play no role in vortex fluids Furthermore, the study of the temperature, doping and layer dependence of parameters will reveal new physics related to phase fluctuations and the mechanism of strong entanglement of vortices in pseudogap phase. appear, so their approximate values can be is approximate data do not very in the asymptotic limits; more often the effects of variation of the multiple parameters are entangled together, so that a global optimization is necessary to find more accurate description of data. This is then accomplished by the second step of fine tuning, which define the best set of parameter values by minimizing the error between the predictions and empirical data. In other words, the parameters are tuned around the roughly estimated values to achieve a better fitting of a set of data (multi-curves). The fine tuning (FT) is realized by a least square fitting process. For example, in the determination with Nernst signal, we divide the entire set of parameters into groups so that the FT can be conducted one group after another, with the former results substituted into the later calculation. This iterative process runs until a local minimum of the error is reached. If there are more than one local minimums, a comparison between them decides the global minimum, and then the FT ends with a set of precisely determined parameters. Sometimes, the physically optimal point is not the global minimum but the local minimum. Therefore, to determine the local minimum, we need to define the range of parameters to be explored, to be specified in the main text. The reliability of the parameters depends on the precision of the comparison between predictions and the data, and the uncertainties of the parameters. The later can be expressed by error bar. Once the optimal set of parameters are obtained, the error bar is determined once the upper boundary of the root mean square error (RMSE) between the predictions and empirical data reaches a threshold equals to the measurement uncertainty. In the resistivity model Eq. ( According to the procedure introduced in the beginning of this section, the error bar can be determined from the uncertainty of the original data We thus use 5 μΩcm as the upper boundary of the RMSE function. The error bar for any one parameter is calculated when the others are set to their FT-determined values, and the results are shown in Table The systematically measured Nernst signal allows us to do reliable parameter determinations. In this part, Eq. ( The process of parameters determination with e N is similar to the one with ρ but there are some more steps due to the two more T dependent parameters e T and H c2 . In the following, OP Bi-2201 is taken as an example to show the specific procedures. In RE, the asymptotic analysis at high and low limits of T and B is also the key strategy. T v can be determined from the zero point of the linear extrapolation of the peak at very high temperature. Using similar linear extrapolation in high fields, H c2 is obtained. The uncertainty of the data is estimated to be ±100 nVK -1 (discussed in the end of this section), and the error bar of T v is found to be ±6.2, thus T v = 71.5 ± 6.2 K. When B → H c2 , a linear dependence of B can be obtained from Eq. ( In the Nernst experiment By private communication, Y. Wang indicates that the noise in strong fields should be larger, thus δe N is larger than ±50 nVK -1 (the maximum value may be ±0.1 μVK -1 at 45 T), consistent with the typical fluctuations of the data. In the present work, only data below 30T are used. We choose a rational fitting error of ±100 nVK -1 as the upper boundary of the error function for the samples except for UD Bi-2201. For UD Bi-2201, the local minimum error is 0.152 μVK -1 , thus we set 0.2 μVK -1 as the upper boundary, to reveal the sensitivity of the model. The procedure to determine the error bar is similar to that above for ρ, except B l is assumed as equals to H c2 at T c (with error bar). The final results of FT