We use transport and neutron scattering to study the electronic phase diagram and spin excitations of NaFe1-xCuxAs single crystals. Similar to Co-and Ni-doped NaFeAs, a bulk superconducting phase appears near x ≈ 2% with the suppression of stripe-type magnetic order in NaFeAs. Upon further increasing Cu concentration the system becomes insulating, culminating in an antiferromagnetically ordered insulating phase near x ≈ 50%. Using transport measurements, we demonstrate that the resistivity in NaFe1-xCuxAs exhibits non-Fermi-liquid behavior near x ≈ 1.8%. Our inelastic neutron scattering experiments reveal a single neutron spin resonance mode exhibiting weak dispersion along c-axis in NaFe0.98Cu0.02As. The resonance is high in energy relative to the superconducting transition temperature Tc but weak in intensity, likely resulting from impurity effects. These results are similar to other iron pnictides superconductors despite the superconducting phase in NaFe1-xCuxAs is continuously connected to an antiferromagnetically ordered insulating phase near x ≈ 50% with significant electronic correlations. Therefore, electron correlations is an important ingredient of superconductivity in NaFe1-xCuxAs and other iron pnictides. Superconductivity in copper-oxides is obtained by electron-or hole-doping into their antiferromagnetically ordered insulating parent compounds with strong electron correlations Since the crystal structure of NaFe 1-x Cu x As does not allow the formation of As-As covalent bond [Fig. One hallmark of unconventional superconductivity in iron pnictides is the appearance of a neutron spin resonance mode in the superconducting state at the antiferromagnetic (AF) ordering wave vector of their parent compounds In electron-doped NaFe 1-x Co x As, two resonance modes are seen in underdoped compositions In this work, we use transport and magnetic susceptibility measurements to characterize NaFe 1-x Cu x As with x ≤ 0.06 and inelastic neutron scattering to study the neutron spin resonance in slightly overdoped NaFe 0.98 Cu 0.02 As. The temperature dependence of resistivity display an evolution from Fermi liquid behavior in NaFeAs, to non-Fermi-liquid behavior near x = 0.018 and back to Fermi-liquid behavior near x = 0.032, pointing to a funnel of quantum critical behavior near optimal doping. A single resonance mode that disperses weakly along c-axis is seen in NaFe 0.98 Cu 0.02 As, similar to slightly overdoped NaFe 1-x Co x As 34 . Similar to what was found in heavily overdoped NaFe 1-x Co x As 33 , the resonance mode is at an higher energy than what is expected from scaling with T c , likely related to the stronger impurity potential of Cu compared to Co Single crystals of NaFe 1-x Cu x As were prepared using the self-flux method method as described in previous work results further substantiated obtained using HYSPEC in Figure The weak resonance mode in NaFe 1-x Cu x As is likely a result of the stronger impurity potential of Cu, which is also likely responsible for the lower optimal T c in NaFe 1-x Cu x As 18 compared to NaFe 1-x Co x As 39,40 and the near-absence of superconductivity in Ba(Fe 1-x Cu x ) 2 As 2 The resonance mode in slightly overdoped NaFe 0.98 Cu 0.02 As with T c = 11.8 K is at E ≈ 5.5 meV for L = 0.5, corresponding to E r ≈ 5.5k B T c . This is higher than E r ≈ 4.3k B T c suggested for doped BaFe 2 As 2 Similarly, the broader resonance at L = 0 and 1 compared to L = 0.5 in NaFe 0.98 Cu 0.02 As [Fig. The superconducting phase in NaFe 1-x Cu x As near x ≈ 0.02 can be continuously tuned antiferro-magnetically insulating with significant correlations near x ≈0.5 through a region of short-range cation and magnetic order 