Bismuth displays puzzling superconducting properties. In its crystalline equilibrium phase, it does not seem to superconduct at accessible low temperatures. However, in the amorphous phase it displays superconductivity at ~ 6 K. Under pressure bismuth has been found to superconduct at Tcs that go from 3.9 K to 8.5 K depending on the phase obtained. So the question is: what electronic or vibrational changes occur that explains this radical transformation in the conducting behavior of this material? In a recent publication we argue that changes in the density of electronic and vibrational states may account for the behavior observed in the amorphous phase with respect to the crystal. We have now undertaken an ab initio computational study of the effects of pressure alone maintaining the original crystalline structure and compressing our supercell computationally. From the results obtained we infer that if the crystal structure remains the same (except for the contraction), no superconductivity will appear. Bismuth (Bi) is an interesting material for besides having a very high thermal conductivity, this semimetal displays puzzling superconducting properties. In its crystalline equilibrium phase it does not seem to display superconductivity at low temperatures. However, in the amorphous phase it displays superconductivity at ~ 6 K The field of superconductivity has experienced an important growth and we speak of conventional and unconventional superconductors and also the ill-defined undetermined category If we graph the dependence of the transition temperature on θD, the Debye temperature, and on N(EF), the density of states at the Fermi level, we find the surface depicted in Figure The BCS theory predicts a transition temperature that depends on the vibrational properties θD and the electronic properties N(EF). V0 was chosen as 0.02 for our purposes. What we mean by the crystalline structures are the structures that under compression maintain the symmetry properties constant like the crystalline angles of the original equilibrium cell. Clearly, the lattice parameters and the interatomic distances will change accordingly. In order to calculate the corresponding pressure for a given compression (percentage of change of volume) of the supercell we do the following. We begin with the structure reported by Wyckoff [6], construct a periodic supercell with 64 atoms, calculate its binding energy (BE) to a high precision (10 -6 in energy, 6 unique symmetry points in k-space, and 5 decimal places), find the parameters that make this structure a minimum of energy (stable structure) and with these parameters calculate 18 compressed and expanded periodic supercells, plot the corresponding binding energy as a function of volume and fit the resulting figure to third, fourth and fifth order polynomials to obtain an analytic expression for the dependence. We chose the adequate fit by requiring that the slope of the curve at 100% volume is as close to zero as possible; this occurs for the fourth order fit where the slope is -0.07 GPa (1eV/Å 3 = 160.2 GPa, The calculations were performed using DMol3 in the Materials Studio suite In table I we present the coefficients of the fourth order fit and the corresponding χ 2 . Table II shows the binding energy as a function of volume and of pressure where the pressure has been determined as the tangent to the fourth order curve adjusted to the simulational points shown in Figure Table For the eDoS the number of states at the Fermi level decreases noticeably in going from a pressure of 7.62 GPa to a value of 8.58 GPa, and this is plotted in Figure The results found seem to indicate that for pressures in the vicinity of possible phase transitions, changes in the eDoS and the vDoS occur that may indicate the tendency of the Wyckoff-like structures to relax to different more stable structures. However, the evidence is not definite since there is no unequivocal way to correlate these changes to structures that may be unstable. The way to go is to construct other phases and study their stability to discern what structure is to be expected. Compression induces changes on the extension along the energy axis for the vDoS to the point that the most compressed structure (14.5 GPa) reaches a maximum of about 21 meV while the uncompressed structure has a maximum of 16 meV. This generates an increase in the Debye temperature θD that would have a linear effect in the BCS equation for the superconducting transition temperature Tc; however, the drop of the density of states at the Fermi level N(EF), induces an exponential decrease that overcomes the increase of θD. In any case, in order to see how these changes reflect in the superconducting Tc, the Wyckoff structure should manifest superconductivity, which it does not, for the low temperatures investigated. Therefore, compressing the crystalline lattice would lower the transition temperature of the structure proposed by Wyckoff and since there is no superconductivity associated to this structure then one can conclude that only increasing the pressure does not make Bi a superconductor. In a previous work Applying pressure to crystalline bismuth, while maintaining the symmetry properties, generates a diminution of the density of electronic states at the Fermi level that according to BCS would indicate a diminution of the superconducting transition temperature. If in fact the Tc of the crystalline structure is below 1.3 mK compressing this material would make the value of Tc even smaller than 1.3 mK. Clearly, new phases have to be explored and compared with the amorphous properties to understand whether new superconductors can be obtained.