In systems having an anisotropic electronic structure, such as the layered materials graphite, graphene and cuprates, impulsive light excitation can coherently stimulate specific bosonic modes, with exotic consequences for the emergent electronic properties. Here we show that the population of E2g phonons in the multiband superconductor MgB2 can be selectively enhanced by femtosecond laser pulses, leading to a transient control of the number of carriers in the σ-electronic subsystem. The nonequilibrium evolution of the material optical constants is followed in the spectral region sensitive to both the a-and c-axis plasma frequencies and modeled theoretically, revealing the details of the σ-π interband scattering mechanism in MgB2. Exotic phenomena and novel functionalities emerge in solids due to the coupling between the charge carriers and collective modes of structural, electronic and magnetic origin. Key to exploiting this phenomenology is the ability to tune the density of carriers and the strength of their couplings to such modes. To gain control over the electronic density of states, advanced materials have been designed, e.g. intercalated graphite Ultrafast techniques using visible light pulses have unveiled some of these phenomena by delivering excess energy to the electrons via an intense pump pulse and subsequently monitoring the transfer of such energy to the different underlying bosons via a delayed optical probe. Whenever a preferential electron-boson interaction channel exists, it dominates the carrier thermalization via simultaneous heating of the bosonic mode. In this regard, a body of work has demonstrated the emergence of hot optical phonon effects in semimetals such as graphite A step further in hot phonon research involves the observation of an anisotropic coupling between different subsets of carriers and a specific phonon. In this respect, a prototypical system is represented by MgB 2 , which below 39 K is a rare example of two-band phononmediated superconductor in the strong coupling regime Here, we use an ultrashort 1.55 eV laser pulse to set the σ and π electronic subsystems of MgB 2 out of equilibrium and follow the σ-π interband scattering by probing the variation of the sample reflectivity (∆R/R) with a broadband pulse covering the in-plane (a-axis) and outof-plane (c-axis) plasma edges In our experiments, we use a high-quality (0001)oriented MgB 2 thin-film, grown by hybrid physicalchemical vapor deposition. In our geometry, the pump beam hits the sample at normal incidence and it is polarized in-plane. The probe beam is a broadband continuum covering the 1.77-2.90 eV spectral region and directed towards the sample under an angle of 15 • . Consequently, it primarily detects the in-plane plasma edge but also explores the c-axis response. Details on the methods are reported in the Supplemental Materials (SM). Figure Complementary information is provided by the ∆R/R temporal dynamics. Several time traces are reported in Figs. We first discuss the narrow feature P c . It is characterized by distinct dynamics compared to the remaining visible spectral range, which is indicative of a different spectroscopic origin. A simple phenomenological explanation for the presence of a sharp peak in the ∆R/R spectrum of a metal can be given by recalling that at high frequencies , where ∞ is the high-energy dielectric function, ω * p = 4π ne 2 /m ∞ is the dressed plasma frequency, n is the carrier density and m is the free electron mass. By assuming that the main effect of the pump pulse is to change n, it results that ∆R/R ≈ 8πe 2 ∆ n/mω 2 √ 1 . Hence, ∆R/R displays a peak at ω * p , i.e. the energy at which 1 = 0. Therefore, the increase of n implies a rigid shift of the plasma edge towards higher energies. Providing an explanation to this process is not obvious, since the total carrier density in the system is constant and can just be redistributed energetically by the action of the pump pulse. The microscopic origin behind such an effect will be clarified later. Up to now, following the above argument, we can confirm that P c corresponds to the c-axis longitudinal plasmon mode, which consistently lies at ∼ 2.66 eV in the equilibrium optical spectra To disentangle the carrier dynamics along the a-and c-axis and extract the significant parameters of the response, we fit an anisotropic Drude-Lorentz model to the static and time-resolved data at 300 K (see SM). By iterating this procedure over the probed time window, we can map the temporal evolution of the bare plasma frequencies (ω p,a/c in Fig. To correctly interpret the intriguing dynamics of ω p,a/c , we pursue theoretical/computational calculations through three distinct temporal regimes. To unravel the effect of the pump pulse on the system, we perform a frozen-phonon ab initio calculation of the coherent electron dynamics triggered by an ultrashort laser pulse (see SM). The aim is to clarify whether carrier densitydependent many-body effects can renormalize the band structure and lead to the observed behavior. Remarkably, we can explain neither the initial blueshift of ω p,a nor the subsequent opposite trends of ω p,a and ω p,c . This calls for a deeper investigation of dynamical many-body effects involved in such an anomalous phenomenon. For this reason, we perform analytical calculations to ), where W top β , W bottom β are the bandwidths of the band β above and below E F , respectively. For low-density bands (as in MgB 2 or in pnictides), within the parabolic-band approximation, such a shift of E F induces a change of the charge density ∆ n α ≈ mχ α /π. These effects have been observed in pnictides in de Haas-van Alphen Once the electronic and hot phonon subsystems have thermalized, the subsequent release of energy occurs via anharmonic decay to acoustic phonons, lasting tens of ps In conclusion, we combined ultrafast optical spectroscopy and state-of-the-art calculations to map the nonequilibrium dynamics in MgB 2 and reveal the phonon-mediated σ-π interband scattering process. Our results show that ultrafast light excitation can be used to control the carrier density in multiband materials via hot phonon effects. More generally, by setting a multiband system out-of-equilibrium, the microscopic details of the scattering mechanism between distinct electronic subsets can be unraveled via selective observables in the time domain. The MgB 2 films were grown by hybrid physicalchemical vapor deposition at a substrate temperature of 730 • C, hydrogen carrier gas pressure of 40 Torr, hydrogen flow rate of 400 sccm, and diborane mixture (5% B 2 H 6 in H 2 ) flow rate of 20 sccm. The deposition rate was 55 nm/min. The resulting thin film was a parallelepiped with a (0001) surface of 5 mm × 5 mm and a thickness of 200 nm along the c-axis. This thickness was controlled by the deposition time (220 s). Epitaxial MgB 2 films were deposited directly on SiC-(0001) substrates. After the deposition, the sides of the substrate were cleaned with 10% hydrogen chloride acid to remove the MgB 2 deposit. The structure of the films was characterized by x-ray diffraction and cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy using a JEOL 2100 LaB6 operated at 200 kV. The dc transport properties were measured using the four-probe van der Pauw method. It is well established that surface contamination by exposure to air strongly reduces the absolute reflectivity of MgB 2 , decreasing the value of ω p over time Femtosecond broadband transient reflectivity experiments have been performed using a set-up described in Ref. To disentangle the a-and c-axis contributions to the ∆R/R caused by the 15 • angle of incidence of our probe beam, we fit an anisotropic Drude-Lorentz model to the static data at 300 K displayed in Fig. To correctly interpret the observed ultrafast dynamics, it is pivotal to clarify how the electronic subsystem of MgB 2 is affected by the interaction with the nearinfrared pump pulse at 1.55 eV. Since this pump photon energy lies below 2.40 eV, it is not sufficient to efficiently induce the in-plane σ-π interband transition. On one hand, we can expect that the tails of both oscillators associated with the σ-σ and the σ-π interband transitions can provide a contribution to the excitation process To this end, we quantify the relative contribution of the σ and π carriers to the equilibrium Drude response at 1.55 eV by performing an ab initio simulation of the optical properties of MgB 2 and including one type of electronic subsystem at a time. The two contributions to the optical conductivity are evaluated on the basis of the calculations reported in Ref. As a result, we can conclude that our pump pulse is not able to selectively excite the carriers residing in either the σ or the π band and that both electronic subsystems undergo an increase of their temperature T e,σ and T e,π upon interaction with the pump pulse. Irrespective of the details of the photoexcited carrier density, it is important to observe that our pump pulse lies in the near-infrared spectral range, thus enabling the photoexcited carriers to generate high-energy phonons. To correctly interpret the blueshift displayed by the a-and c-axis plasma edges, we first need to clarify how the electronic subsystem of MgB 2 is affected by the interaction with the near-infrared pump pulse at 1.55 eV. To verify this hypothesis, we need to discard the possi-bility that many-body effects caused by electron-electron interactions play an important role in the renormalization of the electronic structure. Hence, we study how the electronic structure of MgB 2 is modified after being photoexcited by an ultrashort laser pulse. Explicit time-dependent quantum mechanical calculations can provide information on the coherent electron dynamics generated by intense short laser pulses and give a microscopic description of the fast electronic response in photoexcited systems with attosecond resolution. The in-house developed code implements a quantum-mechanical time-dependent method that evolves the electronic wavefunction with the propagator proposed by Allen and co-workers The propagator contains the sum of the unperturbed Hamiltonian at a certain k point of the crystal periodic structure (H 0 (k)) and of the perturbing Hamitonian (H ), representing the interaction of the applied electromagnetic field with the crystal dipole moment matrix of the periodic system. It reads (1) The initial electronic wavefunction, Ψ(t 0 , k), is the matrix of crystal orbitals (CO's) of the periodic system at a specific k point, built as a linear combination of Bloch orbitals (BO's) extended overall the entire crystalline solid; the BO's are, in turn, a linear combination of a set of basis functions; ∆t is the time step; H(k) is the Hamiltonian of a specific k point in the reciprocal space, H(k) = H 0 (k)+ H . The perturbing Hamiltonian is then calculated as a product of the electric field and the crystal dipole moment, here written as where, D is the dipole moment matrix between crystal orbitals, ω is the frequency of the incoming photon; E(t) is the electric field amplitude or field envelope, here kept constant in time, and τ is the pulse duration, here set at 6 fs. The calculations are carried out in the CO framework. The field polarization can be chosen during simulations. The CO's coefficients of Ψ(t, k) are updated at each time step under the effect of the external field. The propagation is carried out starting from COs orthonormalized by the Löwdin transformation. This approach allows to gain a detailed microscopic description of the ultrafast electronic response of the system, which can be followed in terms of a large number of observables (i.e. time-dependent electron density distribution, CO occupancies, dipole moment changes and relative absorption spectra). In the past, it has been successfully employed also to investigate the photolytic splitting of water ice by vacuum ultraviolet light The ground electronic states of the structures were calculated with the Gaussian 09 The effect of a single pump laser beam, oriented in the plane of the structure layers, is investigated on the fast time scale at the Γ, A, K and M points of the BZ. The field-induced changes of the electronic structure are calculated using a pump photon energy at 1.55 eV or tuned to resonate with the selected k points. Moreover, in order to investigate the electronic response dependence on the pump fluence, different field strengths are applied during the dynamics, corresponding to fluences of 0.10, 0.42, 1.68, 3.77, 6.72 and 10.51 mJ/cm 2 . Tables We now address the anomalous blueshift displayed by the a-and c-axis plasma frequencies. The phenomenological argument raised in the main text for describing the blueshift in the dressed c-axis plasma frequency involved an increase in the effective carrier density n during the nonequilibrium evolution of the system. Providing an explanation to this process is not obvious, since the total carrier density in the system is constant and can just be redistributed energetically by the action of the pump pulse. As we discussed in the main text, here we demonstrate that the time evolution of the plasma frequency ω p,a can be attributed to the different role played by the photoinduced heating of the electronic and phononic bath after the excitation. To get a deeper insight on this mechanism, we consider the processes occurring in a multiband system with strongly particle-hole asymmetric bands. Indeed, similarly to the case of pnictides where χ denotes the real part of the electron-phonon self-energy at zero energy. While the Eliashberg calculation of the self-energy gives χ = 0 for half-filled bands, at low carrier density χ becomes in general differ-ent from zero, and can lead to an observable shrinking or expansion of the Fermi surface area as a function of the electron-phonon interaction. By computing χ for an Einstein phonon and making the analytical continuation with the Marsiglio-Schlossmann-Carbotte method so that in agreement with previous estimates . Since R β > 0 for a band having electron character (so that E β T E β B ) while R β < 0 for a band having hole character the final sign of χ α depends on the intraband vs interband nature of the dominant interaction. For example, in the case of pnictides, the dominant channel is provided by spin-fluctuations interband interactions between hole and electron bands, leading to a shrinking of all the Fermi pockets with respect to LDA To address the thermal effects in the situation where the electronic temperature T e does not necessarely coincide with the bosonic one T b we identify in the expression for χ(T ) two separate terms, one depending on the Fermi function f(ω 0 , T e ), controlled by the T e , and one depending on the Bose function b(ω 0 , T b ), controlled by T b . This distinction can be achieved by performing the analytical continuation of the Matsubara self-energy Σ(iω n ) without leaving the ambiguity in the use of the Fermi The two separate contributions ( After the first 170 fs, the system equilibrates to a state with hot σ/π carriers and E 2g phonon, and then starts to equilibrate with the remaining phononic bath with the less efficient electron-phonon scattering channels and the phonon-phonon anharmonic processes. This relaxation process activates the interband σ-π scattering mecha-nisms which leads to an increase of the π Fermi surface, needed to preserve the total number of carriers in the system. After about 2 ps, the system is then overall at equilibrium with a larger effective number of carriers in all bands, as reported by the optical measurements. The above scheme can be used to indirectly estimate the heating of the hot phononic bath via its effect on the bare plasma frequency of the σ band, given by From Eq. 9 we can estimate the change of ñσ due to the measured change in ω p,σ . Indeed, we have that Since ∆ñ σ depends on the ∆χ σ computed above, we then conclude that the hot phonons reach a temperature around 450 K. After elucidating the origin of the anomalous blueshift of the a-and c-axis plasma frequencies, here we concentrate on the long timescale dynamics of the system, subsequent to the extinction of hot phonon effects. Our aim is to evaluate how the c-axis plasmon energy is renormalized upon lattice expansion. As discussed in the main text, lattice expansion is expected to result from hot phonon energy dissipation via anharmonic coupling with low-energy acoustic modes. To this end, we perform ab initio calculations of the dynamical electronic properties of MgB 2 for different lattice parameters in the case of uniaxial (c-axis) and of three-dimensional lattice expansion. Specifically, we simulate the effect of the lattice expansion on the c-axis plasmon of MgB 2 by calculating the loss function L(q, ω) in the long-wavelength limit (q = 0) and at different lattice parameters. Two models for the MgB 2 lattice parameter expansion were employed. In the first case, we obtain the lattice parameters by considering a three-dimensional lattice expansion. Here, at a fixed volume value, the c/a ratio is optimized using the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) The collective electronic excitations of a bulk solid can be traced The sum over n and n includes 30 valence bands. For the description of K xc a Random-Phase Approximation (i.e. K xc = 0) was employed. In both analyzed cases, we find that the c-axis plasmon peak energy redshifts by 37 meV/P, where P is rate of the volume expansion in percent. The results of the calculations are shown in Fig. 