Monolayer Mo 2 C is a new member of two-dimensional materials. Here the electronic structure and lattice dynamics of monolayer Mo 2 C are calculated. According to the electron-phonon interaction, it is predicted that monolayer Mo 2 C could be a quasi-two-dimensional superconductor and the effects of functional-groups are crucially important considering its unsaturated surface. Despite the suppressed superconductivity by chalcogen adsorption, our most interesting prediction is that the electron-phonon interaction of monolayer Mo 2 C can be greatly enhanced by bromine absorbtion, suggesting that Mo 2 CBr 2 as a good candidate for nanoscale superconductor. Two-dimensional (2D) graphene-like carbides and carbonitrides (MXenes, e.g. Ti 2 C and Nb 2 C) have attracted enormous interest for their novel chemical and physical properties, since they were successfully produced by etching the A layers of MAX phase (M is an early transition metal, A is an element from group IIIA or IVA, and X is carbon or nitrogen) Recently, 2D layered Mo 2 C as a new member of MXenes was formed from Mo 2 Ga 2 C thin films. The metallic nature of Mo-Ga bond is weaker than Mo-C bond which has a mixed covalent/metallic/ionic character, thus monolayer Mo 2 C can be produced by selectively etching Ga layer Superconductivity in ultrathin films owns promising future for applications, e.g. superconducting computational devices, thus great efforts have been made to discover 2D superconductors In this work, the lattice dynamics and electron-phonon coupling (EPC) of monolayer Mo 2 C and functionalized ones have been studied via first-principles density functional theory (DFT) and density function perturbation theory (DFPT). Our calculations find that the strong EPC in monolayer Mo 2 C may lead to superconductivity, while the oxidation would make its superconductivity disappear. Besides, the superconducting T C is also obviously suppressed by absorbtion of sulfur or selenium. In contrast, the EPC of monolayer Mo 2 C can be greatly enhanced by bromine absorbtion, leading to a predicted T C up to 12 K. The electronic structure calculations have been performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) with projector augmented wave method The vacuum space of ∼ 15 Å is intercalated into interlamination to eliminate the interaction between layers. A 12 × 12 2D grid uniform is applied for both the k-points of the self-consistent and q-points of dynamical matrices calculations. The EPC calculation is estimated according to the Migdal-Eliashberg theory [α 2 F (ω)], which is given by 21 : where N (ε F ) is the electronic DOS at Fermi level, ω qν denotes phonon frequency of the νth phonon mode with wave vector q, and the phonon linewidth γ qν is defined by where ij denote indices of energy bands, Ω BZ is volume of Brillouin zone, ε ki and ε k+qj are eigenvalues of Kohn-Sham orbitals at given bands and wave vectors. The g k,qν is the EPC matrix element which can be determined self-consistently by the linear response theory, which describes the probability amplitude for scattering of an electron with a transfer of crystal momentum q, is determined by where M is the atomic mass, dVSCF dûqν measures the change of self-consistent potential induced by atomic displacement, ψ i,k and ψ i,k+q are Kohn-Sham orbitals. The EPC constant λ is obtained by summation over the first Brillouin zone or integration of the α 2 F (ω) in the q space where EPC constant λ qν for mode ν at wave vector q is defined by the integration To obtain accurate electron-phonon interaction matrices, a dense 36×36×1 grid is adopted for the EPC calculation. A. Unfunctionalized monolayer Mo2C The structure of unfunctionalized monolayer Mo 2 C is layered hexagonal with a space group of D 3d , and the stacking of the Mo-C-Mo is in the ABC-type along the hexagonal c axis (see Fig. The calculated band structures and density of states (DOS) are shown in Fig. Then the phonon properties and electron-phonon coupling are calculated. The SOC is not included in these calculations, considering its negligible effects on the Fermi surfaces. For monolayer Mo 2 C, the Raman modes can be decomposed as A 1 1g ⊕ 2E 1 g at the zone center (see Fig. The calculated phonon dispersions along major high symmetry lines and phonon densities of states (PDOS, F (ω)) for monolayer Mo 2 C are shown in Fig. No imaginary frequency exists in the full phonon spectra, indicating the dynamical stability of monolayer Mo 2 C. Meanwhile, the phonon behavior exhibits several remarkable characteristics. First, near the zone center, both the LA and TA branches are near linear while the ZA branch (out-of-plane acoustical mode) is quadratic. These characters reflect the nature of 2D sheet. In detail, the ZA phonon in 2D materials like graphene has a quadratic dispersion over a wide range of the 2D Brillouin zone ω ZA = a ZA q 2 , where a ZA is a positive constant and q is the 2D phonon wave vector. The similar conclusions are also found in monolayer black phosphorene where μ * is the Coulomb repulsion parameter and ω ln is the logarithmically averaged frequency. When taking a typical value μ * = 0.1, the estimated T C is about 5.9 K. In above study, it has been predict that pure monolayer Mo 2 C maybe a quasi-2D superconductor. However, in real situations, the functional group at surfaces of monolayer Mo 2 C are unavoidable considering its highly unsaturated surfaces. In fact, previous studies reported that monolayer Mo 2 C transforms from metal to semiconductor with F-and Cl-adsorption 10 , namely the Fand Cl-functionalized monolayer Mo 2 C could not be a superconductor. In the following, the changes of superconductivity by adsorbing various functional group will be studied, which may shed light to tuning the superconductivity of monolayer Mo 2 C in real experiments. Due to the full adsorption is more stable than the partial case 10 , the 1 × 1 Mo 2 C unit cell (u.c.) with two functional groups X (one on each surface), i.e. Mo 2 CX 2 , is adopted in our calculation. Four functional atoms (X=O, S, Se, and Br) are considered. Considering the symmetry, there are three mostly possible siteconfiguration for adsorption: AB-adsorption (Fig. For the AB-adsorption, one X atom is right above C layer, while another X is right below other side Mo. For the AC-adsorption, each X atom is right above/below other side Mo layer. For the BB-configuration, both two X atoms stand above/below the C site. The crystal structures are fully relaxed upon the absorptions, and the calculated lattice constant as well as total energy are listed in Table The electronic structures for Mo 2 CX 2 are calculated. Due to the unchanged symmetry of crystalline field, the splitting of Mo's d orbitals is similar to pristine monolayer Mo 2 C. Quantitatively, the absorption of X further raises the energy of doubly-degenerate d xz and d yz due to the strong hybridization with the p orbitals of X. In details, the on-site energy difference between d xz /d yz and d x 2 -y 2 /d xy is about 1.72, 0.99, 0.71, 0.21 eV for the O-, S-, Se-and Br-adsorption respectively, according to the MLWFs calculation. The lower of d xz /d yz orbitals can be also evidenced in the band structures of Mo 2 CX 2 , as shown in Fig. The calculated phonon dispersion along major high symmetry lines are shown in Fig. Our results for α 2 F (ω), F (ω) and PDOS of Mo 2 CX 2 are shown in Fig. In addition, we had tried the full -OH cover up Mo 2 C surfaces. However, even after the atomic relaxation, an imaginary frequency of phonon appears at the M point, implying unstable structure. Therefore, structural phase transition would appear which makes the problem more complicated. Thus, the decoration of OH group is beyond the current work and deserves individual studies in future. We have analyzed the electronic properties, the lattice dynamical properties, and superconductivity of monolayer Mo 2 C and its functionalized ones. Our calculations have confirmed the strong EPC in monolayer Mo 2 C, which may lead to superconductivity below 5.9 K. Even though, since the absorption of functional groups is unavoidable in real experiment, its superconductivity can be modified. Our calculation have found that for chalcogen functionalized monolayer Mo 2 C the superconductivity would be seriously suppressed (or even totally disappear). The most interesting prediction is that electronphonon coupling can be greatly enhanced in monolayer Mo 2 C by bromine absorbtion, and thus its corresponding superconductive T C may be pushed up to 12.8 K, suggesting that Mo 2 CBr 2 may be a good candidate as nanoscale superconductor.