The short coherence lengths characteristic of low-dimensional superconductors are associated with usefully high critical fields or temperatures. Unfortunately, such materials are often sensitive to disorder and suffer from phase fluctuations in the superconducting order parameter which diverge with temperature T, magnetic field H or current I. We propose an approach to overcome synthesis and fluctuation problems: building superconductors from inhomogeneous composites of nanofilaments. Macroscopic crystals of quasi-one-dimensional Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 featuring Na vacancy disorder (δ ≈ 0.2) are shown to behave as percolative networks of superconducting nanowires. Long range order is established via transverse coupling between individual one-dimensional filaments, yet phase coherence remains unstable to fluctuations and localization in the zero-(T,H,I) limit. However, a region of reentrant phase coherence develops upon raising (T,H,I). We attribute this phenomenon to an enhancement of the transverse coupling due to electron delocalization. Our observations of reentrant phase coherence coincide with a peak in the Josephson energy E J at non-zero (T,H,I), which we estimate using a simple analytical model for a disordered anisotropic superconductor. Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 is therefore a blueprint for a future generation of nanofilamentary superconductors with inbuilt resilience to phase fluctuations at elevated (T,H,I). be described as "quasi-one-dimensional" (q1D), since they exist in bulk macroscopic form yet exhibit an intense uniaxial anisotropy in their physical properties. Modulating the transverse (interfilamentary) coupling in these materials is of fundamental interest due to an expected dimensional crossover, whose impact on the electronic properties remains unclear. Although fabrication techniques for such nanofilamentary composites are in their infancy, we may hasten their development by studying quasi-one-dimensional (q1D) crystals featuring chainlike structures, which behave as weakly-coupled arrays of parallel nanowires. Within the superconducting phase, coupling between nanowires is expected to occur via the Josephson effect, i.e. phase-coherent Cooper pair tunnelling. The M 2 Mo 6 Se 6 family M ions are intercalated between the chains and act as a charge reservoir for a single 1D conduction band of predominant Mo d xz character. Transverse coupling occurs via the M ions and the electronic anisotropy may hence be tuned by selection of M. Furthermore, M 2 Mo 6 Se 6 crystals typically display small M ion deficiencies, In this work, we show that disordered single crystals of superconducting Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 display "reentrant" characteristics, where phase coherence is stabilized by an increased inter-filamentary coupling within a region of non-zero (T, H, I) phase space. The ability to control the transverse phase coherence by modulating (T, H, I) arises from the sensitivity of the inter-filamentary coupling to electron localization, which is gradually suppressed as (T, H, I) increase. Reentrant phase coherence is a highly desirable property, since maintaining phase stiffness Electronic and crystal structure of Na pling implies that any superconducting order parameter in this material will be highly anisotropic and exhibit a low phase stiffness. Secondly, the small Na atomic radius and elevated growth temperature (1750 • C) are expected to increase the Na ion mobility during crystal synthesis, resulting in a substantially larger Na deficiency than the usual ∼ 2.5 -5% observed in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 . We therefore synthesized a series of needle-like Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 single crystals with typical lengths 2-3 mm (see Methods for details). Synchrotron X-ray diffraction measurements indicate a typical 10% Na deficiency, i.e. δ ≈ 0.2, although the (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ crystal superstructure remains highly ordered. [A complete structural refinement is included in the Supporting Information.] The influence of the Na vacancy-induced disorder can clearly be seen in the electrical resistivity R(T, H, I), which rises due to localization at low temperature (Fig. We first demonstrate that Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 displays the 2-step transition outlined in Fig. ure However, 1D LAMH theory can only describe our data over a finite temperature range ∼ 0.4 K. As the temperature is reduced further, an anomaly appears in each R(T ) curve whose position is displaced to lower temperature as I increases. For I ≤ 0.1 mA, the LAMH regime in R(T ) is terminated by a sharp peak: this corresponds to a suppression of single-particle tunnelling between phase-incoherent superconducting filaments, followed by the onset of phase coherence (i.e. interchain Cooper pair tunnelling) at lower temperature. R(T ) subsequently forms a finite-resistance plateau instead of falling to zero, which we attribute to isolated barriers such as micro-cracks and twin boundaries separating macroscopic phase-coherent superconducting regions (SI sections IIID, VIII). Eventually R(T ) rises again as T → 0: this is the first experimental signature of reentrance. In contrast, for I > 0.1 mA the resistance begins to diverge from the LAMH model around T ∼ 1.8 K but continues to fall without forming a plateau, and eventually saturates with no upturn in the T → 0 limit. The sharp peak is smeared into a broad hump (Fig. Our electronic structure calculations predict that a 1D→q3D dimensional crossover for twoparticle hopping (i.e. Josephson coupling) should occur at temperature t 2 ⊥ /t // = 1.0 K (SI Section I). However, the anomaly in the R(T ) data and the deviation from LAMH fits suggest that transverse coupling develops at higher temperature 1.4 K T J 2.0 K. This increase in T J relative to our theoretical expectations may be attributed to two factors: firstly, any defects (including Na vacancies) strongly reduce the effective t // due to the ease of blocking electron motion along a single (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ filament. Although it may initially seem counter-intuitive for inter-chain defects to influence intra-chain transport, each Na vacancy not only removes one electron from the conduction band (which is predominantly of Mo d xz character), but also locally modifies the crystal field. In such intensely anisotropic materials, even minor crystal field inhomogeneities can lead to an enhanced back-scattering at low temperature. Interestingly, our experimental R(T ) and voltage-current V (I) data share all the features of the well-known Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition, which establishes long-range order in 2D materials. This suggests that an exponential divergence in the transverse phase correlation length occurs close to T J in q1D materials. The similarity between 2D systems exhibiting BKT transitions and q1D superconductors becomes apparent upon considering the phase of the order parameter on each 1D filament (Fig. Combining our LAMH fitting parameters and T J enables us to estimate a typical filament diameter ∼ 0.4-0.7 nm (SI section IV). This corresponds closely to the (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ chain diameter of 0.60 nm and the hexagonal lattice parameter a = 0.86 nm, indicating that single (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ chains behave as 1D superconducting nanowires. Our analysis also indicates that current flows inhomogeneously through Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 and is supported by simulations of a disordered q1D conductor with an anisotropic random resistor network (SI section V). We attribute the inhomogeneous flow to the enhanced influence of disorder in 1D materials: above T J , defects (e.g. Na vacancies) restrict transport along individual (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ chains, forcing the current to follow a highly percolative route. Aside from the 2-step 1D → q3D transition, the major feature of interest in Fig. Secondly, for T < 1 K the resistance falls as I rises. This indicates that elevated currents induce reentrant phase coherence even in the T → 0 limit. Thirdly, the resistance rises (signalling a loss of phase coherence) upon reducing the temperature for I ≤ 0.1 mA. Long range superconducting order is therefore only stable within a well-defined region of non-zero (T, I) phase space. To determine whether the phase coherence is also reentrant in magnetic fields, we measure the magnetotransport perpendicular and parallel to the c axis (Fig. A striking divergence of R(T ) is observed at low current for T 0.8 K and H ⊥ 2.5 T (Fig. The reentrance visible within our R(T ) data in Figs. We map the extent of phase coherence in Na In an inhomogeneous superconductor, reentrance may occur if the Josephson energy E J (T, H, I) rises with respect to the thermal energy k B T (or the Coulomb energy E C in granular materials). Let us now attempt to model the effects of localization on the transverse phase coherence. The (T, H, I) evolution of the inter-filamentary pair hopping energy cannot be determined experimentally: even if the transverse resistance R ⊥ (T, H, I) could be accurately measured (an extremely challenging task due to the crystal morphology, anisotropy and disorder), it would contain inseparable contributions from single-particle and pair hopping, and fall to zero (depriving us of information) upon establishing phase coherence. Instead, we estimate the (T, H, I) dependence of E J within an analytical framework originally proposed by Belevtsev et al. for inhomogeneous superconductors: 34 where R T is the resistance between superconducting filaments and is the pairing energy. For reentrant superconductivity, a peak is expected to form in E J at finite (T, H, I). Since tanh ( /2k B T ) falls monotonically to zero as (T, H, I) increase, a peak in E J at non-zero (T, H, I) can only develop if the drop in tanh ( /2k B T ) is initially compensated by a larger reduction in R T (see Fig. In the granular superconductors for which equation (??) was originally derived, the origins of this reduction are well understood. Energy levels in individual grains are quantized, creating an activation energy for electron transfer: R T therefore falls exponentially as T rises. Increasing I also reduces R T , since the associated increase in voltage diminishes the effective barrier height between grains. If R T furthermore exhibits negative magnetoresistance, then reentrance may occur upon raising T , H or I. Applying a similar scenario in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 , we extract E a (T, H) from R NS (T, H) and treat this term analogously to the granular activation energy discussed above. We do not consider any Coulomb contribution to the reentrance, since Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 is crystalline and R NS (T ) does not obey the Efros-Shklovskii hopping law Using a similar current dependence for the inter-filamentary electron transfer rate to that in granular superconductors (see SI Section VII), we may then utilize the framework of equation ?? to estimate the evolution of E J (T, H, I). Although we cannot calculate absolute values of E J (since several scaling parameters remain unknown), we may nevertheless establish the existence and location of any peaks in E J (T, H, I). The resultant curves are plotted above the corresponding R(T, H, I) data in Fig. This discrepancy between data and model is linked to the nature of the disorder-induced superconductorinsulator transition in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 . It is possible that the typical disorder level in our crystals is sub-critical, i.e. R(T = 0) ∞ and the q1D hopping model which reproduces our experimental R(T ) data (Fig. remains valid regardless of the zero-temperature state of Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 : equation (??) continues to yield values for T R (H, I) in good agreement with our experimental data, even as our calculated E J values become vanishingly small in the T → 0 limit. Upon increasing (T, H, I), the electrons are delocalized due to thermal activation, Zeeman level splitting and reduced barrier heights. Cooper pairs begin to tunnel between the (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ filaments and phase coherence is initially stabilized rather than destroyed (Fig. (due to the combination of a small density of states at the Fermi level and weak electron-phonon coupling), the electron delocalization mechanism responsible for reentrance remains active at tem-peratures at least an order of magnitude higher (see Fig. In addition to the transverse coupling detailed above, we cannot rule out some contribution from intra-filamentary defects -i.e. Josephson coupling across barriers cutting (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ chainsto the observed reentrance in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 . Such defects are certain to be present in our samples, and we believe that they share responsibility for the finite-resistance plateaus which form in R(T ) hancements in superconducting nanoparticles, Na 2 Mo 6 Se 6 precursor powder was prepared using a solid-state ion exchange reaction technique. Crystals were initially cleaned using sequential baths of hydrochloric acid, an ethanol/acetone mixture and distilled water. Subsequently, four Au pads of thickness 20 nm were sputter-deposited onto the surface, two at each end of the crystal (I +/-) and two closer to the centre (V +/-). Electrical contacts were made to these pads using 50 μm Au wire and Epotek E4110 Ag-loaded epoxy. Resistivity measurements were performed using a standard ac four-probe method (ν = 470 Hz) using two separate systems: a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) with a 14 T magnet and a cryogen-free dilution refrigerator equipped with a 9 T/4 T vector magnet. RF noise was removed from our measurement cables using ferrite filters prior to entering the dilution refrigerator. Inside the refrigerator, all signals were carried by stainless steel microcoaxial cables. To remove blackbody radiation, the cables were thermally anchored at numerous points (including the mixing chamber, i.e. the coldest part of the refrigerator) before reaching the sample. The standard inbuilt ac transport hardware was used in the PPMS, while R(T ) measurements in the dilution refrigerator were performed using a Keithley 6221 ac current source and a Stanford SRS830 lock-in amplifier. Both methods provided identical and reproducible data. Importantly, no phase shift was observed by the lock-in, implying that no extrinsic capacitive effects are present in our data. The V (I) curves in Fig. ( 3 and 0.6 mA. 2.5 K is the maximum temperature attainable in our dilution refrigerator; T ons = 2.7 K was determined using dR/dT | T ons = 0 from a separate measurement in another cryostat (see Fig. We define H c2 (T ) (and I c (T )) in this manner to consistently characterize the entire superconducting phase, since the error in T ons (H, I) is large for high (H, I). The dotted/dashed lines are fits representing upper/lower limits to H c2 (T, I low ). For H c2⊥ , the lower limit is defined by a WHH fit to the experimental data, while the upper limit assumes that H c2 (T ) remains linear at all temperatures, similar to a previous report for Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 . We have performed ab initio density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the electronic structure of stoichiometric Na 2 Mo 6 Se 6 , using the internal coordinates obtained from our X-ray structural refinement described in Sect. II and the full-potential linear augmentedplane-wave method. In the direction perpendicular to the chain, the dispersion is very small. From Fig. Note that w/W is not quite as tiny as t ⊥ /t since in the perpendicular direction there are 6 nearest-neighbor chains, but in the parallel direction only 2 nearestneighbor triangles. The tight-binding expression for the band dispersion is 5 : Here, in contrast to the convention used to define the molecular orbitals above, the cartesian xyz-system is global with y pointing between nearest-neighbor chains. With w/W being so small, the density of states (DoS) is simply N (E) = 1/W states per spin per M Mo 3 Se 3 , independently of w, E, and the M -stoichiometry, as long as the dispersion is linear and no other band conducts. In the rigid-band band picture, this is valid from approximately M 0.75 to M 1.05 . The measured Na content of our crystals (δ ∼ 0.2) lies comfortably within this range. For Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 and Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 , respectively, we therefore obtain N (E) = 0.135 and 0.166 states/(eV×spin×M Mo 3 Se 3 ). This bare DoS will be renormalized by electron-phonon and electron-electron interactions with a mass-enhancement factor 1 + λ. This can be obtained from the ratio between the experimental electronic specific heat coefficient γ and the bare DoS. In the absence of heat capacity data for Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 , we use data 3 from In 2 Mo 6 Se 6 and, assuming that the mass enhancement is the same for the two materials, we end up with an enhanced DoS of 0.17 states/(eV×spin×M Mo 3 Se 3 ) for Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 . For the present study, the most important parameters from the electronic structure are t and t ⊥ . Our calculated values (in • K) for the Na, K, Rb, In, and Tl chain compounds are given in Table These calculations provide a significant advance in understanding the superconducting transition in q1D materials. Specifically, the relative size of t ⊥ and t // deter- If we compare data from the literature in other q1D superconductors, we find that a crossover from single to 2-step transitions occurs at t 2 ⊥ /t // T P = 1. Here T P is the pairing temperature: in the absence of any pseudogap or other exotic effects, T P ≡ T c for a conventional superconductor, while T P ≡ T ons for a q1D material exhibiting a 2-step transition. This ratio is tabulated in the last column of Table To the best of our knowledge, M 2 Mo 6 Se 6 and Sc 3 CoC 4 are unique amongst q1D crystalline superconductors in possessing a sufficiently large electronic anisotropy to exhibit 2-step transitions. No calculations for the hopping integrals in Sc 3 CoC 4 exist in the literature and we were therefore unable to verify whether this material complies with our empirical criterion for the crossover. The key point which we wish to reinforce is that from a superconducting perspective, Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 , Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 and Sc 3 CoC 4 all remain one-dimensional until T < T J , upon which pairs of electrons may hop between filaments. The unique property which differentiates Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 from the other compounds is its propensity for intrinsic disorder, caused by the large Na vacancy population. It is this disorder which leads to the reentrant behavior in the inter-filamentary phase coherence which we observe. X-ray diffraction experiments were performed at the Swiss-Norwegian Beamlines (SNBL) of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (Grenoble, France) at the end station BM01A, using a PILATUS2M pixel area detector. Our refinement indicates a hexagonal lattice with space group P6 3 /m and parameters a = 8.65 Å, c = 4.49 Å at 293 K, with a minimum inter-chain Mo-Mo separation of 6.4 Å. This is in agreement with previous reports. The key result from our XRD experiments is the large Na deficiency observed in superconducting Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 : we measure δ = 0.2±0.036 for the crystal whose .cif file is attached, while similar crystals provided δ = 0.22±0.030 and δ = 0.26±0.08. The quality of the refinement can be quantified using a goodness of fit parameter χ f provided by SHELX, where χ f = 1 describes a flawless correspondence to the theoretical structure. We obtain χ f = 1.086, 1.160 and 1.351 respectively for the three crystals detailed above. It is therefore clear that although small variations may exist between crystals, the typical Na deficit is at least 10%. Crucially, we cannot detect any Mo or Se deficit, implying that the (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ chains remain highly structurally ordered. A. Estimating ξ(0) Before proceeding with any quantitative analysis of the superconducting transition in R(T ), we require an estimate of the coherence length ξ. We can of course use our experimentally-determined ξ // from our fits to the upper critical fields H c2//,⊥ in Fig. A superconductor lies in the dirty limit if l < ξ 0 , where l is the mean free path and ξ 0 is the clean limit coherence length. The substantial presence of Na vacancies suggests that Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 will fall into this category: to verify this, we evaluate l using 1/ρ = ne 2 l/ k F (where n = 3.13×10 21 cm -3 is the carrier density assuming 0.9e -/unit cell, i.e. δ =0.2) and ρ is the normal-state resistivity. To avoid any extraneous influence from localization, we use ρ(300 K) = 1.1×10 -6 Ωm, yielding l ∼ 8 nm. ξ 0 is calculated from the BCS relation ξ 0 = v F /1.76πk B T c , in which we set T c ≡ T ons and v F = dE/dk| kF ≡ 3.6 eV × c/π (from our band structure calculations). This yields ξ 0 397 nm l. The clean limit ξ 0 must therefore be replaced by the dirty limit ξ d = 0.85 √ lξ 0 and we hence obtain ξ d = 48.0 nm. Our experimentally-estimated ξ // = 14.4-21.0 nm lies below this BCS value, as expected for a short coherence length superconductor. In a 1D filament at temperature T < T ons (where T ons is the pairing temperature and hence corresponds to the onset of superconducting fluctuations), the superconducting order parameter may fluctuate to zero at certain points along the filament. This allows the phase to slip by 2π, creating a resistive state. A theory describing these thermally activated phase slips was originally developed by Langer, Ambegaokar, McCumber and Halperin (LAMH) where the attempt frequency is given by: and τ GL = [π /8k B (T ons -T )] is the Ginzburg-Landau relaxation time. Following a development of the energy barrier by Lau et al., where C is a dimensionless parameter relating the energy barrier for phase slips F to the thermal energy near T ons : Here R q = h/4e 2 = 6.45 kΩ is the resistance quantum for Cooper pairs and R NS the normal state resistance of the wire. We plot the temperature dependence of F and Ω in Figs. It is important to note that the peak emerging in R LAM H and R (Figs. At low currents I 0.1 mA, a sharp peak in R(T ) emerges at the lower boundary of the temperature range within which the LAMH model is valid (Fig. Figure Although Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transitions are generally considered to be a property of 2D materials, evidence for BKT-type behavior has been reported in experimental and numerical studies of q1D superconductors. Several unique electrical transport characteristics are observable at BKT transitions. Firstly, V (I) should exhibit power-law behavior with V ∝ I α(T ) , where α(T) is related to the superfluid density ρ s by α = 1 + πρ s 2 /4m e k B T . ρ s (and hence α) rises steeply in a "Nelson-Kosterlitz jump" at the BKT transition, Together, these characteristics enable the accurate determination of T BKT from transport experiments, as previously demonstrated in a range of 2D disorder and possible strong correlation effects. For comparison, Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 crystals consistently exhibit a lower (2.5-5%) Tl deficiency Given that exponential BKT-type scaling in R(T ) and LAMH phase slips may both contribute to R(T ) above T J , one might wonder why the exponential component is not obscured by phase slips. In Fig. The quasi-linear behavior exhibited by the LAMH model after Halperin-Nelson rescaling is a consequence of the duality between vortices in a BKT transition and phase slips in 1D. In fact, a chain of Josephson junctions (analogous to a 1D array of phase slips) may also undergo a zero-temperature transition of the BKT universality class. The results of our LAMH fitting procedure allow us to estimate the typical diameter d F of the superconducting filaments in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 . First, let us naively assume that current flows homogeneously through the crystal. By setting Lm = w (where w = 0.4 mm is the voltage contact separation) and using our experimental ξ // = 14-21 nm, we may deduce n (the number of filaments in a typical crystal cross-section) and hence estimate the filament diameter. For I = 1 μA, we obtain n = 3.5-2.3×10 6 and use the crystal cross-section A ∼ 8×10 -9 m 2 to deduce a maximum filament diameter d F = 54-66 nm. The diameter of a 1D superconducting filament must be smaller than its coherence length and so this figure is clearly far too large: we have overestimated d F due to the inhomogeneous current flow through the crystal. In such a strongly 1D material, defects will force charge transport to occur via a highly percolative route. The typical current-carrying fraction of the crystal crosssection will therefore be small ( A), leading to a considerable reduction in d F . (We will quantitatively justify the reduction in the current-carrying fraction in section V, in which we describe a random resistor network simulation which proves that the majority of the current is carried by a small fraction of isolated filaments.) To estimate the reduction in d F , we use our experimentally-estimated T J = 1.71 K to extract a Josephson energy 38 E J ≡ 2k B T J /π = 94 μeV, and hence an inter-filamentary critical current I f c ≡ 2eE J / = 46 nA. Defining a total critical current I c (T = 1.71K) = 1.2 mA from our V (I) data (see Fig. As we have demonstrated in section IV, the filamentary diameter d F which we extract from our LAMH fits is only physically meaningful if the current flows inhomogeneously through a Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 crystal. Here we justify this assertion of inhomogeneity by simulating the current flow through a q1D material using an anisotropic random resistor network (Fig. where σ ij ≡ 1/R ij are the conductances between nodes i and j, V i,j are the voltages at each node in the array, and we employ the boundary conditions V = 1 at the base of the array and V = 0 at the top. This creates a set of m×n coupled simultaneous equations, which we solve by matrix inversion. The results for a 120×120 array are shown in Fig. Although we attempted to thoroughly soak each end of the Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 crystals in epoxy, it was not possible to ensure that the ends of the crystal were uniformly coated with Au during the preceding sputtering procedure. Even small local variations in the contact resistance due to an inhomogeneous Au coating will accentuate the intrinsic inhomogeneity in the current flow due to onedimensionality and disorder, thus leading to the highly inhomogeneous current distribution which we infer from our measurements. We estimate the zero-temperature upper critical fields H c2⊥,// using the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) model: where t = T /T c , the Maki parameter α = -5.2758 × 10 -5 dHc2 dT Tc , the reduced magnetic field h = -(4/π 2 )H c2 / dHc2 dt t=1 and λ so is the spin-orbit coupling. Our fits yield 3.66 T ≤ H c2⊥ (0) ≤ 5.02 T and 15.7 T ≤ H c2// (0) ≤ 18.0 T. Within our experimentally-accessible field range, H c2 (T ) varies approximately linearly with temperature for both field orientations and so the values of λ so required to reproduce our data are unphysically large: λ so = 40 for H c2⊥ and 17 ≤ λ so ≤ 80 for H c2// . This suggests that orbital limiting may not be the principal factor contributing to the suppression of superconductivity. It is well known that multiband superconductors with at least one dirty band can exhibit linear H c2 (T ) behavior followed by an upturn at low temperature. In a generalized inhomogeneous superconductor, the Josephson coupling between phase-disparate superconducting islands can be expressed by: Here, R T = E a /e 2 ω T is the tunneling resistance between superconducting filaments with a characteristic tunnelling frequency ω T : where s is the barrier width, (φ -eV ) is the effective barrier height for tunnelling between filaments and A is a constant. In granular superconductors (for which these equations were originally derived), E a is a characteristic energy scale describing the quantized level mismatch and typical capacitive charging energy 2e 2 C of each superconducting grain. . R(H) at T = 1.8 K (below the onset of superconducting fluctuations) is plotted in Fig. In the absence of any capacitive effects in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 , we use the VRH activation energy E a (T, H) to evaluate E J in equations 8,9: To achieve the reentrant superconductivity which we observe as a function of temperature, current and magnetic field, peaks must develop in E J (T ),E J (H),E J (I) for non-zero T, H, I respectively. We consider these cases individually below. To evaluate E J (T ) we require the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap (T ) and the activation energy E a (T ) for electron transport between filaments. (T ) is obtained from a numerical solution of the s-wave BCS gap equation: where V kk is the pairing potential and |ε 2 k | + | 2 k | is the quasiparticle excitation energy. E a (T ) is evaluated using our experimentally-determined VRH parameters T 0 and d. We plot (T ) and R -1 T (T ) in Fig. Field The reentrant behavior which we observe in a magnetic field is perhaps the least obvious to predict, since at first glance there is no field-dependent term in equation 1 which will increase E J for non-zero field. However, we recall that strongly-localized electrons exhibit an exponentially large negative magnetoresistance. Within the VRH transport model, this can be expressed as a fielddependent localization temperature: We use our ρ(H) curve at T = 1.8 K (Fig. which we may rearrange and solve for T 0 (H). Substituting our numerical expression for T 0 (H) into equation 11, we obtain a field-dependent activation energy E a (H) which balances (H), the field dependence of the superconducting gap. (H) can be approximated as 52 : in which H c2 is determined from our WHH fits (Fig. (H) and R -1 T (H) are plotted in Fig. In a transport experiment, a voltage V must be applied for a current I to flow. For our crystals, the normalstate resistance is approximately Ohmic, i.e. V = IR NS where R ≈ 1Ω. This is justified by the linear I -V curves which we acquire in the normal state (Fig. Since we know neither the barrier height φ nor width s, calculating E J (I) is daunting and we are obliged to approximate heavily: for this reason, we do not provide any estimate of the error in E J (I). We start by exploiting the apparent analogy between the onset of phase coherence in our q1D crystals with 2D materials exhibiting BKT transitions, where E J = 2 π k B T BKT at T BKT . Setting T J ≡ T BKT = 1.71 K, we evaluate (T = T J ) and E a (T = T J ) using T 0 and d from our VRH fits, then substitute these numerical values into equation 8 (setting A=1), leaving us with 2mes 2 (φ-I) 2 = 775. Now we are finally forced to make an educated guess at the average barrier width: here we cannot simply assume that this is equivalent to the interchain separation ∼ 0.64 nm, since we must take into consideration the real-space decay of the amplitude of the localized electron wavefunctions. The effective barrier width therefore ranges from 0.64 nm up to the 1D localization length 53 ξ L ≡ 4/k B T 0 N 1D EF = 380 nm (where N EF = 1.07 × 10 28 J -1 m -1 is the 1D density of states, which we estimate using the experimentallydetermined 0.055 states eV -1 atom -1 for In 2 Mo 6 Se 6 ). The current dependence of the superconducting gap (I) is still an open question theoretically. However, we may derive an approximate relation using Ginzburg-Landau theory: where ψ is the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter and v s the superfluid velocity. We recall that the supercurrent density J s = 2en s v s , where the superfluid density n s = |ψ| 2 , i.e. J s varies linearly with v s (except close to J c ). ; to impose gap closure at I c we therefore approximate (I) using The similarity of this relation to the gap variation in a low-dimensional superconductor in a magnetic field (equation 15 above) should not be surprising, since if we disregard vortex penetration then the current-induced uniform magnetic field varies linearly with the applied current I. Very close to I c , equation 17 breaks down and the gap is expected to close more rapidly; however this occurs too late to have any effect on the peak formation in E J (I). We plot the resulting (I) and R -1 T (I) in Fig. Until now, we have focused on tuning the reentrant phase coherence by modulating (T, H, I), since these are the key parameters which will vary during practical applications of a nanofilamentary superconductor. It is also instructive to consider the effect of the disorder level on the reentrance, since future methods of synthesizing nanofilamentary superconductors are likely to enable some tuning of the eventual disorder. Reentrance in a less-disordered crystal The Na vacancies responsible for the disorder in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 form naturally due to the high crystal growth temperature (1750 • C) and we cannot precisely control their concentration. However, we may infer the resultant disorder level in our crystals using two parameters: the resistivity at room temperature ρ(300K) and the variable range hopping temperature T 0 which describes the normal-state divergence of ρ(T ) at low temperature. ρ(300K) and T 0 both rise with disorder. A detailed study of the evolution of the normal-state ρ(T ) and T ons , T J with disorder is beyond the scope of this work and will be published elsewhere. We therefore believe that reentrant phase coherence can persist in nanofilamentary superconductors as long as there is sufficient disorder to cause localization in the normal state (i.e. dR/dT < 0, dR/dH < 0). The reentrance threshold T R (H, I) will fall to zero as the disorder is reduced. In the weak disorder limit (where the normal state remains metallic), we expect behaviour simi- lar to that seen in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 , in which a 1D→q3D dimensional crossover occurs, 11 but no reentrance is observed. Deducing the origins of the finite-resistance plateau Data from this less-disordered crystal are also helpful to understand the origin of the finite-resistance plateau which forms in both crystals for I < 10μA. In Fig. Instead, we believe that this plateau originates from isolated cracks, twin boundaries or other large-scale extrinsic barriers which separate crystalline regions exhibiting transverse phase-coherence, i.e. long-range superconducting order. This is supported by the plateau resistance remaining approximately constant over a broad temperature range (> 1 K for I = 0.5μA in Fig. Regarding the possible role of other (non-Josephson) effects in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 , we note that the observation of reentrance in zero magnetic field (Figs. 2(a), 3(a), 4(a,b)) absolves exchange-field compensation, geometric vortex pinning, 55 Fermi surface reconstruction However, we do not exclude the presence of a FFLO phase at high fields in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 . The weak-limit BCS Pauli limit H P ≡ 1.84T ons = 5.0T: we observe reentrant phase coherence at H // = 8.5 T, considerably above H P (Fig. (35) J < T < T ons and phase coherence is only established below T J . So far, 2-step transitions have been reported only in Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 , Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 11 and Sc 3 CoC 4 . 12 Figure S 3: R(T ) data normalized to the normal-state resistance at Tons for currents varying from 1 μA to 0.6 mA. As I increases, the finite-resistance plateau vanishes and the peak terminating the 1D LAMH regime at higher temperature is gradually broadened into a hump.