We studied thermal and dynamic history effects in the vortex lattice (VL) near the order-disorder transition in clean NbSe2 single crystals. Comparing the evolution of the effective vortex pinning and the bulk VL structure, we observed metastable superheated and supercooled VL configurations that coexist with a hysteretic effective pinning response due to thermal cycling of the system. A novel scenario, governed by the interplay between (lower) elastic and (higher) plastic energy barriers, is proposed as an explanation for our observations: Plastic barriers, which prevent the annihilation or creation of topological defects, require dynamic assistance to be overcome and to achieve a stable VL at each temperature. Conversely, thermal hysteresis in the pining response is ascribed to low energy barriers, which inhibit rearrangement within a single VL correlation volume and are easily overcome as the relative strength of competing interactions changes with temperature. A wide variety of complex systems can be described as collectively interacting particles on random potential landscapes. Among others, vortices in type-II superconductors, 1 charge density waves, 2 electron crystals, In very low pinning materials, such as clean NbSe 2 single crystals, the BG phase is stable in a large region of the vortex field-temperature phase diagram. In our previous experiment, in-situ linear AC measurements revealed that configurations with intermediate degrees of disorder, created through different dynamic his-tories, display an intermediate effective pinning. This paper is organized as follows: In section II, an introduction to the experimental techniques and its relationship with the underlying VL properties is presented. In section III, some relevant technical details regarding experiments and samples are given. In section IV, results corresponding to the AC susceptibility VL pinning measurements and SANS structural observations are presented and discussed. Section V summarizes the conclusions. A. Linear AC susceptibility and the Campbell regime In order to investigate the spontaneous modification of VL pinning properties, a non-invasive experimental technique is imperative. An ideal way to measure the VL response in weak pinning type-II superconductors is by AC susceptibility restricted to the linear Campbell regime: where λ L is the London penetration depth, φ 0 = h/2e 2068 T nm 2 is the flux quantum and α L is the curvature of the effective mean pinning potential, also known as the Labusch constant. Since the real component of the AC susceptibility χ is determined by the experimental geometry and the dimensionless parameter λ R /D, with D a characteristic sample dimension, SANS is a non invasive technique suitable for probing magnetic structures at nanometric scales. Here, the incident neutrons' magnetic moment causes them to be diffracted by the magnetic field modulation due to the VL. Diffracted neutrons are collected using a positionsensitive detector, thus obtaining the scattered intensity distribution on the detector plane. For a perfectly regular hexagonal lattice with lattice parameter a 0 , reflections will take place only for scattering vectors Q 0 matching any of the reciprocal lattice vectors; thus first order Bragg peaks (BPs) will correspond to Q 0 = 4π a0 √ 3 . The scattering process is elastic and the scattering angle θ 0 , measured relative to the field direction, is given by Bragg's law: where K = 2π/λ N is the neutron wave vector corresponding to a wavelength λ N . Since Q 0 K, the scattering angle is small and sin θ 0 ≈ θ 0 . For an imperfect lattice with dislocations, spatial correlations decay exponentially beyond a characteristic length ζ associated with the spatial scale at which dislocations appear. where ξ is the superconducting coherence length and c is a heuristic factor. The modified London model has been successfully applied to fit experimental data corresponding to d-wave or multi-gap superconductors using c between 1/4 and 2. The study has been performed in clean NbSe 2 single crystals with T c ∼ 7.2 K, grown in Bell Labs as described elsewhere. Linear AC susceptibility experiments were performed using a home-made susceptometer based on the mutual inductance technique where both the AC and DC fields are parallel to the c axis of the sample. The susceptometer was installed in a bath He cryostat that allowed temperature regulation within ∆T 2 mK down to T min ∼ 4.3 K. In order to study thermal history effects throughout a wide range of temperatures, experiments were performed at a moderate DC field, H = 1 kOe. For all susceptibility measurements, AC field amplitudes were restricted to h AC < 10 mOe. Linear response and low dissipation, which are characteristic features of the linear Campbell regime, were verified. For some sequences, susceptibility measurements were interrupted at certain target temperatures to apply a shaking AC field. Here, 1000 cycles of a larger sinusoidal field with amplitude 5 Oe and frequency 1 kHz was applied before resuming linear susceptibility measurements. The SANS experiments were conducted using the D33 instrument at the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL). A. History effects in the effective pinning Linear AC susceptibility curves measured after different thermal and dynamic histories are shown in Figure Certain thermal protocols can also reduce effective pinning without any dynamic assistance. FIG. clear reduction of effective pinning with respect to the original FCC process. To what extent pinning is softened depends on the lowest temperature reached T min . For a clearer comparison among the various thermal histories, we define the height of the PE as where T po is the local maximum of χ (T ) (matching the onset of the PE) and T p , the local minimum (maximum effective pinning) when the PE is observed. In the inset of Figure B. History effects in the VL structure Thermal-history-dependent effective pinning has been ascribed to spontaneous VL ordering promoted by the faster strengthening of vortex-vortex interactions with respect to pinning forces as the system is cooled in the BG phase. If dislocations were removed as a result of thermal cycling, larger correlation lengths ζ due to a reduction of the VL dislocation density should be observed as narrower rocking curves (RCs). In Figure As explained in Sec. II B, measuring full RCs at higher temperatures was not feasible. Instead, I max (T ) was acquired at several temperatures for the various VL configurations (Figure the modified London model (Eq. 3 and red line in Figure Hysteretic responses in glasses are ascribed to energy barriers that may trap the system in metastable configurations. Our observations suggest that there are mainly two different types of energy barriers: 1) those that are easily overcome and vanish as the relative weight between competing interactions changes with temperature, and 2) those exceeding the available thermal energy and therefore requiring dynamical assistance to annihilate topological defects and drive the VL to the ordered Bragg glass phase at low temperature. These two kinds of energy barriers explain our results and reveal an interesting 6 . 8 0 6 . 8 5 6 . 9 0 6 . 9 5 -0 . 8 -0 . 7 -0 . 6 -0 . 5 -0 . 4 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 2 ) underlying physics. In a metastable VL, the size of the correlated volumes, determined by the dislocation density, are not drastically affected by the thermal history. However, at low temperature, elastic vortex-vortex interactions prevail over vortex-pinning interactions, producing short-range vortex accommodation inside each correlation volume. In this local reorganization, the VL overcomes lower energy barriers, leading to spontaneous local ordering. This subtle accommodation can drastically affect the VL effective pinning and, thus, linear AC response, but would not significantly affect the neutron scattering pattern. Results presented in Secs. IVA and IVB support the proposed scenario based on observations in extreme situations: the most ordered (BG) and the most disordered (FC) VL configurations. To further test the consistency of our picture, we analyzed the thermal cycling response of VL configurations initially stabilized with various intermediate dislocation densities. These configurations were prepared by shaking the system at various temperatures near T po , within the transitional region. Each intermediate cooling response depends on the shaking temperature. It is particularly interesting whether both kinds of barriers play an important role in the PE. The spontaneous VL disordering responsible for the increase in the effective pinning in the transitional region (sudden drop in χ (T ) above T po ) has been a subject of controversy for decades. The first simple explanation, given by Pippard, In order to clarify the spontaneous thermal disordering above T po , we conducted a systematic study of history effects in the AC response. The linear AC response recorded in various thermal cycles, each starting from an ordered VL, is shown in Figure Thermal history effects associated to the creation of dislocations are likely to become apparent at higher tem-peratures. Consequently, the memory of the dislocation density will be lost if the system is warmed beyond some characteristic temperature T * . The number of spontaneous dislocations (and disclinations) is expected to increase when approaching the disordered phase, We have studied thermal and dynamic history effects in the VL in clean NbSe 2 , inspecting the evolution of effective pinning by means of AC susceptibility techniques and observing the VL bulk structure in SANS experiments. The reported results suggest a novel scenario to describe the order-disorder transition and the Peak Effect anomaly. Additionally, the proposed framework helps to clarify the controversial relationship between the VL structure and effective pinning. In the proposed picture, the interplay between two different types of energy barriers is the origin of the history and memory effects in the effective pinning potential. On one hand, high plastic barriers impeding the annihilation or creation of topological defects, that would otherwise reduce the total VL energy, require dynamic assistance to be overcome. On the other hand, low elastic barriers prevent the VL from accommodating the pinning landscape at the local level. These barriers are easily overcome and vanish as the relative weight between competing interactions changes with temperature. This subtle elastic arrangement would favor the elastic vortex-vortex interaction at low temperatures and the vortex-pinning interaction in the transitional region. This constitutes the main ingredient for the spontaneous PE and the observed thermal hysteresis in the linear AC response. In our scenario, thermal history does not drastically affect the size of the correlated volumes, which is mainly determined by the mean dislocation density, but clearly affects vortex arrangements within the correlated volumes. This provides an explanation for different pinning intensities in configurations showing similar lowtemperature SANS rocking curves. Quenched disloca-tions in field cooling protocols are responsible for the wide RCs recorded in SANS experiments An important remark: When vortex displacements involve larger distances, dislocations are created, annihilated, and/or redistributed, erasing metastable configurations and its related memory effects. Hence, the proposed picture and its underlying physics cannot be ac-cessed through invasive techniques. This explains the disagreement between observations by linear AC susceptibility or ultrafast transport techniques and conventional transport experiments, in which VL self-reordering and edge contamination are also present. 