One of the biggest puzzles concerning the cuprate high temperature superconductors is what determines the maximum transition temperature (T c,max ), which varies from less than 30 K to above 130 K in different compounds. Despite this dramatic variation, a robust trend is that within each family, the double-layer compound always has higher T c,max than the single-layer counterpart. Here we use scanning tunneling microscopy to investigate the electronic structure of four cuprate parent compounds belonging to two different families. We find that within each family, the double layer compound has a much smaller charge transfer gap size (∆ CT ), indicating a clear anticorrelation between ∆ CT and T c,max . These results suggest that the charge transfer gap plays a key role in the superconducting physics of cuprates, which shed important new light on the high T c mechanism from doped Mott insulator perspective. Since the discovery of copper oxide (cuprate) high temperature superconductors about 30 years ago, understanding its microscopic origin has become one of the greatest challenges in condensed matter physics. The problem is well-defined, i.e., to find the mechanism of Cooper pairing for charge carriers residing in the two-dimensional CuO 2 plane that is common to all cuprates. However, after decades of experimental and theoretical investigations, very few consensuses have been reached First, the parent compound is an antiferromagnetic (AF) Mott insulator due to strong onsite Coulomb repulsion, and the long-range AF order is suppressed by hole doping. Second, the superconducting (SC) phase exists in a range of hole concentrations, and the T c,max is reached at optimal doping near the center of the dome. The definition and doping dependence of other phases, such as the pseudogap phase One of the central issues about the cuprates is what determines the T c,max of a specific system, which varies dramatically from 25 K to 138 K in ambient pressure It is highly desirable to find a direct connection between T c,max and the microscopic electronic structure, especially that of the parent compound from where superconductivity emerges. The most relevant bands of the cuprates derive from the Cu 3d x 2 -y 2 orbital and two O 2p orbitals in the CuO 2 plane In this paper we use scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) to investigate the CTG in four parent cuprates belonging to the Ca n+1 Cu n O 2n Cl 2 and Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca n-1 Cu n O 2n+4 families respectively. We found that within each family, the double-layer compound (n = 2) has much smaller Δ CT than that of the single-layer (n = 1) compound. The anticorrelation between ∆ CT and T c,max within each family suggests that the Mottness in parent cuprate plays a crucial role in determining the SC properties upon charge doping. In particular, reducing the electron correlation strength to the intermediate regime enhances superconductivity, which is consistent with the pairing mechanism based on the doped Mott insulator picture. For CCOC single crystals, polycrystalline samples are firstly synthesized by heating the powder mixture of CaO and CuCl 2 with a molar ratio of 2:1 at 1073 K for 24 h with intermediate grindings. Then they are heated to 1203 K at a ramp rate of 60 K/h and are kept there for 10 h. Finally, CCOC single crystals are obtained by cooling at a rate of 60 K/h down to room temperature. For 2-layer CCOC single crystals, the CaO, CuCl 2 and CuO powders are firstly mixed with a molar ratio of 3:1:1 and heated to 1223 K at a rate of 180 K/h and kept there for 24 h. The polycrystalline samples are obtained by cooling down to room temperature at a rate of 240 K/h. The 2-layer CCOC single crystals are then obtained with a similar approach as the CCOC, with the reaction temperature raised to 1373 K. High quality Bi-2201 and Bi-2212 single crystals are grown by the traveling solvent floating zone method The details of the STM experiments were described elsewhere The differential conductance (dI/dV) curves are obtained by using standard ac lock-in technique with a modulation frequency f = 423 Hz. two reasons why we choose to study these four cuprates. First, they can be cleaved easily between two van der Waals bonded neighboring layers, as indicated by the blue planes in Fig. For CCOC and 2-layer CCOC, pristine parent compounds can be grown by the flux method, and the former one has been investigated extensively as a prototypical Mott insulator The most prominent feature of the spectrum is a well-defined energy gap around the Fermi level (E F ), which is the CTG of this parent Mott insulator. To give a quantitative analysis of the gap size, we take the logarithm of dI/dV signal as shown in Fig. We then performed the same measurements on the 2-layer CCOC Mott insulator. The topographic image (taken with V = -3 V and I = 1 pA ) in Fig. Figure Because of the spatial inhomogeneities in these samples, the dI/dV curves exhibit more complicated behavior. On the Bi-2201 surface (Fig. The results shown above clearly demonstrate that within each cuprate family, the double-layer compound has much smaller CTG size than their single-layer counterpart. In Fig. The experimental trend observed here implies that the T c,max of a cuprate at optimal doping is related to the CTG size in its parent compound. This is very surprising because the latter is a much bigger characteristic energy as compared to the former, and the two regions are well-separated in the phase diagram. We propose that the anticorrelation between Δ CT and T c,max actually sheds important new lights on the mechanism of superconductivity in the cuprates. From the doped Mott insulator perspective, the superexchange coupling J between local moments is responsible for the spin singlet pairing However, if the CTG size is too large, it will weaken the pairing strength hence lowering the T c,max that can be achieved. We note that in Bi-2212, the highest T c cuprate studied here, the CTG size is merely 1.0 eV, putting it in the intermediately correlated regime. The next question is what factors determine the CTG size in the parent compound, which varies dramatically in the four samples studied here. Because the structure of a single CuO 2 plane is nearly the same in all cuprates, it is quite obvious that the out-of-plane environment is mainly responsible for the CTG size variations. As has been shown by first-principles calculations, a key factor is the negatively charged apical ions The main message revealed by the observed relationship between Δ CT and T c,max is that the fate of a particular cuprate family is encoded in its parent compound. This conclusion highlights the importance of Mottness in cuprate high temperature superconductors. Our experiments indicate that the parent CTG size is the most relevant energy scale for the origin of superconductivity. More importantly, Δ CT can be measured accurately by STM experiment, thus providing a stringent constraint on available theories. Moreover, the sensitivity of Δ CT to the out-of-plane environment suggests possible route to control Δ CT , and consequently T c,max 