We report on specific heat and magnetotransport measurements performed on superconducting Cu 10% TiSe 2 single crystals. We show that superconductivity persists in transport measurements up to magnetic fields H R well above the upper critical field H c2 deduced from the calorimetric measurements. Surprisingly this "surface" superconductivity is present for all magnetic field orientations, either parallel or perpendicular to the layers. For H ab, the temperature dependence of the H R /H c2 ratio can be well reproduced by solving the Ginzburg-Landau equations in presence of a surface layer with reduced superconducting properties. Unexpectedly this temperature dependence does not depend on the field orientation. It has been shown several decades ago that surface superconductivity can persist up to temperatures much larger than the bulk critical temperature in the presence of a magnetic field parallel to the sample surface Surface effects might also play a fundamental role in unconventional superconductors. Indeed, those materials naturally present layered structures. It has been suggested that a new type of superconductivity, called pair density wave In this paper we show some evidence for the presence of some puzzling surface superconductivity in the Cu 10% TiSe 2 dichalcogenide. 1T-TiSe 2 is an octahedrally coordinated dichalcogenide which exhibits a charge density wave (CDW) accompanied by a periodic lattice distortion below 200 K. Recent discoveries of chirality Single crystals of Cu x TiSe 2 were grown by mineralization. Stoichiometric amounts of Cu, Ti and Se powders were heated up to 650 o C in a quartz tube under vacuum. Sub-milimetric to milimetric hexagonal platelets, with thickness on the order of 20 μm, were obtained (see inset of figure Figure with H c2//ab ∼ 1.45 ± 0.05 T and H c2//c ∼ 0.85 ± 0.05 T (see dotted line in Fig. On the contrary the shape of the resistivity transition strongly depends on the field orientation. Indeed, as shown in Fig. with H c3 c ≈ H c2 ab ≈ H c3 ab /1.7 as suggested by D. Saint-James and P. G. De Gennes Figure Assuming that the system consists of two (semi-infinite) surface (S) and bulk (B) superconductors in contact (T S c < T B c ) one can solve the linearized Ginzburg-Landau equations in presence of a magnetic field parallel to the interface An estimation of γ from other techniques is then necessary in order to be conclusive on the surface superconducting properties. Note that band structure calculations of TiSe 2 slabs predict a small 10% decrease of the surface Ti 3d bandwidth with respect to the bulk It is worth noting that a very strong lock-in of the vortices along the ab-planes has been observed recently In summary, we have demonstrated through the comparison between specific heat and resistivity measurements the existence of surface (or interface) superconductivity in Cu 10% TiSe 2 single crystals. Surprisingly, this surface superconductivity is present for all magnetic field orientations either parallel or perpendicular to the layers. For H close to the ab-planes, the temperature dependence of the H R /H c2 ratio indicates the presence of surface (or interface) layers with depressed superconducting properties. The influence of those layers on the superconducting properties for H c deserves further theoretical and experimental works. R is surprisingly much larger than H c2 for θ → 0. Upper panel: angular dependence of the H R /H c2 ratio showing that this ratio only weakly depends on the field orientation in striking contrast with standard surface superconductivity (solid line). electrical resistance of the sample. A kink is then clearly visible in the R versus H curve and R only reaches its normal state value for H = H R >> H c2 (open squares and short solid lines in Fig.