We applied ab initio phonon analysis to layered titanium-oxypnictides, Na 2 Ti 2 Pn 2 O (Pn = As, Sb), and found a clear contrast between the cases with lighter/heavier pnictogen in comparisons with experiments. The result completely explains the experimental structure, C2/m for Pn = As, within the conventional electron-phonon framework, while there arise discrepancies when the pnictogen gets heavier, being in the same trend for the BaTi 2 Pn 2 O (Pn = As, Sb, Bi) case. The fact implies a systematic dependence on pnictogen to tune the mechanism of the phase transition and superconductivity from conventional to exotic. Recently discovered layered titanium-oxypnictides, ATi 2 Pn 2 O [A = Na 2 , Ba, (SrF) 2 , (SmO) 2 ; Pn = As, Sb, Bi] [ Examining whether the observed superlattices are explained by the conventional ab initio framework or not can provide a critical clue for the questions. For experimental side, Davies et al. All the calculations were done within DFT using GGA-PBE exchange-correlation functionals To deal with all the compounds systematically, we checked the convergence of plane-wave cutoff energies (E cut ), kmeshes, q-meshes, and smearing parameters. The most strict condition among the compounds was taken to achieve the convergence within ±1.0 mRy per formula unit in the ground state energy, resulting in E (WF) cut = 90 Ry for wavefunction and E (ρ) cut = 800 Ry for charge density. For undistorted Na 2 Ti 2 As 2 O and Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O, (6 × 6 × 6) k-meshes were used for the Brillouin-zone integration. Phonon dispersions were calculated on (6 × 6 × 6) q-meshes. For distorted Na 2 Ti 2 As 2 O (C2/m) and Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O (Cmce) superlattices, (4 × 4 × 4) kmeshes were used. For the distorted Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O superlattice, (4 × 4 × 4) q-meshes were used to calculate phonon dispersions. We also calculated a ground state energy of the experimentally observed Na 2 Ti 2 Sb 2 O (Cmcm) superlattice For Pn = Sb, we obtained phonon dispersions as shown in Fig. Putting the discrepancy for Pn = Sb aside for a while, we can provide a plausible explanation for the lattice instabilities as follows: The lattice instability mainly derives from in-plane Ti vibration. To make account for the inter-atomic forces to restore the lattice displacements, we can ignore (at least for the discussion of the instability) the contribution from Na because there are no bonds between Na and Ti (Fig. Getting back to the discrepancy, the present results confront the sharp contrast between Pn = As and Sb in terms of whether the conventional electron-phonon treatment for the phase transition works or not. Since it is clearly reported One of the possible mechanisms would be the spatial anisotropy introduced via spin-orbit couplings The trend in h above is again consistent with our previous study for BaTi 2 Pn 2 O (Pn = As, Sb, Bi), where we showed that the conventional electron-phonon framework could explain experiments only for Pn = As, but not for the other heavier Pn. , where E corr. and E ph. correspond to the typical energy scale of electronic correlations and electronphonon interaction, respectively. Though the superconductivities in BaTi 2 Pn 2 O (Pn = Sb, Bi) have been thought to be conventional BCS type We performed ab-initio phonon calculations for Na 2 Ti 2 Pn 2 O (Pn = As, Sb) to investigate if the experimentally observed superlattice peaks can be explained by negative frequency modes. For Pn = As, we obtained a C2/m (monoclinic No.12) superlattice that is completely consistent with the experimentally observed structure. The consistency indicates that simple electron-phonon interaction can explain the phase transition for Pn = As. On the other hand, we obtained a Cmce (orthorhombic No.64) superlattice for Pn = Sb that is inconsistent with the experimentally observed structure Cmcm (orthorhombic No.63). The discrepancy would be intrinsic so that it should be accounted for by those mechanism beyond electron-phonon interaction, such as strong electronic correlations. Such a discrepancy is also found in superconducting BaTi 2 Pn 2 O when the pnictogen gets heavier. These facts imply a systematic dependence on pnictogen to tune the mechanism of the phase transition and superconductivity from conventional to exotic. We described electronic structures for undistorted Na 2 Ti 2 Pn 2 O (Pn = As, Sb) structure in order to carefully examine the artifacts due to the choice of pseudo potentials (PP). The obtained electronic structures shown in Fig. 