Topological superconductivity is a state of matter that can host Majorana modes, the building blocks of a topological quantum computer. Many experimental platforms predicted to show such a topological state rely on proximity-induced superconductivity. However, accessing the topological properties requires an induced hard superconducting gap, which is challenging to achieve for most material systems. We have systematically studied how the interface between an InSb semiconductor nanowire and a NbTiN superconductor affects the induced superconducting properties. Step by step, we improve the homogeneity of the interface while ensuring a barrier-free electrical contact to the superconductor, and obtain a hard gap in the InSb nanowire. The magnetic field stability of NbTiN allows the InSb nanowire to maintain a hard gap and a supercurrent in the presence of magnetic fields (∼ 0.5 Tesla), a requirement for topological superconductivity in one-dimensional systems. Our study provides a guideline to induce superconductivity in various experimental platforms such as semiconductor nanowires, two dimensional electron gases and topological insulators, and holds relevance for topological superconductivity and quantum computation. A topological superconductor can host non-Abelian excitations, the so-called Majorana modes forming the basis of topological quantum computation. tivity. Here we engineer a high-quality interface between semiconducting InSb nanowires and superconducting NbTiN resulting in an induced hard gap in the nanowire by improving the homogeneity of the hybrid interface while ensuring a barrier-free electrical contact to the superconductor. Our transport studies and materials characterization demonstrate that surface cleaning dictates the structural and electronic properties of the InSb nanowires, and determines the induced superconductivity together with the wetting of the superconductor on the nanowire surface. We show that both the induced gap and the supercurrent in the nanowire withstands magnetic fields (∼ 0.5 Tesla), a requirement for topological superconductivity in one-dimensional systems. InSb nanowires have emerged as a promising platform for topological superconductivity Here we tackle the soft gap problem in InSb nanowire devices by focusing on the constituents of a hybrid device realization which are crucial for the interface. In general, realizing a hybrid device begins with surface preparation of the host material followed by the deposition of a superconductor. In host materials with low surface electron density or a small number of electronic subbands such as semiconductor nanowires, the correct surface preparation is of paramount importance to ensure a barrier-free coupling to the superconductor. Here we also adopt this procedure for our nanowires Figure We now turn our attention to the surface of InSb nanowires prior to superconductor deposition. To determine the effects of surface cleaning on transport, we characterized longchannel nanowire devices with ∼ 1 μm electrode separation where the channel surface is cleaned using different methods, along with control devices with pristine channels (details in the Supporting Information). TEM studies on the cleaned wire surface confirm this observation (Figure This indicates that a complete removal of the native oxide (∼ 3 nm) does not guarantee a barrier-free interface to the superconductor for InSb nanowires, which could be related to the surface depletion of InSb previously reported for a (110) surface, Next, we investigate the wetting of the superconductor on the nanowire surface. Figure Figure The devices prepared with sulfur cleaning and NbTi/NbTiN electrodes in Figure Finally we study the magnetic field response of the optimized hybrid devices combining sulfur cleaning followed by an in-situ low-power argon cleaning, and NbTi/NbTiN superconducting electrodes. Figure Fabrication details of the long-channel devices in Figure Measurement setup. All the data in this study is measured using RC, copper powder, and π filters thermalized at different temperatures. Differential conductance measurements are performed using standard ac lock-in techniques. Nanowire devices are kept in vacuum during low temperature measurements. Details of ensemble averaging. Conductance is averaged over different nanowire devices for each value of gate voltage. Devices within an ensemble are fabricated simultaneously on a single substrate, have identical geometries, and are measured during the same cool down. Extraction of contact resistance. We extract contact resistances by fitting the conductance measured as a function of gate voltage using the method described in Ref. S4. Here we leave the product of capacitance and mobility as a free fit parameter which is not taken into consideration. Discussion of the wetting layer. Throughout our study we have tried various etching techniques (HF, lactic acid, sulfur solution, He ion beam, Ar plasma) in combination with different contact materials (Ti, Al, V, Cr -evaporation; Al, NbTi, NbTiN, MoRe -sputtering). Our observations rule out a work function (W ) related explanation for the improvement due to inclusion of a wetting layer: Ti (W = 4.33 eV) 