Electrical characteristics are measured in submicron YBaCuO-normal metal point contacts with a direct conductivity. In a microwave field, such contacts reveal a nonstationary Josephson effect which can occur in the current concentration region not only in the initial weak bonds in YBaCuO but also the weak bonds of a phase-slip center type, formed as a result of a significant current injection (as well as a microwave field). The existence of internal weak bonds in the HTS-electrode contact area produces a narrow minimum in the differential resistance near zero biases. Moreover, the effect of magnetic flux quantization is observed for separate granules in magnetic fields stronger than the first critical field. The observation of quantum coherent effects in ordinary superconductors requires the presence of artificially prepared weak couplings like tunnel barriers, microconstrictions, and point contacts. The new metaloxide hightemperature superconductors are distinguished by the existence of weak couplings which are inherent in these materials. This makes it possible to observe quantum interference in bulk samples By subjecting the YBaCuO-Ag point contacts with a direct type conductivity to a microwave field, we have been able to observe the nonstationary Josephson effect in the form of strongly blurred Shapiro steps with an anomalously large period whose magnitude is mainly determined by the resistance of the normal bank. The Josephson effect could be observed not only in the initially existing weak couplings in YBaCuO, but also in weak couplings of the phase-slip center type which were produced by a significant current injection (and the microwave field). In magnetic fields stronger than the first critical field H c1 for granules, we also observed oscillations of the differential resistance of point contacts, produced apparently by the magnetic flux quantization at individual granules. In the course of our investigations, we studied the electrical characteristics I(V ) and dV /dI(V ) of submicron size pressure point contacts (PC) with a direct conductivity between the normal electrode (Ag or Fe) and the cleaved surface of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-y ceramic pellets prepared by cryo-chemical technology gap minima. For some contacts, the gap minima are preserved with increasing temperature right up to T ≈ 80 K, while for some other contacts these minima disappear at temperatures of about 20-30 K. At first, it was assumed that the existence of the central minimum is associated with the proximity effect, i.e., with the superconductivity induced in the N-electrode since the coherence length in YBaCuO, which is identified with the size of a Cooper pair, is much smaller than the size of the investigated contacts. However, such an assumption had to be rejected in view of the fact that this minimum is preserved even when a magnetic material (iron) is used for normal electrode (Fig. Figure The jump (∼ 0.2 Ω) in the differential resistance preceding the onset of oscillations can be estimated by a comparison of the curves 1-3 in Fig. Such a coincidence is a strong argument in favor of the Josephson nature of the oscillations (curves 2, 3 in Fig. A combined action of a microwave field and a constant magnetic field on the contact results in a different type of oscillations (curves 4-8 in Fig. It can be assumed that the emergence of the second type of oscillations (near V = 0) is not associated with the Josephson effect (as in the first case). If this were not so, the oscillation period would gradually approach the value δV = hω/2e 16 μV (for 7.5 GHz) as V → 0, which is not observed in actual practice. Since these oscillations completely disappear upon the introduction of a microwave field (curve 9), the formation of a chain of successive phase slip centers (PSC) under the action of a transport current observed by us in point contacts based on perfect YBaSrCuO single crystals We believe that the emergence of these oscillations can be associated with the magnetic flux quantization at the crystallographic objects in the vicinity of the point of contact between Ag and YBaCuO that are asymmetric relative to the current flow axis. Indeed, if the period of these oscillations is measured in units of voltage, we can use the IVC to express it in terms of the magnetic field generated by the transport current flowing through the contact. The approximate value of this period is estimated at several oersteds, which gives a value of quantization contour of several square microns. Electron micrographs reveal that most of the elongated granules which form this ceramic do possess such a cross-sectional area. Hence it can be concluded that flux quantization occurs at individual granules. By the way, the vortex nature of the observed effect is also indicated by an insufficient reproducibility of individual oscillations upon repeated recordings of the dV /dI(V ) dependences. The possibility of observing flux quantization in between the granules is ruled out for two reasons, viz., their considerably larger size than the theoretically calculated quantization area, and the magnetic fields much stronger than H c1 for granules required for observing such oscillations. The role of the magnetic field is apparently re-FIG. duced to the suppression of superconductivity at weak couplings between granules and to a transfer of the granules to the mixed state (H c1 for granules is of the order of several hundred oersteds). The microwave field apparently plays stabilizing and/or synchronizing role, ordering the passage of magnetic vortices into (or out of) the quantization contour. The YBaCuO-Ag contacts, in which the point of contact was formed on the S-electrode surface cleaved in liquid helium, reacted in a different manner to the microwave radiation (Fig. Similar oscillations of the differential resistance were observed by us earlier Note that the displacement of the region of onset of differential resistance oscillations of the second type towards higher voltages (Fig. Thus, it has been established in the present work that in the investigated contacts of YBaCuO-Ag type, the internal nonstationary Josephson effect may emerge on initial weak couplings in YBaCuO or on weak couplings of phase slip center type, formed under the effect of a considerable current injection (or microwave field). In addition, the magnetic field quantization effect has been observed in individual granules in the mixed state. *The effect of magnetic field on these contacts was not studied.