Two rings with currents ia and ib become magnets that can either attract or repel each other. If mechanical work is extracted from this ring system, either by bringing closer the rings during an attraction or by separating them as the result of a repulsion, the energy of the rings, the only existing source of energy in the system, decreases: If an energy either of attraction or repulsion is communicated to the system, (working against the forces) its energy increases, i.e. the currents in the rings increase. This happens because the currents existing in the rings are free, i.e. not linked to any device which imposes a current (power supply, constant current). Similarly, the effect of electromagnetic induction can increase or decrease the currents with the corresponding mechanical work linked to these developments. Not only does the current in the rings decrease as they get closer during the attraction, but it also can be cancelled and, if the effect continues, it may even change its direction. An application that already exists is the levitation train. It is attracted by the rail and held on it, but if it is very close to this due to the weight of the goods a strong repulsion (levitation) occurs. Another application would be the accumulation of energy in these rings, where they can spend large amounts of current, not only because of its high critical currents but also by the fact that the magnetic flux remains constant, cannot increase. Another advantage in this storage system is its complete reversibility in the exchange of electromagnetic energy and mechanical work. In the energy storage system, the greater the current flowing through the ring, the greater its energy is (1⁄2 LI 2 ). For the storage of important amounts of energy, a high current (I) is required. In order to attain this, there has been made a study of the ideal conditions (whether of attraction or repulsion) to store as much energy as possible. The higher t h e difference between initials currents, the higher difference between the magnetic forces of attraction and repulsion is. The mechanical work done in attraction (during an approach) reduces the magnetic energy into the ring and increases it in repulsion. The curves F(x) for attraction and repulsion are not symmetric. The experiences carried out so far have proved the feasibility of a scheme based on superconducting ceramic rings, which would allow the reversible conversion of mechanical work into electromagnetic energy to be stored in the rings as superconducting permanents currents. The samples are made by the crystallization process "Top seeding melt grown". The seed is a Sm Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7 introduced into the fluid of Y Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7 , whose melting point is higher than the YBCO and thus remains solid crystal driving the crystal growth during the slow cooling of YBCO. In the crystal lattice the green phase of YBCO and other types of doping are injected. During crystallization the formation of lattice defects (pinning) is favored to increase the amount of current. At the same time this method allows us that all the magnetic flux from the field is trapped by this material and behaves as a pure electrical conductor without Meissner effect. This simplifies the calculations of distribution of the permanent current to flow through the ring. Here the only property that has the superconducting ring is their zero electrical resistance In this work have been studied interactions between superconducting rings made of YBaCuO, in order to explore the feasibility of a system for storing energy coming from mechanical work. This mechanical work is converted into electromagnetic energy in the form of permanent currents in the rings. The process is reversed to return reversibly again electromagnetic energy as mechanical work by the forces of attraction (or repulsion) between the loaded rings. For this experiment confronted two of these superconducting rings and measured the attractive and repulsive force between them as function of its separation x. The Faraday-Lenz Law (from now FLL) explains how a magnetic flux that goes through a closed current circuit acts over it. That is we will use to explain how bulk, ring shaped, superconductors interacts with each other when they have currents circulating through them. Attending to the FLL, the flux passing through a ring can be written a s : As we are talking about superconductors, we assume that R=0. Therefore we have, This implies that φ ( t ) = constant, the magnetic flux remains constant in this case. Consider a bulk YBaCuO ring called 'a' and another called 'b' which can move only vertically over a line passing through their center of symmetry as seen in figure1. At the beginning we have two bulk superconducting rings 'a' and 'b' with an initial flux φ a and φ b , i a and i b are the initials currents lower than critical currents. Initial flux in a: (3) If we approach sample 'b' to sample 'a' the magnetic fields will interact in attractive or repulsive way depending the faces we confront. Φ=φ a -φ b repulsion (4) Where φ a and φ b are the magnetic flux for 'a' and 'b' respectively. The magnetic flux in 'a' will be affected by 'b' and the flux in 'b' will be affected by 'a' too. This means that the final flux in 'a' and 'b' will be: The aim of the experiment is to measure the repulsion and attraction forces between two ring shaped superconductors by putting one above the other. Samples were induced previously at constant field cooling with closed core To measure the interaction forces between the induced rings we used a balance In every moment we kept submerged both rings in liquid nitrogen to ensure the superconducting state and avoid current losses. The sample at the bottom of the cryostat was fixed deep inside and does not move at all. The other one was attached to the end of a piston rod which moves from top to bottom over the sample, as shown in figure We measure the weight in the balance each time we approach the sample at the end of the piston to the bottom of the cryostat in which center were placed the fixed sample. The sample at the end of the piston rod approaches to the minimum distance of 10.5mm taking measurement from the balance each 0.5mm. Once the samples were separated at the minimum distance, the piston was moved up to the maximum separation distance of 30.5mm. Each time we measured at a fixed step and at regular time periods in order to replicate easily each time we measure. In this context the forces which we consider involved are, Cryostat weight (F C) Liquid nitrogen weight (F LN ) Arquimedes push (F Arq ) Magnetic force (F mag ) The weight registered in the balance is the sum of all these effects. Therefore, we need to isolate the magnetic force from the other contributions. Instead of this we isolated the other contributions from the magnetic forces making measurements with only the sample at the bottom of the cryostat and at the end of the piston we placed a nylon disc to avoid any magnetic interaction. Here we had all contributions except the contribution due to the magnetic force. We have then, As we made the measurement process ensuring repeatability, the only we had to do was, Doing this for all measurements we obtain the magnetic force F mag. In order to verify experimentally the decrease in I during the attraction and the increase in I during the repulsion, we use the experimental measurement of the force versus distance F(x); the force can be expressed by the equation ( The absolute value F(x) increases, as x decreases, but at the same time the value of I a (I b ) decreases during the attraction and increases during the repulsion. In an attraction, as the absolute value of F(x) increases, due to the decrease in x, there decreases the current I as well (see equation ( To highlight the decrease in current during the attraction, see Ec.7, choose a large initial current i a for the final current I b a change of sign appears. i a = 5551 A, i b = 238 A. Now, in Figures. To show the inertia that has an electromagnetic induction between two samples two measurements are made, a measure consists of a separation between the two samples and the other an approximation between them. We started approaching one ring to another, and then distancing. It may be a delay in establishing the final current On the circumference of a ring, E = V / (2π R). For a charge q that is on the circumference, F = q E, F = q V / (2π R). Measurements show that magnetic forces F mag are proportional to the product of the induced current in both samples (I a •I b ), and it decreases as separation distance increases ( We made measurements pairing P1-P2, P1-P3 and P4-P5. Current in P1 is 23 times higher than in P2 and 3.5 times higher than in P3. The induced current in P4 is about 1.37 times higher than in P5. The results can be seen in Figures 9, 10 and 11 By measuring the magnetic interaction forces with the distance we found that the induced current decreases in both samples during the magnetic attraction and increases during the magnetic repulsion Charge carriers in superconductors are not affected by thermal agitation. Then, they are able to move along the crystalline net without interacting with any ion pinned in the net and without any resistance to its movement. Such charge carriers act like they were independent and moves from a nuclei to another one without getting disturbance by any of them. The other particles jointed to the nuclei take part in thermal agitation, even the nuclei. In figure The difference between repulsion forces F R and attraction forces F A are, ( ) Where f(x) ≥ x 2 . This difference is always positive and increases as increases M (decreases distance) as we saw in equations ( As the difference between initial currents i a and i b are too high in figure In a uniform field (∂H/∂x = 0) the force is zero The work made by these magnetic forces is, 4-Application to the levitation train. The attraction and repulsion between two rings with free currents is not quite the same as the attraction and repulsion between two magnets. While in magnets the magnetic moments are fixed, in ferromagnetic materials, the domains may experience either an orientation or a disorientation. In magnets the orientation of the domains is fixed and has got a single direction, but in ferromagnetic materials the domains are generally disorientated. In the presence of a magnetic field, the flux tubes of the field generate vortices in a superconductor. If the superconductor is massive, there is nothing but vortices; if the superconductor has a hole in its center, there may be currents too, provided that Ampere's circuital law can be established around the hole, In a ferromagnetic material, the magnetic field orientates the domains in its direction. As the field increases, both the vortices and the domains come closer and closer to its direction. Between the source of the field and the sample there occurs an attraction, that is, both of them show a resistance to separating. If the superconductor is separated from the magnetic field, the currents increase (that is, the rotation of the vortices increases in speed), and, vice-versa, if the superconductor comes close to the magnetic field, the rotation of the vortices decreases in speed; if it continues to approach the field, (that is, if the field continues to increase at the level of the superconductor), this decrease eventually brings the rotation to a full stop and reverses its direction, so that the former attraction between the rings becomes now a repulsion (Faraday-Lenz law). In the presence of a magnetic field, the superconductor behaves as a ferromagnetic material, except that, instead of being there any rigid domains, in this case, there are vortices. The charge carriers are free and must satisfy the condition R = 0 (that is, constant flux). The interaction between a magnetic field and a superconductor applicable to the levitation train is the following: Starting from a fixed point of magnetization in the superconductor, that is, a point on the rail, any separation from the rail causes an attraction between them, while approaching the rail causes a repulsion, that is, the train never touches the rail, but, since experiencing, at the same time, an attraction to it, remains over it. In the figure In all experiments of interaction between two rings there can be observed the tendency to an exponential increase in the forces, as the rings approach each other, during the repulsion. Let us see what happens theoretically, Equations. ( (Attraction) Eq.( While, during the attraction, both currents and forces tend to a constant finite value (i/2), during the repulsion, both of them increase as far as reaching very high values. In conclusion, the repulsion has to be used, in order to store bigger amounts of energy. In a superconducting ring it may be observed both a slowdown and a change of direction of the current, but in a ferromagnetic material where the movements of the charge carriers behave like superconductors, currents come from ferromagnetic domains. But what happens when the movement of the currents comes to a stop or slow down? Pierre Weiss has supposed that the domains are magnetized to saturation; they are orientated so that the magnetic field is cancelled on the outside. Their effects may only be observed, if a magnetic field is capable of orientating the domains in a single direction. For this saturated magnetization, the charge carriers, that have got a mass as well, are supposed to exchange their energy with the inner energy of the medium until they reach an equilibrium with this medium, that is, the same temperature. But what happens when the energy of the domains decreases as a result of a mechanical work that leaves its system? In all possible oscillations of energy that our sample may undergo, there is only one source that can either absorb or loose energy: the inner energy of the medium where the sample is. These possible developments of ferromagnetic domains are now being researched by our team.. Circulating currents into the samples could be braked (or increased) by an inductive e.m.f. which acts over the charge carriers. This takes place because the mutual induction M acts as a vehicle for the induction between the samples. The attractive (or repulsive) mechanic work Fdx represents the energy lost (or gained) by charge carriers which are present in both rings, where the decreasing (or increasing) energy are determined by Idφ. The results attained in this work prove the feasibility of a system for storing in superconducting rings energy resulting from mechanical work and its subsequent reversibility (into its former state). This procedure has two advantages over the SMES of superconducting coils: the magnetic flux in the rings remains constant during the whole process and, as a result, there is no decrease in critical current. The only forces found in the operations of loading and unloading would be those of compression. The energy stored by the two rings in question is represented by the area under the curve and the x axis ( Fdx). In Ec.8 (repulsion) we note that the values of I become very large when the mutual inductance M approaches the values of L (self-induction).(It can be seen that the repulsion curves can store much more energy that the attraction curves would).