Motivated by the spin-triplet superconductor Sr2RuO4, the thermal Hall conductivity is investigated for several pairing symmetries with broken time-reversal symmetry. In the chiral p-wave phase with a fully opened quasiparticle excitation gap, the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity has a temperature linear term associated with the topological property directly, and an exponential term, which shows a drastic change around the Lifshitz transition. Examining f -wave states as alternative candidates with d = ∆0 ẑ(k 2 x -k 2 y )(kx ± iky) and d = ∆0 ẑkxky(kx ± iky) with gapless quasiparticle excitations, we study the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity, where for the former state the thermal Hall conductivity has a quadratic dependence on temperature, originating from the linear dispersions, in addition to linear and exponential behavior. The obtained result may enable us to distinguish between the chiral p-wave and f -wave states in Sr2RuO4. The transition metal oxide Sr 2 RuO 4 where η = ±1 represents the chirality corresponding to the sign of an orbital angular momentum L z = ±1 along the z axis. This is a two-dimensional analog of the Anderson-Brinkman-Morel (ABM) state of superfluid 3 He. Since Sr 2 RuO 4 has a strong two-dimensional structure, the chiral p-wave state has a nodeless quasiparticle excitation gap, and the topological property is characterized by the so-called Chern number. On the other hand, the following order parameters with the f x 2 -y 2 -wave and the f xy -wave symmetries where there exist line nodes along Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), de Haas-van Alphen measurement studies In the chiral p-wave phase, while the chiral edge current expected theoretically The low-energy properties including the topological aspect in the f -wave phases are different from that in the chiral p-wave phase, which is strongly reflected in the thermal Hall conductivity. Thus in this paper, we will investigate the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity for the f x 2 -y 2 -wave and the f xy -wave states in addition to the chiral p-wave state, which may give us information concerning the distinction between the chiral p-wave and the other f -wave phases. The holelike α and the electronlike β bands have nearly one-dimensional character and their net Chern numbers cancel to zero making them insensitive to the Lifshitz transition Since the thermal Hall conductivity is closely related to the topological aspect in the spin-triplet superconducting phase with broken time-reversal symmetry, we focus on the γ band for simplicity. By means of the single band tight-binding model on the two-dimensional square lattice, the following Bogoliubov de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is introduced as where c kσ is the annihilation operator of an electron with wave vector k[= (k x , k y )] and spin σ(=↑, ↓). ε k and ∆ k are the energy dispersion of electrons in the normal phase and the gap function, respectively, written as and where t (t ′ ) stands for the hopping amplitude between nearest-neighbor (next-nearest-neighbor) sites. μ denotes the chemical potential and ∆ is a superconducting gap amplitude. Figure Diagonalizing Eq. (3), we obtain the quasiparticle energy where the line nodes in the f -wave phases generate the gapless excitations. At the van Hove points k = (π, 0) and k = (0, π), the gap functions vanish for all pairings in Eq. ( We now discuss the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity, using the model parameters t ′ = 0.35t and ∆ = 0.1t, and assume the chirality with η = +1. We first study the density of states (DOS) and the quasiparticle energy dispersions around the gapless points for the f -wave phases, where the excitation gaps vanish at k = k 0 [≡ (k 0 , k 0 )] in the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phase, and at ) in the f xy -wave phase, which are given by Figure In the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phase the lowest order with respect to the q ≡ kk 0 in the energy dispersions reads where θ represents an angular dependence of wave vector q and q ≡ |kk 0 |. Thus, E k± has a linear dispersion for all directions around k = k 0 , which leads to a linear DOS at ε ∼ 0, as shown in Fig. On the other hand, the f xy -wave state has a more complicated dispersion relation. In particular, along the k x or k y direction, the energy dispersions for μ < μ c are given by with q = (q x , q y ) ≡ kk 1 . For μ > μ c case, a similar behavior is obtained. Because of the contribution from the q 2 y term the finite DOS appears around ε = 0 (Fig. We consider now the energy dispersion of a ribbon with open boundary conditions in the y-direction, while keeping translation invariance along x-direction, which leads to edge states related to the bulk topological properties due to the bulk-edge correspondence Linear dispersions for edge states appear in the chiral p-wave phase at k = 0 (μ = 1.3t) and k = π (μ = 1.5t), respectively, whereby the crossing point at ε = 0 jumps when passing through the Lifshitz transition. Due to the full excitation gap, these edge states are topologically protected and robust against temperature effect and disorders. While there exist similar edge states for the f x 2 -y 2wave phase, the bulk superconducting excitation gaps vanish at k = k 0 ∼ ±0.6π. For the f xy -wave phase, edge states with crossing ε = 0 appear at k = 0, k 1 (μ = 1.3t) and k = k 2 , π (μ = 1.5t), where the bulk gap vanishes too. The non-trivial topology of the superconducting states is captured through the Chern number. The formula is given by where M stands for the number of sites and u kn is the periodic part of the Bloch wave function of the BdG equations. The matrix element J μ k is formally defined like a current (= ∂H k /∂k μ ), and f (E kn ) is the Fermidistribution function. For the materials with a nodeless insulating or superconducting gap, the Chern number is an integer. In order to avoid a divergence, a very small imaginary constant iξ is introduced in the denominator of the integrand as follows, (E kn - shows the discontinuous change at μ = μ c for the chiral p-wave and the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phases, which indicates that the topological property changes concomitantly with the Lifshitz transition. The magnitude of the Chern number with integer corresponds to the number of linearly dispersing edge states due to the bulk-edge correspondence, which is consistent with the energy dispersions in Fig. The Chern number in the f xy -wave phase is sensitive to the magnitude of ξ and moves toward integer upon decreasing ξ except for μ ∼ μ c . However, in contrast to the chiral p-wave and the f x 2 -y 2 -wave cases, the Chern number deviates from integer over a wider range and changes smoothly around μ = μ c with ξ = 0, even at vanishing temperature, which indicates that edge states are fragile due to the finite DOS at ε ∼ 0 resulting from q 2 y terms in Eq. In this subsection we discuss the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity. The formula in a spin-triplet superconductor with broken time-reversal symmetry is given by where f ′ (ε) denotes the derivative of the Fermidistribution function. The treatment of the numerical calculation is the same as that of the Chern number. In the low-temperature limit, the thermal Hall conductivity for the topological superconductors becomes linear in temperature as The temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity κ xy is depicted in Fig. Next, let us consider the structure of Λ(ε) which determines the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity, depicted in Fig. With increasing |ε|, Λ(ε) reveals a bending at the characteristic energy defined as ε 0 , which corresponds to a minimum gap (pseudogap) near the van Hove points in the quasiparticle DOS for the chiral p-wave (f x 2 -y 2 -wave) state In comparison to the chiral p-wave and the f x 2 -y 2wave phases, the central peak of Λ(ε) in the low-energy region for the f xy -wave state is smaller and much narrower, so that the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity becomes less sensitive to the tuning of the chemical potential. Note that the constant ξ is irrelevant to the temperature dependence of κ xy because κ xy vanishes at T → 0 and the contribution of the narrow central peak of Λ(ε) to κ xy is small at T > 0. Λ(ε) for the f x 2 -y 2 -wave state in the low-energy region has a linear slope, which can be represented analytically as This formula is obtained by means of the expansion in a power series with respect to wave vector around the gapless points [k = (k 0 , k 0 )] in Eq. ( For an illustrative analysis of temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity, we use a following function Λ(ε) for the chiral p-wave and the f x 2 -y 2 -wave states instead of the exact Λ(ε) Substituting Eqs. ( where ζ(s) is the Riemann ζ function with ζ(3) ≈ 1.202. this analysis, the thermal Hall conductivity is expected to be composed of the T -linear term and an exponentially small correction in the chiral p-wave phase. In addition to the contribution from these terms, a quadratic term in temperature κ Q xy appears in the f x 2 -y 2wave phase. While the thermal Hall conductivity deviates from the T -linear term monotonically with increasing temperature in the chiral p-wave phase, in the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phase we find a non-monotonic behavior due to the T 2 term (κ Q xy ) resulting from the linear dispersions around the gapless points for μ < μ c . The schematic behavior is depicted in Fig. In the case of μ > μ c , since the sign of N C is different from that of α, the thermal Hall conductivity shows similar temperature dependence in both the chiral p-wave and the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phases. In comparison with the chiral p-wave phase, however, a rapid deviation from the T -linear term occurs for the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phase due to the contribution from the T 2 term. Note that we consider here the chirality η = +1 case, and the thermal Hall conductivity with η = -1 leads merely to the sign inversion of that with η = +1. Thus, deviations from the T -linear term are expected to show the exponential and the T 2 behaviors in the lowtemperature region for the chiral p-wave and the f x 2 -y 2wave phases, respectively. Figure With further increasing temperature in the f x 2 -y 2wave phase, the exponential term becomes dominant in the thermal Hall conductivity, which is well described as T . Thus δ ′ obtained by the Arrhenius fit reproduces the pseudogap amplitude ε 0 . We stress that in particular, the chemical potential of the bulk Sr 2 RuO 4 is expected to be slightly smaller than μ c , and the deviation from the T -linear term (κ xy -κ L xy ) for μ < μ c shows a clear difference between the chiral pwave and the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phases. This result may enable us to distinguish the pairing symmetries in Sr 2 RuO 4 . We have investigated the temperature dependence of the thermal Hall conductivity in the spin-triplet superconducting states with broken time-reversal symmetry. By means of the two-dimensional tight-binding model describing the γ band, we calculate the thermal Hall conductivity for the chiral p-wave state and the f -wave (f x 2 -y 2 and f xy ) states. Since the former has a nodeless superconducting gap, the topological properties emerge clearly even in the finite temperature region, and the Chern number changes concomitantly with the Lifshitz transition. The two f -wave phases have nodes in the gap functions yielding gapless excitations. While the f x 2 -y 2wave state possesses linear dispersions around the gapless points in the bulk system, the Chern number becomes integer only at absolute zero temperature. On the other hand, in the f xy -wave phase a finite DOS at ǫ ∼ 0 exists, originating from the quadratic dispersion with respect to wave vector around the gapless points. Here the Chern number deviates from integer even at absolute zero temperature. In the topological superconducting phase, it is well known that a T -linear term proportional to the Chern number appears in the thermal Hall conductivity. In the chiral p-wave and the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phases the thermal Hall conductivity changes drastically due to the sign switching of the Chern number around the Lifshitz transition. Compared with these pairing phases, the thermal Hall conductivity in the f xy -wave phase is essentially insensitive to the topological properties and the change of the Fermi surface topology. While the thermal Hall conductivity in the chiral pwave phase consists of the temperature linear and the exponential correction term, the f x 2 -y 2 -wave phase lead to a quadratic correction term with respect to temperature due to the linear dispersions. The coefficient of the quadratic term is not connected with the topological character and the Lifshitz transition, but the band structure around the gapless points. Thus, since the sign of the coefficient corresponds to that of the Chern number in the parameter region of Sr 2 RuO 4 , the thermal Hall conductivity shows obviously different behavior for the chiral p-wave state and the f x 2 -y 2 -wave states in the low-temperature region. It is important to notice that although both f -wave states are "nodal" superconductors, the position of the nodes within the Brillouin zone has a strong influence on the low-energy quasiparticle spectrum and the low-temperature behavior, not only for the thermal Hall effect, but also for other quantities such as the specific heat or the London penetration depth. This result may help to distinguish different chiral pairing states. The contributions from other types of bands, such as the α and β bands, whose Fermi surfaces are more removed from the van Hove points, are not taken into account in the present study. The f x 2 -y 2 -wave state would give rise to the gapless excitations on those bands, which may generate a power-law behavior in the temperature dependencs for the thermal Hall conductivity in contrast to the chiral p-wave phase. This multi-band effect is an interesting open problem to be addressed in the future. (A.3) Finally, we obtain Eqs. ( 