We calculate the admittance of two types of Josephson weak links-the first is a one-dimensional superconducting wire with a local suppression of the order parameter, and the second is a short S-c-S structure, where S denotes a superconducting reservoir and c is a constriction. The systems of the first type are analyzed on the basis of time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equations derived by Gor'kov and Eliashberg for gapless superconductors with paramagnetic impurities. It is shown that the impedance Z (Ω) has a maximum as a function of the frequency Ω, and the electric field E Ω is determined by two gauge-invariant quantities. One of them is the condensate momentum Q Ω and another is a potential μ related to charge imbalance. The structures of the second type are studied on the basis of microscopic equations for quasiclassical Green's functions in the Keldysh technique. For short S-c-S contacts (the Thouless energy E Th = D/L 2 ≫ ∆) we present a formula for admittance Y valid frequencies Ω and temperatures T less than the Thouless energy E Th (ħΩ,T ≪ E Th ) but arbitrary with respect to the energy gap ∆. It is shown that, at low temperatures, the absorption is absent [Re(Y ) = 0] if the frequency does not exceed the energy gap in the center of the constriction (Ω < ∆ cos φ 0 , where 2φ 0 is the phase difference between the S reservoirs). The absorption gradually increases with increasing the difference (Ω -∆ cos φ 0 ) if 2φ 0 is less than the phase difference 2φ c corresponding to the critical Josephson current. In the interval 2φ c < 2φ 0 < π, the absorption has a maximum. This interval of the phase difference is achievable in phase-biased Josephson junctions. Close to T c the admittance has a maximum at low Ω which is described by an analytical formula. The study of dynamic effects in superconductors began soon after the appearance of microscopic BCS theory of superconductivity. On the other hand, the intensive study of dynamic collective modes in superconductors, both in low-and high-T c ones, is carried out in the last decade. A special attention is paid to the amplitude mode (AM), which is called often in literature the Higgs mode. A weak incident electric field E(t ) = E Ω cos(Ωt ) obviously can not lead to a perturbation of the order parameter ∆ be-cause it is a scalar so that δ∆(t ) can be proportional only to even orders of E 2n (t ). However, as we have shown recently, If the frequency of the external electric field Ω coincides with the frequency of the AM 2∆/ħ, a resonance absorption of the incident electromagnetic field E Ω takes place and the real part Y ′ (Ω) ≡ Re[Y (Ω)] of admittance has a sharp peak at Ω = 2∆/ħ. A similar peak was obtained in Ref. 33, where linear response of a superconductor with a finite-momentum pairing was calculated. As the authors of Ref. 33 claim, their results can be applied to high-T c superconductors with a pair density wave or to superconductors in the Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state. High frequency properties of superconductors are important not only from the point of view of fundamental physics, but also of applications. In particular, the use of superconducting devices in qubits and in highly sensitive detectors requires the knowledge of the admittance Y (Ω). where I c = π∆ 2 /(4eT R) is the critical current of this JJ near T c , R is the resistance in the normal state and ν in is inelastic scattering time. An anomalous behavior of the admittance Y (Ω) was obtained also in Ref. 44 where also a short JJ was studied by another method (tunnel Hamiltonian method and subsequent averaging via the Dorokhov's procedure). In the current paper, we calculate and analyze the admittance of short JJs of two configurations. In Section II, we present basic equations for quasiclassical Green's functions which will be used in Section III, where we consider a superconducting wire or film in which the superconducting order parameter Ψ is suppressed locally so that the amplitude |Ψ(x)| has a dip at x = 0. At strong suppression, one can speak of a weak link. This model has much in common with the so-called phase-slip centers The gauge-invariant quantities Q and μ are defined in terms of the vector potential A and scalar electric potential where χ is the phase of the order parameter and Φ 0 = hc/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. Substituting Eqs. ( In Section IV we consider a short S-c-S contact. By using a rather general formula for admittance derived in Ref. 42, we analyze the admittance of this JJ. [The authors of Ref. 42 provided the expression Eq. ( In this Section, we present basic equations for quasiclassical Green's functions including the Keldysh function which is needed in a non-stationary case. These equations were employed in our previous work for analysis of a uniform case Like in Ref. 32, we consider the diffusive limit in onedimensional geometry so that Q = (Q, 0, 0). The current I Ω and the gap perturbation δ∆ Ω are found from nonstationary equations for matrix quasiclassical Green's functions ǧ . These equations, in the absence of a magnetic field, have the form (7) The diagonal matrix elements of the matrix ǧ are the retarded (advanced) Green's functions ĝ R(A) , and the offdiagonal element is the Keldysh function ĝ , The functions ĝ R(A) and ĝ are 2 × 2 matrices in the particle-hole space. All the functions depend on two times t and t ′ . The diagonal matrix Σ consists of matrices ΣR(A) = ∆i τ2 + i γR(A) , where ∆ is the superconducting gap and γ is a damping matrix. The matrix ǧ (t , t ′ ) obeys the normalization condition The current in the diffusive limit is determined by the expression where σ is the conductivity. In equilibrium and in absence of a dc current, the Green's functions ĝ R(A) and ĝ have the form where g The matrices τi are the Pauli matrices operating in the particle-hole space. We calculate the impedance and the gauge-invariant quantities Q and μ in the next Section where nonstationary Ginzburg-Landau equations We consider a one-dimensional superconducting wire or film in which the superconducting order parameter ∆ ∝ Ψ is locally suppressed, see Fig. Here, f = |Ψ|/|Ψ ∞ | is the dimensionless modulus of the order parameter Ψ, where . The length and time are measured in the units ξ sf = 12D t 0 and t 0 = ħ 2 /(2τ sf ∆ 2 ), where τ sf is the spin-flip relaxation time. The current I and the voltage V are measured in units of σV 0 /ξ sf and V 0 = ħ/2et 0 . The gauge-invariant quantities Q and μ are defined in Eqs. ( The magnitude of the relaxation rate ν of the normal-ized potential μ depends on the choice of the model. In the model of a gapless superconductor with paramagnetic impurities considered in Ref. 57 ν = 12. The value of ν in conventional BCS superconductors is much smaller. where the parameter a 0 can be either small (weak suppression of f ) or large (strong suppression of f ). The reasons for the suppression of ∆ can be different. For example, a locally enhanced concentration of paramagnetic impurities leads to such a suppression. Note that the stationary and nonstationary Josephson effects for large a 0 have been studied in Ref. 68. From Eq. ( In this Section, we consider the case when only ac current flows through the system. From Eqs. ( In absence of a constant current (I 0 = 0) we need to find a stationary solution only for Eq. ( with X = κ 0 (|x| + x 0 ) and κ 2 0 = 1/2. The integration constant X 0 ≡ κ 0 x 0 is found from the matching condition Eq. (19), In the case of weak (a 0 ≪ 1), respectively, strong (a 0 ≫ 1) suppression, the constant X 0 = κ 0 x 0 is The dependence f 0 (x) is shown schematically in Fig. Having determined the stationary function f 0 (x), we can find the linear response, i.e., the functions Q Ω , μ Ω and E Ω in the presence of a weak ac current We can linearize Eqs. ( Deviations from these values, δE arise due to a local suppression of superconductivity at x = 0. We introduce a function E Ω (x) which is connected with δE Ω (x) via the relation δE Ω = f 0 (x)E Ω . The function E Ω obeys the equation (see Appendix A) The boundary condition at x = 0 for the function We need to solve Eq. ( The complex impedance of the system consists of two parts Z Ω = Z ΩL + δZ Ω , where the first term is the impedance in the absence of the weak link (a 0 = 0) and the second term is related to the presence of the local suppression Note that for small a 0 the problem can be solved analytically. Consider first this case. As follows from Eq. ( In the main approximation, Eq. ( where In the case of a small parameter a 0 , a solution with continuous functions E Ω (x) and For the voltage δV Ω and the impedance δZ Ω we obtain and respectively. Therefore, the impedance variation The total resistance and the reactive part of the impedance of the wire is One can see that the active part of the impedance increases due to a suppression of the order parameter f at x = 0. The reactive part increases at Ω ≤ 1 and decreases at Ω ≥ 1, that is, the variation of the reactive part δZ ′′ Ω changes sign at It is of interest to find also the admittance Y (Ω) ≡ 1/Z (Ω). From Eqs. (30), (35), and (36) in the main approximation in the parameter a 0 , we obtain This expression shows that the considered system can be modelled as a conductance and an inductance connected in parallel. The small gap suppression causes a small increase in the inductance L = 2L/(1 -a 0 /2L) and does not change the real part of the conductance. At strong suppression (a 0 ≫ 1), the solution of Eq. ( We see that the resistance due to the weak link δR(Ω) is positive and has a broad maximum at frequencies Ω m that are slightly less than 1 (at small a 0 ). The position of the maximum shifts towards smaller Ω m with increasing a 0 (when a 0 remains less than ≈ 2.5). The reactive Ω changes sign at approximately the same frequencies. At a 0 > ∼ 2.5, the maximum value of δR(Ω) decreases with further increase of a 0 , whereas the frequency Ω m increases [see Fig. In Figs. gauge-invariant potential ∂ x μ Ω (x) for two values of a 0 , i.e., for a 0 = 0.5 (weak suppression) and a 0 = 2.4 (strong suppression). One can see that these quantities may be comparable in their values. This means that the electric field E Ω is not determined only by the condensate momentum Q Ω [see Eq. ( In this Section, we consider short Josephson junctions of the S-c-S or S-n-S types in the dirty limit, i.e., in the limit τT c ≪ 1, where τ is the momentum relaxation time. We also assume that there are no barriers at the S-c interfaces. In the considered model, two superconducting reservoirs S are connected by a narrow constriction. Since the length of the constriction 2L is assumed to be less than the coherence length ξ S ≃ D/T c , that is, the Thouless energy is large (D/L 2 ≫ T c ), it does not matter whether the constriction is normal or superconducting. Formula for the impedance Z (Ω) in this case has been obtained by one of the authors (in collaboration with Artemenko and Zaitsev) in 1979 The microscopic theory developed in Ref. 42 is based on the generalized Usadel equation, Eq. ( In the considered limit of a short junction, one can neglect all the terms in Eq. ( That is, the matrix ǎ does not depend on the coordinate x. The current I through the considered JJ is expressed through the anisotropic part of the Keldysh function â as follows A formal solution of Eq. ( ( As follows from Eq. ( Ǧ(-) = ǧ (0) sinh( ǎL/l) , (44) where Ǧ(±L) ≡ Ǧ(±) are the known matrix Green's functions in the reservoirs. From this equation we find In particular, The matrices [ ĝ (±) ] R(A) are expressed in terms of the retarded (advanced) Green's functions in the reservoirs ĝ R(A) (±L) ≡ ĜR(A) that are known and have the form Here, we introduce the transformation matrix Ŝ(t , ±L) = exp(i τ3 φ(t , ±L)/2) in order to take into account the presence of the phase of the superconducting order parameter in the banks φ(t , ±L) = ±[φ 0 + φ ac (t )]. The Green's functions ĜR(A) 0 (ǫ) in reservoirs in the absence of phase difference coincide with the matrices ĝ R(A) eq defined in Eq. (11). Consider first the stationary case. In the equilibrium case [φ ac (t ) = 0], the Keldysh function â depends only on the time difference (t -t ′ ) and its Fourier component is where β = 1/2T . The matrices âR(A) (ǫ) are found from Eqs. ( and ζR (ǫ) = (ǫ + i γ) 2 -∆ 2 cos 2 φ 0 . The function ζ R (ǫ) is defined in Eq. ( In obtaining Eq. ( and the expressions for Ĝ(+) R(A) and Ĝ(-) R(A) , which directly follow from Eq. ( Thus, the Josephson dc current I J can be easily found from Eqs. (41) and (48). The integration over energy ǫ can be transformed to the summation over Matsubara frequencies ω > 0 for the first term in Eq. ( where the critical current I c also depends on the phase difference 2φ 0 and is determined by the expression 43 where R -1 = σS /2L with the cross section area of the junction S . One can see that near T c , when arcsin(∆sin φ 0 /ζ ω ) ≃ ∆sin φ 0 /ω and ζω (φ 0 ) ≃ ω, the critical current does not depend on the phase difference 2φ 0 and is equal to I c = (π/4)(∆ 2 /eT R). In this Section, we find a linear response of the system to ac phase variation φ Ω . To do this, we need to find a deviation of the Keldysh component δ â = â -â0 due to variation φ Ω . It can be written in the form The first two terms represent a regular part, which is an analytical function in the upper (lower) half-plane, and the last term is a non-analytical "anomalous" part. where and The functions j R and j an (ǫ) are determined as follows (see Appendix B) . Equations ( determine the admittance of the system Y Ω = I Ω /V Ω . One can see that at low frequencies and temperatures Re[Y (Ω)] is zero. Indeed, one can represent tanh(ǫ ± β) in the form tanh(ǫ ± β) ≃ tanh(ǭβ) ± (Ω/2) cosh -2 (ǭβ). Taking into account that at |ǭ| ≤ ∆cos(φ 0 ) ζR This means that the part of the regular "currents" -( j R + j A )(Ω/2) cosh -2 (ǭβ) cancels the anomalous "current" j an (Ω/2) cosh -2 (ǭβ). The remaining part of the regular "current", ( j R -j A ) tanh(ǭβ), contribute only to the imaginary part of the admittance Im[Y (Ω)]. In Fig. In Fig. As we noted in the Introduction, an interesting behavior of the admittance takes place at low Ω and high temperatures (T ≫ ∆). The main contribution to the real part Y ′ (Ω) [see Eq. ( The largest contribution occurs due to the first terms in the square brackets in Eq. (61). Integrating these terms, we obtain the main contribution to the the admittance 1/R. The second important contribution to Y ′ (Ω) stems from the second term in the square brackets at the right hand side of Eq. ( In this interval, we have One can see that Y ′ (Ω) increases with increasing Ω if the frequency Ω exceeds a threshold value Ω Th which depends on φ 0 . In the absence of the phase difference (no supercurrent flows through the JJ) we have Ω Th = 2∆/ħ. The curves correspond to cos(2φ 0 ) = 1 (red), cos(2φ 0 ) = 0.87 (black), cos(2φ 0 ) = 1/ 2 (green), and cos(2φ 0 ) = 0 (blue). At low temperatures, the real part of the admittance Y ′ (Ω) increases monotonously with increasing Ω if the latter exceeds 2∆ and φ 0 ≤ φ c , where φ c is the phase difference corresponding to critical current. At φ 0 > φ c , the admittance has a maximum at small Ω. fore, setting cosh -2 (ǫβ) ≈ 1, we obtain at T ≫ ∆ where ν in = γ ǫ /2. Thus, the admittance is given by Eq. ( The function P (φ 0 ) is shown in Fig. The integral in Eq. ( Therefore, the deviation δY ′ (Ω) of the real part of the admittance Y ′ (Ω) from its value in the normal state (1/R) is The normalized deviation δ Ỹ ′ (Ω) ≡ δY ′ (Ω)R has a maximum at Ω = 0 with a magnitude δ Ỹ ′ (Ω) max ≃ 2eI c R/ħν in ≃ ∆ 2 /(T ħν in ) which can be much larger than 1. The enhancement of the admittance, Eq. ( It is of interest to calculate the density of states (DOS) N (ǫ, x) in the junction and its spatial dependence. Note that this dependence cannot be found in tunnel Hamiltonian approach. The function N (ǫ, x) is zero at energies |ǫ| ≤ ∆, but is finite at energies |ǫ| ≥ ∆. In this energy range, ∆ ≤ |ǫ| ≤ ∆, the DOS N < (ǫ, x) is given by (see Appendix C and Ref. 69) where the function M < is i.e., x = 0 (solid red), x = 0.5 (dashed blue), and x = 0.9 (dashdotted green). We set cos φ 0 = 0.5. We plot the DOS N < (ǫ, x) for different E ≡ ǫ/∆ in Fig. where The DOS N > (ǫ, x) for different E is shown in Fig. In Fig. We analyzed the admittance Y (Ω) of short weak links of two types. The first one is a one-dimensional superconducting wire with a local suppression of the superconducting order parameter |Ψ|. This system resembles a phase-slip center or a one-dimensional Larkin-Ovchinnikov-Fulde-Ferrell structure. We calculated Y and the impedance Z = Y -1 on the basis of non-stationary Ginzburg-Landau equations. As we mentioned in the Introduction, the branchimbalance, i.e., the unequal population of the electronand hole-like branches of the excitation spectrum, arises in nonuniform superconductors when a conversion of the supercurrent j S into the quasiparticle current j N takes place (see Refs. 52-55). The typical examples of such a conversion are the passage of the charge current through the S/N boundary, The electric field E , which arises in the wire (see Fig. We also analyzed ac properties of short Josephson S-c-S weak links. The admittance Y (Ω) is described by an expression that has been obtained on the basis of microscopic equations for quasiclassical Green's function in the Keldysh technique. At low temperatures T , the absorption is absent (Y ′ = 0) if the energy of photons ħΩ is less than the lowest energy gap in the center of the constriction ∆ = ∆cos φ 0 . With increasing the difference (ħΩ -∆), the absorption monotonously increases if the phase difference 2φ 0 is less than the phase difference 2φ c corresponding to a maximum of the Josephson current I J = I c . In the interval 2φ c < 2φ 0 < π, the dependence of Y ′ (Ω) has a maximum. The hump in the obtained dependence Y ′ (Ω) is much broader than the peak in absorption in a current-carrying superconductor. The anomalous enhancement of the real part of the admittance Y ′ (Ω) at low frequencies Ω described by Eq. ( where Φ = H 0 S + L I J is the magnetic flux through the loop, and S respectively L are the area respectively inductance of the loop. Therefore, the absorption can be studied in the setup used in Ref. 59 if the magnetic field contains not only dc but also an ac component, H (t ) = H 0 + H Ω cos(Ωt ). Qualitatively, our results are applicable to the system studied in Ref. 59 because the length of the constriction 2L (2L ≈ 160nm) is comparable with the coherence length ξ S ≈ 100nm. By varying H 0 , one can change the phase φ 0 using the relation in Eq. ( At high temperatures (T ≫ ∆), the main contribution to the admittance Y Ω occurs due to the anomalous term. Quasiparticles with large enough energies (ǫ ≥ ∆) yield the admittance Y ′ approximately equal to that in the normal state Y ′ n = 1/R, whereas quasiparticles with energy range defined by Eq. ( The deviation δ Ĝ(-) due to a small phase perturba-tions φ Ω is found from Eq. ( where G ± ≡ G 0 (ǫ ± ), ǫ ± = ǭ ± Ω/2. As follows from Eq. ( 