We discuss thermal transport through a Josephson junction in a time-dependent situation. We write the spectral representation of the heat current pumped by a generic drive. This enables separation of the dissipative and reactive contributions, of which the latter does not contribute to long-time averages. We discuss the physical interpretation, and note that the condensate heat current identified in [K. Maki and A. Griffin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 15, 921 (1965)] is purely reactive. The results enable a convenient description of heat exchanges in a Josephson system in the presence of an external drive, with possible applications for the implementation of new cooling devices. Devices based on quantum mechanical effects could have a huge technological impact in the next decade. Quantum computers 1 , sensors In this direction, the possibility to coherently control the heat flowing between two superconductors by manipulating the superconducting phase difference has attracted much attention The dependence of the heat current flowing through a temperature-biased Josephson junction on the order parameter phase difference was predicted soon after the discovery of the Josephson effect, tion, but its exact interpretation is less clear, given that it remains nonzero and can have either sign also at T = 0. Moreover, although its contribution to steady-state quantities vanishes in the cases considered, it is not immediately obvious whether it in general could contribute to time-averaged quantities in other situations. In this work, we revisit the previous results. We write the currents in a spectral representation, and define associated causal response functions, which clarifies the general structure. From this approach, it follows that the condensate component persisting at T = 0 is purely reactive, and does not contribute to long-time averages of heat currents, for any form of drive. We discuss the analytic properties of the reactive components, and point out a "quasiparticle" part not explicitly discussed in previous works. Finally, we obtain a simple result for the heat current driven by an arbitrary periodic drive, and discuss issues relevant to practical implementation and physical interpretation of the results. We consider two superconductors S 1 and S 2 with superconducting gaps ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 , respectively, connected by a tunnel junction of resistance R T . The superconducting leads are assumed to be at temperatures T 1 and T 2 (see Fig. The time-dependent phase difference φ(t) is gauged to the tunneling Hamiltonian, so that the order parameters ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 are real-valued. Moreover, a standard unitary transformation Before starting, it is useful to clarify what we mean by heat current. The observable we are interested in is the variation of the energy of superconductor i in time. Following previous works 21, Note that as soon as S 1 and S 2 are coupled through H T , a fraction of energy is stored as (Josephson) coupling energy. This energy is a property of the total system, and cannot be clearly identified as belonging to either S 1 or S 2 . At the same time, the energy flowing out of, say, S 1 can either go to S 2 or increase the coupling energy. This problem is evident in the strong coupling regime, where the energy associated to H T can dominate over the other contributions where the ensemble average is A = Tr[Aρ], and ρ(t) is the density matrix of the total system. Above, unitarity of the time evolution, ρ = -i[H, ρ], was used. The time variation Ẇ (t) of the Hamiltonian is related to the work done on the system and the power injected in it and, since the electron current operator I and the voltage V are proportional to [H T (t), N 1 ] and ∂ t φ, respectively, we obtain the familiar form for the power injected in a electrical circuit, i.e., Ẇ (t) = I(t)V (t). The power injected into the total system can thus either increase the energies of the superconductors or change the coupling energy. As expected, in the results below the coupling energy term does not contribute to time-averaged heat currents, and in the time average, the total absorbed heat current -P The heat current P (1) where ) and η → 0 + . Above, R T is the tunnel junction resistance, and we set e = k B = = 1. General properties of the above result can be more clearly seen in the spectral representation. Similarly as in standard discussions of the charge current, we define 36 It will also be convenient to consider the Fourier transform of the heat current, P where z is some real-valued window function normalized to ∞ -∞ dx z(x) = 1 and z its Fourier transform -for example a Gaussian, z(x) = e -x 2 / √ π, z(y) = e -y 2 /4 . Using the definition of Φ in Eqs. (6) and taking the Fourier transform produces: where the J are causal response functions 30 defined as and w J/qp (E) are the Fourier transforms of w J/qp (t) = Ẇ J/qp 1 (t)W J/qp 2 (t). The response functions have the symmetry J J/qp (ω) = -J J/qp (-ω) * . By using F j (E) = -F j (-E), we can write explicitly where ] is the reduced density of states. The expressions corresponding to P The above result has a linear response theory form, as expected for computation for the change in operator expectation values in response to a perturbation. Dissipation in linear response is associated with a specific component -often the imaginary part -of the response functions. In the results here taking the definition in Eq. ( The imaginary ("dissipative") parts can be written as The form of the result suggests they are both associated with quasiparticle transport. In the normal state, ). In contrast to the imaginary part, the real ("reactive") part of the response functions gives only nonzero frequency contributions to the heat current. The part Re J J 1 corresponds to the "condensate" heat current sin (ω). The part Re J qp 1 was not discussed in previous works, as it does not contribute in the constant-voltage case, but for general drive it is nonzero. Since the response functions are causal, the reactive parts can be obtained via Kramers-Kronig relations where P denotes the Cauchy principal value. The part Re J qp 1 (ω) is formally divergent, cf. 36 -the divergence is regularized by finite bandwidth/momentum dependence of tunneling. It can also be regularized by subtracting the subtraction does not change the result. We can write The normal-state result is Re J qp 1 (ω)| N = 0. Similarly as the charge current response functions, 36 the J J/qp (ω) functions above have logarithmic singularities Finally, we can comment on the long-time averages. Based on Eqs. ( Consider now the sum power P (T ) = -P (1) -P , which can also be written as where are response functions of the charge current, and comparison with Eqs. ( Experiments to measure the heat current transferred in superconducting nanosystems are challenging. The physical observable is the variation of temperature of one lead. Such a measurement is usually done in the steady state regime when the transient dynamics has vanished. Under this condition it is natural to assume that the system has a periodic evolution and study what is the heat current transported in a period. Since the Josephson system dynamics is completely characterized by the superconducting phase, we consider evolution periodic in the following sense: In particular the constant voltage bias discussed in Refs. 24 and 28 is periodic in this sense. Then, Substituting this to Eqs. ( qp + P where the combined response function appearing above is: and the effective phase difference is The long-time average coincides with the average over a single period -for z(x) = θ(1 -x)θ(x) and τ = T , z(τ Ω[k -k ]) * = δ k,k in ( The result in Eq. ( The standard spectral representation expresses clearly the general properties of the tunneling heat current. Here, it directly indicates that the reactive "condensate" component cannot contribute to long-time averages. Moreover, a simple result is obtained relating the dc heat current to the imaginary part of a response function and the Fourier components of the drive. The physical interpretation of the results should be viewed in the context of discussions on heat currents in coupled quantum systems. We can also note that arguments similar to the above can have also some implications on the more general discussion on definition of heat currents in coupled quantum systems, In summary, we wrote a spectral representation for the energy current in Josephson junctions, to obtain a clear picture of the energy currents predicted in tunnel Hamiltonian calculations. Being relatively simple, the results open the way to the practical design and optimization of SIS' coolers working on pulsed drive cycles, and for an improved understanding of their general performance properties.