In this paper we demonstrate the necessity of including the generally omitted collective mode contributions in calculations of the Meissner effect for non-uniform superconductors. We consider superconducting pairing with non-zero center of mass momentum, as is relevant to high transition temperature cuprates, cold atoms, and quantum chromodynamic superconductors. For the concrete example of the Fulde-Ferrell phase we present a quantitative calculation of the superfluid density, showing the collective mode contributions are not only appreciable but that they derive from the amplitude mode of the order parameter. This latter mode (related to the Higgs mode in a charged system) is generally viewed as being invisible in conventional superconductors. However, our analysis shows that it is extremely important in pair-density wave type superconductors, where it destroys superfluidity well before the mean-field order parameter vanishes. There is a strong current interest in collective modes in superconductors in large part stimulated by the excitement surrounding the discovery of the Higgs boson For this class of superfluids, the collective mode contribution to the superfluid density has been largely ignored in previous literature We provide two different, but related, derivations of the superfluid density for the tractable case of the Fulde-Ferrell (FF) superfluid Before giving these more complete calculations, here we provide a general argument for the necessity of including collective mode effects in non-uniform superconductors. The origin of collective mode contributions to the Meissner effect ( Here ∆ (0) is the order parameter in the absence of A μ and ∆ (1) is a correction linear in A μ . It is this term which gives rise to the rarely discussed collective mode contributions to the superfluid density. Since ∆ (1) is a scalar quantity, it can depend on only scalar, linear functions of A μ . Therefore, in a uniform superfluid ∆ (1) is a function of only ∇ • A where j z (Q) is the equilibrium current. It is useful to express Eq. ( where both saddle-point equations, and the symmetry of mixed partial derivatives has been used. Equation In this paper the collective-mode contribution will be shown to be appreciable; this underlines the inadequacy of including only the so-called bubble term Mean-field formalism.-The FF mean-field Hamiltonian, in the ψ Here an irrelevant constantk ξ k-Q,↓ has been ignored. The notation is as follows: the dispersion relation is defined by ξ k,σ = k 2 /2mμ σ , where μ σ is the fermionic chemical potential for a species with spin σ =↑, ↓, m is the fermion mass, and ∆ denotes an swave pairing gap. It is useful to define μ = 1 2 (μ ↑ + μ ↓ ) and h = 1 2 (μ ↑μ ↓ ). The dispersion relations are then written compactly as The inverse Nambu Green's function is then G -1 = iω n -H FF , where iω n is a fermionic Matsubara frequency. The inverse bare Green's function is defined by Note that Greek indices denote spacetime coordinates: μ = (t, x, y, z); whereas Roman indices denote spatial coordinates: i = (x, y, z). Here Q μ = (0, Q). Explicit calculation then gives the full Green's function which has appeared in the literature We now study the EM response of this superfluid. For the issue of primary concern in this paper (the superfluid density) the distinction between neutral and charged superfluids is irrelevant. For the purposes of simplicity, our general equations are for neutral superfluids. We apply linear response theory, where, a fictitious vector potential A μ is applied, and at the end of the calculation A μ → 0. The EM current is j μ (q) = K μν (q)A ν (q), where K μν (q) is the EM response kernel. The response kernel can also be expressed as K μν (q) = P μν (q) + (n/m)δ μν (1δ μ,0 ) (with μ and ν not summed over) where the EM response functions are denoted by P μν (q). In the Kubo formalism the EM response functions for a superfluid are (5) Here q μ = (iΩ m , q), with iΩ m a bosonic Matsubara frequency. The quantity Γ μ (k + , k -) denotes the full EM vertex, where the incoming (outgoing) momentum is k + (k -), with k μ ± ≡ k μ ± q μ /2 . To determine the full vertex Γ μ (k + , k -), we apply the Ward-Takahashi identity (WTI) . This is an exact relation in quantum field theory which relates the single particle Green's function to the full vertex. It is a gauge invariant statement and here it reflects the underlying global U (1) gauge symmetry. Furthermore, satisfying the WTI ensures conservation of particle number (or charge in the charged superfluid case). The bare WTI, , is satisfied by the bare vertex γ μ σ (k + , k -) = (1, k/m). In the limit q μ → 0, the WTI reduces to the Ward identity: The second term diagrammatically represents a vertex insertion in the self energy. This relation then importantly shows that the full vertex can be obtained by performing all possible vertex insertions in the full Green's function The gap equation for an FF superfluid is ∆ Note that ∆ is a function of the FF pairing vector Q, and by differentiating the gap equation with respect to Q (at fixed μ and h) one can obtain (∂|∆| 2 /∂Q) μ,h . An explicit calculation then gives the following important identity (for ∆ = 0): The order of limits in which frequency and momentum are taken to zero is important; frequency iΩ m and q z are set to zero, and then q x , q y → 0. In the following section this will be clarified. The quantities P z 0 and M 0 are generalized three-particle and four-particle Green's functions, respectively, which are defined in the next section. The generalized Green's functions in Eq. ( Superfluid density derivation via Kubo formula.-In this section we use the Kubo formula and Eq. ( Note that, the order of limits in the above expression is crucial. To compute n ij s , first set ω = q i = q j = 0, then take q k → 0, where k = i, j. The collective modes are contained within the second term. Evaluating this expression we find where we define X k ≡ D -1 sinh(βE kQ ), and The first term in Eq. ( The second term represents the collective mode contribution arising solely from P ij (0). As an important check we note that Eq. ( k {log[2 cosh(βE kQ ) + 2 cosh(βh kQ )]βξ kQ } is the mean-field thermodynamic potential Note that the collective mode contribution is only along the direction of the FF pairing vector, in agreement with the general arguments presented earlier. Direct calculation shows that n ij s is diagonal, with n xx s = n yy s = 0, as required by symmetry. Superfluid density derivation via equilibrium current.-A verification of this Kubo analysis and the collective mode contributions can be made in a slightly simpler fashion. Here we derive the superfluid density in the direction along the FF pairing vector using only the equilibrium current and its partial derivative with respect to Q. The equilibrium current in the z-direction is . This expression follows from j z = 2 (∂Ω/∂Q)| μ,h,∆ . By symmetry the mean-field currents in the other directions vanish: In what follows it will be important to fix μ and h, and to consider the Q-dependence of only the gap: ∆(Q). The following lemma, whose proof is given in the Supplemental Material, will also be required: The partial derivative of j z can now be computed. Using the number equation n = σ k G σ (k), along with the aforementioned Lemma, the partial derivative of j z is then ( = (n zz s /2m). Note that the above expression, which reproduces Eq. ( Numerical Results.-In Fig. The red curve in Fig. This figure encapsulates the important point that collective modes of the order parameter can substantially reduce the transition temperature from its mean-field value. In this way a pairing gap persists above the temperature at which the superfluid density disappears. This is a variant on a particular pseudogap scenario in the high T c cuprates Conclusions.-In this paper we have computed the superfluid density tensor n ij s for the FF superfluid phase. Importantly, we have shown (using multiple, distinct theoretical frameworks) that widely neglected collective (amplitude) mode contributions cannot be ignored. In general they will affect n ij s for the broad class of Q = 0 pair-density wave superconductors. Indeed, while Fig. Given the intense interest in condensed matter observations of a Higgs mode, one can inquire as to what is the relation between the amplitude mode evident in pairdensity wave superconductors and the Higgs mode in condensed matter Supplemental Material: Collective mode contributions to the Meissner effect: Fulde-Ferrell and pair-density wave superfluids Rufus Boyack 1 , Chien-Te Wu The starting point for our study of Fulde-Ferrell superfluids is the mean-field Hamiltonian The matrix representation of this Hamiltonian, in the where Here we have ignored an irrelevant constantk ξ k-Q,↓ . The inverse Nambu Green's function is then G -1 = iω n -H FF , where iω n is a fermionic Matsubara frequency. Performing the matrix inverse we obtain If we shift k → k + Q/2, then redefine Q → 2Q, this Nambu Green's function agrees with Eq. (3) of Ref. If we perform this inversion, and define the bare Green's function by G -1 0,σ (k) = iω nξ k,σ , then the full Green's function is where the self energy is given by Here k μ = (iω n , k), Q μ = (0, Q) and without loss of generality the FF pairing vector is assumed to be along the ẑ-direction: Q = Qẑ. The full Green's function is thus Similarly, from the Nambu Green's function in Eq. ( It will be convenient later to express the Gorkov function symmetrically by For a polarized superfluid it is useful to define the chemical potential and effective magnetic field by For convenience we shall need the following dispersion relations Our primary interest is for the case where ∆ = ∆ * , and here it has been assumed ∆ is real. The coherence factors of the Green's functions are then defined by Similarly the poles of the Green's functions are defined by x 2,↓ = E kQg kQ . With the above definitions, it follows that the spin up and spin down Green's functions are In terms of the coherence factors, the Gorkov function is Finally, it will prove convenient when evaluating the superfluid density to define the following the expressions The X k and Y k expressions are the same definitions as given in Ref. For completeness here we summarize the four mean-field equations in Fermi units. The mean-field equation for the gap ∆ [defined in Eq. ( Regularizing this equation using m/(4πa) = -1/g + k (1/2 k ), and converting it into dimensionless form, then gives Here we defined , where E F is the Fermi energy and k F is the Fermi wave vector. All expressions with a tilde (such as X k ) are to be interpreted as having their dependent variables normalized to Fermi units. The mean-field equation for the FF pairing vector Q [defined in Eq. ( In terms of dimensionless variables, this equation becomes The number equations are In terms of dimensionless variables these become Here we used k 3 F = 3π 2 n as the relation between particle number and the Fermi wave vector. The two number equations can be rewritten as n = σ n σ and p = (n ↑n ↓ )/(n ↑ + n ↓ ). By taking the sum and difference of Eq. (32), we can then express these as two number equations: There are now four equations: Eq. ( In order to determine the full vertex and response functions in the superfluid phase, we apply the Ward-Takahashi identity (WTI). The Ward-Takahashi identity for the full vertex Γ Here k μ ± = k μ ± q μ /2, where q μ = (iΩ m , q) with iΩ m being a bosonic Matsubara frequency. This is an exact relation in quantum field theory which relates the single particle Green's function to the full vertex. It is a gauge invariant statement and here it reflects the underlying global U (1) gauge symmetry. The bare WTI identity, q μ γ μ σ (k In order to satisfy the WTI one must insert all possible vertices into the self energy Feynman diagram Note that, the external lines for ∆ and ∆ * are merely for illustration. They carry no momentum, and so the self energy is indeed a two point function. For the self energy Feynman diagram of Fig. The Feynman diagrams for the full vertex are expressed in Fig. Feynman diagrams for the full vertex Γ μ σ (k+, k-). In the next section we shall verify that, for q μ = 0, the collective mode vertices satisfy q μ Π μ (q) = 2∆ and q μ Πμ (q) = -2∆ * . Given these relations, we now verify that the WTI is indeed satisfied by the full vertex appearing in Eq. ( Collecting terms we then have Thus the Ward-Takahashi identity is indeed satisfied by the full vertex in Eq. ( In this section the explicit form of the collective mode vertices is determined. To do this, it is crucial to ensure that they are consistent with the mean-field gap equation. The gap equation is given by Here g > 0 is an s-wave interaction constant. This equation is equivalent to the statement that the mean-field thermodynamic potential is stationary with respect to ∆. In Fig. (3) the gap equation is expressed as a Feynman diagram. To derive the collective mode vertices, we perform all possible vertex insertions on the gap equation. In Fig. (3) there are three possible vertex insertions: a collective mode vertex can be inserted on the gap ∆, a bare vertex can be inserted in the bare Green's function, and a full vertex can be inserted in the full Green's function. After performing all these possible vertex insertions on the gap equation, we obtain the Feynman diagrams in Fig. FIG. Mathematically these Feynman diagrams are expressed as Notice that the full vertex appears in this expression. If we insert the full vertex from Eq. (36) into Eq. (41), and then shift k → k + Q/2, we obtain the following expression: Using the property derived in Eq. ( Therefore Eq. ( Performing the same analysis on the conjugate gap equation, The collective mode vertices can be written as the following matrix equation (for q = 0): Here the response functions entering into the above equation are It is convenient to perform an integration by parts on the above expression as follows: Combining this expression with that for the response function in Eq. (39), and using Eq. ( The first term represents a "bubble" contribution whereas the second terms represent the collective mode contribution. Here the order of limits is crucial. For instance, to compute n ij s , first set ω = 0 and q i = q j = 0, then finally take q k → 0, where k = i, k = j. Using the Gorkov function derived in Eq. ( As noted previously, P x 0 = P y 0 = 0. By taking the limit in Eq. ( This produces Eq. ( The bubble term in Eq. ( In this section we compare our expression for the superfluid density with that appearing in Ref. Using Eq. ( Combining Eq. ( This is in agreement with Eq. ( Computing the derivative then gives The superfluid density thus becomes Using the W k function from Eq. ( The second term gives zero contribution. Therefore the superfluid density reduces to This proves the equivalence between Eq. (66) and Eq. (71). The equilibrium current in the z-direction is After performing the Matsubara frequency summation, we obtain which is in agreement with Eq. (20) of Ref. This result is proved as follows: From the gap equation in Eq. ( Inserting this relation into Eq. (80), and then using Eq. (36), gives Thus the lemma is proved. Taking the derivative of Eq. (77), and using the lemma in Eq. ( Thus, the z, z-component of the superfluid density tensor is the derivative of j z with respect to Q. Taking the explicit Q-derivative of Eq. ( Here the saddle point equation j z = 0 has been used to simplify the above expression. Performing the remaining Q-derivative, and accounting for the Q-dependence in the gap ∆ through Eq. ( Thus, from Eq. (83), it follows that the superfluid density is This reproduces the result in Eq. (71), which was shown in Sec. (IV B) to be equivalent to Eq. (66). Interestingly, due to the underlying rotational invariance of the FF state The self-consistent equation for Q is given in Eq. (78). After performing integration by parts on the expression in Eq. (78), we obtain Evaluating the derivatives and simplifying then gives The second term gives zero contribution, and thus In the last step the saddle-point condition j z = 0 has been used. Thus the x, x-component (and similarly the y, y-component) of the superfluid density vanishes as a result of the self-consistent condition for the pairing vector Q. In Eq. ( The first of these conditions reproduces the gap equation while the second reproduces the constraint that the equilibrium current j z vanishes The partial derivative of j z at fixed μ and h is given by Since the equilibrium current is related to the thermodynamic potential by j z = 2 (∂Ω/∂Q)| μ,h,∆ , Eq. (95) can be expressed as Explicit calculation shows that the second order partial derivatives are symmetric, thus this expression can be simplified to 1 4 Thus, by taking various partial derivatives of the thermodynamic potential Ω, one can compute the superfluid density in the z, z-direction, with collective mode contributions incorporated. The first term is the bubble contribution while the second term is the collective mode contribution. By explicit calculation, we obtain where P z 0 and M 0 are defined in Eq. (67). Inserting these definitions into Eq. (101) and simplifying then reproduces which is the expression for n zz s obtained in Eq. ( The first expression is related to n zz s by Eq. (101). Thus the FF phase is stable if the following two (sufficient) conditions are satisfied: s /n; in this case there are no collective modes.