The point-contact spectra of tetragonal YBa2Cu3O 7-δ with Tc = 50 -60 K are studied at various temperatures. The single-electron energy (2∆0/kTc 17) and its temperature dependence are determined. The characteristic energies of quasiparticle excitations interacting with conduction electrons in this high-Tc. superconductor are found to correlate with the characteristic phonon energies. The possibility of a pair gap, which increases with temperature, is revealed near the critical temperature. Tetragonal crystals of YBaCuO are known to exhibit superconducting properties at T < T c 60 K The lattice parameters of the crystals were determined on an automatic diffractometer "Syntex-P2" by the method of least squares from 32 reflexes with 23 • < θ < 25 • in the K α -radiation of Mo. Unanneaied crystals had the following lattice parameters: Figures The supplementary structure in the gap region in Fig. Dependence of differential resistance (V1(eV ) ∝ dV /dI(eV )) for sample No.1 at T =4.2(1,2); 10(3); 20(4); 30(5); 40 tive (see Fig. From the results of neutron diffraction analysis Therefore, the interaction of electrons with local vibrational modes is apparently essential for high-temperature superconductivity in these compounds. In the superconducting state with a high bias voltage, the differential resistance increases almost linearly with eV in the bias voltage range from 40 to 150 meV (dashed lines in Figs. A peculiar behavior of V 1 (eV )-characteristics in the temperature range T = 50 -60 K corresponding to the superconducting transition for this sample is worth noting (curves 8-10 in Fig. The R 0 (T ) dependence for sample No.2 corresponds qualitatively to the standard theory of S-c-N microbridges: as T → T c from below, R 0 increases, the rate of increase dropping sharply at T > ∼ T c . It is noteworthy that the shape of V 1 (eV ) for this contact changes at T > 30 K, i.e., in the region where the gap considerably decreases with temperature, while the coherence length increases. This anomaly is apparently due to a peculiar effect of similarity between HTS and normal metals. The absence of a broad minimum in the vicinity of T c in point contact spectra of sample No.2 (see Fig. It should be noted in conclusion that singularities of point-contact spectra described in the present paper are not specific for the tetragonal crystallographic modification of Y Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ . They are also inherent to a certain extent in the orthorhombic modification with T c the vicinity of 90 K. The point-contact analysis of the properties of this modification will be published later.