Parametric conversion and amplification based on three-wave mixing are powerful primitives for efficient quantum operations. For superconducting qubits, such operations can be realized with a quadrupole Josephson junction element, the Josephson Ring Modulator (JRM), which behaves as a loss-less three-wave mixer. However, combining multiple quadrupole elements is a difficult task so it would be advantageous to have a three-wave dipole element that could be tessellated for increased power handling and/or information throughput. Here, we present a dipole circuit element with third-order nonlinearity, which implements three-wave mixing. Experimental results for a non-degenerate amplifier based on the proposed third-order nonlinearity are reported. In quantum devices based on superconductors, Josephson junctions provide a nonlinear interaction between electromagnetic modes which is purely dispersive. However, because the Josephson potential is an even function of the superconducting phase difference φ, this nonlinearity is, to lowest order, of the form φ 4 . This Kerr nonlinearity is useful for engineering interactions between modes, but it imparts undesired frequency shifts. This problem is analogous to that generated by χ (3) media in nonlinear optics A form of this φ 3 nonlinearity has been realized with four Josephson junctions arranged in a ring threaded by DC magnetic flux. This device, called the Josephson ring modulator (JRM) An inherent advantage of such a dipole element is that it is more modular and easier to integrate into complex circuits. In particular, such an element can be tessellated, as with a Josephson junction In this Letter, we report an experimental realization of a pure φ 3 nonlinear dipole element, demonstrating its performance in a non-degenerate parametric amplifier. Because this dispersive element is asymmetric in the transformation of φ → -φ, in contrast with the SQUID Fig. where φ is the superconducting phase across the small junction, φ ext = 2πΦ ext /Φ 0 is the reduced applied magnetic flux, and Φ 0 = h/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. Note that Eq. 1 is only a function of a single degree of freedom φ as we eliminated the dynamics due to any intra-array modes and considered only common excitations across the array of n junctions. This reduction is valid when E J E C for each junction where E C = e 2 /2C J is the Coulomb charging energy of the junction with capacitance C J , and when C 0 C J /n 2 where C 0 is the capacitance to ground of each island between junctions With α ∼ 0.8 and Φ ext ∼ 0.5 Φ 0 , this circuit is well known as the flux qubit Through numerical minimization of Eq. 1, we analyze the SNAIL's mixing capabilities by Taylor expanding about the minimum φ min to obtain the effective potential for φ = φ -φ min : where (c translates to a U eff with nonzero c 3 , but c 4 = 0. Note that the case of n = 1, corresponding to the SQUID, always gives c 3 = 0 since the potential about φ min is always a pure cosine irrespective of the values of α and Φ ext . Interestingly, α and Φ ext are not enough to break the φ → -φ symmetry in this case. Additionally, in the n 1 limit, the array behaves as a linear inductance and the potential approaches the fluxonium qubit/RF-SQUID regime For the SNAIL to achieve Kerr-free three-wave mixing, we must optimize on the parameter space of (α, Φ ext ). The top (bottom) panel of Fig. In order to experimentally verify our model for the SNAIL as a cubic nonlinearity, we integrate it into a design for a non-degenerate three-wave mixing amplifier. Such an amplifier consists of two spatially and spectrally separate modes that are coupled by a pump applied at the sum of their respective frequencies. Achieving amplification with this pump condition is an explicit signature of a cubic nonlinearity To achieve the same coupling term, we arrange four identical SNAILs into a ring. Like the JRM, this Wheatstone bridge of SNAILs cancels all cubic terms in the Hamiltonian of the device except the desired φ x φ y φ z . This cancellation assumes that all four SNAILs are identical. Note that inverting the polarity of one SNAIL would destroy this cancellation, since U eff (Eq. 2) depends on the sign of φ. While the JRM relies on the flux through the exterior ring to achieve a cubic potential, in our design each SNAIL individually achieves φ3 , and so we can eliminate the exterior DC loop in the ring. This is advantageous as it prevents an extra DC persistent current from biasing the SNAILs, and allows for future tessellation without introducing a prohibitively large DC loop. Moreover, the SNAIL allows flexibility for other applications currently unfeasible with the JRM, such as endowing a single mode with a cubic nonlinearity. Further applications may also prefer the expression of terms such as a φ 2 x φ z for degenerate three-wave mixing For enhancement of the nonlinearity and maximal isolation, we designed a resonant embedding structure using microstrip resonators Using standard Dolan bridge techniques for aluminum Josephson junctions on silicon, we fabricated a ring of four SNAILs according to the above design (Fig. Biasing at this optimal flux point, we applied a strong microwave pump tone on the pump port at frequency f P = f S +f I to drive the parametric amplification process. Achieving parametric amplification with this frequency condition provides the explicit signature of three-wave mixing, and hence the presence of a φ 3 nonlinearity. The top panel of Fig. In future work, the dipole nature of the SNAIL enables the replacement of a single SNAIL with an array of SNAILs (Fig. Another relevant application of the SNAIL is for Kerr-free tunable coupling between two cavities (Fig. In conclusion, we have introduced a dipole realization of a pure φ 3 nonlinearity, the SNAIL, which performs three-wave mixing in the microwave regime of superconducting quantum circuits. We have also demonstrated the SNAIL's three-wave mixing capabilities by integrating it into a non-degenerate three-wave mixing amplifier, whose performance matched that of similar quantum-limited amplifiers based on the JRM. However, the SNAIL has the advantage of supporting parametric three-wave processes without introducing extra Kerrinduced frequency shifts. Left for future work is the demonstration of this feature. Furthermore, the dipole nature of the SNAIL allows for the integration of cubic nonlinearity wherever the circuit designer deems necessary. Specifically, this enables the construction of threewave mixing circuits that share the work between many junctions to increase bandwidth and input power handling capabilities, without the addition of prohibitively large DC loops. Thus, the SNAIL will likely be at the heart of the next generation of robust quantum-limited