Combined scanning tunneling microscopy, spectroscopy and local barrier height (LBH) studies show that low-temperature-cleaved optimally-doped Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 crystals with x=0.06, with T c = 22 K, have complicated morphologies. Although the cleavage surface and hence the morphologies are variable, the superconducting gap maps show the same gap widths and nanometer size inhomogeneities irrelevant to the morphology. Based on the spectroscopy and LBH maps, the bright patches and dark stripes in the morphologies are identified as Ba and As dominated surface terminations, respectively. Magnetic impurities, possibly due to cobalt or Fe atoms, are believed to create local in-gap state and in addition suppress the superconducting coherence peaks. This study will clarify the confusion on the cleavage surface terminations of the Fe-based superconductors, and its relation with the electronic structures. One major difference between the iron-based superconductors (FeSC) and conventional superconductors is the necessary involvement of magnetic elements. For a long time magnetic elements had been thought to suppress the superconductivity because of the competitive nature of superconductivity and magnetism, but with the cuprates and now FeSC, there are two cases of high-temperature superconductivity that apparently are magnetic in origin FeSC share a common Fe 2 X 2 layer structure where X is a pnictogen (P, As) or a chalcogen (S, Se, Te). With the incorporation of intercalation layers between the Fe 2 X 2 layers, FeSC are classified into five families: '11', '111', '122', '1111' and complex structure materials In this work on optimally-doped Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 crystal (Co-Ba122), we find that different "terminations" or morphologies can be observed even from the same batch of crystals and same low-temperature cleavage condition, indicating the similar surface free energy of the different configurations. On the other hand, the superconducting gap maps from different terminations are not affected by surface terminations, owing to the global nature of the superconductivity. The Ba or As dominated surfaces can be directly identified by combining the STM, STS and local barrier height (LBH) information. In addition, non-superconducting impurities are observed in the superconducting map. We suspect the magnetic impurities are possibly cobalt or Fe atoms, showing an in-gap state and suppressing the coherence peaks of the superconductivity. Single crystals of Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 were grown out of self-flux, and FeAs and CoAs binaries synthesized similar to our previous reports The single crystals of Co-Ba122 (x = 0.06 dopant levels) were cleaved in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) at ~ 100 K and then immediately transferred to the STM head which was precooled to 4.2 K. The STM/STS experiments were carried out at 4.2 K in UHV low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope with base pressure of 2×10 -10 Torr, with mechanically cut Pt-Ir tip. All Pt-Ir tips were conditioned and checked using clean Au (111) surface before each measurement. Topographic images were acquired in constant current mode with the bias voltage applied to the samples. All the spectroscopies were obtained using the lock-in technique with bias modulation V rms = 0.5 mV at 973 Hz. Spectroscopic imaging was preformed over a grid of points (64 × 64 pixels) at various energies using the same lock-in amplifier parameters The surface topographic images of Co-Ba122 are shown in Figure The area with the coexistence of the two characteristic domains provides the best opportunity to explore the correlations between the different surface morphologies with the properties of the crystals on the Co-Ba122, as the STM morphology is the constant local density state of the surface which relies on their environment where Δ is the superconducting gap function, T is the temperature, Γ is the broadening parameter. S-wave gap function was used to fit the normalized dI/dV. During the fitting, energy dependent broadening parameter Γ (Γ(E) = Γ 1 + Γ 2 *E) were used The data of Figures To reveal the intrinsic differences from the two domains, we look into the spatial dependent superconductivity gap maps derived from the pixel by pixel dI/dV spectra fitting of those two domains with the s-wave Dynes and Γ(E) model. The gap map shows nanometer size inhomogeneity as widely reported in literature for these Fe-based superconductors The similarity of the superconducting behavior from different morphologies is reasonable since the superconductivity is a bulk global property rather than a local behavior, considering the 3 nm coherence length of pairing electrons found for Co-Ba122 8 . The influences of the rich surface morphologies should be reflected in the local density of state (LDOS) as it is more termination, composition and reconstruction related. To identify the surface chemistry of the domains, the barrier height mapping was used to measure the local barrier height (work function) of the material ) By combining all the experiment results above, we believe the bright patches are Ba dominated while the dark stripes are As dominated. The 0.2 nm height difference between the bright patch and the dark stripes in the Fig. The LDOS below the Fermi level in Fig. With the above knowledge of the surface chemistry of the complicated morphology of the Co-Ba122, we can analyze more details from the images to explore the understanding of the material. As shown in Fig. The dI/dV spectroscopies along the blue arrow in Fig. Considering the elements in our crystals, we suspect those impurities might be Co or Fe atoms. Those impurities are not the Co dopants that replace the Fe atoms in lattice to create the superconductivity of the crystal, the pairing type of the crystal should not be changed by those small amounts of impurities. We comprehensively studied the low-temperature cleaved surface of optimal doped Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 single crystals with T c = 22 K using low temperature STM. Various surface morphologies with bright or dark areas coexist in our cleavage conditions, but the superconducting gap maps show same gap width and similar nanometer size inhomogeneity, owing to the global nature of the superconductivity. But the variation in the morphologies shows vast differences in the LDOS and LBH maps. The bright patches and dark stripes were identified as Ba or As dominated surface terminations. Locally appeared in-gap state as well as the suppressed coherence peaks of the SC is observed around some atomic level protrusions, which we suspect as magnetic impurities. In summary, combined STM, STS and LBH studies show that no matter how complicated the morphologies are, the surfaces are the mixture of the Ba dominated bright patches and As dominated stripes. We believe this study clarifies the confusion on the terminations of the cleavage surface of the Fe-based 122 superconductors. 