Many recent studies show that superconductivity not only exists in atomically thin monolayers but can exhibit enhanced properties such as higher transition temperature and stronger critical field. Nevertheless, besides being air unstable, weak tunability in these intrinsically metallic monolayers has posed a severe limitation in exploring monolayer superconductivity, hence hindering possible applications in electronic devices. Using field effect gating, we prepared monolayer superconductivity in easily accessible CVD-grown WS 2 , a typical ambient stable semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD). Here, we present a complete set of competitive electronic phases over an unprecedented range from band insulator, superconductor, to an unexpected re-entrant insulator. Throughout the superconducting dome, the Cooper pair spin is pinned by a strong internal spin-orbit interaction, making this material arguably the most resilient superconductor in a magnetic field. The re-entrant insulating state at positive high gating voltages is plausibly attributed to localization induced by the characteristically weak screening of the monolayer, providing the key insight into many domelike superconducting phases observed in field induced quasi-2D superconductors. Reducing the dimensionality from three (3D) to two (2D) often conserves the fundamental electronic properties while simplifies theoretical approaches, making 2D a fruitful dimensionality allowing exact solutions of many important physical models Similarly, this dimensional crossover has been widely observed in interface superconductors and cuprates approaching the optimal gating and doping, respectively These imposed requirements have motivated the search of truly monolayer superconductors. Recently, epitaxial growth on optimized substrates for single-atomic thick metal films However, due to the large intrinsic carrier density, switching electronic phases in these superconductors appears difficult Here we demonstrate that semiconducting TMD monolayers WS 2 , where both carrier tunability and true 2D characteristics are accessible, provide the unique all-round option for field effect control of various quantum phases. By field effect gating, WS 2 flakes evolve from a direct band insulator to metallic states, which develop into Ising superconductivity Monolayer WS 2 is grown by chemical vapor deposition. The high quality of the as-grown crystalline sheets is confirmed by strong photoluminescence (PL) and mobility of μ ~300 cm 2 /Vs at 10 K and the optimal gating, which are comparable or higher than cleaved counterparts applying firstly a maximal ionic gate at T ~220 K we can introduce the strongest electrostatic field effect, which is subsequently fixed by freezing the ionic liquid below its glass transition temperature T g ~190 K. By grounding the ionic gate and sequentially warming the device slightly above T g , we are then able to create dense coarse doping states (colour coded in Fig. positive on the left while negative on the right. Around optimal doping, there is a crossover linking two monotonic correspondences (as elaborated in Fig. V eff with a superconducting ground state. At V eff = 1130 V, optimal transport shows the lowest R s and the highest superconducting transition temperature T c . The sheet resistance R s as a function of temperature at the left and the right sides of optimal doping is shown in Fig. The critical temperature T c is determined by widely used 50% of normal state resistance. A full phase diagram is shown in Fig. The V eff dependence of Hall carrier density n Hall (lower panel, Fig. In many quasi-2D superconductors The unique feature of 2D superconductivity in monolayer WS 2 is the Ising pairing Ising superconductors such as ion-gated multilayer MoS 2 The highly unexpected feature is the reversible re-entrance into a strongly insulating state at high V eff . The signature of this fully insulating state has been observed in many systems manifesting as mobility peaks A direct comparison in Arrhenius plots (Fig. To account for the anomalous re-entrant insulator, we propose a scenario of a V eff dependent band variation as sketched in Fig. With this physical picture in mind, we can understand the shift in maxima between n Hall (10K) and T c (Fig. 2 lower panel). As a result, the interplay between carrier and disorder shapes the superconducting dome versus V eff . Considering that electrostatic gating by polarising dielectrics (polarised dipole) and ionic media (cation-anion pair) are equivalent, the competing quantum phases induced in the present study represents the high field limit in respect of superconducting domes reported previously 