We study the ultrafast Kerr effect and high-harmonic generation in type-II superconductors by formulating a new model for a time-varying electromagnetic pulse normally incident on a thin-film superconductor. It is found that type-II superconductors exhibit exceptionally large χ (3) due to the progressive destruction of Cooper pairs, and display high-harmonic generation at low incident intensities, and the highest nonlinear susceptibility of all known materials in the THz regime. Our theory opens up new avenues for accessible analytical and numerical studies of the ultrafast dynamics of superconductors. Introduction -The discovery of superconductivity in 1911 by Kamerlingh Onnes introduced a startling new phenomenon to physics: that of systems exhibiting zero electrical resistance at low temperatures Research into superconductivity is currently very active, with recent work on high-temperature superconductors -reaching up to a critical temperature of 203 o Kattracting considerable attention The effect of static external magnetic fields on a superconductor is one of the subject's most fascinating and studied aspects, and all the introductory and advanced textbooks contain many details on how superconductors behave under the influence of time-independent fields. However, somewhat surprisingly, the influence of a time-dependent electromagnetic pulse has been somewhat neglected in the literature, with very few exceptions In this paper we present for the first time exhaustive analytical and numerical calculations based on the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation, and show the appearance of a Kerr effect in a type-II superconductor induced by an incident, arbitrarily short light pulse. We show that, due to progressive and step-like Cooper pair destruction, these superconducting materials display large nonlinear optical behaviour, such as high harmonic generation, at extremely low laser intensities -typically on the kW/cm 2 scale in the THz regime -and may prove to be a key element in future photonics applications. Our approach is physically more transparent and much more intuitive than the approach based on the BCS Hamiltonian. We specialise our discussion to elemental niobium (Nb) thin films. Governing equations -We begin our study with the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation (TDGLE) where ψ(x, y, t) is the complex order parameter (|ψ| 2 is proportional to the total number of Cooper pairs present in the sample: ψ = √ n c e iθ ), n c is the number density of Cooper pairs, x, y are the coordinates on the plane of the thin film, m * is the mass of a Cooper pair (approximately equal to twice the mass of a free electron, when neglecting the binding energy), q = -2e is its charge (equal to twice the free electron charge -e), D is the diffusion constant, A(x, y, t) is the vector potential describing the spatial and temporal structure of the incident electromagnetic pulse, p is the electron momentum operator and c is the speed of light in vacuum. The phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau parameters and β have units of energy and energy×volume respectively and are explicitly given by α = α 0 (T -T c ), where α 0 and β are constants specific for the material used. T is the temperature of the system and T c is the critical temperature below which superconductivity emerges The set-up considered in this paper is sketched in Fig. As a first attempt to understand the origin of the optical nonlinearity [not to be confused with the electronic nonlinearity, which is given by the |ψ| 2 ψ term in Eq. ( We see that optical nonlinearities become important when the vector potential term in parentheses is dominant, and by using E = -(1/c)∂ t A (in the φ = 0 gauge) to approximate the amplitudes A ≈ -Ec/ω 0 , along with the usual light intensity equation I = 0 cE 2 /2 (assuming unity refractive index), we find a value for the nonlinear intensity scale given by I 0 = c 0 m * |α|ω 2 0 /q 2 , where ω 0 is the carrier frequency of the pulse. For light of intensity I ≥ I 0 then the term proportional to A 2 ψ in (2), which is responsible for the nonlinear interplay between the field and the superconductor, cannot be ignored; and as we will see below a very powerful cubic nonlinearity is predicted. The first term in The basic physics of the process giving rise to Kerr optical nonlinearity can be explained as follows: as the light pulse impacts the superconductor Cooper pairs are destroyed, increasing the number of normal electrons in the material. As each progressive peak and trough of the light pulse reaches the material the value of the order parameter drops and then begins to recover as Cooper pairs are destroyed -generating harmonics -and then reformed, due to the phonon-mediated potential. This mechanism is reminiscent of the ionization dynamics in plasma physics in which light strips electrons (free electrons are "created") from their atoms, see for instance a recent work on the subject The total current in the superconductor is composed of an Ohmic component and a supercurrent, the latter given explicitly by where the second term is proportional to the spatial gradient of the phase θ of the order parameter, as can be seen if we rewrite (3) as J s = -q 2 m * c |ψ| 2 A + q m * |ψ| 2 ∇θ. All time-dependences are implicit and vector notation has been removed as J s has only an x-component, since the input pulse is linearly polarized. Estimate of χ (3) -The nonlinear electric susceptibility χ (3) of the superconducting film can be derived as follows. The magnetic vector potential evolves due to the current density via the well-known wave equation: where 0 is the vacuum permittivity. Taking the partial time derivative of both sides of equation ( , where the right-hand side is proportional to the material polarization. Assuming that the normal part of the current can be disregarded as it does not contribute to the optical nonlinearity (the metallic part of the system is simply absorptive) then the nonlinear polarization is seen to be of Kerr type, i.e. P NL = χ (3) E 3 , by solving analytically Eq. ( where we have defined a ≡ 2m * Dα/ 2 ; b ≡ 2m * Dβ/ 2 ; d ≡ q 2 DA 2 0 /( c) 2 . Inserting expression ( The value of χ GL in Eq. ( Simulations and results -Using the above TDGL equation ( As a representative example, for our estimates we choose pure niobium (Nb) as it has the highest critical temperature T c of all elemental superconductors The critical temperature of bulk Nb is T c = 9.25 o K Using a laser pulse with carrier wavelength λ 0 = 188 μm and a Nb film for a target, we find that optical nonlinear effects should emerge at very low incident intensities of the order of kW/cm 2 , and on ultrafast time scales of the order of picoseconds. Specifically, at a temperature T = 4 o K, I 0 ≈ 3.1 kW/cm 2 . Our parameters used give the value of χ (3) ≈ -4.24 × 10 -7 m 2 /V 2 , which is to the best of our knowledge the highest theoretical value ever predicted in a χ (3) -material in the THz regime In the first simulation we show what happens in a simplified scenario, when taking into account one spatial dimension only (x). Figure 