We extend the standard effective model of d-wave superconductivity of a single band tight-binding Hamiltonian with a nearest-neighbor attraction to include finite range periodically modulated pairhopping. The pair-hopping is characterized by a fixed wave number Q Q Q = Qx breaking lattice rotational symmetry. Within self-consistent BCS theory we study the general variational state consisting of two incommensurate singlet pair-amplitudes ∆ Q 1 and ∆ Q 2 and find two types of ground states; one of the Larkin-Ovchnnikov (LO) or pair-density wave (PDW) type with ∆ Q 1 = ∆ Q 2 and Q1 = -Q2 ≈ Q Q Q, and one of the Fulde-Ferrell (FF) type with ∆ Q 2 = 0 and Q1 ≈ ±Q Q Q. An anomalous term in the static current operator arising from the pair-hopping ensures that Bloch's theorem on ground state current is enforced also for the time-reversal and parity breaking FF state, despite no spin-population imbalance. We also consider a supercurrent by exploring the space of pairmomenta Q1 and Q2 and identify characteristics of a state with multiple finite momentum orderparameters. This includes the possibility of phase-separation of current densities and spontaneous mirror-symmetry breaking manifested in the directional dependence of the depairing current. It is well established that various coexisting orders, in particular, spin-and charge-density wave order, are a ubiquitous phenomenon of the cuprate high-temperature superconductivity. Less clear is the degree of interdependency between these orders and superconductivity. A PDW without coexisting uniform order has not been directly observed, and neither is a mechanism for its formation in systems without population imbalance clear. In order to consider moderate interaction strengths we tailor a Hamiltonian which promotes PDW order. As inspiration, we take stripe domain walls acting as πjunctions of superconducting order. Unexpectedly, we find that the lowest energy PDW/LO state is typically near degenerate with an FF state, and a phase transition between the two states may occur as a function of doping (see FIG This paper is organized as follows. In Section II the proposed Hamiltonian is discussed and its mean-field decomposition is introduced in II.1, where approximations are discussed. The ground state and phase diagram of the model is presented in II.2 and the cancellation of current in the FF state is discussed in relation to Bloch's theorem on ground state current in Section III. We proceed in Section IV to discuss the generalized description of a current carrying state with two order-parameters, the results are presented in IV.1 and IV.2. We conclude with a summary and an outlook in Section V. We start with a tight-binding Hamiltonian on a square lattice (length a = 1) with the dispersion ε(k) = -2t(cos(k x ) + cos(k y )) -4t cos(k x ) cos(k y ) where t = -0.3t and t = 1. (All energies will be measured in units of t.) The interaction is given by with r ± ij = (r i ± r j )/2, illustrated in FIG 1 . 32 r - ij refers to the relative coordinate between electrons with t(r - ij ,r - kl ) = δ r - ij ,x/2 δ r - kl ,x/2 + (x → -x, ±ŷ) assuring paircreation and annihilation on nearest-neighboring sites. The pair-hopping is accounted for by T (r + ij -r + kl ) where r + ij -r + kl is the relative coordinate between pairs. This defines a class of Hamiltonians without explicitly broken translational invariance. To make contact with observed striped orders we consider an explicitly broken rotational invariance with pair-hopping in the x-direction with length P/2, 33 where Q Q Q = Qx = 2π P x represents the modulation ( P = 8 is considered in this paper). Here κ μ , μ = x, y sets the hopping range and in the limit κ x,y → ∞ (3) reduces to an ordinary nearest-neighbor interaction. In order to have a negligible zero-momentum pairing the modulation needs to be well resolved by the hopping range, thus we will consider κ x 2 P . We have also included a possible finite hopping range along the y-direction, but it is of secondary importance and the value κ y will only be specified when it is essential. Going over to reciprocal space and identifying the singlet paring we find where Here is a Gaussian potential that benefits finite momentum pairing, with κ x,y acting as the potential-width. Subsequently, we will only present and discuss the d-wave part explicitly since the s-wave turns out to be negligible. We will study the interacting model in BCS mean-field theory using the following quadratic Hamiltonian with n k = σ c † kσ c kσ where μ is tuned to get the correct particle number (see Appendix B). That there are two pair-fields with different momenta Q 1 and Q 2 complicates the model compared to standard BCS, as CDW operators ρ QCDW = σ c † kσ c k+QCDWσ (with , n ∈ Z ) and higher order pair-fields of the type ∆ q+QCDW are induced. (For the FF state with only one pair-field, no other terms are generated, and (7) is complete.) Note that other possible self-consistent charge or spin orders (such as the striped magnetic order shown in FIG With these approximations, the self-consistency equation for the gap functions is given by Even if the additional CDW and pair-fields are set to zero, the Hamiltonian (7) cannot be directly diagonalized except for short commensurate periods. Since we are interested in studying the system for continuous (incommensurate) variations of the pair momenta we have to truncate the matrix form of the Hamiltonian. A convenient way to formalize this is to work with the Gorkov equations for the single-particle Greens functions. The spin-independent imaginary time Greens function takes the form G k,k (τ ) = -T τ c σ,k (τ )c † σ,k (0) with σ = ↓, ↑ and the anomalous Greens functions . The general expressions for the full Greens functions in terms of Matsubara frequencies z = iω n (ω n = 2π β (n+ 1 2 )) are derived as Considering the diagonal part (k = k ) of the full Greens function we see that it couples to off-diagonal Greens functions, with a static part corresponding to the ρ QCDW . Consistent with the discussion of the mean-field Hamiltonian these off-diagonal Greens functions induce correspondingly shifted anomalous Greens functions. With the same motivation, we will truncate this proliferation at the lowest level neglecting all off-diagonal Greens functions. With this approximation (also used by Loder et al. The Matsubara sum is conveniently handled by analytic continuation where we can sum over residues of the anomalous Greens function. We evaluate this system over a 350 × 350 grid, at zero and finite temperature. To solve the system, ( In FIG 2 the equilibrium state free energy F = E -T S is plotted against Q for κ x = 0.2; 0.3 and electron densities ρ = 0.65; 0.80. A finite temperature T = 0.01 was used as a regularization (see Appendix C for details on the entropy). The lowest energy state Q 0 = (Q 0 , 0) coincides well with Q = 2π 8 , however there is a slight deviation which grows with the width of the potential, κ x . Note that we loose the ability to form a condensate for |Q -Q 0 | κ x and there is a negligible zero-momentum pairing. For ρ = 0.8 LO is the ground state, but at ρ = 0.65 FF has the lowest energy, nevertheless, they are near degenerate. In fact, the LO or FF character of the ground state is not heavily dependent on κ x , and we set κ x = 0.2 throughout the paper. In FIG 3 we report the phase diagram 34 for doping x = 1 -ρ and temperature T . The free energy F was calculated for LO, FF and the normal state respectively. We see the emergence of two domes where LO and FF dominate respectively, and a region of near degeneracy. At low temperature, we can identify a phase transition between the two distinct symmetry states with a quantum critical point at x ∼ 0.27. We have noted that the phase diagram is quite sensitive to the interaction modulation momentum Q Q Q, but we will not explore that dependence in present work. At higher dopings, FF is the ground state despite it breaking time-reversal symmetry. In general, one would expect such a time-reversal breaking state to carry current. However, this is not possible due to the theorem, attributed to Bloch, stating that even with interaction included the ground state must have zero current. As comparison, the density of states (DOS) is included in FIG 4 alongside the normal state and an ordinary dwave SC at same coupling. The spectral function shows similar features as previous works In this section we will investigate cancellation of current in the FF state, predicted by Bloch's theorem on ground state current. Consider a uniform current J q=0 derived from the continuity equation lim q→0 q•J q = [H, ρ q ] -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 giving (Here and subsequently, we drop the q = 0 subscript on J ). Alternatively, and with the same result, the expression for the current operator can be derived from a Peierls substitution of a constant vector potential in the lattice Hamiltonian, through J = dH dA | A=0 . The first term is the ordinary single-particle current operator, J sing , and the second is related to the pair-hopping and will be referred to as the anomalous current operator J an . The anomalous term vanishes in the limit where the interaction is q-independent (V (k, k , q) = V (k, k )), which is the case for a density-density interaction. Bloch's theorem implies that the ground state of an interacting Hamiltonian cannot carry a current. This is readily shown using the polarization operator P = 1 N i r i n i , which (up to a total derivate) satisfies Ṗ = J. Assuming a current carrying ground state |φ , with current J φ , we can construct another state |ψ = e iδ δ δ•P |φ , with δ δ δ as a vector parameter. Evaluating the energy (assuming T = 0) of this state to linear order in δ δ δ we find where E φ = φ|H|φ and J φ = φ|J|φ . With a suitable choice of δ δ δ we can always lower the energy compared to a putative ground state with a current. The proof of this theorem is typically presented for a Hamiltonian with density-density interactions, A mean-field calculation is a minimization within a subspace of states and therefore it is not, a priori, obvious that it will respect Bloch's theorem. This problem was already discussed by Fulde and Ferrell 13 . However, by using the same arguments as before, we can show that Bloch's theorem will be obeyed also within the meanfield subspace. Focusing on the FF state with arbitrary momentum Q we have the explicit representation of the BCS-like ground state at self-consistency where ). Here ) for which the quasi-particle has lower energy than the finite momentum Cooper pair, consequently is over the remaining momenta. Assuming that this state has current J Q and energy E Q we construct a new state where v k and u k are unaffected by the shift. To linear order it is easy to show that this state has energy (16). Thus the energy can be lowered by an appropriate small shift of the pair-momenta anti-parallel to the current. The state |Q + 2δQ is not a self-consistent solution at pair-momentum Q + 2δQ, but it has the correct particle number (inherited from the unshifted state, given by n = k 2 + k 2v 2 k ) and is contained in the variational space of the Hamiltonian at Q+2δQ, so its energy will be higher than the corresponding self-consistent state. Thus by successive iterations of momentum-shift and convergence to self-consistency, we can continue to lower the energy until the ground state is found. Hence the meanfield calculation is true to Bloch's theorem. In FIG As a consequence, any time-reversal breaking ground state must have a mechanism for cancellation of current. We have seen that pair-hopping yields such a mechanism through the introduction of an anomalous current. Another mechanism, which does not require an anomalous term, is to consider the original Fulde-Ferrell state which arises because of spin-population imbalance. We will now turn to the LO state and discuss how it is affected by a homogeneous current (for details about the physical relevance of this approach see Appendix D). We will first review the procedure in an ordinary superconducting state with one order-parameter, and then discuss the necessary generalizations in order to consider current in a PDW-state with two order-parameters. The usual procedure , which carries a current J c = en m q s . As a result the spectrum becomes Doppler-shifted and states with E < 0 will be excited already at T = 0. These excited states constitutes a counter propagating current J e , and we write the total current as J = J c -J e . The destruction of the total current as a function of q s is two-fold: (i) More quasiparticles will be excited, which enhances J e , and (ii) excitations will change the self-consistent condition and deplete the condensate, resulting in a smaller J c . In general the function J(q s ) will be concave For PDW we proceed in a similar manner by considering the effective Hamiltonian H MF in ( shifted from the minimum. Thus we are considering the mapping q 1 , q 2 → J, which is no longer just doubly degenerate but the degeneration is spanned by two continuous dimensions. Nevertheless the procedure is in principle straightforward: We should minimize the energy over a subset of q 1 , q 2 which corresponds to one specific current J. In the remainder of this paper, we will focus on systems with LO ground state picking ρ = 0.8. We need to probe all states spanned by Q 1 , Q 2 . Even though the ground state is an LO state the current carrying metastable state might not be, thus we will consider FF and LO states independently. (Note that we extend the meaning of LO to include ∆ Q1 = ∆ Q2 , |∆ Q (1,2) | > 0.) Because of the rather complex minimization problem, we do not aim to fully investigate the various parameter-dependent possibilities, instead we focus on two features characteristic of the PDW state: A phase-separation between LO and FF solutions and spontaneous mirror-symmetry breaking. From a symmetry perspective, driving current transverse to Q Q Q = Qx is similar to an ordinary superconductor since the state is expected to be invariant under orderparameter exchange, ∆ Q1 ↔ ∆ Q2 . In contrast, a state with the current along Q Q Q is not symmetric under orderparameter interchange and we expect this case to be fundamentally different, hence, current along Q Q Q will be the main target of the investigation. As mentioned, the problem with considering two orderparameters is the extended parameter space. In general, we can construct a state for each pair of Q 1 , Q 2 , however, we are only interested in the lowest energy state for each current, which reduces the relevant parameter space to a two-dimensional subspace of , which only induces current along x. There are however additional states that only have current along x which we can construct by shifting Q 1 and Q 2 in opposite y-directions. These states would break mirror-symmetry Q (1,2)y → -Q (1,2)y and we explore this possibility in Section IV.2. Here we prevent this symmetry breaking by picking κ y sufficiently small, making this shift energetically expensive. (This assumption was confirmed for κ y = κ x = 0.2.) In FIG 6 the free energy for the LO states as a function of the order-parameter momenta is presented. The energy forms circular equipotent contours for Q 1x , Q 2x near the energy minimum (at ±Q 0 ), in this region LO is stable and both order-parameters are non-zero. When increasing the momenta further the LO state becomes unstable towards an FF state. These FF states are independent of Q 1x (Q 2x ) indicating that ∆ Q1 = 0 (∆ Q2 = 0). (Note that there exist FF states of higher energy even where the LO state is stable.) The extreme energy states for a specific current in positive x-direction is traced out in red dots (also shown in FIG 7). The extreme energy LO and FF solutions as a function of current are presented in FIG In FIG 8(a) the evolution of the order-parameters is presented as a function of current. The FF and LO state shows similar behavior, however, FF carries more weight in its non-vanishing component than LO does in each of its components. (Note that FF ∆ Q1 (∆ Q2 ) refers to different states ∆ Q1 = 0, ∆ Q2 = 0 (∆ Q1 = 0, ∆ Q2 = 0) while LO ∆ Q1 (∆ Q2 ) refers to the same state.) One might expect that the LO state would enhance the condensate running in the forward directing and deplete the trailing one in order to create a current running forward. Surprisingly we see that orders remain (to high accuracy) of same size, albeit Q 1 = -Q 2 as is seen in 8(b). It seems as the LO state can utilize the anomalous current from the pair-hopping, which is equally benefited by both orders. Without pair-hopping this feature is expected to change and the phase-separation is likely not to occur since the near degeneracy between FF and LO is expected to be lifted (see Appendix A). In the next section we will see a different scenario emerge, where instead two distinct LO states are near degenerate. For reference, currents are measured in units of e t ac with t, a, c being the hopping parameter and lattice axes respectively. As an order-of-magnitude estimate we find J d,x 2.0 × 10 8 A/cm 2 (with t = 350 meV and a, c appropriate for YBCO In this section we remove pair-hopping transverse to Q Q Q = Qx, corresponding to κ y → ∞. In FIG 9 the directional dependence of the depairing current is shown and we note a rather high anisotropy of J d,x /J d,y 3.2. More striking is the apparent cusp at θ = 0, which is highlighted in FIG We have studied an extension of the standard effective model of d-wave superconductivity in the cuprate superconductors where the nearest-neighbor attraction is extended into a modulated longer range pair-hopping. The pair-hopping is such that it only breaks the rotational symmetry of the lattice, and is modulated by a wave vector Q Q Q = Qx (aligned with a crystal axis). By construction, it suppresses uniform superconductivity while promoting the formation of a pair-density wave (PDW) with a periodically modulated superconducting order. We have used the model to make a self-consistent exploration of the space of two finite momentum orderparameters ∆ Q1 and ∆ Q2 . Interestingly, there is a close competition between two different types of ground states: a Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) state with ∆ Q1 = ∆ Q2 and sought for PDW), and a Fulde-Ferrell (FF) state with only one finite ∆ The former spontaneously breaks translational symmetry while the latter spontaneously breaks time-reversal and parity. Which state has lower energy depends sensitively on the detailed form of the interaction and parameters of the model. A quantum critical point separating the two solutions as a function of doping may be realized. An important aspect of the analysis is an "anomalous" term in the static current operator is due to the pair-hopping, and instrumental to a proper consideration of Bloch's theorem on no ground state current. It is this term that enables a BCS ground state given by a single component finite momentum condensate, i.e. the FF state, without spin-population imbalance. This in contrast to a density-density type attraction for which we find, as expected, that FF states are only metastable with a finite current. We expect that this observation should be pertinent to the suggestions of an FF-like state related to loop current order by Agterberg al. Translational symmetry breaking manifested by CDW order seems quite generic in cuprate superconductors. This observation would rule out the possibility of a pure FF state that was studied in this paper. Nevertheless, it is still conceivable that such a pairing state is FF-like in the sense of breaking time-reversal and parity, but with a secondary pair-amplitude generated by the coupling to the CDW. Another aspect of the model that should also be explored are the effects of nematic distortion of the single-particle energies, which may change aspects of the interplay between LO and FF ground states. discussed in Appendix B). The authors of this paper have confirmed that this shift was indeed not included. A final remark is that the FF state never becomes the ground state, instead it monotonically increases with Q. Thus, if we consider a Landau-Ginzburg type formulation of the free energy in terms of two order-parameters with opposite momenta, we see that it is the attraction between the two that stabilizes the LO state. This is in contrast to the pair-hopping model, that has been the main focus of this paper, where each finite momentum component may order independently. The interaction between the two may be attractive or weakly repulsive, corresponding to an LO ground state, or highly repulsive, leading to an FF ground state. For completeness we recapitulate the variational mean-field formulation in terms of a Hamiltonian H MF = i μ i A i , where A i are (normal and anomalous) quadratic fermion operators and μ i are variational parameters. such that the variational parameters should satisfy Importantly, stationarity implies that the full set of quadratic operators A i generated by a complete Wick decomposition of H MF should be included in the variational Hamiltonian. For the problem at hand with the proposed variational parameters {∆ Q1 (k), ∆ Q2 (k), μ k } (where μ k couples to σ c † kσ c kσ ) this means that we also generate terms related to CDW and higher harmonic pair-fields, as discussed in the main text. (This is true for the LO states where both orders are non-zero. For the FF state, similarly to an ordinary single component superconductor, the mean-field Hamiltonian is complete.) we can quantify its importance by calculating the energy in the state acquired by solving the approximate equations ( where k ± = k±k 2 , and ρ q (k) = 1 β n G k,k+q (iω n ). In contrast to the superconducting condensate the Gaussian v(2k + ) will restrict the summation over k + . In general we can make E CDW negligible by picking a small enough κ x,y . Indeed ECDW E-E N 0.01 for parameters used in this paper. The energy contribution of the CDW is tiny, consequently, we expect a relatively small CDW order-parameter and that the coupling between different harmonics of the pair-fields are weak such that we can treat these independently for each set of Q 1 and Q 2 . An additional aspect of the interaction (2) is that it breaks the discrete rotational symmetry of the tightbinding lattice. Therefore the Hartree-Fock (densitydensity) terms will generate an anisotropic single-particle energy. (For a nearest-neighbor attraction, the additional terms be momentum independent in standard fashion and absorbed in μ.) The variational singleparticle energy now reads B4) with V given by 5 and where "exchange" indicates a similar (slightly more complicated) term arising from the exchange. This implies that the single-particle energies also need to be solved for self-consistently, even in the normal state, leading to a nematic distortion of the Fermisurface. A numerical check of the magnitude of the contribution of the Hartree-Fock terms to the energy indicates that they are of similar magnitude and sign as the condensation energy. However, for a proper study of this effect it would seem appropriate to also include a (local) Coulomb interaction which would counteract the distortion. Although an interesting topic for future studies we have ignored this aspect in the present work, and taken μ k = ε k -μ. For completeness, we also comment on the role of the chemical potential μ in these calculations. We are working with fixed particle number but with different variational Hamiltonians specified by the two pair momenta Q 1 and Q 2 (one momentum for the FF states). For each realization, the chemical potential must be tuned in order to get the correct particle number, while minimizing the free energy Ω within the variational space. Clearly, at the correct particle number N the state which minimizes Ω (corresponding to some value of μ) also minimizes the free energy F = H MF -T S MF at this particle number. It is the latter F that should be used as a measure to compare mean-field solutions at different Q 1,2 when working at fixed particle number. The excitations of our mean-field Hamiltonian can in principle be found as Bogoliubov quasi-particles γ α = i A iα c i + B iα c † i where i range over 2N degrees of freedom (spin and momenta) and α over 2N quasi-particles. The entropy can then be found through the standard expression where f α is Fermi-Dirac distribution of ε α . Using where f p is evaluated at the corresponding pole ε p . Since we truncate the Gorkov equations by throwing away offdiagonal Greens function we do not have access to the exact single-particle states, however, we can still use expression (C2) as a consistent approximation of entropy. The physics of a supercurrent is treacherous subject with various limits and considerations. Considering a homogeneous current flowing in a superconductor is formally justified in a 3D material in the limit d ξ, d λ, where d is the sample size and ξ, λ the correlation and penetration depth respectively. d λ implies that we can neglect the effect of self-field from the current, In 2D, where the relevance of a PDW has been discussed in connection to the decoupling of layers at 1/8 doping in LBCO, 