In this paper we will construct the coherent states for a Dirac electron in graphene placed in a constant homogeneous magnetic field which is orthogonal to the graphene surface. First of all, we will identify the appropriate annihilation and creation operators. Then, we will derive the coherent states as eigenstates of the annihilation operator, with complex eigenvalues. Several physical quantities, as the Heisenberg uncertainty product, probability density and mean energy value, will be as well explored. Graphene is a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal honeycomb lattice, which is the basic structural element of other allotropes including graphite, charcoal, carbon nanotubes and fullerenes. Graphene is a zero-gap semiconductor, because its conduction and valence bands meet at the Dirac points which are six locations in momentum space, on the edge of the Brillouin zone, divided into two non-equivalent sets of three points, typically labeled as K and K . By contrast, for traditional semiconductors the point of primary interest is denoted as Γ, where the momentum is zero Thus, even neglecting their spin, at low energies the electrons can be described by an equation that is formally equivalent to the massless Dirac equation: Here v F ∼ 10 6 m/s (.003 c) is the Fermi velocity in graphene, which replaces the velocity of light in Dirac theory, σ is the vector of Pauli matrices, Ψ(r) is the two-component wave function of the electrons and E is its energy It is important to stress that graphene belongs to a class of systems in condensed matter for which the low-energy quasi-particles behave like massless or massive Dirac fermions. These systems are known as Dirac materials in the literature As we shall see below, under particular physical conditions, a problem similar to that considered in In order to do that, this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 the Dirac-Weyl equation will be introduced and the physical problem to be considered will be briefly discussed. In section 3 the annihilation operator associated to the system will be defined, and the corresponding coherent states will be constructed as eigenstates of that operator. We will analyze as well several physical quantities for these states. Our conclusions will be presented in section 4. Let us suppose now that the graphene is placed in a static magnetic field which is orthogonal to the material surface (the x -y plane) where -e is the charge of the electron. Landau gauge is conveniently chosen, with the vector potential given by A = A(x)ê y and B = ∇ × A = B(x)ê z , B(x) = A (x). Taking into account the translational invariance along the y direction, the two-component spinor Ψ(x, y) is expressed as: being k the wave number in the y direction and ψ ± (x) describing the electron amplitude on two adjacent sites in the unit cell of graphene. Thus, the Dirac-Weyl equation ( which can be easily decoupled into two Schrödinger equations , where For a constant magnetic field, orthogonal to the graphene surface and pointing in the positive z direction ( B = B 0 êz with B 0 > 0), the vector potential is selected as A = B 0 xê y . Introducing now the constant ω as: whose dimensions are (lenght) -2 , the potentials in (5) become two shifted oscillators of the form Thus, the eigenvalues E ± n for the Hamiltonians H ± are related as follows: and the associated eigenfunctions are those of the standard harmonic oscillator: where H n denotes the Hermite polynomial of degree n ∈ N. We conclude that the complete solution of the corresponding Dirac-Weyl equation in a constant magnetic field consists of the eigenvalues where the plus (minus) sign refers to the enegy electrones (holes), and the normalized eigenvectors , n = 1, 2, . . . Since the eigenstates of the previous Dirac-Weyl equation are expressed in terms of the eigenfunctions of the standard harmonic oscillator, it seems natural to look for an annihilation operator for the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( where θ± , N are given by with z = ω/2 (x + 2k/ω), and f, f 1 are two real adjustable functions which will be used to guarantee that Â-Ψ n = c n Ψ n-1 . Then: In order to ensure that Â- it must happen that In such a case it is obtained that: and the explicit expression for the annihilation operator Âturns out to be: Equation Let us define the coherent states Ψ α as eigenstates of the annihilation operator Âwith complex eigenvalue α: Expressing Ψ α as a linear combination of the states Ψ n , we have Using equation ( First of all suppose that f (n) = 0 ∀ n = 1, 2, . . . Thus we get a 1 = √ 2αa 0 /f (1) and where The free constant a 0 is used to normalize Ψ α ; we obtain: 3.1.2 Case with f (1) = 0 If f (1) = 0 we obtain that a 0 = 0 and the following recurrence relationship: Now, depending on the value of f (2), two possibilities appear once again. A. Case with f (2) = 0. If we suppose that f (n) = 0 ∀ n = 2, 3, . . . and define g(n) ≡ f (n+1), equation ( Substituting this expression in equation ( B. Case with f (2) = 0. On the other hand, if f (2) = 0 and f (n) = 0 ∀ n = 3, 4, . . . the normalized coherent states turn out to be now: where h(n Let us notice that the graphene coherent states of Eqs. Let the dimensionless position and momentum operators be given by: In units of , the Heisenberg uncertainty relation is expressed by where σ 2 S ≡ Ŝ2 -Ŝ 2 for an arbitrary observable Ŝ. We will calculate next these quantities for some examples of the coherent states, which will stress the important role played by the function f (n) in our treatment. The case with f (1) = 0. Let us consider first the particular choice f ( N ) = 1. Thus, expression (20) leads to: where r = |α|. Using these coherent states, the mean values for the operators ẑ, p of Eq. ( Through them it is straightforward to calculate (σ z ) 2 α (σ p ) 2 α (see Figure The case with f (1) = 0. As we saw in section 3.1.2, when f (1) = 0 two options appear, which depend on the value taken by f (2). 1 , so that f (n) = 0 ∀ n = 2, 3, . . .. From Eq. ( The mean values for the operators of Eq. ( In the limit α → 0 it turns out that (σ z ) 2 α (σ p ) 2 α → 1 (see Figure 2 . The explicit expression for the normalized coherent states arises from equation ( where p F q is a generalized hypergeometric function defined by The mean values for the operators in Eq. ( In the limit α → 0 we get (σ z ) 2 α (σ p ) 2 α → 4 (see Figure The probability density ρ = Ψ † α Ψ α will be used to analyze the properties of the graphene coherent states. It will depend on the following matrix elements Note also that, according to Eq. ( where θ =Arg[α], r = |α|. Plots of this probability density for two magnetic field intensities and different θ's and r's are shown in Figure A. Case with f (2) = 0. On the other hand, for the states of Eq. ( B. Case with f (2) = 0. Finally, by employing the states of Eq. ( For the graphene coherent states under study, the probability density reaches a maximum which displaces along the x direction as the parameter θ ∈ [0, π/2] grows. Also, when r → ∞ we have ρ(r) → 0 θ. The previous behavior can be interpreted as follows. According to the mean values of the position and momentum operators, they can be expressed in terms of the complex eigenvalue α in the way: where F 1,2 (|α|) are certain functions that depend on the graphene coherent states under study. In particular, when α is real (for θ = 0) we have p = 0 which means that, on average, the electron moves as many times to the right as to the left, canceling out at the end the positive momentum contributions with the negative ones. Meanwhile, when α is purely imaginary (for θ = π/2) we have that ẑ = 0. This can be interpreted as if the system would perform symmetric oscillations around the equilibrium position z 0 (or potential center), which is determined by the magnetic field intensity. On the other hand, when B 0 increases the maximum of the probability density also grows up while their width decreases (due to probability conservation). This means that the electron is to be found in a more bounded region as B 0 grows. An opposite interpretation can be formulated when B 0 decreases. The mean energy value, Ĥ α , is another quantity useful to characterize the graphene coherent states. According to the expansion in Eq. The mean energy value is calculated for each coherent state using this expression, which leads to the following results. Ĥ α for f (1) = 0. For the coherent states of Eq. ( 3.4.2 Ĥ α for f (1) = 0 A. Case with f (2) = 0. For the coherent states of Eq. ( While Figures Dirac electrons in graphene placed in homogeneous magnetic fields which are orthogonal to the material surface are ideal systems to start implementing the coherent states treatment in solid state physics. In particular, for constant magnetic fields the problem has been addressed for the first time quite recently It is important to remark that, in a sense, the graphene coherent states remind the multiphoton coherent states On the other hand, the analysis of the probability density allows to characterize some physical properties of the graphene coherent states. This function indicates that the description for these states remains simple for finite r, whatever the value of the parameter θ is. However, the probability density reaches a maximum whose position along the x axis actually depends on θ (see Figures Finally, it is important to stress that the non-uniqueness of the annihilation operator leaves open the possibility of exploring more complicated expressions for this operator. As a conse-quence, plenty of new sets of coherent states can be generated; some of them could be more useful than others for describing interesting physical phenomena in graphene and other carbon allotropes (see e.g. 