Josephson junctions with graphene as the weak link between superconductors have been intensely studied in recent years, with respect to both fundamental physics and potential applications. However, most of the previous work was based on mechanically exfoliated graphene, which is not compatible with mass production. Here we present our research using graphene grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) as the weak link of Josephson junctions. We demonstrate that CVD-graphene-based Josephson junctions with Nb electrodes can work effectively without any thermal hysteresis from 1.5 K down to a base temperature of 320 mK, and they show an ideal Fraunhofer-like interference pattern in a perpendicular magnetic field. We also show that the critical current of the junction can be tuned by a gate voltage. Furthermore, for our shortest junctions (50 nm in length), we find that the normal state resistance oscillates with the gate voltage, indicating that the junctions are in the ballistic regime, a feature not previously observed in CVD-graphene-based Josephson junctions. graphene-superconductor (SGS) Josephson junctions should have a bipolar critical current that can be tuned from the electron band to the hole band by application of a gate voltage. Here we report our study on SGS junctions based on CVD graphene. The fabrication process has been carefully optimised to be compatible with very short and wide junctions. We show that these junctions exhibit ideal I-V characteristics and an ideal Fraunhofer pattern in a perpendicular magnetic field. We also show that the critical current of the junction can be effectively tuned by the gate voltage. Conduction through junctions based on CVD graphene is usually assumed to be diffusive due to a short mean free path. We have developed a robust process to fabricate Josephson junctions based on CVD graphene, which is compatible with mass production. The graphene samples used in our experiment (Graphenea TM ) were synthesised and transferred to a silicon substrate with a 300nm-thick oxide layer. The transferred graphene was initially characterised by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM), which showed that the silicon substrate was fully covered by graphene, mostly mono-layer (see Supporting Information for the images). After that, we use electron beam lithography (EBL) to define the superconducting electrodes. In order to reduce the junction normal state resistance R n and thus to increase the junction critical current I c , the Josephson junctions we define are of short length L, in the range 50-250 nm, and large width W = 80 μm, i.e. with a typical aspect ratio of ~1/1000 (Figure We measured the electronic properties of the graphene-based Josephson junctions using a normal 4-probe configuration, in a where R n is the normal state resistance of the junction, Δ is the temperature dependent energy gap of the superconductor, ω = πk B T(2n + 1)/ħ is the Matsubara frequency for integer n, φ is the phase difference across the weak-link, and δ = √Δ 2 cos 2 (φ/2) + (ħω) For a given T, the expressions in Eqs. ( We also measured the electronic properties of the junctions in a perpendicular applied magnetic field. As Josephson junctions with finite area, they are expected to show the effect of quantum interference, since the perpendicular magnetic field can induce a phase difference between the supercurrent at different points across the junction width. In Figure The higher-order peaks, though not as high in contrast as the central ones, are still clearly visible. In another measurement on the same device, we managed to see peaks up to ±80 μT (Figure One of the key advantages of a graphene-based Josephson junction is that the critical current can be effectively tuned by the gate voltage, thanks to the relatively low density of states in graphene. The product of critical current I c and normal state resistance R n is the characteristic switching voltage when the junction jumps from the superconducting state to the normal state around the critical current. For a weak-link Josephson junction in the dirty limit, the product I c R n is a figure of particular interest since it is solely determined by the operating temperature and the energy gap of the superconductor, as indicated by the form of Eq. ( where Δ 0 ≈ 1.764k B T c is the superconducting energy gap at T = 0 K. In Figure Hall bar structures on the same CVD graphene sample, using the same fabrication technique as for the junctions. From a 4-probe measurement on the Hall bar at room temperature, we calculate that the conductivity σ of the graphene is 1.92 mS. From the Hall effect measurement at room temperature, we calculate that the area carrier density n of the graphene is 5.59 × 10 12 cm -2 . (See Supporting Information for detailed measurement results.) Thus the mean free path at room temperature can be calculated as l = σh 2e 2 √nπ ⁄ = 59 nm. The mean free path is only expected to be a fraction higher at low temperatures, so that the value obtained from the Hall measurement is in excellent agreement with our estimated range above. The measured conductivity of graphene also implies that the contact resistance between the graphene and the superconducting electrodes accounts for a large proportion of the normal state resistance of the junction. In conclusion, we have developed a successful method to fabricate Nb/Graphene/Nb Josephson junctions based on CVD graphene, which is important for both fundamental research and applications. The excellent quality of our junctions has been demonstrated by a series of measurements. The junctions can work over a wide temperature range from 320 mK to 1.50 K without any hysteresis, and exhibit an ideal Fraunhofer quantum interference pattern in a perpendicular magnetic field, showing the uniform distribution of the supercurrent in the junction. By carefully optimising the fabrication process, we have managed to reduce the junction length to 50 nm, shorter than the mean free path, so that evidence of ballistic transport can be observed. As far as we know, this is the first time ballistic transport has been observed in a junction based on CVD graphene. In addition, the critical current can be effectively modulated by the gate voltage, allowing more flexibility for device operation, for example simpler voltage-based control of flux or phase qubits incorporating Josephson junctions. Thanks to the relatively low cost and high quality of CVD graphene, our device is compatible with large scale production whilst maintaining its excellent properties, and so provides a competitive solution for graphene-based electronics. Lower panel: fitting residue versus gate voltage V g , showing periodic oscillations. The red and blue points are the residues when V g is swept upwards and downwards, respectively. All data was measured at 320 mK.