The relation between the polar structural instability and superconductivity in a Weyl semimetal candidate MoTe 2 has been clarified by finely controlled physical and chemical pressure. The physical pressure as well as the chemical pressure, i.e., the Se substitution for Te, enhances the superconducting transition temperature T c at around the critical pressure where the polar structure transition disappears. From the heat capacity and thermopower measurements, we ascribe the significant enhancement of T c at the critical pressure to a subtle modification of the phonon dispersion or the semimetallic band structure upon the polar-to-nonpolar transition. On the other hand, the physical pressure, which strongly reduces the interlayer distance, is more effective on the suppression of the polar structural transition and the enhancement of T c as compared with the chemical pressure, which emphasizes the importance of the interlayer coupling on the structural and superconducting instability in MoTe 2 . Inversion symmetry breaking and polar structural instability in metallic compounds have received growing attention as a key factor for exploring exotic electronic states Given the semimetallic band dispersion along with the inversion symmetry breaking and spin-orbit coupling, there may exist topologically protected crossing points at the vicinity of the Fermi level, which allows the emergence of the Weyl fermion as a low-energy excitation In this Rapid Communication, we adopt not only the physical pressure but the chemical pressure, that is the Se substitution for Te, to establish the phase diagram of MoTe 2 as a function of temperature and pressure. Upon the application of physical and chemical pressures, T c of 0.1 K in MoTe 2 increases significantly by a factor of more than 20 with replacing the T d (polar) phase by the 1T' (nonpolar) phase. To clarify the role of the polar lattice distortion in the superconductivity, we measured the heat capacity and thermopower of the polar and nonpolar phases in Mo(Te 1-x Se x ) 2 and found that the superconductivity is sensitive to the subtle modification of the phonon dispersion or the Fermi surface topology. In addition, the importance of the interlayer coupling both on the structural and superconducting transitions in MoTe 2 is discussed from the viewpoint of the anisotropic lattice change under pressure. Single crystals of MoTe 2 were prepared by the chemical vapor transport method as reported in Ref. Figures Next, we compare the normal state properties of polar and nonpolar phases in Mo(Te 1-x Se x ) 2 with x = 0 and x = 0.2, respectively. To analyze the phonon properties and electronic density of states, we measured the temperature dependence of the specific heat C p . Figure Here we discuss the possible origin of the large enhancement of T c upon the structural transition from the polar to the nonpolar phase in Mo(Te 1-x Se x ) 2 . Using the evaluated Θ D , the electron-phonon coupling strength λ p can be calculated with the equation of the McMillan formula By assuming the Coulomb pseudopotential μ * = 0.1 (commonly accepted value), λ p is evaluated to be 0.31 and 0.52 for x = 0 and x = 0.2, respectively. These values are similar to that in Ref. where I 2 i , D i (E F ), M i , and ω 2 i are the mean-squared electron-phonon coupling matrix element averaged over the Fermi surface, electronic density of states at the Fermi surface, atomic mass, and averaged squared phonon frequency of ith atoms in the unit cell, respectively On the other hand, λ p can be calculated using the Eliashberg electron-phonon spectral function α 2 F(ω), expressed as λ p = ∞ 0 dωα 2 F(ω)/ω. Recently, it has been reported that a transverse acoustic phonon mode corresponding mainly to the Te-Te interlayer vibrations in the 1T' phase of WTe 2 has a significant contribution to λ p through the large density of α 2 F(ω) To elucidate the possible origin of the difference between the two phase diagrams, we compare the lattice parameters of MoTe 2 as functions of physical and chemical pressures. As shown by red circles in Fig. In conclusion, we establish the structural and superconducting phase diagrams of MoTe 2 as functions of temperature and the physical or chemical pressures. Both kinds of pressure, especially the physical pressure, significantly enhance T c in the vicinity of the critical pressure P c , where the polar lattice instability disappears. From the anisotropic lattice changes under the physical and chemical pressures, the interlayer coupling is found to be a key parameter dominating both the structural and superconducting instability. Note that the chemical pressure, which has less influence on the interlayer coupling, enhances T c as well as the physical pressure, implying that not only the interlayer distance but the polar lattice distortion has an impact on the superconductivity. The heat capacity and transport measurements on Mo(Te 1-x Se x ) 2 imply that the electron-phonon coupling is enhanced upon the polar-tononpolar transition. This work demonstrates the strong anticorrelation between the polar lattice instability and superconductivity in the Weyl semimetal candidate MoTe 2 .