We use neutron scattering to study the electron-doped superconducting NaFe0.985Co0.015As (Tc = 14 K), which has co-existing static antiferromagnetic (AF) order (TN = 31 K) and exhibits two neutron spin resonances (Er1 ≈ 3.5 meV and Er2 ≈ 6 meV) at the in-plane AF ordering wave vector Q AF = Q1 = (1, 0) in reciprocal space. In the twinned state below the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural transition Ts, both resonance modes appear at Q1 but cannot be distinguished from Q2 = (0, 1). By detwinning the single crystal with uniaxial pressure along the orthorhombic b-axis, we find that both resonances appear only at Q1 with vanishing intensity at Q2. Since electronic bands of the orbital dxz and dyz characters split below Ts with the dxz band sinking ∼ 10 meV below the Fermi surface, our results indicate that the neutron spin resonances in NaFe0.985Co0.015As arise mostly from quasi-particle excitations between the hole and electron Fermi surfaces with the dyz orbital character. Understanding the role of magnetism in the electron pairing of unconventional superconductors such as copper oxides, iron pnictides, and heavy Fermions continues to be an important topic in modern condensed matter physics because superconductivity in these materials is derived from their long-range antiferromagnetic (AF) ordered parent compounds In electron-doped superconducting NaFe 1-x Co x As [Fig. thus suggesting that the double resonance originates from the anisotropic superconducting gap in the underdoped regime If we assume that low energy spin excitations in iron pnictides originate from quasi-particle excitations between hole and electron Fermi surfaces [Fig. Our neutron scattering experiment was carried out on IN8-Thermal neutron three-axis spectrometer at Institut Laue-Langevin, Grenoble, France. We used horizon- High-quality NaFe 0.985 Co 0.015 As single crystals are prepared by self-flux method Figure Since our experiments are carried out using the same spectrometer setup on the same unaxial pressure detwinned and twinned (pressure released) sample with the same sample holder, we are able to compare the effect of uniaxial pressure on the double resonances directly. Figure Figure Several different theories have been proposed to understand the double resonances Alternatively, the double resonances may be associated with the gap anisotropy induced by the strong orbitalselective superconducting pairing In conclusion, our INS experiments on partially detwinned NaFe 0.985 Co 0.015 As shows that neutron spin resonance in this system only appear at the AF wave vector Q AF = (1, 0). We connect our observations with the anisotropic band shifting below T s in NaFe 1-x Co x As su-perconductors. The d yz /d xz orbital degeneration breaks at T s (or higher temperatures under uniaxial pressure), and bands with dominant d yz orbital character shift up in energy and have better nesting conditions 