We report first-principles calculations of the superconducting properties of β-Bi2Pd within the fully anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg formalism. We find a single anisotropic superconducting gap of s-wave symmetry which varies in magnitude on the different regions of the Fermi surface. The calculated superconducting energy gap on the Fermi surface, the superconducting transition temperature, the specific heat, and the quasi-particle density of states are in good agreement with the corresponding experimental results and support the view that β-Bi2Pd is a phonon-mediated single anisotropic gap superconductor. In recent years considerable attention has been devoted to the study of superconductors in the Bi-Pd family of alloys In this work, we present the first theoretical study of the phonons and the role of the electron-phonon interaction in the superconducting state of β-Bi 2 Pd by performing state-of-the-art ab initio calculations powered by electron-phonon Wannier interpolation The calculations are performed within the generalized gradient approximation to density-functional theory The superconducting gap is evaluated using the anisotropic Migdal-Eliasberg formalism The technical details of the Migdal-Eliashberg calculations have been described extensively in Refs. Z(k, iω n ) is the mass renormalization function, ∆(k, iω n ) is the superconducting gap function, λ(k, k ,n -n ) is the momentum-and energy-dependent electron-phonon coupling, k (k ) is an electronic state of combined band and momentum index, and μ * is the semiempirical Coulomb parameter From the superconducting gap function ∆(k, iω n ) one obtains the superconducting gap at real-valued frequencies ∆(k, ω) via Padé approximants Figures The inclusion of the SOC leads to the splitting of bands around the Fermi level and the opening of two continuous gaps that extend over the whole Brillouin zone as shown in Fig. In order to quantify the interaction between electrons and phonons, we calculate the Eliashberg spectral function, α 2 F (ω), and the cumulative electron-phonon coupling (EPC) strength, λ(ω). As shown in Fig. After assessing the EPC, we investigate its effect on the superconducting pairing mechanism. The superconducting gap function and the critical temperature are estimated by solving the anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations Figures We further fit the temperature dependence of the average value of the superconducting gap using the singleband BCS s-wave model with ∆(0) taken from our first-principles calculations. Here α BCS = 1.764, t = T /T c is the reduced temperature, ε = ε/∆(0) is the normalized normal-state singleparticle energy, k B θ D is the maximum phonon energy within the Debye theory set to 1000, Ẽ = ε2 + ∆2 is the normalized excited quasi-particle (electron and hole) energy, and ∆ = ∆/∆(0) is the superconducting gap normalized by its zero temperature value. In the second case, the data is fitted using the single-gap α model Next, the temperature dependence of the normalized electronic specific heat in the superconducting state is calculated within the α model using the following expression -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function and γ n = (2/3)π 2 k 2 B N F is the Sommerfeld coefficient. The temperature derivative of the gap function d ∆2 (t)/dt is given by where g = α BCS √ ε2 + ∆2 2t . In Fig. The argument for a multigap scenario presented in Ref. Besides the temperature dependence of the specific heat, other measurements have been used to address the issue of multigap superconductivity. The temperature dependence of the lower critical field Finally, we calculate the quasi-particle density of states (DOS) in the superconducting state N s (ω) according to: Our results at 1 K are shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have studied the superconducting properties of β-Bi 2 Pd within the ab initio anisotropic Migdal-Eliashberg theory. We have shown that the spinorbit coupling only results in a slight increase in the predicted superconducting gap and critical temperature, while the structure of the superconducting gap remains practically unaffected. We find a sizable anisotropy in the electron-phonon coupling leading to a single superconducting gap which varies in magnitude over the disconnected sheets of the Fermi surface. The experimental superconducting gap, critical temperature, specific heat, and tunneling conductance are well described assuming a conventional phonon-mediated mechanism as the origin of the superconducting transition.