In the presence of spin-orbit coupling, electron scattering off impurities depends on both spin and orbital angular momentum of electrons -spin-orbit scattering. Although some transport properties are subject to spin-orbit scattering, experimental techniques directly accessible to this effect are limited. Here we show that a signature of spin-orbit scattering manifests itself in quasiparticle interference (QPI) imaged by spectroscopic-imaging scanning tunneling microscopy. The experimental data of a polar semiconductor BiTeI are well reproduced by numerical simulations with the T -matrix formalism that include not only scalar scattering normally adopted but also spin-orbit scattering stronger than scalar scattering. To accelerate the simulations, we extend the standard efficient method of QPI calculation for momentum-independent scattering to be applicable even for spin-orbit scattering. We further identify a selection rule that makes spin-orbit scattering visible in the QPI pattern. These results demonstrate that spin-orbit scattering can exert predominant influence on QPI patterns and thus suggest that QPI measurement is available to detect spin-orbit scattering. Spin-dependent scattering has played important roles in many fields of physics for a long time. Spin-dependent asymmetric scattering of electron beams in vacuum provided a foundation of relativistic quantum mechanics For example, spin-dependent impurity scattering caused by spin-orbit scattering is among the origins of anomalous Hall effect and (extrinsic) spin Hall effect Interference of wave functions results in a periodic modulation of the local density of states (LDOS). This modulation, known as quasiparticle interference (QPI), has been imaged by spectroscopic imaging scanning tunneling microscopy (SI-STM) in a wide variety of materials A primal difference between spin-orbit and scalar scattering is that the former depends on both spin and momentum of electrons whereas the latter does not. Consequently, spin-orbit scattering can cause additional enhancement or suppression of QPI that is unanticipated for scalar scattering. Lee et al. theoretically indicate that spin-orbit scattering enhances new scattering channels for the surface states of topological insulator Bi 2 Te 3 In this paper, exploiting atomic-resolution SI-STM and numerical simulations, we reveal that spin-orbit scattering is predominant for QPI of the quasi-two-dimensional states of a polar semiconductor BiTeI. We performed a detailed analysis of QPI using the standard Tmatrix formalism with an extended technique to accelerate calculations including not only momentum-independent scalar scattering but also momentum-dependent spin-orbit scattering. All the components of QPI observed by the experiments are successfully reproduced when spin-orbit scattering is considered. The key ingredient is the selection rule due to spinorbit scattering, which selectively enhances one of the main scattering channels contributing QPI of BiTeI. Our finding demonstrates that spin-orbit scattering is actually observed in QPI and provides a foothold to get better insight into the electronic states through QPI. BiTeI has a polar crystal structure with layered stacking of triple layers composed of Te, Bi, and I layers, and hosts giant Rashba-type spin splitting in bulk bands as well as at the surface as observed by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) To define points to be focused, we briefly summarize QPI of BiTeI. (Experimental details are described in Ref. 24.) Figure Although the positions of the hexagonal ring and the strong Γ-M peaks are understood as described above, there remains a puzzle in their intensities. The intraband scattering is mostly forbidden because the backscattering from k to -k is suppressed due to the antiparallel spin orientations. The Γ-M peaks are nevertheless allowed because of deviation from the backscattering. Meanwhile, the interband scattering giving the hexagonal ring is always q inter q inter q inter q intra q intra q intra q inter Intra-band ("peak") allowed because the spin orientations are almost parallel. That is, the spin texture of the band structure is more beneficial for the hexagonal ring than for the Γ-M peaks, although the former is actually weaker than the latter. This inverted intensity is a robust signature of spin-orbit scattering, as revealed below. To solve the puzzle of intensity, we numerically simulate QPI patterns. To model the quasi-two-dimensional state originating from the bulk valence band predominated by Bi 6p z orbitals, where I and σ i (i = x, y, z) are the identity matrix and the Pauli matrices, respectively, with If E(k) and V (k) are constant and Λ(k) = 0, Eq. ( We extend so that it is invariant under a three-fold rotation along the z direction, mirror operation about the xz plane (x is along the Γ-M direction), and the time-reversal operation. The higher terms up to k 6 are required for QPI calculations performed in the whole surface Brillouin zone whereas k 3 terms are enough to reproduce the ARPES results near the Γ point , and E 0 = -0.352 eV by fitting experimental data (Fig. where ρ(q, ω) is the Fourier transform of the LDOS, ρ(q, ω) = ρ(r, ω)e -iq•r dr. Here we consider the Green's function in matrix form to include spin. In the presence of a scattering where the T matrix satisfies Fitting results to determine the parameters of Eq. ( Since there is an energy offset ∆E 0 between ARPES and QPI dispersions, E 0 is given by the sum of two fitting parameters, Here Ĝ0 is the bare Green's function, Ĝ0 (k, ω) , where n (k) and ψ n (k) are the nth eigenvalue and the nth eigenstate of the bare Hamiltonian, respectively, with η being a small broadening factor (10 meV for our simulations). QPI patterns can be computed in principle with these equations. For momentumindependent scattering (e.g., scalar scattering), a direct calculation of the k summation requires O(N 4 ) operations for a single QPI image, where N × N is the number of grid points. The amount of this calculation can be reduced to O(N 2 log 2 N ) by using fast Fourier transform (FFT) We begin our simulations with a scalar impurity. In this case, the scattering potential is independent of momentum, V = V 0 I, where V 0 is strength of scattering (V 0 = 0.1 eV for all simulations). The T matrix is also simplified to a momentum-independent form. This simplification makes the calculation greatly easy and is why a scalar impurity is widely assumed as scattering center. The simulation result successfully reproduces the hexagonal ring and the Γ-M peaks as shown in Fig. No prominent feature appears near the Γ point, being consistent with the experiments. (See Appendix B for details.) Although these basic features are reproduced, the ring is stronger than the peaks, replicating the puzzle. This discrepancy in intensities is robust as long as the band parameters are in a reasonable range, suggesting that the scattering is not a simple scalar one. We then consider two kinds of scattering, magnetic scattering and spin-orbit scattering. Since both rotate electron spin, they may change the situation that is beneficial for the hexagonal ring. Figure In contrast, noteworthy results are found for spin-orbit scattering, where c is the effective spin-orbit coupling parameter The remaining feature, the humps in the Γ-M direction, can be calculated by taking data acquisition procedures of SI-STM (the setpoint effect) into account. Even if a dI/dV spectrum is proportional to LDOS at each location as generally assumed, the proportional constant is not generally uniform but has a spatial structure reflecting variation of the tip height. The height of a scanning tip is adjusted at each location such that the tunneling current is a set value. The current is determined by the LDOS integrated up to a given bias voltage V set . Consequently, a dI/dV image observed by SI-STM depends on V set as well as the LDOS, where E F is the Fermi energy All of the hexagonal ring, the strong Γ-M peaks, and the Γ-M humps are well reproduced. The peak intensities agree with the experiment as shown in Fig. The above results of numerical simulations clearly show that spin-orbit scattering is the crucial ingredient to explain the QPI intensities of BiTeI. The contrasting results of magnetic and spin-orbit scattering can be understood as follows. Electrons with spin-up and spindown feel potentials of opposite signs for magnetic scattering An essential point of this mechanism is the scattering amplitude. To the first order of V , a contribution to QPI from a scattering process (k → k) and its time-reversal counterpart (-k → -k ) are written as where Θ is the time-reversal operator. (Derivation of these formulas is written in Appendix C.) The difference between the two processes is found to be the potential in the scattering amplitude. For scalar scattering Vk,k = V 0 I, Eqs. ( As for topological surface states of Bi 2 Te 3 , [9, 10] we presume that spin-orbit scattering sense, the quasi-two-dimensional states of BiTeI with two scattering channels, one of which is sensitive to spin-orbit scattering and the other insensitive, are suited to investigate effects of spin-orbit scattering. QPI arising from electronic states near the Brillouin-zone boundary may be subject to spin-orbit scattering because of large momenta and θ k,k ∼ π/2 Including other factors affecting QPI intensities would be conducive to better quantifying strength of spin-orbit scattering. A delta-function scattering potential is used for simplicity in our simulations. In a more realistic case, V 0 in Eq. ( Strength of spin-orbit scattering therefore may be underestimated due to these factors. Nevertheless, the strength of spin-orbit scattering obtained for BiTeI (80 Å2 ) is much larger than a theoretical value for n-GaAs (5.3 Å2 ), In conclusion, using atomic-resolution SI-STM and numerical simulations with the Tmatrix formalism, we identify a signature of spin-orbit scattering in the QPI patterns of BiTeI. Spin-orbit scattering manifests itself in QPI through a selection rule originating from the scattering amplitude. Our results highlight the importance of the scattering process beyond featureless scalar scattering and, more importantly, suggest a potential capability of QPI measurement as a local, direct (unaffected by scattering time), and quantitative probe of spin-orbit scattering detected heretofore by transport measurements. We believe that including spin-orbit scattering into QPI analysis, which is now readily possible as demonstrated in our simulations, leads to a deeper understanding of electronic states of and more functionality from strong spin-orbit coupling systems. via FFT without taking the k summation FFT, the essential point to reduce the amount of calculation, is available as in Eq. (A3) because Eq. (A1) is expressed virtually as a product of two matrices; one is a function of k and the other is a function of k + q. At a glance, this condition is not satisfied for general scatterers because the T matrix depends on momentum. However, when Vk,k is expressed as a sum of products between kand k -dependent matrices where late QPI patterns as in the case of momentum-independent scattering. We rewrite Eq. ( By multiplying v(k) Ĝ0 (k, ω) from the left and taking a sum with respect to k, we obtain where ω) and M (ω) = p v(p) Ĝ0 (p, ω) t u(p). Since these equations are summarized as K n (k , ω) = n j=1 {M (ω)} j v(k ), Eq. (A5) is also summarized as where {M (ω)} 0 is the identity matrix, t u(k){M (ω)} 0 v(k ) = t u(k)v(k ). Now the T matrix and thus the second term of Eq. ( to O(N 2 log 2 N ). Spin-orbit scattering, Vk,k = V 0 {I + ic(k × k ) • σ}, is written in the form of Eq. (A4). In two dimension, it is written as Vk,k = The M matrix is Note that each element of M is a 2 × 2 matrix independent of k and thus M j is readily calculable. Calculation of Fig. Meanwhile, from the viewpoint of the so-called joint density of states (JDOS), one may expect a large QPI intensity near q = 0; if DOS is large at a given k, large DOS is also found near k, resulting in a large QPI intensity near q = 0. However, as revealed by JDOS calculations shown below, such a JDOS-derived pattern near q = 0 has never been observed in BiTeI. In the JDOS approach, QPI patterns are interpreted to be proportional to JDOS, where ρ 0 (k, ω) is the DOS at k, ρ 0 (k, ω) = -Im Tr G 0 (k, ω) . To include a spin effect, spin-dependent JDOS is considered, where ρ i (k, ω) = -Im Tr σ i G 0 (k, ω) . The JDOS approach always predicts a large QPI intensity near q = 0 because the JDOS is the auto-correlation of ρ i (k, ω). Actually, as shown in Fig. Given Vk ,k † = Vk,k as V is Hermitian, Eqs. The second follows from three identities; g n (-k, ω) = g n (k, ω) as H 0 is time invariant, and β L α = α ΘL † Θ -1 β and β α = α β , where α = Θ α , β = Θ β , and L is a linear operator Therefore, by rotating S m (k ) and ψ m (k ) by π along the z direction, we obtain where R zπ denotes π-rotation of spin orientation along the z direction. Equation (D2) means ψ n (k) σ z ψ m (k ) = 0 for two states with the spin orientations parallel and lying in the xy plane. [1] N. F. Mott, "The Scattering of Fast Electrons by Atomic Nuclei," Proc. R. Soc. A 124, 425-442 (1929).