Recent experiments showed that thinning gallium, iron selenide and 2H tantalum disulfide to single/several monoatomic layer(s) enhances their superconducting critical temperatures. Here, we characterize these superconductors by extracting the absolute values of the London penetration depth, the superconducting energy gap, and the relative jump in specific heat at the transition temperature from their self-field critical currents. Our central finding is that the enhancement in transition temperature for these materials arises from the opening of an additional superconducting gap, while retaining a largely unchanged "bulk" superconducting gap. Literature data reveals that ultrathin niobium films similarly develop a second superconducting gap. Based on the available data, it seems that, for type-II superconductors, a new superconducting band appears when the film thickness becomes smaller than the out-ofplane coherence length. The same mechanism may also be the cause of enhanced interface superconductivity. Fundamental mechanisms governing superconductivity in the two-dimensional (2D) limit represent a long-standing problem in physics On the other hand, 2D systems will often exhibit a van Hove singularity with an associated divergence in the electronic density of states (DOS) which can, within a BCS scenario, result in an enhanced superconducting transition temperature, Tc In this paper we analyze the experimental self-field critical current density, Jc(sf,T), of ultra-thin films including: single-atomic-layer FeSe, few-atomic-layer hexagonal Ga, Mo2C, and exfoliated 2H-TaS2, 2H-NbSe2, and 2H-MoS2 to extract their fundamental superconducting parameters. Some of these systems exhibit a significantly enhanced Tc over that observed in the bulk state, and in most cases their superconducting parameters were not previously established for such ultra-thin films. Because Jc(sf,T) is directly related to the London penetration depth, (T), If a superconductor has rectangular cross-section then the experimentally-measured critical current Ic can be converted to a critical current density Jc = Ic/(4ab), where, in accordance with commonly-accepted convention Recently we showed for type-I superconductors, and for type-II superconductors, where, 0 is the magnetic permeability of free space, 0 is flux quantum, and  = / is the Ginsburg-Landau parameter (any temperature dependence of which we neglect). By measuring Jc(sf,T) and knowing the magnitude of  the inversion of Eq. 4 gives us a tool to convert Jc(sf,T) to absolute values of (T). Figure If Jc(sf,T) measurements are performed to low enough temperature, by which conventional agreement is T < Tc/3 for s-wave [28], and: for d-wave Based on Eqs. 5 and 6, we can conclude that the Jc(sf,T) of s-wave superconductors is exponentially flat for T < Tc/4: while at the same conditions Jc(sf,T) of d-wave superconductors: is a linear function with the slope inversely proportional to (0). For the above case of NbN Previously, we performed this analysis for a wide range of thin-film superconductors, including metals, nitrides, oxides, cuprates, pnictides, borocarbides, MgB2 and heavy Fermions Recently In this paper, we employ the general approach of BCS theory where ΔC/C is the relative jump in electronic specific heat at Tc, and  = 2/3 for s-wave superconductors where, kB is Boltzmann's constant. By substituting Eq. 10 in Eq. 4: one can fit experimental Jc(sf,T) data to deduce (0), Δ(0), ΔC/C and Tc as free-fitting parameters. The corresponding equation for d-wave superconductors can be found elsewhere Next we illustrate the method in the case where the superconductor has two gaps opening on two separate bands as is particularly relevant to the ultra-thin superconductors discussed below. Where there are two strongly-coupled bands, then the so-called -model This means that Jc for each band is calculated using Eq. 11. As a consequence of this, the Jc(sf,T) dataset should be reasonably rich to derive parameters with acceptable uncertainty. However, dense Jc(sf,T) data sets are generally unavailable in the literature. Thus, to run the model (Eq. 12) for limited experimental data sets it is convenient to sacrifice some parameter(s) by fixing to certain value(s). For example, because the specific heat jump, ΔC2/C2, for the band with the smaller gap is poorly constrained we often fix this to the weakcoupling BCS limit for s-wave superconductors, i.e., 1.43 (other authors choose to fix other parameters, see for instance Application of the model to an MgB2 thin film (2b = 10 nm)  0.2 nm, in good agreement with the independently reported value of 85 nm (green data point on y-axis) In the case of a two-band superconductor that has completely decoupled bands, Jc(sf,T) can be written in the form: where, Jc(sf,T) for each band described by Eq. 11, and indices 1 and 2 will be attributed to separate (0), Δ(0), ΔC/C and Tc values for each band and all eight parameters may be used as free-fitting parameters. Again, we need to note, that for sparse Jc(sf,T) datasets one or two of these eight parameters can be fixed. More details and examples for application of this 'weakly-coupled bands model' can be found elsewhere Experimental Jc(sf,T) data for a thin (2b = 10 nm) film of MgB2 (right axis, blue) together with values of (T) (left axis, red) derived by Eq. 4. The solid curves are for the 'strongly-coupled bands model' in a BCS-like fit using Eq. 12. The single green data point at T = 0 K is the independently-reported ground-state value of (0) = 85 nm Sample fabrication details, critical current measurement techniques, and other characterization methods were reported elsewhere Double-atomic-layer hexagonal Ga (2b = 0.552 nm) is a type-II superconductor is shown in Fig. Substituting the derived coherence length, ab(0) = 17.3 nm, into c = ab(0)/ab(0) and using Eq. 11 allows us to fit the Jc data and derive thermodynamic parameters for the Ga film as follows: the transition temperature, Tc = 4.40 ± 0.12 K, the specific heat jump at Tc, C/C = 0.84 ± 0.18, the London penetration depth, ab(0) = 371.5 ± 6 nm, the superconducting energy gap, (0) = 0.91 ± 0.20 meV, and GL parameter, c = 21.5 (Fig. Note that the derived superconducting energy gap is in excellent agreement with that reported from differential tunneling conductance spectra for the same film We can also fit the Bc1(T) data set from the same work where (T) is calculated again using Eq. ( The fit to the Bc1(T) data is shown in Fig. The superconducting transition temperature of single-atomic-layer FeSe (2b = 0.55 nm) is Tc = 23.5 K A fit of the available Jc(sf,T) data to a single-band BCS model (Eqs. 10 and 11) is shown in Fig. The gap is anisotropic in the basal-plane Brillouin zone, modulating with four-fold rotational symmetry between 1.22 meV and 2.0 meV. Our deduced value is therefore very reasonable. Any anisotropy would simply modify the detailed T-dependence of Jc(sf) below Tc2 which, in our case, is insufficiently defined by just three low-T data points. The band with the larger gap with Tc1 = 23.6 ± 0.4 K and ab,1(0) = 346 ± 2 nm has parameters that one can expect for a weak-coupled BCS superconductor: C1/C1 = 1.1 ± 0.1, and 1(0) = 3.45 ± 0.13 meV, that converts to 21(0)/kBTc1 = 3.40 ± 0.15, close to the weakcoupling BCS value. The derived total London penetration depth (which is the composite value originating from both bands) ab(0) = 331 nm is even closer to the bulk value (0) = 325 nm The important point is that a second larger gap is observed in ARPES and STM studies and, perhaps more importantly, the decay length observed for the enhanced gap 2H-TaS2 is a layered superconductor with inter-plane distance of 0.60 nm 12.1 As a result, for the two-decoupled-bands model the derived ground-state London penetration depth (which is the collective value arising from both bands) is ab(0) = 728 nm, practically the same as the value derived for the single-band model (Fig. To further explore this finding, we measure and fit Jc(sf,T) for as wide a range of sample thicknesses as experimentally possible, in this case from 2b = 4.2 nm to 2b = 14.9 nm. The results are presented in Fig. The 'bulk-like' band for all these 2H-TaS2 crystals has a critical temperature within a relatively narrow interval of Tc = 0.70 ± 0.07 K. The consistency of values for the energy gap for this band, (0) = 137 ± 24 eV, is also evident. The small apparent trend of increasing transition temperature for each band as the crystal thickness reduces may not be significant. The standard deviations in Tc values shows that they are largely within error of each other. However, as noted, the larger energy gap in ultra-thin FeSe varies with thickness Based on these results obtained for ultrathin FeSe and TaS2 crystals we can ask the question: is there a common physical condition at which the new superconducting band appears with decreasing crystal thickness? Considering many possibilities for these very different superconductors, we found that the common circumstance is that the crystal thickness becomes smaller than the ground-state out-of-plane coherence length, c(0). Consider the FeSe single-atomic-layer superconductor, noting that: where (0) is the mass anisotropy (which for FeSe is 2.0 What might be the physical origins of this second gap? Firstly, there is clearly some electronic coupling between the superconducting films and their substrates. Using ARPES Lee et al. Alternatively the effect could be intrinsic, involving some kind of electronic renormalisation at the surface due, for example, to image Cooper pairs or coupling to surface plasmons. Turning to the TaS2 exfoliated crystals the mass anisotropy is (0) = 6.7 The data presented in Fig. The inferred thermodynamic parameters are thus consistent with bulk values. Data presented in Fig. Additionally, the experimental Jc(sf,T) data for double-atomic-layer hexagonal Ga (2b = 0.552 nm) does not cover a large enough temperature range to reveal the appearance of the expected second superconducting gap, and this system remains to be studied. However, we are proposing that, as Tc of the double-atomic-layer Ga film is notably higher than for bulk Ga, the same mechanism of the opening of an additional superconducting gap is likely to occur for both Ga double-and triple-atomic-layer Hexagonal triple-atomic-layer Ga (2b = 0.828 nm) is a type-II superconductor Self-field critical currents were measured on a current bridge with width 2a = 2.0 mm. To derive the coherence length we use the same approach as for the hexagonal double-atomiclayer Ga film, i.e. we applied a criterion of 50% normal resistance recovery to the R(T, B) curves The free-fitting value for the coherence length ab(0) = 16.3 ± 0.1 nm is in good agreement with the value obtained for double-atomic-layer hexagonal Ga, ab(0) = 17.3 ± 0.1 nm. Substituting the derived coherence length, ab(0) = 17.3 nm, in Eqs. 4 and 8 allows us to fit the Jc data and derive thermodynamic parameters for the Ga film as follows: the transition temperature, Tc = 3.95 ± 0.03 K, the specific heat jump at Tc, C/C = 2.2 ± 0.2, the London penetration depth, ab(0) = 547 ± 7 nm, the superconducting energy gap, (0) = 0.75 ± 0.07 meV, and GL parameter, c = 33.5 (Fig. The lower energy gap, (0), and larger penetration depth, ab(0), show the trend of weakening superconductivity in the triple-layer Ga film in comparison with the double-layer Ga film, consistent with the fall in transition temperature. We should note that our proposed enhancement in Tc in thin films due to the opening of a second superconducting gap (while the "bulk-like" gap remains unchanged) should be detectable by several other techniques which are sensitive to additional bands crossing the Fermi surface, such as scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) or ARPES, but also these distinct gaps should be evident in the temperature-dependence of the upper critical field. Figure Available Bc1(T), and Bc2(T) data for this system (Fig. and, if we adopt the simple assumption that the T-dependence of  derives solely from that of , using  =  vF/( ) then we may use Eq. 10 to calculate the T-dependence of Bcross. Thus, if g(T) represents the T-dependence of  -2 then the full equation for Bc2(T) for a two-band superconductor is of the form: where indices 1 and 2 denote Band 1 and Band 2, respectively. A fit of Bcross(T) to Eq. ( To lend more support for our proposal that a new superconducting gap appears when the crystal thickness become less than the out-of-plane coherence length, c(0), we have searched the literature for Jc(sf,T) data for other very thin films. We report below analyses of datasets we could find to date. Rusanov et. al. We should mention that the interface superconductivity To lend more support for this idea in Fig. There is no experimental data for the coherence length in (CaCuO2)n/(SrTiO3)m=2 superlattices, however, reported estimated values for the in-plane coherence length, ab(0) = 2.5-3.5 nm, and for the mass anisotropy,  = 4.5-7.5, for a comparable (CaCuO2)n/(SrTiO3)m=3 superlattice We consider now other 2D and atomically-thin systems in which the effect of a new gap opening might be easily observed. We have only chosen systems which are currently under active research and development. This does not mean that other systems beyond those listed below have less interest. CCO unit cells The Ye and Iwasa group discovered More recently At present, only Costanzo et al Transition metal carbides form another class of 2D superconductors in which the effect of a new superconducting gap opening might be observed. Recently Xu et al From several Bc2(T) and Ic(st,T) datasets for Mo2C films of different thicknesses and widths reported by Xu et al The GL parameter was established to be c = 23. The derived C/C = 3.5 ± 0.3 and (0) = 0.61 ± 0.08 with 2(0)/kBTc = 4.8 ± 0.6 indicate that this superconductor is a strongcoupled superconductor. However, measurements need to be done below 2 K to ascertain whether a second gap opens. Niobium diselenide is another 2D superconductor in which the effect of new superconducting band opening might be observed. Recently, several groups Figure All materials considered to this point were type-II s-wave superconductors. Hightemperature superconducting cuprates form the widest class of quasi-2D superconductors which are, however, type-II d-wave superconductors. As there is a vast literature on cuprate superconductors we defer any discussion on these with the exception of one very recent report. Fete et al Saito et al The status of the topic was recently reviewed Here we have analyzed self-field critical currents for atomically-thin Ga, TaS2 and FeSe superconductors and deduced their absolute values of the London penetration depth, the superconducting energy gap, and the relative jump in specific heat at Tc. It has been observed in all of these systems that Tc is elevated relative to the bulk values and, in TaS2 and FeSe, the enhancement in both cases has been previously attributed to increased electron-phonon interaction. Our central finding is that this enhancement in Tc observed for these ultrathin materials arises from the opening of a second, larger superconducting gap, while keeping essentially unchanged the smaller "bulk" superconducting gap. The fact that this smaller gap remains unchanged is strong evidence that the electron-phonon interaction itself remains unchanged and that a new band moves up to cross the Fermi surface or a preexisting ungapped band at the Fermi surface becomes gapped. As such, the effect seems to be neither associated with the presence of a van Hove singularity Based on the available data, we conclude that for type-II superconductors the common physical condition at which this new superconducting band appears is that the film thickness falls below the ground-state out-of-plane coherence length for the material. A similar mechanism may also come into play for the appearance of interface superconductivity. The parameters p will be optimised when 0 = ∂SSE(p) ∂p = -2 ∑(y i -f(p, x i )) ∂f(p, x i ) ∂p . The estimated asymptotic covariance matrix of the estimated parameters can be formed: We can also obtain an estimate of how much each parameter depends on the values of the others using the equation dep p i = 1 -1/V ii (V -1 ) ii . We calculate the adjusted R-squared coefficient by using the following method: Where y i is the experimentally-observed dependent variable, f i is the calculated dependent variable, and σ i is the estimated error for the variable y i .