Unlike the widely studied s-type two-gap superconductor MgB 2 , the chemically similar compounds ZrB 2 and HfB 2 do not superconduct above 1 K. Yet, it has been shown that small amounts of self-or extrinsic doping (in particular with vanadium), can induce superconductivity in these materials. Based on results of different macro-and microscopic measurements, including magnetometry, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), resistivity, and muon-spin rotation (μ + SR), we present a comparative study of Zr 0.96 V 0.04 B 2 and Hf 0.97 V 0.03 B 2 . Their key magnetic and superconducting features are determined and the results are considered within the theoretical framework of multiband superconductivity proposed for MgB 2 . Detailed Fermi surface (FS) and electronic structure calculations reveal the difference between MgB 2 and transition-metal diborides. Borides, carbides, and nitrides were among the early compound superconductors discovered in the first half of the previous century ZrB 2 and HfB 2 are two such non-superconducting refractory materials with melting points of ∼ 3000 K, behaving essentially as Pauli paramagnets down to low temperatures. The electrons in the 4d shell of zirconium (Zr) and those in the 5d shell of hafnium (Hf) are less localized than those of the 3d row. In a recent study, Both pure and V-doped compounds crystallize in the layered AlB 2 structure with a P6/mmm hexagonal space group, where the Zr (or Hf) atoms and the B atoms occupy, respectively, the 1a (0,0,0) and 2d (1/3, 2/3, 1/2) positions. As in MgB 2 , their crystal lattices are characterized by hexago- nal metal layers alternating with graphite-like B layers (see Fig. Previous results of band-structure calculations The ZrB 2 FS consists of four short cylindrical hole-type pockets around the A point and four tripod-shaped electrontype pockets, each consisting of a triangular ring around the K point and three elliptic extensions near the Γ AH plane. Since the FS of HfB 2 exhibits essentially the same features, we refrained from presenting it in a separate figure. These features are really quite different from those of the FS of MgB 2 . Most obvious is the reduction of the two almost two-dimensional hole sheets centered near the A point for MgB 2 to one much smaller and 3-D type pocket for Zrand Hf-diboride. Likewise the 3-D parts are quite different in shape for MgB 2 . It is therefore not surprising that the two borides investigated here are less favorably conditioned for superconductivity than MgB 2 and indeed for both pure compounds, no superconductivity was detected above 1 K. The band-structure calculations for the T-borides considered here indicate that in both cases the density of electronic states at the Fermi energy N (E F ) is located in a region where N (E) exhibits a pseudo-gap, i.e., is much reduced. It is thus remarkable that a very small (4-5%) V-for-Zr or Vfor-Hf substitution results in onsets of superconductivity up to approximately 8 K. More details on the crystal structure and defect-induced phase instabilities of these types of compounds are discussed in Ref. 7. Polycrystals of ZrB 2 , HfB 2 , Zr 0.96 V 0.04 B 2 , and Hf 0.97 V 0.03 -B 2 were synthesized via boron carbide reduction and structurally characterized as described in Ref. 7. For our magnetic measurements, the samples in form of fine powders, with masses between 50 and 100 mg, were sealed in Teflon (PTFE) tubes. The NMR investigations including line-shape and spin-lattice relaxation measurements were performed in an applied magnetic field of 3.505 T, since higher fields would reduce the possibility to resolve the quadrupolar effects. In our case, the 11 B nucleus (spin I = 3 /2) proved to be the most suitable one, since it allows a direct comparison between the four samples and it is four times more abundant than 10 B. The NMR signals were monitored by means of standard spin-echo sequences, consisting in π/2 and π pulses of 2 and 4 μs, respectively, with recycle delays ranging from 10 to 100 s, depending on the temperature ranging between 4 and 295 K. The NMR line-shapes were obtained via the fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the echo signal which, due to the high sensitivity of 11 B, could be acquired using relatively few scans (from 4 to 2048). The spin-lattice relaxation times T 1 were measured with the inversion recovery method, using a π-π/2-π pulse sequence. The magnetometry measurements were performed by using a commercial Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS XL) from Quantum Design, equipped with a 7-T magnet and covering the temperature range from 2 to 400 K. For the resistivity measurements, the samples were densely packed in cylindrical pellets with a diameter of 1.4 mm and a thickness of 5 mm, produced by applying high external pressures. The electrical contacts with a four-probe configuration were made by means of an electrically-conducting silver epoxy. Preliminary μ + SR measurements were made at the GPS spectrometer of the SμS facility of Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) in Villigen, Switzerland. The available sample mass (300 mg) was sufficient to stop the 4-MeV muons without additional degraders and with a minimal background signal. To avoid pinning effects, well known for distorting the vortex lattice (VL) in the superconducting phase of MgB 2 , 18 the transverse-field (TF) muon-spin rotation measurements were made at the highest field available (0.6 T). The 11 B NMR lines of all the samples (both pure and Vdoped) were measured from 5 to 295 K; typical data are shown in Fig. with eq the largest EFG component (parallel to the applied magnetic field), I the nuclear spin, and Q the quadrupole moment of the nucleus. By considering the hexagonal symmetry of the AlB 2 structure, we can assume that the in-plane anisotropy parameter η = (V x x -V y y )/V zz = 0 and, therefore, V x x = V y y . Since the V i, j tensor is traceless, by evaluating eq = V zz from the simulated ν Q data (see Eq. 1), we get V zz = 1.1 × 10 20 Vm -2 and V x x = V y y = -5.5 × 10 19 Vm -2 . 1 (T ) data at 3.505 T for all the investigated samples, compared with MgB 2 and AlB 2 data (from Ref. 24). From a standard fit, assuming only one spin-lattice relaxation time, The raw data, i.e., Here τ d is the time delay in the NMR pulse sequence, T 1s and T 1n the spin-lattice relaxation times of the superconducting and normal grains, respectively, α the superconducting volume fraction and β the stretching parameter (close to 1 in this case). We assume that α is a temperaturedependent fit parameter, ranging from ∼ 1 (in case of maximum superconducting fraction, as evaluated from magnetometry data), down to 0. In the transition region the two plateaux are connected with a sigmoidal function. The T -1 1 (T ) spin-lattice relaxation data above T c follow the linear behavior in T of a simple metal (see Fig. The low-field region (from 0.2 to 6 mT), exhibits an initial linear trend in M (H). It is possible to extract an approximate value of μ 0 H c1 , defining it as the field at which the deviation from the linear trend (called Meissner line) exceeds the sensitivity of the instrument. Performing this analysis, for each of the M vs. H curves, we obtain μ 0 H c1 (T ), as shown in Fig. Systematic resistivity measurements were performed in zero field on all the samples (ZrB 2 , HfB 2 , Zr 0.96 V 0.04 B 2 , and Hf 0.97 V 0.03 B 2 ), as shown in Fig. Each resistance measurements in zero field (ZF) was performed from 2 to 310 K, while in field we focused our attention on the superconducting transition region (range from 2 to 10 K). Due to the small resistivity values, i.e., ρ(T c ) ∼ 0.7 μΩcm for Zr 0.96 V 0.04 B 2 and 0.8 μΩcm for Hf 0.97 V 0.03 B 2 , we argue that we can analyze our data within the clean limit approximation. Based on the data at different fields, the μ 0 H c2 (T ) values were evaluated. According to the theory of Werthamer, Helfand, and Hohenberg (WHH), Within this approximation, μ 0 H c2 (T c ) can be fitted with a parabolic curve: From the Ginzburg-Landau formula ξ(0) = [φ 0 /(2πμ 0 H c2 (0))] 1/2 , our estimate of the coherence lengths ξ(0) in both Zr 0.96 V 0.04 B 2 and Hf 0.97 V 0.03 B 2 are 4.5(1) and 5.5(1) nm, respectively. By numerically solving we finally obtain the Ginzburg-Landau κ parameter, with a value of 125 for Zr 0.96 V 0.04 B 2 and 80 for Hf 0.97 V 0.03 B 2 , respectively indicating the strong type II nature of these superconductors. From κ = λ/ξ, the London penetration depth λ(0) in the two materials, is 570 and 445 nm, respectively. Values of similar magnitude for the magnetic field penetration depth were obtained from preliminary muon-spin rotation (μSR) experiments on Zr 0.96 V 0.04 B 2 (see Fig. Here Φ 0 = 2.068 × 10 -3 Tμm 2 is the magnetic flux quantum and γ μ = 2π × 135.53 MHz/T, the muon gyromagnetic ratio. Figure As a final note, we recall that the choice of the applied transverse field is crucial for the correct determination of the field penetration depth. Indeed, detailed studies of the magnetic field dependence of the muon-spin depolarization rate in MgB 2 (see, e.g., Figs. 1 and 2 in Ref. 18) have shown strong pinning effects in low applied fields (below 0.3 T). These imply a considerably distorted vortex lattice leading to a strong decay of the muon asymmetry and hence underestimated λ ab (0) values. However, since in fields exceeding 0.3 T, only weak or no pinning effects were observed, we are confident that by applying a transverse field of 0.6 T, our results reflect the penetration depth.