Motivated by the exploration of bipolaronic superconductivity in conducting polymers, we examine such a possibility in the starting member of p-oligophenyls -p-terphenyl with three phenyl rings, belonging to the family of conducting polymer polyparaphenylene. The formation of bipolarons is identified from Raman scattering measurements. Both the dc and ac magnetic susceptibility measurements reveal that p-terphenyl is a type-II superconductor with a critical temperature of 7.2 K upon doping potassium. The electron-lattice interaction, manifested by pronounced bipolaronic bands, is suggested to account for the observed superconductivity. Conducting polymers are thus demonstrated to have the potential for the development of new superconducting technologies and devices. Conducting polymers have been the focus of a great deal of research in the past nearly 40 years A bipolaron is spinless with an electric charge ±2e. It is then thought of as analogous to the Cooper pair in the BCS theory of superconductivity The natural separation of spin and charge in such onedimensional systems remains an active area of condensed matter research and is thought to be relevant to high temperature superconductivity. Furthermore, the charge pairing (bipolaron) can be formed at room temperature in conducting polymers due to strong electron-lattice interaction Among conducting polymers, polyparaphenylene is attractive for its non-degenerate ground state structure, high conductivity Potassium-doped p-terphenyl was synthesized from purified p-terphenyl (99.5%) and potassium metal (99%) purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and Sinopharm Chemical Reagent, respectively, according to the procedure reported previously Upon doping potassium into p-terphenyl, the strongest intra-ring C-C stretching bands at 1605 and 1593 cm -1 show little downward shifts in wavenumber. They merge to bipolaronic bands centered at 1589 cm -1 Having clarified the bipolaronic character, we turn to examine the possible superconductivity in the synthesized sample. Zero electrical dc resistivity and Meissner effect are the two essential characters for a material to be called as a superconductor. Both of them are reached at a critical or superconducting transition temperature T c and below. However, the temperature-dc conductivity measurements in these materials are not as easy as one thought. They are mechanically brittle, so it is very difficult to fabricate reliable electrical contacts to measure their intrinsic transport properties. In fact, their true metallic state has not been achieved from the temperature-dc conductivity measurements The measurements of both the dc and ac magnetic susceptibilities were performed on our sample with a SQUID magnetometer (Quantum Design MPMS3) in the temperature range of 1.8-300 K. Figure The Meissner effect of this material is clearly demonstrated from the magnetization measurements as a func- tion of magnetic field up to 500 Oe in the ZFC run at various temperatures in the superconducting state. The results are summarized in Fig. Figure Figure The obtained H c2 (T ) as a function of temperature is shown in Fig. The present results provide unambiguous evidence for superconductivity in p-terphenyl, which was driven by the exploration of bipolaronic superconductivity in conducting polymers. The formation of bipolarons in this material has been identified from Raman scattering measurements. Although the mechanism of superconductivity either from bipolarons This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China. We thank Hai-Qing Lin and Ho-Kwang Mao for strong support and valuable discussion.