We report the effects of heavy-ion irradiation on FeSe single crystals by irradiating Uranium up to a dose equivalent matching field of B φ = 16 T. Almost continuous columnar defects along the c-axis with a diameter ∼10 nm are confirmed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. Tc is found to be suppressed by introducing columnar defects at a rate of dTc/dB φ ∼ -0.29KT -1 , which is much larger than those observed in iron pnictides. This unexpected large suppression of Tc in FeSe is discussed in relation to the large diameter of the columnar defects as well as its unique band structure with a remarkably small Fermi energy. The critical current density is first dramatically enhanced with irradiation reaching a value over ∼2×10 5 A/cm 2 (∼5 times larger than that of the pristine sample) at 2 K (self-field) with B φ = 2 T, then gradually suppressed with increasing B φ . The δl-pinning associated with charge-carrier mean free path fluctuations, and the δTc-pinning associated with spatial fluctuations of the transition temperature are found to coexist in the pristine FeSe, while the irradiation increases the contribution from δl-pinning, and makes it dominant over B φ = 4 T. FeSe composed of only stackings Fe-Se layers To understand these intriguing properties and the unexpected high T c in FeSe system, it is crucial to know the gap structure, which is unfortunately still under debate. A nodal gap was reported based on the observation of the V-shaped STM spectrum, a nearly linearly temperature dependent penetration depth at low temperatures, and a large residual thermal conductivity Unfortunately, the effects of heavy-ion irradiation on pure FeSe is still left unexplored. In this paper, we re-port a systematic study of heavy-ion irradiation in highquality FeSe single crystals by Uranium irradiation. T c is found to change sensitively with the density of columnar defects with an unexpected large suppression rate dT c /dB φ ∼ -0.29KT -1 . The critical current density is first dramatically enhanced with irradiation up to a doseequivalent matching field B φ = 2 T, and then gradually suppressed with further increasing the dose. Origins of the large T c suppression rate as well as the vortex pinning mechanism are discussed in detail. High-quality FeSe single crystals were grown by the vapor transport method Single crystals used for the irradiation were selected from the same batch, and were confirmed to show similar properties in the pristine state with negligible piece dependent T c and J c . Before the irradiation, single crystals were cleaved to thin plates with thickness ∼20 μm along the c-axis, which is much smaller than the projected range of 2.6 GeV Uranium for FeSe of ∼60 μm, calculated by SRIM-2008 (the Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter-2008) According to the study by G. Szenes where S e is the electronic stopping power, S et is the threshold value, and a(0) is related to the thermal diffusivity. The eq.( The T m of FeSe is ∼1238 K Figure To study the effects of columnar defects to the critical current density, we first measured magnetic hysteresis loops (MHLs) at several temperatures for the pristine and Uranium irradiated crystals. Typical results of the MHLs for the pristine and irradiated crystals with B φ = 1, 2, 4, and 8 T are depicted in Fig. The shape change of MHLs after irradiation can be seen more clearly in the scaled plot. As has been demonstrated in several superconductors, the MHLs at different temperatures can be well scaled onto one curve by choosing appropriate reducing parameters M * and H * , if one single pinning mechanism is dominant where ∆M is M down -M up , M up [emu/cm 3 ] and M down [emu/cm 3 are the magnetization when sweeping fields up and down, respectively, a [cm] and b [cm] are sample widths (a < b). Magnetic field dependence of J c for the pristine and irradiated crystals with B φ = 1, 2, 4, and 8 T are shown in Figs. than 2 T, the value of J c is decreased, which makes the H sf too small to cause the dip-like structure, while the central peak is still broader than the pristine one. The effects of columnar defects are summarized by the normalized T c and the self-field J c at 2 K as a function of B φ as shown in Fig. Before discussing the unexpected large T c suppression rate by Uranium irradiation in FeSe, it is worth noticing that the heavy-ion irradiation not only creates columnar defects, but may also produce secondary energetic electrons as they lose energy. The secondary electron irradiation can introduce point-like defects, which may act as pairing breaker and suppress T c unless the gap structure is isotropic s-wave. Such an effect is indeed observed in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ thin films Recent STM observations show that twin boundaries in FeSe may act as pairing breakers, which lift the nodes in their neighborhood, and have long-range effects more than one order larger than the coherence length On the other hand, the value of J c is enhanced dramatically with the irradiation for B φ ≤ 2 T. As also shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of J c is normalized by the value of J c (0) obtained from the extended Maley's method In summary, we report a systematic study on the effects of columnar defects on FeSe single crystals by Uranium irradiations. T c is found to be suppressed by columnar defects at a large rate of dT c /dB φ ∼-0.29 KT -1 . The unexpected large suppression of T c in FeSe is discussed in relation with the large diameter of the columnar defects as well as its unique band structure with a remarkably small Fermi energy. The critical current density is first dramatically enhanced with irradiation reaching a value over ∼2×10 5 A/cm 2 at 2 K (self-field) for B φ = 2 T, then gradually suppressed with increasing B φ . The coexistence of δl-and δT c -pinnings in the pristine FeSe (δT c -pinnings are more dominant) is turned into dominant δl-pinnings after the irradiation.