Superconducting electronic devices have re-emerged as contenders for both classical and quantum computing due to their fast operation speeds, low dissipation and long coherence times. An ultimate demonstration of coherence is lasing. We use one of the fundamental aspects of superconductivity, the ac Josephson effect, to demonstrate a laser made from a Josephson junction strongly coupled to a multi-mode superconducting cavity. A dc voltage bias to the junction provides a source of microwave photons, while the circuit's nonlinearity allows for efficient down-conversion of higher order Josephson frequencies down to the cavity's fundamental mode. The simple fabrication and operation allows for easy integration with a range of quantum devices, allowing for efficient on-chip generation of coherent microwave photons at low temperatures. Josephson junctions are natural voltage to frequency converters via the AC Josephson effect. For a Josephson junction without an applied DC voltage bias, Cooper pairs tunnel coherently from one superconducting condensate to the other resulting in a supercurrent flowing without dissipation. However, for a nonzero DC voltage bias less than the superconducting energy gap, transport is prohibited unless the excess energy (hf = 2eV ' , where h is Planks constant, f is frequency and 2e the charge on the Cooper pair) can be dissipated into the environment. The analogy between a single Josephson junction and a two-level atom was first proposed theoretically in the 1970's We demonstrate lasing in the microwave frequency domain from a DC voltage biased Josephson junction strongly coupled to a superconducting coplanar waveguide resonator. Our device obeys several properties present in conventional optical lasers, including injection locking and frequency comb generation, with an injection locked linewidth of ≤ 1 Hz, which exceeds performance of other state of the art laser systems. The laser consists of a halfwave coplanar waveguide (CPW) resonator with resonant frequency f -≈ 5.6 GHz made from thin (20 nm) NbTiN (Fig. One side of the SQUID is tied to the central conductor of the CPW, with the other end attached directly to the ground plane to enhance the coupling to the cavity. An on-chip inductor positioned at the electric field node of the cavity allows for a DC voltage bias to be applied across the SQUID The device is mounted in a dilution refrigerator with base temperature T = 15 mK, with the magnetic flux through the SQUID tuned via a superconducting vector magnet (12). We first examine the response of the device without applying any microwave power to the cavity input. At the output we measure the power spectral density, S(f), of the emitted microwave radiation as a function of voltage bias V b . Simultaneously, we record the corresponding current flowing through the device, I ; = 2eΓ )* . The coupling between a DC voltage biased Josephson junction and a cavity, λ = E 1 /φ - = Cω - = , is set by the junction's Josephson energy, E J , together with the cavity inductance L = 1/Cω - = where C is the cavity capacitance and ω -= 2πf -. When the device is configured in the weak Josephson coupling regime (λ ≪ 1, Fig. We increase the microwave emission by increasing E J via the applied flux, to the extent that the junction and cavity become strongly coupled and the system transitions to nonlinear behavior (λ ≫ 1) To understand the emission characteristics, we numerically simulate the time evolution of the coupled resonator-Josephson junction circuit for increasing E J (12). If the cavity only supports a single mode, the emission power at n = 1 grows with increasing E J , however there is only weak emission for bias voltages corresponding to n > 1. Higher-order cavity modes allow for direct emission of higher frequency photons that can be down-converted to the fundamental cavity frequency via the non-linearity of the Josephson junction. Simulations for n = 20 modes show that for weak coupling (λ << 1), disconnected resonant peaks are visible in the response, in agreement with the experimental data (Fig. To directly confirm lasing, we measure the emission statistics in the high Josephson coupling regime at V b = 192.5 μV. The emitted signal is mixed with an external local oscillator and the resulting quadrature components digitized with a fast acquisition card (Fig. To confirm coherence over longer time scales, we plot the in-phase and quadrature components of the down-converted signal from 5 x 10 5 samples on a two-dimensional histogram (Fig. The donut shape of the histogram confirms lasing, with the radius A = N = 172 representing the average coherent amplitude of the system, while the finite width σ O = (2δA = + N KRJST )/2 = 6.89 a result of amplitude fluctuations in the cavity emission δA = 2.66 broadened by the thermal noise from the amplifier chain, N noise . When the device is not lasing (V b =18 μV in Fig. Our results conclusively demonstrate lasing from a DC biased Josephson junction in the strong coupling regime. Analysis of the output emission statistics shows 15 μs of phase coherence, with no sub-threshold behavior. The Josephson junction laser does not suffer from charge-noise induced linewidth broadening inherent to semiconductor gain media, and so reaches an injection locked linewidth of < 1 Hz. The device shows frequency tunability of greater than 50 MHz by directly tuning the cavity frequency, and frequency tunability over more than 100 MHz through the generation of injection-locking sidebands. Additional frequency control may be achieved by using a broadband tunable resonator 