We study the angular dependence of the dissipation in the superconducting state of FeSe and Fe(Se 1-x Tex) through electrical transport measurements, using crystalline intergrown materials. We reveal the key role of the inclusions of the non superconducting magnetic phase Fe 1-y (Se 1-x Tex), growing into the Fe(Se 1-x Tex) pure β-phase, in the development of a correlated defect structure. The matching of both atomic structures defines the growth habit of the crystalline material as well as the correlated planar defects orientation. Within the Fe-based superconductors, the PbO type Fe chalcogenides, i.e.: the "11" compounds, have the simplest structure but a very complex electronic and magnetic behaviour In particular, the normal and superconducting states of Fe(Se 1-x Te x ) are strongly influenced by hydrostatic and chemical pressure Fe 7 Se 8 intergrowth in the (PbO-type tetragonal) β-FeSe matrix, has been the source of confusion in earlier reports of superconducting and normal properties of these materials. A low temperature synthesis is needed to grow clean single crystals of the tetragonal β phase of these compounds On the other hand, the microscopic geometry of the intergrown phases structural coupling determines the kind of defects (geometry and distribution) that influence the vortex dynamics in the dissipationless state and the properties of the dissipation below the superconducting critical field and above the zero critical current state. In a certain range of defect density, the potential application of these materials in wires or tapes, has to be considered. These intergrown crystals are possible emergent materials suitable for application given their high superconducting critical field and the simple way to generate correlated defects in them. This article is focused on the correlated defects in superconducting FeSe and in the Fe(Se 1-x Te x ) family. We study the microscopic nature of these defects characterizing local and bulk transport properties. Correlation is established by combination of a number microscopic and macroscopic experimental techniques in a wide range of applied temperatures and magnetic fields. This has allowed us to separate the intrinsic and defect induced contributions to superconductivity. (1 -y) 0.78. This is an indication that the crys- tals have a mixture of structural phases because pure β-phase with a tetragonal PbO type structure would be near y=0. It is therefore expected to find inclusions of NiAs type hexagonal phase. Indeed, the XR diffraction data of our crystals show the presence of both tetragonal and hexagonal phases. Other authors have found nanoscaled hexagonal phase in a tetragonal matrix and that the shape and size of this intergrowth depends on the crystal growth speed For Fe 1-y Se, we identified the tetragonal PbO type structure with the space group P 4/nmm of the β phase and the hexagonal NiAs type structure of the Fe 7 Se 8 (Fe 0.875 Se) compounds. In the tetragonal phase, we found the reflections from (00l) and (l0l) planes families, while in the hexagonal phase, only the (00l) reflections were present. For the samples containing Te, we observed that those with lower Fe content have larger hexagonal phase peaks, and that the (l0l) reflections are comparatively less intense. The c axis of the tetragonal phase increases with x, in good agreement with the measurements of other authors In the magnetization measurements it is expected to find characteristics of both phases present in our crystals. Figure They both have a FM behavior at high temperatures and at ∼130 K or ∼220 K they have a change in the easy axis of magnetization causing a drop in the magnetization (AF) In figure With increasing Te content, the hump rapidly disappears as expected if the hexagonal phase content decreases. In the case of Fe 0.72 (Se 0.47 Te 0.53 ), the system tends to order at temperatures below 100 K but does not saturate. In the samples with more Te, the system is paramagnetic. In the inset of figure We obtain a superconducting volume fraction of 80%, 56% and 94% for Fe 0.92 Se, Fe 0.72 (Se 0.47 Te 0.53 ) and Fe 0.89 (Se 0.29 Te 0.71 ), respectively. The main features of the normal state resistivity in samples of the β-phase have been described in the literature The in plane resistivity of our Fe 1-y Se crystals exhibits a metallic-like behavior down from room temperature with a change in the slope at T s 90 K. This change is associated with a structural transition of the β-phase from tetragonal to orthorhombic Our neutron diffraction experiments on powders (see Appendix) clearly support this fact. In Te doped samples, the resistivity increases with decreasing temperature until a certain T * at which it becomes metallic-like. This is a common feature of all of our samples, and increasing the Te content, T * decreases as shown in figure The behavior above T * is unlikely to be related to the semiconducting hexagonal phase Fe 2 Te 3 because it is also seen in pure β-phase crystals, both in the literature Furthermore, the Te dependence of T * has the same behavior as the pressure dependence of the resistivity maximum in Fe(Se 0.5 Te 0.5 ) As we have stated in the previous section, the lower the amount of Fe the greater the proportion of hexagonal phase, but this varies with the Se content. This fact is also made evident in the superconducting transition. Our Fe 1-y Se crystals present a transition around T onset c 12 K, higher than the transition temperature for pure β-phase samples (T c = 8.5 K) As customary, the transition temperature is defined by the intersection of the linear extrapolation from the normal state and the transition zone. The possibility of stress at the interfaces between the hexagonal and tetragonal phases and in consequence increment of the transition temperature is discussed in the Appendix. In brief, a systematic widening of the neutron diffraction peaks for the samples with mixture of phases, corresponds to the existence of such stresses, that have an influence on the pres-sure dependent T c . On the other hand, the Te dependence of the transition temperature presents a maximum at x 0.4 as is expected from other results in the literature We will now discuss the superconducting state of Fe deficient Fe 1-y (Se Using the conventional one-band WHH theory we obtained the value of H c2⊥ (0) as a function of composition. The inset of figure Figure In the linear response regime, the resistivity is well approximated by, with the activation energy Here, T is the temperature, H is the applied magnetic field, U 0 , ρ 0 and q are constants and T c is the transition temperature at H = 0 T. Figure In the XR diffraction patterns we identified the Fe 1-y Se (00l) and (l0l) families and the (00l) one for the Fe 7 Se 8 spurious phase, see figure In the hexagonal phase, the vacancies are ordered as a superstructure. Due to the crystal growth procedure, the most likely superstructure is the one called 3c, in which the lattice parameter of the superstructure is 3 times that of the normal cell Additionally, when the magnetic field is applied in the direction Θ = ±34(1) • , the vortices are crossing the ab-plane in their movement. Using the angular dependence of the dissipation described above, we know that the resistivity has a minimum when the vortices cross the ab-plane. In figure The sketch in the inset of figure Microscopically, this boundary matching both phases should have just one direction and the minima in the dissipation as a function of the angle Θ should not be symmetric with respect to the Θ=0 • direction. We have found this situation only in very small samples with a platelet surface of 2500 μm 2 or less. For larger samples, as that shown in figure As a final remark, we want to go back to the very different scenario observed in the angular dependence of the resistivity on the samples with Te in figure We have presented the angular dependence of the dissipation in the superconducting state of FeSe and Fe(Se 1-x Te x ) using crystalline materials with Furthermore, information on intrinsic superconducting properties was provided. We reported an increase of the critical superconducting field with the Te content and a maximum in the critical temperature for Te content x 0.4 . An increase of the T c was observed with respect to crystals with only the β phase, may be related with tensions on the interphase between the tetragonal and the hexagonal phases. For the resistivity in the normal state, we reported a maximum at a temperature that increases with the Se content. present in Fe 1-y Se. In the pure 4c superstructure, a gradual drop below 210 K has been reported The behavior of the bulk magnetization, shown in Fig. superstructures. The magnetic subnetwork related to the 4c structure smoothly starts reorientation towards the (001) direction when the temperature decreases below 210 K, getting closer to the easy axis of the 3c structure. The neutron diffraction intensity diminishes, but the bulk magnetization increases. On the other side, the 3c subnetwork undergoes a sudden reorientation at around 140 K, and at this point the bulk magnetization quickly falls with decreasing temperature. This is consistent with a mixture of 3c and 4c superstructures From the analysis of the neutron diffraction data, we also obtained the temperature dependence of the lattice parameters of the β-phase for the two polycrystals under study, see figure A2. In both cases, there is a structural transition at ∼90 K from tetragonal P 4/nmm to orthorhombic Cmma. There is a good agreement between the lattice parameters obtained with neutron diffraction at the G4.1 instrument, the 3T2 instrument and with XR measurements. On the other hand, there is a small difference between the lattice parameters obtained This difference is not enough to explain the increment of transition temperature in the resistivity described in Section III.B. Given the sensitivity to external pressure, it was reported that a change in T c of ∼3.5 K is obtained with a pressure of 0.4 GPa The difference of the lattice parameter a obtained in reference For all temperatures and reflections, the polycrystal with mixture of phases presented wider peaks. This could be interpreted in terms of tensions in the sample with mixture of phases (probably at the boundary regions), defective structures, grain size disorder, etc.