The order parameter of bulk two-dimensional superconductors is classified as nodal, if it vanishes for a direction in momentum space, or gapful if it does not. Each class can be topologically nontrivial if Andreev bound states are formed at the edges of the superconductor. Non-magnetic impurities in the superconductor affect the formation of Andreev bound states and can drastically change the tunneling spectra for small voltages. Here, we investigate the mean current and its fluctuations for two-dimensional tunnel junctions between a normal-metal and unconventional superconductors by solving the quasi-classical Eilenberger equation self-consistently, including the presence of non-magnetic impurities in the superconductor. As the impurity strength increases, we find that superconductivity is suppressed for almost all order parameters since i) at zero applied bias, the effective transferred charge calculated from the noise-current ratio tends to the electron charge e and ii) for finite bias, the current-voltage characteristics follows that of a normal state junction. There are notable exceptions to this trend. First, gapful nontrivial (chiral) superconductors are very robust against impurity scattering due to the linear dispersion relation of their surface Andreev bound states. Second, for nodal nontrivial superconductors, only px-wave pairing is almost immune to the presence of impurities due to the emergence of odd-frequency s-wave Cooper pairs near the interface. Owing to their anisotropic dependence on the wave vector, impurity scattering is an effective pair breaking mechanism for the rest of nodal superconductors. All these behaviors are neatly captured by the noise-current ratio, providing a useful guide to find experimental signatures for unconventional superconductivity. The symmetry of the superconducting order parameter is crucial to determine many properties of a superconductor. The majority of superconductors feature a conventional spin-singlet s-wave pair potential. Any deviation from this pair potential, be it spin-triplet states or higher harmonics like p-wave or d-wave, is considered unconventional In this work we study the current, shot noise and noisecurrent ratio of normal-metal-superconductor junctions, including the effect of non-magnetic impurity scattering in the superconductor, for the most representative twodimensional unconventional order parameters. Depending on the shape of the order parameter in reciprocal space, superconductors in two dimensions can be classified into two groups: (i) Gapful superconductors with a finite order parameter and (ii) Nodal superconductors where the order parameter vanishes in a given direction. At the same time, each order parameter can be topologically nontrivial or trivial depending on whether SABS appear or not. For example, the conventional spin-singlet s-wave state belongs to the gapful trivial group. Chiral superconductors We consider a two-dimensional normal-metalsuperconductor junction where transport takes place along the x direction and set the interface at x = 0. We thus parametrize the conserved transverse component of the wave vector k y using the angle of incidence θ = sin -1 (k y /k F ), with k F the Fermi wave vector. Depending on the direction of propagation of the quasiparticles, we define the angles θ + ≡ θ ∈ [-π/2, π/2] and θ -= π-θ. We model the scattering at the interface using a δ-function potential V (x) = Z( 2 k F /2m)δ(x), with Z the dimensionless barrier strength and m the electron mass. We assume a clean normal metal (x < 0) and a uniform distribution of non-magnetic impurities in the superconducting region (x > 0) with induced self-energy â(x). The superconducting order parameter is given by ∆(θ α , x), with α = ±. In the normal region, we take â(x < 0) = ∆(θ α , x < 0) = 0. For a spin-degenerate system, the quasi-classical Green's function Here, v F x = v F cos θ is the x component of the Fermi velocity v F and the particle-hole space is spanned by Pauli matrices τ0,1,2,3 , with τ0 the identity matrix. The quasiclassical Green's function is normalized as (ĝ αα ) 2 = -1. To account for unconventional superconductivity in the rightmost region (x > 0), we use the notation with Θ(x) the Heaviside function. The subindices R, I refer to the real or imaginary part of the order parameter. We choose the global U (1) gauge so that the order parameter is real for non-chiral superconductors or it is proportional to a cosine function of the angle for chiral ones. The resulting form factors χ R,I (θ α ) are enumerated in Table The spatial dependence of the order parameter is determined self-consistently in terms of the quasi-classical Green's function, namely with the angle average defined as -π/2 dθf (θ α ). The sums include a cutoff n max , defined as the maximum integer that satisfies n max ≤ ω D /(2πT ). T c is the critical temperature of the bulk superconductor and ω D = 2πT c is the Debye frequency, ignoring thermodynamic phenomena. In the bulk of the superconductor, i.e., deep inside the superconducting region, a finite order parameter fulfills ∆ R,I (x → ∞) ≡ ∆ b . Following Ref. 15, the self-energy for the distribution of non-magnetic impurities is written as â = 3 j=1 a j τj , with where 1/τ and σ are the normal scattering rate and the strength of a single impurity potential, respectively. For the numerical calculations, it is useful to express the Green's function in terms of the Riccati parameters where G S α (ω n , θ α , x) and F S α (ω n , θ α , x) satisfy the equations with Finally, at the interface, we set the boundary conditions 41-45 with σ nθ = 4 cos 2 θ/ Z 2 +4 cos 2 θ the normal state angle-dependent transmission. Following the scattering formalism with ḠS α = G S α (E, θ α , x = 0) and E > 0 the real excitation energy of an incident quasiparticle. Using the reflection amplitudes, we define the differential conductance and differential noise power 18 In the normal state, the differential conductance and noise power are respectively defined as The zero-temperature current and shot noise are then obtained integrating Eqs. ( with V the voltage drop at the NS interface 47 . In this section, we use our model for the study of ballistic (impurity-free) normal-metal-superconductor junctions with a barrier controlling the interface transmission. The following results for conductance, shot noise and noise-current ratio are gathered in Table I under the columns "ballistic". In the limit of transparent junction, with Z = 0, all types of superconductor feature a perfect Andreev reflection at the interface. Consequently, the differential conductance is a constant with twice the value of the normal state conductance for small applied bias voltage compared to the bulk gap [see Fig. For gapful nontrivial (chiral) superconductors, the conductance reduces to a finite value, slightly over σ N for the chiral p-wave case or comparable to σ N /2 for the rest of chiral pairing states. For trivial superconductors, both nodal and gapful, the conductance is reduced well below the normal state conductance σ N . The resulting normalized tunnel conductance is strongly suppressed for small energies, featuring a (U-) V-shape profile for (gapful) nodal pairing states. In the gapful trivial case the conductance tends to zero, while for the nodal trivial cases it tends to a finite but small value The tunnel conductance in the ballistic limit is thus a useful tool to explore the symmetry of the superconducting pairing. However, the height of the zero-bias peak and the gap suppression are very sensitive to the barrier strength and are also rounded by temperature effects A more clear distinction between all superconductors is given by the noise-current ratio, shown in Fig. In summary, there are three general trends for ballistic junctions that are neatly captured in the noise-current ratio in the tunnel limit: (i) Nodal nontrivial superconductors display a noiseless zero-bias peak and their ratio is zero; (ii) chiral superconductors feature a conductance of magnitude comparable to the normal state with noisecurrent ratio 1; and (iii) trivial (gapful and nodal) superconductors have a suppressed conductance and ratio approaching 2. We now consider the presence of non-magnetic impurities in the superconductor. We explore two cases for the FIG. (a) Born limit with σ = 0. (b) Unitary limit with σ = 0.99. In all cases, Z = 5. impurity potential. The Born limit accounts for weak impurity potentials that induce small scattering phase shifts. We thus take the limit σ → 0 in Eq. ( On the other hand, the Unitary limit considers infinitely strong impurity potentials. Taking σ → 1 in Eq. ( In the bulk of the superconductor, the Green's function becomes divergent for energies close to the continuum levels at the edges of the gap. Close to the interface, however, the Green's function can develop divergences in the presence of emergent SABS and it is approximately zero otherwise. Whether the superconductor is nontrivial and develops SABS or it is trivial and does not have subgap states crucially determines the impact of the impurity scattering In the following, we set the barrier strength Z = 5, where the general behavior of trivial and nontrivial unconventional superconducting orders is clearly displayed, and study the effect of scattering by non-magnetic impurities in the superconductor for zero and finite applied bias. A. Effect of impurities at zero bias. The zero bias transport results, for a tunnel junction with Z = 5, are shown in Fig. Finally, chiral superconductors are mostly unaffected by the impurity scattering. This behavior is clearly shown by the noise-current ratio, which remains almost 1 in both Born and Unitary limits for several values of the scattering rate. At first sight this result seems at odds with the fact that nontrivial superconductors should be sensitive to impurity scattering in the Born limit. The main difference is that gapful nontrivial superconductors feature SABS with a linear dispersion relation, instead of flat bands like nodal superconductors. The resulting angle-averaged Green's function at low energies for chiral superconductors is not divergent, since the SABS only contribute for specific values of the angle (e.g., for E = 0, the chiral p-wave SABS has a small contribution at |θ| ∼ 0). This fundamental difference justifies the importance of chiral superconductors as sources of SABS with topological protection against disorder We now study the voltage dependence of the current and fluctuations. In the normal state, the current through the junction follows a linear ohmic behavior where I N = R -1 N V , with R N the normal state resistance and V the applied voltage (see gray lines in Fig. Chiral p-wave superconductors, blue line in Fig. Nodal nontrivial superconductors display a completely different behavior. Even in the tunnel regime considered here with Z = 5, the subgap current is greatly enhanced in the ballistic limit. The impurity scattering reduces the subgap contribution of d xy -and f x -wave superconductors, although the current is still greater than I N . Conversely, the current for p x -wave superconductors is enhanced over the ohmic case even in the presence of impurities. As for the zero-bias results, the noise-current ratio clearly displays the behavior of each pairing state, as it is shown in Fig. In order to study the I-V characteristics at high volt-ages, we define the excess current as the difference between the superconducting and normal state currents, namely, The presence of a finite excess current for high voltages, ideally for eV → ∞, indicates a strong contribution of Andreev reflections for energies below the gap In the ballistic limit, nodal nontrivial superconductors feature a finite excess current while it is suppressed for the rest of superconductors at large voltages. The value of the maximum excess current is determined by the interface transparency, resulting in I ball exc (Z = 5) (1/6)∆ b /(eR N ). In Fig. We present an exhaustive description of the transport properties of two-dimensional junctions with unconventional superconductors, including the effect of scattering by non-magnetic impurities in the superconductor. The main results of this work are gathered in Table The inclusion of impurity scattering at the superconductor further distinguishes unconventional superconductors, and these changes are again clearly captured in the noise-current ratio. The ratio for trivial superconductors is decreased from 2 to 1 as the scattering rate is increased. This transition is faster in the Unitary limit; dominant in the absence of SABS. Conversely, the ratio for nodal nontrivial superconductors is increased from 0 to 1, and the transition is faster in the Born limit. A notable exception is the case of p x -wave. This special nodal pairing develops an s-wave odd-frequency component at the interface which is highly resistant to impurity scattering. Interestingly, gapful nontrivial (chiral) superconductors are also resistant to the impurity scattering. The linear dispersion of the SABS in these superconductors guarantees that the correction coming from the selfenergy of the impurity distribution is always small. Their noise-current ratio is thus barely changed by the presence of non-magnetic impurities, a clear signature of the topological protection of these pairing states. Our results can be used for the experimental classification of pairing symmetries. We have demonstrated the utility of noise measurements for the identification of order parameters, even in the cases where tunnel conductance can be ambiguous A special mention should be made about p x -wave pairing. The flat band SABS of this nodal superconductor induces a perfect Andreev reflection, resulting in an noiseless resonance at zero energy. This behavior survives the presence of non-magnetic impurities in the superconductor and can be observed even when the normal metal is in the diffusive regime Finally, the connection between symmetry of the pairing state and transport properties of two-dimensional spin-degenerate superconducting junctions presented here provides a good starting point to consider more complicated three-dimensional pairing states.