Device-based tunnel spectroscopy of superconductors was first performed by Giaever, whose seminal work provided clear evidence for the spectral gap in the density of states (DOS) predicted by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory Here we demonstrate that vdW semiconductors MoS 2 and WSe 2 deposited on the superconductor NbSe 2 form high quality tunnel barriers, with transparencies in the 10 -8 range. Our measurements of the NbSe 2 DOS at 70mK show a hard superconducting gap, and a quasiparticle peak structure with clear evidence of contributions from two bands Conductance-voltage characteristics obtained when tunnelling across normal metal-insulatorsuperconductor (NIS) junctions (as in the Giaever experiment) are dominated by strong quasiparticle peaks at energies corresponding to ±∆, where ∆ is the superconducting gap. Below the gap, in BCS superconductors, the conductance signal due to quasiparticles is strongly suppressed. Conductance at these energies might be due to finite quasiparticle lifetimes in materials with strong electron-phonon coupling Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon vortex bound states in Type II superconductors Such experiments are critically dependent on the ability to resolve spectral features above the sub-gap background signal. Sub-gap tunneling across NIS junctions with transparent barriers can arise due to two-electron Using vdW layered materials as tunnel barriers greatly expands the range of addressable materials, in particular to those not easily covered by oxides The residual conductance is likely due to environment-assisted tunneling (Supplementary Section 7). Second, the intricate structure of the quasiparticle peak. This spectrum differs from a standard BCS DOS by having a relatively low quasiparticle peak and a shoulder at lower energies. The latter feature can be clearly seen in the second derivative (Fig. Two-band superconductivity was first discussed theoretically by Suhl et al. In the SSM model, the superconducting gaps ∆ i (E) in the two bands i are found by solving the coupled equations whereas the DOS of each band is given by Here N i (E F ) is the DOS at the Fermi energy in the normal state in band i. The conductance is calculated by convolution of the DOS with the derivative of a Fermi-Dirac distribution with temperature T , accounting for a ratio η between the tunneling matrix elements for the two bands, The best fit to our data with the above equations is shown in Fig. We now turn to the response of the tunneling spectrum to perpendicular magnetic field B ⊥ , shown in Fig. In type-II superconductors above B c1 vortices penetrate the sample. In this so-called "mixed state" the superconductor consists of quasi-normal vortex cores, and a gapped inter-vortex area. Due to the hard gap, our measurement spectrally differentiates between these regions: at low bias, sub-gap tunneling takes place only near the vortex cores. At higher bias, quasiparticle tunneling occurs at the entire area of the sample. In the remainder of this letter we provide further evidence that the sub-gap signal is associated with vortex-bound states. Close inspection of the low bias region in Fig. Finally, ref. We repeat the same measurement and analysis for magnetic field applied parallel to the sample, B (Fig. The signal changes abruptly at B = 0.5T , which we associate with B c1 . It is manifest as an increase of the height of the quasiparticle peak (panel d) and a sharp increase of the zero bias signal (panels c,e). We rule out the possible contribution of residual perpendicular fields, due to misalignment of the sample with the parallel field; this is compensated to better than 0.5% of the parallel field. Tunneling investigation away from perpendicular fields was carried out by Hess et al. To probe the nature of this regime, we apply the same sub-gap analysis carried out for B ⊥ (Inset to Fig. We now turn to discussion of the zero-bias conductance, and its dependence on B. For B ⊥ (Fig. Our work opens up the possibility of using vdW barriers to investigate the density of states of other vdW materials, and in particular superconductors The vdW tunnel junctions were fabricated using the dry transfer technique The model used to fit the data measured in this work, utilizes the McMillan equations where the terms, H 0 , H int and H dis describe the band dispersion, Cooper channel interaction and disorder scattering respectively. We have We fit the dI/dV curves measured with small perpendicular magnetic field using the zero field SSM model (figure We can estimate the transparency of our tunnel barrier T from the well-known expression from Sharvin where G N is the junction conductance in the normal state, A is the area of the junction, k F the Fermi momentum and T the average transmission of each conductance channel. We measure G N = 7μS for A = 1.6 μm 2 . k F in metals is usually ∼ 10 10 m -1 and it is about half this value in NbSe 2 . Taking the lower value, we get T ∼ 3 × 10 -8 . We can make an independent estimate of T using the textbook WKB formula for a square barrier of thickness d and height U [60]: where m * is the effective mass of the electron in the barrier, here MoS 2 . We can make a more rigorous estimate of U (and thus T ) by using Brinkman et al.'s result At zero magnetic field, the sub-gap conductance of the measured tunnel junction at zero bias voltage is highly suppressed, to ∼1/500 of the normal state conductance. This residual conductance cannot be accounted for by the thermal broadening of the SSM model, as this gives negligible values at the sub-kelvin temperature range. In principle, one or more of the following could be responsible for the sub gap signal: (i) pair tunnelling (due to Andreev reflection) ⊥ ≈ 6, reflecting a rapid increase in bound-state spectral weight. This slope appears to be generic, as two other devices (B and C, red and blue dots) exhibit a similar slope, noting that in Device C there is a finite onset field. For s-wave superconductors one expects minimal vortex overlap, resulting in a minimal slope of 1.2