We present a scanning probe technique for measuring the dynamics of individual fluxoid transitions in multiply connected superconducting structures. In these measurements, a small magnetic particle attached to the tip of a silicon cantilever is scanned over a micron-size superconducting ring fabricated from a thin aluminum film. We find that near the superconducting transition temperature of the aluminum, the dissipation and frequency of the cantilever changes significantly at particular locations where the tip-induced magnetic flux penetrating the ring causes the two lowest energy fluxoid states to become nearly degenerate. In this regime, we show that changes in the cantilever frequency and dissipation are well-described by a stochastic resonance (SR) process, wherein small oscillations of the cantilever in the presence of thermally activated phase slips (TAPS) in the ring give rise to a dynamical force that modifies the mechanical properties of the cantilever. Using the SR model, we calculate the average fluctuation rate of the TAPS as a function of temperature over a 32-dB range in frequency, and we compare it to the Langer-Ambegaokar-McCumber-Halperin theory for TAPS in one-dimensional superconducting structures. The single-valuedness of the superconducting wavefunction gives rise to a host of novel macroscopic phenomena, the most striking being fluxoid quantization in multiply-connected devices and quantized vortices in bulk samples and films A number of experimental techniques have been applied to study the physics of fluxoid states in superconducting rings, including transport measurements Here, we present a scanning probe technique for measuring the dynamics of fluxoid transitions in multiply * rbudakian@uwaterloo.ca connected planar superconducting structures. In these studies, a micron-size magnetic particle is attached to the tip of an ultra-soft silicon cantilever and scanned over a surface containing an array of lithographically patterned micron-size aluminum rings. During the scan, the cantilever is resonantly driven to a small fixed amplitude using a piezoelectric transducer. When the magnetic tip is positioned over an individual ring near the superconducting transition temperature T c , large variations in the frequency and dissipation of the cantilever can be observed at locations where the tip applies a half-integer number of flux quanta through the ring. The modification to the mechanical properties of the cantilever is caused by the correlated dynamics between the resonant motion of the magnetic tip and thermally-activated phase slips (TAPS) in the ring. We show that this interaction can be modeled as a classical stochastic resonance (SR) process The method introduced in this work is conceptually similar to single-electron electrostatic force microscopy (e-EFM) In principle, Φ 0 -MFM can be used to study fluxoid dynamics in any multiply connected superconducting structure capable of hosting a discrete spectrum of fluxoid states. In this work, we apply Φ 0 -MFM to study fluctuations in thin superconducting rings, because the structure of fluxoid states in thin-wall superconducting rings provides a simple framework for demonstrating the concepts behind the technique. Furthermore, fluxoid fluctuations in these devices are well-described by the Langer-Ambegaokar-McCumber-Halperin (LAMH) theory for TAPS The paper is organized into the following sections: In section II, we discuss the details of the experimental setup. In section III, we demonstrate the dynamical phenomenon that underlies Φ 0 -MFM, and we present a model that considers the dynamics of driven fluxoid transitions and their interaction with the cantilever. We use the model to extract the average fluxoid transition rate, and we compare it to the LAMH theory. Finally, we present data for a superconducting ring containing a weak link, and we study the phase slips dynamics across the weak link in response to the local fields generated by the magnetic tip. In section IV, we present a summary of the technique and concluding remarks. The key component of the setup is an ultra-soft silicon cantilever with a magnetic particle attached to the tip (Fig. The cantilever is positioned vertically with respect to the surface in the pendulum geometry, and the tip oscillates in the x-direction. The magnetic tip is fabricated by gluing a micron-size SmCo 5 particle to the tip of the cantilever and shaping it by focused ion beam milling (Fig. Arrays of aluminum rings were fabricated by electronbeam lithography and lift-off of 5 nm-thick(45 nm-thick) Ti (Al) films deposited on silicon substrates by electron beam evaporation. The substrate containing the patterned devices is mounted onto a three-axis nano-positioner and a scanner that control the relative position of the cantilever with respect to the surface. The assembly is placed in a high vacuum chamber that is inside of a continuous-flow 3 He refrigerator. The sample temperature is controlled using a resistive heater and measured using a calibrated ruthenium oxide thermometer, which are both mounted close to the sample. During measurement, the sample temperature can be continuously varied from 340 mK to 4 K with 0.3 mK precision. We have studied more than 10 rings using 4 different magnetic tips. Here, we report measurements taken on two of these rings. Ring 1 had a radius of R = 1.40 μm and a uniform wall width of w = 212 nm (Fig. Force measurements are performed in the frequency detection mode In order for the superconducting order parameter to remain single-valued, the phase of the order parameter must change in integer units of 2π around any closed path inside the superconductor. For a ring geometry, this requirement ensures that the fluxoid, given by Φ = Φ + (m/e) v s • ds = nΦ 0 , only takes on integer values n of the flux quantum Φ 0 = h/2e. Here, v s is the superfluid velocity, Φ = A • ds is the total magnetic flux, and m, and e are the electron mass and charge, respectively. For the present work, the wall thickness of the rings is smaller than both the superconducting penetration depth (λ ∼ 1 μm) and the coherence length (ξ ∼ 0.5 μm). Near T c , magnetic screening is negligible and the ring behaves effectively as a onedimensional (1D) superconductor, with the supercurrent velocity given by v s = h(n -φ)/2mR, where R is the radius of the ring, and φ = Φ/Φ 0 . By minimizing the Ginzburg-Landau free energy of the ring, we find the free energy of the fluxoid states: where F c = V B 2 c /2μ 0 is the superconducting condensation energy of the ring, B c = Φ 0 /(2 √ 2πξλ) is the thermodynamic critical field, V = 2πRwd is the volume of the ring, and d is the thickness of the film. The supercurrent in the ring is found from Eq. (1) using where We note that since for rings in the present work 2πR > ∼ ξ, the pair breaking effects are relatively small. Hence F n (φ) and I n (φ) are close to quadratic and linear functions of the applied flux (Fig. Close to T c , where fluxoid transitions become reversible, the transition between states having winding numbers n and n + 1 occurs at half-integer values of the flux quantum φ = n + 1/2. For thin-walled superconducting rings, the fluxoid transitions occur via phase slips The equilibrium fluxoid state of the ring depends on the applied flux, and hence on the relative position of the magnetic tip and the superconducting ring. Scans of superconducting rings taken at temperatures sufficiently close to T c exhibit sharp concentric circular contours in the frequency of the cantilever, corresponding to tip positions where the cantilever frequency dips below the native resonance frequency (Fig. In Section III B, we show that the frequency dips seen at higher temperatures are caused by a dynamical effect, in which small oscillations of the cantilever, in the presence of TAPS, drive transitions between the two lowestenergy fluxoid states near values of the applied flux that make the energies of the two lowest-energy fluxoid states degenerate. This effect leads to a synchronization of the fluxoid transitions with the motion of the cantilever (at least in a statistical sense). The resulting interaction of the micromagnet with the synchronously switching supercurrent gives rise to a position-dependent force, which modifies the resonance frequency and dissipation of the cantilever. Stationary or quasi-static currents in the ring also produce a frequency shift, however this contribution is often much less than the dynamical one. In particular, near T c , we find that the dynamical contribution (∆f ∼ 5 Hz) is much larger than the static contribution (∆f ∼ 0.2 Hz) and dominates the overall frequency shift. The dynamical frequency shift maps tip locations to values of the applied flux corresponding to the equilibrium transitions between the lowest-laying fluxoid states. For a thin-walled ring, the dark contours seen in the frequency shift image (Fig. Figure The spatial map of the fluxoid transitions can be used to estimate the z-component of the magnetic field distribution produced by the magnetic tip on the surface. To build a model of the magnetic particle, we first measure the total magnetic moment of the particle by cantilever torque magnetometry To study the temperature dependence of the dynamical signal, we took a series of short line scans across the n = 3 to 4 transition (marked by a red line segment in Fig. To gain a qualitative understanding of the temperature dependence, observed in Fig. A quantitative description of the experimentally observed dynamical effects requires a model of the coupling between the cantilever motion and the fluxoid dynamics in the superconducting ring. For this analysis, it is sufficient to consider a range of energies of order k B T in the neighborhood of the crossing point between states n and n + 1, i.e., |F n+1 (φ) -F n (φ))| < ∼ k B T , where both fluxoid states have a substantial probability of being occupied (Fig. The dynamics of the probability P n (t) is determined by the relaxation rate ν r : Here, Γ n,n+1 and Γ n+1,n are the transition rates n → n + 1 and n + 1 → n, respectively. It is worth noting that at φ = n + 1/2, Γ n,n+1 = Γ n+1,n and ν r = 2Γ n,n+1 . The force produced by the supercurrent I(t) on the cantilever can be expressed as ζ(t) = κ(r tip )I(t), where κ(r tip ) represents the coupling, which depends of the relative position of the tip and the ring. The equation of motion for the cantilever becomes: where x is the displacement of the tip from its equilibrium position, γ 0 is the unmodified dissipation of the cantilever, and f (t) is the force applied by the feedback controller, which resonantly excites the cantilever to a fixed amplitude x 0 . The periodic motion of the cantilever tip with amplitude x 0 generates a small modulation of the flux through the ring with amplitude δφ = (dφ/dx) x 0 . Small oscillations of flux modulate the energies of the fluxoid states F n (φ) and F n+1 (φ), along with the transition rates Γ n,n+1 and Γ n+1,n as shown in Fig. If ζ(t, x) is sufficiently small, then the motion of the cantilever can be represented as a sum of two components: x(t) = x 0 e iωt +x s (t). The first term represents the coherent response at the resonance frequency ω produced by the feedback control, and the second term represents the stochastic part of the motion, with the time-averaged quantity xs (ω) = 0, where xs (ω) is the Fourier component of the stochastic displacement at the cantilever frequency. We are interested in the effect of the fluctuating force on the frequency and dissipation of the cantilever. In particular, we consider the time-averaged quantities ∆ω ≡ ω -ω 0 and ∆γ ≡ γ -γ 0 , which are calculated by Fourier transforming Eq. ( If the stochastic force due to fluctuating current is weak, i.e., |ζ(t, x)| kx 0 , then we expect |x s (t)| x 0 , and approximate x(t) x 0 e iωt in obtaining ζ(ω) . This approximation allows us to effectively decouple the cantilever dynamics from the dynamics of the phase slips, which greatly simplifies the analysis. If the flux modulation is sufficiently small such that (dP eq n /dφ)δφ 1, the resulting modulation of P n (t) is linear in δφ, with P n (t) P eq n (φ 0 ) + δP e i(ωt-θ) , Figs. To find ∆ω and ∆γ we consider the ensemble averaged current: I(t) = I n (φ)P n (t) + I n+1 (φ)(1 -P n (t)). Using Eq. 2, we find that I(t) = -∆IP n (t) -I n+1 (φ(t)), where ∆I(φ) = I n+1 (φ) -I n (φ). The first term in I(t) describes the contribution to the current from the thermally-activated transitions between the two states, and the second term represents the flux dependence of the current in each state. Here, we consider only the first term, since the second term is not relevant to the effect of interest. The resulting expression for the average stochastic force is ζ(t) = -κ(r tip )∆IP n (t), and the Fourier component of the statistically-synchronized stochastic force due to the cantilever-driven phase slips is ζ(ω) = -κ(r tip )∆IδP e -iθ . By combining this expression with Eq. ( where Notice that α depends only on parameters of cantilever and its position with respect to the ring. We find that the dissipation shift vanishes for both ν r ω 0 and ν r ω 0 , and it becomes maximum for ν r ∼ ω 0 (Fig. By constructing the ratio ∆ω/∆γ using Eqs. ( It is worth emphasizing that, while the expressions for ∆ω and ∆γ are each functions of position and temperature, the ratio ∆ω/∆γ in the linear SR regime only depends on the phase slip rate. Thus, the ratio provides a robust and convenient way to measure ν r without any prior knowledge of α and β. To be in the linear SR regime, two conditions must be satisfied: (i) the oscillation amplitude of the cantilever should be sufficiently small i.e., (dP eq n /dφ)(dφ/dx)x 0 1, so that the modulation of the occupation probability of the fluxoid states is small; (ii) the stochastic force acting on the cantilever should be a weak perturbation, i.e. |ζ(t, x)| kx 0 . For data shown in Fig. where t = T -1.13875 K. The height of the phase slip energy barrier ∆F can be determined from the measured ν r . The rate of TAPS is given by where Ω is an attempt frequency. At φ = n + 1/2, Γ n,n+1 = Γ n+1,n = Γ and ν r = 2Γ. We use the result obtained by McCumber and Halperin (MH) where τ = πh/8k B (T c -T ). Using Eqs. As described in details in Append. D, from the SR model (Eqs. It is instructive to compare the determined phase slip barrier height ∆F to the value, predicted by the theory developed by Langer and Ambegaokar (LA). The energy barrier for phase slips in a 1D wire is ∆F = (8 √ 2/3)ξwd B 2 c /2μ 0 and the corresponding barrier height is We find that ∆F calculated from Eq. ( In this section, we demonstrate the ability to use the strong magnetic fields produced near the magnetic tip to locally probe the field dependence of the phase slip rate in a thin ring containing a constriction. By combining the frequency and dissipation shift images using Eq. ( From the image in Fig. While a quantitative explanation of these observations requires a numerical simulation of the Ginzburg-Landau equations and goes beyond the scope of this paper, the observed field dependence of the phase slip rate can be qualitatively understood from the following considerations. In the case of a homogeneous wire, the energy barrier for a phase slip is of the order of the energy needed to suppress the order parameter in a length ∼ ξ of the wire. When the magnetic tip is placed above the wire, the magnetic field induces a whirlpool of current in the superconducting region below the tip, which locally suppresses the order parameter, and consequently lowers the energy barrier locally near the tip. The energy barrier for a superconducting ring of variable cross section placed in an inhomogeneous magnetic field is determined by its weakest part, where a combination of the sample geometry and the magnitude of the order parameter minimizes the energy barrier. We find that the largest suppression of the energy barrier is achieved when the tip is located adjacent to, but not directly above, the constriction. While our measurements cannot determine the exact location where the phase slip occurs, the following scenario could explain the observed behavior. Superconductivity in the wider section of the wire is suppressed more strongly by the tip field because the critical field for a wire of width w < λ scales inversely with the width (see (A1)). Therefore, there is a greater suppression of the order parameter when the tip is positioned in the regions adjacent to the constriction, rather than directly over the constriction. The suppressed order parameter propagates into the constriction over a distance ∼ ξ via a negative proximity effect. Here, ξ(1.28 K) 560 nm, is comparable to the length of the constriction. The reduction of the order parameter together with the smaller cross-sectional area of the constriction lowers the barrier in this region further, thus increasing the phase slip rate through the constriction. We have introduced a scanning probe technique, Φ 0 -MFM, for studying phase slip dynamics in multiply connected superconducting structures. In Φ 0 -MFM, the dynamical interaction between a magnetic particle attached to the cantilever and the fluctuating currents in a superconducting device modifies the frequency and dissipation of the cantilever. We find that over a wide range of fluctuation frequencies, the interaction is well described by a linear SR process. We further demonstrate that the SR model can be used to extract the average rate of TAPS in thin-wall superconducting rings. We find that the measured phase slip rate is consistent with thermally activated behavior, but the corresponding energy barrier is reduced in comparison to the Langer-Ambegaokar prediction. Lastly, we use a superconducting ring containing a constriction to demonstrate that the strong magnetic field produced by the magnetic particle may be used to probe the effects of a local magnetic field on the energy barrier of the fluxoid states. In summary, Φ 0 -MFM is a non-contact scanning probe technique capable of mapping out fluxoid or vortex transitions and characterizing their dynamics over a wide range of temperatures and magnetic fields. This technique could be a valuable tool for investigating various superconducting structures, with applications to fundamental science and technology. The frequency shift is expected to be proportional to the supercurrent in the ring. We found that the temperature dependence ∆f (T ) ∝ 1 -(T /T c ) 3 provides excellent agreement with the observed temperature dependence of the frequency shift. Based on the onset of the frequency shift, we determine the critical temperatures to be T c =1.163 K (Ring 1) and T c =1.325 K (Ring 2). Ring 1 and Ring 2 were fabricated separately using two different evaporators for Al film deposition. This explains the significant difference between critical temperatures of the two rings. The superconducting coherence length was determined from the suppression of T c with the magnetic field applied perpendicular to the plane of the ring. The magnetic field is generated using a superconducting solenoid magnet. The critical field of a thin-wall ring, for magnetic fields applied perpendicular to the plane of the ring, is analogous to the parallel critical field of a thin film, provided that w λ (see p. 131 of Equation (A1) holds for thin superconducting rings, because the demagnetization effect vanishes at the second order superconducting transition where λ → ∞. By substituting B c = Φ 0 /(2 √ 2πξλ) and ξ(T ) = ξ(0)/ 1 -T /T c we find: where . Thus, the superconducting transition temperature is a quadratic function of applied field. This behavior is indeed observed in measurements (Fig. For Ring 1, we find ξ(0) = 108 nm. Similar measurements of the coherence length gave ξ(0) = 104 nm for Ring 2. As a control experiment for using Eqs. (A3-A4), we measured the suppression of the transition temperature by a magnetic field in two rings of the same radius R = 0.9μm, but different wall widths w = 201 ± 8 nm and w = 111 ± 5 nm (Fig. The large hysteresis observed at low temperature is a consequence of the increased barrier height of the fluxoid transitions, which prevents the small variations of the magnetic flux caused by the cantilever oscillations from changing the fluxoid state of the ring. Thus, the discrete frequency jumps observed at low temperature originate from an interaction that is different from the dynamical one discussed in the main paper. At lower temperature, the current in the ring is independent of the cantilever oscillation, and the frequency shift, caused by oscillations of the magnetic tip in a static inhomogeneous magnetic field B ring produced by the ring at the location of the magnetic tip, is proportional to ∆f ∝ (∂ 2 B ring /∂x 2 )m tip , where m tip is the magnetic moment of the tip Figure In this appendix, we discuss the details for estimating the magnetic field profile produced by the magnetic particle for the measurements presented in Sec. III A. From the SEM images of the tip, we modeled the geometry of the magnet particle as the sum of a cube having dimensions (710 × 800 × 840) nm 3 , and a pillar with dimensions (290 × 290 × 1800) nm 3 . As a first approximation, we assume a uniformly magnetized tip. We determine the magnitude of the magnetic moment using cantilever torque magnetometry To account for the asymmetry observed in the frequency shift contours, we assume that the magnetic moment is tilted by 19 • in the -y direction; the tip itself is tilted by 22 • sideways in the +y direction. The presence of multiple magnetic domains in the SmCo 5 particle might explain the large tilt angles required to match the experimental data. The cross-sections of the field profiles are shown in Fig. The fluxoid transition contours measured in the experiment were also matched by using an effective point dipole model of the tip. While it is possible to achieve very good agreement for data taken at a particular tip-surface height, the position of the point dipole must be varried for scans at different tip-surface separations. The estimates of the magnetic field with the effective point dipole model, when compared to those from the 3D model, give slightly broader distributions with ∼ 10% lower peak magnetic fields under the tip. Hence, we suggest 10% as an upper bound on the error for the estimation of the tip field. The source of error is a combination of the complicated shape of the tip and the sparsity of the transition lines used in matching to the model. The precision of the calibration procedure could be improved in several ways: (i) using tips that have a simpler geometry, e.g., a bar having a uniform cross section; (ii) combining N scans, each taken by applying a uniform magnetic field with magnitude B l = l Φ 0 /(N πR 2 ), where l = {0, 1, . . . N -1}. This would increase the number of transition lines on the scan by N times, and it would better constrain the tip model. -∆ω/2π (Hz) Appendix D: Estimate of the coupling between the cantilever and the supercurrent in the ring The coupling between the cantilever and the supercurrent for a thin-wall ring κ(r tip ) can be estimated by noticing that the mechanical work -ζδx needed to move the tip by a distance δx is equal to the magnetic energy -IδΦ. Hence, we find κ(r tip ) = Φ 0 (dφ/dx). From Eq.( -2 (1 -t) we found that I 0 (T ) = 66(1 -t)μA, (D5) which corresponds to λ(0) 164 nm (Fig. Comparison of the shape of the ∆ω and ∆γ peaks, shown in Fig. The calculated ∆ω(φ) and ∆γ(φ) curves are shown in Fig. In our analysis thus far, we have neglected the contribution to the flux from the self-inductance of the ring. We estimate the self-inductance to be From the signal strength we estimated that I 0 (T ) = (1 -T /T c ) × 66 μA. We can see that the circulating current has the largest value of 0.5∆I = 0.6 μA at T ≈ 1.14 K. The resulting correction to the applied flux from the self-inductance term is 1.7 × 10 -3 Φ 0 , which is sufficiently small so that we can neglect its contribution. Shaded region marks the temperature range where νr(T ) was extracted from data; points at other temperatures were calculated with extrapolated νr and were not used for the fit.