Recent experiments on Majorana fermions in semiconductor nanowires [Albrecht et al., Nat. 531, 206 (2016)] revealed a surprisingly large electronic Landé g-factor, several times larger than the bulk value -contrary to the expectation that confinement reduces the g-factor. Here we assess the role of orbital contributions to the electron g-factor in nanowires and quantum dots. We show that an L • S coupling in higher subbands leads to an enhancement of the g-factor of an order of magnitude or more for small effective mass semiconductors. We validate our theoretical finding with simulations of InAs and InSb, showing that the effect persists even if cylindrical symmetry is broken. A huge anisotropy of the enhanced g-factors under magnetic field rotation allows for a straightforward experimental test of this theory. Early electron spin resonance experiments in the 2D electron gas (2DEG) formed in AlGaAs/GaAs heterostructures found a reduced Landé g-factor of electrons Recently, this discrepancy has attracted interest due to the experimental discovery of a zero bias conductance peak in semiconductor nanowires proximity coupled to an s-wave superconductor In a recent experiment with InAs nanowires gfactors In this work, we present a mechanism that can lead to very large g-factors in higher subbands of nanowires and similarly shaped nanostructures. With this we can explain both the large g-factors observed in Refs. 8-10, and 15, and the chemical potential dependence Cylindrical symmetry -We start by considering cylindrical nanowires and estimate the maximally achievable g-factor for subbands as a function of their orbital angular momentum. Initially, we assume independent SU(2) spin rotation symmetry (no SOC) and timereversal (TR) invariance without magnetic field. We then introduce magnetic field parallel to the wire, thus preserving the rotational invariance (both in real space and spin) around the axis of the wire (z direction in the following). As the wire is translationally invariant in the z direction, and the conduction band minimum is at k z = 0, we restrict to k z = 0 in the following and investigate the wavefunction in the xy plane only. As a consequence of separate real space and spin rotation symmetries, the states can be classified by their orbital angular momentum L z = 0, ± , ±2 , etc. and spin S z = ± 2 (for brevity we drop the z subscript in the following and use the lower case letters for angular momentum in units of ). The lowest subband is twofold spin degenerate l = 0, s = ± 1 2 , higher subbands with l = 0 being fourfold ±|l|, ± 1 2 . In a simple quadratic band with an effective mass m * , the momentum and electrical current are related as J = e m * p. Using the orbital angular momentum L = r × p the orbital magnetic moment is expressible as We see that the orbital magnetic moment is enhanced by the low effective mass of the bands. Because of the fourfold degeneracy, we cannot unambiguously calculate g-factors and thus next include spin-orbit coupling. With SOC the orbital and spin angular momentum is no longer separately conserved, but the total angular momentum f z = l z + s z is still conserved and takes halfinteger values. Without magnetic field the system is TR invariant. As angular momentum is odd under TR, the degenerate Kramers-pairs have opposite f . Turning on SOC splits the fourfold degeneracy of the l = 0 subbands into two degenerate pairs: +|l|, + 1 2 and -|l|, -1 2 stay degenerate (f = ±(|l| + 1 2 )) and so do +|l|, -1 2 and -|l|, )), as shown in Fig. The magnetic field B couples to the total magnetic moment M = M og * e 2m0 S Below we will see from numerical simulation that this is a good approximation even in a less ideal case. This result is analogous to the well known Landé gfactor of the Hydrogen atom when taking relativistic SOC into account: the splitting induced by weak external magnetic field has contributions from both the orbital and spin angular momentum Wire simulations -We next validate our theoretical findings with simulations of nanowires using an eightband k•p-model for zincblende semiconductors where |u n are the basis states of the 8-band k • p Hamiltonian with local angular momentum j n Figure The splitting ∆E l is generic if SOC is present, since in a typical semiconductor wire with SOC there is no symmetry that would protect the degeneracy between states of different total angular momentum. The conduction band of zincblende semiconductors has a purely s-orbital character at the Γ-point of the Brillouin zone (BZ), which is insensitive to SOC. Thus, also the conduction subbands of a zincblende nanowire are mostly derived from s-orbitals. Any nonzero splitting ∆E l results from p-like hole contributions to the conduction band due to confinement. This explains why the splitting in the conduction band is so small compared to the split-off energy of the valence bands ∆, which is 0.81 eV for InSb and 0. for InAs Since ∆E l results from the scattering of states at the surface of the wire the boundary conditions impact the numerical value, and even the sign, of ∆E l While in zincblende wires boundary effects are dominating, in wurtzite wires the situation is different: There, the conduction band has a mixed s and p-character. Thus, wurtzite wires have an intrinsic splitting independent of confinement Symmetry breaking -We now consider the effects of broken cylindrical symmetry and solve the full 2D cross section of hexagonal zincblende wires, grown in the 111 direction, using a 2D discretization of the k•p-model In Fig. The electron g-factor anisotropy in the magnetic field of 2DEGs is well established In a Majorana wire circular symmetry breaking by gate potentials and band bending is mandatory to create a Rashba effect in the wire Conclusions and Outlook -In summary, we have provided a theory for the previously unexplained large gfactors observed in nanowires. Our findings help to better understand and optimize Majorana experiments. Similar results apply to quantum dots. For cylindrical quantum dots we find that orbital g-factor enhancements are still significant if the length of the dot is much shorter than its diameter, see the Supplemental Material 37 for more details. Due to the observed robustness of the effect, it also applies in irregularly shaped quantum dots and can explain g-factor fluctuations there. pean Research Council through ERC Advanced Grant SIMCOFE, the Swiss National Science Foundation and through the National Competence Centers in Research MARVEL and QSIT. The cylindrical symmetry of a quantum wire allows for a considerable reduction in the computational effort of simulating the wire. To make use of this we furthermore assume that the zincblende structure itself has cylindrical symmetry by employing the so-called axial approximation In its simplest form the axial approximation amounts to equalling the two Luttinger-Kohn parameters γ 2 = γ 3 . We choose to set γ 2 = γ 3 only in the terms of the Kane Hamiltonian Within the axial approximation, the wave-function can be written as where |u n are the basis states for the 8-band k • p Hamiltonian |j tot , j z : (S2) The states |u 1 and |u 2 derive from s-orbitals, whereas the remaining basis states are derived from p-orbitals. Since the Hamiltonian is block-diagonal in the total angular momentum f z one obtains the orbital part of each component The Hamiltonian is transformed into polar coordinates (x, y, z) → (ρ, φ, z) where the φ-dependece of H Polar drops out due to the axial approximation. The momenta k x and k y are transformed by Below we write all the terms that appear in the Hamiltonian and need to be transformed (note that k ρ and k φ do not commute when the magnetic field is turned on) According to Eq. (S1), in the final matrix elements H ij , one needs to replace each occurence of k φ by l zn = f zj zn . For a uniform magnetic field B in the z direction the vector potential may be taken as which can be included in the simulation by substituting where φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. We solve the system of coupled differential equations for the eigenmodes by rewriting it first to a generalized eigenvalue problem where H is the Hamiltonian with substituted discretized expressions for the differential operators. The indices i, j of H ij run over both the basis states Eq. (S2) and the discretized radial positions ρ. We have to consider boundary conditions of both Dirichlet type v ni = 0 and Neumann type v niv n(i+1) = 0. If i corresponds to a position with ρ = W , with W being the radius of the wire, the Dirichlet condition is taken. If i corresponds to ρ = 0 the Dirichlet condition is taken for l z = 0 and the Neumann condition for l z = 0. Thus, the matrix C ij , which encodes the boundary conditions, has only diagonal elements which are 1 if i corresponds to an interior site of the wire and 0 if i is either at ρ = 0 or ρ = W . We calculate the spin-orbit interaction (SOI) splitting δE of the subbands perturbatively in the rotational invariant case with γ 2 = γ 3 in a circular wire. We use the continuum Hamiltonian in cylindrical coordinates. Starting from the exact solution in the γ 1 = γ 2 = γ 3 = 0 case The real-space continuum problem can be exactly solved for the electron-like wave functions when γ 1 = γ 2 = γ 3 = 0. Following Ref. 8 we express the hole-like components in terms of the electron-like ones from the Schrödinger equation, and substitute it back to the electron component equation to get the Helmholtz-equation where ∇ 2 is the Laplacian, E is the (unknown) energy of the state and ψ eσ (r) is the wave function amplitude in the electron-like bands (the equations are identical for the two spin sectors). The full wave-function, including the hole-like components can be written as where for a cylindrical wire the momenta can be written in cylindrical coordinates as in Eq. (S4). The hole-like components of the real space wave-function are obtained by acting with the differential operators on the electron-like wave-function on the right. As the equation is invariant under rotations around the z axis and translations along the z axis, the wave-function can be separated as ψ e↑ (ρ, φ, z) = R lσ (ρ)e ilφ e ikzz , substituting this we get the Bessel equation for the radial part where χ is the radial wavenumber and is determined by the boundary conditions. The solutions can be written in terms of Bessel functions R lσ (ρ) = J l (χρ). Setting k z = 0, the full wave function can be written as where we used that the action on our ansatz amounts to the replacement of k φ with l. The different hole-like Bloch states have different internal angular momentum, but the total angular momentum of each component is the same, this is manifest in the extra orbital phase factors in the expression. The hole-like contribution is proportional to the radial derivative of the wave function. As the Bessel-functions cannot have both vanishing magnitude and derivative at finite ρ, it is not possible to demand vanishing of all components of the wave function at the boundary. In the large wire (large W and small χ) limit the hole-like amplitude is suppressed, so demanding the electron-like component to vanish is approximately a good boundary condition. We assume that the system is infinite, but the states are confined by a large potential V at the boundary. Assuming V is much larger than any of the energy scales in the problem, then the wave function decays exponentially outside as where W is the radius of the wire where the potential step is. The expectation value of the potential energy goes as , so in the large V limit the wave function amplitude is minimized, and the states get shifted up as √ V . We express the magnitude squared of the wave function on the boundary using our previous expression. where σ = ±1 stands for up and down spin, are constants with length squared dimension and we introduced the dimensionless quantity χ = χW , such that R = J l (χW ) = J l (χ ) and R = W dJ l dρ (χW ) = χ J l (χ ). It can be seen that in the W 2 a, b limit (for InSb b < a ≈ 10nm 2 ) the total amplitude can be minimized by minimizing the amplitude in the electron bands. This happens when χ = z lp , the p'th root of J l . For finite W we expand around this solution. To get a tractable approximation we can treat R and R as independent variables and express R that minimizes the amplitude in terms of R : (S24) The right hand side does not depend on γ 0 and is linear in ∆ for small values and E can be set to zero for approximate calculations if the subband energy is much smaller than the bandgap, E E 0 . We expand both sides to first order in δχ = χz lp and use the identity (S25) Such a change in χ effectively renormalizes the radius of the wire and results in a splitting between states with different total angular momentum. From Eq. (S17) the energy E of a state in the small χ (large W , small l and p and small E) limit is approximately where we set χ = z lp /W ignoring SO corrections. Note that this approximation does not depend on γ 0 . Substituting χ with χ + δχ from (S25) and expanding to linear order the energy change induced by SOI is (S27) In the large W limit the subband splitting is (dotted lines in Fig. which for the lowest l = 1 subband gives where in the last approximation we used the renormalized parameters for InSb In the above calculation we used the linearized expression for E and set E = 0 in a and b. A more precise result can be obtained for thin wires by numerically solving the third order Eq. (S17) for E with χ = z lp (no SOI), substituting it in Eq. (S25) and calculating the energy at the modified χ by again using Eq. (S17). All results shown in the main text refer to the hard boundary condition case, where the wave functions is set to zero at the boundary of the wire. Here we instead apply a step potential, which is set to zero inside the wire and 0.2 eV outside of the wire. This mimics the minimal amplitude boundary condition referred to above. Most results, like the g-factors and the magnitude of ∆E l , are very similar with soft and hard boundary conditions. The most striking difference is that, for soft boundary conditions, and zero magnetic field, the Kramers pair ±|l|, ∓ 1 2 is higher in energy than the Kramers pair ±|l|, ± 1 2 . Thus ∆E l has a negative sign in the soft boundary case. In Fig. Here we consider InAs wurtzite wires in the 0001 growth direction, as they have been used in Majorana experiments using m ⊥ = 0.0416 m e and m = 0.0370 m e which is in good agreement with our numerical solution. Note that the sign is opposite from the zincblende hard boundary case. For large wire diameters (around 100 nm) the subband splitting becomes of similar size as the SOI splitting leading to a reduction of the SOI splitting. This is also visible in the rescaled energies shown in Fig. The same reasoning as for wires leads to enhanced g-factors in quantum dots with (approximate) cylindrical symmetry. Cylindrically symmetric quantum dots are simulated in the axial approximation. Due to the additional confinement in z-direction a 2D boundary value problem needs to be solved now. In Fig. The k • p approximation is only guaranteed to work for long wavelengths and the zincblende k • p model used in our simulations neglects the Dresselhaus term, which results from inversion symmetry breaking. For comparison, we also simulate semiconductor wires in zincblende structure using highly accurate first-principles derived tight-binding models. In the tight-binding framework the states are described correctly in the whole Brillouin zone of the lattice, thus, abrupt changes like a hard boundary pose no problem. For the first-principles calculations we used the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) In Fig. In the main text we consider hexagonal wires grown in the 111 direction of a zincblende semiconductor. Again we take the k • p-parameters from Ref. In previous 8-band zincblende k • p simulations we neglected the Dresselhaus term. While we implicitly checked that the Dresselhaus term does not introduce significant changes via the tight-binding calculation, it is convenient to have a direct comparison of 8-band k • p results with and without Dresselhaus term. The Dresselhaus term is added to the 8-band k • p Hamiltonian using the definitions and parameters of Ref. should affect the SOI splitting ∆E l , like it is the case in wurtzite wires. However, for InAs and InSb it is too small in magnitude to have a significant effect, see Fig. In the main text we focused on hexagonal and cylindrical wires, here we consider now rectangular wires. The parameters of the simulation are identical to the hexagonal case apart from the the growth direction which is now 001. For a simple quadratic band with effective mass m * the energy levels at k = 0 of a rectangular wire with dimensions L x and L y are given by E nx,ny = with the quantum numbers n x and n y taking on nonzero positive integer values. The corresponding wavefunctions are given by ψ nx,ny (x, y, z) = 1 N nx,ny sin n x π L x x sin n y π L y y e ikz , (S33) where N (n x , n y ) is a normalization factor. In the case L x = L y the lowest energy level is E 0,0 and the first excited level is two-fold degenerate E 1,2 = E 2,1 . With SOI the two-fold degeneracy is lifted into two separate states with f z ≈ 1 2 and f z = 3 2 with SOI splitting ∆E 1 . Note that due to the C 4 symmetry of the wire the angular momenta f z = {-3 2 , -1 2 , 1 2 , 3 2 } are still in different symmetry sectors. Therefore, we can still talk of the l ≈ 1 subbands as in the cylindrical case and also the enhanced g-factors are found. This is illustrated in Fig. Upon deformation of the quadratic wire the geometry splitting of the second and third state soon surpasses the SOI splitting ∆E 1 and g-factors decline rapidly, see Fig. which is also found in good approximation in our more sophisticated 8-band k • p calculation. If L x and L y differ enough the geometry splitting exceeds the SOI splitting and the wavefunctions are no more angular momentum eigenstates, see Fig. The realization of Majorana states requires a proximity induced superconducting pairing potential in the wire 