Besides the cuprate superconductors lead-doped barium bismuthate still attracts intense interest concerning its relatively high critical temperature and the nature of its superconductivity in vicinity to a charge density wave ordered topological insulator. Here we present bilayers of barium bismuthate and barium leadate and find two-dimensional superconductivity at their interfaces well described by current-voltage characteristics compatible with a Berezinski ȋ-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition. Magneto-transport studies independently prove the two-dimensional character of the superconducting properties in these bilayers. The particular dependence of the superconducting transition temperature on the thickness of the barium leadate top layer suggests the formation of the superconducting state to be strain-induced through the interface. Interfaces in oxide heterostructures serve as an inexhaustible source for the creation of new electronic phases well constrained on the nanoscale Up to now, only few superconducting oxide interfaces have been realized. However it is an appealing challenge to identify further superconducting bilayers because different perovskite parent compounds account for novel characteristics of electronic states in proximity to the interface. For example, BaBiO 3 (BBO) is predicted to be a large-energy gap topological insulator due to spinorbit coupling (when electron doped) Inspired by the discovery of a superconducting state at LAO/STO interfaces, we investigated BBO/BPO bilayers (BLs) in expectation to identify 2D superconductivity non-existent in both parent compounds. Thin films of nominal BaBi 0.25 Pb 0.75 O 3 , BBO, BPO, and BBO/BPO BLs were grown by PLD using commercially available, stoichiometric targets with purities of at least 99.9% at maximum reachable density. We used single crystalline (001) oriented STO crystals as substrates, which we cleansed in acetone and isopropyl prior to deposition. HF buffering STO substrates For BaBi 0.25 Pb 0.75 O 3 thin films we used 1000 laser pulses (LP) resulting in film thicknesses of ≈ 420 nm. For thin films of BBO and BPO we used 50-150 LP corresponding to film thicknesses of ≈ 25-75 nm for BBO and ≈ 17-50 nm for BPO. Concerning the BBO/BPO BLs we kept the thickness of the BBO starting layer constant (always 100 LP) and only varied the number N of LP of the BPO top layer. All grown BaBi 0.25 Pb 0.75 O 3 thin films show an increase in resistance with decreasing temperature and a superconducting transition at T c,ip ≈ 8 K, which is determined at the inflection point (ip) of R(T ) at the transition (see Fig. BBO and BPO thin films display peaks consistent with only (00l) oriented planes in routinely taken x-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments. BBO thin films are insulating with resistances ranging from MΩ to GΩ over the whole accessible temperature range. Pure BPO thin films instead turn out to be metallic (see Fig. BBO/BPO BLs reveal only peaks classified by (00l) orientation in XRD studies separated in individual reflexes for BBO and BPO, respectively. Peaks assigned to a homogeneously doped BaBi 1-x Pb x O 3 phase could not be identified (see Supplemental Material [40], Fig. Normalized resistances of pulsed laser deposition (PLD) grown thin films of BaPbO3 (BPO) and BaBi0.25Pb0.75O3 and BaBiO3 (BBO)/BPO bilayers (BLs) as function of temperature. Whereas BBO thin films are highly insulating (not shown), BPO thin films show metallic behaviour (gray hexagons). Thin films of nominal BaBi0.25Pb0.75O3 are superconducting at low temperatures. BLs with a fixed thickness of BBO (100 laser pulses (LP)) and variable thickness of BPO top layer (controlled by the number of LP N ) undergo superconducting transitions (samples with N = {40, 60, 80, 100}). (N = {80, 100}) and no superconducting transition for samples with N = 150. The observation of an optimal BPO thickness to reach maximum T c and the suppression of superconductivity beyond this thickness indicates that the BL superconductivity is related to the interface (see below) and may also be dependent on the thickness of the BBO starting layer (in the case of atomically thin BBO layers which is not investigated here). If the superconducting transition is really driven by the interface, then a likely scenario is that a 2D superconducting sheet is formed within the bilayered samples. Such behavior is described by a BKT transition BKT predictions signifies unambiguously that indeed a 2D superconducting sheet is formed through the interface. The ohmic regime observed below T BKT for small currents is attributed to be responsible for the deviations from the fits due to finite size effects An estimate of the thickness of the superconducting sheet can be retrieved by measuring the magnetotransport properties of our BLs. Such measurements are evaluated in the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) regime for magnetic fields up to H c2 . They also act as an independent proof for the observed 2D superconductivity given that the sheet thickness d sc is comparable to or smaller than the GL coherence length ξ GL The GL theory for thin superconducting sheets allows to express both magnetic fields in terms of the magnetic flux quantum φ 0 , the thickness d sc of the 2D superconducing sheet, the product of the penetration depth and the thermodynamic critical field said quantity the thickness d sc can be calculated supporting a thickness of the 2D superconducting sheet to be in the range of d sc ≈ 11.8 nm being clearly smaller than the nominal thickness of the BPO top layer. The calculated thickness d sc is robust against different experimental determination of H c2 (see Supplemental Material [40], Fig. The coherence length of the BL (N = 60) is estimated to be ξ GL ≈ 11.0 nm, the value of which we extracted from the temperature dependence of the upper critical magnetic field obtained from R(T, H) measurements (see Supplemental Material [40], Fig. We suggest that the occurrence of 2D superconductivity in BBO/BPO BLs results from a strained growth of BPO on top of BBO possibly also affecting the crystallographic phase of BBO at the interface. Reciprocal space maps, which were taken for BLs with N = 50 and N = 150 (see Fig. These observations aid the idea of a strain-only effect at the interface: as BLs with N = 50 become superconducting, whereas those with N = 150 stay metallic in the accessible temperature range, a possible existence of an established homogeneously doped region equal to BaBi 1-x Pb x O 3 is hardly conceivable. Ultimately a most favorable thickness of the BPO film exists to assign a robustly induced superconducting phase with maximum T c . In this study we have shown that BLs of BBO and BPO become superconducting depending on the thickness of the BPO top layer with transition temperatures as high as T c,ip = 3.5 K for our given sample layout. The electrical transport characterization clearly revealed a BKT transition identifying a 2D superconducting state within the BLs. Magneto-transport investigations independently provide evidence for the two-dimensionality of the superconducting sheet estimating the thickness of the sheet to be d sc ≈ 11.8 nm. X-ray studies suggest an interface-driven epitaxial-matched strain effect at the interface between BBO and BPO responsible for the occurrence of the observed 2D superconducting state. The encountered transition in BBO/BPO bilayers is a remarkable further precedent of interface driven ground-state variance. With the identification of a robust superconducting state at the interface of two "hidden" topological insulators 