In spite of Anderson's theorem 1 , disorder is known to affect superconductivity in conventional s-wave superconductors For most conventional superconductors, the presence of disorder decreases the superconducting transition temperature, T c 2,3 . While the exact reason for this is still a subject of investigation, it is thought that localization effects coupled with enhanced Coulomb interactions resulting from the short elastic mean free path give rise to an inhomogeneous superconducting state with large amplitude and phase variations, even though the disorder may be uniform In a few superconductors, increasing disorder increases T c : perhaps the best-known example is Al, where the enhancement of T c with disorder can be as large as a factor of 5 The heterostructures used in this work consisted of 20 monolayers (ML) of LAO grown epitaxially on Ti termi- In (111) interface structures, the transport characteristics (longitudinal resistance, Hall coefficient, and quantum capacitance) are strongly anisotropic The data discussed here are for two freezing voltages V F = -10 V and V F = 50 V for which we have taken the most extensive data. Data for other voltages (e.g., V F = 0 V) follow the expected trend (see Supplementary Information). The Ar/H 2 annealed samples showed a superconducting transition, with V F affecting both the normal state resistance R N and the superconducting transition T c . As expected from our previous work The difference between electrostatic doping and frozen disorder can be seen clearly in the nonlinear differential resistance dV /dI as a function of dc current I dc and gate voltage V g at temperatures far below T c , shown in Fig. FIG. I dc (nA) FIG. Figure A different representation of the data for the Ar/H 2 annealed samples in Fig. V at this temperature). Thus the temperature at which the configuration is frozen in is T F ∼ 1 K. We now come to the question of the origin of this effect. In (001) interface samples, the resistance at low temperature depends on the history of how V g is swept after first cooling the sample down from room temperature, eventually settling into a hysteretic but reproducible behavior as a function of V g . This has been ascribed to an irreversible change in the occupation of charge states near the interface that can only be reset by warming to room temperature, indicating that the relevant energy scales for population or depopulation of these charge states are of that order (∼ 25 meV). We also observe a similar initial, irreproducible, history dependence of the properties in the (111) interface samples on first cooling down from room temperature, after which the properties as a function of V g become hysteretic but reproducible. However, the freezing effects in the (111) interface samples reported here are different, in that different values and V g dependences of I C , R N and T C can be stabilized at very low temperature depending on the freezing voltage V F without introducing new irreproducible dependences at these temperatures. Furthermore, these frozen state sets/resets at a much lower energy scale, ∼ 1K. It may be possible that the freezing effect is associated with other trapped states with much lower energy scales. From Fig. The 20 monolayer (ML) (111) LAO/STO interface samples reported on in this study were prepared by pulsed laser deposition using a KrF laser (λ = 248 nm). A LAO single crystal target was used for deposition, and the laser repetition was kept at 1 Hz, laser fluence at 1.8 J/cm 2 , growth temperature at 650 C, and oxygen pressure at 1 mTorr. The deposition was monitored via in situ reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED). Hall bars were then fabricated using photolithography to define an etch mask to protect the Hall bars during the subsequent argon ion milling. The argon ion milling etched the unprotected areas to the bare STO, leaving the LAO on top of the Hall bars. A final photolithography step deposited a Au film on the electrical contacts to enable visual location of the contacts for wire-bonding. Additionally, Au was deposited on the etched bare STO, which enabled us to to confirm that the bare STO did not become conducting after the ion milling process or subsequent annealing steps. The crystal orientation of the Hall bars shown in inset of Fig. 