Collective modes manifest themselves in a variety of different physical systems ranging from superconductors to superfluid 3 He. The collective modes are generated via the Higgs-Anderson mechanism that is based on the symmetry breaking double well potential. Recently collective modes were explored in superconducting NbN and InO in the presence of a strong terahertz laser field. In both cases a single collective mode that oscillates with twice the frequency of the superconducting energy gap ∆ was discovered. Superfluid 3 He is the host for a whole variety of collective modes. In particular, in the superfluid 3 He B-phase, two massive collective modes were found with masses 8/5∆ and 12/5∆. We show that for both cases of the superconducting films and for the superfluid 3 He B-phase, the collective modes satisfy the Nambu identity that relates the masses of different collective modes to the energy gap parameter ∆. The recent discovery of the Higgs boson [1, 2] triggered a great deal of excitement in the high energy physics and low temperature physics communities. In each of the fields of high energy and low temperature physics, the double well potential plays a central role in the field dynamics -it breaks the symmetry and creates collective modes discovered a simple and beautiful relation between the masses of different collective modes and the superconducting energy gap, known as the Nambu identity. For the case of up to two collective modes the Nambu identity reads, where m 1 and m 2 are the masses of the collective modes and ∆ is the energy gap parameter. Recently, the collective modes were explored in superconducting NbN in the presence of a strong terahertz laser field. In their experiment, Matsunaga et al The collective modes were experimentally discovered previously in the superfluid 3 He independently by Giannetta et al In this Comment we review the Nambu identity and compare it with the collective modes experimentally found in the superfluid 3 He B-phase. The fermion-fermion interaction is mediated by the Feynman vacuum "bubble" diagrams depicted on Fig. where we used the standard notation The Feynman vacuum diagrams represent the meson exchange between the interacting fermions as one can clearly see from the Fig. where ε ikl is the unit antisymmetric tensor of the third rank. The integrals (2,3) become and . Performing the integration in the complex plane Here Λ is the cut-off momentum, and N F is the density of states at the Fermi surface, It is defined in terms of the Fermi momentum p F , the Fermi velocity, v F , and the spin degeneracy ν = 2. If we introduce momentum densities for the π and σ modes, we find, . Now we notice a simple relation This relation implies the connection between the massive σ and massless π modes, This immediately leads to the Λ-independent, and therefore gauge invariant, expression, which can be written as With the self-consistent condition, J π (0) ≡ 1, and with a ≡ q 2 /4m 2 , we obtain By adding and subtracting a, the identity (18) can be rewritten as On the other hand, the summation of the geometric series generated by the Feynman bubble diagrams and depicted in Fig. which is equivalent to the meson exchange with the masses m π and m σ correspondingly, i.e. which can be simplified as, We clearly see that at the bottom of the gap, that corresponds to q 0 = 0, i.e. for a = 0, we obtain the massless π-meson, m π = 0, while at the top of the gap, q 0 = 2∆, i.e. for a = 1, we obtain the single massive σ-meson with the mass m σ = 2∆. Integrating over the gap, we arrive at the Nambu mass identity For the total angular momentum J = 1 the interaction mode becomes τ α [σ × q] i . In terms of the loop integrals J (1) σ (q) = ig In other words the massless π-mode with a J = 0 interaction mode becomes massive for the J = 1 interaction mode, whereas the massive σ-mode with J = 0 interaction mode becomes massless for The five-fold splitting (with (2J + 1) components) found in the superfluid 3 He B-phase is consistent with the J = 2 modes (see Fig. J σ (q) + 2 5 J π (q), J (2) σ (q) = ig d 4 p (2π) 4 2[p 2 0q 2 0 /4ε 2 p -∆ 2 /5] [(p 0q 0 /2) 2ε 2 p -∆ 2 + i ][(p 0 + q 0 /2) 2ε 2 p -∆ 2 + i ] = (30) 2 5 J σ (q) + 3 5 J π (q), where J π (q) and J σ (q) are the loop integrals 