Georg Bednorz "for their important breakthrough in the discovery of superconductivity in the ceramic materials" in 1986 as described in the citation of their 1987 Nobel Prize in Physics. It is this breakthrough discovery that has ushered in the explosion of research activities in high temperature superconductivity (HTS) and has provided immense excitement in HTS science and technology in the ensuing decades till now. Alex has not been resting on his laurels and has continued to search for the origin of the unusual high temperature superconductivity in cuprates. My first encounter with Alex was through a phone conversation on December 10 th , 1986, following my short note to him and Georg Bednorz a week earlier (Fig. Indeed, in the last three decades, great progress has been made in all areas of HTS research and development: materials, science, and technology. For example, more than 250 stable compounds of cuprates and iron-based pnictides and chalcogenides have been discovered with T c up to 134 K and 164 K in HgBa 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 7 at ambient and 32 GPa, respectively (not to mention the most recently reported unstable hydrogen-rich molecular compounds with a T c up to 203 K under ultrahigh pressures above 200 GPa, to be discussed later); many new unusual phenomena have been observed in these compounds; the electronic, phononic, and magnetic spectra have been determined in many of these compounds; various theoretical models have been proposed to account for the observations; kilometer-long HTS ribbons have been fabricated with respectably high J c ; and many prototypes of HTS devices have been successfully constructed and demonstrated with performance better than their non-superconducting counterparts. Unfortunately, to date there exists no theoretical HTS model that is commonly accepted, and commercially viable HTS devices are yet to be made available. We believe that the most effective way to provide relief to the above impasse is to increase the superconducting material space with higher T c preferably above room temperature, higher J c via anisotropy reduction, and a greater number of material and structural types through the discovery of novel compounds. In view of the complexity of the existing HTS materials, a holistic multidisciplinary enlightened empirical approach has been proposed to achieve novel HTS with higher T c It is therefore not surprising to find that the search for novel superconducting materials with higher T c has been an important integral part of superconductivity research ever since its discovery, as shown in Fig. Cuprate superconductors with a T c above 77 K, the liquid nitrogen boiling point, share a common layered structure with multiple block subsystems: an active subsystem, where certain interactions promote charge-carrier pairing, and a charge reservoir subsystem to offer carriers to the former subsystem without introducing defects, similar to that which occurs in a semiconducting superlattice structure. As a consequence, many cuprates, especially those with high T c s, show high anisotropy, or quasi 2D-like features. Excitations with different energy scales are believed to provide the glue for superconducting electron-pairings, although a commonly accepted nature of such excitations for the high T c is yet to emerge. One way that has long been proposed to achieve enhanced T c s is to take advantage of artificially or naturally assembled interfaces, where soft phonons and/or excitons may occur. In fact, the discovery of the layered cuprate HTS and the great advancement in molecular beam epitaxy growth of perfect thin films have revived the interest in, and accelerated the search for, the interfacial effect in the artificially assembled composite layered compound systems. In addition, naturally assembled metal/semiconductor interfaces have been demonstrated in the BSCCO single crystalline samples by the observation of the Shapiro steps in a microwave environment Although the idea to achieve high T c via interfaces is not new, the first serious model analysis was not made until 1973 when Allender, Bray, and Bardeen (ABB) examined the effect of metal/semiconductor interfaces on superconductivity The alkaline-earth iron arsenide CaFe 2 As 2 (Ca122) is the parent compound of a large superconductor family. The superconductivity of many compounds in this family seems to be rather unusual. The most unusual observation is the non-bulk superconductivity up to 49 K induced in Ca122 at ambient pressure by slight Ca-replacement with a rare-earth element, La, Ce, Pr, or Nd Later studies show that the complex phase-evolution under pressure can be reproduced through heat treatment Layered cuprate superconductors have dominated the HTS field of study since their discovery. Great efforts have been devoted to the enhancement of their T c via chemical and/or physical means. Indeed, by controlling these two knobs, T c has been optimized for each compound or compound family. For example, the peak T c of the three major cuprate families that superconduct above the liquid nitrogen boiling point, HBCCO High pressure investigations have been made on the three optimally doped representative members of the families, but only up to 30s GPa, i.e. Bi 2 Sr 2 Ca 2 Cu 3 O 10 (Bi2223) The scientific significance of the recent report by Drozdov/Eremets et al. Although there are several excellent ultrahigh pressure labs in the US, China, Japan, and Europe, to date and to the best of our knowledge, there is only one lab (Shimizu's in Japan) that has reproduced the resistive transition in H 3 S together with Eremets Re-examine it As discussed in Ref. 2, known high T c superconductors exhibit multiple interactions, and magnetic interaction has been considered by many to play an important role. The question arises whether ferroelectric interaction can play a beneficial role for superconductivity as depicted in Fig. 