We use inelastic light scattering to study Sr1-xNaxFe2As2 (x ≈ 0.34), which exhibits a robust tetragonal magnetic phase that restores the four-fold rotation symmetry inside the orthorhombic magnetic phase. With cooling, we observe splitting and recombination of an Eg phonon peak upon entering the orthorhombic and tetragonal magnetic phases, respectively, consistent with the reentrant phase behavior. Our electronic Raman data reveal a pronounced feature that is clearly associated with the tetragonal magnetic phase, suggesting the opening of an electronic gap. No phonon back-folding behavior can be detected above the noise level, which implies that any lattice translation symmetry breaking in the tetragonal magnetic phase must be very weak. The iron-based superconductors exhibit rich phase diagrams due to the interplay among charge, spin, orbital, and lattice degrees of freedom A pivotal fact in support of the spin-nematic scenario is that a novel tetragonal SDW (t-SDW) phase can take over inside the o-SDW phase and, upon the formation of the new magnetic order, the C 4 lattice symmetry is restored. First discovered in Ba 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 Here we report a Raman scattering study of the sequential C 4 -C 2 -C 4 transitions in Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 . We first confirm that these transitions leave clear signatures in the energy spectrum of Brillouin zone-center phonons, consistent with the expected changes in the point-group symmetry. Upon cooling into the t-SDW phase, we observe a pile-up of intensity in the electronic Raman spectrum near 260 cm -1 along with a depletion at lower energies, suggesting the opening of an electronic gap of similar sizes. While electronic band reconstructions might be caused by charge-density modulations The single crystals of Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 used in this study were grown by a self-flux method Our Raman scattering measurements were carried out in a confocal backscattering geometry using a Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRAM HR Evolution spectrometer equipped with a liquid-nitrogen cooled CCD detector. The λ = 632.8 nm line from a He-Ne laser was used for excitation. The laser beam was focused down to a ∼ 10μm-diameter spot on the sample surface, which was held under ultra-high vacuum in a liquid-helium flow cryostat. To reduce heating, we used laser power less than 0.4 mW. Our measurements involved two types of sample surfaces that are parallel to the crystallographic ab and ac planes [insets of Fig. From factor-group analysis, one expects a total of four Raman-active phonons in the tetragonal phase: A 1g , B 1g , and 2×E g . The E g modes can be detected on the ac surface with ac polarizations of the incident and scattered photons. Because these modes are two-fold degenerate in the tetragonal phase and they become non-degenerate B 2g and B 3g modes in the orthorhombic phase, the splitting of the corresponding Raman peaks has been previously used to characterize the C 4 -C 2 nematic transition [ To quantitatively describe the T evolution, we fit all the spectra in Fig. As we already know from previous reports The pile-up of intensity near 260 cm -1 and above, along with intensity depletions at lower energies, indicates the opening of a new electronic gap in the t-SDW phase. Indeed, gap-opening behaviors associated with the o-SDW phase have been consistently observed in both optical conductivity With commonalities in the large energy width, the B 2g symmetry, and the temperature dependence, our result in Fig. Finally, it is expected that there may be (π, π) charge order accompanying In summary, we have performed a systematic Raman scattering study of Sr 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 which exhibits two magnetic transitions. The temperature evolution of an E g phonon confirms the sequential C 4 -C 2 -C 4 transitions in our sample. Upon entering the t-SDW phase, we observe a distinct B 2g electronic feature that indicates the development of a new electronic gap of about 260 cm -1 , or 32 meV. While charge order may accompany the t-SDW order and break the lattice translation symmetry, our deliberate search for phonon back-folding behaviors yields a null result, implying that any such symmetry breaking must be weak.