We develop a magneto-elastic (ME) coupling model for the interaction between the vortex lattice and crystal elasticity. The theory extends the Kogan-Clem's anisotropic Ginzburg-Landau (GL) model to include the elasticity effect. The anisotropies in superconductivity and elasticity are simultaneously considered in the GL theory frame. We compare the field and angular dependences of the magnetization to the relevant experiments. The contribution of the ME interaction to the magnetization is comparable to the vortex-lattice energy, in materials with relatively strong pressure dependence of the critical temperature. The theory can give the appropriate slope of the field dependence of magnetization near the upper critical field. The magnetization ratio along different vortex frame axes is independent with the ME interaction. The theoretical description of the magnetization ratio is applicable only if the applied field moderately close to the upper critical field. It is well known that, the interaction between the defect-induced strain and the flux vortices in superconductors gives rise to the flux-pinning behaviors In this paper, we develop a ME model accounting for the interaction of the vortex lattice and crystal elasticity. The theory extends the Kogan-Clem's anisotropic GL model The GL theory with a phenomenological mass tensor ij M describes reasonably the major behaviors of anisotropic superconductors near the critical temperature c T . A new feature in deformable superconductors is the vortex-induced strain in terms of the elastic response of the crystal in the presence of vortex lattices. The free energy is Here, (2 ) i e c ’ĆĮ ’ĆŁ ’āæ ’ĆŁ ╬Ā A , A is the vector potential of the local magnetic field H , ’üÖ is the order parameter, ijkl ’ü¼ are elastic coefficients and ij u is the strain tensor. The inverse mass tensor 1 ij M ’ĆŁ has the principal values 1 ( 1, 2, 3) i Mi ’ĆŁ ’ĆĮ . ’üĪ and ’üó are the coefficients in the GL functional expansion. In terms of the well-established strain dependence of c T , the vortex-induced strain enters in the free energy via the material characteristic ’üĪ [The mean mass T is c T at zero strain and 0 ’üĖ is the GL coherence length ’üĖ at temperature 0K, i.e. The free energy now reads Here, all quantities are dimensionless, with the same notations as their dimensional counterparts. 1 () where the GL parameter ( , , ) x y z is obtained by rotating ( , , ) X Y Z with an angle ’ü▒ around axis Y . The axis z gives the vortex direction. Introducing the oblique coordinate system 1 2 3 ( , , ) x x x , the anisotropic ME problem transforms into a quasi-isotropic one. Varying the free energy (4) with respect to * ’üÖ , i A and ij ’üŁ , the equations of equilibrium in the vortex frame (Fig. The elasticity equation 0 Eqs. (5a)-(5d) describes the ME behavior of deformable superconductors in the presence of vortex-induced strain. The solutions for the GL equations near the upper critical field 2 c H have been well established for the isotropic case x x x (Fig. ’üŁ’üż ’ĆĮ (see Appendix A for the details). In the new frame, Eqs. (5a)-(5d) read 2 ( * Re( ) ) 0 H , the strain effect ij ij u ’üĪ and high-order 2 ’üÖ can be neglected [19], and Eq. (6a) now reads 2 1 () This looks exactly like the isotropic case of Abrikosov's classical treatment The angular dependence Eq. (6b) is rewritten as H , the anisotropy dose not change the features of i Q in the isotropic case drastically Going back to the original coordinate frame ( , , ) x y z , we obtain with the help of Eq. (A16): Using the angular dependence of ( )sin cos cos sin This reveals an important distinct feature in anisotropic superconductors at the immediate vicinity of 2 c H : the axial currents do exist in an array of vortices, and these currents vanishes when the vortices direct along one of the principal crystal axes a and c . In isotropic materials ( 13 ’üŁ’üŁ ’ĆĮ ), there is no axial currents at any vortex directions. 2 c H : Abrikosov identities in anisotropic case with magneto-elastic effect As in original Abrikosov approach where the well-known Abrikosov identities are derived for the isotropic case without strain effect, we introduce the operators 12 i ’é▒ ’üÉ ’ĆĮ ’üÉ ’é▒ ’üÉ and then Eq. (6a) reads (see Appendix B for the detailed derivations) Accounting for Eq. (11a), 3 Q has the order of 22 () H . All terms on the RHS (right hand side) of Eq. ( or in the vortex frame, where 0 H is an arbitrary constant, and ’ü½ has been given in Eq. (8a). To normalize the solution 0 ’üÖ of the homogeneous equation ( )] in Eq. ( where 2 Q in the derivation of Eq. ( H . The existence of a solution 1 ’ü╣ for the inhomogeneous linear equation ( is orthogonal to the solution 0 ’üÖ of the corresponding homogenous equation 0 0 ’Ć½ ’üÉ ’üÖ ’ĆĮ [19]. This leads to the second Abrikosov identity. Eq. ( Bearing in mind that from Eq. (14b) the magnetic induction is ’üĘ can be obtained in terms of Eq. ( If we introduce the following notations (the last one is derived from the lattice structure and 1 ’üó the structure parameter), Eq. ( The general form of the free energy in anisotropic superconductors with elasticity effect is Using Eqs. (14b) ( and expressing ’üĘ in terms of Eq. ( Now let us go further with the last term in the free energy (22a), considering the effect of the vortex-induced strain with the help of elasticity equations (6c) and (6d). The Fourier form of the vortex induced strain ij u reads [16] 0 where () i u q is the displacement component in Fourier space, and ij u is the homogenous strain induced by the vortex. Applying Eq. ( where 1 () Sq ’üĪ ’ĆĮ q and () ’üĘ q is the Fourier transform of Eq. ( we have the strain field in deformable superconductors: With the help of Eqs. (25a) and (25b), the last term in the free energy (22a) now can be expressed as (the detailed derivation can be found in The final form of the free energy can be written as or with the help of Eq. ( Let us validate Eq. A ’üó ’ĆĮ is a geometric constant for the triangular lattice In deformable superconductors, the free energy (27b) depends on the strains via ’üĪ given in Eq. (3b). For the uniform deformation, using Eq. (25a) we have where Since ij kl ijkl ’üĄ ’üĄ ’ü¼ is an invariant independent with coordinates transformation, we can calculate ij ’üĄ and ijkl ’ü¼ [in the new frame 1 2 3 ( , , ) x x x ] in terms of the crystal frame ( , , ) abc . mn p is the uniform stress applying on the superconductor, such that the nonzero components are 11 where ij C are the elastic moduli in the crystal frame. Thus, we have or in an estimation for the order of magnitude, where ’ü¼ is of the order of the elastic modulus. Combining Eq. ( The elastic energy can be evaluated with the help of Eqs. (20) (26) ( ) Here, Following the approaches in . In the vortex frame ( , , ) x y z , the field components z H and x H are calculated by Now the magnetization M in the vortex frame reads in conventional units. The ratio ( 1)sin cos cos sin is independent with the vortex structure parameter A ’üó and elasticity parameter e ’üó . This extend the conclusion by Kogan and Clem The magnetization components in the crystal frame ( , , ) X Y Z is obtained by using the coordinate transformation relations in Eqs. (33a) and (33b): The magnetization ratio in the crystal frame is Ghosh et al. The theory considers the mediate vicinity of 2 c B , and high-’ü½ material, such that from Eq. (32) for calculation convenience. According to the magnetization experiment Since the mechanical parameters not involved in this experiment, we take H is relatively poor [Fig. To check the anisotropic magnetization ratio Eq. ( ’ü¦ ’ĆĮ [Fig. ’ü¦ ’ĆĮ to fit the data; this value approaches 17 proposed by Tuominen et al. H is nearly two orders of magnitude higher than the applied field. ’ü¦ ’ĆĮ . It must be noted, the seemingly good fit by 15 ’ü¦ ’ĆĮ is actually out of scope of the theory, so it masks the physics of the anisotropic magnetization. We implement the fit for the Tl-2223 samples, which is supposed to have remarkably high ’ü¦ and H ’ĆĮ , independently of the ’ü¦ value used above ~15 [Fig. Based on the anisotropic GL theory, we model the ME interaction in a uniaxial superconductor. The present model includes the anisotropic superconductivity and elastic deformation, by introducing the anisotropic electron mass and the elastic energy in the GL free energy. The GL equations are now correlated to the ME interaction. The solutions are obtained by using the anisotropic Abrikosov identities under the considerations of the elasticity effect. As a validation, the formulas of the free energy is compared with the classical results. The elasticity parameter e ’üó , vortex-lattice parameter A ’üó and anisotropy parameter ’üż determined for practice. We derive the practical forms of free energy and magnetization. The formula of the anisotropic magnetization ratio remains its classical representation, even taking into account the ME coupling effect. We compare the theory with the experiments. By including the ME interaction, the model gives a satisfied description of the field dependence of the magnetization near the upper critical field. In Fe-based superconductors, the strong dependence c Tp ’éČ’éČ leads to a remarkable ME interaction, which is comparable to the vortex energy. The ME coupling effect is important for an appropriate description of the magnetization behaviors. The effect of the ME interaction is absent in the magnetization ratio xz MM along different vortex frame axes. This enables the fitting of the relevant experiments to determine the anisotropic parameter ’ü¦ substantially. However, it should be noted that, excessively high ’ü¦ values lead to unrealistically large 2 c H , especially when the field directs approximately in the superconducting layer ( ab plane). One must bear in mind the applicability range of the theory: H . Extending the theory to a moderate field range is significant for practice. However, in this case, the precise vortex structure and spatial distribution of order parameter should be considered. This makes the problem intricate, not to mention the anisotropies of elasticity and superconductivity. The anisotropic ME interaction in the moderate magnetic field range will be the focus of our next research. 0 0 0 0 The upper indices dictate the contravariant quantities. Supposing an array of vortices tilted from the crystal axes, we introduce a new coordinates ( , , ) x y z of vortices. ( , , ) x y z is rotated with respect to the ( , , ) X Y Z through an angle ’ü▒ about the Y axis (Fig. where the transformation coefficients cos 0 sin The three invariants of the tensor, tr( ) ╬╝ , ’āŚ’āŚ ╬╝ ╬╝ and det( ) ╬╝ give the following useful relations ’üŁ’üż ’ĆĮ ), we introduce an oblique angled rectilinear coordinate system 1 2 3 ( , , ) x x x . The coordinate transformation between ( , , ) x y z and 1 2 3 ( , , ) x x x is chosen as [19] 11 x ax ’ĆĮ , 22 x bx ’ĆĮ , 3 1 3 x cx dx ’ĆĮ’Ć½. (A5) The inverse transformation is Obviously, the new coordinate system is oblique: the new x and 3 x axes are along with the old 2 x and 3 x axes, while the new 1 x axis is inclined with the 1 x at an angle ’Ć© ’Ć® 1 =arctan cd ’ü¬ ’ĆŁ (Fig. x and the old z axis is important since in the vortex problem near 2 c H , any z -independent quantity ’ü© is 3 x -independent: The tensor components ij ’üŁ in 1 2 3 ( , , ) x x x relates to ij ’üŁ through the transformation relations: The isotropic ij ’üŁ requires that i j mn ij mn ’üó ’üó ’üŁ ’üż ’ĆĮ , in matrix form it becomes where the invariance relations Eq. (A4) and 1 2 3 1 ’üŁ ’üŁ ’üŁ ’ĆĮ (obviously from the definition of the dimensionless inverse mass) have been used. The metric tensor ij g of the new frame is obtained using Eq. (A8), The constant ij g make the covariant derivatives reduce to the partial ones, and since det 1 ij g ’ā®’ā╣ ’ĆĮ ’ā½’ā╗ , the Levi-Civita tensor ijk e preservers its 0 , 1 ’é▒ form when transformed from ( , , ) x y z to 1 2 3 ( , , ) x x x . In the new frame ’ü¼ are obtained from their counterparts in the frame ( , , ) x y z through the coordinate transformation relations: (1 ) last one just reproduces the result by Cano et al.