High-temperature superconductivity is closely adjacent to a long-range antiferromagnet, which is called a parent compound. In cuprates, all parent compounds are alike and carrier doping leads to superconductivity, so a unified phase diagram can be drawn. However, the properties of parent compounds for iron-based superconductors show significant diversity and both carrier and isovalent dopings can cause superconductivity, which casts doubt on the idea that there exists a unified phase diagram for them. Here we show that the ordered moments in a variety of iron pnictides are inversely proportional to the effective Curie constants of their nematic susceptibility. This unexpected scaling behavior suggests that the magnetic ground states of iron pnictides can be achieved by tuning the strength of nematic fluctuations. Therefore, a unified phase diagram can be established where superconductivity emerges from a hypothetical parent compound with a large ordered moment but weak nematic fluctuations, which suggests that iron-based superconductors are strongly correlated electron systems. Iron pnictides share some common behaviors with many other unconventional superconductors, such as cuprates and some heavy-fermion superconductors, where superconductivity is achieved by suppressing the long-range antiferromagnetic (AFM) order in parent compounds A unique feature for the AFM order in iron pnictides is that it is always closely accompanied by a nematic order, which breaks the in-plane C 4 rotational symmetry of the high-temperature tetragonal lattice structure while preserving the translational symmetry Here, we perform a detailed investigation on the nematic susceptibility of a variety of iron-based superconductors by studying the uniaxial pressure effect on the in-plane resistivity. The temperature dependence of the nematic susceptibility above the structural or nematic transition temperature T s can be well fitted by a Curie-Weiss-like function, which gives a nematic Curie constant A n . We show that a linear relationship exists between |A n | -1 and the ordered moments in several classes of parent compounds and doped samples. Our results suggest that the suppression of the AFM order and the emergence of superconductivity are associated with the enhancement of nematic fluctuations. Effectively, these socalled parent compounds and their underdoped samples may all lie on a line with a general parent compound at one end and a QCP at the other. This picture unifies various iron-based superconductors into a coherent phase diagram. RFeAsO, NaFe 1-x Ni x As, Ca 1-x La x FeAs 2 and Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 single crystals were grown by flux methods similar to those reported previously Figure in several classes of undoped and doped iron-based superconductors. The T ′ value of FeSe is much larger than the similar Curie-Weiss temperature obtained by measuring the resistivity change with strain in Ref. Since A is obtained from resistivity measurement, the effect of Fermi surfaces has to be considered. We introduce a dimensionless parameter κ as ( normalized by that in BaFe 2 As 2 , where ν Γ F and ν M F are the Fermi velocities at the respective hole and electron pockets above T s that are nearly nested. Such a form is associated with the scattering of spin fluctuations in the dirty limit Figure The Curie-Weiss temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility gives a Curie constant C, which is associated with magnetic fluctuations. Since the nematic order in iron-based superconductors is an Ising-type order Figure The roughly linear relationship in Fig. While these two descriptions are indistinguishable in BaFe 2-x Ni x As 2 , the latter may be more reasonable since this relationship also holds for other compounds as shown in Fig. The above discussions suggest that a unified phase diagram for iron pnictides may be established as shown in Fig. Our results support the idea of treating iron pnictides as strongly correlated systems In the end, we note that superconductivity has been found in many other iron-based materials In conclusion, we find that the magnetic ground states of a variety of iron-based superconductors can be achieved by tuning the strength of nematic fluctuations, suggesting the dominant roles played by magnetic and nematic correlations. Accordingly, a unified phase diagram can be established where superconductivity comes from the suppression of the AFM order in a hypothetical parent compound by enhancing nematic fluctuations. Our results provide general understandings on some of the key phenomena in iron-based superconductors, such as the variety of ordered moments in the so-called parent compounds and the role of isovalent dopants in generat-of CAS. Z. Y. M. is supported by the National Thousand-Young-Talents Program of China.