The flux flow properties of epitaxial niobium films with different pinning strengths are investigated by dc electrical resistance measurements and mapped to results derived within the framework of a theoretical model. Investigated are the cases of weak random pinning in as-grown films, strong random pinning in Ga ion-irradiated films, and strong periodic pinning induced by a nanogroove array milled by focused ion beam. The generic feature of the current-voltage curves of the films consists in instability jumps to the normal state at some instability current density j * as the vortex lattice reaches its critical velocity v * . While v * (B) monotonically decreases for as-grown films, the irradiated films exhibit a non-monotonic dependence v * (B) attaining a maximum in the low-field range. In the case of nanopatterned films, this broad maximum is accompanied by a much sharper maximum in both, v * (B) and j * (B), which we attribute to the commensurability effect when the spacing between the vortex rows coincides with the location of the grooves. We argue that the observed behavior of v * (B) can be explained by the pinning effect on the vortex flow instability and support our claims by fitting the experimental data to theoretical expressions derived within a model accounting for the field dependence of the depinning current density. The vast majority of technologically important superconductors are superconductors of type II: Magnetic field penetrates these as a flux-line array of Abrikosov vortices. The repulsive interaction between vortices makes them to arrange in most cases into a triangular lattice. In the presence of a transport current density j which is smaller than the depinning current j d , the vortex lattice is pinned. In the opposite case j > j d , i. e. when the Lorentz force exerted by the transport current dominates the pinning force, the vortex ensemble moves causing dissipation associated with heat generation. As a well-known approach, an enhancement of j d leading to a reduction of dissipation can be achieved by strategically introducing vortex pinning sites There are several flux-flow instability mechanisms discussed to explain voltage jumps in the CVCs. First, the instability may be due to a thermal runaway effect due to Joule heating Although the flux flow instability has been known since many years To bridge this gap, the effect of pinning on the hot electron flux-flow instability has been analyzed by one of us At T T c , pinning effects on the flux-flow instability parameters have recently been analyzed theoretically in Ref. In this paper, we experimentally explore the vortex dynamics in the regime of high vortex velocities in epitaxial Nb films with different pinning types and its strength at T = 0.4T c , where the hot-electron mechanism of the hotelectron vortex-flow instability dominates The samples are three 80 nm-thick epitaxial (110) Nb films patterned by conventional photolithography into four-contact bridges. The films were deposited by dc magnetron sputtering with a sputtering rate of 1 nm/s in an ultra-high vacuum setup. The substrates were epitaxially-polished a-plane (1120) sapphire substrates kept at 850 • C during the deposition process. Details of the film growth and the morphology characterization of the as-grown films are given in The as-grown films are characterized by a superconducting transition temperature T c = 9.1 K defined by using a 50% resistance criterion. After the exposure of the films to the ion beam, T c dropped to 8.97 K and 9.03 K for sample I and sample G, respectively. The upper critical field H c2 (0) of all samples is about 1.1 T, as deduced from fitting the dependence H c2 (T ) to the phenomenological law The electrical resistance measurements were done with magnetic field oriented perpendicular to the film surface. The nanogrooves in sample G were aligned along the current flow such that the vortex motion under the action of the Lorentz force took place across the grooves. Since unavoidable self-heating can affect the experimental data, several measures have been undertaken. To minimize self-heating effects, CVCs were measured in a pulsed current-driven mode with a rectangular pulse width of 1.1 ms and a pulse-off time of 1 s. By sweeping the current forth and back, we verified that no hysteresis occurred in the CVCs. The instability points in each curve have been proven to remain unchanged so that this allowed us to conclude that Joule self-heating effects can be neglected in our measurements. The CVCs were measured at T = 0.4T c for a series of magnetic fields in the range 0 to 1 T. Figure where B ist the applied magnetic field and L = 100 μm ist the distance between the voltage contacts. At larger magnetic fields B > 0.3 T, the CVCs become more smeared and finally the instability jumps disappear and a continuous nonlinear transition to the normal state takes place. From the measured V (I) data we deduce the values of the depinning current density j d = I d /wd by using a 10 nV voltage criterion. Here w = 10 μm is the sample width and d is the sample thickness. The instability current density j * = I * /wd is determined from the current I * relating to V * . The magnetic field dependences of the depinning current density for all films are plotted in Fig. For film G, one can also recognize a small peak in the dependence j * (B) near B m = 7 mT as reminiscent of the more pronounced peak in the dependence j d (B) in Fig. The magnetic field dependence of the instability velocity deduced from the CVCs for all films is presented in Fig. Since both, the monotonic and the non-monotonic dependences of v * (B) have previously been observed in different temperature ranges and for different degrees of dis- order The degree of disorder and the different origin of pinning in different samples hence allow us to explain the observed behavior of v * (B) as follows. At larger fields, when the vortex lattice parameter a = (2Φ/ √ 3B) 1/2 is smaller than the quasiparticle diffusion length, the velocity v * is independent of B, which is consistent with the LO prediction for higher temperatures (T ≃ T c ). With decreasing B, the vortex lattice parameter is increasing and becomes comparable with the quasiparticle diffusion length such that the instability velocity related to a via the quasiparticle scattering time τ E as v * τ E ∼ a increases as 1/ √ B with decreasing field at fields B < B cr . Hence, from this crossover field one can estimate the quasiparticle scattering time as τ E ≃ 10 ns in our Nb films. With further reduction of the vortex density at lower magnetic fields, the pinning efficiency grows since the now small number of vortices can be pinned to even few pinning sites. In this way, the random pinning disturbs the moving vortex lattice which, at the same time, exhibits softening at smaller fields. In consequence of this, there appear vortices moving more slowly and faster than the mean velocity of the vortex ensemble. The flux-flow instability takes place as soon as the instability velocity is reached by "faster" vortices. Since the distribution of vortex velocities becomes broadened and the difference between the mean vortex velocity and the velocity of "faster vortices" is growing with decreasing magnetic field, this results in the observed decreasing v * (B) behavior with decreasing field below B cr1 . According to the pinning picture above, the absence of a low-field crossover in v * (B) for sample A can be understood as a consequence of the fact that the random pinning in this sample remains too weak even for the softened vortex lattice. The increased strength of the random pinning in sample I causes the vortex lattice to become soft at notably higher fields, such that the mentioned crossover at B c1 is observed. Finally, in the nanostructured sample G an additional sharp peak to the left of the crossover field B cr1 can be attributed to the enhanced coherence of the moving vortex lattice at the matching field. This coherence becomes apparent as Shapiro steps For a quantitative interpretation of the experimental results we use a phenomenological model where j d is the depinning current density and j * 0 is the instability current density in the film without pinning. The limiting case of no pinning with μ = 0 is realized when j d = 0, while the upper limit for the depinning current j d = j * 0 results in μ = 0.5. The theory further relies upon a magnetic field dependence of μ assuming the following scaling for the dependence of the depinning current density on the magnetic field where j B and B c are constants deduced from experimental values of j d (B), while the exponent m > 0 is the main parameter which determines the B-dependence of μ. It is this parameter which must be determined from experiment. Obviously, with m = 0 Eq. ( where K = j 2 B B 2 c /2γ 2 and γ is a constant. Further, the magnetic field behavior of the critical velocity is predicted to be primarily determined by the derivative of the parameter μ with respect to magnetic field ( One can see that dμ/dB changes its sign at m = 1/2. Namely, μ(B) decreases with increasing B for m > 1/2, whereas μ(B) increases for 0 < m < 1/2. In Ref. where v * max is a fitting parameter. The structure of Eq. ( In the general case of arbitrary pinning strengths, it has been shown where A is a constant. It has been revealed Next, we use the deduced exponents to fit the dependences of the instability velocity on the magnetic field v * (B) by using Eq. ( In all, the use of the scaling exponents m deduced from the experimental dependences of the depinning current j d (B) on the magnetic field has allowed us to successfully fit the dependences v * (B) for the three samples with different pinning types. To summarize, the flux-flow instability has been investigated in as-grown, ion-irradiated and nanopatterned epitaxial Nb films. The instability current densities j * have been revealed to only weakly depend on the pinning strength of the films, which is in contrast to the depinning current being very sensitive to the distribution and type of pinning sites in the samples. Both, irradiated and nanopatterned Nb films demonstrate a nonmonotonic dependence of the instability velocity v * on the magnetic field B, attaining a maximum at a crossover field B cr1 . In addition to the broad maxima of v * (B) at B cr1 , v * (B) exhibits a pronounced sharp maximum at the fundamental matching field when the vortex lattice is commensurate with the periodic pinning structures. A change of the exponent m in the dependence of the depinning current on the magnetic field j d (B) ∝ 1/B m has been observed, with m = 0.5 for the as-grown film, m = 0.7 for the ion-irradiated film, and m = 1 for the film with periodic nanogrooves. A theoretical account for this exponent change has allowed us to derive an analytical expression for v * (B) and to quantitatively describe the different behaviors of v * (B) observed in our experiments.