We demonstrate a novel approach to thermometry at the nanoscale exploiting a superconducting weak link. Such a weak link probed with nanosecond current pulses serves as a temperature sensing element and, due to the fast inherent dynamics, is capable of delivering unprecedented temporal resolution. We employ the thermometer to measure dynamic temperature of electrons in a long superconducting wire relaxing to the bath temperature after application of the heating pulse. Our measurement delivers nanosecond resolution thus providing the proof-of-concept of the fastest-todate all-solid-state thermometry. Our method improves the state-of-the-art temporal resolution of mesoscopic thermometry by at least two orders of magnitude, extending temporal resolution of existing experiments and introducing new possibilities for ultra-sensitive calorimeters and radiation detectors. Investigations of thermal processes in mesoscopic systems demand application of a fast thermometry that can be easily integrated with a structure One approach to boost the temporal resolution of a thermometer is to embed a temperature sensor into a microwave or RF resonator in determination of heat capacity, thermal conductivity, studying mechanisms of heat exchange in nanostructures or even in experiments detecting single photons, provided possibility to launch them on demand synchronized to the pulses probing the JJ. Below we describe our approach to fast thermometry at nanoscale. First we show how the switching feature of any superconducting weak link i.e. its transition from the superconducting to the normal state can be utilized to derive the weak link temperature. We validate the introduced probing protocol by studying dynamic temperature of our model system (Aluminum superconducting nanowire), with true nanosecond resolution, and compare our measurement with prediction of the heat flow equation. Subsequently, prior to a summary, we outline the powerful perspectives for future studies that our method brings about. Josephson junction as a temperature-sensitive switch JJs are sometimes referred to as switches for their ability to carry supercurrent only to a certain level and, above this level, they switch to a finite voltage state (Fig. Temperature dependence of the switching current for the superconducting weak link studied in this work. Inset: IV curves collected at three temperatures: 16.5 mK, 1.2 K, 1.32 K (from left to right, offset horizontally). driving JJ out of its metastable state The key observation in the current context is the dependency of the switching current threshold on temperature (Fig. FIG. Model system for testing the proposed thermometry The suggested thermometry scheme can be realized based on different types of JJs, such as tunneling JJs (a very thin oxide layer sandwiched between two superconducting electrodes), proximity JJs (a piece of normal metal interrupting superconductor) or superconducting bridges e.g. Dayem nanobridges, etc. To get a temperature profile of the wire once the wire switches to the normal state we solve the heat balance equation in a steady state characterized by a constant electric current dissipating the Joule heat in the wire. The equation reads: where left part of equation deals with hot electron diffusion (κ(T e ) is the electron thermal conductivity) and ) is a source/drain term accounting for the heat generation and absorption in a unit length of the wire with r -resistance per unit length, S -wire cross-section, i b -biasing current, H(T c ) -the Heaviside step function and qep (T e ) -hot electron power fed back to phonons. κ(T e ) and qep (T e ) are numerical data calculated according to the integrals found in ref. 26 and 27. At T e > T c , qep (T e ) is equal to (T 5 e -T 5 ph ) with = 1.8 × 10 9 W/m 3 /K 5 being the electron-phonon coupling constant in Aluminum. The theoretical steady state profile corresponding to our experimental realization is presented in the inset of Fig. The cooling of the wire is governed by the temporal relaxation equation taking into account two relaxation paths for the excess electron energy: the electron-phonon coupling and the diffusion of hot electrons: ) compared with experimental relaxation (black triangles, the same data as in Fig. where c s (T e ) is experimentally determined heat capacity of Aluminum found in ref. 28. The initial condition is assumed to be the steady state profile introduced above and displayed in the inset of Fig. We have benchmarked the ultrafast thermometry protocol employing an Aluminum Dayem nanobridge as a temperature-sensing element. However the method will work for any kind of JJ which exhibits switching current dependence on temperature. Subject to the temperature interval of interest one may use a tunnel junction or proximity junction e.g. superconductor-normal-metalsuperconductor SNS junction. By selection of proper materials and adjusting the length of the normal bridge (in the latter case) one can engineer operational temperature range and magnitude of the switching current to match experimental requirements. Temperature is an equilibrium concept and its application to describe a state of rapidly heating or cooling system may rise some questions. In solid state physics temperature determines the occupation of electron states (in equilibrium according to the Fermi-Dirac distribution). There are situations when electron distribution is far from equilibrium, but without external excitation it locally quickly converges to the Fermi-Dirac function due to fast electron-electron interaction. It happens at time scales much shorter than relaxation times considered in the presented experiment. We assume that electron subsystem undergoes quasi-static evolution and is described locally at each moment with equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution. Thus temperature of electron system is well-defined all the time during relaxation. Our concept of temperature measurement can be also extended to probe non-equilibrium systems i.e. where electrons are not Fermi-Dirac distributed. In such a case the measured temperature is called effective temperature and corresponds to the equilibrium temperature if the same physical effect is observed e.g. the same switching current. Variations of switching current in JJs are set by two factors: (i) value of the superconducting gap (it is local property of the junction that sets the critical current) and (ii) strength of electromagnetic fluctuations induced by environment (it is non-local property that may make junction sensitive to temperature of remote impedance). In case of a Dayem nanobridge with critical current of about 100 μA, as the one studied here, first factor dominates and fluctuations play a minor role. However, for a tunnel junction with low critical current fluctuations will dominate and a sensor based on such a junction will be sensitive to a non-local temperature of the environment. The presented thermometry is unique with respect to power dissipation. Pulses probing JJ thermometer have steep rising slopes and with standard equipment can be made shorter than 1 ns. Consequently, they cause negligible heating of the sample and do not rise sample temperature. It is in contrast to familiar DC and RF techniques where probing signals may alter temperature which one wishes to measure. The proposed thermometer can be considered as a base sensing element for bolometers operating in the farinfrared, THz and microwave bands. Owing to its very small size the JJ-based thermometer could be integrated with very small absorber with all three dimensions falling into a few tens of nanometers providing a versatile platform for sub-aJ/K calorimetry. Small metal volume of 10 5 -10 6 nm 3 employed as the absorber yields a heat capacity of (10 2 -10 3 )k B offering high gains in sensitivity and temporal resolution of incident radiation We have presented implementation of the hysteretic superconducting weak link for nanosecond thermometry applications. Such a weak link exhibits a very fast intrinsic dynamics falling into picoseconds range and is perfectly suited for sensing rapidly changing electron temperature, with the temporal resolution of a single nanosecond easily achievable. Successful implementation of our approach paves the way to cutting-edge experiments in the field of thermodynamics of low temperature quantum circuits. It gives rise to development of ultra-sensitive low noise calorimeters and bolometers for health, security and astronomical applications. The measurements were performed in the Triton 400 dilution refrigerator. Pulses for testing the weak link were tailored with Agilent 33250A AWG and sent down the junction with coaxial line equipped with attenuators at different temperature stages. Switching events were recorded and counted with LeCroy HRO 66Zi oscilloscope and Philips PM 6680 counter. The steady state temperature profiles in the wire were calculated with the Runge Kutta method of 4 th order treating the two coupled 1 st order differential equations. The heat flow equation was solved with Matlab Partial Differential Equation Toolbox.