We study a superconductor that is coupled to a superfluid via density and derivative couplings. Starting from a Lagrangian for two complex scalar fields, we derive a temperature-dependent Ginzburg-Landau potential, which is then used to compute the phase diagram at nonzero temperature and external magnetic field. This includes the calculation of the critical magnetic fields for the transition to an array of magnetic flux tubes, based on an approximation for the interaction between the flux tubes. We find that the transition region between type-I and type-II superconductivity changes qualitatively due to the presence of the superfluid: the phase transitions at the upper and lower critical fields in the type-II regime become first order, opening the possibility of clustered flux tube phases. These flux tube clusters may be realized in the core of neutron stars, where superconducting protons are expected to be coupled to superfluid neutrons. An array of magnetic flux tubes is created in certain superconductors for intermediate strengths of an external magnetic field. Superconductors with this property are said to be of type II. This is in contrast to type-I superconductors, where the magnetic field is either completely expelled or completely destroys the superconducting state, but never penetrates partially through quantized flux tubes. The Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ -the ratio between the magnetic penetration depth and the coherence length of the superconducting condensate -predicts whether a superconductor is of type I or of type II. The goal of this paper is to study the critical magnetic fields for the flux tube lattice in a two-component system, where the superconductor is coupled to a superfluid. We consider a system of two complex scalar fields and an abelian gauge field, with the two scalar fields coupled to each other and one of them coupled to the gauge field -the neutral scalar field is then indirectly coupled to the gauge field through the charged scalar field. Various aspects of this system will be discussed, such as the effect of different forms of the coupling between the scalar fields (density coupling vs. derivative coupling), effects of nonzero temperature, and the interaction between magnetic flux tubes. Special emphasis will be put on the transition region between type-I and type-II behavior, because this region is changed qualitatively by the presence of the superfluid, and one of the main results will be the topology of the phase diagram in this region. Our calculations are based on a Ginzburg-Landau free energy for two condensates. We start, however, from a field-theoretical Lagrangian from which we compute the thermal fluctuations of the system. This is necessary in order to generalize the standard temperature-dependent coefficients of the Ginzburg-Landau potential to the situation of two coupled fields. We shall work in a relativistic formalism, but the main results hold for non-relativistic systems as well because we only consider the static limit. The coupled equations of motion for the two condensates and the gauge field -which yield the profile and energy of a single flux tube -are computed numerically. Nevertheless, where possible, we derive simple analytical results. For instance, when we compute the free energy of a flux tube array, we employ an approximation valid for sparse arrays, based on the numerical solution for a single flux tube, which is sufficient to derive certain aspects of the phase structure. For a complete study of the phase diagram a fully numerical A superconductor that is coupled to a superfluid is expected to exist in the core of neutron stars in the form of superconducting protons which coexist with superfluid neutrons The energy gaps from nucleon Cooper pairing depend strongly on density, varying non-monotonically along the profile of the star, with a maximum of the order of 1 MeV at intermediate densities and being much smaller at higher densities deep in the core There are other possible two-or multi-fluid phases in the core of a neutron star, where at least one of the components is charged. For instance, hyperon condensation may yield further condensate species A mixture of a superconductor with a superfluid is conceivable not only in neutron stars but also in the laboratory, for example in ultra-cold atomic systems, where Bose-Fermi mixtures have been produced If we relax the condition of exactly one of the two components being charged, we find more realizations. Systems of two superconducting components have been discussed in the literature Our study makes use of and extends various results of the literature. The model we are using is a gauged version of the one of Ref. In Sec. II, we present the model, compute the free energy densities of the various phases at vanishing magnetic field, and introduce effects of nonzero temperature. In Sec. III, we derive the expressions for the critical magnetic fields H c , H c1 , and H c2 for our two-component system and use the flux tube -flux tube interaction to point out the possibilities of first-order phase transitions. Our numerical results, most of them in the form of phase diagrams, are presented in Sec. IV, together with a discussion of the type-I/type-II transition region. We give our conclusions and an outlook in Sec. V. Throughout the paper, we use natural units = c = k B = 1 and Gaussian units for the electromagnetic fields, such that the elementary charge is e = √ α 0.085 with the fine structure constant α. A. Lagrangian and basic phase structure Our calculation will essentially be a mean-field Ginzburg-Landau study, and we could thus, as a starting point, simply state the Ginzburg-Landau potential. We choose a slightly more general field-theoretical language, mainly because it provides us with the framework of thermal field theory to introduce temperature. Starting from a Ginzburg-Landau potential directly, this would be less straightforward in our two-component system. In the following, we thus start with a Lagrangian for two complex scalar fields, and the zero-temperature Ginzburg-Landau potential simply is the tree-level potential of this Lagrangian. This is Eq. ( The Lagrangian is where with the covariant derivative D μ φ i = (∂ μ + iq i A μ )φ i , where A μ is the gauge field and q 1 , q 2 the electric charges, with the complex scalar fields φ 1 , φ 2 , the mass parameters m i ≥ 0, the self-coupling constants λ i > 0, and the field strength tensor We have included two types of cross-couplings between the fields: a density coupling with dimensionless coupling constant h, and a derivative coupling which allows for two different structures with coupling constants g 1 and g 2 of mass dimension -2. Due to this derivative coupling, the model is non-renormalizable and an ultra-violet cutoff is required in general. However, in our Ginzburg-Landau-like study we are only interested in an effective potential for which the only occurring momentum integral is made finite by nonzero temperature. Therefore, the non-renormalizability will not play any role in the following. The chemical potentials μ 1 and μ 2 are introduced in the usual way, they can be formally included in the Lagrangian as temporal components of the gauge fields in the covariant derivatives, q i A 0 → -μ i , including the covariant derivatives in the coupling terms Since we are interested in a superconductor coupled to a superfluid, we assume only one of the fields to be charged, say field 1, and the second to be neutral, Moreover, we are only interested in static solutions and thus drop all time derivatives. Then, the zero-temperature tree-level potential U = -L φi→ φi is where we have reduced the Yang-Mills contribution to a purely magnetic term, B = ∇ × A, and where we have introduced the abbreviations Boundedness of the tree-level potential requires h + gμ 1 μ 2 < √ λ 1 λ 2 . In the remainder of the paper, we shall set g = 0, mainly for the sake of simplicity To define the possible phases of the system and establish the notation for their condensates, we start with the simplest case of spatially uniform condensates in the absence of a magnetic field, ∇ρ 1 = ∇ρ 2 = ∇ψ 1 = ∇ψ 2 = A = 0. As a consequence of these assumptions, the potential becomes independent of G. The local minima of the potential yield the possible phases, i.e., we need to solve the algebraic equations which allow for the following solutions. • In the normal phase ("NOR"), neither the charged nor the neutral field condenses, Figure • In the (pure) superconductor ("SC"), only the charged field forms a condensate, whereas the condensate of the other field is zero, • In the (pure) superfluid ("SF"), only the neutral field forms a condensate, while the charged fields remains uncondensed, • In the coexistence phase ("COE"), both condensates exist simultaneously. Without coupling, the coexistence phase is realized if and only if both chemical potentials are larger than the corresponding masses. The coupling favors (h > 0) or disfavors (h < 0) the COE phase. The condensates and the free energy density are The ground state is then found by determining the global minimum of U . The resulting phase diagram in the μ 1 -μ 2 plane is shown in Fig. We intend to include temperature T into the potential (5) in an effective way. In Ginzburg-Landau models this is usually done by introducing T -dependent coefficients, with a T -dependence that is strictly valid only close to the critical temperature. In our system, the form of these coefficients is not obvious because we have two fields and hence (at least) two critical temperatures. We thus proceed by introducing temperature in our underlying field theory and derive an effective potential. This will be done in a high-temperature approximation, assuming the condensates to be uniform, and without background magnetic field. Once we have derived the T -dependent Ginzburg-Landau potential, we shall reinstate the magnetic field for our discussion of the phase diagram and allow for spatially varying condensates and gauge fields in a flux tube. Neglecting zero-temperature quantum corrections, the one-loop potential is where the sum is taken over all 6 quasiparticle excitations ki . Without condensation, each of the complex scalar fields yields 2 excitations (both massive if m i > 0), corresponding to particle and anti-particle excitations, while the gauge field has two massless excitations, corresponding to the two possible polarizations of massless photons. These are 6 modes in total. In the coexistence phase both scalar fields condense. As a consequence, there is one Goldstone mode from the neutral field and one would-be Goldstone boson from the charged field, which becomes a third mode of the now massive gauge field. Together with the two massive modes from the scalar fields and the two original modes of the gauge field -which are now massive as well -these are again 6 modes. The excitations ki are computed from the tree-level propagator. Their expressions are very complicated, but for the high-T approximation we only need their behavior at large momenta. All details of this calculation are deferred to appendix A. From a field-theoretical perspective our high-T approximation is very crude, and for a quantitative evaluation of the model for all temperatures more sophisticated methods are needed, such as the two-particle irreducible formalism We also simplify the result by only keeping the leading order contribution from the derivative coupling G. As a result, all temperature corrections can be absorbed into thermal masses and a thermal density coupling, and we can work with the effective potential where For the following, we can thus simply take Eqs. ( where the critical temperatures T c1 and T c2 indicate the phase transitions to the SF and SC phases, In the limit h = 0, Eq. (16a) reduces to the well-known result for a single charged field, see for instance Eq. (4.24) in Ref. The critical temperatures The free energy can be computed from the potential ( Since we are interested in the phase structure at fixed external (and homogeneous) magnetic field H = H e z , we need to consider the Gibbs free energy To determine the complete phase diagram, we would have to compute the Gibbs free energy for all possible phases at each point in the phase space given by the thermodynamic variables (μ 1 , μ 2 , T, H). The possible phases are the NOR, SF, SC, and COE phases listed above, and for the phases that are superconducting (SC and COE) we have to distinguish the Meissner phase, in which the magnetic field is completely expelled, B = 0, from the flux tube phase, where a lattice of magnetic flux tubes is formed, admitting part of the applied magnetic field in the superconductor. We shall simplify this problem by not computing the Gibbs free energy for the flux tube phase in full generality, which would require us to determine the spatial profile of the condensate and the magnetic field, including the preferred lattice structure, fully dynamically. Instead -following the usual textbook treatment A. Critical magnetic field Hc Definition. The critical magnetic field H c is the magnetic field at which the Gibbs free energies of the superconducting phase in the Meissner state and the normal-conducting phase are identical, resulting in a first-order phase transition between them. The Gibbs free energy of the COE phase with complete expulsion of the magnetic field is where V is the total volume of the system and U COE is the free energy density from Eq. (11b), with the masses m 1 , m 2 and the coupling h replaced by their thermal generalizations m 1,T , m 2,T , h T . We neglect any magnetization in the normal-conducting phases, and thus B = H in the SF phase, which yields the Gibbs free energy with U SF from Eq. Here we have introduced the Ginzburg-Landau parameter with the magnetic penetration depth and the coherence length ξ, Definition. Suppose there is a second-order phase transition between the superconductor in the flux tube phase and the normal-conducting phase, such that the equations of motion can be linearized in the charged condensate. Then, the critical magnetic field H c2 is the maximal magnetic field allowed by the equations of motion. H c2 is a lower bound for the actual transition from the flux tube phase to the normal-conducting phase because it does not exclude a first-order transition at some larger H. We call the critical field for such a first-order transition H c2 . By definition, as we approach H c2 , the charged condensate approaches zero and the neutral condensate approaches the condensate of the SF phase. For magnetic fields H close to and smaller than H c2 , we can write the condensates and the gauge field as their values at H c2 plus small perturbations. Then, for the calculation of H c2 itself the equations of motion linear in the charged condensate are sufficient. We are also interested in checking whether and in which parameter regime the flux tube phase is energetically preferred just below H c2 . This is done within the same calculation, but taking into account higher order terms in the equations of motion and the free energy. This calculation is somewhat lengthy and is explained in appendix B. Here we summarize the results. The critical magnetic field becomes where the second expression relates H c2 to H c by using Eq. ( where φ4 1 is the spatial average of the charged condensate (B9), where and where with the error function erf. In the limit of a single superconductor, h = 0, we recover the standard result: in that case, Eq. Anticipating the numerical results in Sec. IV, let us comment on a possible first-order phase transition at H c2 , as mentioned in the definition at the beginning of this section. Suppose we are in a parameter region where the flux tube phase is favored just below H c2 , i.e., let κ be larger than the critical κ defined through Eq. ( Definition. The critical magnetic field H c1 is the magnetic field at which it becomes energetically favorable to put a single flux tube into the superconductor in the Meissner phase, resulting in a second-order phase transition from the Meissner phase into the flux tube phase. H c1 is an upper bound for this transition because there can be a first-order transition at some smaller H, i.e., it can be favorable to directly form a flux tube lattice with a finite, not infinite, distance between the flux tubes. We call this first-order critical field H c1 . According to the definition where F is the free energy of the flux tube, and where we have used with the winding number n of the flux tube, the length of the flux tube L, and the fundamental flux quantum Φ 0 = 2π/q. Placing a single flux tube into the system results in a loss in (negative) condensation energy, and thus the free energy increases. However, at fixed magnetic field H, there is an energy gain from allowing magnetic flux into the system. As a consequence, there is a competition between these two contributions of opposite sign in Eq. The calculation of H c1 thus amounts to the calculation of the free energy of a single flux tube F , for which we can largely follow Ref. and the gauge field The profile functions f i and a have to be computed numerically. Their boundary conditions are , such that the condensates approach their homogeneous values ρ 0i and the magnetic field vanishes far away from the center of the flux tube. The values of the neutral condensate and the gauge field at the center of the flux tube are determined dynamically. We have set the winding number of the neutral condensate to zero because the flux tube does not induce a superfluid vortex with To write the free energy of the flux tube in a convenient form, we introduce the dimensionless variable abbreviate the dimensionless gradient coupling by and the ratio of neutral over charged condensate by It is also useful to write , which follows from Eq. where prime denotes derivative with respect to R. This yields the equations of motion for a, f We solve these equations numerically with a successive over-relaxation method. The profiles themselves have been discussed in detail in Ref. and linearize the profile equations where We can decouple the equations for u 1 and u 2 by diagonalizing M , where ν ± are the eigenvalues of M and (γ ± , 1) its eigenvectors, given by where . This yields two uncoupled equations for ũ1 and ũ2 , where ũ = U -1 u, which we solve with the boundary condition ũ1 (∞) = ũ2 (∞) = 0 (which leaves one integration constant from each equation undetermined). We undo the rotation with u = U ũ, and, together with the solution to Eq. (41a), insert the result into Eq. ( where K 0 and K 1 are the modified Bessel functions of the second kind, and the constants C, D + , D -can only be determined numerically by solving the full equations of motion, including the boundary conditions at R = 0. In deriving the linearized equations (41), we have not only used u 1 , u 2 , v 1, but also v 2 u 1 , u 2 , which implies e -2R/κ e -√ ν±R . This assumption is violated if κ is sufficiently large compared to 1/ √ ν ± (compared to 1/ √ 2 in a single superconductor), i.e., deep in the type-II regime. Later, when we use the solutions of the linearized equations for the interactions between flux tubes, we are only interested in the transition region between type-I and type-II behavior, where 1/κ √ ν ± , i.e., for our purpose the linearization is a valid approximation. If the phase transitions from the Meissner phase to the flux tube phase and from the flux tube phase to the normalconducting phase were of second order we would be done. The critical magnetic fields of the previous sections would be sufficient to determine the phase structure. We shall see, however, that, due to the presence of the superfluid, first-order phase transitions become possible. To this end, we compute the Gibbs free energy of the entire flux tube lattice, rather than only of a single flux tube. We shall do so in an approximation of flux tube distances much larger than the width of a flux tube. We generalize the Gibbs free energy (28) to a system with flux tube area density ν and add a term that takes into account the interaction between the flux tubes where we have eliminated F in favor of H c1 with the help of Eq. ( We calculate F int (R 0 ) in appendix C in an approximation that is valid for large R 0 . This calculation makes use of the method first employed in Ref. As explained in the appendix in more detail, the integration can be reduced to an integral over the plane that separates the two Wigner-Seitz cells, which, in this simple setup, are two half-spaces. Since the integration along the direction of the flux tubes is trivial, we are left with a one-dimensional integral. As a consequence of the approximation, only the profile functions of a single flux tube appear in the integrand. In the derivation we have also assumed the asymptotic values of the condensates to be identical to the homogeneous values in the Meissner phase, ρ 01 and ρ 02 . We shall later insert our numerical solutions f 1 , f 2 , and a into Eq. ( where we have used γ + γ -+x 2 = 0 for Γ = 0, which follows from Eqs. , and the integral The result In particular, all dependence on x, which contains the neutral condensate, has disappeared, as it should be. If, on the other hand, λ 2 x 2 < λ 1 , we see from Eqs. ( Going back to the full expression By comparing Eq. ( An attractive long-distance interaction between the flux tubes can have very interesting consequences. Recall that H c1 is the magnetic field at which the phase with a single flux tube is preferred over the phase with complete field expulsion. In other words, at H c1 the flux tube density is zero and increases continuously, while the flux tube distance decreases continuously from infinity at H c1 . If the interaction at infinite distances is attractive, the flux tubes do not "want" to form an array with arbitrarily small density. Assuming that the interaction always becomes repulsive at short range [which our numerical results confirm if we extrapolate Eq. ( In the single-component system, this first-order phase transition is not realized because it occurs in the type-I regime. More precisely, if we were to continue H c1 into the type-I regime, then, at H c1 , it does not matter that the flux tube phase is made more favorable by an attractive interaction because the normal-conducting phase is the ground state (under the assumption that the gain in Gibbs free energy is not sufficient to overcome the difference to the normal phase). In the two-component system, however, the attractive interaction may exist in the regime where, at H c1 , the Meissner phase (and the phase with a single flux tube) is already preferred over the normal phase. Hence, any arbitrarily small binding energy will lead to a first-order phase transition at H c1 < H c1 . As we move along H c1 3 In Ref. x 2 . Consequently, even in the near-symmetric situation the two critical κ's are different and only become identical in the limit x 1. towards smaller values of κ, i.e., towards the type-I regime, we hit the critical point given by Eq. ( for H and R 0 . We may use the same method to compute a potential first-order phase transition from the flux tube phase to the normal-conducting phase, i.e., in the free energy comparison we replace G COE with G SF from Eq. ( The results in the previous sections have shown that the presence of the superfluid affects the transition from type-I to type-II superconductivity in a qualitative way, and we will make these results now more concrete by discussing the phase diagram of our model. To this end, we need to locate this transition in the parameter space. A priori, we have to deal with a large number of parameters, m 1 , m 2 , λ 1 , λ 2 , q, h, G, and the external thermodynamic parameters T , H, μ 1 , μ 2 . Having in mind a system of neutron and proton Cooper pairs we set m 1 = m 2 ≡ m and q = 2e, and express all dimensionful quantities in units of m. Many interesting results can already be obtained with a density coupling alone, and we shall therefore set the gradient coupling to zero, G = 0, which implies h T = h, for all numerical results. This leaves us with the 3 coupling constants λ 1 , λ 2 , h, plus 4 thermodynamic parameters. If we take the condition H c2 = H c as an indication for the location of the type-I/type-II transition, then Eq. In the interior of a neutron star, as we move towards the center and thus increase the total baryon number, the system will take some complicated path in our multi-dimensional parameter space, under the assumption that the model describes dense nuclear matter reasonably well. Here we do not attempt to construct this path. But, we keep in mind that nuclear matter is expected to cross the critical surface H = H c2 if we move to sufficiently large densities. Therefore, we now choose a path with this property. Starting from the diagrams in Fig. with λ = (λ 1 , λ 2 ). In Fig. In the lower panels of Fig. the transition between the COE phase and a single-condensate phase, and with the help of the condensates ( Here we proceed with the discussion of the critical magnetic fields, and for the remainder of the paper we shall restrict ourselves to zero temperature. At first sight, the phase structure in Fig. In Fig. In the right panel we zoom in to the critical region of the lower left panel of Fig. includes the results for higher winding numbers. We see that they are energetically disfavored for the parameter set chosen here. In Ref. The most straightforward interpretation of the right panel of Fig. The motivation for the conjecture is as follows. The existence of the first-order line H c1 and its starting point is predicted rigorously in our approach. Let us move along that line assuming that we go beyond our approximation and know the complete result. As we move towards large α, we will deviate from the line predicted by our approximation. At some value of α, we will intersect the curve H c . In order to resolve the contradiction of our phase structure, we expect this intersection to occur "on the other side" of the intersection between H c2 and H c . This implies that our approximation underestimates the binding energy of the flux tubes, i.e., we expect the flux tube phase to be more favored in the full result. We have not found a simple reason -other than the inconsistency of the phase structure -why our approximation distorts the full result in this, and not the other, direction. Now, at the new, correct, intersection of H c1 and H c , there must necessarily be a third line attached, namely H c2 (just like in our approximation). The reason is that if we cross H c1 we end up in the flux tube phase and if we cross H c we end up in the normal-conducting phase, and these two phases must be separated by a phase transition line. This critical field H c2 might be larger than H c2 for all α (below the α of the triple point where H c1 , H c2 and H c intersect) or H c2 might merge with H c2 , leading to an additional critical point. The latter is the scenario shown in the right panel of Fig. some fine-tuning of the interaction between the flux tubes since the second-order line H c2 does not know anything about this interaction. The first-order phase transitions with H as an external variable translate into mixed phases if we fix the magnetic field B (spatially averaged) instead. Again, this can be illustrated by the analogy to the onset of baryonic matter at small temperatures. As a function of μ B , this onset is a first-order transition with a discontinuity in baryon number density n B . If we instead probe this onset with fixed n B (spatially averaged), we pass through a region of mixed phases, for example nuclei in a periodic lattice, until we reach the saturation density. These mixed phases are realized in the outer regions of a neutron star, and it would be an intriguing manifestation of this analogy if the mixed flux tube phases discussed here are realized in the core of the star. Each first-order transition in H yields two critical magnetic fields B which we compute as follows. At H c1 , the lower critical field is B = 0, and the upper critical field is B = Φ 0 ν [using Eq. ( We have shown that the coupling to a superfluid can have profound effects on the magnetic properties of a superconductor. We have started from a microscopic model for two complex scalar fields, coupled to each other via density and gradient coupling terms, with one of the fields being electrically charged. By computing the thermal excitations of the system we have derived a Ginzburg-Landau-like effective potential for the charged and neutral condensates and the gauge field. This potential has then been evaluated at nonzero temperatures and external magnetic fields, computing the two condensates dynamically for all 4 possible phases: condensation of both fields (superconductor + superfluid), condensation of only one field (pure superconductor or pure superfluid), or no condensation. We have discussed the structure of the resulting phase diagram in the multi-dimensional parameter space, with the main focus on the transition region between type-I and type-II superconductivity. To this end, we have computed the critical magnetic fields H c , H c2 (analytically) and H c1 (numerically, based on the profile functions of a magnetic flux tube). In contrast to the standard scenario of a single superconductor, these three magnetic fields do not intersect in a single point if the superconductor coexists with a superfluid. The phase structure around these intersection points is (at least partially) resolved by computing the first-order phase transitions H c2 and H c1 . This has been done by employing a simple approximation for the free energy of a flux tube array that is valid for large flux tube distances and that effectively reduces the calculation to solving the equations of motion for a single flux tube. The new critical fields H c , H c2 , H c1 do intersect in a single point, restoring the topology of the transition region, with (segments of) the second-order transition lines replaced by first-order transitions. In particular, we have identified a new critical point -and derived an analytical expression for its location -where the second-order flux tube onset H c1 turns into a first order transition H c1 . The presence of the first-order transitions allows for mixed phases with flux tube clusters, very similar to a type-1.5 superconductor, which consists of two charged fields coupled indirectly through the gauge field. There are several possible improvements and extensions of our work. Our approximation for the flux tube array can be improved for instance by determining dynamically the values of the condensates far away from the flux tubes instead of using the values of the homogeneous phase. To settle the precise location of the phase transition lines, it would be interesting to perform a brute force numerical calculation of the free energy of the flux tube phase, for which our results are a valuable guidance. There are several other interesting aspects of our model which we have mentioned but not worked out in detail. For instance, one could perform a more systematic study of the effect of the derivative coupling, which we have included in all our analytical results, but set to zero in the final numerical results of the phase diagrams. Or one could perform a more detailed study of flux tubes with higher winding numbers, which turned out to be energetically disfavored for the parameter regime we have studied, but which are known to potentially play a role in the two-component system. One can also study the phase structure at nonzero temperature in more detail and/or improve the large-temperature approximation on which our Ginzburg-Landau potential was based. Or one can include superfluid vortices, aiming at the phase structure at nonzero magnetic field and externally imposed rotation. Our setup and our results are applicable to dense nuclear matter in the core of neutron stars. For instance, one can fit our model parameters, such as the density coupling and gradient coupling, to values predicted for nuclear matter and eventually compute the phase structure as a function of the baryon number density rather than of an abstract model parameter. One may also ask whether a potential phase of flux tube clusters would affect the transport properties of the core in a detectable way. Moreover, it would be interesting to employ our results in studies of the time evolution of the magnetic field in a neutron star. Here we have computed the ground state in equilibrium for given temperature, magnetic field and chemical potential, but for more phenomenological predictions one needs to know whether and on which time scale this ground state is reached. with the space-time four-vector X = (-iτ, r) and the four-momentum K = (k 0 , k), where k 0 = -iω n with the bosonic Matsubara frequencies ω n = 2πnT , n ∈ Z. In the imaginary time formalism, we have to replace A 0 → iA 0 . The terms of second order in the fluctuations can then be written as with The inverse tree-level propagator is an 8 × 8 matrix, which reads with the scalar field sector, where , the inverse gauge field propagator, where σ ≡ 1 -1/ξ, and the off-diagonal blocks that couple the scalar fields to the gauge field, We are interested in an effective potential for the condensates ρ 1 and ρ 2 , and thus we need to keep these condensates general. Nevertheless, it is instructive to first discuss the dispersions at the zero-temperature stationary point, i.e., we set ρ 1 = ρ 01 and ρ 2 = ρ 02 with the condensates in the coexistence phase ρ 01 and ρ 02 from Eq. ( where, in the second step, we have absorbed all terms that do not depend on ρ 1 or ρ 2 into "const.", and dropped all higher-order terms in the derivative coupling (i.e., we assume Gμ 2 1, where μ stands for all energy scales μ 1 , μ 2 , m 1 , m 2 , ρ 1 ρ 2 ). Dropping the constant contribution, we add the T 2 terms to the potential ( Inserting our ansatz into the potential (B1), using partial integration and the equations of motion (B3) and (B5), and keeping terms up to order φ4 1 , we find after some algebra the free energy We will first compute H c2 from Eqs. (B3) and afterwards compute the Gibbs free energy just below H c2 from Eq. (B6). We assume the neutral condensate in the SF phase to be homogeneous, and thus Eq. (B3b) yields 2 φ2 2 = ρ 2 SF , as expected. For the solution of Eq. (B3a) we can simply follow the textbook arguments because it has the same structure as for a single-component superconductor. It reads and thus is equivalent to the Schrödinger equation for the one-dimensional harmonic oscillator, -2 2m ψ (x)+ m 2 ω 2 x 2 ψ = Eψ with the identification E/( ω) = (λ 1 ρ 2 SC + h T ρ 2 SF )/(2qH c2 ). Since the eigenvalues are E n = (n + 1 2 ) ω, the largest magnetic field for which the equation allows a physical solution is obtained by setting n = 0, in agreement with Eq. ( where the exact value of the prefactor C 0 ∝ (H c2 -H) 1/2 is not relevant for the following. The result shows that, for H just below H c2 , charged condensation with small magnitude of order (H c2 -H) 1/2 occurs in a slab confined in a direction perpendicular to the external magnetic field, here chosen to be the x-direction, with width (qH c2 ) -1/2 . Had we allowed for y and z dependencies of the condensate, we could have used this linearized approximation to discuss crystalline configurations and determine the preferred lattice structure. Here we continue by checking whether the solution (B9) is energetically preferred over the normal-conducting phase for H below and close to H c2 . To this end, we need to compute the Gibbs free energy, as defined in Eq. ( Inserting this result into Eq. (B6) and using Eq. (B9) yields the Gibbs free energy with G SF from Eq. with the dimensionless variable t = √ qH c2 x and the dimensionless quantities where p indicates the magnitude of the neutral condensate and γ the magnitude of the gradient coupling G relative to the density coupling h T , both in units given by the critical magnetic field. [equivalent to Eqs. is the free energy density of a single flux tube from Eq. ( Notice that any explicit dependence on the density coupling h T has disappeared, while the derivative coupling Γ does appear explicitly. We can now go back to the interaction free energy (C1) and identify the full free energy U 2 ) - where we have rewritten the volume integral as a surface integral and where we have made the contributions from the two flux tubes (a) and (b) explicit. Since the derivatives of all fields vanish at infinity, the integration surface is reduced to the plane that separates the two Wigner-Seitz cells. We now use the geometry of the setup to simplify this expression: we align the z-axis with flux tube (a), such that this flux tube sits in the origin of the x-y plane, with the x-axis connecting the two flux tubes. Therefore, Q (a) , f For each of the terms in the interaction energy we need to replace α i by either √ ν + or √ ν -. From Eq. ( Therefore, if γ 2 -+ x 2 -Γxγ -> 0, one can use the same arguments as in the main text for the discussion of the attractiveness of the flux tube interaction at large distances, only with a more complicated eigenvalue ν -, which now depends on the gradient coupling Γ. In Ref.