While it is known that the amplification of the superconducting critical temperature T C is possible in a system of multiple electronic components in comparison with a single component system, many different road maps for room temperature superconductivity have been proposed for a variety of multicomponent scenarios. Here we focus on the scenario where the first electronic component is assumed to have a vanishing Fermi velocity corresponding to a case of the intermediate polaronic regime, and the second electronic component is in the weak coupling regime with standard high Fermi velocity using a mean field theory for multiband superconductivity. This roadmap is motivated by compelling experimental evidence for one component in the proximity of a Lifshitz transition in cuprates, diborides, and iron based superconductors. By keeping a constant and small exchange interaction between the two electron fluids, we search for the optimum coupling strength in the electronic polaronic component which gives the largest amplification of the superconducting critical temperature in comparison with the case of a single electronic component. Room-temperature superconductivity has been, and is the dream of, scientists, since the discovery of superconductivity in 1911, not only due to its enormous potential in applications, but also for the experimental evidence of the possibility of emergence of macroscopic quantum coherence at room temperature. After the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in cuprate perovskites The phenomenon of room-temperature superconductivity is frequently associated with strong coupling and real space pairing approaching a BEC regime, contrasted with weak coupling and momentum space pairing of conventional low TC BCS superconductors. For the BCS superconductor the distance between paired electrons can be of the order of several thousands of Angstroms, much larger than the average inter-particle distance whereas, for high-temperature superconductors, this distance is of the order of some unit cells with formation of local molecular-like pairs. From the viewpoint of theory in the strong coupling limit the electron-lattice system enters the polaronic regime with low charge density and low Fermi energy, where phonon frequencies reach an ultralow energy. However, in this regime superconductivity competes with the proximity to a structural lattice instability and localization of charge carriers In agreement with the prediction First, the polaronic carriers are in a coupling regime intermediate Second, the cuprates are characterized by two electronic components The key role of configuration interaction between a first pairing channel in the BCS-BEC sector and a second pairing channel in the BCS regime has been proposed by Bianconi-Perali-Valletta (BPV) for cuprates In the BPV proposed scenario In cuprates it has been confirmed that multiple electronic components are involved in the pairing from penetration depth In 2001 the predicted BPV scenario was shown to emerge clearly in superconducting MgB2, where in a superlattice of atomic boron layers intercalated by magnesium layers a wide band of boron π electrons coexists with boron σ electrons with a small Fermi energy, since the chemical potential is near the σ band edge in the energy scale of its energy fluctuations due to zero point motion The case of magnesium diboride provided a clear confirmation that, first, the high TC materials should be formed in a nanoscale superlattice of atomic layers and/or second that multiple Fermi surface spots should coexist and give different superconducting condensates for each electronic component. Finally, the fine tuning of the chemical potential should be achieved in different ways by pressure, by chemical doping, or by misfit strain of charge injection (or by a combination of these) in order to cross an electronic topological transition (ETT) called a Lifshitz transition In 2008 the discovery of iron based superconductors was rapidly recognized to be another realization of a superstriped material where the Fermi level is close to a Lifshitz transition It was necessary to improve the energy resolution of ARPES experiments down to a few meV and to tune the photon energy to get the top of the incipient band dispersing in the c-axis direction. Finally, since 2011 several high-resolution ARPES experiments have experimentally confirmed that the maximum critical temperature occurs near a Lifshitz transition For pressurized sulfur hydride, while the first proposed paradigm in 2015 was "superconductivity in a single effective band" In this work we propose a road map based on our knowledge of different realizations of the shape resonance scenario. We consider the first band to be in the intermediate coupling regime represented by a first electronic component, the intermediated polaron liquid, with vanishing Fermi velocity and a second electronic component, the quasi-free particles, with large Fermi velocity and in the weak coupling BCS regime. We fix the exchange-term controlling the pair exchange interaction, represented by the interband pairing, at a low value so that the mixing between the two condensates is small and the two condensates are distinguishable with quite different gap/TC ratio as in the experiments The Hamiltonian for our model is given by: H ' = ε ' k a .,/ 0 a .,/ + ε ) k b .,/ 0 b .,/ .,/ Here, V is the volume of the system and the terms in H " (i = 1 -3) are momentum k, g dependent. Electron creation and annihilation operators are denoted a 0 , a in band 1 and b 0 , b in band 2. The effective intraband pairing potentials are given by V ' , V ) , whereas V ') = V )' stems from interband pair scattering which is assumed to be the same for scattering between channels 1 and 2 and 2 and 1. The band energies ε " (k) reflect the localized flat band and the itinerant one and are correspondingly approximated by: ε ' = const. = B; ε ) k = k ) /2m . More complex and realistic band dispersions have been considered, e.g., for cuprates After performing a Bogoliubov transformation of the Hamiltonian, the finite temperature mean-field gap equations are explicitly obtained Δ ' * = V ' a , through which the order parameters are coupled. This yields the self-consistent set of coupled gap equations: . . ) being the quasiparticle excitation energies for each component in the superconducting phase. These equations have to be solved simultaneously and self-consistently for each temperature T in order to derive the temperature dependence of the coupled gaps. Since a variation of the chemical potential does not enter explicitly in our model system, the effect of doping is simulated by varying the inter/intraband pairing potentials. The critical temperature TC is given by the condition ∆ ' , ∆ ) to yield the linearized gap equations: Upon replacing the summations by integrals and introducing the density of states at the Fermi level N " (0) , the dimensionless coupling constants are defined by λ "" = N " 0 V " , λ ') = N ' (0)N ) (0)V ') . With this definition the above equations become: where ω ' , ω ) , ω ',) refer to the cutoff frequencies related to band 1,2 whereas ω ',) is either ω ' or ω ) , depending on the band considered in the respective integration. By considering, explicitly, the band energies given above, attributing a large, but finite, density of states also for the flat band, and defining N ' /N ) = C, Equations (9,10), they can be reformulated like: with the parameter B being calculated self-consistently to obey the same zero gap relations. The coupled integrals can be solved analytically for certain limits only, namely x >> 1 where the tanh (x) approaches 1, or in the opposite limit x << 1 when it becomes x. All intermediate cases, as discussed below, have to be solved numerically. The logarithmic BCS expression is used to approximate the integrals involving the second parabolic band, and with λ ') = λ )' the integrals can be solved like: The two approximate solutions are (i) x << 1: tanh x = x; (ii) x >> 1: tanh x = 1. yielding an implicit relation for TC. which can be solved explicitly: This expression differs from the one as discussed in the general two-band approach introduced by Suhl, Matthias, and Walker (SMW) In the following the coupled gap equations are solved numerically using the assumption that a strong coupling and a weak coupling band coexist. In addition C = 1 because, for simplicity, we incorporate the effects of the different strengths of the pairing interaction in the coupling matrix. In this case one superconducting gap (strong coupling band) is substantially larger than the second one (weak coupling band). The flat/band steep band scenario admits two possibilities, namely, that the flat band is realized either in the strong coupling band or in the weak coupling band. For both cases the enhancement of TC caused by the interband interaction is calculated, as well as the temperature dependence of the related gaps and the isotope effects on TC which helps in understanding the experimental results and leads to conclusions concerning the mechanism realized in sulfur hydride. Special cases of the above scenarios are studied in the following, where ω ' = ω ) = 150 meV, namely, the combination: λ )) = 0.1, λ ') = 0.03, λ )) = 0.2, λ ') = 0.03, and λ )) = 0.2, λ ') = 0.1. In all three cases the only variable is now λ ' related to the polaronic flat band which is varied from 0.05 to 0.6, i.e., from very weak to moderately strong coupling. The other parameters as given above are in the weak coupling limit, thus, allowing to use a BCS type scheme to evaluate the characteristic properties of our system. First, TC is calculated as a function of λ '' for the three cases given above (Figure The corresponding gaps and the dependence of them on TC and λ '' are shown for the same parameter combinations in Figure To conclude, high-temperature superconductivity in sulfur hydride and possible room-temperature superconductivity cannot be achieved within conventional single-band/single-gap theories in the sense of Eliashberg, BCS or strong coupling theories since all these approaches limit TC to values smaller than 30 K due to the inherent inverse relation between phonon energy and the electron-phonon coupling constant. In addition, isotope effects are not pressure dependent as long as the structure remains unchanged. even though the value of α can be smaller than the BCS value. The scenario outlined in this work shows that a two-band/two-gap theory can easily lead to values of TC > 200 K using rather moderate inter-and intraband coupling constants. By extending the SMW model to a combination of a flat band, i.e., dispersion-less polaronic type, and a steep itinerant one, moderate coupling is realized in combination with weak coupling. Such an approach resembles the BEC-BCS crossover discussed broadly in the literature for ultracold fermionic atoms and for the high-TC superconductors Finally we would like to note that these materials show an inherent inhomogeneity as it has been found experimentally 