We directly image individual vortex positions in nanocrystals in order to unveil the structural property that contributes to the depletion of the entropy-jump entailed at the first-order transition. On reducing the nanocrystal size the density of topological defects increases near the edges over a characteristic length. Within this "healing-length" distance from the sample edge vortex rows tend to bend while towards the center of the sample the positional order of the vortex structure is what is expected for the Bragg-glass phase. This suggests that the healing-length may be a key quantity to model the entropy-jump depletion in the first-order transition of extremely-layered vortex nanocrystals. The growing demand of miniaturization in superconducting devices applied to the detection of different types of radiation From a fundamental point of view, vortex matter in type-II superconductivity is a case-study for understanding how the physical properties and phase diagrams change when going from macroscopic to nanocrystalline condensed matter. In the case of hard condensed-matter, nanocrystals are made up of at most a few thousand of particles (atoms); 9,10 similarly soft-condensed matter "vortex nanocrystals" can be nucleated in micron-sized samples with the same amount of vortices. In the case of nanocrystalline vortex matter confinement effects also affect the transition lines and structural properties, Recently, some of us reported 25 on the peculiarities of decreasing the system size in extremely-layered vortex matter: for roughly hundred particles (vortices) no melting-point depression is observed in contrast to results in hard condensed matter. In this work we study the evolution of the structural properties on reducing the system size of nanocrystalline vortex matter. We characterize the variation and spatial distribution of elastic and plastic deformations in the quenched nanocrystalline vortex solid. Our vortex nanocrystals with less than 4000 vortices are nucleated in the whole area of micron-sized engineered samples at low applied fields. We have direct access to the static structural properties with single-vortex resolution. Nanocrystalline vortex matter is nucleated in micronsized Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+y disks with diameters d ranging 30 -50μm and thicknesses between 1-2 μm. Disks are engineered from optimally-doped crystals (T c = 90 K) by combining optical-lithography and physical ion-milling techniques. As a result of the final cleaving process, more than 90 % of the disks present sub-micron steps at the surface. We avoid using these disks for our study when possible. In a very few cases, see for instance Fig. The nanocrystalline vortex solid is directly imaged with single-vortex resolution by magnetically-decorating vortex positions at 4.2 K after field-cooling the sample at low fields from T > T c , as described in Ref. 29. The micron-sized samples were obtained from the macroscopic sample studied in Ref. 30, and part of the fabricated disks were used to investigate the phase diagram of mesoscopic vortex matter reported in Ref. 25. Figure Figures We quantify the proliferation of topological defects with the radial density of topological defects, ρ def (r) = N def (r)/N v (r). We actually consider N def y N v at a radius r as the number of defects and of vortices included in a circular shell with inner radius r -δr/2, and outer radius r + δr/2. The calculations are performed considering concentric circular shells of width δr = 2a and taking the origin at the center of the vortex nanocrystal. The top panel of Fig. The abrupt increase of ρ def (r) at the vicinity of the sample edge occurs in a larger typical distance when increasing the nanocrystal flexibility (decreasing B). We quantified this tendency by fitting the data with a ρ def (r) = A 1 + A 2 exp [(r/a -d/2a)/α] dependence, see full lines in Fig. The healing length a • α described above may be an useful quantity to model the B and d-dependent entropyjump depletion in the vortex first-order transition. This depletion refers to observation of a smaller ∆S/∆S 0 at the first-order melting transition of nanocrystalline vortex matter as compared to the case of macroscopic samples, see insert to Fig. The displacements perpendicular to the vortex structure main directions are quantified by the transverse displacement correlator that can be obtained as B T = 2B(r) -B L (r). For sufficiently large distances such that [u(r) -u(0)] > a the Bragg-glass structure enters in the quasi-ordered regime in which the dependence of B(r) is logarithmic with distance. Direct imaging of vortex structures in dislocation-free regions of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ vortex matter For macroscopic Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ vortex matter with a density of 16 G we do not observe the Larkin regime B * (r) ∼ r, indicating that the Larkin length is smaller than our spatial resolution for u(r). We do observe however that B(r) * ∼ (r/a) ν with ν = (0.4 ± 0.2) and B T (r)/B L (r) ∼ (1.4 ± 0.5) up to the r/a ∼ 10-range (see Fig. This scale of equilibration of the random-manifold regime is of the order of the vortex nanocrystals we study. The displacement correlator in nanocrystalline vortex matter, as a function of field and sample physical size, is shown in Figs. The exponent ν and the B T /B L ratio have values expected for the random-manifold regime within the error, but in the case of the smallest 16 G nanocrystal both magnitudes increase considerably. This can be due to the bending of vortex rows close to the sample edge dominating the nucleation of the smallest studied nanocrystal. Indeed, the Delaunay triangulation of Fig. The previous analysis shows that the relevance of bulk pinning for vortex nanocrystals with 400 -1500 vortices does not differ quantitatively from what is expected for macroscopic vortex matter. Physical properties that are affected by confinement in nanocrystalline vortex matter are thus controlled by the vortices located in a strip of width of order a • α from the sample edges. The larger a • α as compared to the sample diameter d, the more important are confinement effects. We have shown that confinement affects the structure of vortex nanocrystals nucleated in micron-sized Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ samples producing an excess of topological defects within a characteristic healing length distance from the edge. Towards the center of the nanocrystal, the vortex lattice recovers the bulk-like structure observed in macroscopic samples, consistent with the nucleation of a Bragg-glass phase. The existence of a finite healing length may help to explain why decreasing the system size to a few hundred vortices does not induce any melting-point depression as observed for nanocrystals of hard condensed matter, 10 but entails a progressive depletion of the entropy-jump at the first-order transition. 