We calculated the optical conductivity σ(T, Ω) of a gas of Bogoliubov quasiparticles (BQP) from their Green's function and the Kubo formula. We compare with corresponding normal state (N) and superconducting state (SC) results. The superconducting case includes the dynamic response of the condensate through additional contributions to the Kubo formula involving the Gor'kov anomalous Green's function. The differences in the optical scattering rate are largest just above the optical gap and become progressively smaller as the photon energy is increased or the temperature is raised. Our results are compared with those obtained using a recently advocated phenomenological procedure for eliminating the effect of the condensate. 1 The δ-function contribution at zero photon energy, proportional to the superfluid density, is dropped in the real part of the conductivity [σ1(T, Ω)] and its Kramers-Kronig transform is subtracted from the imaginary part σ2(T, Ω). This results in deviations from our BQP and superconducting state optical scattering rates even in the region where these have merged and are, in addition, close to the normal state result. Optical spectroscopy continues to find broad applicability as a technique which reveals the dynamics of the charge carriers in a great variety of materials. While other methods such as angular resolved photo emission spectroscopy (ARPES) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) are surface probes, optics involves the bulk. In superconducting materials the real part of the complex dynamic longitudinal conductivity σ sc (T, Ω), at temperature T , contains combined information on the absorption of photons of energy Ω from the Bogoliubov quasiparticles (BQP) as well as from the condensate itself through the braking of Cooper pairs. An important question raised recently is, how can these two contributions be separated and, in particular, the quasiparticle contribution σ bqp (T, Ω) isolated? This piece is directly related to quasiparticle relaxation processes which are fundamental. Specifically, it speaks to the inelastic scattering processes involved. This work was motivated, in part, by a recent attempt by Dordevic et al. Here we will base our considerations on theoretical results obtained from Eliashberg theory which applies to an isotropic conventional electron-phonon superconductor. The dynamic longitudinal optical conductivity σ sc (T, Ω) of a superconductor as a function of temperature (T ) and photon energy (Ω) can be computed from the knowledge of the 2 × 2 Nambu matrix Green's function One could consider many complications such as the existence of anisotropy, 7-9 a gap with d-wave symmetry, Most of the results we will present here are based on the electron-phonon interaction spectral density α 2 F (ω) for Pb. In Sec. III we present several relevant intermediate results which allow us to calculate the optical scattering rate. This quantity which is related to the imaginary part of the optical self-energy 26 plays a dominant role in the analysis of optical data. However, for the superconducting state its precise interpretation in terms of quasiparticle relaxation remains controversial. In terms of the spectral density associated with the quasiparticle Green's function G (anomalous Gor'kov Green's function F ) denoted by A(k, ω) [by B(k, ω)] the Kubo formula for the real part of the dynamic optical conductivity in the superconducting state at temperature T and photon energy Ω reads: with e the charge on the electron, k the momentum, v F (k) the Fermi velocity, and f (T, ω) the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at temperature T . The first term within the last set of square brackets, A(k, ω)A(k, ω + Ω), defines the optical conductivity of the BQP gas [σ bqp (T, Ω)], while the second term, B(k, ω)B(k, ω + Ω), is a direct additional contribution to Re{σ sc (T, Ω)} from the condensate and is not a part of the conductivity of a BQP gas. The A(k, ω) are determined by the renormalized frequencies ω(T, ω) and gap functions ∆(T, ω) and, thus, know about the condensate. Consequently, the electrodynamics of the BQP gas is an unambiguous concept and follows from retaining only the first term in the last line of Eq. (1). After considerable algebra 4,27 the superconducting state complex optical conductivity of an electron-phonon metal can be reduced to a convenient form for numerical calculations. A particularly compact form given in the literature is: 28 with Ω p the plasma frequency, β = 1/(k B T ), and where ⋆ indicates the complex conjugate. Equation (2) gives both, the real and imaginary part of the dynamic conductivity. Here By definition and with ω(T, ω + i0 + ) and ∆(T, ω + i0 + ) the renormalized frequency and gap function determined from Eqs. (B1) and (B3). These follow in the usual way from the knowledge of the electron-phonon interaction spectral density α 2 F (ω) associated with a particular material and the Coulomb repulsion parameter μ ⋆ . Here we will use the known spectrum of Pb in most of our calculations. with σ(T, Ω) related to M (T, Ω) such that and Here σ 1 (T, Ω) and σ 2 (T, Ω) are the real and imaginary part of the complex optical conductivity σ(T, Ω), respectively, and m b is the band mass. The scattering rate 1/τ opt (T, Ω) of Eq. ( We consider four possible cases and compare these with each other, namely, the superconducting state (sc), the Bogoliubov quasiparticle gas (bqp), the normal state (n), and results based on a phenomenological procedure aimed to extract quasiparticle scattering rates from superconducting state optical data (sc-m). The suggestion by Dordevic et al. and for the imaginary part their model conductivity These two equations are their equations ( In Fig. Only two curves are considered because σ 1 (T, Ω) is the same for the sc and sc-m cases. The solid (red) curve applies to the superconducting state while the dasheddotted (blue) curve is for the BQP gas. Optical absorption starts at the finite photon energy Ω = 2∆ 0 ≃ 2.8 meV because in both cases the quasiparticle excitation spectrum is gaped. Just above the optical gap the two responses show distinct behavior. The dashed-dotted (blue) curve for BQP has an inverse square root singularity associated with the onset of optical absorption while the solid (red) curve for the superconducting state, by contrast, rises slowly out of zero. In Appendix A we calculate the real part of the optical conductivity of a BQP gas in the clean limit of BCS theory. In this limit the spectral functions in Eq. ( which we repeat here for the convenience of the reader. This inverse square root singularity is clearly seen in the dashed-dotted (blue) curve of Fig. The deviations between the remaining three curves are in fact rather small at all energies except for two features. First, the solid (red) curve for the superconducting state shows a peak in the phonon assisted region between ∼ 10 meV to ∼ 20 meV which is not part of the other two curves. The deviations are of the order of 20 %. Second, at energies below ∼ 6 meV the solid (red) curve rapidly goes to zero while the dashed-dotted (blue) curve shows a plateau before it eventually drops to zero. This plateau has its origin in the interband transitions. These are shown in Fig. In this section the temperature was chosen to be large enough to expect results different from the T = 0.5 K case which is basically the zero temperature limit. In particular, we chose T = 5 K or T /T c ≃ 0.69. This remains within the superconducting state but is sufficiently high that the optical gap is reduced from its T = 0 value of 2.8 meV to 2.4 meV. Results for the real part of the optical conductivity are presented in Fig. Results for the optical scattering rate are presented in Fig. So far we did not include in our work static elastic residual impurity scattering, rather only inelastic scattering was considered. Eqs. ( The same as Fig. set 1/τ imp = 6.28 meV in Eqs. (B3) for illustrative purposes. This affects both the real and imaginary part of the optical conductivity. In Fig. with Γ ≡ 1/τ imp . In the superconducting state this gets gaped with loss optical spectral weight transferred to the condensate. The phonon assisted processes (incoherent part) provide an additional contribution which contains the remaining optical spectral weight approximately proportional to λ/(1 + λ) and these are the only processes that show up at finite photon energies in Fig. The truncated peak in the solid (red) curve of Fig. In Fig. The same as Fig. the weak coupling limit and also has a large maximum phonon energy of ω max = 49 meV. The superconducting gap at 2 K is ∆ 0 = 2.9 meV. The impurity scattering was taken to be 1/τ imp = 1 meV which remains in the clean limit, i.e. ∆ 0 τ imp > 1 to be compared with the results presented in Fig. In Fig. close to 1/τ sc opt (T, Ω) and 1/τ n opt (T, Ω). The results presented are based on the optical conductivity within the CuO plane (ab-plane). We calculated the optical conductivity σ sc (T, Ω) (superconducting state) and σ bqp (T, Ω) (BQP gas) and compared the two. Of particular interest in such a comparison was the derived optical scattering rate which corresponds to the imaginary part of the optical self-energy. This optical constant was often highlighted in the experimental literature because it provided information on quasiparticle relaxation. What was directly accessible in experiment was the superconducting state optical scattering rate 1/τ sc opt (T, Ω) while it was the BQP gas scattering rate 1/τ bqp opt (T, Ω) which was more directly interpretable. Thus, the question arose as to how similar or different these two rates were. This was recognized in a recent paper by Dordevic et al. In the phonon assisted energy region between 10 and 20 meV (in the specific case of Pb) a broad peak appeared in the optical scattering rate of the superconducting state which was not seen in either the normal state or the BQP gas. This translated into deviations of ∼ 20 %, still rather modest. We also found that, at finite temperature, a sharp peak developed in the optical scattering rate of the BQP gas below the optical gap. Such a peak was neither present in the superconducting nor in the normal state. It was traced to a zero crossing of the imaginary part of the BQP gas' optical conductivity. It is a signature of this crossing and is not directly related to a relaxation rate. Furthermore, from the optical gap energy to approximately twice this energy the BQP optical scattering rate had a plateau which was traced back to the interband transitions present in this case, even in the clean limit. However, above ∼ 6 meV [∼ 4∆(T )] we found that when 1/τ bqp opt (T, Ω) was compared with 1/τ n opt (T, Ω) the agreement was almost as good as it was at high energies. Thus, normal state and BQP gas optical scattering rates were close to each other in the entire range of photon energies above twice the optical gap. This central conclusion remains true when finite residual scattering due to disorder is introduced, when the temperature is increased, when we go from strong coupling Pb with a soft phonon spectrum to weak coupling V 3 Si with a large maximum phonon energy of ∼ 50 meV, and when gap anisotropy is considered. The specific example provided is for Hg1201, a cuprate with d-wave gap symmetry. trix elements. As seen in the solid (red) curve of Fig. Here, T is the temperature, μ ⋆ is the Coulomb pseudopotential, ω n = πT (2n + 1), n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . the Matsubara frequencies, and λ(iω n -iω m ) is given by: (B2) Eqs. (B1) are valid for any amount of electron-impurity scattering as this contribution cancels in these equations. This set of equations can be used to calculate thermodynamic properties, the penetration depth, etc. If one wants to determine response functions, like the optical conductivity, the renormalized frequencies ω(T, ω) and the gap function ∆(T, ω) are required. These are obtained from Eqs. (B1) by analytic continuation using an algorithm developed by F. Marsiglio et al. 