A self-doping effect between outer and inner CuO 2 planes (OPs and IPs) in multi-layer cuprate superconductors is studied. When one considers a three-layer tight-binding model of the Hg-based three-layer cuprate derived from the first principle calculations, the electron concentration gets to be large in the OP compared to IP. This is inconsistent with the experimental fact that more hole carriers tend to be introduced into the OP than IP. We investigate a three-layer Hubbard model with the two-particle self-consistent approach for multi-layer systems to incorporate electron correlations. We observe that the double occupancy (antiferromagnetic instability) in the IP decreases (increases) more than the OP, and also reveal that more electrons tend to be introduced into the IP than OP to obtain the energy gain from the on-site Hubbard interaction. These results are consistent with the experimental facts, and this electron distribution between the OP and IP can be interpreted as a self-doping effect arising from strong electron correlations. Since the discovery of cuprate superconductors, high-T c (critical temperature) superconductivity has attracted much interests both experimentally and theoretically in condensed matter physics. To clarify these phenomena in the multi-layer cuprates, in this paper we concentrate on the Hg-based three-layer cuprate Hg-1223 as a typical example for the multi-layer cuprate superconductors, which includes asymmetric CuO 2 planes: two OPs and one single IP. To understand differences of electronic properties among materials, it is useful to start from the first principle calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT). Although the Mott insulating phase cannot be described by the DFT band calculations, they give us a good basis set for considering strongly correlated systems. As shown later, we can obtain a three-layer tight-binding model for Hg-1223 from the DFT band calculations and maximally localized wannier functions. However, this effective model shows that the electron concentration gets to be large in the OP compared to IP. This is an opposite result to the experimental fact that more hole carriers tend to be introduced into the OP than IP. Motivated above, to incorporate electron correlations, a three-layer Hubbard model is investigated with the twoparticle self-consistent approach for multi-layer systems. We observe that the double occupancy (AF instability) in the IP decrease (increases) more than OP. We also reveal that more electrons tend to be introduced into the IP than OP with increasing the on-site Hubbard interaction in order to obtain the energy gain from the on-site Hubbard interaction. These results are consistent with the experimental fact suggested above, and the electron distribution between the OP and IP can be interpreted as a self-doping effect arising from electron correlations. In this study a three-layer Hubbard model is investigated with multi-layer TPSC approach. The three-layer Hubbard is given as an effective model for Hg-based three-layer cuprate Hg-1223, and then their parameters are also obtained from maximally localized wannier functions derived from band structures of Hg-1223. To investigate such a multi-layer Hubbard model, we consider the TPSC approach for multi-layer systems, and evaluate the interacting Green's function from the self-energy with the TPSC approach. Let us consider an effective model for Hg-1223 derived from the first principle calculations, i.e., a three-layer Hubbard model: The total Hamiltonian H is composed of the one-body part H 0 and two-body one H int . H 0 describes a three-layer tightbinding model, where c a † iσ (c a iσ ) is the field operator which creates (annihilates) an electron at site i with spin σ (=↑, ↓) in layer a (= 1, 2, 3), and n a iσ = c a † iσ c a iσ . Here t ab i j represents the (spin-independent) transfer integral of single-electron hopping to (i, a) from ( j, b), and μ denotes the chemical potential. We also specify layer a = 1, 3 as two OPs and a = 2 as one single IP. In this paper, the intra-layer single-electron hopping is taken into account until the third-neighbor hopping, and the inter-layer singleelectron hopping works between the OP and IP only. Furthermore, H int represents the Coulomb interaction, which means the on-site Hubbard interaction U. The one-body part H 0 can be rewritten by using the Fourier transformation for the field operators c a kσ where N is the number of sites and R i represents the position of site i on the square lattice. Then H 0 can be given as a 3 × 3 matrix form where the field operators in a vector form represent c † kσ = (c 1 † kσ c 2 † kσ c 3 † kσ ) and c kσ = (c 1 kσ c 2 kσ c 3 kσ ) T , and ξ indicates the energy dispersion matrix defined by the second line above. Here ǫ k -μ is the intra-layer energy dispersion measured from the chemical potential μ, and t k is the inter-layer single-electron hopping, Now t, t ′ , and t ′′ represent the intra-layer transfer integral for the nearest, second, third neighbor hopping, respectively. The inter-layer single-electron hopping can be described by one single parameter t ⊥ . We can diagonalize the one-body part H 0 immediately: the energy eigenvalues E m k (m = 1, 2, 3) can be specified as where we have here specified ) can be also given as In this study the carrier doping can be adjusted by the chemical potential μ. We here show the procedure of the TPSC approach for multi-layer systems, i.e., multi-layer TPSC approach. The TPSC approach To understand the one-particle electronic properties, we evaluate the Green's function in the multi-layer systems, defined as where k = (k, iω n ) and the Matsubara frequency for Fermions ω n = (2n + 1)π/β (n ∈ Z). To obtain this with the multi-layer TPSC approach, let us first consider the spin and charge (orbital) susceptibility in the multi-layer systems. Using the spin operators in the momentum space k↓ c a k+q↑ , and S + a q = k c a † k↑ c a k+q↓ at layer a, and the charge susceptibility in the momentum space n a q = k [c a † k↑ c a k+q↑ + c a † k↓ c a k+q↓ ] at layer a, we define the longi-tudinal and transverse spin susceptibility as and the charge (orbital) susceptibility as where q = (q, iǫ m ), the Matsubara frequency for Bosons ǫ m = 2mπ/β (m ∈ Z), and the inverse temperature β = 1/T (k B = 1). Here T τ indicates the imaginary-time ordered product and • • • represents the quantum statistical average. In the presence of spin SU(2) symmetry, the longitudinal and transverse spin susceptibility satisfy χS ≡ 2 χSzz = χS± . In the multi-layer TPSC approach the spin and charge (orbital) susceptibility are assumed to take the following forms: Note that the matrix products are defined here as Here the polarization function χ 0 is given as obtained from the non-interacting Green's function Ĝ0 (k) = (iω n -ξk ) -1 . The spin and charge channel interaction, are determined self-consistently together with the double occupancy n a ↑ n a ↓ ≡ n a i↑ n a i↓ by the q-sum rule for the spin and charge susceptibility and TPSC ansatz in multi-layer systems: and Here the layer filling n a = n a ↑ + n a ↓ at layer a is the σsummation of the electron concentration n a σ = n a iσ at layer a with spin σ. Now we assume paramagnetic states so that n a ↑ = n a ↓ . After determining the spin and charge (orbital) susceptibility, we can straightforwardly obtain the following expression for the self-energy from them, as where Û = diag (U, U, U) denotes the "bare" on-site Hubbard interaction. Thus the interacting Green's function in the multi-layer TPSC approach can be given straightforwardly as To evaluate the layer filling n a at layer a, and also to determine the chemical potential from the total filling, it is useful to obtain n a from the Green's function as follows: This is a general expression satisfied for both interacting and non-interacting case. The numerical results are shown as follows: the noninteracting results where the three-layer tight-binding model (only the one-body part) is taken into account, and the TPSC results where the three-layer Hubbard model (with the on-site Hubbard interaction) is investigated with the multilayer TPSC approach. In our numerical results we commonly set the number of the discrete mesh points for the wave number and Matsubara frequency to be (k x , k y , ω n (ǫ m )) = (64, 64, 4096), and the temperature to be T = 0.01 eV (∼ 100 K). Let us start with the non-interacting results obtained from the three-layer tight-binding model. We here treat the average filling n av = (1/3) 3 a=1 n a as a parameter, which can be specified by adjusting the chemical potential μ. The energy band structure measured from μ at the half-filling n av = 1 and its Fermi surfaces of the three-layer tight-binding model are shown in Fig. In Fig. On the other hand, we can compare the electron (hole) concentration n a (1n a ) in the OP and IP, which is shown in Fig. Since a = 1, 3 and a = 2 represent the OPs and IP, respectively, the m = 1 energy band has larger component of the IP than OPs, so that more hole carriers are injected into the IP than OP. Thus, if the inter-layer single electron hopping arises as a form of Eq. ( However, this is an opposite result to the experimental fact. Therefore the three-layer tight-binding model derived from the DFT calculations cannot describe the correct doping dependence of the OP and IP in the multi-layer cuprates. Fig. ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ To obtain the correct doping dependence of the OP and IP, we consider the electron correlations in the multi-layer cuprates with the multi-layer TPSC approach. We first show the spin susceptibility in the OP and IP (0 ≤ q x,y ≤ π), which are defined as χ OP S ≡ χ 11 S = χ 33 S and χ IP S ≡ χ 22 S , respectively. Here we have set the following parameters: the on-site Hubbard interaction U = 5.0 eV, average filling n av = 0.85, and zero (Matsubara) frequency ǫ m = 0. Similar to the non-interacting case, one can observe that the peak for χ IP S is larger than χ OP S , so that the IP still have stronger AF instability than OP. This is also qualitatively consistent with the experimental fact suggested previously. The spin and charge channel interaction, and double occupancy in the OP and IP can be determined self-consistently together with the spin (and charge) susceptibility, which are displayed in Fig. ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ χ S mainly contributes to Σ. Also, the double occupancy is suppressed in both of the OP and IP, which is related to the spin channel in interaction U a S through the TPSC ansatz Eq. ( Finally the layer filling n a is evaluated from the interacting Green's function through the self-energy derived from the multi-layer TPSC approach in Eq. ( To summarize, considering a triple-layer Hubbard model as an effective model for the Hg-based triple-layer cuprate Hg-1223 derived from the first principles calculations, we investigate it numerically with the multi-layer TPSC approach. We here show that the double occupancy (AF instability) decreases (increases) in the IP more than OP, and that the electrons tend to be introduced into the IP to obtain the energy gain from the on-site Hubbard interaction. These results are consistent with the experimental facts, and this electron distribution between the OP and IP can be interpreted as a selfdoping effect arising from strong electron correlations. Although we have focused on an effective model of Hg-1223 as an example for the multi-layer cuprates, the selfdoping effect may be considered to appear in the other triplelayer cuprates if their electron correlations are strong enough and their tight-binding parameters not so far from those for Hg-1223. Furthermore, this effect may also occur in the other multi-layer cuprates having n > 3 CuO 2 planes in a unit cell because it is attributed to the existence of the asymmet-ric CuO 2 planes and difference of the electron correlations in their CuO 2 planes. To obtain the energy gain from the on-site Hubbard interaction, the electron concentration in the IP tends to be approaching to the half-filling due to the self-doping effect. Of course, it does not reach the half-filling even when the different double occupancy occurs between the OP and IP. This is because, if too large difference of the layer filling between the OP and IP arises from the strong electron correlations, the energy gain cannot be obtained from the electron itinerancy, i.e., the inter-layer single electron hopping. Therefore the different layer-filling between the OP and IP gets balanced by the competition between the electron correlations and itinerancy before the layer-layer filling in the IP becomes the half-filling.