We calculate superfluid density for a dirty d-wave superconductor. The effects of impurity scattering are treated within the self-consistent t-matrix approximation, in weak-coupling BCS theory. Working from a realistic tight-binding parameterization of the Fermi surface, we find a superfluid density that is both correlated with Tc and linear in temperature, in good correspondence with recent experiments on overdoped La2-xSrxCuO4. The superfluid density, ρ s , plays a special role in the physics of cuprate superconductors, as it determines the stiffness of the superconducting order parameter to fluctuations in its phase. Strong motivation comes from a recent experiment, 30 which provides exhaustive evidence that the superfluid stiffness and the superconducting transition temperature of overdoped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 approach zero in tandem as a function of doping. The new study reinforces the argument that the close correlation between T c and ρ s is a significant and intrinsic feature of the overdoped cuprates. It also shows that the superfluid density retains an approximately linear temperature dependence over a wide temperature range, as expected for a d-wave superconductor in the clean limit. To try to resolve this contradiction we have revisited the theoretical relationship between disorder, superfluid density and T c within dirty d-wave BCS theory. The gap equation for a weak-coupling d-wave superconductor can be written in the imaginary-axis formalism as 32 where ∆ k is the gap parameter at wave-vector k, ω n = 2πT (n + 1 2 ) are the fermionic Matsubara frequencies, V k,k is the pairing interaction, ω 0 is a high frequency cut off, and ... FS denotes an average over the Fermi surface. In the self-consistent t-matrix approximation, 32,33 point-like, nonmagnetic impurities renormalize the fermionic Matsubara frequencies according to Here c is the cotangent of the scattering phase shift, Γ is a scattering parameter proportional to the concentration of impurities and For a d-wave order parameter, which averages to zero over the Fermi surface, there is no explicit impurity renormalization of ∆ k , just an indirect reduction through the effect of the impurities on ωn . For simplicity, we assume a separable pairing interaction based on a d-wave form factor Ω k defined in the first Brillouin zone of the two-dimensional CuO 2 planes, where a is the lattice spacing and Ω k is normalized such that Ω 2 k FS = 1. The pairing interaction therefore takes the form We will see below that for weak-coupling BCS, where the cut-off frequency of the interaction, ω 0 , is much larger than the superconducting transition temperature, T c , the combined effect of V 0 and ω 0 is captured by the cleanlimit transition temperature, T c0 , so that V 0 and ω 0 do not appear explicitly as parameters in the theory. Introducing a temperature-dependent gap amplitude, ψ(T ), the gap equation becomes Cancelling common factors, rearranging and reassigning k → k we have In the absence of disorder the quasiparticle energies are unrenormalized (ω n = ω n ) and the gap vanishes (ψ → 0) at the clean-limit transition temperature, T c0 . Using Ω 2 k FS = 1, we have at this temperature where the approximation is valid when ω 0 T c0 . This rearranges to give the familiar weak-coupling BCS result The logarithmic temperature dependence in Eq. 8 can be used to obtain an expression for the coupling constant V 0 that applies at any arbitrary temperature T : 42,43 This allows V 0 to be eliminated from the gap equation, which then takes the form ln Rapid convergence lets the Matsubara sum to be taken to infinity, eliminating explicit dependence on ω 0 . For a given choice of Fermi surface and impurity parameters, Eqs. 2 and 11 are solved self consistently to obtain ωn (T ) and ψ(T ). In the presence of disorder the energy gap closes at a reduced transition temperature, T c . For T ≥ T c , N k (ω) → 1 and the t-matrix equation describing the impurity scattering, Eq. 2, simplifies to The imaginary part of the self energy in this limit is denoted Γ N , the normal-state scattering rate due to impurities. Equation 11 can be solved with ψ → 0 and ωn where ψ 0 (x) is the digamma function. The zero-temperature, zero-disorder penetration depth, λ 00 , is closely related to the bare plasma frequency, ω p . The corresponding superfluid density is 44 Here we specialize to a quasi-2D material with layer spacing d and in-plane energy dispersion k . F is the Fermi energy, k = (k x , k y ) is the in-plane momentum and ∂ky k is the in-plane velocity. We change Eq. 17 to a Fermi surface integral by transforming coordinates from (k x , k y ) to ( , φ), where φ is the angle in the plane, measured about π a , π a at low hole dopings and (0, 0) at higher dopings. The Jacobian of the transformation is When the energy and k z integrations are carried out we obtain where the Fermi wavevector k F and Fermi velocity v F are functions of φ. The Fermi surface average used in the previous section, ... FS , must include the same Jacobian factor: For calculation of plasma frequency and superfluid density we define a second Fermi surface average, ... FS , that contains the additional factor of v 2 F,x : For Fermi surfaces that are close to circular these distinctions are usually not important. However, for the overdoped cuprates, the details of the Fermi-surface averages turn out to be crucial to understanding the temperature dependence of superfluid density measured in experiments, and so are given here in full. The finite temperature superfluid density, in the presence of disorder, is most efficiently calculated using a Matsubara sum. where the effects of disorder are built in via the renormalized Matsubara frequencies and gap. superconductor with a circular Fermi surface. The degree of scattering is characterized by the normal-state scattering rate, ΓN , in units of the clean limit transition temperature, Tc0, for scatterers acting in the Born limit (c 1) and the unitarity limit (c = 0). The temperature dependence of the gap, ∆(T ), has been calculated self-consistently for each set of impurity parameters, assuming a separable d-wave pairing interaction. We use the normal-state impurity scattering rate Γ N to parameterize the amount of scattering in the theory. Motivated by the known types of elastic-scattering disorder in La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 and other cuprates, we allow for two types of defects acting in combination: weak-limit scatterers, parameterized by Γ N,Born , to capture the effect of out-of-plane defects such as Sr dopants; and strongscattering disorder, parameterized by Γ N,unitarity , to represent native defects in the CuO 2 planes, such as Cu vacancies. The combined effect of Born and unitarity-limit scattering is additive in the self energy (Eq. 2). Here λ 00 is the zero-temperature penetration depth of a notional system with the same Fermi surface (doping level) that does not contain disorder. It cannot be accessed experimentally but an estimate of λ 00 can be made starting from the measured zero-temperature penetration depth, λ 0 , and then correcting for the degree of superfluid suppression using the T → 0 limit of Eq. 22: The final form for the residual resistivity is then We note that this neglects the effects of small-angle scattering, making it an upper bound on resistivity. If known, the small-angle scattering correction can be applied to Eq. 25 as a refinement. Sufficiently far from half-filling the Fermi surface of a quasi-2D metal is well approximated by a circle, and the d-wave form factor is Ω(φ) ≈ √ 2 cos(2φ). In this limit the angle integrals can be evaluated analytically As discussed above, it is convenient to parameterize the disorder level in terms of normal-state scattering rate Γ N . We see in Fig. The mid-range curvature of ρ s (T ) seen in Fig. To bridge between superfluid density and ARPES measurements we assume the standard parabolic relationship between T c and hole doping p. The specific form used in Ref. 30 is This maps fairly closely onto the stated Sr concentrations in the ARPES experiment of Ref. 40, with a slight offset: i.e., x = 0.15 → p = 0.16 and x = 0.22 → p = 0.23. In future, it would be highly informative if ARPES measurements could be carried out on samples similar to those used in the penetration depth measurements, so that details in the electronic structure could be lined up precisely with the doping-dependent superfluid density. In any case, we note that the parameter p is a nominal hole doping, and is only used in the calculations as an internal variable. The doping dependence of the calculated superfluid density shown in Fig. In deciding on the appropriate level of disorder to assume in the calculations, useful guidance comes from dc resistivity. As discussed in Sec. II, the scattering rate relevant to pair-breaking and superfluid density is the elastic scattering rate, which is related to the residual resistivity ρ 0 ≡ ρ(T → 0), not the resistivity at T c . To avoid uncertainties associated with extrapolating resistivity below T c , we assume a single, doping-independent scattering rate in our calculation, as our primary aim is to illustrate the physics contained within dirty d-wave superconductivity. In addition, as mentioned previously, the theoretical resistivity given in Eqs. 23 and 25 does not account for the effects of small-angle scattering, which in the cuprates can cause the momentum relaxation rate, Γ tr , to be substantially smaller than the single-particle relaxation rate, Γ sp . Overdoped Tl 2 Ba 2 CuO 6+δ provides a useful point of reference here, as it is sufficiently clean that quantum oscillation experiments have been performed. The calculated superfluid density is presented in Fig. The superfluid density calculated from dirty d-wave BCS theory reproduces many of the features observed in the experiments in Ref. 30. In particular, ρ s (T ) shows a strong, nearly linear temperature dependence over almost the full doping range, despite the strong suppression of superfluid density caused by the disorder. The correlation between T c and ρ s0 [see inset of Fig. One concern might be that the crossover in T c (ρ s0 ) from linear to square-root behaviour does not occur as smoothly in the experimental data as in the theoretical curve. In the idealized form considered in this paper, the dirty d-wave BCS theory assumes spatial homogeneity, whereas there is a body of evidence that real samples of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 consist of an inhomogeneous mixture of superconducting and metallic regions, with the fraction of metallic regions increasing on overdoping. Another possible concern is the degree of superfluid suppression predicted by the calculations, which at first sight appears surprising large. We emphasize again that the disorder level assumed in the calculation corresponds closely to the observed resistivity, and is really the only adjustable parameter in the model. Here, a useful cross-check comes again from comparison with overdoped Tl 2 Ba 2 CuO 6+δ , where for T c ≈ 25 K material the degree of superfluid suppression, ρ s0 /ρ s00 , is estimated to lie in the range 0.25 to 0.4, 53 despite overdoped Tl 2 Ba 2 CuO 6+δ having a residual resistivity Finally, while the main purpose of our calculation is to illustrate the qualitative features contained within dirty d-wave superconductivity, it is interesting that the implied clean-limit transition temperatures, T c0 , are large and have a suggestive similarity to the temperatures at which the first experimental signatures of superconductivity are observed in properties such as magnetoresistance. In conclusion, we find that dirty d-wave BCS theory, applied to a realistic parameterization of the dopingdependent Fermi surface, reproduces most of the phenomenology of the superfluid density in overdoped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . 30 A strong suppression of superfluid density is achieved without introducing significant curvature in ρ s (T ) by considering predominantly weak, Born-limit scattering, at a disorder level compatible with the observed resistivity, and in a regime that firmly satisfies the conventional definition of clean-limit superconductivity, Γ tr 2∆ 0 . We conclude that the correlation between T c and ρ s observed in the overdoped cuprates is a generic feature of a disordered d-wave superconductor. Erratum: Disorder and superfluid density in overdoped cuprate superconductors In Section III C of our paper, the scattering parameters were reported as ρ 0 ≈ 16 μΩcm, Γ N = 18, Γ N,Born = 17 and Γ N,unitarity = 1 K. The actual values used in the calculations and the preparation of the figures were a factor of π larger; i.e., ρ 0 ≈ 50 μΩcm, Γ N = 18π, Γ N,Born = 17π and Γ N,unitarity = π K. Note that the revised value of ρ 0 is in good correspondence with the residual terahertz conductivities reported in Fig. 