Superconductivity appears in the cuprates when a spin order is destroyed, while the role of charge is less known. Recently, charge density wave (CDW) was found below the superconducting dome in YBa 2 Cu 3 O y when a high magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the CuO 2 plane, which was suggested to arise from incipient CDW in the vortex cores that becomes overlapped. Here, by 63 Cunuclear magnetic resonance, we report the discovery of CDW induced by an in-plane field that does not create vortex cores in the plane, setting in above the dome in single-layered Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6 . The onset temperature T CDW takes over the antiferromagnetic order temperature T N beyond a critical doping level at which superconductivity starts to emerge, and scales with the psudogap temperature T * . These results provide important insights into the relationship between spin order, CDW and the pseudogap, and their connections to high-temperature superconductivity. The data that support the findings of this study are available on reasonable request. High transition-temperature (T c ) superconductivity is obtained by doping carriers to destroy an antiferromagnetic (AF) spin ordered Mott insulating phase. Although it is generally believed that the interaction responsible for the spin order is important for the superconductivity 1 , the nature of the normal state is still unclear 2,3 . For example, in the region with low carrier concentration p (0 < p < 0.2), a pseudogap state emerges where partial density of states (DOS) is lost below a characteristic temperature T * well above T c 4 or even T N 5 . Although the nature of the strange metallic state is still under debate, it is likely connected to both spin and change fluctuations or even orders. In fact, experimental progress suggests that the spin and charge degrees of freedom are highly entangled. For example, a striped spin/charge order was found around x∼1/8 in La 1.6-x Nd 0.4 Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO) two decades ago 6 . More recently, various forms of charge order were reported in many other systems. Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ found a modulation of local DOS in the vortex cores where superconductivity is destroyed 7 , which was interpreted as due to halos of incipient CDW localized within the cores Application of a high magnetic field is useful to diagnose the interplay between various orders in the cuprates. When a high magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the CuO 2 plane, superconductivity can be suppressed substantially. In YBCO, 63 Cu NMR at H = 28.5 T revealed a long-range charge density modulation perpendicular to the CuO-chain in the sample with p = 0.108 19 . RXS also indicated that a high field induces a correlation along the CuO-chain direction and modifies the coupling between CuO 2 bilayers, thus causes a threedimensional CDW These findings have arisen much interests, but the origin of the CDW and its connection to superconductivity is yet unknown. As the long-range CDW onsets below T c (H = 0) and only emerges when the field is applied perpendicular to the CuO 2 plane, a wide-spread speculation is that it is due to incipient CDW in the vortex cores 7 that becomes overlapped as the field gets stronger In order to clarify the relationship between the intertwined AF spin order, CDW, pseudogap and superconductivity, we apply high magnetic fields up to 42.5 T parallel to the Cu-O bond direction (H a or b axis) in Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6+δ where the pseudogap spans from the parent AF insulating phase to the overdoped superconducting regime Evidence for a field-induced CDW in underdoped Bi2201. Figures However, the spectrum is broadened at T = 4.2 K for p = 0.135 (Fig. Figure Next we show that the field-induced phase transition is due to a charge order, but not spin order. Figures Therefore, the splitting of the satellite line (Fig. Figure H-T phase diagram for underdoped Bi2201. To obtain the CDW onset temperature (T CDW ) and the threshold field (H CDW ) for p = 0.114, we study the temperature dependence of the NMR spectra at various magnetic fields (Figs. Figure Relationship between CDW and superconductivity. Figure and La was the lowest at the doping concentration where H c2 was the smallest there 24 , which led to the suggestion that CDW can only be seen when the superconducting state is suppressed as the vortex cores become overlapped. In the present case, however, no vortex cores are created in the CuO 2 plane. In fact, H CDW and T CDW are more related with doping concentration itself as can be seen in Fig. In this section, we discuss possible CDW form and the implication of the phase diagram we found. First, the result can be understood by an incommensurate 1-dimensional (1D) long-range CDW as follows, as the situation is similar to that observed at the in-plane Cu 2F -site located below the oxygen-filled CuO chain in YBCO It has been known that magnetic field works to induce a correlation along the CuO-chain direction and modifies the coupling between CuO 2 bilayers in YBCO Second, how about a 2D-CDW case? Recent resonant X-ray scattering measurement on Bi2201 p ∼ 0.11 found a perfect 2D but local (ξ ∼ 20 Å) CDW formation along the Cu-O bond direction with the wave vector (Q * , 0) and (0, Q * ) (Q * ∼ 0.26) , where X = a-axis and Y = b-axis are the modulation directions 30 . As suggested by RXS and STM measurements, when the CDW amplitudes are equivalent δν X = δν Y , such CDWs yield I(ν) ∼ -ln[(ν -ν Q )/δν]/δν 30 . In this case, the logarithmic singularity appears at δν = 0 30 , which is different from the 1D case. It is obvious that we can not explain our experimental results with such 2D CDW. However, if the amplitude for each directions is different, δν X(Y ) ≫ δν Y (X) , two edge-singularities will appear 30 . It is also interesting to note that if there are CDW domains with modulations ) in each domain, the NMR lineshape will be the same as in the 1D case. Third, a 3D CDW will not show two edge singularities in ν Q distribution in any case 30 . Therefore, we may exclude the possibility of a 3D CDW because, being different from the bilayer YBCO, the long distance between CuO 2 planes produces no CDW correlation along the c-axis in Bi2201 16 and in our case the magnetic field is applied parallel to the CuO 2 plane. We now show in Fig. Figure Samples. The single crystals of Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6+δ (Bi2201, p = 0.114 (x = 0.75), 0.128 (0.65), 0.135 (0.60), and 0.162 (0.40)) were grown by the traveling solvent floating zone method T c (H) is defined at the onset temperature of diamagnetism observed by ac-susceptibility measurement using NMR coil. The H CDW is slightly lower than that in YBCO, suggesting that CDW has a similar energy scale across different class of cuprates. However, the relationship between H CDW and H c2 is completely different from that seen in YBCO where H CDW scaled with H c2 . Namely, H CDW