We report modifications of the temperature-dependent transport properties of MoS 2 thin flakes via field-driven ion intercalation in an electric double layer transistor. We find that intercalation with Li + ions induces the onset of an inhomogeneous superconducting state. Intercalation with K + leads instead to a disorder-induced incipient metal-to-insulator transition. These findings suggest that similar ionic species can provide access to different electronic phases in the same material. Transition metal dichalcogenides are a fascinating class of layered materials, where different orders -such as superconductivity and charge-density waves -compete with each other and give rise to complex phase diagrams reminiscent of those of cuprates and iron pnictides In recent years, ionic gating has been utilized to control the transport properties of a wide range of materials, including oxides Here, we tackle this issue by performing ionic gating experiments on archetypal layered semiconductor MoS 2 using K + and Li + as dopant ions. MoS 2 is known to undergo a series of insulator-to-metal-to-superconductor phase transitions both upon surface electrostatic carrier accumulation We prepared few-layer MoS 2 flakes by micromechanical exfoliation of their bulk crystals (2H polytype, SPI supplies) via the well-known scotch-tape method -and bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide(TFSI -)based salts, and observed no significant dependence of the gating efficiency on the anion choice. Both Li + and K + electrolytes were liquid at room temperature and underwent a glass transition below ∼ 250 K. Transport measurements were performed as a function of the temperature T via the standard lock-in technique in a Quantum Design R Physical Properties Measurement System with minimal exposure to ambient condition. We accessed the intercalated state in our MoS vices by slowly (dV G /dt ∼ 2 mV/s) ramping the gate voltage V G to a target value at T = 300 K and monitoring their conductivity for sharp increases in its value as the signature of the onset of intercalation 15 (see Fig. Fig. We first consider the behavior of a K + -gated device (device A): in this case, the gate voltage was ramped up to a maximum of +3.1 V, and R H was measured twice: first at V G = +2.8 V, and then at V G = +3.1 V. The corresponding values of n H show that the carrier density at V G = +2.8 V (n H ≃ 4.4 × 10 14 cm -2 ) is about six times smaller than the one at V G = +3.1 V (n H ≃ 2.6 × 10 15 cm -2 ). This strongly suggests that the device is still mainly in the electrostatic accumulation regime at V G = +2.8 V, and is instead intercalated at V G = +3.1 V. It is worth noting that this large increase in n H does not lead to a significant increase in σ s , indicating that doping with K + ions, while inducing carriers, severely reduces the carrier mobility (at T = 300 K, μ H ≃ 12 ± 3 and 2.5 ± 0.2 cm 2 /Vs for V G = +2.8 and +3.1 V, respectively). We can also roughly estimate the nominal doping level x in the K x MoS 2 stoichiometry at V G = +3.1 V (K 0.45 MoS 2 ), assuming a uniform distribution of the dopants in all the layers (five for this specific sample). This estimation indicates that the sample at V G = +3.1 V should be completely in the metallic state, and in the correct doping range to show superconductivity at low temperature Let us focus now on the behavior of a Li + -gated device (device C). Interestingly, Li + -gated devices did not show significant signs of intercalation in the same voltage range for which intercalation occurred in the K + -gated devices. Instead, we observed an electrostatic increase of σ s with increasing gate voltage up to V G ≃ +3.6 V. Larger voltage values caused a peculiar behavior to emerge, where σ s appeared to randomly "jump" between high-and low-conductivity states as V G was increased. This behavior, which may be associated with an unstable incorporation of the Li + ions between the MoS 2 layers, continued up to V G ≃ +6.1 V. Even larger gate voltages up to V G ≃ +7.0 V featured a second stable region of monotonically increasing σ s , which was about 4 times larger than that for V G ≃ +3.6 V. The corresponding values of carrier density, as measured by Hall effect at T = 220 K, were n H (+3.6 V ) ≃ 2.8 × 10 14 cm -2 and n H (+7.0 V ) ≃ 7.1 × 10 14 cm -2 (Li 0.12 MoS 2 ), with a Hall mobility μ H ≃ 12 ± 2 and 9.2 ± 1.8 cm 2 /Vs in the two cases, respectively. The significant increase in both σ s and n H indicate that the high-conductivity state at V G ≃ +7.0 V may be associated with Li + intercalation. The corresponding nominal doping x ≃ 0.12 achieved in our sample is still below the onset of superconductivity in chemically intercalated samples, which emerges only for x ≥ 0.4 Overall, the following main differences emerge when comparing K + and Li + intercalation at the same operating temperature (T = 300 K): first, the decrease in mobility is much less pronounced in the case of Li + doping, indicating a much less prevalent introduction of extra defects in the system; second, while the thickness of the two samples was comparable, the final n H is significantly smaller in the Li + -doped one, indicating that K + ions are able to more efficiently penetrate between the MoS 2 layers. Furthermore, the onset of K + doping requires smaller gate voltages, but leads to device degradation for smaller V G values as well. We now consider the T -dependent transport properties of our devices down to 2 K in both K + and Li + -doped samples. We characterize our devices first in the electrostatic regime, and again after the electric field has driven the ions to intercalate the material. Fig. When the ions are able to intercalate the sample, we would also expect a metallic behavior and a further reduction of R s at low-T . Moreover, given that the doping level K 0.45 MoS 2 determined at 240 K, we would also expect the emergence of a superconducting transition at T ∼ 6 K 38 . However, the T -dependence of R s in the intercalated state does not show any of these features. Instead, it shows a clear non-monotonic behavior and two regions where R s decreases for increasing T : one for T 150 K and one for T 20 K. The second one, the low-temperature upturn, is insensitive to the applied magnetic field, ruling out a possible contribution from weak localization. For intermediate temperatures, R s increases as e -A/T , A ≃ 107 K (see Fig. These results indicate the peculiar condition of a system being close to becoming an insulator, while at the same time presenting a metal-like density of charge carriers at high T . Thus, we investigated whether n H was metallic at low-T as well. Fig. We thus suggest that the electrochemically intercalated K + ions are behaving as thermally-activated electron donors and reside in shallow trap states in the bulk MoS 2 energy gap: the material thus behaves more like a highly-doped but highly-defective semiconductor with a field-induced metallic channel at its surface, instead of showing a proper metallic character across its entire thickness. Moreover, this very defective character of the K + -doped regime is able to account for both the sharp reduction in carrier mobility, and the emergence of an Anderson-like localization regime at low T . A disorder-induced metal-to-insulator transition was recently reported in ion-gated monolayer ReS 2 In Fig. The most likely explanation of these results is that the size of the K + ion is too large to be able to intercalate the MoS 2 lattice without introducing significant distortions and defects in its entire volume. These defects would then act as shallow trap states, capturing most of the transferred electrons at low T and suppressing the metallic behavior except in the thin layer at the surface due to electrostatic accumulation. We note that a similar disruptive effect of large intercalating species was also observed in ion-gated TaS 2 , where it leads to abrupt device failure Further evidence of the importance of dopant size on the behavior of ion-gated devices lies in the fact that we were able to observe a clear downturn in the R s vs. T curve in the Li + -doped state below 4 K. Fig. In conclusion, we employed polymer electrolyte gating to intercalate MoS 2 thin flakes with different ionic species. We unveiled the critical role of ionic size in the determination of the electric transport properties of the intercalated devices. The larger K + ions were found to strongly damage the MoS 2 lattice leading to an incipient metal-to-insulator transition at high doping levels. The smaller Li + ions preserved the metallic character of the devices and allowed the emergence of an inhomogeneous bulk superconducting phase. These findings highlight the critical role of the ionic medium in electrochemically gated devices, both for electrostatic carrier accumulation and field-driven ion intercalation.