The anisotropy of the Fe-based superconductors is much smaller than that of the cuprates and the theoretical calculations. A credible understanding for this experimental fact is still lacking up to now. Here we experimentally study the magnetic-field-angle dependence of electronic resistivity in the superconducting phase of iron-based superconductor CaFe0.882Co0.118AsF, and find the strongest anisotropy effect of the upper critical field among the iron-based superconductors based on the framework of Ginzburg-Landau theory. The evidences of energy band structure and charge density distribution from electronic structure calculations demonstrate that the observed strong anisotropic effect mainly comes from the strong ionic bonding in between the ions of Ca 2+ and F -, which weakens the interlayer coupling between the layers of FeAs and CaF. This finding provides a significant insight into the nature of experimentally observed strong anisotropic effect of electronic resistivity, and also paves an avenue to design exotic two dimensional artificial unconventional superconductors in future. Since the discovery of superconductivity of 26 K in fluorine doped quaternary compound LaFeAsO, Recently, high-quality single crystals of CaFeAsF and the Co-doped compounds with the size above 1 mm were grown successfully by our group using a new flux CaAs, FIG. a DX-2700 type powder x-ray diffractometer using Cu K α radiation. The electronic resistivity (including the magnetic field angle-resolved electronic resistivity) were measured using a four probe technique on the physical property measurement system (Quantum Design, PPMS) with magnetic field up to 9 T. The angle φ was varied from 0 • to 180 • , where φ = 0 • indicates the orientation with the magnetic field parallel to the c-axis of the sample. In addition, the current was applied always perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field, as shown schematically in the inset of Fig. The first-principles calculations presented in this work were performed using the all-electron full potential linear augmented plane wave plus local orbitals (FP-LAPW + lo) method The x-ray was incident on the ab-plane of the sample when carrying out the x-ray diffraction measurements. The diffraction pattern is shown in Fig. We perform the measurements of temperature dependent electronic resistivity with the magnetic field along various orientations to study the anisotropy effect of H c2 of superconductor CaFe 1-x Co x AsF. As shown in Fig. To gain more information about the anisotropy effect of H c2 , we further measure the magnetic-field-angle dependence of electronic resistivity under various magnetic fields at the temperature region near the SC transition point. Here we take the data at the temperature of 19 K as an example and plot it in Fig. Here, it should be noted that the resistivity in the superconducting state merely depends on the effective magnetic field H/H GL c2 , i.e., ρ = ρ[H/H GL c2 (φ)], at a given temperature. tivity falls into one curve at a fixed temperature. In addition, temperature dependence of the fitted anisotropic parameter γ is also shown in Fig. In Fig. Although we have found the largest anisotropy parameter γ of CaFe 0.882 Co 0.118 AsF in iron-based superconductors, the experimental observation is consistent with the theoretical prediction by the first-principal calculations. Previously, D. J. Singh et al In order to examine the detailed electronic structure of CaFe 0.882 Co 0.118 AsF and clarify the nature of the emergence of strongest electronic anisotropy among the FeSCs, we carried out the first-principles calculations. The electronic band structure should be changed slightly by the cobalt doping of 11.8% based on the rigid-band approximation. For simplicity, we just only show the en-ergy band and its Fermi surface topology of CaFeAsF in Fig. Quantatively, we calculated the charge density distribution, ρ(r), as shown in Fig. In summary, magnetic field angular dependence of resistivity in the superconducting state was measured on the single crystals of CaFe 0.882 Co 0.118 AsF. The obtained anisotropy parameter γ based on the anisotropic Ginzburg-Landau theory is much larger than that of other FeSCs. By the charge density distribution calculations, we found that the strong electronic anisotropy mainly comes from the strong intra-layer ionic bonding in CaF layer, which weakens the interlayer coupling between the layers of FeAs and CaF. Our results demonstrate that the fluorine-base 1111 system may be the most 2D superconducting material in FeSCs, from the viewpoint of electronic structure. The interplay between strong electronic anisotropy and unconventional superconductivity is an important issue for the understanding the mechanism of unconventional superconductor, which deserves our attentions in the future. The CaFe 1-x Co x AsF single crystals were grown using the CaAs self-flux method.