In contact with a superconductor a normal metal modifies its properties due to Andreev reflection. In the current work the local density of states (LDOS) of superconductor -normal metal Mo78Ge22 -Au bilayers are studied by means of STM applied from the Au side. Three bilayers have been prepared on silicate glass substrate consisting of 100, 10 and 5 nm MoGe thin films covered always by 5 nm Au layer. The tunneling spectra were measured at temperatures from 0.5 K to 7 K. The two-dimensional cross-correlation between topography and normalized zero-bias conductance (ZBC) indicates a proximity effect between 100 and 10 nm MoGe thin films and Au layer where a superconducting gap slightly smaller than that of bulk MoGe is observed. The effect of the thinnest 5 nm MoGe layer on Au leads to much smaller gap moreover the LDOS reveals almost completely suppressed coherence peaks. This is attributed to a strong pair-breaking effect of spin-flip processes at the interface between MoGe films and the substrate. Disorder and reduced dimensionality affect the physical properties of metallic systems in several ways Amorphous MoGe thin films are suitable system for studying the interplay between superconductivity and reduced dimensionality. Several transport experiments showed a reduction of the superconducting transition temperature T c In a contact with a normal metal the superconductor wave function is changed by the proximity effect In this work, the local density of states (LDOS) has been measured by means of the scanning-tunnelingmicroscope (STM) technique. The two-dimensional cross correlation between the topography of locally varying Au thickness and the tunneling zero-bias conductance (ZBC) for 10 nm and 100 nm MoGe bilayer samples indicate a presence of the proximity effect in the LDOS of Au overlayer. The LDOS spectra on Au reveal the gap which is only slightly suppressed in comparison with that in bulk MoGe. It means that down to 10 nm thickness the superconducting properties of MoGe are not changing. In the bilayer with 5 nm MoGe the tunneling spectrum shows a high ZBC and strongly suppressed coherence peaks. Such a strong suppression of superconducting LDOS in the same 5 nm Au layer cannot come just from proximity effect. Also there is no correlation between the topogra-phy and ZBC. Then, the proximity effect is not sufficient to explain the spectra measured on Au but superconductivity in the 5 nm MoGe is strongly suppressed. We consider a strong pair breaking due to the spin-flip processes at the interface between MoGe and the glass substrate. Consequently, superconductivity in MoGe will be supressed as well by an inverse proximity effect. A magnetron sputtering technique was used to produce MoGe thin films with thicknesses of 5, 10, and 100 nm covered by Au layer with thickness of 5 nm. The films were deposited on commercially available silicate glass slides of 10 mm x 10 mm x 0.5 mm size. MoGe was sputtered on the rotating sample holder from a commercial single composite target with a 99.9+ % purity. The sputtering conditions for MoGe were: chamber pressure 3.7×10 -10 Pa, argon pressure 2.2×10 -5 Pa, DC target power 100 W, substrate temperature 22 • C, the sputtering rate is 0.59 Ås -1 . Immediately after MoGe deposition, the Au thin film was sputtered with the rate 4.54 Ås -1 to prevent the oxidation. The thickness of the sputtered films was controlled by quartz crystal microbalance device. The topography of the samples is shown in Fig. The scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy experiments were performed by means of a homemade STM head The procedure was repeated until the current position dependence exhibited the conductance quantization and single-atom contact phenomena inherent for gold The individual spectra have been measured in temperature range between 0.5 K and 7 K. At the lowest temperature we have also performed the current imaging tunneling spectroscopy (CITS) providing the spectral maps at each point of the topography. The experimental conductance spectra were analyzed assuming normal metal -insulator -superconductor (NIS) contact described by eq. where e is a charge of electron, I nis is a tunneling current, V is a bias voltage between Au tip and the sample, dI/dV is experimental differential conductance, G nn -normal-state differential conductance, N s (E) is superconducting density of states (SDOS), N n (0) is the normal-state density of states at Fermi level, and f is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. The superconducting density of states was taken in the Dynes form where ∆ is a superconducting gap and Γ is the broadening parameter. Each curve was normalized to the normal state spectrum. Since the Au tip possess a constant density of states (N n (0) = const), consequently, each of differential conductance spectra reflects the SDOS of the MoGe, smeared by 2k B T in energy at the measuring temperature. In the low temperature limit (at k B T ≪ ∆), the differential conductance corresponds directly the SDOS. In Figure All curves were fitted according to the eq. ( The temperature dependence of ∆(T ) was compared with theoretical curve (lines in Fig. where ∆(0) is the superconducting gap at zero temperature. One can see, that experimental data (dots) deviates from the theoretical prediction (lines). We suggest that such behavior could be explained by the influence of proximity effect. Since the measurements were performed on the normal side of the metal-superconductor bilayer, the Andreev reflection where ξ n,s are the normal and superconducting coherence lengths, D = 1 3 v F l el is the diffusive constant with v F is Fermi velocity, and l el is the elastic mean free path. In ref. where L n is the thickness of normal metal. Taking as a true superconducting gap in bulk MoGe 1.13 meV The ZBC maps obtained via current image tunneling spectroscopy are plotted in Fig On the contrary, the 5 nm MoGe sample shows the weakest correlation with a smeared central peak and the correlation value of only 0.08. It is despite the high RMS roughness which should impose a strong proximity effect. All this corroborates another pair-breaking mechanism, most probably the spin-flip scattering at the interface which is expanded by the the inverse proximity effect to the bilayer Scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy measured on 5 nm gold overalyer on 100, 10 and 5 nm MoGe films reveal suppression of superconducting energy gap and T c upon reduction of the thickness of MoGe films. The two-dimensional cross-correlation between topography and ZBC for the 10 and 100 nm MoGe samples indicates a proximity effect in Au layer where slightly smaller superconducting energy gap as compared to the bulk MoGe is observed. The superconducting properties of MoGe remain unchanged down to 10 nm thickness. In the STM LDOS spectra of the 5 nm MoGe sample a high ZBC and low coherence peaks are observed. This cannot be explained by a simple proximity effect and another mechanism is functioning. It is probably an inverse proximity effect from the interface between the MoGe film and the glass substrate where the spin-flip scattering suppresses the superconductivity.