Transition metal dichalcogenides host a wide variety of lattice and electronic structures, as well as corresponding exotic physical properties, especially under certain tuning conditions. Here, we are the first to report the observation of pressure-induced three superconducting transitions in TaTe2, a charge density wave (CDW) -bearing layered transition-metal dichalcogenide that is metallic but not superconducting at ambient pressure. We find that its CDW state can be easily suppressed upon increasing pressure up to ~ 1 GPa. A superconducting state then emerges from the suppressed CDW state and persists to the pressure about 7 GPa. Unexpectedly, another superconducting state appears at ~ 11 GPa within the same monoclinic (M) structure of its ambient-pressure one. Upon further compression to 21 GPa, a third superconducting state with higher Tc appears from a high-pressure (HP) phase. Our experimental results suggest that the pressure-induced three superconducting transitions in TaTe2 are respectively driven by the suppression of the CDW state, the change of the  angle in the M phase and the transition of M-to-HP phase. These results demonstrate not only the versatile nature of this correlated electron system, but also the first experimental example that shows the pressure-induced evolution from a CDW state to three superconducting states driven by different mechanisms. In layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), a charge density wave (CDW) is frequently observed, appearing as a periodic modulation of the electronic charge density In this study, we report a new case, finding pressure-induced three superconducting transitions in the non-superconducting CDW-bearing compound TaTe2, revealed by complementary measurements of in-situ high pressure electrical resistance, ac susceptibility, Hall coefficient, angle dispersive X-ray diffraction The high-quality single crystals were synthesized by the chemical vapor transport method, using iodine as a transport agent First, we performed in-situ resistance measurements on the TaTe2 sample in the low pressure range by using a piston-cylinder pressure cell. Figure 27-Supplementary Information-SI). A thermal hysteresis in resistivity is observed (Fig. To investigate the evolution of the observed superconducting state under higher pressure, we carried out high-pressure measurements on the TaTe2 samples in a diamond anvil cell. As shown in Fig. Interestingly, when we applied pressure up to 11.5 GPa, the resistance drop reemerges and zero resistance is observed at ~ 0.5 K, indicating that a new superconducting state appears (Fig. The onset temperature of this resistance drop shifts slightly to higher temperature with increasing pressure (Fig. High pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed at the two Synchrotron Radiation Facilities to clarify whether the observed superconducting transitions in pressurized TaTe2 are related to the structure phase transitions (Fig. We summarize the high-pressure transport results and structure information for TaTe2 in Fig. To understand the evolution of the pressure-induced multiple superconducting transitions from the CDW ordered state, we performed high-pressure Hall resistance and magnetoresistance measurements on the TaTe2 sample by sweeping the magnetic field perpendicular to the ab plane at two temperatures (4K and 10 K) and various pressures. The pressure dependence of the Hall coefficient (RH) and the MR% (MR is defined as [(R(7T)-R(0T)/R(0T)]100%) are illustrated in Fig. GPa where the SC-II state presents. We suggest that reducing  angle by ~2.5 degrees and more can induce the appearance of the SC-II state. At ~ 21 GPa, the  angle starts to show an increase with pressure, which is likely associated with the presence of the HP phase developed from the matrix of the monoclinic phase. We propose that the semimetal state may be associated with the peculiar positive magnetoresistance state that is observed (Fig. In summary, we report the observation of pressure-induced three superconducting transitions in the CDW-bearing compound TaTe2. We propose the possible reasons for these three superconducting states as follows: the suppression of the CDW ordered state and the enhancement of superconducting carrier density lead to the appearance of the SC-I state; the critical  angle of the M phase drives the emergence of the SC-II state; and the pressure-induced structural phase transition gives rise to the development of the SC-III state. To the best of our knowledge, this is the only experimental example that three different superconducting transitions can be tuned out by pressure from one compound with a homogenies lattice structure. These results are expected to shed new insight on the underlying superconducting mechanisms in the correlated electron systems of the transition metal ditellurides, and even in the other unconventional superconducting compounds. 