The intricate interplay of interactions and Fermiology can give rise to a close competition between nodeless (e.g. s-wave) and nodal (e.g. d-wave) order in electronically driven unconventional superconductors. We analyze how such a scenario is affected by a Zeeman magnetic field HZ and temperature T . In the neighborhood of a zero temperature first order critical point separating a nodal from a nodeless phase, the phase boundary at low HZ and/or low T has a universal line shape cubic in HZ or T , such that the nodal state is stabilized at the expense of the nodeless. We calculate this line shape for a model of competing s±-wave and d-wave pairing in iron-based superconductors. Introduction. Superconductivity is a quantum manybody state of matter which is a phase-coherent superposition of paired electrons Iron-based superconductors In this Letter, we elaborate on how the competition between an s-wave and a d-wave state is affected perturbatively by a Zeeman field H Z or temperature T . As a phenomenological starting point, we place ourselves at a first order zero temperature critical point where we assume a gapped s-wave and a nodal d-wave state to be of equal energy density. As partly elaborated on above, such a situation might occur in a multiple Fermi surface scenario with a balanced energetic significance of pairing formation and condensation energy. When a weak Zeeman field is turned on, the s-wave state will not respond to it since all quasiparticles are gapped. The dwave state, however, possesses gapless quasiparticles at the nodes, which are polarized due to the Zeeman field. This gain in magnetic polarization energy makes the dwave state preferable, and thus serves as a parameter to tune a phase transition from s-wave to d-wave. This similarly applies for finite temperature, where the d-wave state, in contrast to the s-wave state, gains free energy through the generation of entropy in the nodal regime. It warrants similarity to the Pomeranchuk effect in He 3 where the crystal phase is stabilized at finite T Model. At zero temperature, a singlet superconductor subject to a Zeeman field is described by the Hamiltonian where ε(k) is the kinetic term of the electrons, ∆ σ,σ (k) = i∆(k)σ y σ,σ , and σ y , σ z denote the Pauli matrices. The orbital magnetic field contribution be weak in comparison to the Zeeman term, e.g. as accomplished by an in-plane field As a specific competing candidate state in materials such as the pnictides, we consider extended s-wave (s ± ) ∆ s± (k) = ∆ s (cos(k x ) cos(k y )) (2) The eigenvalue spectrum of ( where the two binary indices label the up/down spin (later denoted σ) and Bogoliubov particle/hole character, respectively. The eigenstates are given by Quasiparticle magnetization. Assume k B T ≈ 0 to be the smallest of all energy scales, and consider the spectrum (3) in the case of ∆(k) = ∆ s±,d± (k) for one representative Fermi pocket (Fig. Due to H Z , the Fermi levels of spin ↑ and ↓ quasiparticles shift against each other, and a Fermi pocket emerges, with its surface given by the elliptic equation Computing the magnetization from there, without loss of generality, we constrain ourselves to the spin ↑ species. The number of particles in a given volume V is given by the area enclosed by the Fermi surface ( From the density n ↑ (E) = Assuming we had started from an equal energy density for s-wave and d-wave, the Zeeman field hence yields a preference for d-wave according to where N n denotes the total number of nodes induced by the d-wave state on the multi-pocket Fermi surface. Quasiparticle entropy. Assume H Z ≈ 0 and finite temperature k B T < ∆ s . The free energy density is given by f = u -T s = -k B T /N ln Z, where u denotes the inner energy density, T the temperature, s the entropy per particle, and Z the (grand) canonical partition function. The latter be denoted by with 1 β = k B T , spin index σ = ±, many-particle state |Ψ , and the corresponding energy E |Ψ constructed from the single-particle states (4) and the quasiparticle energy E σ,+ (k) given by ( Due to the discontinuity of ρ σ,+ (E) at the band edge, we have to include the boundary terms upon partial integration. The boundary terms, however, may be neglected for β 1, which, together with f s ≈ 0 in this limit, leaves us with where ρ σ,+ (E) = and E max = lim sup k∈BZ E σ,+ (k). We are interested in the lowtemperature behavior of f d , which is why we are allowed to model the density of states by a linear function along with (6), i.e. ρ σ,+ (E) = αE σ,+ such that Υ σ,+ (E) = α 2 E 2 σ,+ . This reduces our task to solving the Fermi-Dirac integral It already shows that the change in free energy density has the low-temperature behavior f d -f s ∝ -T 3 . The integral is solved by the integrand's primitive where Li i (x) denotes the polylogarithm x Li s-1 (x) and Li 1 (x) = -ln(1 -x). The integral in with ζ(3) ≈ 1.20206 (Apéry's constant), and the universal cubic phase boundary shape depicted in Fig. At the latest since the discovery of the iron pnictides, materials with competitive unconventional nodal and nodeless superconducting pairing tendencies have established an intricate problem to be further studied experimentally and theoretically. We have shown that the perturbative Zeeman-magnetic and entropic response of nodal quasiparticles pave the way to tilt the thermodynamic balance in favor of the nodal, in our case d-wave, superconducting state by a term which is cubic in the perturbation parameter, i.e. either H Z T . In the neighborhood of a zero temperature first order critical point between the nodal and the nodeless state, this gives rise to a universal cubic phase transition line shape in favor of the nodal state. Whether this contribution can yield an observable magnetically or entropically induced superconducting phase transition crucially relies on a careful material design as well as the detailed tunability of system parameters towards such a critical point. From a broader perspective, iron-based superconductors are not the only class of materials displaying comparable superconducting pairing tendencies towards a nodal and a nodeless state. For instance, the nodeless chiral p-wave state predicted for strontium ruthenate 