We report high resolution ARPES measurements of detwinned FeSe single crystals. The application of a mechanical strain is used to promote the volume fraction of one of the orthorhombic domains in the sample, which we estimate to be 80% detwinned. While the full structure of the electron pockets consisting of two crossed ellipses may be observed in the tetragonal phase at temperatures above 90 K, we find that remarkably, only one peanut-shaped electron pocket oriented along the longer a axis contributes to the ARPES measurement at low temperatures in the nematic phase, with the expected pocket along b being not observed. Thus the low temperature Fermi surface of FeSe as experimentally determined by ARPES consists of one elliptical hole pocket and one orthogonally-oriented peanut-shaped electron pocket. Our measurements clarify the long-standing controversies over the interpretation of ARPES measurements of FeSe. FeSe has emerged as a focus of research within the field of Fe-based superconductors due to the observations of high-T c in FeSe under pressure, in intercalates, and in monolayer form, and also because of the insight that it gives on the unresolved mystery of the nematic phase In this article we report high resolution ARPES measurements of single crystal samples of FeSe which are detwinned in the low-temperature orthorhombic phase by the application of a mechanical strain. We confirm that the longer axis of the elliptical hole pocket is parallel to the shorter b axis of the orthorhombic structure. Our measurements of the electron pockets in one domain below T s reveal a stunning anisotropy: although all reasonable models of the electronic structure of FeSe to date have included electron pockets oriented along both the a and b directions, in the nematic phase only the peanut-shaped electron pocket oriented along the longer a axis may be observed by ARPES. This remarkable symmetrybreaking in the observed electronic structure can be considered to be profound manifestation of nematic order. Samples were grown by the chemical vapour transport method Hole Pockets. In Fig. It can be seen from the high-symmetry measurements in Fig. Electron Pockets. In the high temperature tetragonal phase, the Fermi surface of the electron pockets around the M or A points consists of two crossed ellipses ) has not been clearly determined how the electron bands would appear within one domain. In Fig. ) In Fig. In Fig. The observed parity switching amongst the bands with d xz / yz orbital character which accompanies any translation by (π,π) is due to the fact that these orbitals have odd parity under the glide symmetry which relates neighboring Fe sites [25]. This effect is therefore not related to the nematic order, and is also observed in the tetragonal phase. However the orientation of the orthorhombic distortion seems to play a crucial role in the ARPES selection rules, since the longer a axis picks out the direction of the branch of the electron pocket on which spectral weight is found, whereas all bands are observed in the tetragonal phase. The Cmma unit cell suggested for orthorhombic FeSe The knowledge gained by these detwinned ARPES measurements complements the existing high-resolution ARPES measurements of twinned samples of FeSe To summarise, we have reported high-resolution detwinned ARPES measurements of FeSe. At low temperatures, the observed Fermi surface consists of a small elliptical hole pocket oriented along the b axis and a small peanut-shaped electron pocket oriented along the a axis; the expected electron pocket along the b axis is not observed at all. Our result mark a step-change in the quality of ARPES spectra of detwinned Fe-based superconductors and reveal the profound electronic anisotropies in the nematic phase of FeSe.