We demonstrate a 16-pixel array of radio-frequency superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors with an integrated and scalable frequency-division multiplexing architecture, reducing the required bias and readout lines to a single microwave feed line. The electrical behavior of the photon-sensitive nanowires, embedded in a resonant circuit, as well as the optical performance and timing jitter of the single detectors is discussed. Besides the single pixel measurements we also demonstrate the operation of a 16-pixel array with a temporal, spatial and photon-number resolution. Nanowire Single-Photon Detectors (SNSPDs) play an increasing role in applications like light detection and ranging (LIDAR) 1 , quantum optics 2,3 , long-distance optical communication 4 , or time-resolved spectroscopy 5 . Many of these applications require multi-pixel devices in order to reduce analysis time or to achieve a photon-number resolution. For that reason, SNSPD arrays have been developed during the last years. These arrays require a multiplexing scheme to reduce the increasing system complexity and heat load due to high-pixel numbers. The state-of-the-art multiplexing schemes are based on a rapid singleflux quantum logic 6 , time-tagged readout 7,8 or current splitting techniques 9 . However, none of those approaches is able to multiplex the bias lines without losing the adjustability of the bias current for each pixel, individually. In addition to SNSPDs, superconducting transition-edge sensors (TES) as well as microwave kinetic-inductance detectors (MKIDs) also provide a single-photon resolution in a wide spectral bandwidth The RF-SNSPD consist of the classical meander-shaped SNSPD which is embedded into a lumped-element resonator. The current, oscillating in this resonant circuit at certain resonant frequency, is used to bias and readout the detector. Thus, the detector can be easily multiplexed in the frequency domain like MKIDs. However, the operation of the RF-SNSPD differs drastically from the MKID. To enable singlephoton detection the RF-SNSPD is driven by a strong microwave signal with amplitudes close to the critical current, I C , of the meander, which has a significantly smaller current-carrying crosssection. In this highly nonlinear regime the absorption of a single-photon is sufficient to create a normal conducting domain inside the meander which increases the damping of the resonator and rapidly stops any oscillation. Since it could be also considered as a reduction of the quality factor of the RF-SNSPD, the timing resolution is in the same order of magnitude as conventional SNSPDs. In contrast to MKIDs, where a slight change in the kinetic inductance due to photon absorption should be carefully amplified and detected, the switching of the resistance due to photon absorption in the RF-SNSPD is much stronger than the readout noise and allows operation at 4.2 K. In this paper, we present results, of the development of a 16-pixel RF-SNSPD array. All detectors are coupled to one common feed line. This reduces the number of wires between the readout electronics at room temperature and the cryogenic stage to a minimum of two coaxial cables. The FDM method enables readout of all 16 pixels at the same time with a time, spatial and photon-number resolution. Furthermore, the FDM allows adjustable individual bias levels for each detector. To the best of our knowledge there have been no experiments, which are demonstrating bias-line multiplexing or the operation of a SNSPD array with time, spatial and photonnumber resolution requiring less wiring. In figure The RF-SNSPD requires only one single NbN layer which is used for the resonant circuit as well as for the photon sensitive nanowire. Thus, it is easy to fabricate the RF-SNSPD in the standard SNSPD fabrication process. At the first step, the 4-nm-thick NbN is deposited on one-side polished R-plane sapphire substrates at a temperature of 850°C using reactive magnetron sputtering. Second fabrication step is the patterning of the CPW and the RF-SNSPDs using electron-beam lithography with PMMA 950k resist. The final step is the transfer of the patterned geometry into the NbN layer using Ar-ion beam etching. Figure We measured the microwave transmission spectrum of the fabricated array, which is shown in figure In order to tune each resonance frequency, we change the length of the inductor Lp, assuming a constant surface inductance of 55 pH per square. But, the current distribution in the bends of the inductor is non-uniform For the optical measurements, the VNA was replaced with an analog signal generator, which produces the single tones to bias and probe the RF-SNSPDs. A 32-GHz real-time oscilloscope, which measures the time-resolved detector response, was used as back-end. This setup was used to record the change of the transmission due to a single-photon detection event of the RF-SNSPD. The example of such an event is depicted in figure detector is in the superconducting state. At t = 0 an instantaneous change in the transmission can be observed, which is caused by the formation of a normal-conducting domain in the nanowire after photon absorption. The rise of the transmitted signal is about 11 dB, as one would expect from the depth of the resonance, measured on VNA (FIG. To quantify the timing resolution, we performed a jitter measurement using a pulsed femtosecond laser at 1.55-μm wavelength. We statistically analyzed the delay times between the detector responses and the correspondent reference pulses of the laser. As a detector response we used the amplitude change of the complex transmission. To perform fast measurement of the complex-transmission transient we used a phase-sensitive homodyne scheme similar to MKID readout schemes. It includes a signal generator and IQ mixer for the demodulation of the carrier signal. To eliminate the quadrature component Q at the output of the IQ mixer, the phase of the input microwave carrier was adjusted with a phase shifter. The 32-GHz oscilloscope is used as the back-end to record the I-component of the transient, which represents the count events of photons. A scheme of our setup is given in figure The optical performance of each detector was characterized individually, measuring their pulsecount rates. Each detector was biased with 80% of the critical-power level. The wavelength of the incident photons have been varied during each measurement from 400 nm up to 750 nm. The detection efficiency (DE) was afterwards calculated as the ratio of the measured count rate to the number of incident photons onto the nanowire. The measured results showed a singlephoton sensitivity of each pixel with a maximum detection efficiency ranging from 2% up to 10%. We also tested the performance of the array operating multiple pixels simultaneously. The signal generator was replaced by an arbitrary waveform generator, which is able to produce eight tones with a specific power level at once. The readout of the array is similar to other FDM schemes and based on the observation of an amplitude change at the corresponding frequencies. A detailed explanation of the readout method is given in our previous article In summary, we have successfully demonstrated the operation of a 16 pixel RF-SNSPD array an integrated and scalable multiplexing scheme. The bias and readout signals are multiplexed in the frequency domain which allows the operation of each pixel at an individual bias level using only one common microwave feed line. We showed the photon sensitivity of each pixel as well as the time, spatial and photonnumber resolution of the array. Furthermore, we demonstrated the timing accuracy of the detected single photons with a precision of 59 ps. This work was supported in part by the Karlsruhe School of Optics and Photonics (KSOP).