Beside the spin density wave (SDW) order inside the superconducting phase in CeCoIn 5 at high magnetic fields, recent neutron scattering measurements have found Bragg peaks in 5% Nd doped CeCoIn 5 at low fields. The intensity of Bragg peaks in low fields is suppressed by increasing field. Based on the phenomenological and microscopic modeling, we show that for the Pauli limited d-wave superconductors in the vicinity of SDW instability relevant for CeCoIn 5 , magnetic impurities locally induce droplets of SDW order. Because of the strong anisotropy in the momentum space in the spin fluctuations guaranteed by the d-wave pairing symmetry, sharp peaks in spin structure factor at Qs are produced by the impurities, even when the droplets of SDW do not order. At zero field, the Nd impurity spins are along the c axis due to the coupling to the conduction electrons with an easy c axis, besides their own crystal field effect. The in-plane magnetic field cants the impurity moments toward the ab plane, which suppress the droplets of SDW order. At high fields, the long-range SDW inside the superconducting phase is stabilized as a consequence of magnon condensation. Our results are consistent with the recent neutron scattering and thermal conductivity measurements. Introduction -The intricate interplay between magnetism and superconductivity represents one of main challenges in strongly correlated electronic systems. The d-wave heavyfermion superconductor CeCoIn 5 is one prototypical system Meanwhile several theoretical proposals have been put forward to understand the origin of high field SDW phase. These theories highlight the importance of vortex lattice It is well known that the response of superconductors to impurity is a powerful signature to understand the pairing mechanism in unconventional superconductors Assuming that the 5% Nd doping has negligible effect on the Fermi surface, and the Nd atoms serve as magnetic impurities in the d-wave superconductivity, a minimal model based on a quasi-nested Fermi surface was proposed to understand these experiments, where the magnetic impurity induces a locally SDW pattern at low field In this work, we present a theory on the magnetic properties in Nd doped CeCoIn 5 . Our theory are based on the following experimentally established facts: (1) the system is close to the SDW instability; (2) the SDW at high fields is formed by the nodal quasiparticles and the ordering wavevector is along the nodal directions of the d-wave superconductivity; (3) the moment of SDW order is along the c axis. Within the phenomenological and microscopic modeling, we show that magnetic impurities generate local droplets of SDW oscillation at low fields, which oscillate and decay in space. Because of the d-wave pairing symmetry, the random impurities can produce peaks in the spin structure factor, even when they do not order magnetically. The impurity moments experience an easy axis anisotropy due to the conduction electrons, besides the anisotropy generated by crystal field. When an in-plane magnetic field is applied, the impurity moments are canted toward the ab-plane, accompanying the reduction of induced local SDW order. At high field, the long-range SDW sets in. Phenomenological model -Here we present the physical picture based on a phenomenological model. We consider a paramagnetic region inside the superconducting phase, where we keep the free energy expansion of magnetization density M z up to the quadratic order. It is sufficient to consider the magnetization inside one layer because of antiferromagnetic order between layers. The total free energy density is where ∇ 2d ≡ (∂ x , ∂ y ), S is the impurity moment and H x is the in-plane magnetic field. Here H Ani (S) is the spin anisotropy for the impurities, which arises from their coupling to the conduction electrons with easy axis anisotropy and crystal field environment. For γ > 0, η > 0, the Q of the SDW is We have expanded the anisotropy of Q(θ) in the ab plane up to cos(4θ) represented by the η term, where θ is the angle between Q and the crystal a axis. For a stronger anisotropy, one needs to include higher order expansion in θ. We have neglected the spin-orbit interaction of the conduction electrons that is responsible for the switching of Q of the SDW order by rotating magnetic field That the system is close to the SDW instability means that the magnetic susceptibility is positive and close to divergence. Microscopic theories show that α(T, H x ) increases with H x . At a critical field, χ(Q) diverges and the magnons condense to form the SDW. For a single impurity located at the origin, S z = S 0 δ(r), the induced local SDW pattern at zero field is Here M z (r) oscillates and then decays as a function of distance as depicted in Fig. The decay is slow because the χ(Q) is close to divergence. We then consider random distribution of impurities with the correlation S z = 0 and S z (r)S z (r ) = A(H x )δ(rr ). We introduce an effective saturation field H s to describe the canting of impurity spin by magnetic field. Therefore, we have x /H 2 s ) when H x ≤ H s and A = 0 otherwise. A self-consistent treatment of the impurity moment direction will be presented in the microscopic model. The spin structure factor S zz (q) = M z (q)M z (-q) is The impurity induced S zz (q) is maximal at four Qs, (±Q x , ±Q y ), with equal intensity, because of the strong anisotropy in the orientation of Q, see Fig. j∈impurity J S S z, j s z, j -μ S H x S x, j . ( where the spin of the conduction electrons is s i = α β c † iα σ α β c iβ . μ c and μ S are the magnetic moments for the conduction electrons and impurity spins. The selfconsistent condition for the anisotropic molecular field h i and pairing potential ∆ i j are h i =j J i j (n j↑n j↓ ) and ). The electron density for up and down spin are n i↑ = l |u i↑,l | f (E l ) and n i↓ = l |v i↓,l | f (-E l ). Here u i↑,l , v i↓,l , and E l are the l-th eigen vector and eigen energy of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation associated with Eq. ( , where x and ŷ are the unit vectors in the x and y direction respectively As shown in Fig. The fully self-consistent calculations enable us to construct field-temperature phase diagrams in the presence of magnetic impurities. In Fig. We have neglected the spin-orbit interaction. As a consequence, the spin structure factor associated with droplets of SDW have four sharp peaks with equal intensity. The spin-orbit interaction couples Q of magnon fluctuations to the inplane magnetic field To summarize, based on both phenomenological and microscopic models, we have provided a theoretical understanding of the effects of magnetic impurity in unconventional Pauli limited superconductors in the brink of SDW instability, and have applied it to the Nd doped CeCoIn 5 . Impurities with magnetic moment parallel to that of conduction electron spins locally induce droplets of SDW, whose amplitude decays in space. Even when these droplets do not order, the spin structure factor exhibits sharp peaks at the same Qs as those of the long-range SDW at high field, because of the strong anisotropy in Q enforced by the d-wave pairing symmetry. With increasing in-plane magnetic field, the impurity moments are canted and the amplitude of the droplets of SDW decreases. At high fields, the long-range SDW inside the superconducting phase is stabilized as a consequence of magnon condensation. Our results are consistent with the recent neutron scattering data and thermal conductivity measurements. The SDW droplets can be probed by NMR measurements. 