Using muon spin rotation it is shown that the field of first flux penetration Hentry in Nb is enhanced by about 30 % if coated with an overlayer of Nb3Sn or MgB2. This is consistent with an increase from the lower critical magnetic field Hc1 up to the superheating field H sh of the Nb substrate. In the experiments presented here coatings of Nb3Sn and MgB2 with a thickness between 50 and 2000 nm have been tested. Hentry does not depend on material or thickness. This suggests that the energy barrier at the boundary between the two materials prevents flux entry up to H sh of the substrate. A mechanism consistent with these findings is that the proximity effect recovers the stability of the energy barrier for flux penetration, which is suppressed by defects for uncoated samples. Additionally, a low temperature baked Nb sample has been tested. Here a 6 % increase of Hentry was found, also pushing Hentry beyond Hc1. The use of multilayers of superconductors with a larger critical temperature T c on top of Nb to increase the accelerating gradient E acc of superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) cavites has first been proposed by Gurevich Kubo proposed two mechanisms that link the change in Meissner screening to the enhanced H entry Checchin in All theoretical considerations for H entry reviewed above are not restricted to the RF case. In fact, there are several non-intrinsic field limitations of SRF cavities, i.e. field emission, multipacting and premature quench, which in general prevent reaching the intrinsic H entry . It is therefore beneficial to use a DC method to measure H entry . For this purpose we have established a muon spin rotation (μSR) experiment where N l (t) and N r (t) are the number of counts in the left and right detector. The parameter α is added to account for detector efficiencies and to remove any bias between the up and down detectors caused by uneven solid angles. In the case where the detector efficiencies are identical, α assumes a value of 1. Samples are placed in a cryostat surrounded by by field-inducing coils. For field penetration measurements, samples are cooled in zero field to below T c in a horizontal gas flow cryostat, which allows to reach a base temperature of about 2.5 K and then a static magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the initial spin polarization to probe if field has penetrated the sample. Specifically, the asymmetry signal gives information on the volume fraction of the host material sampled by the muon that does not contain magnetic field. This signal can be used to characterize the superconducting state, particularly the transition from Meissner to mixed state. The total asymmetry function is a sum of two terms. The first one is the dynamic Kubo-Tuyabe function where γ μ =13.55KHz/G is the gyromagnetic ratio of the muon and φ the phase. The value of a 0 compared to its initial low field value is a measure of the volume fraction being in the field free Meissner state. All samples were made from fine grain niobium from Tokyo Denkai with a residual resistance ratio (RRR) above 300. In These coin samples have a thickness of 3 mm and are 20 mm in diameter. They were cut by water jet from sheets. The prolate ellipsoids were machined to the dimensions of a semi-major axis of 22.9 mm and a semiminor circular cross-section of 6.3 mm radius. After machining the samples were treated by buffered chemical polishing (BCP) to remove 100 μm of outer material. Afterwards all samples, except the ones which were used for Nb 3 Sn coating, have received a 1400 • C annealing at TRIUMF. This treatment is effective in releasing virtually all pinning The Nb 3 Sn coatings were produced by vapor diffusion at Cornell University. This process includes heating up to 1100 • C which also strongly releases pinning. Furthermore, in Since all Nb substrates have received a high temperature annealing and pinning is mainly a bulk effect the measurements presented here have no ambiguity concerning H entry vs pinning. Figure assuming T c =9.25 K for Nb The lower estimate for H entry is the largest measured H 0 for which a 0 > 0.95 or a 1 =0 holds. The higher estimate is the smallest H 0 for which a 0 < 0.05 holds. This criteria has been chosen since there have been fluctuations in a on the order of 10 % for some data sets like the Nb 3 Sn bullet. This is most likely related to the position and polarization of the incoming muon beam. The uncertainty in H entry is the difference in H 0 for these two data points plus an additional 1 % to account for additional error sources mainly from potential misalignment. Figure For all coated samples, a value significantly above H c1|Nb is found, close to the superheating field of Nb H sh ≈240 mT There is no clear trend in H entry vs. layer thickness. This suggests that the superconductor-superconductor (SS) boundary is providing effective shielding up to H sh| Nb , while the superconductor-vacuum (SV) bound- ary is not providing shielding above its lower critical field H c1 . Note that realistic surfaces contain defects. A possible explanation why the SS but not the SV boundary provides shielding above H c1 could be that the proximity effect recovers the order parameter ψ in the vicinity of defects at the SS boundary. In the following we present a simplified simulation model to strengthen support for this hypothesis. It has to be noted that this model cannot serve as a quantitative description of the experimental results, due to several simplifications as outlined in the following. In the interests of simple calculations, we assume that the defects are approximately the same size, and are very frequent, such that they can be approximated in a 1D model. The systems of interest are SN and SNS systems comprised of a semi-infinite superconducting slab for x < 0, a normal conducting plane with finite thickness for 0 < x < d and for the SNS case, another superconducting slab for x > d, see Fig. where κ = λ ξ is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter. To arrive at these equations, the normalizations were applied (tilde indicates physical units). a and b are constants, e s and m s are twice the electron charge and mass respectively, c is the speed of light and μ s is the permeability. The modified Ginzburg-Landau equations for the superconducting charge carriers within the normal conducting domain are where α = m n a n /( m s | a s |). ψ is taken to be real, which can be done for our problem in one dimension without loss of generalization and simplifies the calculations to a real second order ordinary differential equations boundary value problem, since it results in ψ * ∇ψ -ψ∇ψ * = 0. The SNS case was examined for identical superconductors only. This was done so as to avoid an issue with Eq. 8 and Eq. 9, where the parameters used would be dependent on which superconductor the superconducting charge carriers originated from. Without this assumption, the equations would have to be reformulated to also include the effects of superconducting charge carriers with different normalizations mixing. The superheating field was taken to be the largest field for which a Meissner state solution could be found. To evaluate this, a magnetic field is applied at the outer surface of the N-layer. This assumes that a vortex has penetrated the SV boundary and reflects the hypothesis that only the SS but not the SV boundary is providing shielding above H c1 . With just one type of superconductor, ψ and A are continuous and differentiable at the interfaces. The systems were solved explicitly. For each domain two of the four continuity conditions were forced to be the value on the boundary of the other domain, and the other conditions were allowed to vary. Then, the solutions were iterated until they converged within a tolerance. Using thicknesses of 1000 and 1500 nm FIG. This corresponds to Cooper pairs in a normal conducting plane of Nb on top of superconducting Nb. The blue line shows two bulk S layers (the same superconductor with κ=1.04 for clean Nb For large d and d → 0, there are no substantial differences found between SN and SNS systems. This can be intuited from an assumption that Cooper pairs penetrate a distance ≈ ξ into the normal layer. Then, for a thick layer (d >> ξ), there should be no difference, as the SNS system effectively becomes an SN system. For a thin layer (d → 0) there should also be no difference, as both the SN and SNS systems are reduced to a bulk superconductor with no N-layer. For intermediate layers (d ≈ ξ), the density of the penetrating Cooper pairs in the N-layer will be greater, resulting in increased shielding. In In order to be useful to SRF applications a thin overlayer thickness d < λ is needed to avoid strong dissipation from vortices within the relevant London layer of a few nm. The results with d λ are interesting in the sense that they provide insight in the physics of layered superconductors. Considering the hypothesis that the proximity recovers the stability of ψ near defects, layers with d ≈ ξ layer could potentially be sufficient to increase H entry . This is consistent with the increased H entry reported here for a 120 • C baked sample and recently reported increased E acc for SRF cavities treated with modified low temperature baking recipes Further simulations with smaller superconducting layers in higher dimensions and further H entry measurements with different layer thicknesses are necessary to further test the proposed hypothesis. FIG. 1. Normalized fit parameter a0 as a function of H0.