We study the effect of the correlated hopping term and the intersite Coulomb interaction term on principal features of the d-wave superconducting (SC) state, in both the electron and hole doped regimes within the t-J-U model. In our analysis we use the approach based on the diagrammatic expansion of the Gutzwiller wave function (DE-GWF) which allows us to go beyond the renormalized mean field theory (RMFT). We show that the correlated hopping term enhances the pairing at the electron-doped side of the phase diagram. Moreover, the so-called non-BCS regime (which manifests itself by the negative kinetic energy gain at the transition to the SC phase) is narrowed down with the increasing magnitude of the correlated hopping ∼ K. Also, the doping dependences of the nodal Fermi velocity and Fermi momentum, as well as the average number of double occupancies, are analyzed with reference to the experimental data for selected values of the parameter K. For the sake of completeness, the influence of the intersite Coulomb repulsion on the obtained results is provided. Additionally, selected results concerning the Hubbard-model case are also presented. A complete model with all two-site interactions is briefly discussed in the Appendix for reference. Superconductivity (SC) in the strongly correlated electron systems has become one of the principal topics of research in the condensed matter physics, mainly because of the discovery of the high-temperature superconducting copper-based compounds. In this respect, the one-band Hubbard and t-J models have been extensively studied 1-7 as it is believed that they capture the physics of the copper-oxygen planes which in turn are regarded as instrumental for achieving the SC state. Within the t-J model in which the local double occupancies are projected out from the wave function and the antiferromagnetic superexchange interaction appears, the SC phase emerges in a straightforward manner already at the renormalized mean-field theory level A modified route is based on starting from the t-J-U model which combines the features appearing both in the Hubbard and in the t-J models. In this approach a relatively strong antiferromagnetic superexchange interaction is present among 3d Cu electrons and is induced by the virtual processes involving 2p bands of the neighboring O 2-ions. Additionally, a small but nonzero number of double occupancies is allowed in the system at the same time. As it has been shown by us very recently In the series of papers The DE-GWF 34 method used here has been applied to the description of the SC phase in our group quite recently The paper is organized as follows. In the next Section we present briefly the extended t-J-U model supplemented with both the correlated-hopping and the direct intersite-Coulomb interaction terms, as well as show the basic concepts behind the DE-GWF method as applied to this model. In Section 3 we discuss our results, focusing on the influence of the correlated hopping term on principal features of the d-wave superconducting phase within the approach based on the t-J-U model in the context of copper based HTS. Such a goal should minimally support the claimed universality of our previous results obtained within the t-J-U model, as well as supplement them with new results in the situation when the added terms are important (e.g., when we compare the phase diagram on the hole-doped side with that for the electron-doping). Additionally, at the end of that Section we also discuss selected results coming from the Hubbard model. The conclusions and outlook are the subject of the last Section. In Appendix A we supply the most general form of the single-narrow band Hamiltonian for the correlated fermions. We start with the t-J-U Hamiltonian 12 supplemented with the correlated electron hopping and the direct intersite Coulomb repulsion terms. Its explicit form is (cf. also Appendix) where the first two terms correspond to the single electron hopping together with the correlated-hopping contribution, the third term represents the antiferromagnetic superexchange interaction, and the last two terms refer to the intra-and inter-site Coulomb repulsion, respectively. By ... and ... we denote the summations over the nearest-neighbors and next nearest-neighbors, respectively. For J = 0 one obtains the Hubbard model, which is also briefly discussed later. For U → ∞ we approach the t-J model limit for which no double occupancies are allowed (cf. Fig. It should be noted that due to the presence of the nextnearest neighbor hopping and the correlated hopping terms, the considered Hamiltonian breaks the electronhole symmetry. In our analysis we use the electron language and define the doping δ ≡ 1n, where n is the number of electrons per atomic site. Therefore, we ob-tain δ > 0 (δ < 0) for the case of hole-doping (electrondoping). Within the DE-GWF method we assume that the system can be described by the correlated Gutzwiller-type projected many particle wave function of the form where |Ψ 0 is the non-correlated wave function subject to our choice. In particular, for the analysis of the SC phase we assume nonzero anomalous averages Ψ 0 |ĉ † i↑ ĉ † j↓ |Ψ 0 , which lead to the d-wave pairing amplitude when transformed to reciprocal space. However, due to the the fact that in this approach we include the superconducting averages not only between the nearest neighbors, small corrections to the bare d-wave symmetry appear where the variational parameters It has been shown where x is yet another variational parameter and The λ Γ parameters are all functions of x which means that there is only one variational parameter of the wave function. In order to calculate the expectation value of the ground state energy one can make use of the following relations for any two local operators ôi and ô′ j from the Hamiltonian where õi The primmed summation has the restrictions l p = l p ′ , l p = i, j for all p and p ′ . The averages in the non-correlated state on the right-hand side of Eq. ( Such a procedure allows us to express the ground state energy Ĥ G as a function of P ij , S ij , n 0 , and x. It has been shown that the desirable convergence can be achieved by taking the first 4-6 terms of the expansion in k appearing in Eq. ( In the next step, we derive the effective single-particle Hamiltonian from the minimization condition of the ground-state energy functional F ≡ Ĥ Gμ G N G , where μ G and N G are the chemical potential and the total number of particles determined in the state |Ψ G , respectively. The explicit form of this effective Hamiltonian is where the effective parameters are defined below For i = j, the -t eff ii has the meaning of the effective chemical potential. It should be noted that when carrying out the calculations, one includes only the noncorrelated parameters P ij and S ij which correspond to the relative distances smaller than some arbitrary value, i.e., |R i -R j | ≤ R max . In our analysis we have carried our calculations to the fifth order (i.e. k max = 5) for R 2 max = 10a 2 , with a being the lattice constant. Next, the effective Hamiltonian ( The dominant contribution to the paired phase comes from ∆ G,ij for which R i -R j = (1, 0)a which we denote by ∆ G for simplicity in the subsequent analysis. In our analysis we have selected the values of t, t ′ , J, U close to those in Ref. 12 as they lead to a very good agreement with the selected experimental data. Namely, we set t = -0.35 eV, t ′ = 0.3|t|, J = 0.25|t|, U = 21|t|. The intersite Coulomb repulsion term is varied within the interval V ∈ [ 0, 2|t| ]. According to the estimates of K for the 3d electrons, the ratio K/U should be taken as relatively small where SC and PM superscripts correspond to the superconducting and paramagnetic phases, respectively, and the averages are of course calculated for the Gutzwiller state, |Ψ G . -0.4 -0. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. From Fig. It should be noted that even though in the starting Hamiltonian we take only the nearest (t = -0.35 eV) and next-nearest neighbor hoppings (t ′ = 0.3|t|) as nonzero, in the effective Hamiltonian the hopping parameters corresponding to more distant sites also appear. This comes as a result of the correlation effects of increased range taken in the higher orders of the diagrammatic expansion. However, the nearest-and next-nearest neighboring effective hopping parameters, t eff 10 and t eff 11 (shown in Fig. In Fig. 32. Namely, the upper critical doping for the SC-phase disappearance (δ c ) is moving towards the half-filling and the non-BCS regime expands with increasing V . Nevertheless, for V 1 the crossover between the BCS-like and non-BCS phases is still quite close to the optimal doping. For the electron-doped case the rise of V also results in moving δ c towards half-filling. However, the doping value which corresponds to the crossover between BCS-like and non-BCS states is practically not affected. For the sake of completeness, in Fig. In Fig. We have analyzed the effect of the correlated hopping term ∼ K and intersite Coulomb repulsion ∼ V on the d-wave superconductivity within the t-J-U model by using the DE-GWF method in both the electron-and the hole-doping regimes. We show that by increasing K we decrease the doping range in which the so-called non-BCS phase appears (see Fig. The calculated nodal Fermi velocity for low values of K show a very weak doping dependence for -0.2 δ 0.4, in agreement with the available experimental data for the hole-doped high temperature superconductors According to our analysis the nodal Fermi momentum is not significantly affected by the correlated hopping in the whole doping range considered (see Fig. The V -term suppresses the paired phase both when K = 0 (shown in Ref. 32) and K = 0 (analyzed here). For values of V ≈ 1 -2 the upper critical doping for the disappearance of the SC is significantly reduced (Fig. It has been emphasized before However, as we have shown here the non-BCS behavior can be obtained also below U ≈ 12 after inclusion of the correlated-hopping term (cf. Fig. It should be emphasized that the electron-hole symmetry breaking induced by the correlated hopping term in the Hubbard model has also been analyzed recently in Ref. 23. However, the effect of sign change of the kinetic energy gain (leading to the appearance of the non-BCS phase) upon the increase of K has not been reported there for the case with t ′ = 0. In general, relatively small values of V and K (< 1) introduced here must be assumed to uphold our quantitative picture obtained in Refs. 12 and 13. On the other hand, some systems show that the v F value is decisively smaller than 2 eVÅ where t ii = t 0 is regarded as constant for a translationally invariant system, as is N = N (in general). The two-site terms are Now, if the single-particle basis is selected as real, we have In effect, putting I 1 and I 2 together, we obtain The first term can be dropped as it defines the refer-ence point for the chemical potential (t 0 = 0), the second and the third define the Hubbard model (primed summation means that i = j) the fourth term defines the direct intersite Coulomb term (in the text we put V ≡ V ij -J ij /2), the fifth represents the Heisenberg exchange, the sixth corresponds to the local pair hopping (neglected in our previous work 