The superconducting transition of FeSe1-xSx with three distinct sulphur concentrations x was studied under hydrostatic pressure up to ∼70 kbar via bulk AC susceptibility. The pressure dependence of the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) features a small dome-shaped variation at low pressures for x = 0.04 and x = 0.12, followed by a more substantial Tc enhancement to a value of around 30 K at moderate pressures. In x = 0.21, a similar overall pressure dependence of Tc is observed, except that the small dome at low pressures is flattened. For all three concentrations, a significant weakening of the diamagnetic shielding is observed beyond the pressure around which the maximum Tc of 30 K is reached near the verge of pressure-induced magnetic phase. This observation points to a strong competition between the magnetic and high-Tc superconducting states at high pressure in this system. The importance of nematic order and magnetic order is a central topic in the study of iron-based superconductors Given the richness of the pressure phase diagram, it is a natural attempt to simulate the high pressure effect chemically. A similar approach has been made on BaFe 2 As 2 , e.g. phosphorous has been substituted for arsenic to introduce the chemical pressure effect The inequivalence between chemical pressure and applied pressure offers the exciting prospect of further fine tuning with a simultaneous application of both tuning parameters. SDW order can also be induced in FeSe 1-x S x when physical pressure is applied To study the pressure evolution of superconductivity in FeSe 1-x S x , we have carried out a series of AC susceptibility experiments on single crystals with x-values straddling across the nematic quantum critical point. In this manuscript, we report a surprising loss of the AC susceptibility signal associated with the diamagnetic shielding for all crystals studied at moderate pressures, near the maximum T c reported near the lower border of the pressure-induced magnetic phase, despite the fact that the crystals have been established to be superconducting via high pressure resistivity measurements FeSe 1-x S x single crystals were synthesized by the chemical vapour transport technique as described elsewhere The previously constructed ambient pressure T -x phase diagram of FeSe 1-x S x The pressure dependence of T c is summarised in Figs. 2a and 2b for x = 0.04 and x = 0.21, respectively. Data from multiple runs are included in the construction of the T -p phase diagrams. In x = 0.04, T c first increases with increasing pressure, then it begins to drop slightly and reaches a local minimum near ∼12 kbar. Similar low pressure behaviour of T c (p) is observed in x = 0.12, except that the local minimum is shifted to ∼10 kbar. In x = 0.21, the local minimum is significantly washed out. Recent high-pressure resistivity measurements on FeSe 1-x S x up to x = 0.12 also pointed out the shifting of the local minimum to lower pressure with increasing x A further increase of pressure leads to a more substantial increase in T c in all three compositions. In x = 0.04, T c reaches ∼ 30 K at ∼ 30 kbar. This is followed by a surprising disappearance of our diamagnetic signal at higher pressure. Similar behaviour is observed in x = 0.12 and x = 0.21. Representative temperature sweeps showing the disappearance of the diamagnetic signal are presented in Fig. Y-doped BSCCO is chosen because of its distinct T c The fact that the loss of AC susceptibility signals occurs near the verge of magnetism suggests a strong interplay between the two ordered states. It is conceivable that the SDW state competes with superconductivity, gapping out portions of the Fermi surface which would otherwise be available for superconducting pairing. This gives rise to patches of superconducting regions within the sample, thereby reducing the volume fraction of the superconducting component. Recent NMR experiments on FeSe lend support to this scenario The same AC susceptibility technique has been employed to study the T c (p) of BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 by some of us, following very similar experimental conditions In summary, we have tracked the superconducting transition of FeSe 1-x S x with x = 0.04, 0.12 and 0.21 up to ∼70 kbar using AC susceptibility. The measured T c (p) shows a local minimum at around 10-15 kbar, which gets progressively washed out with increasing sulphur content. At a slightly higher pressure, a significant loss of the susceptibility signal corresponding to the superconducting transition is observed for all three compositions studied. The weakening of the diamagnetic shielding occurs near the verge of pressure-induced SDW order, which leads to the conclusion that the SDW phase competes with superconductivity, resulting in the reduction of superconducting volume fraction. Voltage (arb. units) 