Half-metals are a class of materials that are metallic only for one spin direction, and are essential for spintronics applications where one needs to read, write, store and transfer spin-data 1-6 . This spin sensitivity appears to restrict them to be magnetic, and the known examples indeed are 7-13 . The fabrication of real spintronic devices from such materials is often hampered, however, by stray magnetic fields, domain walls, short spin coherence times, scattering on magnetic atoms or magnetically active interfaces, and other characteristics that come along with the magnetism. The surfaces of topological insulators 14 , or Dirac or Weyl semimetals 15, 16 , could be an alternative 17, 18 , but production of high-quality thin films without the presence of the bulk states at the Fermi level remains very challenging 19, 20 . Here we introduce non-magnetic half-metals and demonstrate that this state is realized in IrBiSe. Using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and band structure calculations we find a record-high Dresselhaus spin-orbit splitting, fully spin-polarized remnant Fermi surfaces and a chiral 3D spin-texture, all with no magnetism present. Promising applications include using IrBiSe as a source of spin-polarized electrons, and lightly doped IrBiSe is expected to generate electric-field-controlled spin-polarized currents, free from back scattering, and could host triplet superconductivity. Materials where electrons have different energies and momenta depending on their spin orientation have significant application potential in spintronic devices The latter have more flexible spin textures, but are essentially two-dimensional with crystal surfaces highly sensitive to the environment, often tending to degrade rapidly over the time. Recently, several compounds have been reported that show giant spin splitting of the bulk bands, however such materials either suffer from the possibility of surface-bulk scattering since their band structures include both bulk and surface states in the vicinity of the Fermi level Here we present non-magnetic IrBiSe, a cubic material that has a unique electronic structure, featuring a giant (~0.3 eV) Dresselhaus IrBiSe is a noncentrosymmetric semiconductor, crystalizing in a simple cubic structure with a P213 space group, which is a derivative of the structure of fools gold, FeS 2 (i.e. it is not a half Heusler compound). Its unit cell and corresponding Brillouin zone (BZ) are shown in Figs. Results of the first-principle band structure calculations of IrBiSe with and without the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in the computational scheme are shown in Fig. From these calculations we find that the material is a semiconductor with a top of the valence band formed by strongly hybiridized Bi p -Se p states while the bottom of conduction band is dominated by Ir d e g states hybridized with the former (see SI). The bands in the vicinity of the chemical potential are strongly influenced by the spin-orbit interaction, and are spin-split everywhere in momentum space, except at the high symmetry points. Interestingly, the splitting is more significant for the valence band than it is for the conduction band. We also mention the presence of two rather rare dispersion crossings at -point at -0.75 eV and -1.3 eV in the case when SOC is not included. Unlike evenly degenerate Dirac crossings two of the bands have linear dispersions while the middle one is quadratic with no linear term at . They become split by SOC into two usual (-1.1 and -1.6 eV) and two double (-0.8 and -1.4 eV) Weyl points. The most remarkable feature of the electronic structure of IrBiSe is the top of the valence band formed by the strongly dispersive state along the -M direction. As follows from the comparison of the computational results, these are non-degenerate states, well split from the other bands below the gap. There are twelve such maxima in the cubic BZ, shown in Fig. The high-quality single crystals used for the experimental study (see SI and Fig. were characterized by transport (Fig. IrBiSe is a nonmagnetic semiconductor as the electrical resistance shows no variation between zero field cooling and field cooling. The ARPES data obtained for IrBiSe are compared with corresponding results of the calculations in Fig. We do not expect a full quantitative correspondence between the datasets shown in panels (c) and (d) of Fig. We also estimate the spin character of two closest features by using circularly polarized light in Fig. With the help of the band structure calculations shown in Fig. Finally, we present the theoretically defined spin characters of the states in IrBiSe in Fig. These spins are directed almost perpendicular to -M, having no k z -component, thus strongly reminiscent of the spin-momentum locking on the surfaces of the topological insulators We thus have seen that IrBiSe has a very peculiar electronic structure: there is only one, non-spin-degenerate and well split from others, dispersive electronic feature that approaches the chemical potential, with spins directed nearly perpendicular to the momentum vector. This dispersion gives rise to the intriguing remnant Fermi surface consisting of spots at discrete values of momentum. To settle the terminology, we briefly mention that the detected giant spin-orbit splitting is of the Dresselhaus type 33 since it is observed for the bulk states due to the lack of inversion symmetry. In analogy to topological insulators, we will refer to IrBiSe as a non-magnetic half-metal (NMHM) since its metallicity is a matter of light hole doping, which appears to be possible, and its Fermi surface is supported by electronic states having only one spin orientation. Unlike in ferro-or antiferromagnetic half-metals Already pristine IrBiSe can be used as an alternative to GaAs as a source of spin-polarized electrons (Fig. The Fermi surface of lightly hole-doped IrBiSe is presented in Fig. Recent experimental studies have reported electrical detection of earlier-predicted current-induced spin polarization on the surfaces of topological insulators Considering the 3D spin texture along the (111) direction, one notices its chirality, dictated by the C3 symmetry of the crystal structure. Negative and positive helicities are seen in Fig. We believe that non-magnetic half-metals are a new materials class in general, and that IrBiSe in particular will play a significant role in solving both fundamental puzzles of physics and practical problems of realization of highly efficient spintronic devices. 