Metallic hydrogen is expected to exhibit remarkable physics. Examples include high-temperature superconductivity and possible novel types of quantum fluids. These could have revolutionary practical applications. The pressures required to obtain metallic hydrogen, however, are expected to be significant. For practical, and terrestrial applications, a key question is therefore whether this phase is metastable at lower pressures. In this work, this possibility is investigated, using firstprinciples simulations. The results show that metallic hydrogen is metastable, but strongly suggest that it is not so to ambient conditions. Implications of these results for fundamental physics, and also practical applications of metastable metallic hydrogen are discussed. In 1935, Wigner and Huntington predicted 1 that sufficient pressure would dissociate hydrogen molecules; and any Bravais lattice of such atoms would be metallic. Initial interest in metallic hydrogen was primarily related to astrophysical problems 2 . Eventually, and to more recently though, there has been significant interest in this phase at relatively low temperatures The pressures involved to dissociate hydrogen molecules are expected to be significant though [447(3) GPa 10 ]. Particularly important for practical, and terrestrial applications is therefore whether metallic hydrogen is metastable. This possibility was suggested in 1972 The theoretical capabilities available in 1972, however, limited the calculations The answer to the question of metastability presupposes solution to a series of interrelated problems: (1) Determination of the minimum-energy crystal structure(s). This includes proof that they lie at stationary points (with respect to all parameters). (2) Proof of (dynamic) stabilities. (3) Analysis of the relation between the ground-and metastable-state structure(s) (assuming that such exist), and the molecular phase. This includes that of the processes that are undergone during transitions between them, and also when the pressure is removed. (4) Determination of the lifetime of this phase. In this Article, we present results from first-principles simulations in support of this answer. Particular focus is given to problems (1) and ( The most promising candidate structures for metastable metallic hydrogen (at least at higher pressures; and likely what one would find experimentally) are the most stable ones just above molecular dissociation. While these are not known experimentally, first-principles simulations In this representation, there are five structures of note (in atomic hydrogen), defined by the axial ratio c/a; three of which have been considered before: those of β-Sn (c/a < 1), diamond (c/a = √ 2), and Cs-IV (c/a > 1), and the other two with c/a 1 and 1. Their structural parameters are reported in the SI. An analysis of (only) these structures reveals several general, qualitative features about metastable metallic hydrogen. Consider the phase diagram (at 0 K), below molecular dissociation; shown in Fig. (a) > 300 GPa: the relative enthalpies of all of the structures remain relatively flat; the only exception being the diamond structure (discussed in more detail below). (b) 200-300 GPa: the enthalpies of the β-Sn, diamond, and Cs-IV structures become nearly degenerate; while those with c/a 1 and 1 begin to decrease and increase, respectively. (c) < 200 GPa: the β-Sn, diamond, and Cs-IV structures become degenerate (precisely at 100 GPa); while those with c/a 1 and 1 sharply decrease and increase, respectively. This division (as meaningful) is supported by the results of additional calculations; presented and discussed below, and also in Section I B 1 of the SI. Additional insight (including into Fig. First: the collapse of energy barriers in the potential-energy surface (PES) of (atomic) metallic hydrogen, between 300 and 200 GPa. Consider the diamond structure. At relatively high pressures, this structure forms an energy barrier (a maximum) between those of β-Sn and Cs-IV. While Fig. Second: the tendency towards the formation of molecules, below 200 GPa. Consider the structures with c/a 1 and 1. The sharp increases in energy as c/a → 0 and → ∞ are due to the Coulomb repulsion resulting from Brillouin planes with like charges that approach each other. This (approach) though is also related to the formation of molecules; resulting in a minimum of energy, prior to its sharp increase. This explains the sharp decrease in energy of the c/a 1 structure. Note the nearest-neighbor distance (at 0 GPa) of 0.9900 Å. The ability of atoms to approach each other is the result of the collapse of (atomic) energy barriers (discussed above). While this occurs, there is also a hardening of molecular ones. Notice the relative heights (and their trends with pressure) of the maxima separating the c/a 1 and 1 structures from the atomic (c/a ≈ √ 2) region. While the BCT structures (discussed above) are the most promising candidates at pressures near molecular dissociation, there is no guarantee that they are representative of those (potentially) so at lower ones. Consider the lattice energy E lattice of metallic hydrogen; in the adiabatic approximation: where E static is the static (electronic ground-state energy, with a fixed lattice) contribution, and E vib is that resulting from atomic vibrations. In metallic hydrogen (and unlike ordinary metals), E static favors anisotropic structures; see Ref. 11 for a discussion. E vib , on the other hand, favors symmetric ones. The subtle (and important) details of these terms, including their relative magnitudes, depends on the pressure. At low pressures, E lattice is determined largely by E static . It is with increasing pressure that E vib becomes (especially) important. Searches were performed for metallic (atomic and/or mixed atomic/molecular) structure(s) with the lowest E static at 0 GPa. These revealed several candidate structures of (potentially) metastable metallic hydrogen. An analysis of the most stable ones over the entire pressure range further supports the results above; such is provided in Section I B 1 of the SI. At present, however, it is relatively low pressures that are of main interest. Below 200 GPa, all structures found show a tendency towards the formation of molecules. This is consistent with the (second) point suggested by Fig. In searches with more than a few atoms, only molecular or mixed atomic/molecular structures were found. In addition, for the latter, as the number of atoms increases, there is a greater proportion of molecules (to atoms). This trend is also reflected in their relative enthalpies. Results and discussion for the most stable of these structures are provided in Section I B of the SI. That this trend occurs means that such structures may not be at stable stationary points. The results above suggest that any metastable structure(s) of metallic hydrogen are (completely) atomic. Such were found in searches with a few or less atoms. The most stable (and nearly degenerate in energy) ones are shown in Fig. The tendency towards the formation of molecules though can be seen, even in these structures. Notice the close proximity of atoms (into the page); this is approximately 0.9914 Å. This is analogous to the results for the c/a 1 BCT structure (discussed above). This means that these structures too may not be at stable stationary points; confirmed, in results presented below. Further results and discussion about these structures themselves is provided in Section I B 3 of the SI. A crystal is dynamically (mechanically) stable, if it executes a stable vibrational motion about its equilibrium configuration for all phonon branches j and wavevectors q. (In other words, they are real; for an imaginary frequency means that the system, subject to a small displacement, will disrupt exponentially with time.) Dynamic stabilities were determined by calculating the phonon density of states F (ω) (along both the real and imaginary axes), for each structure. Consider first the BCT structures; Fig. Figure Consider now the candidate structures; Fig. The possibility of metastable metallic hydrogen has been investigated in detail. This was considered from two approaches, by an analysis of: the BCT structures (stable above molecular dissociation); and the prediction of new candidate ones at 0 GPa. The results obtained are self-consistent, and provide strong evidence regarding this possibility. The results in Section I are concisely summarized by the processes undergone on the PES of hydrogen, as the pressure is removed (following molecular dissociation): (a) At (relatively) high pressures (> 300 GPa): the PES of (atomic) metallic hydrogen is well defined; and it remains qualitatively similar below molecular dissociation. (b) At intermediate pressures (200-300 GPa): the energy barriers of metallic hydrogen on the PES collapse; while those of the (completely) molecular phase harden. (c) At lower pressures (< 200 GPa): the PES of molecular hydrogen is well defined. From these results, we conclude that (atomic) metallic hydrogen is metastable; but only to 300-200 GPa. Below 200 GPa, metallic hydrogen has no region of stability. Metastable metallic hydrogen, even at these pressures, may have important practical applications. Such pressures are significantly less than those expected for molecular dissociation There are therefore several important, open questions. One mentioned, are the properties of metastable metallic hydrogen; for example, superconductivity. Whether this phase is even realizable though depends on its lifetime; and such properties on its finite-temperature stability. Answering these, and related questions, will be the subjects of future work. All calculations were performed using the Quantum ESPRESSO (QE) densityfunctional theory code Stationary points of structures were found by performing constant-pressure geometry optimizations. These were done using the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno algorithm 27 , as implemented within QE. Energies, forces, and pressures were converged to 10 -5 Ry, 10 -4 Ry/a.u., and 0.5 kbar, respectively. Calculations were based on the ab initio structure searching approach These are (essentially) default values, capable of generating candidate structures for further analysis. Random structures were constructed by generating random primitive (lattice) vectors, renormalizing the volume (to the expected average), and proton configurations. Searches were performed over unit cells containing 1 to 10 atoms. In particular, geometry optimizations (at 0 GPa) were performed; for each unit-cell size, 1000 trials. Symmetries of the (relaxed) structures were then determined with the FINDSYM program Phonons were calculated using density-functional perturbation theory, as implemented within QE. (Phonon) density of states F (ω) were calculated over a grid of 4×4×4 phonon wavevectors q. Such a q-point grid is estimated to be twice as dense (in each direction) as sufficient to accurately calculate F (ω) of metallic hydrogen 