We calculate the effect of impurities on the superconducting phase diagram of transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field. Due to strong intrinsic spinorbit coupling, the upper critical field greatly surpasses the Pauli limit at low temperatures. We find that it is insensitive to intravalley scattering and, ultimately, limited by intervalley scattering. Introduction.-Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) monolayers are recently discovered twodimensional (2D) semiconductors of the form MX 2 (M=Mo, Nb, or W, and X=S, Se, or Te), with a hexagonal lattice structure similar to graphene, but with two inequivalent sites in the unit cell Due to the heavy constituent atoms, TMDC monolayers exhibit a very large intrinsic spin-orbit coupling (SOC), often called Ising SOC The coupling between the spin and valley degrees of freedom has remarkable repercussions for the superconducting properties that have been reported in these materials. In heavily n-doped ionic-gated MoS 2 flakes, a 2D superconducting phase with a critical temperature T c around 10 K has been observed In this work, we establish the theory of the upper critical field for Ising superconductors at arbitrary disorder strength, assuming a conventional s-wave Cooper pairing. The enhancement of the in-plane upper critical field above the Pauli limit is a general feature of superconductivity in the presence of SOC. It has been predicted in disordered 2D superconductors with spin-orbit scattering Understanding the role of impurities is important for future applications of TMDCs and their incorporation into van der Waals heterostructures The model.-The Hamiltonian describing the normal state of TMDC monolayers in the vicinity of the ±K points in the presence of a parallel magnetic field is arXiv:1705.01865v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 16 Jun 2017 Here, q = (q x , q y ) is a small momentum measured from ±K, v is the velocity associated with the linearized kinetic dispersion, E g is the difference in on-site energy responsible for the opening of a band gap, and ∆ A and ∆ B are spin-splitting parameters on two different sublattices. Furthermore, σ x,y,z , s x,y,z , and η x,y,z are Pauli matrices acting in sublattice, spin, and valley spaces, respectively, and the Zeeman energy h = 1 2 gμ B B is related with the amplitude of the magnetic field and the in-plane g-factor. FIG. We proceed by projecting the Hamiltonian (1) to the conduction band (n-doped regime). The spinindependent part of the Hamiltonian (1) gives the dominant contribution to the energy of the system and has a simple spectrum ξ q = v 2 |q| 2 + E 2 g . It is diagonalized by the unitary transformation U q = exp[iα q σ y η z ] exp[iβ q σ z η z ], with tan(2α q ) = v|q|/E g and tan(2β q ) = q y /q x . By assuming ξ q ∆ A , ∆ B and by projecting U q H q U † q onto the conduction band, we obtain where η = ±1 represents the valley index and ∆ so (q ] is an effective SOC parameter , so that ∆ so can be taken as a constant. The energy spectrum of Hamiltonian (3) is illustrated in Fig. Superconductivity is described using a standard BCS Hamiltonian, where the singlet pairing of electrons into Cooper pairs is necessarily intervalley. The corresponding mean-field Hamiltonian reads where c ηq = (c ηq↑ , c ηq↓ ) T is an annihilation operator for spin-up and spin-down electrons, and ∆ is the superconducting order parameter. For compactness, we use the abbreviations η = -η and q = -q. In the vicinity of the second-order superconducting phase transition, ∆ solves the linearized self-consistent gap equation where λ is the BCS pairing amplitude and Ω is a cut-off frequency. The particle and hole Green's functions are given as G - ηqω = (iω-H ηq ) -1 and G + ηqω = (-iω-H T ηq ) -1 , respectively, with Matsubara frequencies ω = (2n+1)πT , n ∈ Z, at temperature T . Scattering potential.-The effect of impurities in 2D hexagonal lattices was extensively studied in the case of graphene The random disorder potentials are characterized by the Gaussian correlators V α (q)V β (q ) = w 2 α δ α,β δ q,q , where α, β = 1, 2x, 2y, and the brackets denote disorder averaging. The ratio w 2i /w 1 ∼ 1/(|K| 2 R 2 ), which is related with the range R of the potential created by a single impurity, is typically small for remote impurities and of order 1 for lattice defects. Then, projecting the Hamiltonian U q H D (q -q )U † q onto the conduction band, we find that Eq. ( where The disorder-averaged Green's function can be calculated from the Dyson equation represented diagrammatically in Fig. , where the self-energy Σ ± η is obtained using the selfconsistent Born approximation. As a result, we find Σ ± η = ∓i[1/(2τ 1 ) + 1/(2τ 2 )]sgn(ω), where 1/τ 1 = πνw 2 1 and 1/τ 2 = πν(w 2 2x + w 2 2y ) are the intra-and intervalley elastic scattering rates, respectively, ν = μ/(2πv 2 F ) is the density of states per spin at the Fermi level, and v F is the Fermi velocity. Upper critical line.-The upper critical field h c2 (T ) = 1 2 gμ B H c2 (T ) can be calculated from the disorderaveraged gap equation ( where we used the standard BCS result T c 1.13Ωe -1/(λν) . Note that Eq. ( where ψ(z) is the digamma function. In this form, it ressembles -and generalizes to arbitrary disorder -an expression derived by Frigeri et al. The result can be understood as follows. The effective magnetic field in the two valleys is given by h eff η = he x + η∆ so e z , where e i is a unit vector in the idirection. Electrons that are both aligned or anti-aligned with their respective "local" field have the same energy when their momenta are opposite and, thus, their contribution to pairing is not affected by the field. As at finite h the local fields are not along the same axis, however, they enter the gap equation with a suppressed weight ∆ 2 so /(h 2 + ∆ 2 so ), determined by the overlap of their spin directions. If one electron is aligned whereas the other electron is anti-aligned with their respective "local" field, they have an energy difference of 2 h 2 + ∆ 2 so when their momenta are opposite and, thus, their contribution to pairing is suppressed by the field. Here the weight is given as h 2 /(h 2 + ∆ 2 so ), which is what appears in Eq. ( Upper critical field as a function of temperature in the absence of intervalley scattering for different values of Ising SOC, as described by Eq. ( As seen in Fig. For weak Ising SOC (∆ so ∆ 0 ), the critical curve h c2 (T ) significantly deviates from the conventional one only at very low temperature, where it diverges (in logarithmic accuracy) as where c is a constant of order 1. Close to T c , one obtains the standard result h c2 ≈ 2.16T c 1 -T /T c . In the more interesting case of large Ising SOC, ∆ so ∆ 0 , Eq. ( (10) Close to T c , the critical field exhibits a standard squareroot dependence on temperature, but with an enhanced prefactor, With intervalley scattering.-At finite magnetic field, intervalley scattering provides an effective spin-flip mechanism, since electrons scattered between two valleys "feel" opposite values of the Ising SOC field. This pairbreaking effect leads to a saturation of h c2 at zero temperature, as illustrated in Fig. in logarithmic accuracy. In the vicinity of T c , the critical line is still described by Eq. On the other hand, the standard expression for the second-order paramagnetically-limited critical line, given by Eq. ( Nature of the transition.-In the absence of SOC, the phase transition is a second-order transition into a uniform superconducting state only at sufficiently high temperature. A non-uniform (Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov, or FFLO) phase could possibly contribute to the enhancement of h c2 , as it was recently discussed in clean bilayer TMDC superconductors Discussion and conclusion.-Experiments In conclusion, we have studied the effect of disorder on TMDC monolayer superconductors. We have predicted that the large enhancement of the upper critical magnetic field is robust to intravalley scattering. Furthermore, we have identified intervalley scattering as a likely mechanism for the more moderate enhancement of h c2 observed in experiment. Interestingly, TMDCs have been identified as a possible platform for topological superconductivity and Majorana fermions We acknowledge funding from the Laboratoire Supplemental Material for "Enhancement of the upper critical field in disordered transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers" This supplemental material contains technical details on the derivation and analysis of the upper critical field h c2 in transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers that were omitted in the main text. In Sec. I, we provide more information on the evaluation of the equations shown in diagrammatic form in Fig. In Fig. The diagrams for the disorder-averaged self-consistent gap equation, Fig. We evaluate the integrals over the momenta using the residue theorem with the substitution dξ q dθ, valid in the regime of chemical potentials specified in the main text. In particular, we obtain where we used the notation ω = ω + 1/(2τ 1 ) + 1/(2τ 2 ). We note that, in general, the renormalized vertex function Π η is dependent on the polar angle θ, due to the anisotropy of the projected disorder potential, Eq. ( ηq ω ηq ω We readily check that Π η (θ) is fully determined by its first harmonics in θ: Namely, by combining Eqs. (S4) and (S3), after integration over θ , we verify that no higher harmonics are generated. Furthermore, the equation for the constant part of the vertex functions Π η0 is decoupled from the angle-dependent parts Π η1 and Π η2 . Replacing the Π η (θ) in Eq. (S1), we see that the angle-dependent contributions vanish after the integration over momenta. Therefore, it is sufficient to compute only Π η0 . The eight different Π η0 are determined from the linear system of equations obtained after integrating (S3) over angles: ηq ω ηq ω Inserting the vertex functions that solve Eq. (S5) into Eq. (S1) yields Eq. ( In the following, starting from the full expression for the critical curve h c2 (T ), given by Eqs. ( A. Limit T → 0 In the absence of intervalley scattering, 1/τ 2 = 0, the critical curve h c2 (T ) is described by Eq. ( where γ ≈ 0.577 and we introduced ρ = h 2 c2 + ∆ 2 so . In the limit T → 0, h c2 diverges, as illustrated in Fig. In the limit of strong Ising SOC, ∆ so ∆ 0 , the condition h c2 ∆ so allows one to simplify Eq. (S7) in the temperature regime T /T c < ∆ 0 /∆ so to Eq. ( At weak disorder, 1/τ 2 ∆ so , ∆ 0 , the poles in the ω-dependent terms in Eq. ( By comparing with Eq. ( which evaluates to Eq. ( For large disorder strength, Eq. ( where The last term in Eq. (S21) is the correction to the linearized gap equation ( 