We report on the development of nearly quantum limited SQUIDs with miniature pickup loop dimensions. The implemented high quality and low capacitance cross-type Nb/AlO x /Nb Josephson junctions offer large I C R N -products and therefore enable an exceptional low noise level of the SQUIDs. Devices with loop dimensions of 1 ╬╝m exhibit white flux noise levels as low as 45 n’üå 0 /Hz 1/2 corresponding to an energy resolution ’üź of about 1 h at 4.2 K, with h being Planck's constant. Moreover, the large usable voltage swings of the devices of about 300 ╬╝V allow highly sensitive and easy single-stage operation while exploring nearly the intrinsic noise of the SQUIDs, beneficial e.g. for sensor arrays in SQUID microscopy. Magnetic imaging In this paper we will thus focus on further noise optimization of such sensors via an increase of the screening parameter ’üó L . In section 2 we briefly describe the sample fabrication. Device characterization and discussion of experimental data will be given in section 3. Finally we will illustrate how further optimization in terms of spin sensitivity S ’üŁ 1/2 can be achieved. The devices described in this paper have been fabricated in the IPHT cross-type Josephson junction technology For the development of planar-type highly sensitive miniature SQUIDs described within this paper, however, we use only some layers of this process. The fabrication starts with the deposition of the Nb/AlO x /Nb trilayer, which is subsequently patterned into a narrow strip, forming part of the SQUID (see part A in figure In this paper we will mainly focus on further noise optimization of SQUIDs with small pickup loop dimensions via an increase of the screening parameter ’üó L = 2L SQ I C /’üå 0 . As the SQUID inductance L SQ = L geo + L kin is given by the geometrical inductance L geo of the SQUID loop and the kinetic inductance For the devices described in this paper, we used a critical current density of about 2.5 kA/cm 2 . This results in a critical current of about 110 ╬╝A for SQUIDs with a junction size of (1.5 ├Ś 1.5) ╬╝m 2 . The characterization of current voltage characteristics of unshunted Josephson junctions fabricated on the same wafer indicate their high quality with ratios of the subgap to normal state resistance of about Device parameters of the investigated SQUIDs: w denotes the inner diameter of the SQUID loop, as indicated in figure The measured white flux noise levels of the investigated devices are listed in table I. For SQUID #3 the measured white flux noise is about 45 n’üå 0 /Hz 1/2 , which corresponds to an energy resolution ’üź = S ’üå /(2L SQ ) = 1.1 h, with L SQ = 5.94 pH. The spectral dependence can be described with S ’üå 1/2 = 35 n’üå 0 /Hz 1/2 ŌĆó[1+(1 kHz/f) 0.3 + (0.3 Hz/f) + 5/ŌłÜ((f/50 Hz) 2 + 1)], as shown by a dashed gray line in figure Thus the measured flux noise of SQUID #3 in the white noise region of 45 n’üå 0 /Hz 1/2 results in a white-noise spin sensitivity of about 9 ’üŁ B /Hz 1/2 . In conclusion, we reported on the development of nearly quantum limited SQUIDs featuring small pickup loop dimensions. Due to the high quality and low capacitance cross-type Josephson junctions, they exhibit very low white flux noise levels down to 45 n’üå 0 /Hz 1/2 . For devices with 1 ╬╝m loop diameter the energy resolution thus corresponds to 1.1 h at 100 kHz. The large usable voltage swings of about 300 ’üŁV offer highly sensitive and easy single-stage operation while exploring almost the intrinsic noise of the SQUIDs. Together with the reproducible fabrication of such devices within this sophisticated technology this allows for the development of sensor arrays that offer advantages for imaging methods such as e.g. SQUID microscopy. The individual noise sources in the investigated devices have been revealed and described, which may allow for further noise optimization especially in the low-frequency range. Further downsizing the SQUID loop dimension will presumably not only further improve the white noise performance but will moreover lead to enhanced coupling to a weak magnetic moment. Beyond that, the presented devices allow for the independent optimization in terms of noise and coupling, e.g. due to the use of local constrictions in the SQUID loop, potentially leading to single spin resolution.