Evidence for the presence of high energy magnetic excitations in overdoped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO) has raised questions regarding the role of spin-fluctuations in the pairing mechanism. If they remain present in overdoped LSCO, why does T c decrease in this doping regime? Here, using results for the dynamic spin susceptibility Imχ(q, ω) obtained from a determinantal quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) calculation for the Hubbard model we address this question. We find that while high energy magnetic excitations persist in the overdoped regime, they lack the momentum to scatter pairs between the anti-nodal regions. It is the decrease in the spectral weight at large momentum transfer, not observed by resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS), which leads to a reduction in the d-wave spin-fluctuation pairing strength. found that high energy magnetic excitations near the antiferromagnetic zone boundary are present across a wide range of doping in the LSCO phase diagram Here we discuss results for the dynamic spin susceptibility Imχ(q, ω), obtained from determinantal quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) calculations for the doped 2D Hubbard model The Hamiltonian for the Hubbard model appropriate for the hole doped cuprates has the usual near neighbor hopping t, onsite U and a negative next-near-neighbor hopping t . Here we will measure energies in units of t and set t = -0.25 and U = 6.5. The chemical potential μ in Eq. ( The imaginary time spin susceptibility is calculated directly from DQMC as (a) Im χ(q,ω) q = (3π/4,3π/4) 〈n〉 = 0.9 0.85 0.8 0.75 〈n〉 = 0.9 0.85 0.8 0.75 FIG. where S z (r) = 1 2 (n r↑ -n r↓ ) is the z component of the spin at site r. The real frequency susceptibility is related to the imaginary time susceptibility by 1 -e -βω Imχ(q, ω). Since inverting Eq. 3 is numerically ill-posed, we use Maximum Entropy analytic continuation The spin fluctuation spectral weight Imχ(q, ω) for some selected q values is plotted versus ω in Fig. To further illustrate the evolution of the calculated spin-fluctuation spectrum with doping, Fig. The peak in the spin-fluctuation spectral weight Imχ(q, ω) versus q for different dopings. Here to the right of (0, 0), q moves along the diagonal and to the left from (0, 0) to (π, 0). The shaded region at large momentum transfer marks a region which is not measured by the RIXS experiments of Refs From the results shown in Fig. The interaction vertex Γ d , Eq. ( RIXS data for LSCO and the DQMC results. However, the region outside of the reach of transition metal L-edge RIXS near (π, π), due to the overall scale of photon momenta, changes considerably and, as we will discuss, has an impact on the strength of d-wave pairing in the Hubbard model. A measure of the strength of the spin-fluctuation d-wave pairing interaction in weak coupling Here φ d (k) = (cos k x -cos k y ) and the k averages are taken over a region of band energies ±0.5t around the Fermi surface. A plot of λ d versus doping is shown in Fig. The interaction vertex Γ d provides another gauge of the d-wave pairing strength, with negative values indicating an attractive interaction. As plotted in Fig. for n = 0.9. The pairing strength λ d given by Eq. ( Regions near (π, π) which are accessible via polarized inelastic neutron scattering provide the dominant contribution to the strength of the d-wave pairing interaction. A closer inspection of the momentum regions accessible near the zone center by RIXS would also be useful in understanding the decrease of pairing strength. The DQMC results reported here and elsewhere are consistent with the weakening of spectral intensity and hardening of the spin excitations observed near the magnetic zone center (π, π) in those measurements Thus we conclude that the evolution of the spin spectrum of excitations with doping in the Hubbard model is consistent with the existing data in the cuprates and can account for the reduction of d-wave pairing strength with doping.