Conventional" superconductivity, as used in this review, refers to electron-phonon coupled superconducting electron pairs described by BCS theory. Unconventional superconductivity refers to superconductors where the Cooper pairs are not bound together by phonon-exchange but instead by exchange of some other kind, e. g. spin fluctuations in a superconductor with magnetic order either coexistent or nearby in the phase diagram. Such unconventional superconductivity has been known experimentally since heavy fermion CeCu2Si2, with its strongly correlated 4f electrons, was discovered to superconduct below 0.6 K in 1979. Since the discovery of unconventional superconductivity in the layered cuprates in 1986, the study of these materials saw Tc jump to 164 K by 1994. Further progess in high temperature superconductivity would be aided by understanding the cause of such unconventional pairing. This review compares the fundamental properties of 9 unconventional superconducting classes of materialsfrom 4f-electron heavy fermions to organic superconductors to classes where only three known members exist to the cuprates with over 200 examples -with the hope that common features will emerge to help theory explain (and predict!) these phenomena. In addition, three new emerging classes of superconductors (topological, interfacial -e. g. FeSe on SrTiO3, and H2S under high pressure) are briefly covered, even though their "conventionality" is not yet fully determined. Superconductivity, the phenomenon where the resistivity falls to zero below a certain critical temperature Tc (discovered in Hg at 4.2 K in 1911) and the magnetic flux is expelled from the bulk of the superconductor (a phenomenon discovered in 1933), was explained as due to electron-phonon coupling by Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS) in 1957. The BCS weakcoupled theory describes the condensation into the superconducting state as due to the exchange of phonons between electrons of opposite spins, an s=0 singlet ground state. Thus the average phonon frequency, <>, or equivalently the characteristic Debye temperature, D, (a phenomenological cutoff of the phonon frequencies) plays an important role in the BCS expression for Tc Tc BCS  <>exp(-1/N(0)V) eq. 1 where N(0) is the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy and V is an average electronphonon coupling strength parameter. The BCS weak coupling theory has N(0)V<1. Many superconductors (e. g. the over 25 superconducting elements Defining "Unconventional Superconductor" (UcS) as a material where the Cooper pairing deviates from the BCS description, where the attraction between pairs and driving mechanism for condensation into the superconducting state might come from, e. g., exchange of spin fluctuations, is not a definition new to this review. This is consistent, e. g., with the definition of UcS in the phenomenological theory review of UcS by Sigrist and Ueda Here, in the Introduction, a short overview discussion will help the reader follow the discussion of the nine classes of UcS, and the three additional classes. As can be inferred from the short discussion above, it is not at present possible to state the cause of UcS, if indeed (as seems unlikely) there is only one such cause. The present review aims to summarize the properties of the various classes of UcS in a way that points to fundamental similarities. One of the questions important for understanding UcS is: what characteristics of materials are causes of, or at least consistent with, UcS? 1.) As we will see in this review, most UcS have strong electron correlations through their d-electrons (cuprates, IBS, Sr2RuO4, cobalt oxide hydrates, layered nitrides) or f-electrons (heavy Fermions and coexistent superconductivity and ferromagnetism). Only the organic UcS rely on pairing between p-electrons. 2.) The main instability found in UcS is antiferromagnetism (as will be seen herein in phase diagrams and discussions for the heavy Fermion 115 structure, CeCu2Si2, U(Pd,Ni)2Al3, for both electron-and hole-doped cuprates, for the majority (but not all) of the IBS, the noncentrosymmetric superconductors like CePt3Si that are strongly correlated, organics, and cobalt oxide hydrates.) In addition there are coexistent superconducting and ferromagnetic compounds like UGe2. Another instability found in some UcS is charge density waves (hole-doped cuprates, theorized in some heavy Fermion superconductors, and cobalt oxide hydrates.) 3.) Two dimensional behavior based on the crystalline structure plays an important role and is widespread in many of the UcS: cuprates (where the ratio of resistivities along the c-axis vs the ab-plane can be larger than 1000), IBS (c/ab ~ 100), Sr2RuO4, layered metal nitride halides, cobalt oxide hydrates, and the 115 structure heavy Fermion superconductors, while there is quasi-1d behavior in some of the organics. This d<3 behavior can play an important role in creating UcS since according to the Mermin Wagner theorem fluctuation effects for d<3 become more important. Such fluctuation effects are predicted (as discussed below) to be a possible superconducting pairing mechanism (superconducting 'glue') in these same aforementioned superconductors. 2d antiferromagnetic fluctuations are repulsive, so a Fermi surface with a sign change in the order parameter where the repulsive interaction is large can cause (see the s± model discussed below for the IBS) attraction and condensation into a superconducting state. Put another way, this sign change in the order parameter under translation by the magnetic ordering vector of the parent phase "tends to remove the detrimental effects of the on-site Coulomb repulsion between the electrons." With all of these named properties being 'consistent' with UcS, there still remains no ability to a priori predict unconventional superconductivity. Put another way, there is no 'microscopic' theory of UcS, like the BCS theory for conventional superconductivity, since -due to the strong correlations -solving the pairing in UcS is a non-perturbative problem. As Norman has put it This review attempts, for the first time, to bring together in one place a discussion and intercomparison of the properties of all of these UcS classes, spanning layered nitrides to heavy fermions, cuprates to organics, IBS to non-centrosymmetric, and other classes as well. There are of course numerous existing reviews devoted to individual UcS classes (e. g. there are over 20 reviews for HFS) as will be cited in the appropriate sections below. As well, there are compendia of reviews of individual superconducting classes (e. g. 24 chapters in Superconductivity, Bennemann. and Ketterson, ed. Discussions of the UcS experimental properties herein are intertwined with the associated theories with thorough references of the continuing effort to achieve theoretical understanding of UcS. UcS are after all the pathway (or one of the pathways, see section 13) to ever higher Tc and perhaps eventually the 'holy grail' of room temperature superconductivity. As with any endeavor on the forefront of understanding, there remain unresolved controversies on whether particular classes exhibit UcS -indeed even the prototype UcS CeCu2Si2 has been recently reexamined in the light of data analysis indicating conventional behavior. We focus on the 9 classes of superconductors for which there is substantial evidence indicating UcS (with a discussion of three additional emerging, possible UcS classes in section 13), and omit the classes where the current consensus is "uncertain" (e. g. for the borocarbides, see ref. As discussed below in section 13, beyond the 9 classes (counting electron-doped and hole-doped cuprates as one class) of superconductors reviewed herein as unconventional, there certainly exist other possibilities for UcS classes. One class of current interest is the relatively young field of topological superconductors, which can be defined as superconductors with "non-trivial" topological states. One predicted possibility for finding topological superconductivity (which until now is mostly a theoretical study) is at the interface between a topological insulator (where the bulk is an insulator and there are conducting surface states that are symmetry protected) and a conventional superconductor. The first 3D topological insulator was discovered in 2008 The two other classes of superconductor discussed in section 13 are the new high temperature superconductor monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3 (interfacial superconductivity) as well as the 200 K Tc superconductor H2S under pressure. Although the latter has been primarily described as a conventional superconductor, there are opposing viewpoints -which illustrates our point here that there continues to be discussion as to which classes of superconductors are unconventional. However, there exists ample evidence for a core understanding of UcS, which it is hoped will assist, among other things, in understanding the emerging new superconductors. We discuss in the next section, section 2, 16 experimental measurements that either (relatively) definitively establish a given material to be an UcS or, again approximately, may be misleading in identifying UcS. When in sections 3-12 below the experimental evidences for UcS for the superconductors in the various classes are discussed, as each piece of evidence for UcS in a particular superconductor is discussed, it will be noted "#" in the text, where "#" is between 1 and 10 (i. e. the lower numbers), for 'strongly suggestive' characteristics and between 11 and 16 (the higher numbers) for indicative but possibly misleading characteristics to keep track of all the UcS features. At the end of each UcS class' section, a short summary of its properties and the current theoretical understanding and outstanding puzzles of interest will be appended. For some classes where the members are quite disparate, a table of the unconventional properties found for each superconductor discussed will be part of the summary. It is this intercomparing of the classes, as well as identifying the important open questions ('puzzles') still present in many of the classes, that hopefully will help understanding of this disparate set of superconductors as an interrelated group. Although comparisons of cuprates, heavy fermions, and to a lesser extent the IBS have been rather common, the entire set (which we admit is likely still incomplete, see section 13) of UcS contains of the order of 9-12 members. Although the current review cites over 75 reviews of the individual classes of UcS and their experimental properties and the theories thereof, no review has so far attempted to discuss them all simultaneously. At the very least, bringing a description, primarily experimental but with attention paid to the theory as well, of these disparate UcS together here in one place should help further investigation into the important commonalities. 2.1. Strongly Suggestive Evidence 2.1.1. Characteristic energy TF (as obtained, e. g., from ~(T/TF) 2 ) is much less than the Debye temperature, D In the BCS theory, as already mentioned, the superconducting transition temperature involves two factors. One factor is an exponential containing the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy, N(0), and a parameter V expressing the strength of the electron phonon coupling. The other factor is some measure of the average phonon frequency which sets the energy scale for the strength of the electron-phonon coupling, as now discussed. Thus, all things being equal, a stiffer lattice leads to a higher Tc in BCS theory. One way to approximately quantify these quantities together in a more typical form (for a thorough discussion see Allen and Dynes, ref. The limits of integration are formally from 0 to infinity, however the upper bound can be set much lower. For example in the 22 K superconductor A15 Nb3Ge The BCS model may be the correct description of a superconductor if the characteristic energy scales are arranged thusly: Tc < D < TF eq. 3 where TF is the Fermi energy, EF (several to ~ 10 eV for most metals), divided by kB. In the current context, we are of course interested in the inverse of this relationship, i. e. if a superconductor does not obey eq. 3, then it is not a BCS superconductor. (It still may be the case that a superconductor whose properties obey eq. 3 is not a BCS superconductor, but matches one or more of the other indicators for being an UcS discussed in the following sections.) One useful rough approximation for TF is that it is inversely proportional to the coefficient of the normal state electronic specific heat,  (=Cnormal/T as T0). Another method for estimating TF is -in strongly correlated metals -to measure the low temperature resistivity, , which in a Fermi liquid will follow a T 2 law: (T0) = 0 + AT 2 eq. 4 where 0 is the 'residual' (or remnant) resistivity as T0. The coefficient 'A' is proportional to 1/TF 2 . (Other methods for estimating characteristic electronic energy scales in addition to TF are discussed below in the various UcS sections.) As an example, Re, which is an elemental BCS superconductor with Tc=1.4 K, has [19] D=416 K, =2.3 mJ/molK 2 and EF = 11.2 eV When superconductivity in a phase diagram (where pressure, doping or magnetic field is the tuning parameter) occurs near where a second order phase transition (such as antiferromagnetism) is suppressed to T=0 with the tuning (see Fig. Thus, the possibility that quantum critical fluctuations could be causing the UcS would be, as a first indication, raised by a phase diagram (such as that in Fig. A magnetic resonance in inelastic neutron scattering below Tc is usually (but see counterarguments for iron based UcS in Hosono and Kuroki Inelastic neutron scattering experiments find a magnetic resonance below Tc quite broadly in two of the classes of UcS discussed in this review, the cuprates (see the review When discussing the magnetic resonance in cuprates, it is common to point out that there is an approximately uniform scaling of the resonance energy with Tc, implying that the resonance is intimately connected to the superconductivity. In the cuprates, Hüfner et al. The pseudogap is well established as a property for underdoped ('underdoped' implies dopinge. g. oxygen stoichiometry 'x' in YBa2Cu3O6+x -where x is less than the concentration needed for 'optimal' -or maximum -Tc) cuprates (see Fig. A nice overview of pseudogap physics in the hole-doped cuprates can be found in the recent theoretical review To give an example of a physical picture of the effect of a pseudogap, as the Fermi surface becomes partially gapped with increasing underdoping (see Fig. The theoretical explanation for the pseudogap remains under discussion, and includes electron correlation effects, hidden order parameters due to various causes, and precursor ("preformed") pairing. See Timusk and Statt Indications of pseudogap behavior in point contract spectroscopy and resistivity exist in one of the HFSs (CeCoIn5), which will be discussed below in section 4. Pseudogap behavior, as we will see, is under discussion in the IBS, section 6. This is a very common type of experimental evidence used to determine UcS. A BCS superconductor has an energy gap open at Tc, thus giving many experimental properties (e. g. electronic specific heat, Cel) an exponential temperature dependence. (Note that since the size of the energy gap increases with decreasing temperature below Tc, the temperature dependence of experimental properties only fits a pure exponential form over limited temperature ranges, e. g. 0.4Tc < T < 0.17Tc Since the advent of UcS in heavy Fermion CeCu2Si2 in 1979, power law temperature dependences have often been used to rule out BCS exponential-with-temperature behavior. In addition, specific power laws (e. g. T for the penetration depth) have been used to distinguish particular symmetries in the nodal behavior and thus in the pairing symmetry of an UcS. As clear from the above historical discussion, this involves various cautions. First, a pure power law must be seen over a large temperature region (not, e. g., just over half a decade in temperature), is only valid for T<<Tc, and therefore extend down to a very low temperature, T<<Tc. In addition to being measured in the low temperature limit where the simple power law is valid, there is another reason why low temperature measurements are critical. For example, distinguishing nodal UcS (where the energy gap, , goes to zero at points or lines on the Fermi surface) from deep minima behavior via, e. g., a finite thermal conductivity divided by temperature, /T, requires data as T0. Thus, such data should be measured at dilution refrigerator (T<0.1 K) temperatures. Even then, the presence of impurities can mask the intrinsic behavior As an example, some typical power laws that have been used to argue for UcS are discussed briefly here (see also Table Table Polar (lines) Axial (points) Specific Heat (C) The specific heat in the superconducting state of CeCu2Si2 follows As a second example, penetration depth, , measurements, for a fully gapped superconductor, (T)  exp(-/T), where (T) = (T) -(T0). (T)  T is clear indication of nodes (e. g. lines nodes from d-wave pairing symmetry) and therefore UcS. For a review of penetration depth in UcS, see Prozorov and Gianetta 2.1.6. Multiple superconducting phases with different order parameter symmetries Superfluid 3 He is the prototypical material with two ordered phases, as discovered in 1972 (for a review, see D. M. Lee, ref. Amongst the UcS classes, heavy fermions have several examples of this metric for unconventional superconductivity with UPt3, (Tc=0.54 K) the third discovered HFS, being the prototype. First discovered by ultrasonic attenuation measurements Other UcS classes that show multiple phases, as will be discussed, might include Sr2RuO4 in magnetic field. In UcS, one or more symmetries in addition to U(1), the one dimensional global gauge symmetry, are broken at the onset of superconductivity In superconductors with time reversal symmetry breaking, the Cooper pairs have non-zero magnetic moments. These small moments align locally producing very small spontaneous magnetic fields which can be detected using SR or magneto-optic measurements of the Faraday or Kerr effects It is accepted that magnetic impurities are harmful to BCS superconductors. For a review, see Maple In the early days of unconventional superconductivity in studies of HFSs, doping experiments were carried out to just qualitatively measure if a non-magnetic dopant had a slower depression rate of Tc than a magnetic one, i. e. if the Tc vs doping was consistent with non-BCS superconductivity. As with any doping experiment (in contrast to application of magnetic field or pressure), there were always concerns that the process of doping had a wider effect than simply placing a local-moment-carrying ion into the lattice. Since (see, e. g., Figs. Good examples of checking for strong Tc -sensitivity to non-magnetic dopants to determine where the superconductivity is unconventional exist, e. g., in the heavy fermions. For example, chemical substitution of Pt with Rh in U2PtC2 suppresses Tc, but not as rapidly as expected for a superconductor with spin-triplet pairing, which should be extremely sensitive to the presence of nonmagnetic impurities As another example, in organic superconductors there is a strong influence of nonmagnetic impurities on Tc, see e. g. Joo et al. One interesting (reverse) example of magnetic vs non-magnetic dopants and their effect on Tc in conventional and UcS is the case of DyNi2B2C, believed to be a conventional BCS superconductor By the name, this indication of UcS is reserved for those superconductors that do not have a center of symmetry in their crystal structure. As discussed in Kneidinger et al. This observation can be understood as follows. As discussed by Mineev and Samokhin We now discuss indicative, but possibly misleading, experimental evidence for UcS in sections 2.1.11. through 2.1.16. The measurement of the angular dependence of the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy in the superconducting state (determined from specific heat data) in zero and applied magnetic fields, coupled with theory, has been used to find nodal, unconventional superconductivity in several UcS. ((,H) can be analyzed similarly.) Where this (technically challenging) method can give a false positive for UcS is when deep gap minima mimic at finite temperatures nodal behavior. One example of this behavior is in YNi2B2C, where C(H,) data were measured at 2 K by Park et al. 2.1.12. See 2.1.5. above -power laws measured over a limited temperature range Power laws are not measured in the proper temperature range (T<0.1 Tc) for the theory indicating unconventional behavior to apply. Certainly data only down to Tc/2 can be ignored. Elemental Ru (which is a conventional superconductor), when Tc is measured as a function of isotope mass, does not show the BCS predicted Tc  M -1/2 , but instead shows essentially no mass dependence for Tc. Although nodes in the superconducting gap are indicative of UcS, it is a misapprehension to expect a  measured in the superconducting state of much more than 2 mJ/molK 2 (the value in high quality nodal d-wave YBCO crystals discussed herein) to be due to nodes. For example, the value of the residual  in UPd2Al3 of 24 mJ/molK 2 measured by Caspary Originally done by Moler et al. Theorists have been heavily involved in working to understand UcS since the first recognized discovery of unconventional behavior in heavy fermion CeCu2Si2 in 1979 (see Fig. That said, there have been a few attempts to begin to form a common theory. Tohyama The history of explaining unconventional superconductivity with spin fluctuations as mediating the pairing extends back to the discovery of UPt3, the third heavy Fermion superconductor (see Fig. A large number of early theories address this issue of spin fluctuation mediated superconductivity specifically in heavy Fermion superconductors: Anderson Proposals that fluctuations near a spin density wave transition could cause UcS in the organic Bechgaard salts were also made After the cuprates were discovered, these ideas were extended to include this new superconducting class: For the IBS, Scalapino As discussed in the introduction to this section above, the theories of UcS in the other classes or even in individual compounds within a class, e. g. UPt3 with its multiple superconducting phases, coexistent ferromagnet-superconductor UGe2 (section 11) or triplet pairing Sr2RuO4 (section 7), do not exhibit much overlap with one another, and are best discussed below in their respective sections. As made clear here already for the heavy Fermion, cuprate, organic, and IBS, although there are theories that attempt to address a wider selection of superconducting classes, these theories are still very much under discussion and development. As Anderson said Because of the long time frame of the ongoing studies, the field of UcS as it relates to heavy fermion materials is an extremely broad one, with disparate results because of the wide range of electronic states (for example the possibility of quadrupolar ordering discussed below in section 4.2.6. for PrOs4Sb12 oftentimes not easily classified in an all-encompassing fashion. (As will be discussed, this is also somewhat true for the extremely large body of work in the cuprates, although they at least have the commonality of the importance of Cu-O planes.) The present review thus not only attempts to meld the properties of heavy fermion UcS into the properties of the broad range of UcS now known, but also to provide some overview within the sub-field of unconventional superconductivity in heavy fermions alone. Just because the low temperature value of C/T (T0) (often just called ) is large for a superconductor is not conclusive that the superconductivity is unconventional, although it is consistent with UcS. Thus Tc < D > TF (section 2.1.1.) is satisfied (1) by all HFSs by virtue of their large  values (since TF  1/) and will not be further mentioned in this section on heavy fermions. Also, the gray area of how to decide which  values are 'large' is clearly somewhat arbitrary. A  value (expressed as mJ/molCe/U/Pr-K 2 , where the normalization scales the  value per mole of contributing f-atoms) that is several times the largest d-electron metal value (e. g.  for -Mn is In terms of the 'strongly suggestive evidence' for determining UcS, the HFSs -being the first discovered -have a very rich set of such characteristics. Tunneling measurements (Section 2.1.7.), which were the first proof of d-wave pairing in the cuprates We will start our discussion chronologically -discussing in detail the first three discovered HFSs (CeCu2Si2, UBe13 and UPt3). Following a similarly thorough discussion of PrOs4Sb12 and CeMIn5, with emphasis on M=Co, we will then cover the high points of several other HFS with  < 100 mJ/molK 2 and then attempt to provide a concise summary/overview of UcS in HFS. This review, in order to remain of quasi-readable length, will not discuss in depth every possible UcS. For example, nothing new would be gained in discussing PuRhGa5, Tc=8.5 K, after PuCoGa5, Tc=18.5 K, since they are essentially identical in their important properties. Similarly, UNi2Al3 is arguably very similar to UPd2Al3, which is more extensively studied. Theory that is unique to a particular system will be discussed below with that compound, with this short introduction meant to provide an overview. Considering first the normal state out of which the superconductivity forms, heavy fermion compounds are highly correlated electron systems with both large low temperature normal state (T>Tc) specific heat  values and large magnetic susceptibilities which reflect their nearness to magnetic behavior. As one example, textbook Curie Weiss behavior in the susceptibility (where 1/  (8/eff 2 )*(T+)) -considered evidence for a local moment -in PuCoGa5 extends In the superconducting state, although exchange of spin fluctuations (ferromagnetic spin fluctuations, Berk-Schrieffer As will be seen below, the use of group theoretical arguments to restrict the possible gap structures (Anderson The distinguishing feature of HFSs is that at the second order superconducting phase transition where the discontinuity/broadened transition in the specific heat occurs, the size of this anomaly, C, is roughly equal to the electronic normal state specific heat, Tc. (In weak coupling BCS theory, C/Tc = 1.43.) Since the definition of a heavy fermion system is that the electronic specific heat coefficient  ( m*, the electron effective mass) is large (as just discussed primarily  100 mJ/molK 2 ), this therefore implies that C/Tc is also large. This of course was the initial exciting development in CeCu2Si2 Work later established the presence of an antiferromagnetic ('A') phase as a function of stoichiometry (slight Cu deficit) in CeCu2Si2, whose proximity to superconductivity in the phase diagram is thought (see section 2.1.2. above) The final resolution of these new low temperature results, which imply nodeless behavior, requires some further time to digest and analyze the data. It would certainly be a surprise if the first UcS in the end was determined to have s-wave symmetry. Such a large specific heat , the strong sensitivity to stoichiometry, a nearby magnetic phase in the phase diagram and evidence for quantum criticality, still argue for a pairing mechanism other than via electron-phonon coupling, but we now understand the correct description as no longer the old picture of CeCu2Si2 as d-wave nodal. Fortunately for the sample growers, although superconductivity in UBe13 is sensitive to defects, both magnetic and non-magnetic, (however superconductivity is not destroyed by grinding The critical field of UBe13 displays unusual behavior, with Hc2(0)=14 T [[135] -a record high for HFSs. Another record high for HFSs, and superconductors in general, found in UBe13 is the slope of Hc2 at Tc, Hc2', which is -45 T/K In penetration depth measurements from Tc=0.86 K down to ~ 0.060 K As discussed above in section 2.1.7., Josephson tunneling can help establish the symmetry of the order parameter in a superconductor if high quality surfaces are available. Han et al. Multiple phases in the superconducting state as an indication of UcS (section 2.1.6.) in UBe13 are in general identified with Th-doped samples (discussed below.) However, after the discovery of multiple superconducting phase in doped U1-xThxBe13, Rauchschwalbe et al. Although, as will be discussed, there is a good amount of theory to describe the two UcS transitions in U1-xThxBe13, the anomaly in pure UBe13 at a temperature not unlike that of the second, lower superconducting transition in U1-xThxBe13 remains a puzzle. It is an important function of this review to point out such interesting, but either unaddressed or poorly understood features of UcS. Thus, in addition to the contradiction discussed above for CeCu2Si2 between the low temperature temperature dependence of C/T (fully gapped) and the other measurements (e. g. 1/T1 and thermal expansion) which indicated nodal behavior, the ~0.5 K anomaly in C/T in pure UBe13 and its possible connection to the second superconducting transition in U1-xThxBe13 joins the 'to-be-understood' list of this review. Although this subject is properly a part of the discussion of UBe13, since it is one of the more fascinating cases of UcS in the heavy Fermions, we will devote a separate section to it. Smith et al. The origin of the lower transition has been the subject of numerous experiments and theories. Since the upper superconducting transition blocks many of the probes (e. g. resistivity, ac) that might have been applied to characterizing the lower transition at Tc2, progress was at first slow. Batlogg et al. Various theories have been proposed to explain these seemingly contradictory results. Kumar and Woelfle Due to the limited temperature range available below Tc2 in U1-xThxBe13, there are not a great deal of power law determinations. Jin et al. More recently, in a theory review by Thalmeier and Zwicknagl In its discovery as the third known HFS (Stewart et al. Besides the normal state temperature dependence of the specific heat (implying the presence of Fermi liquid spin fluctuations) and the T 2 temperature dependence (Willis et al. Mueller et al. Although there is no complete theoretical understanding of this complex behavior, Joynt and Taillefer residual  150 mJ/molK 2 for their two samples. The Ott et al. sample was an adjacent piece to a sample in which dHvA oscillations were observed, i. e. presumably of high quality. The Sulpice sample was the first one to clearly show two transitions in the specific heat at Tc (i. e., the sample was well ordered) -later recognized by Fisher et al. There have been various further measurements consistent with the triplet E2u model and contrary to, e. g., the singlet E1g model. These include small angle neutron scattering After the discoveries of heavy fermion superconductivity in CeCu2Si2 (1979), UBe13 (1983), and UPt3 (1984) there was a long period with no further discoveries (URu2Si2, discovered in 1986, has a  value only as large as -Mn and will be discussed below in the  < 100 mJ/molK 2 section, section 4.3.) until 1991, when the group of Frank Steglich found the heavy fermion antiferromagnets UNi2Al3 and UPd2Al3, Tc = 1.1 and 2 K respectively. (Geibel et al. Neutron scattering experiments (Geibel et al. More recent neutron scattering experiments have been used to explore the connection between the superconducting pairing mechanism and the observed magnetic response of the antiferromagnetic UPd2Al3. Bernhoeft et al. Other evidence for UcS in UPd2Al3 includes (, H) (Watanabe et al. Josephson tunneling on heteroepitaxial thin films of UPd2Al3 on LaAlO3 was carried out, where the film quality was somewhat less than for bulk specimens (Tc decreased by 20%, TN decreased by 15%, residual resistivity increased a factor of seven (Huth et al. PrOs4Sb12, Tc=1.8 K, in the skutterudite family, has a low temperature specific heat above Tc (from where the normal state  is extrapolated) that is complicated by a low lying first excited crystal field level that is only 7 K above the ground state. Various extrapolations/estimations for  exist (Bauer et al. Although the discovery work The superconducting upper critical field, Hc2(0), is approximately 2 T. At fields starting ~ 4.5 T, there is (Aoki et al. Concerning indications of UcS in PrOs4Sb12, muon spin resonance (Aoki et al. In terms of temperature dependence of various measured parameters in the superconducting state, these measurements give mixed indications. Penetration depth  determined by SR indicates (MacLaughlin et al. In summary, despite improvements in sample quality the arguments for UcS in PrOs4Sb12 are not as uniform as for the other heavy fermion superconductors in section 4. Perhaps this is inherent in the proposed different superconducting pairing mechanism -exchange of quadrupolar rather than magnetic fluctuations. These tetragonal 115 compounds are a subset of the more general series CenMmIn3n+2m, with M=Co, Ir, Rh, Pd and Pt. The basic building block of these compounds is CeIn3, called the 'infinite layer' compound since, when n gets very large, CenMmIn3n+2m approaches CeIn3. These very interesting superconductors, along with the PuMGa5, M=Co, Rh, have been frequently reviewed, see, e. g., Setai et al. In addition, CeCoIn5 possesses a large number of non-exponential temperature dependences in various superconducting state properties (5), all consistent with line nodes as listed in Table Tunneling measurements (Zhou et al. The question of a possible pseudogap in CeCoIn5 is at present the subject of conflicting measurments. The resistivity at 1.35 GPa (where Tc as a function of pressure is a maximum at 2.6 K) shows a slight decrease ~0.4 K above Tc that has been called (Sidorov et al. In summary, there appears to be conflicting evidence, pro and con, for a pseudogap in CeCoIn5, so at present this remains an open question. We will discuss the well established pseudogap behavior in both the electron and the hole doped cuprates below. Once that discussion is complete, it will become clear how, in comparison, uncertain the existence of a pseudogap in CeCoIn5 is. Joining the list of strong indications for UcS in CeCoIn5 is the presence of a magnetic resonance in inelastic neutron scattering below Tc (C. Stock et al. Another piece of evidence for UcS in CeCoIn5, which is the result of many experiments leading up to what is now considered the final answer, is the presence of a second superconducting phase (6) -see Fig. A last piece of evidence for UcS in CeCoIn5 is the response (J. P. Paglione et al. To summarize the experimental measures that indicate UcS in CeCoIn5, small characteristic temperature (1) superconductivity forms out of a non-Fermi liquid normal state (2), magnetic resonance below Tc (3), some disputed evidence for a pseudogap (4), power law temperature dependences of various properties (, C/T, 1/T1, and ) in the superconducting state (5), presence of more than one superconducting phase (7), and (, H) as well as C(, H) show an angular dependence characteristic of nodal (in this case dx2-y2) behavior (11) are all present. Concerning the metric for UcS of high sensitivity to impurities (2.1.9.), it is believed from band structure calculations that the M transition metal site in CeMIn5 is relatively decoupled from the Ce site (Sarrao and Thompson To summarize the theoretical and experimental insights into the UcS in CeCoIn5, the large set of experimental results have not yet lent themselves to a comprehensive theoretical understanding. Magnetic fluctuations are strongly believed to be important, see for example the magnetic interaction model proposed by Monthoux et al. No resistive or tunneling evidence for a pseudogap just above the bulk Tc of 0.4 K exists, presumably because of the electrical short at 1.2 K due to a resistive transition, 0, proposed by Bianchi et al. By doping Hg on the In site, Bauer et al. Hegger et al. In Fig. Below are listed a few of the less strongly correlated compounds which are often lumped under the "heavy fermion" label. This is meant to be a representative, not exhaustive, list. The ferromagnetic compounds UGe2 and URhGe are discussed in section 11. (ferromagnetic UcS). Also occurring in the tetragonal 115 structure as do the CeMIn5 just discussed, PuCoGa5 has Tc=18.5 K and was, surprisingly enough, the first Pu compound found to superconduct at any temperature (Sarrao et al. The normal state temperature dependence of the resistivity in PuCoGa5 is   T 1.35 from Tc to 50 K, consistent with non-Fermi liquid behavior although there is no sign of a magnetic phase transition or a quantum critical point to cause this behavior. Perhaps more interesting, the normal state magnetic susceptibility published in the discovery paper (Sarrao et al. Additionally, the measured  just above Tc in the Hiess et al. work is ~3-4 times smaller than is the Sarrao et al. sample. Further unpublished work by the Los Alamos group (J. D. Thompson The study of CePd2Si2 represents a significant subfield of UcS, that where antiferromagnetism is suppressed by applied pressure and a dome of superconductivity appears in the phase diagram, see Fig. URu2Si2 was discovered to be a superconductor, Tc=1.5 K, by W. Schlabitz et al. Concerning the superconducting properties of URu2Si2, the temperature dependences in the superconducting state that imply line nodes (C  T 2 Fisher et al. Point-contact spectroscopy measurements on a URu2Si2 single crystal with the tip applied along the a-axis direction (on the 0.5 mm thin edge of the crystal) yielded evidence for a pseudogap (4) that extended above Tc = 1.37 K by 0.6 K (Morales and Escudero CeIn3 is an antiferromagnet, TN=10.2 K, =130 mJ/molK 2 , which superconducts (the superconducting dome, see Fig. This skutterudite is included here for completeness. With its high Tc (7.9 K), it is an unlikely candidate for triplet superconductivity, where Tc should be highly sensitive to defects. With a  value of 87 mJ/molK 2 (Gumeniuk et al. Having discussed a number of heavy fermion superconductors as pertains to the question of whether their superconductivity is unconventional, we have seen a wide variety of properties and proposed explanations. As clear from the discussion, this question is sufficiently complex that the answer is not always straightforward. For example, the prototype heavy fermion superconductor, CeCu2Si2, with its several properties consistent with UcS (including strongly enhanced effective electron mass, strong antiferromagnetic fluctuations, sensitivity to nonmagnetic defects, nearness in the phase diagram to a magnetic phase transition) has recently had its specific heat down to 0.04 K analyzed as a fully gapped superconductor (Kittaka et al. As we have discussed, the proposed mechanisms for superconductivity in heavy fermion systems, although spin-fluctuation mediation is a strong favorite, include other possibilities: antiferro-quadrupolar (PrOs4Sb12) and magnetic exciton (UPd2Al3). Of course, some heavy fermion systems are inarguably UcS, e. g. UPt3, U1-xThxBe13, and CeCoIn5 all have more than one superconducting phase; CeCoIn5 has a narrow spin resonance below Tc in the neutron scattering, indicative of a sign change in the order parameter as well as tunneling evidence for dx2-y2 pairing symmetry; U1-xThxBe13 and UPt3 both -in the best quality samples -have large (sample dependent) residual specific heat  values in the superconducting state (30% and from 0 up to 45% respectively of normal). As will be seen when the other superconducting classes are discussed in the following sections, the heavy fermion superconductors, diverse as their properties are (see Table Superconductivity was discovered in Ba (hole)-doped La2CuO4, Tc~35 K (tetragonal structure with planes of CuO2), in 1986 by Bednorz and Mueller. Measurements of Tc vs pressure (Chu et al. Although the search for higher Tc in the 'cuprate' superconductors has reached a Tc as high as 134 K (for HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8+  ), which increases to 164 K at 31 GPa (Gao et al. There are several collections of experimental reviews of the cuprates, e. g. the five volumes of The Physical Properties of High Temperature Superconductors [#1-5 references) ed. by D. M. Ginsberg, the two volumes Thus, although not the first discovered UcS (which were heavy fermions) nor even the second (organic superconductors), the amount of theoretical and experimental work on the cuprate superconductors probably exceeds that on all the other classes of UcS combined. Distilling this body of theoretical and experimental work down to just one link in the chain of understanding UcS in general will necessitate brevity on subjects worthy of the entire length of this review. An overview of a representative cuprate phase diagram (both the more heavily studied hole doped side and the less studied electron doped side -represented by R2-xCexCuO4- , R=Pr, Nd, Sm, discovered by Tokura, Takagi and Uchida We begin with a brief outline of the electron doped R2-xCexCuO4- , then discuss their superconducting properties, followed by similar treatment for the more-completely-studied hole doped cuprates. Fig. Two recent reviews exist for the electron doped cuprates, Armitage, Fournier, and Greene The focus of the current review is on the superconducting properties which, unavoidably, are influenced by the properties of the normal state out of which the condensation into the superconducting state occurs. Thus, we offer here a brief synopsis of the complex normal state on the right side of the phase diagram in Fig. Although not of particular import for the superconducting properties, the antiferromagnetism for the electron doped R2-xCexCuO4, R=Nd (Pr, Sm, Eu), is not just the simple ordering of Cu spins (for R=Nd, TN=255 K) in the CuO2 layers like on the hole-doped side, despite the similar ordering temperatures. The rare earth R atoms give rise to a "rich set" The normal state resistivity for 'optimally doped' (meaning at the peak of the superconducting dome) electron doped cuprates follows a T 2 (Fermi liquid) temperature dependence from Tc up to 200 K (e. g. in Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4 ('NCCO') Tsuei, Gupta and Koren However, the electron doped cuprates display a broad arrange of behavior just as do the hole doped cuprates, and several samples display linear-with-temperature resistivities, thought to be consistent with spin fluctuations and quantum criticality (Jin et al. As was mentioned with Fig. Turning now to investigation of the superconducting state properties which can provide evidence for UcS (Unconventional Superconductivity), we begin with tunneling into the electron doped cuprates (which has been quite revealing as discussed below for the hole doped cuprates). This work has had a number of materials issues, as well as puzzling results. In addition, early work (e. g. point contact spectroscopy, Huang et al. In zero field and below Tc, point contact spectroscopy on NCCO, Tc=25.1 K, gives (Shan et al. More interesting than this (long standing in the hole doped cuprates) disagreement on , is Niestemski et al.'s analysis of their STM data on PLCCO. They conclude that their tunneling spectra can be related to an electron-bosonic (where the bosons are spin fluctuations) mode coupling at energies of 10.5±2.5 meV. This energy is consistent with a (inferred from inelastic neutron scattering and discussed below) magnetic resonance (3) mode energy (~11 meV) in PLCCO (S. D. Wilson et al. Another use of tunneling data is via model fits to determine s-vs d-wave symmetry. In the electron doped cuprates, these fits are not definitive. Most n-type cuprate tunneling data are on epitaxial thin films or crystals. The lack of a zero bias conduction peak (ZBCP) (normally if such a peak is present it implies a sign change in the phase of the order parameter, i. e. consistent with d-wave or s as found in the IBS) can be due to inherent disorder. The critical comparison of the mean free path and the coherence length, 0 ~ l, for disorder to suppress the ZBCP (Aprili et al. Although of great utility for the hole doped cuprate superconductors and the IBS, because of those materials' larger superconducting gaps, ARPES results for the superconducting gap in electron doped superconductors, with ~4 meV, are less conclusive. Armitage et al. When it comes to a high energy gap-like structure (the 'pseudogap'), ARPES see such a structure (4), e. g. in single crystal PLCCO, Tc=26 K, without difficulty Yu et al. As discussed above in section 2.1.5., the power law dependence of the penetration depth can be affected by impurities and therefore be difficult to interpret definitively. In addition, early measurements of  in NCCO returned results (exponential temperature dependence) consistent with s-wave pairing symmetry. Cooper Despite the lack of a pure power law, the 1/T1 data for single crystal PLCCO, Tc=24 K, of Zheng et al. Blumberg et al. Batlogg et al. Phase sensitive measurements (7) were performed using patterned thin film SQUID devices with Josephson junctions. The first results, on the half-flux quantum effect (discussed below, see also Figs. Wilson et al. Although not as mature a materials class as the hole doped cuprates, these materials -thanks to the definitive phase sensitive experiments which build on prior experience in the hole doped superconductors -appear to be clearly UcS, with nodal dx2-y2 pairing symmetry. Besides the phase sensitive, tricrystal experiments, the fit to the NMR data In terms of the phase diagram sketched above in Fig. Rather than digress into the fascinating history of these discoveries, we simply list the resultant main cuprate superconductor 'classes' (the Bi-, Tl-, and Hg-based families: Bi2Sr2Can-1CunO2n+4, Tl2Ba2Can-1CunO2n+4 HgBa2Can-1CunO2n+3- , n=1, 2, 3, ...) -with some representative Tc values given in Table Table In the theory of Anderson, in order to capture the essential physics of superconductivity in La2-xMxCuO4, the focus is on the Cu d-electron orbital which, after hybridization with the O anions, results in a single d-band. With the addition of on-site Coulomb repulsion with strength U, Anderson proposes a nearly half filled single band 2D Hubbard model (although in reality there is coupling between the CuO2 layers). As reviewed by Scalapino The fundamental question in the cuprates, and indeed in all UcS, is what is the interaction that causes the pairing of the electrons? One facet that *is* known is that the pairing symmetry in the cuprate superconductors is d-wave, from phase sensitive tunneling, ARPES, and several other measurement techniques as will be discussed. At present, the consensus in the cuprates is that the cause of the pairing interaction remains "disputed" (Anderson In this primarily experimental review, our task vis-à-vis theory is to inform the reader of the current state of theoretical understanding where consensus has been reached, and -after an introductory discussion -to provide appropriate recent references to introduce the ongoing debatable issues. We now turn to the rather thorough experimental characterization of the superconducting properties as they shed light on UcS in the five sub-classes (La2-xMxCuO4, YBa2Cu3O7- , and the Bi, Tl, and Hg based compounds) representative of hole doped cuprates. Since much of the following discussion of the hole doped cuprates and their unconventional superconductivity focuses on their pairing symmetry being d-wave, we present the proof of dwave pairing by phase sensitive tunneling experiments first, somewhat out of historical order. As will be discussed, numerous other measurement techniques also strongly support the presence of d-wave pairing in the hole doped cuprates. In 1994, Tsuei et al. The most measureable effect caused by a superconducting ring containing an odd number of  phase shifts is that -under the conditions in the Tsuei et al. design -one half of a flux quantum, 0/2, will be spontaneously generated. This generation of 0/2 in Josephson junctions in a frustrated geometry of superconductors with unconventional pairing was first theoretically proposed for the heavy fermion superconductors by Geshkenbein, Larkin and Barone In BCS theory, the dependence of Tc on the molar mass of a superconductor is TcM -1/2 . As discussed in section 2.1.13., there are well known exceptions even in the elemental superconductors, e. g. the Tc of Ru is essentially independent of M (T. H. Geballe et al. In the case of the optimally doped cuprates, only a small isotope shift (where 16 O is replaced by 18 O or 63 Cu is replaced by 65 Cu),  significantly less than 0.5, is observed. Thus, in general, the role of phonons for the peak high temperature superconductivity in the cuprates is not considered to be of primary importance In optimally doped La1.85Sr0.15CuO4, Franck, Harker and Brewer In YBa2Cu3O7- , for an oxygen content of 6.94 and Tc=93 K (i. e. optimally doped), the isotope exponent  for substitution of 63 Cu by 65 Cu is (Zhao et al The above is not to say that the isotope effect is small for all levels of hole doping in the cuprates. In fact, for an oxygen content that gives Tc~50 K in YBCO,  exceeds 0.2 (Zech et al. As an interesting separate case, in La2-xSrxCuO4 as a function of Sr content  can exceed 1 (Zhao et al. As an example of the development over time of theory to correctly explain the varied isotope results for the hole doped cuprates, the enhancement of  in La2-xSrxCuO4 around x=0.115 (where Tc27 K) was argued by Pickett, Cohen and Krakauer More recently, Johnston et al. Bang Greco and Zeyher In summary, clearly the isotope effect in single layer La2-xMxCuO4 remains the exception amongst the cuprates. The behavior of  for optimally hole-doped materials, n2, appears to be understood by numerous authors to provide evidence for electron coupling to anisotropic phonon (B1g oxygen) modes providing at least an enhancement in Tc over an alternative d-wave pairing interaction such as exchange of spin fluctuations. A 'pseudogap' refers to particular observed properties above Tc in both the electron and hole doped cuprates (although there are differences between the two, e. g. point contact spectroscopy in the electron doped cuprates does not show a pseudogap). This term was first used for the cuprates by J. Friedel Although, as discussed above for the heavy fermion superconductors CeCoIn5 and URu2Si2 (and below for IBS and the cobaltates), there are other superconductors where evidence for a partial gap above Tc has been observed, the reviews that exist on the pseudogap (see, e. g., Timusk and Statt The pseudogap in the cuprates remains a central focus of much research today, and should be named as one of the outstanding puzzles in UcS. As Norman says in his 2012 overview of the theory of cuprates, "the nature of the pseudogap phase is key." There are several important open questions concerning the pseudogap in the cuprates: what is its cause, how does it relate to/interact with the superconducting gap, and -seemingly a straightforward, easily answereable question -where does T* go to zero (a potential quantum critical point) as a function of composition? Concerning this last question, despite an enormous amount of data, there exists no consensus. One set of experiments and analysis states that T*0 at an approximate hole doping of p=0.19 (e. g., see Vishik et al. It is fair to say that ARPES measurements, along with tunneling discussed below, have been at the forefront at trying to unravel both the important pseudogap-related questions: the correct, intrinsic behavior of the pseudogap and the relationship between the pseudogap and the superconducting gap. Although this effort is far from complete, recent STM (discussed below in section 5.2.5.3) work is providing important clues. To finish the section on ARPES investigation of the pseudogap in hole-doped cuprates, Fig. While ARPES provides evidence for the opening of a pseudogap in the charge channel, NMR is sensitive to behavior in the spin channel. Warren et al. The cause of this pseudogap, both in the tunneling conductance and in the other measurement techniques discussed here, has been a question of key theoretical interest. One proposal is that the pseudogap was a precursor (the nomenclature used by Warren et al. in discussing their NMR data) to the full superconductivity that occurs at lower temperature, with 'preformed' (incoherent) Cooper pairs at T* but no phase coherence/no diamagnetic fluctuations above Tc ( see the review by M. Norman In addition, recent work (K. Fujita et al. Finding how this fluctuating charge ordering relates to the pseudogap and the superconductivity (see Huxley The specific heat displays evidence for the cuprate pseudogap in several ways. When the doping level is at or above optimal doping, the jump in the specific heat at Tc, C, is approximately 1 times the normal state electronic specific heat, as expected (D. Einzel Tallon and Loram The phenomenon of a pseudogap in the underdoped cuprates is observed by a number of different types of measurements (in both spin -e. g. NMR -and charge -e. g. ARPES -channels) -a far richer set of observations of this phenomenon that in any other class of UcS. See Fig. As is apparent, some of the above set of data (e. g. NMR) for the pseudogap and the data shown in Fig. To make clear that the question of where T*0 is still open, there are ARPES data (Kondo et al. The proposed theories for explaining the cuprate pseudogap are still under discussion. (for a review, see Scalapino As discussed above for the electron doped cuprates, a narrow-in-energy (resolution limited) resonance that is magnetic in nature has been observed in the superconducting state in the neutron scattering data for the hole doped cuprates. This resonance -peaked at the antiferromagnetic wavevector -was first discovered in bilayer YBCO, Tc=91 K by Rossat Mignot et al. Most experimental characterization of cuprates does not focus on non-exponential temperature dependences of measured quantities as evidence for UcS nearly as much as in the heavy fermions, instead focusing on the properties just discussed above. However, some data do exist in the literature, and will be discussed here. For a review, see Tsuei and Kirtley Penetration depth data on optimally doped YBCO (Hardy et al. In some classes of superconductors, the temperature dependence of the NMR 1/T1 spin lattice relaxation time deep in the superconducting state can be used (see Table Determinations of power laws in the electronic component of the specific heat in the cuprates are also not of the same utility as for some other classes of UcS. This is because of impurity effects (Schottky anomaly) dominating the low temperature C/T (specific heat divided by temperature) in all but the purest samples of, e. g., YBCO (Revaz et al. Xia et al. YBCO has been shown to be extremely sensitive to Zn substitution on the Cu site, e. g. the Tc for pure YBCO is suppressed from 92 K to ~50 K for YBa2Cu2.9Zn0.1O7- . (Chien, Wang and Ong As will be discussed for IBS, and as has been discussed above for CeCoIn5, angle resolved specific heat in field can graphically display the nodal structure of UcS. Although many measurements for the cuprates give clear evidence for dx2-y2 pairing symmetry, with the accompanying nodal structure, C(H,) measurements in the cuprates have been less successfulpresumably due to the low temperature magnetic impurities (see section 5.2.7.) above). For example, measurements by Park and Salamon As already discussed in section 2.1.15., Moler et al. In addition to the superconducting properties of the hole-doped cuprates as they pertain to UcS, the question of quantum criticality (section 2.1.2.) is of interest. Due to the high critical fields of the hole-doped cuprates, measurement of non-Fermi liquid behavior in the normal state resistivity down to low temperatures is rare. Cooper et al. Now that the cuprates (electron-and hole-doped) have been (briefly in relation to the extant body of knowledge) discussed, we see that indeed the cuprates offer an important additional set of properties bearing on the overall question of UcS beyond what is seen with heavy fermion superconductors. Most importantly, the broad range of properties in the cuprates that show pseudogap behavior (from ARPES to specific heat to even the polar Kerr effect) makes the rather sparse indications of a pseudogap in just two heavy Fermion compounds (CeCoIn5 and URu2Si2) seem -in comparison -both qualitatively and quantitatively uncharacteristic of that class of materials. Secondly, the proof of d-wave pairing in the cuprates by phase sensitive measurements -despite CeCoIn5, URu2Si2, and others heavy fermion compounds having convincing evidence for d-wave symmetry -is lacking for the heavy fermion superconducting class. Thirdly, the large body of knowledge on the isotope effect (or sometimes the lack thereof) in the cuprates provides important insight for the theorists into the superconducting pairing mechanisms that is totally lacking in the heavy fermion superconductors with their lower ( 2.3 K in CeCoIn5) Tc's. (Although PuCoGa5, Tc=18.5 K, and PuRhGa5, Tc=8.7 K, have higher Tc values, their  values do not really qualify them as 'heavy' Fermion systems. Plus, the problems of substitution using the extremely radioactive Pu isotopes and the attendant Tc decay with time (Tc ~ -0.5 K/month) due to self-irradiation damage effects In terms of puzzles that remain unsolved in the cuprates, certainly that of the provenance of the pseudogap, about which so much experimentally is known, -together with convincingly explaining the pairing mechanism for the superconductivity -must be rated number one. The many differences between Lax-2(Sr,Ba)xCuO4 and the other hole doped cuprates also certainly need to be further understood. Iron Based Superconductors What the community considers to be iron based superconductors (IBS) involves superconductivity in iron 3d electrons, not just superconductivity in a compound that contains iron such as Th7Fe3, Tc=1.8 K discovered in 1961 (Matthias, Compton and Corenzwit IBS since their rapid emergence starting in 2008 have continued to bring new interesting physics, with some of the important problems being related to unusual charge and spin ordering (stripes). Like in the cuprates (see Fig. In addition, just like in the cuprates there are numerous reviews on just one aspect of IBS, see, e. g., the review on neutron scattering (Dai In addition to the continuing discoveries in bulk IBS, much recent work Presenting a finalized overview of UcS in the IBS is somewhat hampered by the ongoing discussion of the gap structure. Early on, Mazin and co-workers (Mazin et al. scattering experiments have established the presence of strong magnetic fluctuations in most of the IBS, even in compounds such as FeSe (Q. Wang et al. As shown, the s gap symmetry on the left in Fig. For spin singlet (s-or d-wave) pairing, the spin susceptibility part of the NMR Knight shift should decrease to zero below Tc in all crystalline directions -thus ruling out triplet (p-or fwave, i. e. spin triplet pairing.) As discussed in the review by Stewart Inosov, in his review Phase sensitive tunneling was instrumental in proving that cuprates have UcS. A good quality of the junction is important, and difficult to achieve in the IBS. A clever work-around was carried out by Chen et al. Since the work of Chen et al., other researchers have done tunneling work in further IBS -all concluding that their data favor the s gap structure: directional point contact Josephson effect in Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2 (Tortello et al. As apparent from the sample phase diagram in Fig. As discussed first in section 2.1.2, one of the indications of non-Fermi liquid behavior is when the resistivity deviates from Fermi liquid behavior ( = 0 + AT 2 ) and varies as, e. g.,  = 0 + aT, i. e. linear in temperature, over a significant temperature range above Tc. This was the case in the discussion above of, for example, CeCoIn5. As detailed in Stewart Another possible evidence for quantum critical behavior is the expected divergence of the electronic effective mass, m*, at the quantum critical point. Corroborating the resistivity data, divergence of m* has also been seen in BaFe2As1.4P0.6 (Walmsley et al. Thus, clearly some of the IBS show non-Fermi liquid behavior, mostly  = 0 + aT, indicating at least the possibility of quantum critical fluctuations being involved in the (therefore unconventional) superconductivity. Until now in this review pseudogap behavior, where part of the Fermi surface becomes gapped above Tc at T* for some unknown reason, has been primarily a property of the cuprates. Do the IBS show pseudogap behavior that can be identified as separate from remnant SDW fluctuations? 6.4.1. ARPES One of the most direct measurements of a pseudogap -a gap opening in the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy above Tc -is ARPES. ARPES measurements have been done on several IBS systems to date. (Due to the multiple bands at the Fermi surface in the IBS, not to mention the difficulties of obtaining clean surfaces, ARPES measurements are obviously more difficult/laborious in the IBS than in the cuprates.) Shimojima et al. On underdoped Ba0.75K0.25Fe2As2, Tc=26 K, Xu et al. Sato et al. Note that the falloff in 1/T1T observed in LaFeO1-xFx, 0.045  x  0.075 -i. e. Tc from 19 to 22 K -by Hammerath et al. Based on NMR 1/T1 data, Cui et al. Moon et al. Kwon et al. Hess et al. Hoffman Whether or not the IBS display pseudogap behavior as observed in the cuprates (a gap above Tc due to unknown origins) must be judged at this time as an open question. The data until now are mixed -in some cases discussed above, there is indeed a gap opened at a temperature T* above Tc and not associated with any possible SDW remnant fluctuations. In other cases this gap is identifiable with the SDW transition of the parent compound decreasing in temperature with increasing doping -e. g. in 1111 LaFeAsO1-xFx (Fig. The measurements of possible pseudogap behavior are still incomplete vis-à-vis the full set of IBS families and the various measurement methods. There seems to be some consensus regarding pseudogap-like features -not associated with remnant SDW fluctuations -in P-doped and K-doped BaFe2As2. As clearly pointed out in the review on STM in the IBS by Hoffman (T)  T is a clear indication of nodal, UcS behavior. This linear temperature dependence has been found (Fletcher et al. 1/T1  T 3 is normally taken as indication of nodal behavior and has been observed in 1111 LaFeAsO0.9F0.1 (Tc=26 K Grafe et al. The measurement of the angular dependence of the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy in the superconducting state (determined from specific heat data) in zero and applied magnetic fields, coupled with theory, can be used to indicate nodal, unconventional superconductivity -with the caveat that deep minima can mimic nodal behavior. Malone et al. Zhang et al. TRSB has not been observed in IBS, although the work of Tafti et al. Such impurities are pair breaking only if they scatter electrons between parts of the Fermi surface with different signs. Before the advent of IBS and their proposed s gap structure, the belief was that a strong influence of non-magnetic impurities on Tc implied d-wave superconductivity. The use of non-magnetic impurities as a way to distinguish s++ from s gap symmetry has been thoroughly discussed in Hirschfeld's review In the introductory section 2 above, we discussed the fact that there is an Fe isotope effect (TcM -0.35 ), 54 Fe replacing 56 Fe, seen both in IBS (SmFeAsO0.85F0.15, Tc=41 K, and in Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2, Tc=38 K, Liu et al. In addition to the C(H, ) measurements (Malone et al. IBS are clearly unconventional. There are some data that strongly support the s gap structure and exchange of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations model first proposed for the IBS by Mazin et al. Already less than a year after the discovery by Maeno et al., Rice and Sigrist In a p-wave (l=1) superconductor, the spatial part of the wave function is antisymmetric and thus the spin part must be a symmetric triplet state, with the spin dependence described by three complex functions. (Balian and Werthamer) The spin dependence of the pairing is typically given in a 2 x 2 matrix for the momentum dependent gap function (k). However, Balian and Werthamer proposed the use of a three component complex vector d(k) for triplet pairing. Discussing now specifically (Liu and Mao The 5 -pairing state in a single band superconductor (which Sr2RuO4 -just like the IBS -is not) would be a priori fully gapped, with (Liu and Mao Sr2RuO4 has been reviewed numerous times, the most recent review was by Liu and Mao This is not the case for Sr2RuO4 -both the in-plane and c-axis resistivity behave as a Fermi liquid,  = 0 + AT 2 up to about 25 K (Maeno et al. Such a peak is an indication of a sign change in the superconducting energy gap  on different parts of the Fermi surface, as would be consistent with d-wave or s± pairing. Since the (a priori nodeless) energy gap in p-wave Sr2RuO4 varies as 0 (kx 2 + ky 2 ) 1/2 , where kx and ky are wave vectors on the Fermi surface (Mackenzie and Maeno Sr2RuO4 is not believed to exhibit pseudogap behavior in any of its properties. In the interests of completeness, it should be mentioned that Jin, Liu and Lichtenberg Power laws in various measured parameters like specific heat, spin-lattice relaxation time 1/T1, or penetration depth  -as discussed above in section 2.1.5. and Table Although C/T of Sr2RuO4 varies (NishiZaki, Maeno and Mao Izawa et al. The absence of the Hebel Schlichter peak in 1/T1 (Ishida et al. Bonalde et al. Lupien et al.'s Liu and Mao, in their recent review Josephson tunneling work by Firmo et al. Finally, Nelson et al. Luke et al. Deguchi et al. Hassinger et al. Sr2RuO4 displays several clear signs of UcS: strong sensitivity of Tc to non-magnetic impurities, breaking of time reversal symmetry, and phase sensitive tunneling proving triplet superconductivity. Evidence for non-exponential power laws in various measurements (e. g. penetration depth, 1/T1) are consistent with nodal behavior, which remains controversial. The ability to prepare thin films of Sr2RuO4 (until now impossible due to the extreme sample dependence on impurities) would be helpful for furthering understanding. Although the theory of the pairing state is well advanced, the actual mechanism that causes this pairing is at this point not well understood. In the IBS discussed above, there seems to be a preference (although no proof) for considering the exchange of antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations as the pairing mechanism. Although this is also one of the proposed pairing mechanisms in Sr2RuO4 (Kuwabara and Ogata 1.) Agterberg, Rice and Sigrist 2.) Theorists soon after Maeno et al.'s discovery in 1994 of superconductivity in Sr2RuO4 have speculated that Sr2RuO4 is near a ferromagnetic instability (e. g. Rice and Sigrist In UcS, one or more symmetries in addition to U(1), the one dimensional global gauge symmetry, are broken at the onset of superconductivity. Breaking of time reversal symmetry (TRS) is not infrequently seen in UcS as discussed in several places already in this review starting in section 2.1.8., e. g. for the transition to the B-phase (cf. Figs. The lack of inversion symmetry ("non-centro-symmetric") in superconductors is another important breaking of symmetry, which leads to non-s-wave parity pairing to some extent (enhanced by the electronic correlation strength) being mixed in with conventional s-wave pairing. (For additional theoretical discussion of this class of UcS, see section 2.1.10. above.) This class of UcS began with the discovery in 2004 of superconductivity (Tc=0.75 K) in noncentrosymmetric CePt3Si (Bauer et al. Based on a result of Anderson in 1984 We review the properties of the prototype material, CePt3Si, and summarize properties for two strongly correlated, believed to be UcS, examples -CeRhSi3 and CeIrSi3 -(which require pressure to superconduct) and two low correlation, ASOC induced examples. Another strongly correlated non-centrosymmetric material, CeCoGe3, (not discussed here) is an antiferromagnet that superconducts (Tc = 0.72 K) under pressure (5.6 GPa) with a high (~7 T, or five times HP) Hc2, taken as consistent with triplet superconductivity. (Settai et al. Yogi et al. It may be that this minor indication of BCS behavior is just simply consistent with the predicted mixture of pairing symmetries (a two component order parameter), and the multi-band nature of CePt3Si. Mukuda et al. In terms of power law measurement that imply UcS in CePt3Si, Mukuda et al. Thus, in summary, CePt3Si qualifies on several counts as an UcS, with the caveat that the power law measurements are over limited temperature ranges. At zero pressure CeRhSi3 orders antiferromagnetically at 1.8 K and has a specific heat =120 mJ/molK 2 (Muro et al. CeIrSi3 is similar to CeRhSi3. In zero applied pressure, TN=5 K and =125 mJ/molK 2 (Muro et al. LiPt3B is a superconductor (T. Badica et al. SR data in the non-centrosymmetric superconductor ZrRe6, Tc=6.75 K, by Singh et al. Finally, there are a large number (see Theoretically, non-centrosymmetric superconductors have been calculated to show a rich variety of complex phenomena, including -e. g. in quasiparticle tunneling -multigap features and spin currents carried by surface states. For reviews, see M. Sigrist The discovery of organic superconductors was published in early 1980, shortly after the heavy fermion CeCu2Si2. Jérome et al. Two dimensional organic superconductivity, Tc=1.4 K, at zero pressure was discovered in 1984 (Yagubskii et al. The restricted-dimension organic superconductors, where the superconductivity comes from p-electrons from the chalcogens, have many interesting and unique properties. These properties can be measured in a single sample (i. e. no change of chemical purity) simply by varying pressure. For example, the 12.8 K superconductor -(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Cl can be tuned (S. Lefebvre et al. In the early years of research on the 1 and 2D organic superconductors, although there were data consistent with UcS (e. g. the work of Choi et al. However, theorists began to propose UcS. Abrikosov By the early to mid-1990's, a number of physical measurements had been gathered thatwith some exceptions -confirmed UcS in the organic superconductors. These measurements mostly concentrated on the highest Tc ambient pressure (2D) superconductor, -(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br and, for the 1D materials, on (TMTSF)2X (X=PF6 under pressure and X=ClO4 at ambient pressure). For X=ClO4, line nodes concluded from: measurements (Takigawa et al. For -(ET)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br (-Br for short): measurements of scanning tunnel spectroscopy (STS) were interpreted as strongly supporting d-wave pairing with line nodes (Ichimura et al. In summary, most of these measurements support a superconducting energy gap with nodes, i. e. UcS. Besides these measurements, there is not much other evidence for UcS in the organic superconductors. There is apparently no pseudogap, 3 (Brown review Finally, although there is strong evidence for the FFLO phase (where high magnetic field in a clean singlet, Pauli-paramagnetic-limited superconductor causes an inhomogeneous, finite momentum state) in several organic superconductors, e. g. in -NCS (Wright et al. This superconducting class consists of electron-doped layered metal nitride halides MNX, with M= Ti, Zr, Hf and the halides X = Cl, Br, I. The undoped parent compounds are 2D layered structure band insulators, with a large (>2.5 eV) gap (Kasahara et al. The upper critical field, Hc2, of this class of superconductors is quite high and gives convincing evidence for quasi-2D behavior, as expected based on the structure (Fig. The isotope effect in Li-intercalated -HfNCl decreases the 25.5 K Tc upon substitution of 15 N for 14 N by only 0.1 K, implying that the exponent in Tc  M - is =0.070.02. (H. Tou et al. NMR measurements of 1/T1 and the Knight shift in -LixZrNCl show singlet behavior with no Hebel-Schlichter peak. (H. Kotegawa et al. Using band structure calculations of the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy and their specific heat data (where the rather low value of =1.1 mJ/molK 2 is found, similar to the value of 2.7 mJ/molK 2 for conventional electron-phonon coupled superconductor MgB2, Tc=39 K) for -Li0.12ZNCl, Tc = 12.7 K, Taguchi et al. Kasahara et al. (Y. Kasahara et al. SR measurements (Hiraishi et al. Due to the air sensitivity of -ZrNCl0.7, tunneling data were measured (Takasaki et al. The -form, where superconductivity was discovered 13 years after its discovery in the -form, is much less well characterized. Based both on the structural differences (Fig. Unlike in the -form, where Hc2(T=0) was different by ~factor of four in the planar and c-axis directions (and Hc2 c / Hc2||c at 1 T was 4.5), in the -form of intercalated TiNCl Hc2 c / Hc2||c ~ 1.2 to 1.5 (Zhang et al. Unfortunately, much of the theoretical discussion is focused on the -form with its higher (25.5 vs 16.3 K) Tc. The -form is experimentally significantly different in two important aspects: it is more isotropic, and Tc is a linear function (see Fig. Phonon-mediated pairing in -NaxHfNCl, Tc=25 K, was considered by Weht, Filippetti, and Pickett Bill, Morawitz, and Kresin The layered metal nitride superconductors may well be UcS, although they are rather understudied -particularly in the -form, at least partially due to air sensitivity and lack of single crystals. Also, a Tc of 25 K discovered in 1998 did not draw the attention that it would have in 1973, when A15 structure Nb3Ge held the record (Stewart A long-standing example of conventional superconductivity coexisting with ferromagnetism is the Chevrel phase HoMo6S8. With special care given to forming a single domain using external fields to reduce the induction B through the demagnetizing field, the local exchange field, Bloc, from the Ho ions can be made less than the upper critical field of the superconducting Mo electrons, and the sample, TCurie ~ 0.7 K, is superconducting below 0.1 K. (Burlet et al. RuSr2GdCu2O8 achieves (Tallon et al. Huxley, in his recent review of ferromagnetic superconductors (Huxley The more interesting, UcS, examples of coexistent superconductivity and ferromagnetism (UGe2 (S.S. Saxena et al. The specific heat  of URhGe above TCurie (9.6 K) is 20 mJ/molK 2 . Below TCurie, the term in the specific heat linear with temperature is raised to 160 mJ/molK 2 (Pleiderer The Tc of UCoGe is, unlike UGe2 and URhGe, insensitive to sample quality (Aoki et al. In summary, UGe2, URhGe, and UCoGe exhibit coexistent superconductivity and magnetism, with evidence for UcS fairly conclusive for the first two. Sufficient water molecules (a double layer) intercalated between the Co oxide planes are necessary for superconductivity, and this composition is known as the bilayered hydrate, while the mono-layered hydrate structure is not superconducting. This dependence on the water content, and the tendency of the water to evaporate at ambient conditions, makes this compound the material with the most sample dependence of any in this review. It displays also the extremal aging dependence of any sample discussed herein: while 239 PuCoGa5, Tc=18.5 K, due to selfirradiation damage, shows Despite the sample difficulties, some measurements indicative of UcS have been made. Photoemission (Shimojima et al. Discussion of theory: Using a multiorbital Hubbard model and the random phase approximation, Mochizuki and Ogata In summary, Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O -with its complex phase diagram and extreme sample dependence -seems clearly to be an UcS. Here at the end of the review of UcS, we mention some interesting new superconducting classes, one (H2S under pressure) with values of Tc over 200 K. At present, these emerging classes might properly be described as "possible" UcS. If H2S is finally adjudged to be conventional, this would run counter to the 30 year old experience that the route towards higher Tc is via UcS based on the example of the cuprates (which up until recently held the record for high Tc: 166 K in fluorinated Hg-1223 at 23 GPa pressure -a slight, 2 K, increase over the 1994 value of Gao et al.) (Monteverde et al. There are several thorough (mostly theoretical due to lack of extensive experimental results as yet) reviews on this subject, e. g. Qi and Zhang Although the superconducting properties of the materials which are thought to be candidate topological superconductors (theoretically predicted The pathway to discovery of superconductivity above 200 K in H2S under pressure was an interesting and somewhat convoluted one. Fundamentally, theorists were trying to help in establishing a pathway to higher Tc values using conventional Eliashberg theory for electron-phonon coupling. Three necessary conditions were listed: high characteristic phonon frequency (<0>), large electronic density of states at the Fermi energy (N(0)), and strong electron-phonon coupling. For example, Ashcroft Experimentally, Drozdov et al. Although this view that superconductivity with Tc~200 K in H2S under pressure is conventional (including the predictions of Also since the early work by Cohen and Anderson, numerous works on predicting Tc in metallic hydrogen under pressure (germane to the discussion of H3S) have been published, e. g. by Papaconstantopoulos and Klein The unfolding reports on high Tc in monolayer films of FeSe (bulk Tc~8 K) on SrTiO3 (STO) substrates were spread over almost a year. Wang et al. Obviously, much theoretical work has been devoted to understanding this unusually high Tc interfacial superconductivity. One representative work is the quantum Monte Carlo study by Clearly, the theory of Li et al. suggests UcS for interfacial FeSe on STO (or TiO2). The correct explanation remains the subject of intense ongoing discussions. We stated in the beginning that a goal of this review was to assist in forming a common description of the various diverse UcS classes, an equivalent to the BCS theory that described what for four and a half decades had seemed a host of unconnected properties in the electron-phonon coupled superconductors. As clear from Tables 2-3, 5, and 7-13 in this review, which describe the indications for UcS of each class, the breadth of behavior in these unconventional superconductors is indeed very large. It may be the case that the classes described herein are so disparate that a common understanding -in the manner of a BCS theory -is not possible. Can coexistent ferromagnetism and superconductivity in UGe2 be understood by a theory that also describes the cuprates? We espouse the belief that a common description of a significant fraction of these disparate classes, which contain pairing symmetries from s to f-wave, which see superconductivity in p-, d-, and f-electron (both 4f and 5f) systems, must be possible. Preparing a theory focussing on commonalities in the various UcS classes may be easier than describing in depth all the special features of just one class. On the other hand, perhaps, as claim various theorists, the explanation for the superconductivity in a particular class (e. g. the cuprates or the IBS) or subclass (e. g. UPt3 or Th-doped UBe13) is already published and awaits merely a wider consensus to be recognized. Such a consensus could be the starting point for a more general theory. In the end, the various indications for UcS for the 9 (up to 12) UcS classes described herein have been analyzed for reproducibility and agreement with other measurement techniques. The hoped-for overarching theory awaits only the proper connection of the various -sometimes seemingly disparate -properties together. With that optimistic note expressed, let us review some of the extant "puzzles" and difficulties in forming an overarching theoretical description which this review of UcS has identified. 1. Chief amongst the important questions is of course: what interaction is coupling the electrons? Certainly spin fluctuations is a popular answer for a number of UcS classes where antiferromagnetism is present in the phase diagram near (e. g. in the hole-doped cuprates and in some heavy fermions) or coexistent with (e. g. in the electron-doped cuprates, in heavy fermion UPd2Al3 and UNi2Al3, and most of the IBS) superconductivity. Fig. If spin fluctuations are the cause of superconductivity, whence do they come? One of the commonly discussed sources is quantum criticality near in the phase diagram to where an antiferromagnetic transition is suppressed to T=0. (There are of course other possibilities for causing a QCP.) As one example, neutron scattering data (Stockert et al. It is worth noting that this review finds evidence (primarily linear-with-temperature low temperature resistivity) for quantum criticality 2 in the majority of the UcS classes discussed herein. As Si and Steglich Despite the oft stated proposal that spin fluctuations may provide the pairing glue in various UcS, this still remains very much an open question (although there is no clear second explanation with any sort of broad acceptance as we have discussed herein.) Anderson As a final word, Norman 2. Perhaps the next most important puzzle is one that indeed does not appear to lend itself to linking the various UcS classes together with one description: the pseudogap. This phenomenon is strongly present in the cuprates, and is called "key" by Norman for understanding the pairing in the cuprates. In the other UcS classes, a pseudogap is possibly present in CeCoIn5, is present in URu2Si2 and Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O and -in the IBS -only appears to be present with any certitude in two cases: BaFe2(As0.7P0.3)2 and Ba0.75K0.25Fe2As2. (In fact, even the word "pseudogap" does not appear in the recent review of the IBS by Hosono and Kuroki 3. Rather than considering the non-unifying pseudogap, is there a strong indication of UcS -other than quantum criticality in the phase diagram -that is more or less commonly present/universal in the classes discussed herein? Rather trivially, the UcS commonly have anisotropy in their gap function (k), ranging from a sign changing s gap function in the IBS; to triplet p-wave in Sr2RuO4, Nax(H3O)zCoO2  yH2O, UGe2, URhGe, the field induced phase in CeCoIn5, and UBe13; to d-wave in the cuprates, organics, possibly heavily overdoped Ba1-xKxFe2As2, several of the heavy fermions including CeCoIn5; to possible f-wave in UPt3 and Sr2RuO4 (which would then have mixed pairing symmetries). (As thoroughly discussed herein, specific assignments of pairing symmetry, with a few exceptions, are still under discussion.) Thus, any theory which attempts to include a broad spectrum of UcS must deal with this strong, but diverse anisotropy in the energy gap. 4. We turn now to a short list of a few of the more unique puzzles of the individual classes mentioned herein that also appear to defy the quest for a common theory of the full set of classes. a. The second, lower Tc bulk C anomaly in the specific heat of U1-xThxBe13 (Fig. b. The linear relation between Tc and the c/a ratio in the 115 structure Ce(M1-xM'x)In5 and Pu(Co1-xRhx)Ga5 superconducting family is an interesting puzzle. This Tc  c/a correlation argues for some common explanation for a sub-class of superconductors which have quite disparate material's properties (e. g. the sample dependent Curie Weiss behavior of the normal state susceptibility all the way from 300 K down to Tc=18.5 K in PuCoGa5). c. The many differences between Lax-2(Sr,Ba)xCuO4 and the other hole doped cuprates certainly need to be further understood. In summary, the classes of UcS reviewed herein show both many similar properties, as well as many properties that may be unique to an individual material. A challenge for theory is to forge a common explanation for the salient points of at least a majority of the classes. Such a starting point would help select directions for further exploration of the remaining unique puzzles and, hopefully, show the way to even higher Tc.