A ferromagnetic insulator in contact with a superconductor is known to induce exchange fields ranging from few to tens of Tesla driven splitting of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) density of states singularity by a magnitude proportional to the magnetization, and the exchange field penetrating into the superconductor to a depth comparable with the superconducting coherence length. This long range magnetic proximity effect in EuS/Al bilayers and the exchange splitting of the BCS peaks position and intensity were found to be influenced by the domain structure in EuS at the nanoscale present already in its unmagnetized state. Upon magnetizing the EuS the splitting was enhanced while peaks became symmetric. Conductance measurements as a function of bias voltage at the lowest temperatures could theoretically relate the line shape of the split BCS DoS with the characteristic domain structure in the ultra thin EuS layer. These results pave the way to engineering triplet superconducting correlations at domain walls in EuS/Al bilayers. Furthermore, the clear gap and splitting observed in our tunneling spectroscopy measurements show that it can be an excellent candidate for substituting strong magnetic fields in experiments studying Majorana bound states. Europium sulfide is a classic Heisenberg ferromagnetic insulator (FI) with a Curie temperature of 16.7 K A renewed interest in studying Ferromagnetic/superconductor structures came with the development of superconducting spintronics In the case of ferromagnetic insulators, a series of interesting phenomena have been predicted to occur in S/FI structures with spin-split density of states (DoSs), such as huge thermoelectric effects A spin-split superconducting DoSs is also an essential ingredient in Majorana-based quantum computing All these applications need a sizable splitting of the superconducting DoSs in a large temperature range below the superconducting critical temperature. A first and essential step towards controlling the magnitude of the exchange splitting is to understand the magnetic proximity effect induced by the FI material in an adjacent superconductor. Although different FI/S systems have been studied for almost three decades, there is still a great deal of controversy about the relation between the magnetic configuration of the EuS and the spin splitting induced in the superconductor Here, we present an accurate tunneling spectroscopy of the superconducting DoS of an EuS/Al bilayer in the temperature range 30 mK-1.2 K. The exchange splitting observed in the Al layer reaches up to 0.2 meV in the presence of a moderate in-plane magnetic field of 30 mT, which is applied in order to align the magnetic domains of the EuS. Once magnetized, the spin-splitting is also clearly observed at zero applied field. Most notable, however, is the fact that the experimental data exhibits the splitting even in the demagnetized phase of the EuS, i.e., even before the first application of a magnetic field. Moreover, the line shape of the BCS singularity is considerably reconstructed as compared to the standard BCS line shapes observed in the magnetically ordered state: In a homogeneous exchange-split superconductor, the total DoS is a sum of a spin-up and a spin-down BCS DoS, shifted in energy with respect to each other by the exchange splitting, resulting in a four-peak structure with the outer peaks higher than the inner ones In order to understand the experimental observations, we model the EuS as a periodic structure of magnetic domains of different sizes and compute the DoS of the Al film with the help of the quasiclassical Green's function formalism. Our analysis shows that an exchange splitting in the DoS of the Al layer before the magnetization of the EuS can only be obtained if the EuS layer consists predominantly of large do-mains, i.e. much larger than the superconducting coherence length. Yet, the fact that the BCS singularity is considerably reshaped in the demagnetized case indicates that domain walls are not that rare, and contribute sizeably to the tunneling spectroscopy. We identify the main physical processes responsible for the reconstruction of the BCS singularity around a domain wall, and make predictions about a possible scanning tunneling microscopy of the EuS/Al bilayer. Further information about the magnetic configuration of EuS can be extracted from the temperature dependence of the exchange splitting. Surprisingly there is a 10% reduction of the splitting when the temperature is varied from 30 to 900 mK. We attribute this large change of the splitting over a temperature range much smaller than the Curie temperature to the Al/EuS interface that may consist of single localized spins (Eu atoms) coupled to the EuS layer only by one bond. We support this hypothesis by a calculation of the average magnetic moment at the interface . Finally we use the well-pronounced gap to achieve a large tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) values at the magnetization reversal point B c ≈ 18.5 mT, ranging from 200 % at T = 30 mK up to 700 % at T = 850 mK. Notably this large TMR values are achieved using only one magnetic layer. Apart from serving as a measurement of the figure of merit for the hardness of the gap in a functional FI/S device, the large observed TMR suggest that Al/EuS systems can be used as building block for a superconducting spin based electronic devices. The tunneling spectroscopy of the EuS/Al bilayer has been done on EuS(5)/Al(7)/Al 2 O 3 /Al Samples are first cooled down from room temperature to 30 mK in a non-magnetic environment. Surprisingly, before the application of any magnetic field, the dI/dV versus V shows four clear peaks indicating an exchange splitting in the DoSs of the bottom Al layer (as shown in Fig. where ∆ i is the pairing potential of each superconductor forming the junction, e is the electron charge, and h ex is the exchange energy induced in the bottom Al layer in contact with the EuS film. Assuming equal pairing potentials in the two Al layers, the measurement is compatible with ∆ ≈ 230 μeV and an exchange splitting 2h ex ≈ 110 μeV. The latter is equivalent to an effective magnetic field B ex = 2h ex /gμ B ∼ 1 T, where g ≈ 2 is the Landé g-factor, and μ B is the Bohr magneton. Energy splittings comparable in magnitude have been reported in measurements on similar junctions, but only after applying a magnetic field We next apply an in-plane magnetic field (B) to the sample. As shown in Fig. Not only the position, but also the shape of the conductance peaks is different before and after the first magnetization of the EuS film. In the demagnetized phase, the amplitude of inner peaks (at | V |< 0.5 mV) is larger with respect to the outer ones. To the best of our knowledge this behavior has never been reported so far, and cannot be described by the oversimplified Tedrow-Meservey model that assumes an homogeneous exchange field induced in the superconductor Another striking observation is the sharpness of the tunneling conductance at the gap edge (black curve in Fig. After the first magnetization of the EuS film, the magnetic field dependence of the tunneling conductance follows the typical ferromagnetic hysteretic behavior. Figure By reversing the field direction (B < 0), i.e., anti-parallel to the EuS magnetization, the number and size of the domains with parallel magnetization is reduced. This leads to a decrease of the the spin-splitting down to the coercive H c ∼ -18.5 mT (see Fig. The junction hysteretic behaviour joined to the strong quenching of the differential conductance at sub-gap voltages (|eV | < 2∆h ex ) suggest the possibility to operate this structure as a magnetic switching device. Notably, such a device is based just on a single ferromagnetic layer and could, in principle, be exploited as a permanent memory element. The performance of the junction as a non-volatile memory can be quantified by its tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) evaluated from the hysteretic spectra of the dI/dV (B) curves shown in Fig. where G f w (G bk ) is the forward (backward) differential conductance. As shown in Fig. In addition, at higher bath temperatures (i.e., for T > 0.5 K) the TMR shows an interesting additional feature in the subgap region (around V 80 μV) that is even more sensitive to the magnetic switching (TMR> 700%). This sub-gap feature stems from the presence of the superconducting matching peaks which are activated by the temperature and exchange field in these junctions.These can be appreciated in Fig. From the tunneling conductances measured at different temperatures we extracted the temperature evolution of both, the exchange energy and the coercive field in a region of temperatures never explored so far for EuS. These results are presented in Fig. In all previous works on EuS/Al, the spin-splitting is modeled by assuming an homogeneous exchange energy h ex . In such a situation, the DoS of the Al-layer can be approximated by the sum of the DoS for spin up and spin down: where is the usual BCS DoS and Γ > 0 is the Dynes parameter describing inelastic scattering. The exchange energy ±h ex describes the splitting observed in the tunneling conductance of the FI/S-I-S tunnel junctions, and the shape of the dI/dV(V) derived from Eq. ( In the demagnetized case, although the total magnetization is negligibly small, a clear splitting is observed in the experiment ( black curve in Fig. The main assumption for our theoretical model is that the EuS consists of magnetic domains, typical for ferromagnetic materials. Indeed, it is known that EuS films are polycrystalline and consist of an ensemble of crystallites with intrinsic magnetization The spin-splitting observed in the differential conductance of FI/S-I-S junctions are attributed to the magnetic proximity effect, i.e to the exchange interaction between the spin moment of the Eu ions S and the spin density of conducting electrons s(r). To describe this interaction we assume a simple exchange Hamiltonian: where J is the interfacial coupling constant. By averaging Eq. ( Here n 2D is the two-dimensional concentration of Eu ions accessible to the Al electrons at the interface, S(x, y) is the average value of the interfacial local moment, σ are the Pauli spin matricies and z M is the position of the EuS/Al interface. By assuming such effective exchange interaction the spectrum of the superconductor adjacent to the EuS can be determined from the quasiclassical Green's function, ǧ, that in the diffusive limit satisfies the Usadel equation under the constraint ǧ2 = 1 and with suitable boundary conditions (details of the notations and the boundary problem are given in the Methods section). The exchange energy ĥ entering this equation consists of the Zeeman term and an interfacial exchange term, ĥ(r) = 1 2 gμ B σ • B + ĥex (r). The term in the r.h.s of ( Equation ( where Tr{. . . } stands for the trace in the Nambu space. It is easy to check that in the homogeneous case the solution of the Usadel equation gives the simple spin-split BCS DoSs of Eq. (2). In order to describe the polycrystalline phase of the EuS with random magnetization we model it by assuming a stripe of domains with alternating up and down magnetization (see Fig. It is instructive to focus first on the problem of two semiinfinite domains with opposite magnetization and a single domain wall at x = 0. This case in fact can be solved analytically. In Fig. where G T is the normal-state conductance of the tunneling barrier, and f (E) is the Fermi function. To extend the model to a realistic multi-domain structure we solved numerically the Usadel equation, and calculated the average DoS for an infinite stripe (see Fig. For the demagnetized phase of EuS we assume that L ↑ = L ↓ and explore the role of the domain size on the tunneling conductance. This is shown in Fig. After applying the magnetic field the ratio L ↑ /L ↓ is increased. By fixing the period of the structure L = L ↑ + L ↓ = 10ξ 0 we show in Fig. There are however two main discrepancies between the theoretical results and the measurements: On the one hand the peaks observed experimentally show a much larger broadening than seen in the calculated ones. This discrepancy is easy to understand recalling that in a real situation magneticdisorder, spin-orbit coupling and the effect of stray fields will broaden all the features The latter discrepancy is a consequence of the assumption we made that the sizes of all up and down domains is unique. In reality, the size of the domains follows certain distribution with an average domain size given, according to our previous results to ∼ 10ξ 0 . In order to describe this situation within our model, we assume for example that inside the up(down) domain there is a smaller down(up) domain. Fig. The last striking feature to be explained is the strong temperature dependence of the exchange coupling observed in Fig. According to our description of the magnetic proximity effect, the exchange field is proportional to the average (localized) spin, Eq. 4. In order to estimate this average we have calculate the magnetization for a cubic lattice with S=7/2 in the nodes and with Heisenberg exchange interaction between nearest neighbors. For the exchange coupling of J = 0.0688 meV, we can recover T C = 16.7 K, using the self-consistency equations of the RPA theory. This calculation (see Fig. An alternative explanation is that the observed 10% reduction of the effective splitting in going from 25 to 900 mK could be attributed to the increase of ξ 0 , and hence to the reduction of the averaged exchange field. This could be correct provided the B = 0 data in Fig. In order to understand this issue we propose the following scenario: Most likely, the EuS surface has a portion of spins which do not have the 5+1 coordination (here 1 stands for the Al atom). There should be spins which stand out of the lattice and are coupled to the rest of the EuS by just one single bond with the same exchange J = 0.0688 meV as the bulk Eu spin. These loose surface spins correspond to a 1+5 coordination (now 5 stands for Al atoms and 1 for Eu). For such spins, we get the cyan curve in the plot of Fig. In summary, by combining tunneling conductance measurements and a microscopic model based on the quasiclassical Green's functions we provided an exhaustive description of the magnetic proximity effect in ferromagnetic insulator/superconductor EuS/Al bilayers. We identified two different magnetic scenarios which change whether the system was first magnetized or not. By comparing our calculations of the density of states and tunneling conductance with the measurements we conclude that the EuS film consists of crystallite with sizes (and domains) larger than the superconduct-ing coherence length. In the demagnetized phase of the EuS layer, each of these crystallites has an independent magnetic moment randomly oriented. We modeled such crystallites as magnetic domains that caused an exchange field parallel to the local average magnetization. Because of the large mean size of the domains in comparison to the coherence length of the superconductor, even before applying any magnetic field the spectrum of the Al layer shows a well defined spin-splitting. By applying a magnetic field the magnetization of the crystallites start to form larger magnetic meta-domains with an homogeneous magnetization parallel to the applied field. This manifests as an enhancement of spin-splitting of the density of states of the superconductor and a modification of dI/dV (V ) curves towards the ones assumed in previous works for an ideal homogenoeus magnetization. Moreover, the observed spin-splitting, evolving in a temperature range much smaller than the Curie temperature of the bulk EuS, reveals the presence of weakly bound spins at the interface of the EuS/Al. Because of the large spin-splitting observed even in the absence of any applied magnetic field, the EuS/Al material combination is an excellent platform for the development of devices requiring the coexistence of superconducting correlations and spin-splitting exchange fields, as for example in the field of Majorana-based quantum computation . The structure of the magnetic tunnel junctions investigated is EuS(4)/Al(4)/Al 2 O 3 /Al(8) (the thickness is in nanometers), where materials are listed in the order in which they were deposited. The junctions were fabricated in a vacuum chamber with a base pressure 2 × 10 -8 Torr using in situ shadow masks. To facilitate the growth of smooth films, a thin Al 2 O 3 (1 nm) seed layer was deposited onto chemically and further in situ oxygen-plasma cleaned glass substrates. The substrate was cooled to liquid-nitrogen temperature for the growth of EuS and Al layers. After warming to room temperature, a thin Al 2 O 3 barrier was formed by plasma oxidization of the 4 nm Al film surface. The top Al film was deposited at room temperature over this, and then the junctions were capped with 6 nm of Al 2 O 3 for protection. We describe the electronic properties of the superconducting film with the help of the quasiclassical Green function ǧ(r), obtained as a solution of the Usadel, Eq. (TeqUsadel0), equation where g ≈ 2 is the Al g-factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, B is the magnetic field, and ĥex (r) is the exchange field coming from the magnetic interface that in general is inhomogenoues in space. The boundary conditions for ǧ inside the Al film at its upper (z = 0) and lower (z = -d) surfaces are obtained by infinitesimal integration across each interface, assuming that ǧ vanishes identically both in the Al 2 O 3 barrier (z > 0) and in the ferromagnetic insulator EuS (z < -d), where v(x, y) = -1 2 Jn 2D σ • S(x, y). Thus, the polarization of the superconductor is intimately connected with the magnetic structure of the EuS film through the quantity v(x, y) in Eq. Despite the fact that the exchange field ĥex (r) is strongly localized at the lower surface of the Al film, the tunneling density of states probed on the upper surface is modified by ĥex (r) equally strongly as on the lower surface, provided d is small compared to the superconducting correlation length. Specifically, if v D/d we find that the Green function on the upper surface ( ǧ0 ) satisfies a 2D version of the Usadel equation, which differs from Eq. ( 