This paper reports a practical method of generating circularly polarized terahertz (THz) waves from intrinsic Josephson junctions (IJJs) and controlling their polarization states by external local heating. We theoretically find that a mesa-structure IJJ whose geometry is almost square can emit circularly polarized THz waves by local heating of the mesa. Moreover, we demonstrate that the polarization states of the THz waves change dramatically with the local heating position. Our results indicate that the use of local heating can provide a high level of controllability of the THz emissions and significantly extend the range of applications of IJJ-based THz emitters. Terahertz (THz) electromagnetic (EM) waves have potential applications in a wide range of fields, e.g. nondestructive inspection of materials, medical diagnosis, bio-sensing, and high-speed wireless communication In this paper, we present a method of generating and controlling circularly polarized THz waves from IJJ mesas by using external local heating. We consider a IJJ mesa whose geometry is almost square and whose temperature distribution is controlled by laser heating (see Fig. To verify this idea for polarization control, we performed a numerical simulation on THz emission from a IJJ mesa such as the one described above. On the basis of the antenna theory, we set W and L so that (L -W )/L almost equals to the Q factor of the emitter. This restriction results in the ±π/2 phase difference between two orthogonal cavity modes when the emission frequency equals to the middle of the resonant frequencies of those modes where ǫ c is the dielectric constant of the junctions, c is the light velocity, j ex is the external current. The electromagnetic (EM) fields in the IJJs are given by ∂y and D is the thickness of the insulating layers of the IJJs. Moreover, we set ǫ c = 17.64, D = 1.2 nm, σ c = 10 S/m, and j c = 2.18 • 10 3 A/cm 2 . For simplicity, the laser heating was simulated by decreasing j c in a square area (20 μm × 20 μm) in the x-y plane, As mentioned before, the excitation of the TM(1,0) and TM(0,1) modes in the mesa must be excited in order to generate circularly polarized waves. The electric fields of the TM(1,0) and TM(0,1) modes are given by, E 1,0 = A 1,0 sin (πx/W ), E 0,1 = A 0,1 sin (πy/L), where Here, f i is the frequency of the input wave (i.e. AC Josephson frequency), δ s is the phase differences between the TM(1,0) and TM(0,1) modes. As described in these equations, the TM(1,0) mode is antisymmetric with respect to the y axis, while the TM(0,1) mode is antisymmetric with respect to the x-axis. Hence, the j c distribution must be antisymmetric with respect to both axes in order to excite both cavity modes. In conclusion, we devised a practical method of generating and controlling circularly polarized THz waves from intrinsic Josephson junctions (IJJs) by using external local heating. For obtaining the circularly polarized THz waves, a mixture of two kinds of THz waves whose polarizations are orthogonal to each other is required. In this study, we examined a mesa-structure IJJ whose width and length are almost equal and excited TM(1,0) and TM(0,1) mode simultaneously by using external local heating. We found that the mesa emits circularly polarized THz waves when we locally heated the corners of the mesa. Furthermore, we revealed that the ellipticity and handedness of the THz waves change dramatically with the heating position. Recently, emissions of circularly polarized THz wave were experimentally reported from a truncated-edge square mesa See supplementary material for the snapshots of the electromagnetic modes in the mesa changing with the heating position.