We observe many-body pairing in a two-dimensional gas of ultracold fermionic atoms at temperatures far above the critical temperature for superfluidity. For this, we use spatially resolved radio-frequency spectroscopy to measure pairing energies over a wide range of temperatures and interaction strengths. In the strongly interacting regime where the scattering length between fermions is on the same order as the inter-particle spacing, the pairing energy in the normal phase significantly exceeds the intrinsic two-body binding energy of the system and shows a clear dependence on local density. This implies that pairing in this regime is driven by many-body correlations, rather than two-body physics. We find this effect to persist at temperatures close to the Fermi temperature which demonstrates that pairing correlations in strongly interacting two-dimensional fermionic systems are remarkably robust against thermal fluctuations. Fermion pairing is the key ingredient for superconductivity and superfluidity in fermionic systems Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC)-BCS crossover of ultracold atoms constitutes a versatile framework to explore the normal phase of strongly correlated fermions (Fig. Here, we address these questions by studying the normal phase of such a 2D ultracold Fermi gas trapped in a harmonic potential. The underlying potential leads to an inhomogeneous density distribution and by making use of a local density approximation, we can directly measure the density dependence of many-body properties. We perform our experiments with a two-component mixture of 6 Li atoms with approximately 3 × 10 4 particles per spin state that are loaded into a single layer of an anisotropic harmonic optical trap. The trap frequencies ω z ≈ 2π × 6.95 kHz and ω z ≈ 2π × 22 Hz in the axial and radial directions result in an aspect ratio of about 300:1. The kinematic 2D regime is reached by ensuring that the thermodynamic energy scales, temperature (T ) and chemical potential (μ), are smaller than the axial confinement energy. We tune the scattering length a 2D by means of a broad magnetic Feshbach resonance To investigate fermion pairing in our system, we use radio-frequency (RF) spectroscopy. The idea underlying this technique is that the bare atomic transition frequen- cies between distinct hyperfine states are shifted due to interactions or pairing between atoms in an ensemble (see Fig. , where m is the mass of a 6 Li atom where n 0 (r) and n (r, ω RF ) are the density distribution of atoms in state |b without and with the RF pulse. An example of the tomographically reconstructed spectra is shown in Fig. In order to achieve a sufficient population of the unpaired branch, we apply the quasiparticle spectroscopy method pioneered in The pairing energy ∆E between the two branches distinguishes between two different pairing scenarios. If ∆E coincides with the two-body bound state E B , we are in the two-body regime. In contrast, we associate the situation of a density (E F )-dependent ∆E exceeding E B with many-body pairing. In Fig. In Fig. At a qualitative level, the main observations from Fig. surement on the BEC side of the crossover. In contrast, for the spectrum displayed in Fig To quantitatively study the change in the nature of pairing from the BEC to the BCS side, we measure the spectra at different magnetic fields and extract ∆E in units of the two-body binding energy E B . In Fig. In Fig. Our qualitative observation of a vanishing gap for weaker attraction is consistent with the picture of the normal phase in the BCS limit being a gapless Fermi liquid We now turn to a discussion of our results in the context of current theoretical understanding and previous experimental work. In After evaporation we introduce imbalance by a sequence of Landau-Zener passages at B = 1000 G where the interaction strength is relatively weak (see Fig. 15 %. As we operate in the normal phase, we do not observe a phase separation into a balanced core and a polarized wing as one observes in a superfluid Final state effects: In an interacting system, the non-interacting free-free transition is not a suitable reference anymore, as interactions -both in the initial and final state -lead to density-dependent mean-field shifts. We address this question, as explained in the main text, by considering only energy differences. In addition, the final state interactions lead to a broadening of the RF transitions which reduces the resolution. This effect can be significant for the |1 |3 -mixture where the final state is most likely a short-lived repulsive polaron Fitting Procedure We model the RF response at a fixed density and interaction strength by a combination of a symmetric Gaussian profile accounting for the quasi-particle peak and an asymmetric threshold function describing the bound-free peak. For the case of dimers as well as zero temperature BCS theory, the line shape Γ of the bound-free peak can be calculated from Fermi's golden rule and is given in terms of the RF frequency ω by (see Section 3.1) where E th = E B denotes the threshold energy for pair breaking, i.e. the binding energy. Due to the 1 ω 2 factor, the formula crucially depends on the exact knowledge of the reference frequency (the free-free transition which is set to zero here). This frequency can be affected by mean field shifts, however, which we account for by including a free parameter η and replacing It is important to note that the maximum of the experimentally recorded RF response does not necessarily coincide with E th . The peak position is shifted towards higher energies due to symmetric broadening of the asymmetric response function, as given in particular by the Fourier broadening, as well as final state effects. Similar to what has been presented in where the threshold energy E th relative to the noninteracting free-free transition energy, the amplitude of the bound peak A bound , the frequency offset η and the width σ broad of the Gaussian broadening are kept as free parameters, while the final state binding energy E f B is fixed for each magnetic field. We observe the broadening to be mostly given by the Fourier limit when using the |1 |2 -mixture. However, there is additional broadening in the |1 |3 -mixture, possibly due to a short lived repulsive polaron final state We extract the temperature of the system with the method established in where λ T is the thermal de Broglie wavelength and β = 1 kBT . Depending on the magnetic field B, the effective temperature exponent α specifies whether the particles are treated as dimers or as free atoms. For ln (k F a 2D ) ≤ 0 we assume the system to be molecular and use α = 2 whereas for ln (k F a 2D ) ≥ 2 the system is fermionic with α = 1. Between these two limits we interpolate α linearly as described in Local density approximation: Due to a spatially inhomogeneous density distribution the thermodynamic quantities T /T F and ln(k F a 2D ) vary from the centre to the outsides of the cloud. We relate these local quantities to those of a homogeneous system by applying the local density approximation (LDA). This approach is justified as long as the external potential varies weakly over the correlation length of the corresponding homogeneous system. In the normal phase this translates into the condition k F (r)R 1, where R is the typical spatial extent of the cloud which in turn accounts for the scale of variation of the potential. For our typical experimental parameters, we can reliably apply the LDA up to around T /T F ≈ 1.5. Consequently we restrict our analysis of the pairing gap in Fig. Absorption imaging: To determine the density n 2D (r) we use high intensity absorption imaging at intensities approximately equal to the saturation intensity. To compensate for the Doppler shift the atoms experience during the imaging, we perform a linear ramp of the laser frequency as described in Atoms in adjacent layers of optical trap: From tomographic RF measurements We quantify the different regimes of the BEC-BCS crossover by the local parameters T /T F and ln(k F a 2D ). The temperature T of the sample is determined by the fitting procedure described above. The Fermi momentum and temperature are directly related to the measured local density via k F = √ 4πn and where n is the atomic density of a single component. In addition, the 2D scattering length is obtained from the harmonic oscillator length l z = /mω z in z-direction and the 3D scattering length a 3D following where A ≈ 0.905. We set the scattering length by adjusting the magnetic offset field in the vicinity of the broad Feshbach resonance at 690 G (832 G) in the |1 |3 (|1 |2 ) mixture as illustrated in Fig. For the interpretation of our data, we compare the experimentally obtained pairing gap to the two-body bound state energy E B . It is calculated from the transcendental equation An overview over the experimental parameters can be found in Tab. S 1. ) 2 approaches the square of the bound-state wave function; thus the BCS spectral function asymptotically crosses over into BEC spectral function for the bound and the free branch. The two branches bend outwards in Fig. The RF response in the absence of final-state interactions involving species |c takes the form where Ω is the Rabi frequency, f (E) the Fermi function, and ξ(ω) = (ω 2 -∆ 2 )/2ω. N b denotes the number of particles in state |b , and we have used the constant density of states ρ(E) = m/(2π 2 ) in 2D. The Θ step function constrains the response to two branches: first, boundfree transitions from the lower branch occur only above a threshold frequency ω Second, free-free transitions from the thermally excited upper branch appear at ω < 0, but are too weak to be observed at low temperature, cf. Fig. It is a remarkable consequence of pairing in 2D that, within the BCS theory, the RF threshold remains E th = E B -U throughout the crossover. Hence, one cannot distinguish between two-body and many-body pairing by measuring the bound-free transition alone. Only by occupying the upper branch and measuring the free peak at E free = -∆ -U can one determine the pairing energy ∆E = E th -E free = E B +∆ in a way that requires no knowledge of the mean-field shift U and quantifies the many-body gap ∆. The measurement of the pairing gap presented in the main text relies crucially on a sufficiently large population in both the paired and the quasi-particle branch. At finite temperature, quasiparticles are excited either thermally or by introducing a small imbalance. For the studied temperature range of T /T F 1.5 we do not observe a significant thermal occupation and thus we work with slight imbalance. This finding is illustrated in Fig. where n f (n d ) denotes the free (bound) density of particles. Indicated in Fig. In this section, we show the spatially resolved response function I(r, ω RF ) measured at 1000 G with a |1 |2mixture, which corresponds to ln(k F a 2D ) ∼ 3.5 and therefore represents the weakly interacting limit of the 2D BEC-BCS crossover. At this interaction strength, the binding energy is E B /h ≈ 7 Hz, which is much smaller than all thermodynamic scales and our experimental RF resolution. In The response also exhibits a density-dependent meanfield shift as expected from an interacting system of fermions. Although it is difficult to make a reliable statement about pairing in this regime due to our finite resolution, the presence of a single branch does suggest the absence of a gap that is larger than the scale of our resolution, or in other words ∆E 0.05 E F at the center of the trap. This should be contrasted with the spectra at ln(k F a 2D ) ∼ 1, where the measured ∆E ≈ 0.6 E F . 