We have fabricated 5 nm ultra-thin NbN nanowires that form a dense and regular array in the linear channels of mesoporous SBA-15 silica substrates. Bulk NbN is a well-known classical superconductor with Tc of 16 K. We show that, by being incorporated into this nanostructure, the composite material exhibits typical quasi-one-dimensional characteristics. We compare the superconducting properties with those of superconducting Pb nanowires of same dimensionality in identical configuration within the linear SBA-15 pores. While Pb nanowire arrays show a pronounced crossover from 1D superconductivity at high temperatures to a 3D bulk superconducting state in the low temperature regime with true zero resistance triggered by transversal Josephson interaction, this transition appears to be completely absent in the NbN nanowire array. The small coherence length in NbN, which strongly suppresses the Josephson coupling is discussed as the origin of this difference. A quasi one-dimensional (quasi-1D) superconductor is a superconducting material which is confined in a 1D geometry of lateral dimensionality equal to or less than the superconducting coherence length of the corresponding bulk material length and the separation of the chains, they can have a weak transverse coupling via the Josephson or proximity effect, respectively We recently presented a study of an artificially grown array structure of parallel ultra-thin Pb nanowires arranged in close proximity in the pores of an insulating mesoporous SBA-15 substrate (Pb-SBA-15) NbN-SBA-15 can be prepared in a manner similar to Pb-SBA-15, but within an N atmosphere to provide the N source. NbN-SBA-15 nanowires were prepared in the mesoporous SBA-15 substrates similarly to Pb-SBA-15 The ratio of ~1 further demonstrates the high filling factor of the SBA-15 pores. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) as a surface-sensitive quantitative spectroscopic measuring the element composition was used to verify the metallic nature of the nanowire surfaces. The DC magnetization was measured under zero-field (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) conditions in a Quantum Design Vibrating Sample SQUID magnetometer on a powder sample of 0.5 mg containing many of the small 10 to 100 micrometer SBA-15 crystallites filled with NbN. The specific heat was measured with a homemade alternating temperature (AC) calorimeter A total mass of 500 μg consisting of a few micrometer-size grains containing the filled SBA-15 crystals and mixed with insulating GE7031 varnish as thermal compound was mounted on the calorimeter chip. The calorimeter was suspended on thin phosphor-bronze wires and contains a resistive Joule heater on the back and a thermocouple connected to the thermal bath. The latter is used to monitor the temperature modulation of the sample using a low-noise preamplifier and a digital lock-in amplifier. Although Tc of NbN is higher, it appears that the superconductivity is weaker and the reason is probably a weaker transverse coupling of the nanowires, thus preserving the 1D nature of these ultra-thin nanowires down to very low temperatures. This contrasts with the dimensional crossover observed for the Pb-SBA-15 nanowires, which originates from a transverse Josephson coupling, which helps establish a 3D bulk phase-coherent superconducting state in macroscopic grains of this composite material Fig. A very similar behavior has been observed for Pb-SBA-15, which is likely a consequence of the 1D nature of superconductivity (see Fig. It is noteworthy that the specific heat data of NbN-SBA-15 and Pb-SBA-15 are so similar, although there is a marked difference in the magnetization data with a much sharper transition for Pb-SBA-15. This is due to the fact that the two quantities react The coherence length of bulk NbN is 6.5 nm In the following, we will roughly estimate the order of magnitude of the phase ordering transition temperature of the NbN nanowire arrays. Since NbN is a Type II BCS material, the free electron concentration can be estimated from Eq. 1 and 2: ( where vF is Fermi velocity, εF is Fermi level, Eg is the energy gap of superconductor. The carrier concentration is 7.5 x 10 25 m -3 and is close to the experimental bulk value of 2 x 10 26 m -3 We have previously found that in 5 nm ultra-thin Pb nanowires arranged in form of a parallel array within mesoporous SBA-15 silica single crystals, a dimensional crossover from a 1D phase-incoherent fluctuating superconducting state to a 3D bulk superconducting state occurs, characterized by global phase coherence throughout the macroscopic nanowire array. The much more continuous magnetic transition, and the one order of magnitude smaller Meissner magnetization of identically arranged 5 nm NbN nanowires in the pores of SBA-15, suggest that the NbN nanowire arrays remain in the 1D fluctuating state to the lowest temperature of our experiments. Although bulk NbN has far more favorable properties for superconducting applications, such as a higher Tc and critical field, it appears to be less promising for applications in the form of ultra-thin nanowire arrays due to its much shorter coherence length 0 = 6.5 nm. This strongly suppresses transversal Josephson coupling of adjacent nanowires within the array. While the nanostructured Pb has shown the potential to remain a superconductor with zero resistance and improved superconducting parameters only a 1D fluctuating superconducting state is found in NbN. Our nanostructured NbN is therefore not a useful superconductor in the technical sense, although phase-incoherent Cooper pairing with finite resistance certainly exists up to 14 K. This reveals the limit of the application of such a nano-structuring technique to applied superconductivity for classical superconductors with higher critical temperatures than Pb, since most of the classical type-II 'old high temperature superconductors' such as NbTi, V3Si or Nb3Sn have rather short superconducting coherence lengths.