The high upper critical field and low anisotropy of iron-based superconductors make them being particularly attractive for high-field applications. However, the current carrying capability needs to be enhanced by overcoming the weak-link effect between misaligned grains inside wire and tape conductors. Here we demonstrate a high transport critical current density (Jc) reaching 1.5  10 5 A/cm 2 (Ic = 437 A) at 4.2 K and 10 T in Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2 (Ba-122) tapes prepared by a combination of conventional powder-in-tube method and optimized hot-press technique. The transport Jc measured at 4.2 K under high magnetic fields of 27 T is still on the level of 5.5  10 4 A/cm 2 , which is much higher than those of low-temperature superconductors. This is the first report of hot-pressed Ba-122 superconducting tapes and these Jc values are by far the highest ever reported for iron-based superconducting wires and tapes. These highperformance tapes exhibit high degree of c-axis texture of Ba-122 grains and low anisotropy of transport Jc, showing great potential for construction of high-field superconducting magnets. Since the advent of iron-based superconductors in 2008, Significant researches have been undertaken to fabricate iron-based superconducting wires and tapes, among which the powder in tube (PIT) method is widely adopted. Previous works in fabricating tapes with hot-pressing process are usually using Sr-122 materials. The c-axis texture of the rolled Sr-122 superconducting tapes can be significantly increased by the hot-pressing process. In addition, we find the texture value of the flat-rolled Ba-122 tapes are higher than that of Sr-122 tapes, The precursor of Ba-122 was prepared by a solid-state reaction method and the tape was prepared by the ex-situ PIT process with Sn (5%) as additive. Ba fillings (99%), K pieces (99.95%), As (99.95%) and Fe (99.99%) powders with a nominal composition of Ba0.6K0.5Fe2As2 were loaded into Nb tube after ball-milling for 10 hours under argon atmosphere. Then the tube was heat-treated at 900 °C for 35 hours. The sintered precursor was ground into powder, mixed with Sn material in an agate mortar and finally packed into Ag tube (Outer diameter: 8 mm and inner diameter: 5 mm). Then the Ag tube was swaged and drawn into a wire with diameter of 1.9 mm and flat rolled into tapes. The hot-pressing process was adopted to the final tapes with a pressure about 15 MPa at 880 °C for 1 hour. The transport critical current Ic was measured by the standard four-probe method with a criterion of 1 μV/cm under 4.2 K at the High Field Laboratory for Superconducting Materials (HFLSM) at Sendai. We carried out Ic measurement in a 14 T superconducting magnet and we also measured the Ic properties of the tapes by a hybrid magnet with the fields up to 27 T. The phase construction of superconducting cores was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation after peeling off the Ag sheathe. The Resistance vs. Temperature curve and the Moment vs. Temperature curves with VSM plugin were measured on Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). In order to investigate the vortex pinning mechanism of our tape, we used the Dew-Hughes model Fig. The electromagnetic properties of the superconducting core were examined. Fig. XRD patterns of the superconducting core of HP tape are shown in Fig. Comparing the texture and core density of the tapes which fabricated by cold-pressing method with our results, we hold that the texture may a dominant parameter which influence the transport Jc of Ba-122 tapes in this work. The electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) technique is an important tool to thoroughly characterize the microstructure, grain size and crystal orientation of the superconducting core. Most grains with the diameter lower than 2 μm are evenly constructed parallel to the caxis. The grain size of the HP Ba-122 superconducting tape is smaller than that of the HP Sr-122 tapes. It is found that grain boundary pinning is dominant in the vortex pinning mechanism in HP Sr-122 superconducting tapes. In this work, we systematically studied the properties of the high-performance Ba-122 superconducting tapes fabricated by hot-pressing process. The transport Jc values achieve 1.5  10 5 A/cm 2 (Ic = 437 A) at 10 T and 5.5  10 4 A/cm 2 at 27 T, respectively. This is the first report in Ba-122 tapes with such high transport Jc values and these are also the highest values ever reported in iron-based superconducting wires and tapes. These values are superior to NbTi, Nb3Sn and MgB2 tapes or wires. We find a high degree c-axis texture in the Ba-122 tapes and about 42.8% of number fraction of grain boundaries are within 9° These Jc results further strengthen the position of iron-based superconductor as a competitor to other superconductors in high field applications. 