We study the electric transport properties of Li x (NH 3 ) y Fe 2 (Te z Se 1-z ) 2 single crystals with z = 0 and 0.6 in the mixed state. Thermally-activated flux-flow, vortex glass and flux-flow Hall effect (FFHE) behaviors are observed. Experimental results show that there are rich vortex phases existing in these systems and the vortex liquid states occupy broad regions of phase diagrams. Further analysis suggests that thermal fluctuation plays an important role in the vortex phase diagrams of Li x (NH 3 ) y Fe 2 (Te z Se 1-z ) 2 . Moreover, for Li x (NH 3 ) y Fe 2 Se 2 , there is no sigh reversal of FFHE in the mixed state and a scaling behavior |ρ xy (μ 0 H)| = Aρ xx (μ 0 H) β with β ∼ 2.0 is observed. Since the discovery of LaOFeAs Among IBSCs, the iron-chalcogenide SC FeSe has a relative low and nearly isotropic μ 0 H c2 with low T c (∼ 8 K) Besides A x Fe 2-y Se 2 and (Li 1-x Fe x OH)FeSe, AM-NH 3 cointercalated FeSe (AM = alkali, alkali-earth, and rare-earth metals) forms another class of iron-chalcogenide SCs with high T c (> 40 K) Single crystals of LiFeSe-122 and LiFeTeSe-122 were synthesized by the low-temperature ammonothermal technique. The detailed experimental procedure and characterizations of crystals were described in previous work Figs. 1 and 2 present the longitudinal resistivity ρ(T, μ 0 H) of LiFeSe-122 and LiFeTeSe-122 single crystals near the superconducting transition region for H ab and H c, respectively. The field-induced broadenings of resistive transitions and resistive tail behaviors are obvious, especially for the field along c axis. Similar behaviors have also been observed in (Li, Fe)OHFeSe, SmFeAsO 0.85 and cuprates where U = J c0 BV L is the thermally-activated energy (TAE) or flux pinning energy, and ρ c = ν 0 LB/J c0 , which is usually considered to be temperature independent. According to the condensation model, U(T, μ 0 H) = U 0 (μ 0 H)(1 -t) q , where t = T /T c (T c is the superconducting transition temperature), q = 2 -n/2 (n depends on the dimensionality of the vortex system with the range from 0 to 3) and U 0 (μ 0 H) is the apparent activated energy and Thus, there is a linear relationship between lnρ(T, μ 0 H) and 1/T in TAFF region (Arrhenius relation) and the slope and y-axial intercept correspond to U 0 (μ 0 H) and lnρ 0 (μ 0 H), respectively. As shown in Fig. Although the lnρ(T, μ 0 H) vs. 1/T can be fitted linearly, there are relative large fitting errors for H c because the Arrhenius relation can only be satisfied in a narrow region. It suggests that the assumptions of linear temperature dependence of U(T, μ 0 H) and temperature-independent ρ 0f may not be valid, leading to lnρ(T, μ 0 H) vs. 1/T deviating from Arrhenius relation where ρ c and U 0 are temperature independent and value of T c is derived from Arrhenius relation. All fits (black dashed lines) using Eq. ( Same analysis procedure can be applied to LiFeTeSe-122. As shown in Fig. The fitted U 0 and q at various fields for both samples are shown in Fig. where μ 0 H irr is an irreversible field and γ, δ are scaling parameters. In LiFeSe-122, when assuming δ = 2, the field is parallel to ab plane, the value of γ is 0.57(3) and 0.67 is 0.17 As shown in Fig. According to the VG model close to the glass transition temperature, T g . In Eq. ( Figure and s is the glass critical exponent. T g can be extracted by applying the relation (d ln ρ/dT ) -1 ∝ (T -T g ) to the resistive tail, and T * is defined as the temperature deviating from the straight line, as shown in Fig. Based on the values of T g and T * extracted from VG model and μ 0 H c2 defined from the 90% ρ n , we plot the vortex phase diagrams of LiFeSe-122 and LiFeTeSe-122 (Fig. The Hall effect in the mixed state is another measurement to study vortex dynamics. Fig. As shown in Fig. In summary, the field-induced resistive broadenings of superconducting transitions and resistive tail behaviors have been observed in Li x (NH 3 ) y Fe 2 (Te z Se 1-z ) 2 single crystals. The detailed analysis shows that these results are associated with the TAFF and VG behaviors. Moreover, the thermal fluctuation plays an important role in the vortex dynamics of Li x (NH 3 ) y Fe 2 (Te z Se 1-z ) 2 single crystals, especially for LiFeSe-122, resulting in broad vortex liquid regions in the vortex phase diagrams. The FFHE with β ∼ 2 indicates the relatively weak vortex pinning force in LiFeSe-122 when magnetic field is along the c-axis and T approaches T c .