We study the dynamics of the Bogoliubov wave packet in superconductors and calculate the supercurrent carried by the wave packet. We discover an anomalous contribution to the supercurrent, related to the quantum metric of the Bloch wave function. This anomalous contribution is most important for flat or quasiflat bands, as exemplified by the attractive Hubbard models on the Creutz ladder and sawtooth lattice. Our theoretical framework is general and can be used to study a wide variety of phenomena, such as spin transport and exciton transport. Charge transport in solids is one of the oldest problems in condensed matter physics. In the early days of the band theory of solids, the velocity of the Bloch electron was argued to be given by the group velocity, which is solely determined by the band dispersion A simple yet powerful method to study the transport of Bloch electrons is the semiclassical approximation. In this approach, the charge carriers are interpreted as wave packets sharply localized in the momentum space. The evolution of the wave packet is described by the dynamics of its momentum and center of mass, where the Berry curvature appears naturally In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of the Bogoliubov wave packet and analyze the supercurrent carried by it. Remarkably, we discover a geometric contribution to the supercurrent, which we call the anomalous velocity, in the sense that it involves the quantum metric of the Bloch wave function and does not depend on the group velocity of the Bloch electron. The integration of * paivi.torma@aalto.fi the anomalous velocity gives rise to the geometric superfluid weight To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that identifies the anomalous velocity contribution to the supercurrent, although transport phenomena in superconductors have been intensively investigated using various methods, such as the Boltzmann equation By using the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, we go beyond the simplest s-wave pairing case Our theoretical framework is general but for concreteness we focus on superconductors. We start from the BdG Hamiltonian, which captures the essential physics of superconducting states and also describes other phenomena, such as exciton condensation where c † σ (r) is the operator that creates a free fermion with spin σ =↑, ↓ at position r, μ is the chemical potential, and h σσ ′ (r) is the single particle Hamiltonian for fermions in a periodic potential. For simplicity we assume that the single particle Hamiltonian preserves the time reversal symmetry, which enables us to write the BdG wave function in a simple way and therefore the geometric effects appear clearly. To simplify the notation, we take h σσ ′ (r) = h σ (r)δ σ,σ ′ , and then h ↑ (r) = h * ↓ (r) ≡ h(r), as a result of the time reversal symmetry. Furthermore, we focus on the spin singlet pairing potential ∆(r, r ′ ), which is assumed to be nonzero only if rr ′ is a lattice vector, and then it can be factorized as ∆(r, r ′ ) = ∆ 0 (r)δ x,x ′ χ([r]-[r ′ ]), where r = [r]+x and To study the supercurrent, we introduce a phase factor to the pairing potential, ∆(r, r ′ ) → e iq•(r+r ′ ) ∆(r, r ′ ). For convenience we will use the terminology "electric current"; however, our results can also be applied to a charge neutral fermionic superfluid since the electric current we are studying is actually generated by the phase twist of the order parameter, and we do not require that the fermions carry true electric charge. The supercurrent can be obtained by evaluating the expectation value of the electric current operator where the single particle velocity operators are v↑ = -v * ↓ = -i[r ↑ , h(r)], with r↑ is the position operator of the up spin particle. A crucial difference between a superconductor and a metal (or an insulator) is that, in a superconductor, the electric current is different from the quasiparticle current because a Bogoliubov quasiparticle is a mix of a particle and a hole and therefore its average charge is smaller than the charge of an electron with the index α represents quantum numbers of the solutions, including momentum and band index. The spinor ψ α (r) = [u α (r), v α (r)] T is the wave function of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle, and u and v are the particle and hole amplitudes, respectively. Calculating the expectation value of the electric current operator in the BCS state, we find (see Appendix A for details) where β = 1/(k B T ), k B the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature, j e,α = ψ α |v e |ψ α is the quasiparticle charge current, ve = v↑ I and I is the identity matrix in the particle-hole space, and j qp,α = ψ α |v qp |ψ α is the quasiparticle current, with vqp = -i[r, H] and r = rI the velocity and position operators of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle, respectively. The existence of two types of currents in superconductors is known In general, the BdG Hamiltonian Eq. ( Within the isolated band approximation, the BdG equation, Eq. (3), can be solved using the following ansatz where m k (r) is the periodic part of the Bloch function of the up spin band. The Berry connection a i (k) and the quantum metric g ij (k) of the Bloch band are defined through m k (r), where i, j = x, y, z are spatial indices, and ∂ i ≡ ∂ ki means the derivative with respect to k i . The spinor (u k , v k ) T is the Bogoliubov wave function in the Bloch basis. The physical picture behind this ansatz is clear: in the q = 0 limit, it describes a Cooper pair formed by Bloch electrons with opposite momentum and spin. For finite q, the Cooper pair (with the wave function proportional to e i2q•r u k v * k ) acquires nonzero total momentum and therefore carries electric current. The spinor (u k , v k ) T can be determined by solving the eigenvalue problem (see Appendix B 1), where ξ k = ε kμ, with ε k is the Bloch energy, ∆ k (q) = ∆ 0,k (q)χ k , ∆ 0,k (q) = m k+q |∆ 0 (r)|m k-q , and χ k is the Fourier transform of χ([r] -[r ′ ]). The eigenvalues of Eq. ( where 2, and s = ±1 labels the upper and lower Bogoliubov bands. The corresponding wave functions satisfy A. Wave packet and its dynamics The wave packet can be constructed using the quasiparticle wave functions where W s k is a normalized distribution sharply localized around the mean wave vector k s c . The center of mass of the wave packet has the same form as in nonsuperconducting systems Here A s (k) is the Berry connection of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle, consisting of contributions from the noninteracting Bloch function and the spinor (u k , v k ) T . In nonsuperconducting systems, the mass center coincides with the charge center The dynamics of the wave packet can be obtained from the time-dependent variational principle where E s k s c (q) replaces the noninteracting dispersion and ) is the Berry curvature of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle, which actually does not appear in our system because the momentum is conserved. For inhomogeneous systems, like cold atomic gases in a harmonic trap In this paper we focus on homogeneous systems where k s c is conserved, and therefore it can be replaced by k without confusion. The quasiparticle current is directly given by ṙs c , which in the small q limit is where E k = E k (q = 0). As expected, the quasiparticle current is the group velocity of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle To find the quasiparticle charge current, we write the Heisenberg equation of the charge position operator rτ 3 (see Appendix B 3) Here H p is the pairing part of the BdG Hamiltonian. The last term in the above equation comes from the rotation in the particle-hole space, so it does not contribute to the translational charge transport. This is like the spin transport in spin orbit coupled systems, where the spin current associated with the spin rotation does not contribute to the translational transport From Eq. ( furthermore, we find that (see Appendix B 3) As we mentioned, q is the total momentum of a Cooper pair, so ∂ q E s k (q) can be viewed as the group velocity of the Cooper pair, and therefore it gives the charge current. Comparing Eq. ( Expanding Eq. ( with where ∆ k = ∆ k (q = 0) is the order parameter without the phase twist, ḡij (k) is given by ḡij with ∆ 0 (k) = m k |∆ 0 (r)|m k , and g ij (k) is the quantum metric of the modified Bloch function mk (r) = ∆ 0 (r)/∆ 0 (k)m k (r), which is defined by Eq. ( The velocity v s e,k may be understood in the following way: the electric current is carried by the particle and hole components of a Bogoliubov quasiparticle, so it may be written as are the group velocities of the particle and hole, respectively. Expanding to the first order of q, we recover Eq. The anomalous velocity contributes to the superfluid weight (lattice equivalent of superfluid density) which tells whether the system is able to carry supercurrent. The anomalous velocity is of particular importance for flat or quasiflat bands where on the one hand critical temperatures are predicted to be greatly enhanced by the high density of states, but on the other hand the group velocity and conventional superfluid weight vanish. There the geometric part of the superfluid weight D geom,ii dominates. Using our results for the anomalous velocity we obtain from This is a generalization of previous results Using the semiclassical wave packet approach we have shown that the charge current is given by the group velocity of the Cooper pair, Eq. ( Here a i (k) is the Berry connection of the modified Bloch function, defined by Eq. ( The theoretical framework developed in this paper may also be used to study other transport phenomena than superfluidity. As an example, the result for flat band superconductivity can be applied to flat band ferromagnetism with , then the single band mean-field Hamiltonian reads where c k = (c k↑ , c k+Q↓ ) T . In general, a finite interaction strength is required to trigger the ferromagnetic instability Having established the currents carried by Bogoliubov wave packets, we now study two concrete models to confirm the validity of our theory and to illustrate the effect of the anomalous velocity. We first study the attractive Hubbard model defined on the Creutz ladder To construct the wave packet with momentum k c and position r c , we use the initial Gaussian distribution where N is a normalization factor and k 0 is a parameter that controls the width of the wave packet in the momentum space. Because the quantum metric is a constant, the following results do not depend on k c . The currents carried by the wave packet can be calculated as j s e (t) = Ψ s (t)|v e |Ψ s (t) and j s qp (t) = Ψ s (t)|v qp |Ψ s (t) , where Ψ s (t) = e -iHt Ψ s (t = 0) is the time evolution of the wave packet. We calculate the currents for the lower band, and the numerical results are shown in Figs. Now we consider another example, the attractive Hubbard model on the sawtooth lattice Fig. Eq. ( We have analyzed the supercurrent carried by Bogoliubov quasiparticles. Using the powerful semiclassical wave packet approach, we discover a new contribution to the supercurrent, the anomalous velocity, which involves the quantum metric of the Bloch wave function. This contribution has been overlooked in previous literature. The integration of the anomalous velocity gives rise to the geometric contribution of the superfluid weight. To validate our theory, we have studied two flat band models in which the effects of the anomalous velocity are clearly seen. The magnetic penetration depth The theoretical framework developed in this paper is general and can be used to study also other phenomena than superfluidity. For example, because of the analogy between the electric current in superconductors and the spin current in non-superconducting systems, we predict that similar geometric effects also appear in spin transport. The intriguing effects of Bloch wave functions in condensed matter physics deserve further study, and the quantum metric may become a basic ingredient in our understanding of material properties. Appendix A: The BdG Hamiltonian and the current operator Our starting point is the BdG Hamiltonian We mainly focus on the cases where the noninteracting Hamiltonian is time reversal invariant and block diagonal. Furthermore, the pairing potential is spin singlet and therefore is a scalar. Possible generalizations are discussed at the end of this appendix. In general, h σ (r) in the continuum form may be written as where V (r) is the periodic potential, ∇ ↑ = ∇ + iA(r), and ∇ ↓ = ∇ -iA(r), here A(r) is the vector potential that gives the periodic magnetic field whose periodicity is commensurate with the periodic potential. The mass, electric charge and Plank constant are taken to be unity. Our theory is formulated for the Hamiltonian in the continuum form; however, the results also apply to lattice models, which can be obtained from the continuum Hamiltonian through the tight-binding approximation. We require that the pairing potential preserves the lattice translational symmetry, and then it can be written as where r = [r] + x and [r] is the position of the unit cell and x is the position within the unit cell. We assume that the inter-unit cell part and intra-unit cell part can be factorized, namely, The pairing symmetry is determined by the inter-unit cell part χ([r] -[r ′ ]), which in general can be complex. For example, the simplest isotropic s-wave pairing is Assuming that the lattice has square symmetry, then the extended s-wave pairing is (e x and e y are primitive vectors) and the d x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing is We further assume that ∆ 0 (x, x ′ ) = ∆ 0 (x)δ x,x ′ , with ∆ 0 (x) is a real and positive function defined within a unit cell and can be rewritten as a periodic function ∆ 0 (r). Physically, it means that the pairing is nonzero only if the two electrons of a Cooper pair feel the same periodic potential (the distance between the two electrons is a multiple of the lattice vector), so this kind of pairing is likely the case for deep periodic potentials. The pairing potential is not the most general one, but it is already more general than the one usually used in the literature here c kσ annihilates a Bloch electron with momentum k and spin σ, m is the band index denoting the band that crosses the Fermi level. The periodic part of the Bloch wave functions m kσ (r) are related by the time reversal symmetry, m k↑ (r) = m * -k↓ (r) ≡ m k (r). Starting from Eq. (A1), we obtain the widely used phenomenological theory of superconductivity where where u.c. stands for unit cell. In previous literature Having discussed the structure of the pairing potential and established the connection between the real space and momentum space BdG Hamiltonians, we turn to the problem of the supercurrent. As we will see, the Bloch wave function as well as the real space pairing potential ∆(r, r ′ ) are needed to get the full supercurrent. We introduce a phase factor to the pairing potential, ∆(r, r ′ ) → e iq•(r+r ′ ) ∆(r, r ′ ), to generate the supercurrent. To study the dynamics of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle, it is convenient to work with the BdG equation in Nambu form, which can be viewed as the Schrödinger equation for the Bogoliubov quasiparticle, with The index α labels quantum numbers of the solutions, e.g., momentum and band index. The spinor ψ α (r) = [u α (r), v α (r)] T is the wave function of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle, and u and v are the particle and hole amplitudes, respectively. We define the position operator of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle as r = rI, where I is the identity matrix in the particle-hole space. On the other hand, the charge operator of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle is given by the third Pauli matrix in the particle-hole space, τ 3 , and therefore the charge position operator of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle can be defined as rτ 3 . The solution to the BdG equation ψ α (r) = [u α (r), v α (r)] T gives the Bogoliubov quasiparticle operator, which diagonalizes the BdG Hamiltonian, The operator c σ (r) can be written in terms of the Bogoliubov operators as The electric current operator is where the single particle velocity operator is vσ = -i[r σ , h σ (r)] = -i∇ σ and rσ is the position operator of the spin-σ particle. Inserting Eq. (A16) into Eq. (A17) and evaluating its expectation value in the BCS state, we find the expression for the supercurrent where f (E α ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. We define the quasiparticle charge current j e,α and "quasiparticle current" j ′ qp,α as Then the supercurrent can be written as where β = 1/(k B T ) with k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. Although j e,α appeared in previous literature The current j ′ qp,α needs more discussion. For the isotropic s-wave paring, χ( , the pairing potential is local and commutes with the Bogoliubov position operator r. Therefore v↑ τ 3 is the velocity operator of the quasiparticle, vqp = -i[r, H] = v↑ τ 3 . Then j ′ qp,α becomes the true quasiparticle current, j ′ qp,α = j qp,α = ψ α |v qp |ψ α , and we recover the result in Now we briefly discuss how to generalize our results to systems with spin orbit coupling and spin triplet pairing. For spin orbit coupled systems, the noninteracting Hamiltonian is where σ i with i = 1, 2, 3 is the Pauli matrix in the spin space and λ denotes the strength of spin orbit coupling. The BdG equation in the particle-hole space spanned by Here we have used the time reversal symmetry, i.e., h(r) = iσ 2 h * (r)(-iσ 2 ). Similarly, the supercurrent is still given by Eq. (A22), with the velocity operator ve given by ve The factor 1/2 comes from the redundancy of the representation in the particle-hole space, i.e., both spin up and spin down operators appear in the particle and hole spaces. In the above derivations we do not require that the pairing is spin singlet and the expression for the supercurrent is unchanged for the spin triplet pairing, although in general the pairing potential ∆(r, r ′ ) becomes a matrix In general, the Hamiltonian Eq. (A1) describes a multiband system. We here focus on the mostly relevant bands, i.e., the Bloch bands that cross the Fermi level. Because of the time reversal symmetry, they are doublydegenerate. We further assume that they are separated from other bands by sufficiently large gaps. This is the isolated band approximation In this appendix we first solve the BdG Hamiltonian within the isolated band approximation. Using the so-lutions, we construct the Bogoliubov wave packet and study its dynamics. The equations of motion of the momentum and mass center of the wave packet are obtained, from which the equation of motion of the charge center can be derived. We then elaborate the quasiparticle and charge currents carried by the wave packet and find that they are given by the group velocities of the qausiparticle and Cooper pair, respectively. The anomalous velocity, related to the quantum metric, appears naturally. Finally, we compare to the fully quantum mechanical derivation of the currents. We find that in the fully quantum mechanical approach, the isolated band wave function is not enough to obtain the correct results. We first solve the BdG equation Eq. (A12) within the isolated band approximation by using the ansatz where m k (r) is the periodic part of the Bloch function of the spin up band we are interested in, with Bloch energy ε k . The spinor (u k , v k ) T is the Bogoliubov wave function in the Bloch basis. The physical picture behind this ansatz is clear: the wave function of a Cooper pair is proportional to e i2q•r u k v * k , so in the q = 0 limit, it describes a Cooper pair formed by Bloch electrons with opposite momentum and spin, while for finite q, the Cooper pair acquires nonzero total momentum and therefore carries electric current. Substituting Eq. (B1) into Eq. (A12), we get As mentioned before, ). Projecting Eqs. (B2) and (B3) to the Bloch wave functions e i(k+q)•r m k+q (r) and e i(k-q)•r m k-q (r), respectively, we obtain the following eigenvalue problem the momentum space order parameter in the presence of phase twist becomes ∆ k (q) = ∆ 0,k (q)χ k with ∆ 0,k (q) = m k+q |∆ 0 (r)|m k-q . The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are obtained easily, where 2, and s = ±1 labels the upper and lower Bogoli-ubov bands. The corresponding wave functions can be chosen as It is useful to expand ∆ 0,k (q) in the small q limit. For convenience we define the modified Bloch function With the help of mk (r), the pairing potential ∆ 0,k (q) can be written as ∆ 0,k (q) = ∆ 0 (k + q)∆ 0 (kq) mk+q | mk-q . (B9) In the small q limit, ln mk+q | mk-q = ln mk + ∂ i mk where i, j, n, l = x, y, z are spatial indices and ∂ i ≡ ∂ ki means the derivative with respect to k i . It is easy to check that the first term in Eq. ( and the quantum metric Eq. (B12) can be written as The quantum metric enters the supercurrent through this term. For the spin triplet pairing potential, which is in general a matrix, we can also define ∆ 0,k (q). However, there is no obvious geometric structure in the small q limit. For a constant ∆ 0 (r), ∆ 0 (k) is also a constant, and ḡij (k) reduces to the quantum metric of the noninteracting Bloch function. However, it is worth mentioning that this is not a necessary condition. It is enough that the pairing potential ∆ 0 (r) is uniform in the orbitals that compose the band we are interested in Following Sundaram and Niu where s = ±1 denotes the upper and lower Bogoliubov bands and W s k is a normalized distribution which is sharply localized around the mean wave vector k s c . Mathematically, where f (k) is an arbitrary function of k. We can choose the same initial distributions W - k = W + k , and then the initial momenta k - c and k + c are the same. However, their time evolutions can be different. After a straightforward calculation we find that the mass center has the same form as in a metal where φ s k (r) = e -ik•r ψ s k (r) is analogous to the periodic part of the Bloch function and A s (k) is the Berry connection of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle, Here a 0 (k) is the Berry connection of the noninteracting Bloch state and -i( is the Berry connection of the wave function in the Bloch basis and is determined by the phase of the order parameter. Sim-ilarly, the charge center is given by The dynamics of the wave packet can be obtained from the time-dependent variational principle Then the equations of motion can be obtained, where ) is the Berry curvature of the Bogoliubov quasiparticle. The center of mass r s c does not appear in the energy, so the momentum is conserved and the Berry curvature does not affect the equation of motion of r s c . Since the momentum is conserved, k s c can be replaced by k without confusion. The above derivation generalizes the derivation in and The BdG Hamiltonian Eq. (A1) can be separated into a noninteracting part and a pairing part, from which we get the Heisenberg equations For a local pairing potential, ∆(r, r ′ ) = ∆ 0 (r)δ [r],[r ′ ] , r commutes with H p and therefore the quasiparticle velocity operator vqp reduces to v↑ τ 3 . The quasiparticle current is directly given by ṙs c , which in the small q limit is Here we have used that The second term in Eq. (B38) is actually a multiband effect because Note that n k |∆(r)|m k is the interband pairing, which vanishes for position independent pairing potential ∆ 0 (r) = ∆ 0 and ∂ i m k |n k is proportional to the interband matrix element of the single particle velocity operator where h k (r) = e -ik•r h(r)e ik•r is the Bloch Hamiltonian. On the other hand, when the pairing potential is nonlocal, we obtain Clearly, s,k j s qp,k (q) = s,k j ′ s qp,k (q), see Eqs. (B36) and (B45) and consider summation over s. Therefore j ′ qp,α can be replaced by j qp,α in Eq. (A22). The quasiparticle charge current can be calculated as The first term in the above equation is and the second term can be calculated using the relation After some calculations, Eq. (B48) gives the anomalous velocity and Eq. (B47) and Eq. (B49) give the conventional velocity, There is a simpler way to obtain the same result in a more intuitive form. Noting that the noninteracting part of the Hamiltonian is q independent, we have and then dq , into Eq. (B57), we find Therefore we obtain that As we mentioned, q is the momentum of the Cooper pair, and k is the momentum of Bogoliubov quasiparticle, and therefore E s k (q) can be viewed as the dispersion of both the quasiparticle and the Cooper pair. The quasiparticle current is given by the group velocity of the quasiparticle, Eq. (B36), while the charge current is given by the group velocity of the Cooper pair, Eq. (B60). Superficially, one may think that the wave packet can be replaced by |ψ k in the above calculations. However, evaluating the position operator on the Bloch-like state |ψ k gives an ill-defined result As a direct application of our results, we study the superfluid weight. The total electric current in the small q limit is The coefficient relating j i and q j gives the superfluid weight, which can be separated into conventional and geometric parts with and The geometric term obtained in this paper is a generalization of previous results where n is the particle density and d is the spatial dimension of the system. This recovers the well-known meanfield result for the superfluid weight in the continuum limit Using the semiclassical wave packet approach we have shown that the quasiparticle and charge currents are given by the group velocities of the quasiparticle and the Cooper pair, respectively. Since E s k (q) is the energy corresponding to the wave function, Eq. (B1), one may think that the same results can be obtained by evaluating the currents j e and j qp using the wave function Eq. (B1). However, direct calculations show and In the small q limit, we find and Comparing to Eqs. (B38), (B51) and (B53), we see that Eq. (B71) is correct only for momentum independent ∆ 0 (k) and the anomalous velocity is missing in Eq. (B72). The reason is that the isolated band wave function Eq. ( with the hopping matrix given by (see Fig. The operators are defined as c † kσ = (c † Akσ , c † Bkσ ), and where N c is the number of unit cells, r iα is the position of the α orbital in the i-th unit cell and c † iασ creates a fermion with spin σ =↑, ↓ at r iα . Solving the eigenvalue problem, we get the band dispersions (C6) The attractive Hubbard interaction with U > 0, can be approximated by where ∆ = diag(∆ A , ∆ B ) and The parameters ∆ α and n α be determined selfconsistently. Fig. 