Based on BCS model with the external pair potential formulated in a work In a work where g is a constant of electron-electron coupling via phonons, ω is the phonon frequency, υ > 0 is the external pair potential (EPP). It should be noted that if g = 0 then for any υ the SC state does not exist (∆ = 0 always). This means that only the electron-electron coupling is cause of transition to SC state, but EPP is not. Thus in such system the critical temperature is infinity formally as illustrated in Fig. where ε n = πT (2n + 1). The self-consistency condition for the order parameter is We can see that the quasiparticle spectrum has a gap υ/2 (υ > 0) even when ∆ = 0. But this state is not SC because the ordering aa , a + a + is absent. Such state can be interpreted as state with a pseudogap due the strong fluctuations of the phase φ(r, t) of the order parameter ∆ = |∆|e iφ so that e iφ(r,t) = 0 The above results are based on BCS theory, however real electron-electron interaction is due to the exchange of virtual phonons. The corresponding potential is described with an expression where, u ph is an electron-phonon coupling constant, ε 1 , ε 2 are energetic parameters of interacting electrons and p 2 -p 1 is transmitted momentum. Since the electrons interact with small total momentum p 2 + p 1 = 0, then we can assume that the transmitted momentum is ∼ 2p F , at the same time, near the Fermi surface we have ε 2 ∼ ε 1 ∼ 0. Therefore the expression (5) can be reduced to Thus the real interaction is replaced with an effective point attraction, which is nonzero in the layer of width 2ω 2p F ∼ 2ω D (Debay frequency) near Fermi surface Our goal is to develop model of superconductivity with EPP using the electron-electron interaction in a form (5) and accounting the Coulomb repulsion. In the section II we develop the Eliashberg theory with EPP and investigate high temperature asymptotics in the absence of the Coulomb pseudopotential and in the presence of one. In the section III, based on effective Ginzburg-Landau theory for the BCS model with EPP developed in Let us take into account the fact that the electron-electron interaction is the result of the exchange of virtual phonons and of screened Coulomb interaction: V ef f (q, iω) = u 2 ph (q)iD(q, iω) + V c (q), where u ph (q) is an electronphonon coupling parameter, D(q, iε) = i2ω(q) (εn-εm) 2 +ω 2 (q) is a phonon propagator. Eliashberg equations, unlike BCS equations, describe the decrease of effectiveness of the interaction at phonon energies ω(q) T (thermal phonons are perceived by electrons as static impurities [5]. Like Eqs. where p ≡ [p, ip = iπT (2n + 1)] and The self-energies are determined by the self-consistency conditions: The self energy S(p, ip) can be broken up into symmetric and antisymmetric parts: where S e and S o are both even functions of frequency ip. Then renormalization coefficient Z for a single-particle Green function are Z(p, ip) = 1 -S o (p, ip). Accounting of S e renormalizes the chemical potential only, that does not influence on the quasiparticles' spectrum. Thus we have ip -ξ -S(p) = ipZ(p) -ξ, where ξ = ξ + S e (p). The functions Z(p) and W (p) are functions of (p, ip). For isotropic s-wave superconductor we can suppose |p| ≈ p F and the main dependence of G(p) and F (p) on p is through the factor ξ ≈ ξ. Then, using method of where m is a phonon interaction. Note that V (0) = g, where g is the dimensionless strength of the electron-phonon interaction. The gap function is Φ(2n + 1) = ∆(2n + 1) where from Eq.( In Eqs. For simplicity we will consider the Einstein model of phonons: all of the phonons have the same frequency ω 0 and We can see that efficiency of the el.-el. interaction through phonons exchange decreases with increasing temperature. Let us consider particular cases of Eqs.(12,13): 1) υ = 0, μ c = 0. Near T c we have |∆| T , then Eq.( The asymptotic limit g 1 can be found in a simple way. Assuming that 2πT ω0 becomes very large so that V (l) becomes increasingly small for values |l| > 2. The gap equation ( Setting the determinant equal to zero gives the critical temperature: 2) υ > 0, μ c = 0. Let temperature is high and the gap is small: T υ |∆|, then Eq.(13) takes a form: Analogously to previous case we use only a matrix of dimension two: Setting the determinant equal to zero at assumption |∆(1)| = |∆(-1)| (since the interaction is symmetrical V (1) = V (-1)) gives that the energy gap ∆ does not vanish at any temperature: However, unlike result of BCS theory (1), the gap tends to zero faster (as 1/T 2 ) that is consequence of the lower effectiveness of the el.-phon. interaction for low phonon energies ω(q) T . 3) υ = 0, μ c = 0. As in previous consideration we suppose g 1. For g > μ c the interaction V (l) -μ c is attractive for small values for l but it becomes repulsive for large values of l. For such values of m that V (n -m) -μ c < 0 we suppose ∆(2m + 1) = 0. Thus, as in previous cases, it is necessary to retain only the gap components ∆(1) and ∆(-1), then Eq.( Setting the determinant equal to zero gives critical temperature: Thus it must be g > 1 + μ c for such a solution. However in real materials as a rule the relation g < μ c occurs and the pairing of electrons can be possible due to reduction of the Coulomb repulsion by Tolmachev's logarithm: which is result of the second order processes From these equations we find the gap like we have done in Eqs.( from where we get the critical temperature: Thus for such a solution it must be g > μ c , that is discussed in Appendix B. We can see that accounting of the Coulomb pseudopotential leads to existence of critical temperature unlike the result (24) where the gap tends to zero asymptotically. The critical temperature (29) is determined by the coupling constants g, μ c and the frequency ω 0 only, like ordinary superconductor (26), but it does not depend on EPP υ. However there is a principal difference of Eq.(29) from Eq.( The expression (28) can be expanded in the vicinity of T c : Thus in this model the gap at T → T c linearly depends on the temperature difference (T c -T ) unlike ordinary mean field theory without EPP where the temperature dependence of an order parameter is (T c -T ) 1/2 . Temperature dependencies of the energy gap for different parameters are shown in Fig. In a work where the last term is energy of the magnetic field 1 2μ0 (curlA) 2 , the coefficients are From the free energy functional we can obtain an equilibrium value of the gap, value of the free energy in this point and the critical momentum of a Cooper pair accordingly: If q = 0 then we obtain Eq.( Unlike BCS theory with EPP, accounting of the Coulomb pseudopotential leads to the gap in a form (28) that provides existence of critical temperature (29). In order to account this facts we should to write the functional (31) in a form where the coefficient Ξ is such to obtain the gap (30): Then the critical momentum of a pair is and the gain in free energy (at q = 0) is Thus phase transition to superconducting state in the Eliashberg theory with EPP is the second order phase transition like in ordinary GL theory. Following the above method we can write the effective GL functional: Basic characteristics of a superconductor (coherence length ξ, magnetic penetration depth λ, GL parameter κ, thermodynamical critical field H cm , the first H c1 and the second H c2 critical fields) for ordinary GL theory at T → T c , effective GL theory based on BCS theory with EPP at T → ∞ and effective GL theory based on Eliashberg theory with EPP at T → T c are presented in the following table : GL theory (υ = 0) BCS theory with υ > 0 Eliashberg theory with υ > 0, μ c = 0 We can see from the table that in the effective GL theory based on the Eliasberg approach the temperature dependencies of the basic characteristics of a superconductor is similar to the ordinary GL theory unlike the approach based on BCS theory. In particular, this model restores ordinary temperature dependence of the coherence length (T c -T ) -1/2 after the BCS model with EPP where it decreases as 1/ √ T at large T that corresponds extremely small value of order of interatomic distances. However the effective free energy functional (40) has an extraordinary form due temperature dependence of the gap as ∆ ∝ (T c -T ) unlike the ordinary GL theory where ∆ ∝ (T c -T ) 1/2 . We cannot write the effective functional as -(T c -T ) 2 a∆ 2 + b∆ 4 (that gives the desired temperature dependence of the gap too) because we will obtain the free energy as F min ∝ (T c -T ) 4 , that means the phase transition to superconducting state will not be second-order phase transition. Based on BCS model with EPP formulated in If electron-phonon interaction is present only (the Coulomb pseudopotential is absent μ c = 0) then the energy gap ∆ does not vanish at any temperature, however the gap tends to zero faster (as 1/T 2 -Eq.( 1/2 . It should be noted that equilibrium uncorrelated pairs are present at T > T c even, unlike ordinary superconductors (which are described by BCS and Eliashberg theories). Based on a free energy functional for BCS model with EPP obtained in 