We have developed a generalized electronic phase separation model of high-temperature cuprate superconductors that links the two distinct energy scales of the superconducting (SC) and pseudogap (PG) phases via a charge-density-wave (CDW) state. We show that simulated electronic-density modulations resembling the charge order (CO) modulations detected in cuprates intertwine the SC and charge orders by localizing charge and providing the energy scale for a spatially periodic SC attractive potential. Bulk superconductivity is achieved with the inclusion of Josephson coupling between nanoscale domains of intertwined fluctuating CDW and SC orders, and local SC phase fluctuations give rise to the Fermi arcs along the nodal directions of the SC gap. We demonstrate the validity of the model by reproducing the hole-doping dependence of the PG onset temperature T * , and the SC transition temperature Tc of YBa2Cu3Oy and Bi2-yPbySr2-zLazCuO 6+δ . The results show that the periodicity of the CDW order is controlled by the PG energy scale, and the hole-doping dependence of the SC energy gap is controlled by the charge ordering free energy. Our approach is to first simulate spatial modulations of the electronic structure resembling experimentally resolved inter- Experiments using different methods have established the occurrence of short-range, incommensurate static CDW correlations in a variety of high-temperature SC cuprates The aim of our work is to establish a quantitative link between the inter-unit-cell dependence of the CO resolved by RXS and imaged in real space by STM, and the energy gaps of the PG and SC phases. Our model is based on an intrinsic propensity for mesoscale electronic phase separation be-low an onset temperature T PS that follows the hole-doping dependence of the PG temperature T * . This picture is similar to that previously advocated by Fradkin and Kivelson Another important ingredient of our model is the experimental observation that the CDW periodicity is independent of temperature, leading us to surmise that the CDW periodicity is set by the onset of the PG at T * . This infers that the CDW order is a consequence of the PG formation. At low doping (p ≤ 0.12) where T CO decreases with decreasing doping, CDW order is potentially suppressed by a slowing down of spin fluctuations and a tendency toward static SDW order. Compatible with experimental signatures of pairing or SC correlations persisting above T c where . is a double-well potential that characterizes the electronic phase separation below T PS . The parameters α and B are constants, and ε controls the spatial separation of the charge-segregated patches. The CH equation obtained from the continuity equation for the local free energy current density J = -M∇μ (where M is the charge mobility and μ = ∂f /∂μ is the chemical potential). Its solution is described in the Apendix I on charge ordering simulations. For each time step the CH equation is solved for u(r, t), and p(r, t) is obtained. We adjust the parameters of the free energy such that when the periodicity of p(r, t) matches that of the experimentally observed CDW order, the calculation is stopped and the solution is taken to be the spatially-dependent static electronic density p(r). Since the method described here does not generate an intra-unit-cell CO symmetry, it is applicable to systems that have SC pairing and CO symmetries other than d-wave. Figure STM differential conductance maps for optimally-doped (T c = 35 K) and underdoped (T c = 32 K and T c = 25 K) Bi 2-y Pb y Sr 2-z La z CuO 6+δ [(Pb, La)-Bi2201] samples Next we use the free-energy simulations and experimentally determined input parameters for the optimally-doped compounds to deduce the SC energy gap ∆ SC , the pseudogap ∆ PG , T c and T * for the underdoped samples. To derive the local SC gap we solved the Bogoliubov-deGennes (BdG) equations via self-consistent calculations based on a Hubbard Hamiltonian [Eq. B1]. The calculations were performed for a sub-lattice about the center of the simulated charge density maps, using periodic boundary conditions and governed by self-consistent conditions for a spatially-varying d-wave pairing potential ∆ d (r) and hole density p(r) [Eq. B4) and B5]. We find that the spatial-average ∆ d (r) decreases with a reduction of p (below p = 0.16), but increases with decreasing λ CO . The latter behavior is because as the two holes are forced closer together by the narrower confining potential the binding energy of the two-body interaction increases. The results on the CuO 2 plane shown in Figs. The values of V GL (r) at optimal doping were multiplied by a scaling factor, such that the calculations (Figs. 1(f) and 2(f)) generate an average value of the pairing potential ∆ d (r) for p = 0.16 that is close to the experimentally estimated value of the low-temperature SC gap ∆ SC . To calculate ∆ d (r) for the underdoped samples (Tables An estimate of T c is obtained by self-consistently solving the BdG equations with a temperature-dependent GL potential where we take V (0, p) ≈ V GL (r, p) and T PS (p), the onset of phase separation transition, is taken to be equan to T * (p) in the calculations. Because of the BdG approach and the above equation, the value of ∆ d (r, T ) decreases with increasing temperature, but the it remains finite in many regions of the system for a significant range of temperature above Tc. This is consistent with the body of experimental results on cuprates mentioned earlier that are suggestive of persisting SC correlations above T c where ∆ d (r, T ) = 44). An experimental value for ∆SC at p = 0.12 is omitted, since deviations from the universal curve are expected for Y123 near 1/8 hole doping, where Tc plateaus. The value of T * ≈ 278 K at p = 0.09 is estimated from a linear extrapolation of data in (Ref. 50). We tune the scaling factors explained in the text to yield the blue and green values at optimum doping. Red values are calculated with the same parameters. p = 0.16 p = 0.12 p = 0.09 λCO(a0) Next, we use the free-energy simulations to make a simple estimate of the PG, under the assumption that the PG appears due to the mesoscale phase separation i) The proportionality constant between V GL (r) and the attractive pairing potential V of Eq. (B4) was adjusted to yield a calculated value of ∆ d (r) that approximately equals the experimental value of the SC gap ∆ SC at p = 0.16. This proportionality constant, once determined, was subsequently used for all other values of p. ii) The scaling factor between the normal resistance R n in Eq. (3) and the resistivity ρ b (1.05T c) just above T c was adjusted until the calculated value of T c at p = 0.16 approximately equaled the experimental value. This same scaling factor was used for all other values of p. iii) The ground state binding energy of a single-particle in a 2-D square (rectangular) box was multiplied by a proportionality factor so as to equal the PG of (Pb, La)-Bi2201 (Y123) at p = 0.16. Again, this same proportionality constant was used for the calculations at other dopings. Next we show that the phase separation approach considered above is able to reproduce the ungapped portion of the Fermi surface (Fermi arcs) that is known to occur near the nodal region just above T c In particular, ∆Φ j increases monotonically from near zero at T c to very large values near T * . Furthermore, ∆Φ j has a large anisotropy when combined with the quantum effects discussed above. The two distinct contributions are separable, such that ∆Φ j (p, T, φ) = ∆Φ j (p, T )∆Φ j (φ). We drop the index j because ∆Φ j (φ) is the same for all domains, and assume E J (p, T ) is the same for all j. These considerations imply that just above T c the electrons ejected by ARPES from different domains come from regions where the SC order parameter has essentially the same Φ j along the antinodal directions, and ∆Φ j (φ) ≈ 0. On the other hand, such phase coherence is lost near the nodal directions where ∆Φ j (φ) ≈ π is maximum. Consequently, the average SC amplitude measured by ARPES may be written as follows This expression contains the two distinct contributions that weaken phase coherence, one from quantum oscillations that depends only on the azimuthal angle φ and one from thermal oscillations that competes with the average Josephson coupling, leading to ∆Φ j (p, T, φ) = ∆Φ j (p, T )∆Φ j (φ) for all "j". We may take ∆Φ(φ) ∼ 1/ cos 2 (2φ), which satisfies the expected inverse cosine dependence and the square makes it symmetric and always positive around the nodal directions (φ = ±π/4 and ±π/4). Now we can infer the functional form of ∆Φ(p, T ) noting that for T < T c, all Φ j are locked together leading to long range order and ∆Φ j ∼ 0. On the other hand, for T ≤ T c all Φ decouple because E J (p, T ) < k B T and ∆Φ > 0. Above T c , E J (p, T ) decreases with increasing T and vanishes near T * . Concomitantly ∆Φ increases. Thus, there are three distinct temperature dependent regimes: (i) T ≤ T c : Since ∆Φ ∼ 0, Eq. ( (ii) T > T * : ∆(p, T ) ∼ 0 and it is clear that there is no gap. (iii) T c < T : Taking into account the effect of E J (p, T ) we assume ∆Φ(p, where A is a constant. This expression vanishes at T c and increases monotonically with p, as expected from ARPES experiments and we obtain the value of A by comparing with the onset of the measured Specifically we use the ARPES measurements 51 at T = 102 K for the Bi2212 compound with T c = 92 K, which shows a gapless region between 28 0 ≤ φ ≤ 62 0 to derive the constant A. Equating ∆Φ(p ∼ 0.15, T = 102K, φ = 28 0 , 62 0 ) = π, yields ∆ d (p, T, φ) ∼ 0 and this is possible if we take A = 2.84π. Note that φ is measured from the (π, π) to (0, π) direction of the Brillouin zone according to Refs. 51 and 52. With ∆Φ(p, T, φ) determined, we may apply the derived equation to any sample. In particular, we apply this expression to the other two Bi2212 compounds measured in Ref. 51. Some above T c values of E J (p, T ) used in the calculations are plotted in Fig. (5) for illustration purpose. Accordingly we obtain for the T c = 86 K compound a gapless region at 23.8 0 ≤ φ ≤ 66.2 0 , which compares well with the experimental 25 0 ≤ φ ≤ 65 0 . For the underdoped T c = 75 K Bi2212 sample at T = 85 K, we obtain 36.5 0 ≤ φ ≤ 53.5 0 , which is also in good agreement with the experimental result from Eq. ( The arrows mark the experimentally determined onset of the gapless regions for each sample, as described above. Our theory infers a fundamental link between the periodicity of the CDW and the PG and SC energy scales of hightemperature cuprate superconductors, and shows that within this framework it is possible to account for the onset temperatures T c and T * of two different cuprate families. We stress that the only quantitative assumptions made in our calculations for underdoped Y123 and (Pb, La)-Bi2201 pertain to a natural scaling factor, which we have determined by scaling calculated free energy parameters to achieve values of the PG and SC gap that agree with experimental values at one particular doping. Our model is general in the sense that it can be applied to other cuprate families, provided the doping dependence of the CDW order is known. Our approach generates a local free energy potential having a spatial periodicity that matches that of the experimentally observed short-range static CDW order. Our calculations in the framework of BdG theory yield different SC amplitudes in distinct charge-ordered domains that generally vanish only above T c . Our approach is consistent with experiments Finally we address the experimental observations indicating a competition between superconductivity and CO. While X-ray experiments show a decrease of the CDW diffraction intensity and correlation length below T c 1,2,4,5,8 , these measurements seem to be detecting static charge correlations. Static CDW order competes with superconductivity by reducing the number of charge carriers available for pairing. On the other hand, our theory requires that dynamic CO is also present to induce a fluctuating hole-pair potential that scales with V GL . While there is some evidence for CDW fluctuations from optical pump-probe ter. Consequently, at early times or small n, we obtain charge modulations with periodicities of only a few lattice Using different parameters and initial conditions we are able to reproduce the experimentally determined CO patterns in cuprates. Although these simulations are not the stable solutions of the CH equation (as is clear from the time evolution of the simulations shown in Fig. In the main paper we present detailed CO, T c and T * calculations for six compounds. Three of the Bi2201 and three of the Y123 families. In the next two paragraphs we give the values of some parameter used in the CH simulations. (Pb, La)-Bi2201: Simulations with α = B = 1, time steps of n = 700, 900, 1300 and ε = 0.012, 0.014, 0.0175 yield checkerboard CO patterns with the desired wavelengths λ CO for (Pb, La)-Bi2201 (at p = 0.126, 0.141 and 0.16) near 4.5a 0 , 5.1a 0 , and 6.2a 0 , respectively. The fewer time steps required to simulate the CO patterns of the underdoped samples is indicative of a reduced charge mobility, and is consistent with an increase of the normal-state resistivity. At later times (i.e., greater n) the periodic electronic structure evolves into an irregular patch-like system of segregated low-and highcharge density regions. In addition, the length scale of the system increases with the phase separated regions forming larger domains. This latter situation was considered previously Y123: Simulations with α = 1, B = 5, ε = 0.0053, 0.0055, 0.0058 and time steps n = 35, 38, 42 yield charge stripe patterns with the desired wavevectors Q = 0.333, 0.317 and 0.287 r.l.u. (λ CO = 1/Q) estimated from (Refs. 4, 5, and 7) for Y123 at p = 0.09, 0.12 and 0.16, respectively. Note that the values of n are much shorter than needed to simulate the checkerboard CO patterns of (Pb, La)-Bi2201. Because of the fewer time steps, the simulations for Y123 are somewhat less sharp. We performed self-consistent calculations with the BdG theory (Refs.58 and 59) for each of the CH simulated charge density maps (Figs. where c † iσ (c iσ ) is the usual fermionic creation (annihilation) operator at site i, the spin σ is up ↑ or down ↓. n iσ = c † iσ c iσ is the number operator, and t ij is the hopping between sites i and j. U is the magnitude of the on-site repulsion, and V is the magnitude of the nearest-neighbor attractive interaction. μ i is the local chemical potential derived in the self-consistent process through which the local charge density is calculated by the CH equation and is maintained fixed. For (Pb, La)-Bi2201 we used nearest-neighbor hopping t = 0.15 eV, next-nearestneighbor hopping t 2 = -0.27t, and third nearest-neighbor hopping t 3 = 0.19t derived from angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) dispersion relations where f n = [exp(E n /k B T + 1] -1 is the Fermi occupation function. It is important to emphasize that the spatially inhomogeneous distribution of charge generated by the CH equation for different dopings was kept fixed while the local chemical potential μ(r) was self-consistently determined in the convergence process. This procedure incorporates the charge inhomogeneity in the calculations in a natural way. 