We demonstrate simultaneous measurements of DC transport properties and flux noise of a hybrid superconducting magnetometer based on the proximity effect (superconducting quantum interference proximity transistor, SQUIPT). The noise is probed by a cryogenic amplifier operating in the frequency range of a few MHz. In our non-optimized device, we achieve minimum flux noise ∼ 4 μΦ 0 /Hz 1/2 , set by the shot noise of the probe tunnel junction. The flux noise performance can be improved by further optimization of the SQUIPT parameters, primarily minimization of the proximity junction length and cross section. Furthermore, the experiment demonstrates that the setup can be used to investigate shot noise in other nonlinear devices with high impedance. This technique opens the opportunity to measure sensitive magnetometers including SQUIPT devices with very low dissipation. Measuring noise provides an uncompromising test of microscopic and nanoscopic superconducting sensors A SQUIPT interferometer consists of a superconducting loop interrupted by a short normal-metal wire in direct metal-tometal contact while an additional superconducting probe electrode is tunnel-coupled to the normal region, cf. Fig. Besides hindering sensor operation, the shot noise A typical SQUIPT based on a superconducting aluminium loop placed into a perpendicular magnetic field is presented in Fig. Simultaneously with measurement of the average current I, current noise through the SQUIPT is probed by the HEMT amplifier via the capacitor C c . At frequencies of the order of the resonance at 2 MHz, formed by the inductance L = (L -1 + L -1 l ) -1 ≈ 16.5 μH (due to the coils L = L l = 33 μH on the sample holder) and the capacitance C coax ≈ 92 pF (mainly due to distributed cable capacitance between the sample holder and the amplifier), the capacitors C c = C l can be considered as electrical shorts. Importantly, this results in a robust peak signature of the white shot noise of the sample, filtered by the characteristic band-pass response of the RL C coax circuit, to be present in the observed voltage noise spectral density. In Fig. Figure We next characterize the flux responsivity of the SQUIPT device by measuring current I(Φ) and voltage V (Φ) modulations at different values of bias voltage or current applied to the tunnel probe. Figures We now turn to a description of the SQUIPT noise measurements. The blue dots in Fig. showcasing how the white current noise S I is filtered by the bandpass response of the RLC circuit, centered around f 0 (refer to Fig. We make the fits to Eq. 1 using S V A , f 0 , the peak height P 0 = R 2 eff S I , and the peak width ∆ f = 2πL f 2 0 /R eff as adjustable parameters. Here, ∆ f gives directly the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the peak in S V in the limit f 0 ∆ f . Of the four parameters, the background level S V A ≈ 3 × 10 -18 V 2 /Hz due to the amplifier voltage noise, and the resonance frequency f 0 ≈ 4.18 MHz can be kept fixed, whereas the peak height and width depend systematically on V , Φ, and T . With the fitting procedure established, Fig. Figure Here at T = 60 mK, for the theoretical model for simplicity we use the noise of an NIS tunnel junction, approximately valid for a SQUIPT at magnetic flux Φ = 0.5 Φ 0 in which case the minigap in the normal metal vanishes In Fig. We achieve the minimum value of NEF ≈ 4 μΦ 0 /Hz 1/2 (green solid / dotted line) at the optimum working point V = 0.24 mV, Φ ≈ 0.4 Φ 0 . For comparison, low frequency ( f ∼ 100 Hz) flux noise NEF ≈ 0.5 μΦ 0 /Hz 1/2 has been reported for a current-biased, optimized Al-SQUIPT in a room-temperature cross correlation setup In summary, we have investigated the flux noise performance of a SQUIPT interferometer based on shot noise measurements with a cryogenic amplifier at frequencies of the order of a few MHz. This represents the first noise study of such a hybrid interferometer not limited by the low-bandwidth room-temperature readout. The setup is capable of resolving the shot noise of a current I ∼ 100 pA in a typical probe junction in an averaging time of the order of 30 s. In future work, the performance can be further improved by employing a lower-noise room-temperature amplifier, and by using the cross-correlation of signals from two low-temperature amplifiers to reject the uncorrelated background S V A while reliably picking out the signal due to S I S . In the present device we reach shot-noise-limited flux sensitivity of the order of μΦ 0 /Hz 1/2 , which can be significantly improved upon optimizing the dimensions of the SNS weak link and the readout tunnel probe. The sample is fabricated using electron beam lithography (EBL) and electron beam evaporation of the Al and Cu thin films. A single lithography step relying on a Ge based hard mask is used to define patterns for multi-angle shadow evaporation of the NIS tunnel probe and the proximity SNS weak link in a single vacuum cycle. The starting point is an oxidized Si substrate onto which we first spin coat a 900 nm thick layer of P(MMA-MAA) copolymer. Subsequently, a 22 nm thick film of Ge is deposited by electron beam evaporation, followed by spin coating a 50 nm thick polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) layer. The EBL step is followed by first developing the chip in 1:3 solution of methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) and isopropanol (IPA) for 30 s, rinsing in IPA and drying. Reactive ion etching (RIE) with CF 4 (for Ge) and O 2 (for the copolymer layer) is then used to create a suspended mask with proper undercut profile for shadow evaporation. The metals are deposited by electron-beam evaporation: first, 25 nm of Al is deposited and oxidized in-situ for 1 min with pure oxygen pressure of 1 millibar to form the tunnel barrier of the normal metal-insulator-superconductor (NIS) probe. Next, approximately 15 nm of copper is evaporated to complete the NIS junction and to form the normal metal part of the SNS proximity weak link. Immediately after this, the superconducting Al loop with 120 nm thickness is deposited to form clean contacts to the copper island, which completes the structure. Figure Here we assume a narrow probe electrode and neglect the dependence of n N (ε, φ ) on the position along the SNS junction For simplicity, let us consider the SQUIPT device at magnetic flux Φ = 0.5 Φ 0 , in which case we approximate n N = 1 and obtain Figure This can be directly integrated to yield S I shot = (2eV /R T ) coth(eV /2k B T e ). Two basic cases are then immediately obtained from this expression, namely (i) for e|V | k B T e the equilibrium thermal noise 4k B T e /R T , and (ii) full shot noise 2e|I| in the limit e|V | k B T e .