Experiment and theory indicate that UPt3 is a topological superconductor in an odd-parity state, based in part from temperature independence of the NMR Knight shift. However, quasiparticle spin-flip scattering near a surface, where the Knight shift is measured, might be responsible. We use polarized neutron scattering to measure the bulk susceptibility with H||c, finding consistency with the Knight shift but inconsistent with theory for this field orientation. We infer that neither spin susceptibility nor Knight shift are a reliable indication of odd-parity. Broad interest in topological superconductivity stems in part from the recognition that this class of superconductors can host Majorana fermionic excitations of special importance for quantum information processing. A remarkable parallel between UPt 3 and superfluid locked to the c-axis by a significant spin-orbit interaction. In previous work we measured the magnetic susceptibility with H ⊥ c using polarized neutron scattering for a UPt 3 crystal with high purity, residual resistance ratio (RRR) of 600 and mass 15 g. field, and an arbitrary final spin state in each case. in the limit R 1. The nuclear structure factor is F N (q) for a reflection being measured at wave vector q and M || (q) is the corresponding Fourier component of magnetization parallel to the applied field. Here γ is the neutron gyromagnetic ratio, r 0 is the classical radius of the electron, and μ B the Bohr magneton. The (1,0,0) reflection is ideally suited for measurements of the flipping ratio, because it is a relatively weak nuclear reflection and has the smallest possible q for the present scattering configuration, maximizing 1 -R in Eq. 1. The results at two magnetic fields, H = 0.4 T and 1.0 T, are shown in Fig. In order to determine the susceptibility from the magnetization, M , we examined its field dependence shown in Fig. In principle we can determine the absolute magnetization directly from our measurements using Eq. 1. However, this neglects potential complications such as extinction, neutron absorption, and depolarization of the incident neutron beam, in addition to the inherent q dependence which reflects the electronic orbital configuration contributing to the underlying magnetism being probed. In Fig. There are two scenarios for the interpretation of these measurements. The first is that the spin-orbit interaction is negligible and there is no spin-momentum locking. We have considered other sources of temperature independent behavior of the bulk susceptibility. For example, there are prism-plane stacking faults spread throughout our UPt 3 crystals (Supplementary Materials) apparently responsible for anisotropic quasiparticle scattering. 17 However, quasiparticle spin-flip scattering from defects, associated with a strong spin-orbit interaction, cannot explain the temperature independence. This mechanism More likely, given the complicated Fermi surface, there are two components to the electronic susceptibility, the dominant one being related to the hybridized local moments evolving from the 5f orbitals of uranium which overshadow a second contribution from itinerant elections responsible for superconductivity. In this case temperature independence of the bulk susceptibility and Knight shift cannot be taken as an indication of oddparity superconductivity. By extension, this result might be relevant for other superconducting materials with a temperature independent Knight shift. Research support was provided by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, under Awards No. DE-FG02-05ER46248 (Northwestern University), No. DE-FG02-10ER46783 (University of Notre Dame), and No. DE-SC0012311 (Rice University), and from the Danish Council for Independent Research through DAN-SCATT. We acknowledge assistance with crystal growth and characterization from J. Pollanen, C. A. Collett, A. Zimmerman, and Jia Li. We thank Elizabeth Schemm and Aharon Kapitulnik for providing the AFM image and we are grateful to ILL for their hospitality and support and to Jim Sauls, Keenan Avers, and Vesna Mitrovic for helpful discussions. * Present address: Department of Physics, Texas A&M University, TX 77843 USA 1 C. W. J. Beenakker, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 4, 113 (2013). 2 D. D. Osheroff, R. C. Richardson, and D. M. Lee, Phys.Rev. Lett.28, 885 (1972).