The excitations in conventional superconductors, Bogoliubov quasiparticles, are spin-1/2 fermions but their charge is energy-dependent and, in fact, zero at the gap edge. Therefore, in superconductors (unlike normal metals) the spin and charge degrees of freedom may be separated. In this article, we review spin injection into conventional superconductors and focus on recent experiments on mesoscopic superconductors. We show how quasiparticle spin transport and out-of-equilibrium spin dependent superconductivity can be triggered using the Zeeman splitting of the quasiparticle density of states in thin-film superconductors with small spin-mixing scattering. Finally, we address the spin dynamics and the feedback of quasiparticle spin imbalances on the strength of the superconducting energy gap. Out-of-equilibrium superconductivity has received a lot of attention since the 1970s Work on out-of-equilibrium superconductivity has concentrated mainly on the energy and charge excitation modes associated, respectively, with heat and charge transport The energy mode can be excited by charge-neutral perturbations such as electromagnetic radiation whose frequency is larger than the superconducting energy gap ∆; the absorption of such radiation breaks pairs and creates quasiparticules In a visionary theoretical paper published in 1976, A. Aronov In a pioneering experiment, Johnson et al. Among excitation techniques besides those mentioned above, we note in particular charge and spin currents generated by the magnetic losses of the precessing magnetisation of a ferromagnet also called 'spin pumping' Spin injection from a ferromagnetic electrode as in Johnson's work A superconductor in good metallic (i.e. high transparency) contact with a ferromagnet experiences a strong suppression of superconductivity in a region up to a few superconducting coherence lengths ξ from the interface, even at equilibrium Placing a tunnel barrier between the superconductor and the ferromagnet decouples the spin and Cooper pair reservoirs and suppresses undesirable proximity and inverse proximity effects Assuming negligible spin accumulation in the ferromagnetic electrode as well as a uniform temperature for the whole system and no charge imbalance (in the superconductor), the spin, 'electrical charge' and 'quasiparticle charge' currents across a ferromagnet-insulatorsuperconductor junction obtained from the Fermi Golden rule read Here V is the voltage (applied or measured) across the junction; e the electron charge, N 0 the density of states of the superconductor at the Fermi level when it is in the normal state; the BCS quasiparticle density of states; μs a chemical potential shift (of opposite sign for opposite spins ); q(E) the quasiparticle charge; and |T | 2 the junction transmission assumed to be identical for each spin. N F = N F ↑ + N F ↓ and δN F = N F ↑ -N F ↓ account for the different density of states, N F ↑ and N F ↓ at the Fermi level for spin up and down in the ferromagnet . (The polarisation of the ferromagnet is encoded in δN F ; thus, in the case where the ferromagnet is replaced by a normal metal electrode δN F = 0.) The assumption of a uniform system temperature implies fast thermalization The difference between the electrical charge current and the quasiparticle charge current is carried by the superconducting condensate Spin accumulation appears in the superconductor -in a dynamic equilibrium between injection and relaxation -and can be described by: dS(t)/dt = Is(t) -S(t)/τs, with S(t) the spin imbalance and τs the spin imbalance relaxation time. In principle, this equation is coupled to Equations 2.1 as μs is directly linked to S(t), and the whole system of equations must be solved self-consistently. However if the superconductor is only slightly out-of-equilibrium (i.e. μs V L , ∆) μs can be neglected in Equations 2.1 and in the stationary limit (i.e. dS/dt = 0) we obtain S = Isτs = P Ieτs, P being the polarisation of the ferromagnetic leads (assumed to be the same for the injector and the detector). Unlike in normal metals, spin accumulation in superconductors is a non-linear function of the injection voltage V L , reflecting the voltage dependence of the junction conductance set by the BCS quasiparticle density of states. The spin imbalance contribution to the nonlocal voltage can be isolated by measuring the latter when the magnetisations of injector and detector are aligned (V P N L ) and anti-aligned (V AP N L ). Inverting Equations 2.1 one gets, in the limit μs V L , ∆: where Ie(V L ) is the local charge current, ρs = τs/(N 0 e 2 ) the spin resistivity, g N S the normalised conductance of the detector junction and Ω the injection volume The result of Eq. 2.2 for spin accumulation arising from a spin injection current agrees with earlier calculations by Maekawa et al. The question arises as to the microscopic mechanisms which determine the spin imbalance relaxation time in a superconductor. In metals, spin relaxation is generally due to spin-flip scattering off magnetic impurities and/or spin-orbit scattering Early experiments on superconducting Al The long spin relaxation time measured in light metals at low temperatures (compared to that in heavy metals), and also indications of an increase of the spin lifetime in the superconducting state, suggest that the superconducting spin relaxation length could be on the order of μm, a length scale accessible to standard electron lithography. The spatial decay of spin imbalances can thus be probed directly with detector electrodes placed at different distances from the injection point. Spin-polarised electrons diffuse from the injection point (or area) and relax over a length xs. When both injector and detector are ferromagnets, the device is known as a 'lateral spin valve'. In superconductors, as mentioned above, charge and spin imbalances can diffuse (from the injection point) and relax over different length scales. Spin imbalance in lateral spin valves depends on the distance x (of the detector) from the injection point. The spin resistance decays exponentially with x and is given by: where A is the cross-sectional area of the metallic or superconducting wire perpendicular to the main direction of diffusion (The system is assumed to be quasi-one-dimensional.) Generalising the Johnson technique to lateral spins valves Jedema et al. Following Johnson where ω L = gμ B H/ , with μ B the Bohr magneton and H the applied magnetic field. P (t) is the probability that, once injected at the injector F1 (cf. Figure Measurements on superconducting lateral spin valves also suffer from stray fields due to the magnetisation of the ferromagnetic electrodes; this can strongly affect superconductivity in a spatially nonuniform manner. As spin resistance is defined as the difference in the nonlocal signal between the parallel and anti-parallel detector-injector magnetisation configurations, it is of the essence to be able to distinguish between out-of-equilibrium spin-dependent effects and equilibrium magnetic landscape effects. Designed to minimize stray field effects while switching between anti-parallel and parallel configurations, the experiment performed by Poli et al. An external magnetic field can be used not only to control the magnetisation orientation of ferromagnetic electrodes but also to change the quasiparticle excitation spectrum in the superconductor. In thin films whose thickness d is smaller than (3 gμ B )/(De 2 H) Building on the concept introduced by Huertas-Hernando et al. Two experiments have followed this idea This expression is particularly suggestive: the spin imbalance can be seen here to depend clearly on the polarisation of the injector electrode (first term) as well as on the Zeeman splitting of the DOS in the superconductor (second term). Here we have introduced two different spin resistivities ρ s2 and ρ s1 associated with two different relaxation times τ s2 and τ s1 in the first and second terms, respectively. Physically this corresponds to different relaxation mechanisms for spin imbalances in the presence or absence of a Zeeman-induced splitting of the BCS DOS. The shape of the signal measured in the experiment (Figure Note that, as spin polarisation is provided mainly by the Zeeman splitting of the superconducting density of states, the injector electrode no longer needs to be a ferromagnet. This can be seen in Figure Spin currents carried by quasiparticles can be converted into transverse charge currents by the inverse spin Hall effect The experiments by Quay et al. These experiments are consistent with -and were interpreted in the framework of -the spin imbalance model presented above, in which spin imbalance appears as a chemical potential shift μs which is opposite for opposite spins, thus bracketing out the question of the spin-dependent energy distribution function. In a simple picture, non-equilibrium excitations in Zeeman-split superconductors can be described by four parameters together quantifying the charge and spin degrees of freedom of the system: μ ↓ , μ ↑ , T * ↓ and T * ↑ . This presupposes that the electron-electron interaction time τ e-e τ e-ph the electron-phonon time, and that the distribution functions can thus be approximated by Fermi-Dirac distributions, and generalises the even and odd modes of the non-Zeeman-split case by taking spin into account. The conceptually simplest spin imbalances are then due to (or associated with) either μ ↓ = μs and μ ↑ = -μs as in Ref.s A complete description of the non-equilibrium excitations requires the knowledge of the spinful distribution functions f↓ (E) and f↑ (E), where the f (E) need not be Fermi-Dirac not share the same chemical potential. Indeed, by solving Boltzmann diffusion equations, and taking into account local modification of superconductivity due to the out-of-equilibrium distribution functions, Krishtop et al. All of this recent theoretical work point to the electron-phonon relaxation time as an upper bound for the spin imbalance relaxation time. This is a natural explanation for the long times measured by Quay et al. The spin imbalance relaxation length is observed to increase with the applied magnetic field, particularly when the orbital depairing is strong, and is explained by Bobkova et al. Spin resonance experiments allow a direct measurement of the spin coherence time, T 2 In a very recent experiment Quay et al. Some data from Ref. We note that, unlike normal metals where T 2 = T 1 the spin imbalance relaxation time, in superconductors T 1 is much larger than T 2 , and that T 2 is of the order of the spin imbalance relaxation time measured in the normal state The influence of out-of-equilibrium quasiparticle distributions, including spin imbalance, is in principle accounted for by the self-consistent BCS gap equation where ω D is the Debye energy and V BCS the BCS interaction strength. The solution in the presence of a Zeeman/Pauli (as opposed to orbital) magnetic field was given by Sarma in 1963 More generally, as already pointed out above, the non-equilibrium spin-dependent distribution functions due to spin injection have to be calculated by solving kinetic equations, which take spin diffusion into account. This is particularly important for mesoscopic devices, as quasiparticles thermalise internally, which is to say recover a Fermi-Dirac distribution, over distances larger than the electron-electron scattering length (typically of the the order μm at very low temperature) In order to observe the predicted modification of the gap due to spin imbalance, a number of experiments have been performed on high-Tc superconductors. Indeed, it has been predicted that spin injection results in a greater suppression of d-wave superconductivity than of conventional s-wave superconductivity, mainly due to injection of low-energy excitations at the orderparameter nodes Coming back to the case of fast thermalization (i.e. quasiparticles thermalise quickly amongst themselves and with the environment compared to the elastic spin-flip time, and the spin imbalance is given by μs), at zero temperature the gap is independent of μs for μs < ∆ 0 while at finite temperature the system goes through a first order transition to the normal state at μs < ∆ 0 The Sarma state and the related 'breached pair' Out-of-equilibrium superconductivity has been an active area of research since the 1970s; however, comparatively little attention has been paid to spinful excitations. The past few years have seen a revival of interest in the latter, in the wake of experiments demonstrating out-of-equilibrium magnetisation, spin-charge separation and quasiparticle resonance in superconducting aluminium in the Pauli limit. With close analogues in cold atom systems and dense quark matter, spin imbalanced superconductors are of interest to the broader physics community beyond condensed matter. Nevertheless, comprehensive theoretical study of out-of-equilibrium superconductivity where spin degeneracy is lifted by Zeeman splitting, which includes the self-consistent calculation of the spatial dependence of the superconducting gap, is still a work in progress. Apart from traditional quasiclassical approaches, attempts to apply hydrodynamical methods to the problem are also underway Competing Interests. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 