We show that, within a linear approximation of BCS theory, a weak homogeneous magnetic field lowers the critical temperature by an explicit constant times the field strength, up to higher order terms. This provides a rigorous derivation and generalization of results obtained in the physics literature from WHH theory of the upper critical magnetic field. A new ingredient in our proof is a rigorous phase approximation to control the effects of the magnetic field. 1.1. Aims and scope. In this paper we are interested in the infimum of the spectrum of the two-particle operator acting in ) : α(x, y) = α(y, x) for all x, y ∈ R 3 . Here -2V (x-y) is the interaction potential between the two particles which we assume to be spherically symmetric, i.e., it only depends on the distance |x -y|. (Later on, we will assume that the interaction potential is non-positive and the minus sign, as opposed to the more usual plus sign, will simplify some formulas.) Moreover, μ ∈ R is the chemical potential. We are interested in the dependence of the operator on two parameters, namely, the inverse temperature β > 0 and a constant magnetic field B ∈ R 3 , whose strength B = |B| we shall assume to be small. More precisely, we are interested in identifying regimes of temperatures T = β -1 such that the infimum of the spectrum of the above operator is positive or negative for all sufficiently small B. As we will explain in detail below, the motivation for this question comes from BCS theory of superconductivity and the operator arises through the linearization of the Bogolubov-de Gennes equation around the normal state. Therefore, the question whether the infimum of the spectrum of the operator (1) is positive or negative corresponds to the local stability of the normal state. c 2017 by the authors. This paper may be reproduced, in its entirety, for non-commercial purposes. The largest magnetic field strength B at a given temperature T below the critical temperature T c where the normal state remains unstable is known in the physics literature as upper critical magnetic field B c2 (T ), and it was first computed in the physics literature by Werthammer, Helfand and Hohenberg (WHH) based on an ansatz and certain simplifications To describe our main result we introduce the effective one-body operator acting in ) : α(-r) = α(r) for all r ∈ R 3 } . Later on, we will see that the variable r ∈ R 3 arises as the relative coordinate r = x-y of the two particles at x and y. We will assume that the operator |(-i∇ r ) 2 -μ| -V (r) has a negative eigenvalue. Then it is easy to see (see, e.g., The interpretation of this result is that, at least in linear approximation, a weak magnetic field lowers the BCS critical temperature to T c (B) = T c -c 0 B +o(B). This is well-known in the physics literature is well-defined and equal to -c -1 0 . As discussed in Appendix A, this reduces to the known result for this slope in WHH theory The mathematical challenge of this problem is that low energy states of the two particle operator It will be more convenient for us to work not directly with the above two-particle operator, but rather with its Birman-Schwinger version. We now describe the precise set-up of our analysis. 1.2. Model and main result. Our model depends on the following ingredients. Assumption 1. (1) Homogeneous magnetic field B = Be 3 of strength B > 0 in the direction of the third coordinate axis e 3 = (0, 0, 1) T (2) Inverse temperature β = T -1 > 0 (3) Chemical potential μ ∈ R (4) Non-negative, spherically symmetric interaction potential V such that V ∈ L ∞ (R 3 ) and |r|V ∈ L ∞ (R 3 ) Probably our analysis can be extended to cover some (not too severe) local singularities of V , but our boundedness assumptions allow us to avoid the related technicalities. Moreover, the non-negativity assumption on V is only for technical convenience and we expect that our results hold true also for non-positive or sign-changing potentials satisfying the remaining assumptions. Standard superconducting materials known at the time when WHH theory was developed are metallic in the normal state with μ > 0. We also allow for μ ≤ 0 since this is relevant for low-density superconductors like SrTiO 3 and for systems close to a superconductor-insulator phase transition. We note that, in part (4) of Assumption 1 V refers to a function R 3 → R, x → V (x). To simplify notation and since the precise meaning is always clear from the context, we use the same symbol V also for the corresponding multiplication operators on L 2 symm (R 3 ) (i.e., (V α)(r) = V (r)α(r)) and on The magnetic momentum and the single-particle Hamiltonian are defined, respectively, by The two particles are represented by coordinates x, y ∈ R 3 . If we want to emphasize the variables on which the operators act, we write (Technically speaking these operators, as well as any operators in what follows, are considered as the Friedrichs extensions of the corresponding differential expressions acting on smooth and compactly supported functions.) Let us introduce a function Ξ β : R 2 → R by ). (We comment in Remark 6 below on our non-standard notation.) Since the operators h B,x and h B,y commute, we can define the operator We will always consider this operator in the Hilbert space L 2 symm (R 3 × R 3 ). Note that, with this notation, the operator in (1) can be written as L -1 T,B + V . Next, in order to formulate our assumption on the critical temperature, we introduce the function χ β : R → R by , where p r = -i∇ r denotes the momentum operator. (The operator χ β (p 2 r -μ) is denoted by K -1 T in 2 corresponding to the eigenvalue 1 which, by assumption, is unique up to a phase. Since p 2 r and V are real operators, so is and we can assume that φ * is real-valued. The spherical symmetry of V from Assumption 1 and the non-degeneracy from Assumption 3 imply that φ * is spherically symmetric. From a physics point of view, Assumption 3 restricts us to potentials giving raise to s-wave superconductivity. It is known that this assumption is fulfilled for a large class of potentials, including those which have a non-negative Fourier transform As the final preliminary before stating our main result, we will introduce some constants. They are defined in terms of the auxiliary functions as well as the function (The prefactor in front of the integral is irrelevant for us and only introduced for consistency with the definition in Note that the quotient Λ 0 /Λ 2 , which will appear in our main result, has the dimension of an inverse temperature. We are now in position to state our main result. Theorem 4. Under assumptions 1, 2 and 3 the following holds. (1) Let 0 < T 1 < T c . Then there are constants B 0 > 0 and C > 0 such that for all 0 < B ≤ B 0 and all (2) There are constants B 0 > 0 and C > 0 such that for all 0 < B ≤ B 0 and all The interpretation of this theorem is that for small magnetic fields B the critical temperature goes down by an amount 2T c (Λ 0 /Λ 2 )B plus higher order terms. This gives, in particular, the slope of the upper critical field at T c ; see also Appendix A. The assumption in part (1) that the temperature is bounded away from zero is probably technical. Note however, that our result is valid for arbitrarily small T 1 > 0, as long as it is uniform in B. The reason for this restriction is that our expansions diverge as the temperature goes to zero. Remarkably, there is no such restriction in part (2) of the theorem. Remark 5. Let us emphasize that our definition of critical temperature coincides with that in (To get the normalization constant, we apply χ βc ((-i∇ r ) 2 -μ)V 1/2 to both sides and use the equation for α * and its normalization.) Remark 6. Our notation deviates somewhat from the standard one in the physics literature. Our V corresponds to -V /2 in the physics literature. Here the factor of 1/2, but not the minus sign, is consistent with Let us compare our results here with those in The reason why the same problem in our setting here of a homogeneous magnetic field is more complicated is the following. In Remark 7. Let us rewrite for a moment the magnetic field strength as B = h 2 , such that h denotes the ratio between the microscopic and the macroscopic scale set by the field strength. Then our result can be stated in the following way. The constant magnetic field B lowers the critical temperature by where can be interpreted as the lowest eigenvalue of the linearized Ginzburg-Landau operator. This formulation shows that our present result extends the earlier result 1.3. Connection to BCS theory. In this subsection we describe how the two-body operators (1) and L T,B arise in a problem in superconductivity. Our purpose here is to give a motivation and our presentation in this subsection will be informal. For background and references on the mathematical study of BCS theory we refer to We consider a superconducting sample occupying all of R 3 at inverse temperature β > 0 and chemical potential μ ∈ R. The particles interact through a two-body potential -V (x -y) and are placed in an external magnetic field with vector potential A(x). In BCS theory the state of a system is described by two operators γ and α in L 2 (R 3 ), representing the one-body density matrix and the Cooper pair wave function, respectively. The operator γ is assumed to be Hermitian and the operator α is assumed to satisfy α * = α, where for a general operator A we write A = CAC with C denoting complex conjugation. Moreover, it is assumed that In an equilibrium state the operators γ and α satisfy the (non-linear) Bogolubov-de Gennes equations where ∆ V,α (x, y) = -2V (x -y)α(x, y) and Here ∆ is considered as an integral operator with integral kernel ∆(x, y). Moreover, h = (-i∇ + A) 2 -μ is the one-particle operator. Note that one solution of the equation is γ = (1 + exp(βh)) -1 and α = 0. This is the normal state. We are interested in the local stability of this solution and therefore will linearize the equation around it. It is somewhat more convenient to write the equation in the equivalent form Then, in view of the partial fraction expansion (also known as Mittag-Leffler series) (where we write n∈Z short for lim N →∞ N n=-N for conditionally convergent sums like this one; convergence becomes manifest by combining the +n and -n terms), Using this formula we can expand the operator tanh(βH ∆ /2) in powers of ∆. Since the Bogolubov-de Gennes equation for the Cooper pair wave function becomes where . . . stands for terms that are higher order in α. The key observation now is that 1 (Here V α on the right side is considered as a two-particle wave function, defined by (V α)(x, y) = V (x -y)α(x, y).) This identity follows by writing and using the partial fraction expansion of tanh to recognize the right side as Ξ β (E, E ′ ). Thus, the linearized Bogolubov-de Gennes equation becomes There are two ways to make this equation self-adjoint. The first one is to apply the operator L -1 T,B to both sides and to subtract V α. In this way we obtain the operator The upshot of this discussion is that positivity of the operator (1) (or, equivalently, of 1 ) corresponds to local stability of the normal state and negativity of these operators corresponds to local instability. If we define two critical local temperatures T loc c (B) as the smallest temperature above which the normal state is always stable and T loc c (B) as the largest temperature below which the normal state is never stable, then our theorems says that (ignoring the presence of T 1 for simplicity) both T loc c (B) and Acknowledgements. We are very grateful to Michael Loss, whose ideas played a crucial role in finding the proof of Lemma 29. E. L. would like to thank Yaron Kadem for helpful discussions. Partial support by the U.S. National Science Foundation through grant DMS-1363432 (R.L.F.) and by Vetenskapsrådet through grant 2016-05167 (E.L.) is acknowledged. In this section we prove bounds on the resolvent kernel of the operator h B = π 2 -μ in L 2 (R 3 ) with a constant magnetic field B = Be 3 with B ≥ 0 and a chemical potential μ ∈ R. (Here and in the following, we use the convention that for an integral operator K its integral kernel is denoted by K(x, y).) We introduce the function We first collect some simple properties of this function. Proof. We introduce coordinates x = (x ⊥ , x 3 ), y = (y ⊥ , y 3 ), perform a Fourier transform in the x ⊥ and y ⊥ variables and use the known structure of the spectrum of the Landau Hamiltonian. Thus, in terms of the projections ) on the k-th Landau level, the kernel of (zh B ) -1 can be written as Explicitly, the kernel of the projection P B is given by where k is the k-th Laguerre polynomial. From these formulas it is easy to deduce (i) and (ii). Our next goal is to quantify the decay of the L 1 -norm of g z B as |z| → ∞ along the imaginary axis. We begin with the simpler case B = 0. We employ the notation that is, μ = μ + -μ -. Lemma 9. For every a > -2 there is a constant C a > 0 such that for all ω ∈ R one has Proof. One has we obtain the bound in the lemma. The next lemma deals with B = 0 by comparing it to the case B = 0. Lemma 10. There are constants δ > 0 and C > 0 such that for all B ≥ 0 and ω ∈ R with . We claim that g z B satisfies the equation To see this, we note that, in the sense of operators, Applying the operator (zh B ) -1 from the left we obtain and, if we set y = 0 and recall Lemma 8 (ii), To obtain the claimed equation it suffices to note that where we used the fact that the vector In fact, (13) implies Here we denoted convolution by * and we made use of Young's convolution inequality. This proves the claimed inequality. Step 3. We now conclude the proof of the proposition. We first observe that by the spherical symmetry of g z 0 and therefore, by Lemma 9, there is a C > 0 such that for all ω ∈ R, and therefore, by . Using once more the bound above on h iω 1 as well as the bound from Lemma 9 on g iω 0 1 we obtain the bound claimed in the lemma. In this section we derive a useful representation formula for the operator L T,B as a sum over contributions from the individual Matsubara frequencies ω n from The magnetic momentum in the center of mass coordinate is Lemma 11. The operator L T,B acts as and Proof. Our starting point is (8) which, in terms of the resolvent kernel G z B from (10), implies that Here we used the fact that According to Lemma 8 (ii), the full resolvent kernel G z B can be recovered from g z B and, after changing coordinates X = (x + x ′ )/2, r = x -x ′ , Y = (y + y ′ )/2 and s = y -y ′ , we obtain and recalling the definition of k T,B (Z, r, s) we can write this as Next, we use the fact that We recall definition (15) of Π X and note that p X = -i∇ X commutes with B ∧ X. Therefore we obtain This shows that This almost proves the result, except that we still need to replace e -iZ•Π X by cos(Z • Π X ). To do so, we change variables Z → -Z, r → -r and s → -s and use α(x, y) = α(y, x) and k T,B (-Z, -r, -s) = k T,B (Z, r, s) (see Lemma 8 (i)) in order to obtain the same formula as in ( If, in addition, τ is real-valued, then In other words, the fact that τ is real-valued allows us to replace e i 4 B•(r∧s) by cos( i 4 B• (r ∧s)). Since we will apply this in a regime where B is small, this roughly corresponds to an improvement of the error from B to B 2 , which will be important for us. Proof. The first formula follows immediately from Lemma 11. To prove the second formula, we interchange the variables r and s and at the same time let Z → -Z. According to Lemma 8 (i) we have k T,B (-Z, s, r) = k T,B (Z, r, s)e -i 2 B•(r∧s) , and therefore (17) becomes When τ is real, we can add this formula and ( We conclude this section with a formula which we need later and which, essentially, is the limiting case B = 0 of Lemma 11. We define, similarly as for B > 0, and Then, setting ρ = r -s, l = p + q and k = (p -q)/2 and recalling ( = - This section contains the technical heart of this paper. We shall approximate the operator L T,B by increasingly simpler operators. Namely, we shall write with certain operators M T,B and N T,B and in Subsection 4.2 we shall show that both differences in parentheses are small when B is small. In the following subsection we investigate in more detail the operator N T,B and show that a leading order approximation for small B is χ β (p 2 r -μ). Then we proceed to find the subleading correction, which will be the key for proving our main result. These approximations are based on a method which we explain in Subsection 4.1. In this section we keep precisely track of the exact parameter dependence of the error terms, even if we do not need this in the present paper. We do this in order to emphasize the explicitness of our method, which might be applicable in different limiting regimes as well. One of the important technical novelties in this paper compared to Throughout this section Assumption 1 is in effect. 4.1. The method. The following proposition is our main technical tool in order to perform the phase approximation. Proposition 13. Let l be a measurable function on with functions g for some a > 1 and ν ∈ R. Moreover, let A Z,r,s , Z, r, s ∈ R 3 , be a measurable family of bounded operators on (where A Z,r,s acts on the center of mass variable X) is bounded and We recall that ν ± denote the positive and negative parts of ν. (In fact, the proposition remains true if ν + and ν -are two arbitrary non-negative numbers, not necessarily arising as positive and negative parts of a common ν.) The proof will be based on the following simple boundedness criterion. Lemma 14. Let B Z,r,s , Z, r, s ∈ R 3 , be a measurable family of bounded operators in L 2 (R 3 ) such that where the operators B Z,r,s act on the center of mass variable X. Then B is bounded with B ≤ C. Proof of Lemma 14. By Minkowski's integral inequality we have for each fixed r ∈ R 3 where we have set The assumption C < ∞ implies, by the Schur test, that the operator b in Proof of Proposition 13. We will apply Lemma 14 with B Z,r,s = l(Z, r, s)A Z,r,s . By assumption we have and therefore j (-r) and where * denotes convolution. By Young's convolution inequality, and similarly for R 3 ×R 3 dZ ds B Z,r,s . We now insert the assumed bound on the L 1 norms of the g (n) j and bound Thus, the claimed inequality will follow from the bound 2 which can be shown by an easy comparison with the corresponding integral. with The difference between this operator and the operator L T,B is that g z B is replaced by g z 0 . We show that the operators are close when B is small. Lemma 15. There are δ > 0 and C > 0 such that for all β > 0 and B > 0 with Proof. We write T,B + L T,B , where the operators L T,B are of the same form as L T,B and M T,B , but with kernels given by We claim that we are in the setting of Proposition 13 with Moreover, the kernel l(Z, r, s) is pointwise bounded as in (21) with C 1 = 2/β and The L 1 norms of g 2 and g 3 are bounded by Lemma 9. We want to bound the L 1 norms of g 1 and g 4 using Lemma 10 and, to do so, we need that the assumption 2 . This is implied by βB(1 + βμ + ) ≤ δ ′ (1 + βμ -) for a suitable δ ′ > 0. (Here and in all the following we estimate 1 + βμ ± ≤ π + βμ ± ≤ π(1 + βμ ± ) in order to obtain nicer expressions.) Under this assumption we therefore obtain (22) with a = 4, ν = βμ and C 2 = CB 2 β 4 . Thus, Proposition 13 yields the bound The argument for the operator L T,B is similar with the same choice (24) for A Z,r,s . Now (21) holds with C 1 = 2/β and 4 = 0 . As before, Lemma 10 yields ( Next, we define an operator N T,B on L 2 symm (R 3 × R 3 ) by (25) with k T,0 (Z, r, s) from Proof. We write T,B , where L T,B is of the same form as L T,B and M T,B , but with kernels given by We will bound the operator |r| -1/2 L (3) T,B |r| -1/2 using Proposition 13. We again make the choice (24) and set l(Z, r, s T,B (Z, r, s)|s| -1/2 . Moreover, in order to bound the kernel we estimate Thus, we obtain the bound (21) with C 1 = B/(2β) and According to Lemma 9 we have the bound (22) with a = 5/2, ν = βμ and C 2 = Cβ 5/2 . Thus, Proposition 13 yields which is the claimed bound. Lemma 16 yields, in particular, the bound The drawback of this bound is that the right side is linear in B. We now show that for α of a special form we obtain a quadratic bound. Lemma 17. If α(X + r/2, X -r/2) = ψ(X)τ (r) with τ even and real-valued, then Proof. Let us define an operator MT,B in L 2 symm (R 3 × R 3 ) which is of the same form as M T,B , but with the factor e Therefore, in order to prove the lemma, it suffices to bound the norm of the operator |r| -1/2 ( MT,B -N T,B )|r| -1/2 . We do with using Proposition 13 and make again the choice (24) for A Z,r,s . Moreover, we bound Thus, (21) holds for l(Z, r, s According to Lemma 9 we have ( which is the claimed bound. . Recall that the operator N T,B was defined in (25), and that its definition involves the operator cos(Z • Π X ). In this subsection we approximate the operator N T,B first with an operator where the cosine is replaced by 1, and then with an operator where it is replaced by 1 Lemma 18. There is a constant C > 0 such that for all T > 0 and all B > 0, Proof. The key observation is the following expression for the operator χ β (p 2 r -μ), Indeed, according to (19) we have with L(p, q) from (20). Doing the Z and the l integrations, we obtain which yields (26). in the form of Proposition 13 with the choice implies that By repeated use of the Schwarz inequality it is easy to see that there is a constant C such that for any self-adjoint operators A 1 , A 2 , A 3 and real scalars α 1 , α 2 , α 3 , This implies that Let us bound the kernel l(Z, r, s) = Z 2 k T,0 (Z, r, s) pointwise. Using we obtain (21) with C 1 = 1/β and According to Lemma 9 we have (22) with a = 3, ν = βμ and C 2 = Cβ 3 . Thus, Proposition 13 yields which is the claimed bound. The following lemma is somewhat technical. It plays a key role in removing a cut-off in the proof of the upper bound on the critical temperature and it is crucial to have a superlinear power of Π 2 X in the norm on the right side. Lemma 19. There is a constant C > 0 such that for all T > 0 and all B ≥ 0, Proof. Our starting point is again (26), which allows us to write the operator Thus, we obtain Since cos λ sin λ = (1/2) sin(2λ), we can rewrite the last term as Finally, we sum over j and use the fact that . Since sin 2 λ + cos(2λ) = cos 2 λ, this is the same as (31). We now bound the right side of (31) from above. Recalling ( We compute and estimate, using Moreover, since cos λ(1 This proves (30). So far, in Lemmas 18 and 19 we have seen that N T,B is given to leading order by χ β (p 2 r -μ). We now extract the subleading term. Lemma 20. There is a constant C > 0 such that for all T > 0, all B ≥ 0 and all α of the form α(X + r/2, X -r/2) = ψ(X)τ (r) with τ radially symmetric and real-valued, one has α, N T,B α - where We claim that α, N T,B α - This is clear for the first two terms on the left side, which correspond to the terms cos(Z • Π X ) and -1 in the definition of O T,B . For the third term on the left side, which corresponds to the term (1/2)(Z • Π X ) 2 on the right side, we use the fact that Z → F τ (Z) is spherically symmetric (which easily follows from the spherical symmetry of τ and of g ±iωn 0 ) to deduce that In fact, this follows by multiplying out the left side and using the fact that the angular average of Z i Z j is (Z 2 /3)δ ij . This proves the claimed formula Thus, it remains to bound the norm of the operator (Π and l(Z, r, s) = |Z| 4 k T,0 (Z, r, s). In order to bound A Z,r,s we use the fact that Because of this inequality and (28) Similarly, one shows A Z,r,s ≥ 0 and therefore A Z,r,s ≤ C/24 = C 3 . We bound l pointwise using ). This leads to (21) with C 1 = 1/β and Then, from Lemma 9 we obtain (23) with a = 4, ν = βμ and C 2 = C ′ β 4 . Therefore, Proposition 13 yields which concludes the proof of the lemma. We consider functions ). The following theorem computes the expectation value of L T,B in states of this form. The bound will turn into an asymptotic expansion in the case where τ varies on a shorter scale than ψ. Theorem 21. There are constants δ > 0 and C > 0 such that the following holds. If with τ spherically symmetric and real-valued, then in terms of the functions g 0 , g 1 and g 2 from (3). Proof. Combining Lemmas 15, 17 and 20 we obtain Here we have bounded (2B) 2 ψ 2 ≤ Π 2 X ψ 2 to simplify the form of the remainder. Therefore it remains to show that dZ F τ (Z) and A (1) To do so, we multiply identity (19) by and integrate with respect to ρ to get This implies Clearly, and a tedious, but straightforward computation yields in terms of the functions g 0 , g 1 and g 2 defined in (3). This finishes the proof of Theorem 21. We now provide the Proof of part (1) of Theorem 4, which will be a rather straightforward consequence of Theorem 21. We will work under Assumptions 1 and 2. Assumption 3 is not needed in this part of Theorem 4. We fix a parameter T 1 with 0 < T 1 < T c and restrict ourselves to temperatures where the functions φ ∈ L 2 symm (R 3 ) and ψ ∈ L 2 (R 3 ) are still to be determined. At the moment we require only that ψ = 1, Π 2 X ψ < ∞ and | • |φ < ∞. Applying the expansion from Theorem 21 with τ (r) = V (r) 1/2 φ(r) we find that, as long as where We have C T < ∞ by our assumptions on φ and the assumption that V ∈ L ∞ (R 3 ). The leading order term on the right side is which makes this term equal to zero at T = T c . (The prefactor here is irrelevant and only used to obtain the precise form of the coefficients Λ 0 and Λ 2 . The quotient Λ 0 /Λ 2 is independent of this choice of normalization.) Note that [5, With this choice of φ we therefore obtain In order to proceed, we note the fact that τ = V 1/2 φ = (2π) -3/2 V α * , and therefore, in terms of the function t from (4), It follows from this identity that and some simple analysis of the function g 0 shows that for all T 1 ≤ T ≤ T c . Using (36) once again we also find that A Tc [τ ] = -Λ 0 , which in turn can be used to prove that Inserting these expansions into (35) we obtain for all T 1 ≤ T ≤ T c . We now choose ψ in order to make the term ψ, Π 2 X ψ as small as possible (with ψ = 1). To do so, we introduce coordinates X = (X ⊥ , X 3 ) with X ⊥ ∈ R 2 and X 3 ∈ R and we define Here ψ ⊥ is a normalized ground state of the Landau Hamiltonian in the plane with magnetic field equal to one and ψ is a fixed L 2 (R)-normalized function which belongs to H 2 (R). With this choice we obtain If we choose l larger than a constant times B -1 , we easily conclude that there is an M > 0 such that for all 0 ≤ B ≤ B 0 and This completes the proof of part (1) of Theorem 4. In this and the following section we work under Assumptions 1, 2 and 3. 7.1. The decomposition lemma. The remainder of this paper is devoted to proving an upper bound on the critical temperature. As a preliminary step we prove in this section a decomposition lemma, which says that, if for some fixed constants C 1 and C 2 independent of B, then Φ has, up to a controllable error, the same form as the trial function that we used in the lower bound on the critical temperature. Theorem 22. For given constants C 1 , C 2 > 0 there are constants B 0 > 0 and C > 0 such that the following holds. Moreover, Thus, Φ is of the form ψ ≤ (X)φ * (r) up to a small error σ. We have control on the expectation of Π 2 X in ψ ≤ . However, for technical reasons we also need control on the expectation of Π 6 X . This is achieved by introducing the parameter ε. The drawback of introducing this parameter is that the norm of error σ deteriorates as ε becomes small. What will save the day is that the error σ can be decomposed in a good part σ -σ 0 , whose norm is controlled uniformly in ε, and an explicit bad part σ 0 , which is of a similar form as the leading term, but where the function ψ > is orthogonal to ψ ≤ . This will allow us to prove that the interaction between the leading term and σ 0 is of subleading order. A similar momentum cut-off for a similar purpose was already introduced in We define the unitary operator ) where, as usual, r = x -y and X = (x + y)/2. Proposition 23. There are constants δ > 0 and C > 0 such that for all T > 0 and B > 0 with Bβ(1 For the proof we need the following lemma which shows how the operator U appears. We will use the following notation Thus, we have shown that which is the same as the claimed identity π r U = U(π r -Π X /2). The other identity in the lemma is proved similarly. Proof of Proposition 23. Since for any real numbers E and E ′ one has we have In the variables r = x -y, X = (x + y)/2 we have π x = πr + Π X /2 and π y = πr -Π X /2 and therefore, according to Lemma 24, Therefore we can write the above inequality on L T,B as Since V commutes with U, we deduce that In order to prove the lemma, it remains to remove the magnetic field from π r . In terms of the Matsubara frequencies , which follows by setting E ′ = 0 in For the corresponding integral kernel we obtain Here we used Lemma 8 for the second equality. Thus, for φ ∈ L 2 symm (R 3 ), considered as a function of the variable r, By a simple convolution inequality, and similarly, using in addition we get Using the bounds from Lemma 10 we find that, if Bβ(1 , and using the bounds from Lemma 9 we find that (Details in getting these estimates are very similar to those explained in the proof of Proposition 13 and thus not repeated here). We conclude that Conjugating the resulting operator inequality by U and by U * and combining it with the above inequality on L T,B we obtain the statement of the proposition. A priori bound on the critical temperature and an operator inequality. As a first consequence of Proposition 23 we obtain a rough a-priori upper bound on the critical temperature. Corollary 25. There are constants B 0 > 0 and C > 0 such that for all 0 < B ≤ B 0 and T ≥ T c + CB one has Proof. According to Proposition 23 there are δ > 0 and C > 0 such that for all T ≥ T c and 0 < Bβ(1 (Note that the constant C can be chosen independent of T , as long as T ≥ T c . In fact, the constant goes to zero as T → ∞.) We next recall that the family of operators V 1/2 χ β (p 2 r -μ)V 1/2 is non-decreasing with respect to β and has an eigenvalue 1 at β = β c . Moreover, since the function χ β (E) is strictly increasing with respect to β for every E ∈ R, we learn from analytic perturbation theory that there are c > 0 and T 2 > T c such that for all Inserting this into the lower bound above we conclude that As a consequence of this corollary, from now on we may and will restrict ourselves to temperatures T such that |T -T c | is bounded by a constant times B. Our next goal is to deduce from Proposition 23 a lower bound on the operator 1 -V 1/2 L T,B V 1/2 . We recall that by definition of β c the largest eigenvalue of the operator Finally, we introduce the operator We can now state our operator inequality for 1 Proposition 26. Given C 1 > 0 there are constants B 0 > 0 and C > 0 such that for all |T -T c | ≤ C 1 B and 0 < B ≤ B 0 one has Proof. As in the proof of Corollary 25 we apply Proposition 23 to obtain δ > 0 and Since the derivative of χ β (E) with respect to T is bounded uniformly in E for T close to T c , we infer that there is a C ′ > 0 such that for all |T -T c | ≤ C 1 B 0 and all E ∈ R, This, together with the gap inequality (44), implies that for |T - as claimed. 7.4. The operator R. We introduce the operator acting in L 2 (R 3 ). Since -1 ≤ cos(r • Π X ) ≤ 1 and since φ * is normalized, we have R ≤ 1 and therefore 1 -R 2 ≥ 0. We now prove a more precise lower bound. Lemma 27. For every B 0 > 0 there are c > 0 and E 0 > 0 such that for 0 < B ≤ B 0 , For the proof of this lemma we need an auxiliary result, which is probably wellknown and whose proof is included for the sake of completeness. We denote by Π ⊥ X = (Π X , Π X ) T the first two components of Π X . Moreover, we denote by P (k) 2B the projections on the k-th Landau level and by L k = L k the Laguerre polynomials. Lemma 28. For every ρ > 0, This lemma implies, in particular, that the operator on the left side commutes with the two-dimensional Landau Hamiltonian (Π ⊥ X ) 2 . Proof of Lemma 28. Let a = (Π (1) X )/(2 √ B) and [a, a † ] = 1. Thus, writing ω = (cos φ, sin φ) we have by the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula, Expanding the exponential, we find It is well-known that there is a basis of the k-th Landau level of the form (a † ) k (b † ) l |0 , l ∈ N 0 , where b and b † correspond to an independent oscillator. Since where we used Proof of Lemma 27. The operator R can be diagonalized explicitly by performing a Fourier transform in the x 3 variable and by decomposing into Landau levels in the (x 1 , x 2 ) variables. The operator then acts as multiplication by the numbers ) To obtain this formula we note that, since φ * is spherically symmetric, We now apply Lemma 28 and obtain Changing variables u = ρ 2 and performing a Fourier transform in the x 3 variable we obtain (49). Since in the same representation Π 2 X becomes multiplication by we need to prove that for 0 < B ≤ B 0 , We prove this inequality separately for small, medium and large values of E k,p 3 . Step 1. We show that there are constants E * > 0 and C > 0 such that for all B > 0, k ∈ N 0 and p Indeed, using the inequalities (33) we get from (48) the operator inequalities Let us abbreviate and note that these numbers are finite by the decay properties of φ * [5, and bound, using (28), We obtain This implies the claimed bound (51). Step 2. We show that R k,pz → 0 as E k,pz → ∞ uniformly for all sufficiently small B , that is, for every B 0 > 0 and ε > 0 there is an E * > 0 such that for all k ∈ N 0 and This follows by a Riemann-Lebesgue-type argument. Indeed, for given ε > 0 we Since (see we find that |R k,p 3 | ≤ Rk,p 3 + ε/2 , and we are reduced to proving that Rk,p 3 → 0 as E k,p 3 → ∞. We prove two different bounds on Rk,p 3 . First, we write Therefore, using (54), 3 ) . This is the first bound. For the second bound, we write d dx (xL with the generalized Laguerre polynomials L k and obtain Rk, k (Bu) . We now use the fact that for every M > 0 there is a C > 0 such that (This bound is a consequence of the more precise uniform asymptotics in Combining the two bounds we see that and this is bounded by k,p 3 }, which is ≤ ε/2 if E k,p 3 is large enough. This proves (53). Step 3. We show that for any E ≤ < E ≥ and any B 0 > 0 there is a c > 0 such that for all 0 < B ≤ B 0 , k ∈ N 0 and p 3 ∈ R with E ≤ ≤ E k,p 3 ≤ E ≥ one has From inequalities (54) and the fact that the equality cos(p 3 x 3 )e -(1/2)Bu L n (Bu) = ±1 holds only on a set of (u, x 3 ) of measure zero we conclude that |R k,p 3 | < 1 for all k ∈ N 0 and p 3 ∈ R. Therefore, arguing by contradiction, if (55) were wrong, there would be a sequence (B j , k j , p 3j ) with 0 < B j ≤ B 0 , E ≤ ≤ E (j) (With the superscript on E (j) k,p 3 and R (j) k,p 3 we indicate that the corresponding quantities are evaluated at B = B j .) After passing to a subsequence we may assume that p 3 j → p 3 , B j → B and E (j) k j ,p 3j → E for some p 3 ∈ R, 0 ≤ B ≤ B 0 and E ≤ ≤ E ≤ E ≥ . If B > 0, then we may assume that k j → k for some k ∈ N 0 and we easily deduce that The claimed bounds on ψ, Π 2 X (E 0 + Π 2 X ) -1 ψ and ξ 2 follow from (59), ( Proof of Theorem 22. Let ψ be as in Lemma 29. For ε ∈ [B, B 0 ] we set ψ ≤ := 1(Π 2 X ≤ ε)ψ , ψ > := 1(Π 2 X > ε)ψ . Recall from Lemma 29 that ψ, Π 2 X (E 0 + Π 2 X ) -1 ψ ≤ CB. This implies that for k ≥ 1, and We now define σ 0 := cos(Π X • r/2)ψ > (X)φ * (r) and σ := σ 0 + ξ + (cos(Π X • r/2) -1) ψ ≤ (X)φ * (r) , so that, by Lemma 29, Φ = ψ ≤ (X)φ * (r) + σ. According to Lemma 29 and (64), we have We now prove the claimed bounds on σ 0 and σ -σ 0 . According to (64), we have Moreover, for each r ∈ R 3 , since 1 -cos λ = 2 sin 2 (λ/2) ≤ λ, where we used (63). Thus, (cos(Π X • r/2) -1) The last integral is finite by the decay properties of φ * , see (for if there are no such Φ, then the theorem is trivially true). According to Theorem 22, for any parameter ε ∈ [B, B 0 ], Φ can be decomposed as Φ = ψ ≤ (X)φ * (r) + σ . The term I 1 is the main term and we have, exactly as in the proof of the lower bound on the critical termperature, Here the remainder εB comes from the bound on Π 2 X ψ ≤ 2 in (38). Let us bound the term I 2 . Using the operator inequality from Proposition 26 (dropping the non-negative term κ(1 -Q)) and recalling that T ≥ T c -C 1 B we obtain where we used the bound on σ from (39). It remains to bound I 3 . According to Lemmas 15 and 16, we have Here in the first inequality we used the assumption that (1 + |r|)V is bounded and in the second inequality we used (38) and (39). We next decompose σ, (1 We found it convenient to fix an arbitrary multiplicative constant so that G(0) = 1. For standard BCS superconductors, G(z) is a smooth function in some interval containing z = 0, and 1/(β c μ) is very small (10 -3 or so, typically). Thus it is appropriate to compute the integrals above by inserting the Taylor series of G, Using this we obtain dB c2 (T ) dT which yields (66) and provides corrections to this WHH result. R. L. FRANK, C. HAINZL, AND E. LANGMANN