Experimental evidence on high-Tc cuprates reveals ubiquitous charge density wave (CDW) modulations 1-10 , which coexist with superconductivity. Although the CDW had been predicted by theory 11-13 , important questions remain about the extent to which the CDW influences lattice and charge degrees of freedom and its characteristics as functions of doping and temperature. These questions are intimately connected to the origin of the CDW and its relation to the mysterious cuprate pseudogap 10,14 . Here, we use ultrahigh resolution resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) to reveal new CDW character in underdoped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ . At low temperature, we observe dispersive excitations from an incommensurate CDW that induces anomalously enhanced phonon intensity, unseen using other techniques. Near the pseudogap temperature T*, the CDW persists, but the associated excitations significantly weaken and the CDW wavevector shifts, becoming nearly commensurate with a periodicity of four lattice constants. The dispersive CDW excitations, phonon anomaly, and temperature dependent commensuration provide a comprehensive momentum space picture of complex CDW behavior and point to a closer relationship with the pseudogap state. With sufficient energy resolution, RIXS can be an ideal probe for revealing the CDW excitations in cuprates. By tuning the incident photon energy to the Cu L 3 -edge (Fig. by the pivotal role that RIXS has recently played in revealing orbital and magnetic excitations in cuprates Notably this quasi-elastic signal is asymmetric with respect to zero energy loss (Fig. In this work, we exploit the newly commissioned ultrahigh resolution RIXS instrument at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility to reveal these low energy excitations near the CDW. We choose the double-layer cuprate Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi2212), whose electronic structure has been extensively studied by surface-sensitive spectroscopy, such as scanning tunneling microscope Figure The second branch of excitations possesses an energy scale of approximately 60 meV, whose energy-momentum-dispersion can be reliably extracted (Fig. Interestingly, the phonon intensity varies non-monotonically with momentum, having a maximum near Q A ~ 0.37 r.l.u. (Fig. It is important to note that the RIXS phonon cross-section directly reflects the momentum-dependence of the electron-phonon coupling strength Temperature dependent measurements were conducted on another Bi2212 crystal with a similar T c (40 K) with results shown in Fig. Our results have several important implications. They provide the first direct evidence for the existence of dispersive CDW excitations in the charge-charge correlation function with a characteristic velocity V CDW . Furthermore, these excitations persist to high energy, at least up to ~ 60 meV, causing the phonon intensity anomaly, indicating that the CDW influences the charge and lattice degrees of freedom, despite its short correlation length. Whether the observed CDW excitations are collective due to a symmetry breaking Finally, the CDW survives up to at least 240 K ~ T*, which taken together with the similarities to striped nickelates indicates a close relationship between the CDW, spins, and the pseudogap. The high quality UD-Bi2212 (Bi 2.2 Sr 1.8 Ca 0.8 Dy 0.2 Cu 2 O 8+δ ) single-crystals (Supplementary Fig. The low energy resolution RIXS data on the UD-NBCO (Nd 1.2 Ba 1.8 Cu 3 O 6+δ ) sample were taken at the ADRESS beamline of the Swiss Light Source at the Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI, Switzerland) using the SAXES spectrometer The NBCO films, 100 nm think, were deposited by high oxygen pressure diode sputtering on SrTiO 3 (100) single crystals. The lattice parameters measured by x-ray diffraction are a = b = 3.84 Å and c =11.7 Å. The RIXS measurements on the UD-Bi2212 sample 1 and 2 were performed using the ERIXS spectrometer at the ID32 beamline of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF, France). The RIXS spectra were taken with the photon energy of the incident x-rays tuned to the maximum of the absorption curve near the Cu L 3 -edge (Supplementary Fig. The ultrahigh resolution data (UD-Bi2212) were normalized to I 0 and corrected for self-absorption effects using the formalism described in Ref. 33. The zero energy positions were determined by comparing the spectrum recorded on small amount of silver paint (at each Q // ) near the sample surface. For more accuracy on the zero energy alignment, the data were fitted using a model involving a Gaussian (elastic peak), a Lorentzian (phonon peak) and an anti-symmetrized Lorentzian (paramagnon) convoluted with the energy resolution (Gaussian convolution). The results of these fits are presented on Supplementary Fig. From this analysis, we extracted the dispersion (peak position) and measured FWHM (full width at half maximum) of the phonon peak at T = 20 K in the sample 1 (Fig. The dispersions and FWHM found at T = 20 K for both sample 1 and sample 2 are similar, with the presence of a softening and a broadening around the CDW wavevector (Q CDW ~ 0.3 r.l.u.). The reproducibility of the low temperature data in two independent measurements and samples confirms our observations of the CDW, its excitations, and the intensity anomaly of the phonon (Supplementary Fig. The calculations depicted in Fig. The theory developed in Ref. 27 considered lowest order diagrams for RIXS in the weak electron-phonon limit, giving the first contribution to RIXS coming from the emission of one phonon. The strength of the signal is directly tied to the momentum dependent electron-phonon coupling. In the limit of small coupling, the intensity smoothly varies in momentum space, with a position that closely follows the bare phonon dispersion. However, if the phonon dispersion crosses the electron-hole continuum, a Fano effect occurs leading to a strong interference between the dispersions of the two excitations, as shown in Fig. Since we have used a simple 1D metallic model having a Peierls instability at 2k F , the particle-hole excitations disperse in energy and momentum in a cone from zero energy, with a dispersion set by the Fermi velocity. When the cone of charge excitations crosses the phonon line, an interference occurs that exploits the momentum dependent electronphonon coupling g(q). For the case of the bond-stretching phonon, g(q) determined from the nature of deformation coupling between Cu and O in-plane displacements is largest for large momentum transfers. Therefore the intensity is stronger on the higher momentum side of the intersection of the phonon line with the charge excitations. This effect well reproduces the experimental observations. taken at Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource is operated by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences. Correspondence to W. S. Lee (leews@stanford.edu), T. P. Devereaux (tpd@stanford.edu), or Z. X. Shen (zxshen@stanford.edu). 