We report an easy and versatile route for the synthesis of the parent phase of newest superconducting wonder material i.e. p-Terphenyl. Doped p-terphenyl has recently shown superconductivity with transition temperature as high as 120K. For crystal growth, the commercially available p-Terphenyl powder is pelletized, encapsulated in evacuated (10 -4 Torr) quartz tube and subjected to high temperature (260C) melt followed by slow cooling at 5C/hour. Simple temperature controlled heating furnace is used during the process. The obtained crystal is one piece, shiny and plate like. Single crystal surface XRD (X-ray Diffraction) showed unidirectional (00l) lines, indicating that the crystal is grown along cdirection. Powder XRD of the specimen showed that as grown p-Terphenyl is crystallized in monoclinic structure with space group P2 1 /a space group, having lattice parameters a = 8.08( and versatile crystal growth method for obtaining quality p-terphenyl. The same growth method may probably be applied to doped p-terphenyl and to subsequently achieve superconductivity to the tune of as high 120K for the newest superconductivity wonder i.e., High T c Oraganic Superconductor (HTOS). Superconductivity often quoted as little above 100 years young; keep on adding new members and repeatedly proving the fact time and again that yes the phenomenon is as young as was a century before. The most recent addition is K doped p-Terphenyl with transition temperature as high as 123K Keeping in view, the fact that though an exciting new member i.e., K doped p-Terphenyl has joined the exotic superconductors community and yet the usual race is missing, the current short note opens new avenue to obtain the material by a simple solid state synthesis route. We report here a novel but simple synthesis route for the growth of quality p-Terphenyl. The commercially available p-Terphenyl powder is pelletized, encapsulated in evacuated (10 -4 Torr) quartz tube and subjected to high temperature (260C) melt followed by slow cooling at 5C/hour. Interestingly, usual automated temperature controlled heating furnace is used during the process. We obtained shiny, one piece, transparent and plate like single crystal of the material. The XRD and SEM of the crystal proved the material to be of reasonably good quality. The short note will hopefully ignite the scientific community at large to race for the 123K superconductivity in K doped p-Terphenyl. Commercially available Alpha Aesar p-Terphenyl with 99+ purity is ground properly with agate mortar and pelletized in rectangular form in argon filled M-Braun Glove Box. The pellet is subsequently put in a quartz tube, sealed gently at open end by cotton and rushed to glass blowing unit. The open end of the quartz tube is attached to a turbo pump, evacuated within minutes to 10 -4 Torr and sealed immediately. The use of glove box and proper sealing of the evacuated quartz tube are necessary to avoid the oxygen contamination. The sealed quartz tube containing the p-Terphenyl pellet is now subjected to the heat treatment in furnace room. The sample is heated from room temperature to 170C at the rate of 8C/hour, and then to 260C at the rate of 3C/hour and hold at the same temperature for 12 hours. The sample is subsequently cooled from 260C to room temperature at the rate of 5C/hour. The schematic of the heat treatment is given in Fig. Raman spectrum of p-Terphenyl single crystal is taken at room temperature using the Renishaw Raman Spectrometer. Fig. A piece of the crystal was subjected to surface XRD and the result is shown in Fig. It is evident from Fig. Figure This work is financially supported by DAE-SRC outstanding investigator award scheme on search for new superconductors. Mrs. Shaveta Sharma is acknowledged for Raman spectrum on our p-Terphenyl crystal. Authors thank Prof. G. Baskaran from Inst. Mat. Sci. Chennai for persuading them to try to get the wonder new superconductor i.e., doped p-Terphenyl. Further studies for doping p-Terphenyl are underway and we are hopeful to establish the novel High T c Oraganic Superconductor (HTOS). 