The proximity-induced superconducting state in the 3-dimensional topological insulator HgTe has been studied using electronic transport of a normal metal-superconducting point contact as a spectroscopic tool (Andreev point contact spectroscopy). By analyzing the conductance as a function of voltage for various temperatures, magnetic fields and gate-voltages, we find evidence, in equilibrium, for an induced order parameter in HgTe of 70 μeV and a niobium order parameter of 1.1 meV. To understand the full conductance curve as a function of applied voltage we suggest a nonequilibrium driven transformation of the quantum transport process where the relevant scattering region and equilibrium reservoirs change with voltage. This implies that the spectroscopy probes the superconducting correlations at different positions in the sample, depending on the bias voltage. The two most important methods to obtain reliable quantitative spectral information about the electronic properties of a superconductor are Giaever tunneling Our aim in this paper is to apply Andreev spectroscopy to the proximity-induced superconducting state in a 3D topological insulator (3DTI). The application of Andreev-spectroscopy to low dimensional heterostructures is a much less mature experimental technique than for bulk systems. The point contact has to be lithographically defined and is therefore usually larger than for bulk systems, where accidentally formed pinholes of smaller dimensions dominate the transport. These experimental concerns are exacerbated in the case of spectroscopy on proximity-induced superconductivity, because of the need to use two dissimilar materials and, unavoidably, a complex lithographically structured geometry. In fact, very few successful spectroscopic experiments on proximitized systems have been carried out. One example, on diffusive systems, is by Scheer et al. We report on a study of a high quality 3-dimensional topological insulator, epitaxially grown strained HgTe, which is proximitized by a conventional superconductor, niobium. In previous experiments we reported on the observation of a 'missing n = 1' Shapiro step 8 , an indication of an unconventional Josephson effect in 3DTI HgTe based Josephson junctions. The same type of observation was subsequently done in Josephson junctions in a 2D topological insulator showing a sequence of evenonly Shapiro steps (up to n=10) and emission at half the Josephson frequency. Both signatures indicate at least a fractional 4π-periodic Josephson effect, and point towards the presence of gapless Majorana-Andreev bound states The NcS junctions in this work are based on epitaxially grown layers of strained HgTe sandwiched between Hg 0.3 Cd 0.7 Te capping layers. These additional layers have a conventional band structure and protect against surface oxidation, which reduces the carrier mobility. They also protect the strained HgTe during subsequent lithographic processing. The HgTe sandwich is shaped as a 1 μm wide bar which at one or both ends tapers out with an angle of about 45 • . The top Hg 0.3 Cd 0.7 Te capping layer is removed by dry etching and subsequently covered by niobium, which is in contact with the strained HgTe. Fig. The quality of the HgTe layers is characterized using a Hall bar fabricated from the same wafer. At zero gate voltage (V g = 0) a density of n 2D ≈ 5 × 10 11 cm -2 and mobilities of μ ≈ 200 000 cm 2 /Vs are routinely achieved resulting in a mean free path l mfp ≈ 2-3 μm. The mobility is about ten times lower when tuning the device into the p-regime. As shown in detailed magnetotransport studies The point contact is fabricated using electron beam lithography and PMMA resist. As HgTe is sensitive to temperatures above 90 • C, all bake-out and lift-off procedures are carried out well below this temperature. In a first step the HgTe mesa is defined using low energy argon sputtering. During this process a thin titanium etch shield, separated by a SiO 2 sacrificial layer from the HgTe, is protecting the mesa. The shield is afterwards removed by a buffered oxide etch dip. The dimensions of the mesa as shown in Fig. For the transport studies the samples are then cooled down in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 30 mK (Device 1) or 120 mK (Device 2-4) and the differential conductance dI/dV is measured using low excitation and low-frequency lock-in techniques combined with DC measurements as depicted in Fig. In the design of the experiment, we anticipate that the transport from N to S will be controlled by the process of Andreev reflection, which allows using the theory of Blonder et al. where f 0 (E, T ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution at energy E and temperature T . A(E), and B(E) are the probability amplitudes for Andreev and normal reflection of an incident electron from and to the normal reservoir. The normal state resistance R N is assumed to be the resistance arising from the finite number of modes carried by the cross-section. The voltage drop is located at the orifice with elastic scattering parametrized by Z = Z p as indicated in Fig. We do not know the coefficients A(E) and B(E) a priori. They contain the spectral information we are interested in and are the result of the interaction of the superconductor with the confined bar of the 3DTI with its limited geometry, finite elastic mean free path and finite interfacial transparency Z m In the covered TI bar we allow for a finite paringpotential ∆, which implies, that the self-consistency equation of the Bogoliubov-De Gennes equations ( needs to be fulfilled. The value ∆ depends on the distribution function, which for a driven system may differ from the one assumed for equilibrium reservoirs. Hence, we will analyze our data under the assumption that Andreev reflection, due to a finite value of ∆, takes place at Z p , which allows us to apply Eq. (1) to our system with initially, for low voltages, the equilibrium reservoirs taken to be in the normal side and in the proximitized HgTe on the superconducting side with a finite value of ∆ = ∆ p , although it does not necessarily resemble a BCS like density of states. Fig. iments are needed to map and evaluate this dependence accurately and to test the full hypothesis. An asymmetric background for negative and positive bias is observed in all devices. The data can be normalized by multiplying with the normal state resistance R N measured at T > T c , as shown in Fig. Close to zero bias, we find a strongly enhanced conductance with a double-peak structure in Devices 1-3 and a single peak for the closed bar (Device 4). As shown in Fig. The data in this figure is taken for Device 1, which we will focus on for a detailed analysis. The conductance is normalized with the normal state resistance R N above the critical temperature T > T c . From Fig. For V SN = 0 the system is in equilibrium and the apparent ∆ is the result of electrons in the HgTe bar underneath the niobium film, which are confined in a certain width and length. Their occupation is given by a Fermi-Dirac distribution and it is part of the superconducting equilibrium reservoir S p . For finite voltage bias, the current in S p is carried away as a supercurrent, and, importantly, the voltage-drop occurring at the interface indicated by Zp in Fig. In Fig. The fits using Eq. ( The treatment of Ref. We interpret the low voltage data as a probe of the induced superconducting state in the 3DTI of strained HgTe. There is no reason to expect a priori a s-wave order parameter. In fact we expect deviations, such as for example predicted by Burset et al. For voltages larger than 0.5 meV, the conductance curves in Fig. Eq. ( The change in conductance around 1.1 mV is now naturally attributed to the superconducting gap of the niobium film. The conductance increases slightly, as expected at the superconducting gap edge. For smaller voltages the conductance reduces, an indication of dominant normal reflections over Andreev reflections (B/A > 1). As shown in Fig. The previous data are all obtained on the electron side (n-type) in which the mobility is high. In Fig. From the conductance curves (Fig. The analysis of our data has lead us to discuss the conductance data resulting from the transport through three different electron systems (N, S p and S m ), separated by two interfaces of transparency Z p and Z m . Following Beenakker with G 0 = 2e 2 /h the quantum unit of conductance, G N the conductance in the normal state, and G S the conductance with one of the electrodes superconducting. This expression is the zero-voltage limit of the classical BTKformula for different values of transmissivity Z. In order to calculate G S , often the conductance at V > ∆ s is used as G N (see also Fig. The most important implication in our case is that one measures at high voltages not a proximity-induced superconducting gap, but rather the parent superconductor. We suggest that the low voltage data should be understood by acknowledging that the scattering region and the equilibrium reservoirs at V SN = 0 should be defined differently from the one at higher voltages, such as in our case V > 0.8 meV. This distinction is in general not specific to our case but should apply to other topological systems, for example the one studied in Kjaergard et al. In conclusion, we have carried out transport spectroscopy of the proximity-induced pair-potential of a niobium covered bar of strained HgTe, which has been demonstrated to be prone to be a 3DTI. In analyzing the data we allow for a finite pairing potential in the strained HgTe, in contrast to a commonly made quantum transport simplification as introduced by Lambert 25 and Beenakker 