The minimal ingredients to explain the essential physics of layered copper-oxide (cuprates) materials remains heavily debated. Effective lowenergy single-band models of the copper-oxygen orbitals are widely used because there exists no strong experimental evidence supporting multiband structures. Here we report angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy experiments on Labased cuprates that provide direct observation of a two-band structure. This electronic structure, qualitatively consistent with density functional theory, is parametrised by a two-orbital (d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 ) tight-binding model. We quantify the orbital hybridisation which provides an explanation for the Fermi surface topology and the proximity of the van-Hove singularity to the Fermi level. Our analysis leads to a unification of electronic hopping parameters for single-layer cuprates and we conclude that hybridisation, restraining d-wave pairing, is an important optimisation element for superconductivity. Identifying the factors that limit the transition temperature T c of high-temperature cuprate superconductivity is a crucial step towards revealing the design principles underlying the pairing mechanism Here we provide direct ultra-violet and soft-xray ARPES measurements of the d z 2 band in La-based single layer compounds. The d z 2 band is located about 1 eV below the Fermi level at the Brillouin zone (BZ) corners. From these corners, the d z 2 band is dispersing downwards along the nodal and anti-nodal directions, consistent with density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The experimental and DFT band structure, including only d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals, is parametrised using a two-orbital tight-binding model Material choices: Different dopings of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 spanning from x = 0.12 to 0.23 in addition to an overdoped compound of La 1.8-x Eu 0.2 Sr x CuO 4 with x = 0.21 have been studied. These compounds represent different crystal structures: low-temperature orthorhombic (LTO), low-temperature tetragonal (LTT) and the high-temperature tetragonal (HTT). Our results are very similar across all crystal structures and dopings (see Supplementary Fig. Electronic band structure: A raw ARPES energy distribution map (EDM), along the nodal direction, is displayed in Fig. To gain insight into the orbital character of these bands, a comparison with a DFT band structure calculation (see methods section) of La 2 CuO 4 is shown in Fig. Most minimal models aiming to describe the cuprate physics start with an approximately half-filled single d x 2 -y 2 band on a two-dimensional square lattice. Experimentally, different band structures have been observed across single-layer cuprate compounds. The Fermi surface topology of La The observation of the d z 2 band calls for a reevaluation of the electronic structure in La-based cuprates using a two-orbital tight-binding model (see methods section). Crucially, there is a hybridisation term Ψ(k) = 2t αβ [cos(k x ) -cos(k y )] between the d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals, where t αβ is a hopping parameter that characterises the strength of orbital hybridisation. In principle, one may attempt to describe the two observed bands independently by taking t αβ = 0. However, the problem then returns to the single band description with the above mentioned contradictions. Furthermore, t αβ = 0 implies a band crossing in the antinodal direction that is not observed experimentally (see Fig. In addition to the hybridisation parameter t αβ and the chemical potential μ, six free parameters enter the tight-binding model that yields the entire band structure (white lines in Figs. It has been argued that orbital hybridisation -of the kind reported here -is unfavourable for superconducting pairing Acknowledgements: D.S., D.D., L.D., and J.C. acknowledge support by the Swiss National Science Foundation. Further, Y.S. and M.M. are supported by the Swedish Research Council (VR) through a project (BIFROST, dnr.2016-06955). This work was performed at the SIS High-quality single crystals of La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 , x = 0.12, 0.23, and La 1.8-x Eu 0.2 Sr x CuO 4 , x = 0.21, were grown by the floating-zone technique. The samples were characterised by SQUID magnetisation ARPES experiments: Ultraviolet and soft x-ray ARPES experiments were carried out at the SIS and ADRESS beam-lines at the Swiss Light Source and at the I05 beamline at Diamond Light Source. Samples were pre-aligned ex situ using a x-ray LAUE instrument and cleaved in situ -at base temperature (10 -20 K) and ultra high vacuum (≤ 5 • 10 -11 mbar) -employing a top-post technique or cleaving device Tight-binding model: A two-orbital tight-binding model Hamiltonian with symmetry-allowed hopping terms is employed to isolate and characterise the extent of orbital hybridisation of the observed band structure where κ, κ 1 , and κ 2 take values ±1 as defined by sums in the Hamiltonian and T denotes vector transposition. Neglecting the electron spin (spin orbit coupling is not considered) the momentum-space tight-binding Hamiltonian, H (k), at a particular momentum k = (k x , k y , k z ) is then given by in the basis c k,x 2 -y 2 , c k,z 2 ⊤ , where the operator c k,α annihilates an electron with momentum k in an e g -orbital d α , with α ∈ {x 2 -y 2 , z 2 }. The diagonal matrix entries are given by and which describe the intra-orbital hopping for d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals, respectively. The inter-orbital nearestneighbour hopping term is given by In the above, μ determines the chemical potential. The hopping parameters t α , t ′ α and t ′′ α characterise nearest neighbor (NN), next-nearest neighbour (NNN) and nextnext-nearest neighbour (NNNN) intra-orbital in-plane hopping between d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. t β and t ′ β characterise NN and NNN intra-orbital in-plane hopping between d z 2 orbitals, while t βz and t ′ βz characterise NN and NNN intra-orbital out-of-plane hopping between d z 2 orbitals, respectively (see Supplementary Fig. and make the following observations: along the k x = ±k y lines, Ψ (k) vanishes and hence no orbital mixing appears in the nodal directions. The reason for this absence of mixing lies in the different mirror eigenvalues of the two orbitals involved. Hence it is not an artifact of the finite range of hopping processes included in our model. The parameters of the tight-binding model are determined by fitting the experimental bandstructure and are provided in Table DFT calculations: Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed for La 2 CuO 4 in the tetragonal space group I4/mmm, No. 139, found in the