It is shown that the spin-orbit and Zeeman interactions result in phase shifts of Andreev-reflected holes propagating at the surface of a topological insulator, or in Rashba spin-orbit-coupled two dimensional normal metals, which are in a contact with an s-wave superconductor. Due to interference of holes reflected through different paths of Andreev interferometer the electric current through external contacts varies depending on the strength and direction of the Zeeman field. It also depends on mutual orientations of Zeeman fields in different shoulders of the interferometer. Such a nonlocal effect is a result of the long-range coherency caused by the superconducting proximity effect. This current has been calculated within the semiclassical theory for Green functions in the diffusive regime, by assuming a strong disorder due to elastic scattering of electrons. Due to a combined effect of a Zeeman field and the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) the wave functions of Cooper pairs in s-wave superconductors acquire a phase dependent factor. This phase is responsible for the magnetoelectric effect It is natural to expect that in superconductor-normal metal proximity systems the phase shift, which is induced by the Zeeman field and SOC, may be observed in the Andreev reflection It is clear that a strong enough SOC is needed to produce a magnetoelectric effect which may be effective in a system of a micron size. Indeed, some two-dimensional (2D) systems have a strong intrinsic SOC A simple interferometer is shown at Fig. The electric current through the interferometer will be studied within the semiclassical theory for electron Green functions The article is organized in the following way. In Sec.II the Usadel equation and boundary conditions for the semiclassical Green function are derived for a TI wire. In Sec.III linearized Usadel equations are derived for the case of a weak proximity effect and the analytic expression for the current is found in the low-bias regime. A summary of the results is presented in Sec.IV. The effective one-particle Hamiltonian of electrons on the surface of TI can be written in the form 25 where k = -i∂/∂r and the Pauli matrices τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 operate in the Nambu space, so that the electron destruction operators in the chosen basis have the form ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ , ψ + ↓ , -ψ + ↑ with the arrows denoting spin directions. The third term in Eq.(1) represents the Zeeman interaction, where Z(r) is parallel to the xy plane (the coordinate axes are shown in Fig. The semiclassical Eilenberger equations for electron Green functions are obtained by expanding the Dyson equation with respect to small Fermi wavelengths, in comparison with other characteristic lengths. These equations serve for calculation of the so called semiclassical Green functions. The latter are obtained from initial Green functions by integration over the particle energy at a fixed momentum direction, which is represented by the unit vector n. These functions are combined into the 2×2 matrix ĝn (r) whose components are g 11 = g r , g 22 = g a , g 12 = g K and g 21 = 0, where g r , g a and g K are the retarded, advanced and Keldysh functions, respectively. These functions, in turn, are matrices in spin and Nambu spaces. The procedure for the derivation of the Eilenberger equations is well described in literature where ∇ * = ∇ * +i[τ 3 F, * ] and the gauge-field vector components are F = Z(r) × e z /v. The parameters D t and D b denote electron diffusion coefficients on the top and bottom surfaces of the wire, respectively. In general these coefficients are different, because environments and surface potentials vary at these interfaces. It is interesting to note that the Zeeman field enters Eq.( Let us consider a weak coupling of the TI wire to the superconducting lead through tunneling barriers, which are shown in Fig. where ĝs is the Green function in the superconducting lead and Γ S is a tunneling parameter on the interface of TI with the superconducting lead. This parameter can be written in terms of the barrier resistance R b = ρ T I D/2Γ, where ρ T I is the wire resistance per unit length. A tunneling contact will be also assumed at the interface of the TI wire with the normal lead at point 1. At this point the Green functions of electrons in both TI branches coincide. One more BC is an evident generalization of Eq. ( where x 2 and x 3 are coordinates in the branches. They are chosen so, that x 2 and x 3 are directed from contact 1 towards respective contacts 2 and 3 with the superconductor. The tunneling parameter Γ N may be expressed through the barrier resistance R b1 = ρ T I D/2Γ N , in the same way as for the TI-S contact. For the massive normal lead one may assume that its Green function is unperturbed by a contact with the TI wire. Therefore, ĝr/a N = ±τ 3 We consider the case of the low temperature T and small bias voltage V , which are much less than the superconducting gap. Therefore, the electric current between the normal and superconducting leads is determined by the Andreev reflection. This current may be expressed via the conductance G(ω), according to the well known expression Let us focus on the high barrier regime, when the barrier resistance R b at TI-S interface is much larger than the resistance of the TI wire and the barrier resistance R b1 at the TI-N interface. In this case G(ω) is given by 18,39 where The functions g 0 are taken in TI wires near contacts 2 and 3. L 2 and L 3 are the lengths of the wires between contact 1 and contacts 2 and 3, respectively. We assume a massive superconducting lead whose Green function is not perturbed by a proximity to TI wires. Therefore, at both contacts these functions have the form g r s = g a s = (-iτ 3 ω + τ 2 ∆)/ √ ∆ 2 -ω 2 for ∆ > ω. At high R b the Green functions in TI are weakly perturbed by the superconductor, so that they can be represented as sums of unperturbed functions and small corrections δg r(a) j , namely g r(a) 0 where j = 2, 3. The functions δg r(a) j ≪ 1 are the anomalous Green functions which are nondiagonal in the Nambu variables. By linearizing Eq.( where Fxj = F x (x j )D t /(D t + D b ). In turn, boundary conditions Eq.( At the same time, M 2 and M 3 become The solutions of Eq.( x +γ y F 2 y ) 1/2 1. By choosing the direction of Z perpendicular to x (F y = 0), the suppression effect can be reduced in samples having the smaller ratio D b /D t of the diffusion constants, as follows from the definition of γ x . It is also possible to construct appropriate barriers at the flanks of the wire to guarantee a weak Klein tunneling between the top and bottom surfaces. By making the angular averaged tunneling rate much less than the Thouless energy E T = D/L 2 , where L =max[L 2 , L 3 ], the bottom surface of TI may almost completely be turned off, that will result in the small damping effect. It should be noted that the third term in Eq.( A simple analytic result may be obtained in the case of V ≪ k B T at small enough L 2 and L 3 , so that k B T ≪ E T . In this case one may set ω = 0 in G(ω) in Eq.( The 2×2 matrices A and B can be obtained from boundary conditions Eq.( where Λ = ρ T I coth κ 0 L/2κ 0 R b1 and κ 0 = κ| ω=0 . For more details of the calculation, see Appendix B. It follows from these expressions that the oscillating part of the current may be of the same order as the constant term, if κL 1 and Λ 1. As can be seen from Fig. It is important that the considered in this subsection short wire regime is valid at low enough temperatures which provide the sufficiently large coherence length ξ = D/k B T , such that ξ ≫ L. Otherwise, one can not simply set ω = 0 in G(ω). Instead of that, the integral over ω in Eq.( In this subsection the numerical results are presented beyond the short wire regime, at k B T E T . G(ω) can be obtained from Eqs.( In conclusion, it is shown that due to a quantum interference of Andreev-scattered waves in wires made of three dimensional TI, the electric current through a TIsuperconductor system can be varied by changing the mutual orientations of Zeeman fields in distant parts of the TI wire. This effect is a direct consequence of the long-range Cooper correlations created by the superconducting proximity effect and the Zeeman-field-induced phase shifts of the pairing functions. This effect is damped at strong Zeeman fields. The damping can be reduced by a special design of the interferometer. On the other hand, it is shown that the discussed interference effects may be observed even at weak fields, due to the strong spin-orbit coupling of TI surface states. With some modification of parameters the theory may be extended to ordinary two-dimensional electron systems with sufficiently strong Rashba interaction. where κ 2 j = 4γ x F 2 xj ± 2i(ω/D) at F y = 0. The "±" signs in κ 2 correspond to retarded and advanced functions, respectively. Due to coordinate dependence of F 2 xj the parameter κ varies with x j . If F 2 xj is a step-function, the wire can be divided into several parts, so that in each of them κ 2 is a constant. The function f and its derivative must be continuous at boundaries between these parts, as it follows from Eq.(B1). Let us consider a simple case where the homogeneous magnetic islands in each shoulder occupy almost the entire wire, except for small regions near contacts with the leads. When the lengths of these regions is much smaller than the coherence length D/2|ω| ∼ D/k B T , the function f and its derivative are almost constant there. Therefore, by neglecting their weak spacial variation one may replace in BC ( The solutions δg 2 and δg 3 of in TI branches 12 and 13, respectively, have the form where the labels r and a are skipped for a wile. They will be restored later, where necessary. In the assumed symmetric case there is a common factor κ in both branches. The four coefficients A j and B j anticommute with τ 3 and can be found from the boundary conditions. According to the definition of the phase Φ, we have Φ(0) = 0 and Φ(x j )| xj =L ≡ Φ j at contacts j = 2 and j = 3, respectively, where Φ j ≃ 2(-1) j Fj L. From the boundary conditions Eq.( 