Recently a new family of Cr-based A 2 Cr 3 As 3 (A = K, Rb, Cs) superconductors were reported, which own a rare quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) crystal structure with infinite (Cr 3 As 3 ) 2-chains and exhibit intriguing superconducting characteristics possibly derived from spin-triplet electron pairing. The crystal structure of A 2 Cr 3 As 3 is actually a slight variation of the hexagonal TlFe 3 Te 3 prototype although they have different lattice symmetry. Here we report superconductivity in a 133-type KCr 3 As 3 compound that belongs to the latter structure. The single crystals of KCr 3 As 3 were prepared by the deintercalation of K ions from K 2 Cr 3 As 3 crystals which were grown from a high-temperature solution growth method, and it owns a centrosymmetric lattice in contrast to the non-centrosymmetric K 2 Cr 3 As 3 . After annealing at a moderate temperature, the KCr 3 As 3 crystals show bulk superconductivity at 5 K revealed by electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity measurements. The discovery of this KCr 3 As 3 superconductor provides a different structural instance to study the exotic superconductivity in these Q1D Cr-based superconductors. The recently discovered Cr-based superconductors A 2 Cr 3 As 3 (A = K, Rb, Cs) have attracted much interest besides the enthusiasm on Fe-based high-T c superconductors. The 133-type KCr 3 As 3 single crystals were prepared by the deintercalation of K + ions from K 2 Cr 3 As 3 precursors. At first, high quality single crystals of K 2 Cr 3 As 3 were grown out of KAs and CrAs mixture using a high-temperature solution growth method as previously reported. Due to this reason, our direct synthesis of KCr 3 As 3 polycrystals from solid state reaction or single crystal growth from high-temperature solutions all failed. For comparison, we also reproduced polycrystalline KCr 3 As 3 samples by the deintercalation process from K 2 Cr 3 As 3 powders which were synthesized by a solid state reaction method as reported. The crystal structure of all samples was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) at room temperature with a PAN-analytical X-ray diffractometer using Cu-K α radiation. The electrical resistivity and heat capacity were measured in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS) by the standard four-probe method and relaxation method respectively. The dc magnetization was measured in a Quantum Design magnetic property measurement system (MPMS) under zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) modes. The hexagonal crystal structure of the 133-type KCr 3 As 3 is illustrated in space group, close to the previous results. ), here t = T/T c , the zero-temperature upper critical field  0 H c2 (0) is estimated to be 20.8 T. This value is much higher than the Pauli paramagnetic limited upper critical field  0 H p = 1.84T c  8.6 T, The temperature dependence of heat capacity is plotted in Figure * renzhian@iphy.ac.cn