We have recently reported the first direct calorimetric observation of a magnetic-field-induced first-order phase transition into a high-field FFLO superconducting state at the Clogston-Chandrasekar 'Pauli' paramagnetic limitHp in a 2D superconductor κ -(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 . The high-field state is both higher entropy and strongly paramagnetic, as thermodynamically required for the FFLO state. Here we compare our results with theoretical predictions for the field dependence of the high-field FFLO state in the 2D limit, revealing tentative evidence for transitions between FFLO states of differing order parameter. We also present calorimetric evidence for a 1st order phase transition into the FFLO state for a second 2D organic superconductor: β ′′ -(BEDT-TTF) 2 SF5(CH) 2 (CF) 2 (SO) 3 . What is the highest possible applied magnetic field in which superconductivity can exist for an electronically 2D superconductor? One possible answer derives from the paramagnetic spin susceptibility of the conduction electrons. Because the electrons in BCS superconducting pairs have oppositely aligned spins with momenta (k ↑, -k ↓), the reduction in Zeeman energy that arises from realignment of the electron spin in an applied magnetic field must eventually exceed the reduction in electronic energy available from the formation of superconducting Cooper pairs as the magnetic field increases in strength. The critical magnetic field at which this should occur is known variously as the Clogston-Chadrasakar or Pauli paramagnetic limit H p . In practice, orbital scattering from magnetic vortices typically limits superconductivity in 'clean' (impurity free) limit materials to magnetic fields much lower than H p . For a 2D superconductor, however, this scattering can be suppressed by aligning the magnetic field exactly parallel to the 2D superconducting planes (thereby confining the vortices to the regions between the planes). This has been confirmed in angle-dependent studies of the Pauli-limited 2D organic superconductor α -(BEDT-TTF) 2 NH 4 (SCN) 4 Perhaps surprisingly, then, it is possible for superconductivity to persist even above this expected paramagnetic limit. One way for this to happen is if Cooper pair formation above H p occurs between Zeeman-split parts of the Fermi surface with momenta (k ↑, -k + q ↓), as first proposed by Fulde and Ferrell This 'FFLO' phase is only energetically favored to exist for H p ≤ H ≤ H c2 , where for a 2D superconductor, the zero temperature upper critical field H c2 (0) has a predicted value of Previously reported transition points for the H c2 (solid symbols) and FFLO (hollow symbols) phase boundaries for κ -(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 for a magnetic field applied parallel to the 2D superconducting layers. Our penetration depth measurements Experimental results for κ -(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 Previous calorimetric For comparison, our own recent calorimetric measurements of the magnetic-field-dependent specific heat for κ -(ET) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 for a magnetic field applied parallel to the 2D superconducting planes are shown in Figs. measurements have the advantage of being able to use the angle dependence of H c2 (θ) to orient the sample in field Looking closer within the FFLO superconducting region, we find additional fine structure in the form of (1) a hysteretic bubble in the specific heat C T (H) extending approximately 3 tesla above H p and (2) in the form of apparent changes in slope of C T (H) just below the upper critical field phase boundary H c2 and the field-independent normal state. Interestingly, the collapse of the bubble in the 23 -24 tesla region coincides with a pronounced drop in |dM/dT | seen in the magnetocaloric effect. These phenomena are suggestive of an predicted change in the orientation of those spins at this field due to a change in the FFLO superconducting order parameter from 1D to 2D The additional features seen in the specific heat and magnetocaloric effect above H p may indicate the existence of phase transitions within the FFLO region. Several theoretical proposals can be found in the literature For a 2D superconducting film, Shimahara For a superconductor with s-wave pairing, four different FFLO phases are expected, beginning with the 1D planar LO phase for 0.24 T c ≤ T ≤ T * = 0.56 T c followed by a state with triangular symmetry for 0.16 T c ≤ T ≤ 0.24 T c , a state with square symmetry for 0.05 T c ≤ T ≤ 0.16 T c , and finally a state with hexagonal symmetry for T ≤ 0.05 T c . For a superconductor with dwave pairing, the more restrictive symmetry of the superconducting pairing means that only two phases are expected: the LO phase for 0.06 T c ≤ T < T * = 0.56 T c and the square state for T ≤ 0.06 T c . We can determine the fields at which field-induced transitions to the LO , triangle (△), square ( ), and/or hexagonal ( ) states should occur by finding the value H c2 (T ) corresponding to each of these temperatures. As the nature of the superconducting pairing in κ -(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 is still a matter of debate The critical fields for the predicted transitions within the FFLO state for s-wave pairing are shown as dashed lines in Fig. The calorimetric signature of the FFLO phase transition in κ -(BEDT-TTF) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 is strongly field-orientation dependent, disappearing for a rotation of less than 1 • As a test, we have carried out preliminary results for angle-dependence of the heat capacity as a function of field C(H) for the highly 2D superconductor β ′′ -(BEDT-TTF) 2 SF 5 (CH) 2 (CF) 2 (SO) 3 with T c = 4.3 K 