The superconducting state in vanadium characterizes with the critical temperature (Tc) equal to 5.3 K. The Coulomb pseudopotential, calculated with the help of the Eliashberg equations, possesses anomalously high value μ ⋆ (3Ωmax) = 0.259 or μ ⋆ (10Ωmax) = 0.368 (Ωmax denotes the maximum phonon frequency). Despite the relatively large electron-phonon coupling constant (λ = 0.91), the quantities such as: the order parameter (∆), the specific heat (C), and the thermodynamic critical field (Hc) determine the values of the dimensionless ratios not deviating much from the predictions of the BCS theory: R∆ = 2∆ (0) /kBTc = 3.68, RC = ∆C (Tc) /C N (Tc) = 1.69, and RH = TcC N (Tc) /H 2 c (0) = 0.171. This result is associated with the reduction of the strong-coupling and the retardation effects by the high value of the Coulomb pseudopotential. It has been shown that the results of the Eliashberg formalism can be relatively precisely reproduced with the help of the semi-analytical formulas, if the value of μ ⋆ is determined on the basis of the Tc-Allen-Dynes expression (μ ⋆ AD = 0.198). The attention should be paid to the fact that in the numerical and in the semi-analytical approach the comparable values of the thermodynamic parameters for the same μ ⋆ have been obtained only in the vicinity of the point μ ⋆ = 0.1. The classical Eliashberg theory is used to quantitative description of the superconducting state, which is mediated by the electron-phonon interaction * Electronic address: edrzazga@wip.pcz.pl whereas the order parameter is given by the formula ∆ n = φ n /Z n . The electron-phonon pairing kernel has the form of λ (iω n -iω m ) = 2 +∞ 0 dω α 2 F (ω)ω (ωn-ωm) 2 +ω 2 . The spectral function α 2 F (ω) is usually calculated numerically by using the ab initio approach, where the electron band energy, the phonon dispersion relation, and the electron-phonon matrix elements are taken into consideration in the possible accurate way The Eliashberg set cannot be solved analytically. For this reason, the semi-analytical expressions exist in the literature, which enable to calculate the critical temperature (T c ), the order parameter at zero Kelvin (∆ (0)), the superconducting and the normal specific heat (C S and C N ), or the thermodynamic critical field (H c ). Be-low we openly present the formula for the critical temperature obtained by Allen and Dynes (known as the AD formula) where the phonon logarithmic frequency possesses the form: ω ln (ω) . The electronfonon coupling constant can be written as: . The correction functions are expressed by the formulas: The second moment of the normalized weight function should be calculated from: The values of the remaining thermodynamic parameters can be calculated on the basis of the formulas presented in the papers and ) is the specific heat jump at the critical temperature. In particular, the specific heat of the normal state should be calculated on the basis of the formula: C N (T ) = ρ (0) γk 2 B T , where ρ (0) is the value of the electron density of states on the Fermi level. The Sommerfeld constant is given by: γ = 2 3 π 2 (1 + λ). Let us note that the formulas Eq. (4)-Eq. ( In the presented paper we have determined the thermodynamic properties of the phonon-induced superconducting state in vanadium. This state is characterized by the anomalously high value of μ ⋆ . The detailed calculations were performed with the help of the Eliashberg equations and the semi-analytical formulas, which allowed us to compare both approaches. We have used the Eliashberg function derived from the work Let us note that the studies on the superconducting state in vanadium last since 1934. For the first time the sudden drop of the resistance to zero at temperature of 4.3 K was discovered by Meissner and Westerhoff In 1982, Zasadzinski et al. presented the results for the superconducting state received as the part of the tunnelling experiment Very interesting results were obtained examining the superconducting state in vanadium, which was subjected to the influence of the high pressure. The experiment conducted in 2000 by Ishizuka et al. In the first step we have determined the values of the Coulomb pseudopotential, for which the critical temperature calculated with the help of the Eliashberg equations reproduces the experimental results ([T c ] exp = 5.3 K) We have used the equation [∆ n=1 (μ ⋆ )] T =Tc = 0 due to the fact that ∆ n=1 represents the maximum value of the order parameter on the imaginary axis. Of course, the Eliashberg equations set was solved in the self-consistent way, whereas we adopted M = 1100. The numerical solutions of the Eliashberg equations were obtained with the use of the methods tested in the papers The full dependence of the order parameter ∆ n=1 on the Coulomb pseudopotential has been plotted in Fig. c ) = 0.368). Physically it means that the depairing electron correlations in vanadium cannot be only linked with the Coulomb static screened repulsion corrected by the retardation effects. For example, in the work In Fig. point μ ⋆ = 0.1, where both methods give comparable results (see Fig. c ) we have obtained the same function ∆ (T ). It differs only slightly from the shape of the curve of the BCS theory, which is the interesting result, since the electron-phonon coupling constant for vanadium is relatively high (λ = 0.91). It appears that the observed result is due to the very high values of the Coulomb pseudopotential, which significantly weaken the strong-coupling and the retardation effects included in the Eliashberg formalism. The easiest way those effects can be modelled is to use the ratio r = k B T C /ω ln . For μ ⋆ (ω Having at disposal the results presented in Fig. c ) and μ ⋆ (ω c ) in the framework of the full Eliashberg formalism we received the same result (R ∆ = 3.67), which is only slightly different from the result of the BCS theory (R ∆ = 3.53) where Z S m and Z N m denote the wave function renormalization factor for the superconducting and the normal state. The thermodynamic critical field is given by the expression below: The difference of the specific heat between the superconducting and the normal state can be determined with the help of the formula: Obtained results have been collected in Fig. c ) we have obtained R C = 1.68 and R H = 0.171. Of course, with increasing significance of the strong-coupling and the retardation effects due to decrease in the value of the Coulomb pseudopotential (μ ⋆ = 0.1 or μ ⋆ = 0.15) the difference between the predictions of the Eliashberg formalism and the BCS theory rises, which has also been presented in Fig. In addition, we have shown that the semi-analytical approach allows, with the good approximation, to reproduce the results of the advanced Eliashberg formalism in the case, when for μ ⋆ we accept the value from the Allen-Dynes formula. It should be emphasized that this value is significantly lower than the value of the Coulomb pseudopotential determined with the help of the Eliashberg equations, and it should be treated as the fitting parameter. It also draws attention that both approaches give comparable results for the same value of the Coulomb pseudopotential only near point μ ⋆ = 0.1. In the case under consideration, the parameter μ ⋆ is the measure of the Coulomb static screened repulsion corrected by the retardation effects. Generally speaking, however, going beyond the description of the depairing electron correlations with the help of the Coulomb pseudopotential seems to be the very interesting direction of research. Particularly, in the context of the superconducting systems, in which induce the electron phases that are competitive with the superconducting state 