We discuss the nonlinear Andreev current of an interacting quantum dot coupled to spinpolarized and superconducting reservoirs when voltage and temperature biases are applied across the nanostructure. Due to the particle-hole symmetry introduced by the superconducting (S) lead, the subgap spin current vanishes identically. Nevertheless, the Andreev charge current depends on the degree of polarization in the ferromagnetic (F) contact since the shift of electrostatic internal potential of the conductor depends on spin orientation of the charge carrier. This spin-dependent potential shift characterizes nonlinear responses in our device. We show how the subgap current versus the bias voltage or temperature difference depends on the lead polarization in two cases, namely (i) S-dominant case, when the dot-superconductor tunneling rate (ΓR) is much higher than the ferromagnet-dot tunnel coupling (ΓL), and (ii) F-dominant case, when ΓL ≫ ΓR. For the ferromagnetic dominant case the spin-dependent potential shows a nonmonotonic behavior as the dot level is detuned. Thus the subgap current can also exhibit interesting behaviors such as current rectification and the maximization of thermocurrents with smaller thermal biases when the lead polarization and the quantum dot level are adjusted. Electron-hole conversion processes are dominant at the interface of a superconductor (S) and metallic (N) system Usually, subgap transport through hybrid systems has been investigated by applying solely electric biases. However, quite recently, it has been pointed out that Andreev currents can also be controlled by thermal biases Our system comprises an interacting QD attached to a spin-polarized electrode (a ferromagnetic contact, denoted by F) and a superconducting reservoir (S), see Figure The Hamiltonian of the system reads where describes electrons with momentum k, spin σ with an internal magnetization M σ along a given spin-quantization axis in the left ferromagnetic lead, while accounts for the right superconductor. The second term of H R depicts the Cooper pairing inside the energy gap ∆. In the QD Hamiltonian the dot energy level ε d is renormalized by the spin-dependent internal potential U σ that describes the effect of electron-electron repulsion in the QD within a mean-field approximation. This approach is valid for metallic dots with good screening properties characterizes the tunneling processes between the dot and F and S leads. We neglect spin-flip scattering (see, however, reference We are specifically interested in the low bias subgap transport regime where Andreev processes are dominant. We write the Andreev current I Aσ for each spin, where the Fermi-Dirac distribution is given by , with the electrode temperature T α = T +θ α (T : background temperature, θ α : thermal shift) and the voltage bias V = V L -V R . We take the common Fermi level as the reference energy (E F = 0). The Andreev transmission T Aσ in equation ( where the first block (i, j = 1, 2) [the second block (i, j = 3, 4)] corresponds to the particle spin-up (spin-down) space, with subscripts 1, 3 referring to electron sectors and 2, 4 denoting hole parts. Note that the whole matrix is blockdiagonal since we have ignored spin-flip processes, hence separating the spin spaces. We also remark that, for each spin-σ space for a particle, the corresponding hole has an opposite spin σ. In order to determine the spin-resolved Andreev current, we explicitly write for the subgap energy region (|ε| < ∆) with where In general, one has ε dσ = ε d -eU σ as illustrated in Figure With the aid of the Green's functions, the spin-resolved Andreev transmission becomes from which [via equation For p = 0, i.e., normal lead, we have |G r 12 (ε)| 2 = |G r 34 (ε)| 2 , and the problem exactly reproduces the results of N-QD-S junctions We now explain how to include the spin-dependent interactions in our setup. We assume a weakly nonequilibrium situation, thereby one can write the nonequilibrium potential σ δU σ , where the characterstic potentials (CPs) u ασ = (∂U σ /∂V α ) eq and z ασ = (∂U σ /∂θ α ) eq respectively determine the potential shift in a spin-dependent manner with respect to applied voltage bias and temperature difference. For definiteness, we assume that the superconductor is at equilibrium and cold, i.e., V R = θ R = 0 and θ L = θ, which is the experimentally relevant situation where D q ασ and D q ασ are the charge and entropic injectivities for each spin σ with q = p, h denoting the particle and hole contributions, and C σσ ′ = (1 + σ ′ p)C σ /2 is the capacitance coupling between spin σ at the dot and spin σ ′ at the left ferromagnetic lead. Hereafter, we simply put V neglecting the spin voltage. The latter approximation is good for ferromagnets with fast spin relaxation processes. The spin-resolved density can be written with the dot lesser Green's function in each spin space with ). The diagonal Green's functions G r 11 and G r 33 can be identified by the relations and where the Lindhard functions which describe spin-dependent screening effects. We are now in a position to calculate the Andreev current. With the solutions in the previous section that clearly include spin-generalized interaction effects, we next discuss the polarization dependence of the subgap transport, i.e., I A = I C A in equation Since the interesting effects stem from the competition between F and S leads, it will be meaningful to separately discuss the cases where the coupling strengths are (i) Sdominant (Γ L ≪ Γ R ) and (ii) F-dominant (Γ L ≫ Γ R ) with several cases of polarization described by the parameter p. In addition, we explore the gate-dependence of the Andreev current for a given polarization. Below, we use Γ L = 0.1∆, Γ R = 0.5∆ for S-dominant case, and Firstly, we discuss the spin-dependent CPs with a nonzero polarization p. Figure The effect of z L polarization for S-dominant case is very small, i.e., z L↑ ≈ z L↓ , as shown in Figure We observe that a left-right asymmetry with respect to ε d appears only with the nonzero polarization p and is more visible in the F-dominant case as shown in Figures 2(c) and 2(d). We remark, however, that even in the S-dominant case [Figures In Figure When the coupling to the F-lead is dominant as shown in Figure In closing, we have investigated the thermoelectric properties of the Andreev current in a F-QD-S hybrid system. Due to the presence of the ferromagnetic electrode, electrons possess different tunneling rates depending on their spin orientations. Therefore, the Andreev current becomes a function of the ferromagnetic degree of polarization when the driving force is either electrical or thermal. Our main findings can be understood from the spindependent characteristic potentials shown in Figure As a consequence, the dependence of subgap transport on the lead polarization has a stronger impact in the ferromagnet dominant case with Γ ≫ Γ R than the opposite limit. This is an interesting finding that is visible only in the nonlinear regime of transport since interactions are crucial beyond linear response. Our results thus show how the Andreev current can be modified by thermal and electrical biases and how these dependences can be tuned by varying the ferromagnetic lead polarization, which might have interesting consequences for the design of future spin caloritronic hybrid devices. 