We study the Josephson effect of a T 1 FT 2 junction, consisting of spin-triplet superconductors (T), a weak ferromagnetic metal (F), and ferromagnetic insulating interfaces. Two types of the triplet order parameters are considered; (k x + ik y )ẑ and k x x + k y ŷ. We compute the current density in the ballistic limit by using the generalized quasiclassical formalism developed to take into account the interference effect of the multilayered ferromagnetic junction. We discuss in detail how the current-phase relation is affected by orientations of the d-vectors of superconductor and the magnetizations of the ferromagnetic tunneling barrier. General condition for the anomalous Josephson effect is also derived. The interplay between ferromagnet and spin-singlet superconductor leads to many interesting phenomena in the Josephson effect, including the long-range spin-polarized supercurrent and a reversal of the sign of supercurrent. Depending on its orientation, the leading order harmonic in the spectral decomposition of the CPR can be sin φ, cos φ, or sin 2φ, where φ is the phase difference between two superconductors. In the presence of the ferromagnetic barrier, the spin-flip scattering of a magnetic moment can rotate the d-vector, or induce a spin-singlet pairing amplitude, leading to the changes of the CPR. (1) The order parameters have an isotropic gap on the cylindrical Fermi surface. We compute the current density in the ballistic limit for two kinds of triplet junctions of T A FT A and T A FT B while varying the junction parameters such as the magnetization of the interfaces, the exchange field of the ferromagnetic metal layer, and the interlayer thickness. We utilize the general formalism of A. Millis et al. to treat properly the interference effect from scattering of quasiparticles at the multilayered spin-active interfaces. Before going into details, we summarize our main results. To do our calculation, we follow closely the formalism and the notations of Ref. 11. First, we summarize the main results of the formalism. We consider the superconductorferromagnet junction with the specular interfaces located at the positions of x = 0 and x = d, as in Fig. where the superscript S indicates the layers of the bulk superconductors or the ferromagnet, and the subscripts α and β are the indices representing the direction of momentum along The junction parameter, defined by Eq. ( the x-axis. The magnitude of the Fermi momentum along the x-axis is denoted by , and its corresponding Fermi velocity is v S = p S /m. The differential equations for the envelope functions of one variable, ĈS αβ (x) = ĈS αβ (x, x + 0), are derived from the Gorkov equation: where ε n = πT (2n + 1) is the Matsubara frequency, and τi and σi are the Pauli matrices in the particle-hole and the spin spaces, respectively. The upper (lower) sign is for α = β (α = β). The Hamiltonian includes the order parameter ∆S and the external potential V S : ĤS = ∆S + V S . The boundary condition for the interface, which supplements the equations for Ĉαβ , can be written by using the transfer matrix M: where the superscripts L and R denote the left-and the right-hand sides of the interface. Now, we apply the formalism to our T 1 FT 2 -type junction. The superconducting order parameter can be written as The d-vectors of triplet superconductor are given by Eq. ( The transfer matrix for the interface can be derived from the scattering theory: where v = v 0 1 + v m • σ. The charge and the magnetic scattering potentials of the interface are denoted by v 0 and v m , respectively. We assume that the Fermi velocity v f is the same everywhere and the magnetic potential is proportional to the magnetization m of the ferromagnetic interface. After solving Eq. ( where N f is the density of states at the Fermi energy. The total current density can be computed by integrating the current density J(p) over the Fermi surface with p • x > 0. The current is continuous at the interface due to particle conservation. The free energy of the junction per unit area of the cross section can be calculated from the current density: where Φ 0 is the flux quantum. We now present our numerical calculations. We compute the current density for the triplet superconductor junctions while varying the magnetization of the ferromagnetic tunneling barrier. The superconductors are assumed to have the same uniform gap ∆ 0 . The energy and the length are scaled in units of the superconducting gap ∆ 0 and the superconducting coherence length ξ = v f /∆ 0 , respectively. To simplify our notations, we introduce a junction parameter U J for the interface potentials and the exchange field: where L and R denote the left-and the right-hand side interfaces, respectively. We define the following dimensionless quantities: the interlayer thickness d = d/ξ, the Fermi wave vector kf = k f ξ, the interface potential ŪS = U S /( v f ), the exchange field h = h/∆ 0 , and the junction parameter ŪJ . In our calculation, we set kf = 1000 and the temperature We compute the current density as a function of the phase difference between two superconductors in the ballistic limit by using Eq. ( For the normal incidence, the d-vectors for the superconductors T A and T B are aligned to the z-and the x-axes, respectively. For a different angle of incidence, it is straightforward to generalize the calculation by replacing the position variable x with x/ cos θ k , with the angle θ k being measured from the normal to the interface. First, we discuss briefly the effect of the magnetic scattering potential on the pairing amplitude to understand its effect on the CPR. where K++ = M-1 ++ . The pairing amplitude f R of the transmitted Green's function ĈR ++ is related to the pairing amplitude f of the incident one ĈL ++ : where f = f 0 + f • σ and Up to the first order in v m , the transmitted order parameter f R can be expanded as where γ = (1 + v 2 0 ) -1 . The nonmagnetic scattering potential v 0 just affects the magnitude of the incident order parameter by a factor of γ. The magnetic potential v m can induce the singlet component f R 0 via the term v m • f and the triplet component f R via the terms of f 0 v m and v v m × f. The induced pairing amplitudes acquire a 90 0 phase shift from the spin-flip scattering. We remark that the exchange field of the ferromagnetic metal layer has the similar effect on the d-vector as the magnetic scattering potential of the interface. In Fig. When the direction of magnetization at the two interfaces and the exchange field of the ferromagnetic layer are mutually perpendicular to each other while the exchange field is aligned to the d-vector, as in the dotted curve, the cos φ-term appears in the CPR, leading to the anomalous Josephson current. In general, the AJE occurs for a non-coplanar distribution of the barrier magnetizations. When the barrier magnetizations have a coplanar distribution, the AJE occurs if the d-vector of the triplet superconductor has both parallel and perpendicular components to the plane formed by the barrier magnetizations. In our choice of the barrier magnetization ŪJ = (x, ẑ, ŷ), a f x -component of the pairing amplitude can be induced in the ferromagnetic layer by the magnetization m y of the right interface and also by the successive spin-flip scatterings from the magnetization m x of the left interface and the interlayer thickness is d = 0.5. The magnitude of the exchange field h is 0, 0.5π, and π for the solid, dotted, and dashed curves, respectively. In (b) and (d), the anomalous Josephson current density J(φ = 0) and the ground state phase φ 0 are plotted as a function of h. and the exchange field h z . A tunneling between the induced f x -components, whose phases differ by 90 0 , leads to the cos φ-harmonic. In Fig. In Fig. In Fig. The d-vectors of the superconductors T A and T B are aligned to the z-and the x-axes, respectively. When the tunneling barrier is nonmagnetic, the second harmonic sin 2φ is the leading order in the CPR due to the orthogonality of the d-vectors. When the exchange field is applied in the x-z plane, the second harmonic remains to be dominant, because the induced pairing amplitude by the exchange field is orthogonal to those of the bulk superconductor. For example, the exchange field parallel to the z-axis, as in the solid curve, can induce the pairing amplitudes f 0 and f y which are orthogonal to the d-vectors of the bulk superconductor. In the dashed curve of Fig. In Fig. In conclusion, we study effect of the nonuniform distribution of the barrier magnetizations on the current-phase relation for the two types of the triplet superconductor junctions T A FT A and T A FT B . The 0 -π transition, the φ-junction, and the AJE can readily be realized by adjusting the relative orientation between the d-vectors of superconductor and the barrier magnetizations. In general, the condition for the AJE is more restrictive in T A FT A than in T A FT B . We also discuss the interference effect on the CPR for the multilayered ferromagnetic junction. In the future, we plan to extend the present work to calculate other physical quantities such as the induced pairing amplitude and the spin current for the triplet superconductor junctions, while incorporating other types of the unconventional superconductors and the effect of a strong exchange field for the ferromagnet.