The manipulation and control of vortex states in superconducting systems are of great interest in view of possible applications, for which mesoscopic materials are good candidates. In this work, we studied the annihilation dynamics and the dissipative aspects of an Abrikosov's vortex-antivortex pair in a mesoscopic superconducting system with a concentric hole. The generalized time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau equations were numerically solved. The main result is the appearance of a phase slip-like line due to the elongation of the vortex and antivortex cores. Under specific circumstances, thermal dissipation might be associated with a sizeable relaxation of the order parameter, so that the energy released in the annihilation of a vortex-antivortex pair might become detectable in measurements of the magnetization as a function of time. The study of vortex matter is an issue of greatest interest, since the comprehension and manipulation of the vortex motion are very important for possible applications as in the case of control of spins by vortices On the other hand, under specific conditions, it is possible that a vortex-antivortex pair (V-AV) becomes stable. Such stability has a close correspondence with the symmetry of the system, e.g., it is possible to stabilize a state with vorticity 3 in a square system by 4 vortices located near the vertices and an antivortex in the center of the square The V and AV can be spontaneously formed after a quench caused by, e.g., a hot spot In Refs. Samples with a V-AV state were also studied by Berdiyorov and coworkers In Ref. when the vortex is entering the system, its average velocity is of the order of 10 3 m/s and, during the annihilation motion, due to the mutual attraction between the V and the AV, its average velocity reaches values of the order of 10 5 m/s. Recently, Zadorosny et al. In practice, mesoscopic superconducting materials have been applied in devices like amplifiers In this work we studied the annihilation process between a vortex and an antivortex in mesoscopic superconducting square systems with a concentric square hole. The study is focused on a systematic analysis of the parameters for which the annihilation process occurs in the superconducting region. Attention is also given to the total energy released in such a collision. Our results indicate that the energy generated in such process can be associated to frequencies in the infrared spectrum and also that smaller systems present the higher energies. We speculate that such system could be the heart of a future device for detection of electromagnetic waves in the appropriate frequency range. This work is organized as follows. In section 2 we briefly delineate the theoretical formalism used to simulate the mesoscopic systems. In section 3 we present the results obtained from the simulations and, subsequently, discuss them. In section 4, we present our conclusions. The time-dependent approach for the Ginzburg-Landau equations, proposed by Schmid where the superconducting current density is given by: Here, the distances are in units of the coherence length at zero temperature ξ(0), the magnetic field is in units of the bulk upper critical field H c2 (0), the temperature is in units of T c , time is in units of t GL (0) = πh/8k b T c u, the Ginzburg-Landau time, A is in units of H c2 (0)ξ(0), φ is the scalar potential and is in units of h/2et GL (0), κ = λ(0)/ξ(0) is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter, where λ(0) is the London penetration length at zero temperature, and the order parameter is in units of α 0 T c /β, where α 0 and β are the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau parameters The equation for the dissipated power energy was obtained by using the Helmholtz free energy theorem for a superconductor in an external magnetic field The first term is the dissipation due to the induced electrical field, W A , and the second one is due to the dissipation related to the relaxation of the order parameter, W ψ . The dissipated power energy is given in units of H 2 c2 (0)/[8πκ 2 t GL (0)]. As W total diffuses through the system, we couple the thermal diffusion equation to the GTDGL ones. By using the approach of Ref. Here, η is the heat transfer coefficient of the substrate, C ef f = π 4 /48u is the effective heat capacity, and K ef f = π 4 /48u 2 is the effective thermal conductivity. In the first part of this work, as we do not take into account dissipative effects, we set u = 1 and γ = 0 in eq.1. Such procedure is still well accepted in the literature We divide the discussion into two distinct scenarios. First, we consider the temperature constant throughout the system. And second, we take into account the heat diffusion produced by the V-AV collision. The simulations of the annihilation dynamics were carried out by adopting u = 1 and κ = 5. The value for κ is equivalent to those of some low critical temperature superconductors, such as the metallic alloy Pb-In Figure The horizontal line in figure Both the V and the AV acquire a high velocity immediately before the annihilation, and after the collision the energy of the system is reduced. The upper inset of figure 7 shows the variation of the superconducting energy, ∆E, as a function of H/H c2 at T = 0.48T c (dashed line of figure Another signature of the size effect is the decreasing of v avg as L/ξ(0) is increased (see the lower inset of figure In the next subsection, we will analyze the kinematic aspects of the annihilation of an Abrikosov's V-AV pair. The data discussed so far were obtained without taking into account dissipation and heat diffusion processes. When, however, heat transfer is considered, the values of the energy of figure It is worth to note in figure Since the magnetization is a measurable quantity, in figure peak of W total in figure In this work we studied the annihilation dynamics of Abrikosov's V-AV pairs in a mesoscopic superconductor with a central hole. In the collision process, the cores of the V and the AV elongates and a phase slip-like (PSlike) appears. In very small samples, L < 10ξ(0), the PSlike degrades superconductivity on the entire region where the pair is moving increasing their average velocity. For systems with L > 10ξ(0), non degraded superconducting regions remain in the moving area implying a lower average velocity. The formation of a V-AV pair and its consequent annihilation in the superconducting region depends on both the size of the system and the temperature. Then, we built an L(T ) diagram which can be used as a guide for the predicted occurrence of the annihilation process. The variation of the superconducting energy just before and immediately after the annihilation, multiplied by the superconducting area, increases as the size of the samples decreases, in accordance with the average velocity of the antivortex, which is lower for larger samples. We coupled the thermal diffusion and the dissipated energies equations to the GTDGL ones. Although, the dissipative term related to the relaxation of the order parameter has been neglected in many works, here we have evidenced that it is a significant contribution to the dissipative processes. We also verified that the time of the V-AV collision is of the order of nanoseconds. Thus, conceivably, the annihilation of Abrikosov's V-AV pairs can be detected by measuring the magnetization response of the sample as a function of time, what would require fast and sensitive detection scheme. Another interesting aspect is that the local increase of the temperature in the annihilation is of the order of 10 -3 T c , which can be measured by a SQUID thermal sensor as described by Halbertal et al. 