We report the observation of extraordinarily robust zero-resistance superconductivity in the pressurized (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 high entropy alloy -a new kind of material with a body-centered cubic crystal structure made from five randomly distributed transition metal elements. The transition to superconductivity (T C ) increases from an initial temperature of 7.7 K at ambient pressure to 10 K at ~ 60 GPa, and then slowly decreases to 9 K by 190.6 GPa, a pressure that falls within that of the outer core of the earth. We infer that the continuous existence of the zero-resistance superconductivity from one atmosphere up to such a high pressure requires a special combination of electronic and mechanical characteristics. This high entropy alloy superconductor thus may have a bright future for applications under extreme conditions, and also poses a challenge for understanding the underlying quantum physics. High entropy alloys (HEAs) are a new class of materials that are composed of multiple transition metal elements in equimolar or near equimolar ratios By applying this concept, many HEAs have been found in disordered solid solution phases with body-centered cubic, hexagonal closest-packed and face-centered cubic crystal structures In many respects, HEAs display novel properties, including ultrahigh fracture toughness at cryogenic temperatures The combination of the promising physical properties found in the HEAs points to great potential for application. Pressure is one of the variables that can uncover unexpected phenomena and properties Figure As shown in Fig. High-pressure resistance measurements were performed for four samples that were cut from the material used as the standard for the superconductivity at ambient pressure. The electrical resistance measurements for these samples were performed between 4 K and 300 K. Figure We summarize our experimental results, obtained from samples measured in the four independent runs, in the pressure-temperature phase diagram shown in Fig. High pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on the (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 HEA were performed at beamline 15U of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The results of two independent experiments show that the superconducting HEA does not undergo a structural phase transition up to pressures of ~ 96 GPa where the volume is compressed by ~28% (Fig. An analysis of the data (Fig. The T C of the HEA superconductor continuously increases up to 96 GPa, distinct from what is observed in both Nb and Ta in the course of their exposure to pressure Thus the superconducting HEA (TaNb) 0.67 (HfZrTi) 0.33 is clearly distinct, and not just a diluted form of Nb or Ta. To further evaluate the potential applicability of the HEA superconductor under extreme conditions, we also estimate the value of the upper critical magnetic field (H c2 , the magnetic field at which superconductivity disappears) for the pressurized material by using the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) formula 