Microscopic theory of the normal-to-superconductor coexistence line of a multi-band Weyl superconductor subjected to magnetic field is constructed. It is shown that Weyl semi-metal that is nonsuperconducting or having a small critical temperature Tc at zero field, might become superconductor at higher temperature, when the magnetic field is tuned to a series of quantized values Hn. The pairing occurs on Landau levels. It is argued that the phenomenon is much easier detectable in Weyl semi -metals than in parabolic band metals since the quantum limit already has been approaches in several Weyl materials. The effect of Zeeman coupling leading to splitting of the reentrant superconducting regions on the magnetic phase diagram is considered. An experimental signature of the superconductivity on Landau levels is reduction of magnetoresistivity. This has already been observed in Cd3As2 and several other compounds. The novel kind of quantum oscillations of magnetoresistance detected in ZrT e5 is discussed along these lines. superconductivity on Landau levels is extended to Zeeman coupling and to the anisotropic 3D WSM in Section IV. Comparison with recent experiments, discussion and conclusions is the subject of Section V. A. Pairing in 2D WSM under magnetic field A Weyl material typically possesses several sublattices. We exemplify the effect of the WSM band structure on superconductivity using the simplest model with just two sublattices denoted by α = 1, 2. The effective electronelectron attraction due to the electron -phonon coupling overcomes the Coulomb repulsion and induces pairing. Typically in WSM there are numerous bands. We assume that different valleys are paired independently and drop all the valley indices (including chirality, multiplying the density of states by 2N f ). To simplify notations, we therefore consider just one spinor (left, for definiteness), the following Weyl Hamiltonian 15 , Here v is Fermi velocity assumed isotropic in the plane x -y perpendicular to the applied magnetic field (assumed isotropic, generalized later to anisotropic 3D WSM). Chemical potential is denoted by μ -chemical potential. Pauli matrices σ operate in the sublattice space (the indices α, β will be termed the pseudo-spin projections) and s is spin projection. Magnetic field appears in the covariant derivatives via the vector potential, D i = ∇ i -i e c A i . Here A is the vector potential. Further we assume the local density -density interaction Hamiltonian 16 , ignoring the Coulomb repulsion (that as usual is accounted for by a pseudopotential, so that g is the electron -phonon coupling). It is important that the interaction has a cutoff Debye frequency Ω, so that it is active in an energy shell of width 2 Ω around the Fermi level B. Matsubara Green's functions and Gor'kov equations. Finite temperature properties of the superconducting condensate are described by the normal and the anomalous Matsubara Green's functions (3) with the spin Ansatz G ts αβ (rτ, r τ ) = δ ts G αβ (r, r , τ -τ ) ; F ts αβ (rτ, r τ ) = -ε ts F αβ (r, r , τ -τ ) ; F +ts αβ (rτ, r τ ) = ε ts F + αβ (r, r , τ -τ ) . Here the Plank constant is set to = 1. Using the Fourier transform, with fermionic Matsubara frequencies, ω s = 2πT (s + 1/2), one obtains from equations of operator motion the set of Gor'kov equations, see ref. 17 generalized to include magnetic field: iωG γκ (r, r , ω) + i vD i r σ i γβ G βκ (r, r , ω) + μG γκ (r, r , ω) + ∆ αγ (r,0) F + ακ (r, r , ω) = δ γκ δ (r -r ) ; -iωF + γκ (r, r , ω) -ivD i r σ i αγ F + ακ (r, r , ω) + μF + γκ (r, r , ω) -∆ * αγ (r, 0) G ακ (r, r , ω) = 0. It will be shown that the singlet pairing pseudo-spin Ansatz, ∆ αγ ≡ σ x αγ ∆, obeys the Pauli principle. The gap function consequently reads: ∆ = 1 2 T r σ x ∆ . Notice, that in contrast to conventional metals with parabolic dispersion law, in the case of the Weyl semi -metals the second Gor'kov equation, Eq.( In this Section the superconductor-normal phase transition line in high magnetic fields is determined. The line breaks into a set of disconnected segments since in certain cases the superconductivity reappears when a Landau level crosses Fermi surface. Near the normal-to-superconducting transition line the gap ∆ is small and the set of the Gor'kov equations 6 can be linearized. In this case the gap equation describing the critical curve H c2 (T ) has the form, see ref. 17 for details, Here the normal GF is obtained from, while a quantity G βγ (an auxiliary function associated with G via a product of an axis reflection and time reversal) obeys a different equations: Here σ t is the transposed Pauli matrix that replaces σ in the customary normal state equation Eq.( In the uniform magnetic field the GF can be written (in the symmetric gauge, A = 1 2 H × r) in the following form: Here l 2 = c/eH is the magnetic length. This phase Ansatz indeed works. Substituting it into Eq.( Here the ladder operators here are defined as with relative distance denoted by ρ = rr . These equations are solved by expansion in the basis of eigenfunctions of harmonic oscillator in Appendix A. The resulting normal GF in terms of generalized Laguerre polynomials are: ; Here the cyclotron frequency in WSM is denoted by ω 2 c = 2v 2 /l 2 and θ is the polar angle of ρ. Similarly the associate GF are: ; . Now we are ready to return to the gap equation at criticality. Substituting the phase factors of GF from Eq.( Adopting the gaussian Ansatz for the gap function, used extensively in calculations since the seminal work 1 , and substituting the above explicit expressions for the GF, one obtains, where the integral have been shifted to ρ = rr . The scalar function S depends on absolute value of ρ only, so that the dimensionless variable u = ρ 2 /2l 2 is used instead. It is a double sum over Landau levels: The integral over θ is just 18 2π, so that the gap equation at criticality takes a form In what follows the integral over u and the sum over the Matsubara frequencies is explicitly performed and the equation used to investigate the effect of Landau quantization of superconductivity in a WSM. Using the integrals over product of generalized Laguerre polynomials the gap equation takes a form, where the effective dimensionless electron -electron coupling λ = g 2 μ/4πv 2 . It is also convenient to scale μ and ω c by the temperature, μ = μ/T, ω c = ω c /T . After summation over the Matsubara frequency, one obtains, separating the zero LL (n = 0) from the rest, where f (n) will be discussed in the next subsection. The separation is required since the expressions in Appendix B are ambiguous for n = 0 and should be defined using L'Hopital's rule. The n, m > 0 part (free of the "ambiguous" terms) is: . The mixed zero-nonzero LL (n = 0, m > 0) part is while the purely zero LL contribution Explicit form of functions A and B is given in Appendix B. It is shown there that the functions are finite for any value of magnetic field and temperature T > 0. The sum is computed numerically. Usually within the BCS approach, the interaction is approximated not just by a contact in space and a step function -like cutoff, see Fig. Neglecting the dispersion of the optical phonon, the sharp cutoff will be replaced by the Lorentzian function of ω s = πT (2s + 1) / : In our scaled units the summation over Landau levels comes with a weight function, The remaining sums over Landau levels in Eq.( Magnetic phase diagram is the main result of the present paper. Although in experiments the material parameter λ is fixed, while temperature and magnetic field (or both) are external parameters, it is more convenient to calculate the critical value of λ as a function of temperature and magnetic field. In Fig. For the weak coupling the conventional H c2 does not appear in the figure, since the critical temperature is below 2K. The only superconducting "dome" appears at the quantum limit with Cooper pairs made on the lowest LL only. At the intermediate coupling the conventional H c2 = 2T does appear (around 4K), but now there are four additional superconducting domes at Landau levels N = 1 -4. At the strong coupling regular H c2 around 12T is clearly the dominant feature with numerous domes appearing at T = 2K. The problematic issue of rigorously defining the semi-classical notion of H c2 from the microscopic calculation is the same as for the conventional superconductor (parabolic band) 3 . Of course at yet lower temperatures more domes appear. In Fig. The superconducting domes on Landau levels are clearly seem as gray areas. Generally they become very narrow as the LL index N grows, at low temperatures and at weak couplings. The WSM, in which we suspect that the high magnetic field superconducting domes were observed (see Section IV), are anisotropic 3D WSM. In addition at fields as large as 50 -60T applied in recent experiments A. Zeeman coupling, the paramagnetic limit Along with the orbital effect of magnetic field on electrons and their pairing, at very high fields the direct (Zeeman) coupling of the magnetic field to spin becomes significant. A textbook example is the Chandrasekhar -Klogston 2 pair breaking phenomenon in conventional metallic (parabolic single band) superconductors. To investigate the Zeeman coupling effect on superconductivity in (2D) WSM, let us consider the following Hamiltonian Here the kinetic energy term and the phonon mediated effective interaction are still defined in Eq.(1) and Eq.( where τ z st is the Pauli matrix in spin space, g L and μ B are the Lande factor and the Bohr magneton respectively. A simple singlet Ansatz, Eq.( . (32) The set of the spin dependent GF is calculated in Appendix C (Eqs.(C7),(C8)). Substituting them into Eq.( Here functions s nm are, , where the dimensionless ratio of the Zeeman energy and temperature, ε = 2g L μ B H/T , is used. In the spin nondegenerate case the separation of the zero LL is not required due to the difference in chemical potentials of the spin projections. The Matsubara sums read: The results of numerical calculations are presented in Fig. Band structure calculations of one of the most promising WSM Cd 3 As 2 show In this subsection the calculation of the magnetic phase diagram is generalized to 3D WSM with (typically several) Dirac points. The band structure of an asymmetric 3D WSM near such a point is captured by the Hamiltonian Here v is Fermi velocity (assumed isotropic) in the x-y plane perpendicular to magnetic field and v z the Fermi velocity along the field and the gauge in the covariant derivatives is chosen to be A = H (-y/2, x/2, 0). The momentum p z in this gauge is a conserved quantum number. The calculation is analogous to the 2D one, since magnetic field enters the dependence Greens functions on lateral dimensions only. The Fourier transform is defined now by It is important to distinguish between the thin film and the "bulk" cases. For a film of thickness d, the field component of the "momentum" is discretized as: The equations for two normal GF (see Eqs.( The magnetic phase Ansatz Eq.( Here the 3D effective attraction strength (see Appendix D for the relevant DOS) is λ = g 2 μ 2 /2π 2 v z v 2 and the dimensionless parameter inversely proportional to the thickness is defined by ζ = πv z /dT . The functions s nmM , s nM , s M depending on the new quantum number M , defined in Eq.( The superconducting "domes" become wider in slab geometry (Fig. In this section experimental evidence for existence of the Cooper pairing in WSM above H c2 is discussed. In addition we discuss the various tacit assumptions of our model and theoretical methods: speculate on possible transition to a triplet superconducting phase and a necessity to go beyond the adiabatic approximation used in the present paper. The conventional metals are explicitly contrasted with Weyl semi -metals. A. Magnetoresistance as a signature of the superconducting state at Landau levels A "smoking gun" revealing the existence of superconductivity on Landau levels would be the dependence of resistivity on magnetic field. In normal metal one observes the resistivity generally increase faster than H superimposed with Shubnikov deHaas (SdH) oscillations around Landau levels. The picture is supported by detailed semi-classical theory valid for high Landau levels Inside the "superconducting "domes" (constituting a very tiny fraction of the magnetic phase diagram within the narrow range of fields) magnetoresistance does not vanish due to phenomenon of the "flux flow". Since 3D Weyl semimetals can be made very clean, unpinned vortex liquid rather than pinned vortex glass 21 is formed. When vortices are allowed to move, the dissipation inside the cores ensues, but the flux flow resistivity is much smaller than the normal state. In the vortex glass state the effect would be more dramatic: the resistivity drops (almost) to zero. It should be noted that "vortices" in the present context should be understood as an inhomogeneity of the order parameter, since the magnetic "envelop" (of the size of magnetic penetration depth) of multiple vortices strongly overlap at such fields. As a result magnetization is practically homogeneous 4,5 . Damping of the amplitude of SdH oscillations in superconducting regions is not expected to be significant, as was already noted while analyzing the SdH oscillations in organic superconductor In a remarkable experiments 9 with magnetic fields up to 50T it was found that beyond several SdH oscillations at high LL riding on magnetoresistance quadratic in H (N = 6 -15 are clearly seen at T = 3K), upon approaching quantum limit at N = 2 -4 the magnetoresistance levels off. The amplitude of the oscillations gradually increases. It is very difficult to explain why the fast increase of the magnetoresistivity is halted at 10 -20 T . It is natural to interpret this as appearance of superconductivity as in Fig. Similar phenomenon (less pronounced since applied magnetic fields were up to 16T only) was observed Our calculation was restricted to the singlet pairing. In some cases strong magnetic field might in principle favor triplet, however there is no experimental evidence in 3D Weyl semi-metals for a triplet state so far. One therefore can ask the following question: is the triplet state possible theoretically in models of WSM considered here. The question was addressed theoretically in a slightly different context of the 2D WSM surface state of topological insulator 2613 . In this system it was found that both the singlet and the triplet phases exist. However, although they are nearly degenerate in some cases (very small chemical potential μ), the singlet always prevail energetically. It was also shown theoretically Let us complement the qualitative estimates made in the introduction on the comparison between the pairing on Landau levels in the parabolic band materials (including semi -metals One observes that although in quantum limit the coupling required is not large, field are inaccessible. On the other hand, even beyond 100T , one has superconducting "domes" at intermediate coupling at high LL N >> 10 (so that the system enters the semi -classical regime 4 with weak quantization effects). The effect therefore is smeared out by disorder other effects. Note that, as demonstrated in Fig. Very recently superconductivity in a two parabolic band semi -metal in strong magnetic field was considered It is important to note that assumptions of our calculation include the adiabatic pairing, namely that the Fermi level is larger than the Debye energy μ/Ω > 1. WSM like ZrT e 5 also can be tuned to small chemical potential Microscopic theory of phonon mediated superconductivity in Weyl semimetals at very high magnetic fields was constructed. Weak coupling was assumed, but the retardation effects were taken into account. It was shown that a Weyl semi-metal in 2D and 3D that is nonsuperconducting or having a small critical temperature T c at zero field becomes superconducting in narrow regions of the magnetic phase diagram around Landau levels, especially near the quantum limit. The Zeeman splitting sometimes becomes of significance at highest fields. Superconductivity has an effect on magneto-conductivity beyond conventional H c2 . Near the Landau levels the magnetoresistivity should diminish. This might explain the recent experiments on Cd 3 As 2 and T aP and perhaps other. This enhancement is especially pronounced for the lowest Landau level. As a consequence, the reentrant superconducting regions in the temperature-field phase diagram emerge at low temperatures near the magnetic fields at which the chemical potential matches the Landau levels. We present next a detailed calculation of the normal GF, while the associate GF are obtained similarly. For g 1 11 , after substitution of the matrix elements from Eq. (A4), one obtains the following second order linear differential equation with a source: This is written via Laplacian, as,represented into the form: Since the operator L in this equation is rotation invariant, g 1 11 (ρ) is a scalar (independent of the polar angle). The operator L has the following eigenfunctions and eigenvalues and eigenfunctions Here n and m are integers and L m n are the generalized Laguerre polynomials. In specific case of a scalar the azimuthal number m = 0, and one obtains: Expanding the GF g 1 11 (ρ) by series of the scalar eigenfunctions of the L operator, g 1 11 (ρ) = n c 0 n φ 0 n , and making the scalar product with φ 0 n , one obtains: Performing the integration, finally Using the relation Eq.(A6), the off diagonal matrix element g 1 21 (ρ) reads: using the relation between Laguere polynomials 18 , the result is: Functions A [a, b] and B [a, b] in the Eq.( Appendix C: Zeeman Effect In the case of the WSM Hamiltonian containing the Zeeman term, Eq.( ∂F st+ γκ (X, X ) ∂τ = ivσ i αγ ∇ i r F st+ ακ (X, X ) -μF +st γκ (X, X ) - here s =↑, ↓ . Substituting Eq.(C4) into Eq.(C3) and using the singlet assumption, ∆ * αγ (r) = ∆ (r) σ x αγ , one obtains Eq.( Similarly for the second set of GF: L n ρ 2 /2l 2 (-iω + μ ± g L μ B H) 2 -ω 2 c (n + 1) 2. Calculation of the GF √ a (-b + ( √ a -2μ) 2 ) - √ b -a + √ b -2μ 2 ;