In this paper, we calculate the superconducting critical temperature as a function of pressure, T c (P ), using a method based on the functional derivative of the critical temperature with the Eliashberg function, δT c /δα 2 F (ω). The coulomb electron-electron repulsion parameter, μ * (P ), at each pressure is obtained in a consistent way by solving the linearized Migdal-Eliashberg equation. This method requires as the starting input only the knowledge of T c (P ) at the starting pressure. It applies to superconductors for which the Migdal-Eliashberg equations hold. We study Al, a typical BCS weak coupling superconductor with a low T c . Our results of T c (P ) as a function of pressure for Al show an excellent agreement with the calculations of Profeta et al. (Phys. Rev. Lett.96, 047003 (2006)) which agree well with experiment. . To determine the superconducting critical temperature, T c , as a function of pressure we use the density functional theory (DFT) and the density functional perturbation theory where the dimensionless parameter μ = V N (E F ) is the product of the averaged screened Coulomb interaction, V, and the density of states at the Fermi energy, N (E F ); E el and ω ph are the electron and phonon energy scales, respectively. Further, Bennemann and Garland 9 , Smith We define a next pressure, say P i+1 and obtain the Eliashberg function at this new pressure. The T c (P i+1 ) is obtained from the value of the functional derivative at P i and the difference in the Eliashberg functions at the two pressures considered (see below for details). From the knowledge of T c (P i+1 ) we fit the value of μ * (P i+1 ) by solving the LME equation which we then use to obtain δT c /δα 2 F (ω, P i+1 ). This procedure can be repeated to get T c at other pressures. One has to be careful with the magnitude of the interval at which we calculate the next pressure since the information carried through the functional derivative could become meaningless for too large pressure intervals. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the theory that supports our method. The method is described in detail in Section III. In Section IV, we report some technical details used in the calculation. In the next section V, we present our results and compare them with other work, namely, with the known successful calculations of Profeta et al. As we mentioned above, we solve the LME equation to fit μ * (P ) to the calculated value of T c (P ). On the imaginary axis, the LME equation is where T is the temperature, ∆n is the gap function, ω n is the Matsubara frequency, ρ is the pair breaking parameter and n = 0, ±1, ±2, .... In particular, λ nn ≡ λ is the electronphonon coupling constant. The numerical solution of the LME, Eq. ( Other authors consider that 3-7 could be enough where g qν,mn k+q,k is the electron-phonon coupling matrix element, k+q,m and k,n are the energy of the quasi-particles in bands m and n with wave vectors k + q and k, respectively. ω qν is the phonon energy with momentum q and branch ν. N ( F ) is the electronic density of states at the Fermi energy, F . From the first order derivative of the self-consistent Kohn-Sham where ∆V qν KS is the self-consistent first variation of the KS potential and ψ k,n is the n th valence KS orbital of wave vector k. The functional derivative of T c with respect to α 2 F (ω), δT c /δα 2 F (ω), is central to this work. With the algorithm of Bergmann and Rainer 25 and Leavens Ounce the functional derivative, δT c /δα 2 F (ω), is known the change in T c , ∆T c , caused by a change in α 2 F (ω) can be obtained directly as we show next. The transition temperature of a superconductor depends on the effective interaction with the existing phonons in the system. To have a high frequency phonon is not enough for a system to have a high-Tc as it can be seen in Al where a 41 meV peak in the phonon spectrum is notorious. The functional derivative δT c /δα 2 F (ω) shows how the different phonon frequencies participate in defining the T c . As a function of the dimensionless variable hω/K B T c it presents a maximum at about 7-8 which turns out to be universal for the conventional superconductors There are several papers in the literature that deal with the functional derivative for different purposes. For example, Bergmann and Rainer To get T c,P i+1 at the next pressure we start from Eq.10 and use the next Eq.11 which can in turn be used to fit μ * (P i+1 ) using the LME equation. This procedure can be repeated at will. Our results are presented in several Tables below. The electron and phonon (PHDOS) densities of states for Al have been calculated using the DFT and the DFPT with plane waves (PW) pseudo-potentials 1-3,37 . To calculate the density of states (DOS) a kinetic energy cut-off of 50 Ry was used. Our calculations were performed using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and the norm conserving pseudo-potential together with the plane wave self-consistent field (PWSCF) (MP) k mesh, respectively. The PHDOS was obtained from individual phonons calculated on a 8x8x8 MP q mesh using the tetrahedron method We now apply the method to the weak coupling superconductor Al. We have taken T c =1.8K In Table GPa. The minimum of the decrement in λ arises between P = 5 and P = 5.5 GPa and so it does not correlate with the minimum in μ * . The lattice parameter, a, diminishes steadily with pressure. Upon a 0.5 GPa enhancement in pressure it changes with a difference around 0.0148 Bohr. This decrement in the lattice constant is higher at low pressure and smaller at high pressure. The minimum occurs at P = 6 GPa. So, this behavior does not seem to correlate either with the behavior of the electron-electron repulsion parameter μ * . Further, if we look at the contribution of each phonon mode (two transverse and one longitudinal) to the behavior of T c under pressure by taking only the corresponding energy interval of α 2 F (ω) into account and apply to this part only our method, we get the result that they all contribute lowering the T c . This behavior is not universal. Some preliminary results for Nb give evidence of a different behaviour. We presented in this paper an application of the functional derivative of the critical temperature with the Eliashberg function, δT c /δα 2 F (ω), to calculate T c as a function of pressure. We applied the method to superconducting Al. We get an excelent agreement with the successful calculations of Profeta et al. This work was performed using the facilities of the super-computing center (Xiuhcoatl) at CINVESTAV-México. González-Pedreros acknowledges the support of Conacyt-México through a PhD scholarship. r Daams and Carbotte 14 fit μ * solving the LME equation using the experimental value of T c . In a more recent work Bauer et all. 15 calculated corrections to μ *