We study theoretically the effects of random nonmagnetic impurities on the superconducting transition temperature T c in a two-band superconductor characterized by an equal-time s-wave interband pairing order parameter. Because of the two-band degree of freedom, it is possible to define a spin-triplet s-wave pairing order parameter as well as a spin-singlet s-wave order parameter. The former belongs to odd-band-parity symmetry class, whereas the latter belongs to even-band-parity symmetry class. In a spin-singlet superconductor, T c is insensitive to the impurity concentration when we estimate the self-energy due to the random impurity potential within the Born approximation. On the other hand in a spin-triplet superconductor, T c decreases with the increase of the impurity concentration. We conclude that Cooper pairs belonging to odd-band-parity symmetry class are fragile under the random impurity potential even though they have s-wave pairing symmetry. Conventional wisdom suggests that the dependence of superconducting transition temperature T c on the concentration of nonmagnetic impurities is closely related to the momentum-symmetry of the pair potential. It is well known that T c of an s-wave superconductor is insensitive to the impurity concentration. In addition to the intraband pair potentials, the interband (or interorbital) Cooper pairing order has been discussed in a topological superconductor Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 In this paper, we theoretically study the effects of nonmagnetic random impurities on T c in a two-band superconductor characterized by an equal-time s-wave interband pairing order. The pair potential is defined by the product of two annihilation operators of an electron. Therefore, the pair potential must be antisymmetric under the commutation of the two annihilation operators, which is the requirement from the Fermi-Dirac statistics of electrons. Due to the two-band degree of freedom, a spintriplet s-wave pair potential is allowed as well as a spin-singlet s-wave one. The latter is symmetric under the permutation of the two band indices (even-band-parity), whereas the former is antisymmetric (odd-band-parity). The effects of impurity potential are considered through the self-energy estimated within the Born approximation. The transition temperature is calculated from the linearized gap equation. We find that T c is insensitive to the impurity concentration in a spin-singlet s-wave interband superconductor. However, T c in a spin-triplet s-wave case decreases with the increase of the impurity concentration. We conclude that odd-band parity Cooper pairs are fragile under the potential disorder even though they belong to s-wave symmetry class. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we explain the normal state that makes possible spatially uniform interband Cooper pairing orders. The gap equation in the clean limit is derived for both a spin-singlet superconductor and a spin-triplet superconductor. The effects of random impurities on the superconducting transition temperature are studied in Sec. 3. The conclusion is given in Sec. 4. Throughout this paper, we use the units of k B = c = = 1, where k B is the Boltzmann constant and c is the speed of light. The interband s-wave pair potential is defined by where ψ † λ,σ (r) (ψ λ,σ (r)) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron with spin σ (=↑ or ↓) at the λ th conduction band and g > 0 represents the interband attractive interaction. By applying the Fourier transformation, the pair potential becomes In the second line, we assume the spatially uniform order parameter which is realized at k + k ′ = 0. To apply the weak coupling mean-field theory, the state at k with spin σ in the first band and the state at -k with spin σ ′ in the second band must be degenerate at the Fermi level. Otherwise interband Cooper pairs have the center-of-mass momenta and their order parameter oscillates in real space ȞN (r) = ξ(r) σ0 v e iθ σ0 v e -iθ σ0 ξ(r)σ 0 , where m is the mass of an electron, μ is the chemical potential, and v represents the hybridization between the two conduction bands. Generally speaking, the hybridization potential is a complex number characterized by a phase θ. We will show that observable values in a superconductor are independent of θ although the expression of the Green function depends on it. Throughout this paper, Pauli matrices in spin, two-band, particle-hole spaces are denoted by σj , ρj , and τj for j = 1 -3, respectively. In addition, σ0 , ρ0 , and τ0 are the unit matrices in these spaces. Since the two bands are identical to each other, the Hamiltonian preserves the symmetry described by where T is the time-reversal operator, K means the complex conjugation. Thus Γ represents the combined operation of the time-reversal and the exchange between the two bands. The normal state Hamiltonian in Eq. ( In the two-band model, it is possible to define two types of interband pairing order: spin-singlet and spin-triplet. In spin-singlet symmetry, the pair potential in Eq. ( On the other hand in spin-triplet symmetry, the pair potential in Eq. ( In what follows, we consider opposite-spin-triplet pairing order. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian in momentum space is represented by where ∆S and ∆T represent the spin-singlet pair potential and the spin-triplet one, respectively. Hereafter we fix the superconducting phase at zero for simplicity. The BdG Hamiltonian can be described in reduced 4 × 4 matrix form by choosing spin of an electron as ↑ and that of a hole as ↓, where s s = 1 for a spintriplet superconductor and s s = -1 for a spin-singlet superconductor. We note in the normal state that ξ * (-k) = ξ(k) holds true in the presence of time-reversal symmetry. The Green function is obtained by solving the Gor'kov equation, where ω n = (2n + 1)πT is a fermionic Matsubara frequency with T being a temperature. The solution of the normal Green function within the first order of ∆ is represented as Ĝ0 where we omit k from ξ(k) for simplicity. The results are common in both spin-singlet and spin-triplet cases because the normal Green function does not include the pair potential in the lowest order of ∆. The anomalous Green functions for a spin-singlet superconductor within the first order of ∆ is calculated as The ρ1 component in Eq. ( where N 0 is the density of states at the Fermi level per spin. We have used the relation where a and b are constants. The last equation in Eq. ( In the case of a spin-triplet superconductor, the anomalous Green function becomes The ρ2 component is linked to the pair potential. The gap equation is represented by Eq. ( deviate from Eq. ( Let us consider the nonmagnetic random impurities described by The first and the second terms in Eq. ( where • • • means the ensemble average, n imp is the impurity concentration, and v imp represents the strength of the impurity potential. We also assume that the attractive electron-electron interactions are insensitive to the impurity potentials where 0 in the subscript indicates unperturbed Green function. By considering Eqs. ( The second and the third terms are derived from the intraband impurity scatterings and the interband impurity scatterings, respectively. By applying the Fourier transformation, the Green function becomes where Σintra and Σinter are the self-energy due to the intraband impurity scatterings and that of interband impurity scatterings, respectively. The details of the derivation are given in Appendix. In the Born approximation, the self-energies are represented as The total self-energy is calculated as with Here the Green function after carrying out the summation of k is indicated by where ρν with ν = 0 -3 are the Pauli matrices in band space. The Gor'kov equation in the presence of impurities is expressed by Eq. (37) with Eqs. ( The normal part of the self-energy is calculated as where τ imp represents the life time due to impurity scatterings. The factor 2 in Eq. ( because Eq. (39) includes f 1 ρ1 . As a consequence, the Gor'kov equation in the presence of impurities becomes, The self-energy renormalizes the frequency and the pair potential exactly in the same manner as ω n → ωn and ∆ → ∆. As a consequence, the anomalous Green function can be calculated as where F0 on the right hand side is shown in Eq. remains unchanged from that in the clean limit. Thus the impurity scatterings do not change T c in a spin-singlet superconductor. The argument here is exactly the same as that in Ref. In a spin-triplet superconductor, the Green function in Eq. ( By substituting the results into Eq. (39), we find because Eq. (39) does not include f 2 ρ2 . The resulting Gor'kov equation becomes, The impurity self-energy renormalizes the frequency as ω n → ωn but leaves the pair potential as it is. Thus the anomalous Green function in the presence of impurities becomes where F0 on the right hand side is given in Eq. ( The results suggest that the impurity scatterings decrease T c for a spin-triplet superconductor. In Fig. The suppression of T c by impurities in a spin-triplet case can be interpreted as follows. The interband impurity scatterings hybridize the electronic states in the two bands and average the pair potential over the two-band degree of freedom. As shown in Eq. suppression of T c . The absence of f 2 ρ2 in Eq. (39) can be understood by such physical interpretation. It would be worth mentioning that the gap equation in Eq. ( Mathematically, the robustness of a spin-singlet s-wave interband superconducting state is described by the anomalous part of the self-energy ΣF = ∆/2τ imp |ω n | in Eq. (48). The suppression of T c in a spin-triplet superconductor is described by ΣF = 0 in Eq. (55). As we already explained below Eq. ( We studied the effects of random nonmagnetic impurities on the superconducting transition temperature T c in a two-band superconductor characterized by an equal-time s-wave interband pair potential. Due to the two-band degree of freedom, both spinsinglet and spin-triplet pairing order parameters satisfy the requirement from the Fermi-Dirac statistics of electrons. The effects of impurity potential is considered through the self-energy obtained within the Born approximation. The transition temperature is calculated from the linearized gap equation. In a spin-singlet superconductor, the random potential does not change T c . On the other hand in a spin-triplet superconductor, T c decreases with the increase of the impurity concentration. We conclude that Cooper pairs belonging to odd-band-parity symmetry class are fragile under the random impurity potential even though they belong to s-wave momentum symmetry. Â± = ρ1 cos θ ± ρ2 sin θ. (62) Here we focus on the anomalous part of the self-energy because its general expression is important to justify the main conclusion. We find the relation, Âν f ν ρν Â+ = f 1 ρ1 -f 2 ρ2 + (cos 2θ f 0 -i sin 2θ f 3 )ρ 0 -(cos 2θ f 3 -i sin 2θ f 0 )ρ 3 . (63) The most important feature is that f 2 ρ2 component changes its sign due to the anticomutation relations among ρj . Together with the intraband contribution ν f ν ρν , we obtain the general expression of the anomalous part in Eq. (39).