We identify an intrinsic mechanism of the anomalous Hall effect for non-symmorphic chiral superconductors. This mechanism relies on both a nontrivial multi-band chiral superconducting order parameter, which is a mixture of pairings of even and odd angular momentum channels, and a complex normal state inter-sublattice hopping, both of which are consequences of the nonsymmorphic group symmetry of the underlying lattice. We apply this mechanism to the putative chiral superconducting phase of the heavy-fermion superconductor UPt3 and calculate the anomalous ac Hall conductivity in a simplified two-band model. From the ac Hall conductivity and optical data we estimate the polar Kerr rotation angle and compare it to the measured results for UPt3 [E. Understanding unconventional superconductors has been one of the central goals in condensed matter research. Among the various unconventional superconductors, chiral superconductors have attracted a great deal of attention in recent years, in part because they provide a platform to study the interplay between spontaneous symmetry breaking and topology 1 . In a chiral superconductor, a Cooper pair carries a nonzero relative orbital angular momentum whose projection along a certain direction is also nonzero. Choosing this direction as the angular momentum quantization axis z, different chiral superconductors that are eigenstates of angular momentum can be characterized by the Cooper pair orbital angular momentum quantum numbers, L = 1, 2, 3, . . . and L z = ±1, ±2, . . . . A general chiral superconducting order, however, need not be an angular momentum eigenstate. For example, chiral f-wave may mix with chiral p-wave, etc. One of the defining properties of a chiral superconductor is its spontaneous breaking of parity and time-reversal symmetry. As a consequence, there can be a nonzero anomalous Hall effect (i.e., a Hall effect in the absence of an external magnetic field), which can be detected by polar Kerr effect measurements 2 . Experimentally, a frequency dependent rotation angle between the polarization of incident and reflected light is measured. This Kerr angle, θ K (ω), is related to the ac anomalous Hall conductivity, σ H (ω), by where n is the frequency dependent index of refraction. A nonzero Kerr signal has been observed in the superconducting phase of several unconventional superconductors including Sr 2 RuO 4 All of these theories (impurity effects, collective modes, and the multiband effect) have so far only been studied for the case of chiral p-wave superconductors. This has led to a better understanding of the Kerr effect in Sr 2 RuO 4 . However, UPt 3 is thought to be a chiral fwave superconductor in its lower superconducting transition temperature phase. One might think that the con-clusions obtained for the Kerr effect in a chiral p-wave superconductor can be directly generalized to higher chirality superconductors with |L z | ≥ 2 without much difficulty. However, such a naive generalization is problematic. As recent studies on non-topologically protected quantities, such as the integrated edge current UPt 3 exhibits multiple superconducting phases in its temperature-magnetic field phase diagram Recently, Yanase In this paper we show that this two band model with a mixed f + d wave superconducting order parameter can give rise to a nonzero Kerr effect with or without the small chiral p-wave pairing component. We find that mixing of the chiral d-component with the chiral f -wave pairing is essential for a nonzero σ H . We also find that the nature of the terms that contribute to σ H are distinct from the terms that give a nonzero contribution for the Sr 2 RuO 4 case Although our work is not a complete theory of the Kerr effect for UPt 3 , it captures a key possible contribution and more generally illustrates the necessary ingredients for a non-zero Kerr effect for a higher chirality superconductor, a case which is noticeably more subtle than that of chiral p-wave. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe the BdG Hamiltonian that we use for the starfishlike Fermi surface. In Sec. III we derive an approximate expression for σ H (ω) for this BdG Hamiltonian, evaluate it numerically, and identify the key ingredients of the result. The estimation of the Kerr angle from σ H and comparison to experiment are given in Sec. IV. Sec. V contains our conclusions and further discussions. Some technical computational details are relegated to the Appendices. 1. Crystal structure of UPt3. Blue disks denote the positions of U atoms. There is a Pt atom (not shown) between each nearest neighbor intra-layer pair of U atoms. The vectors ei and ri connect two nearest neighbor intra-layer and interlayer U atoms, respectively. The coordinate system is chosen such that x e1. We focus on a two-band model proposed by Yanase where c kis is the anihilation operator for an electron with momentum k, sublattice index i and spin quantum number s. In this basis the BdG Hamiltonian can be written as with where Ê(k) is the normal state Hamiltonian and ∆k is the superconducting order parameter, both 4 × 4 matrices. Using σ α and s α to denote the four Pauli matrices for the two sublattices and spin, respectively, we can write the normal state Hamiltonian Ê(k) as where σ ± = (σ 1 ± iσ 2 )/ √ 2 and ξ k , k and g k are given by Here, ξ k contains all nearest neighbor (NN) hoppings within the same sublattice, both in-plane hopping with parameter t and intra-sublattice NN hopping along the c-axis with parameter t z , μ is the chemical potential and k = (k x , k y , 0). The three unit vectors, e i = (cos φ i , sin φ i , 0) with φ i = (i -1) 2π 3 and i = {1, 2, 3}, are defined within the plane as shown in Fig. Diagonalizing the Hamiltonian Ê(k) gives the two normal state band dispersions, , each of which is two-fold degenerate. The Fermi surfaces are shown in Fig. B. Superconducting order parameter ∆(k) The superconducting order parameter ∆(k) proposed in Ref. 35 is an E 2u state that can be written as ∆(k) = η 1 Γ1 (k) + η 2 Γ2 (k). Here Γ1 (k) and Γ2 (k) are two basis functions of the E 2u representation, and (η 1 , η 2 ) = ∆ 0 (1, iη)/ 1 + η 2 , with overall pairing magnitude ∆ 0 and η a real number that controls the anisotropy of the order parameter. Due to the relative phase between η 1 and η 2 , ∆(k) is chiral, with the chirality determined by the sign of η. Γ1 (k) and Γ2 (k) are both triplets in spin as suggested by experiments where, for nearest-neighbor intersublattice pairing, In the expressions for Γ1 (k) and Γ2 (k), the spin Pauli matrix s 1 = s 3 is 2 indicates that the spin triplet pairing d vector is along the ẑ-direction (or the crystal c-axis). The presence of sublattice Pauli matrices σ 1 and σ 2 comes from the fact that the f -and d-wave components are derived from the real and imaginary part, respectively, of a pairing amplitude for electrons from NN inter-sublattice U ions. Because of the mixing between the f -and d-wave has a term which is not proportional to the identity matrix σ 0 s 0 , which makes ∆(k) nonunitary The expressions for Ê(k) and ∆(k) defined above can now be substitued into the BdG Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( with The two bases are In the above equations, where 1, 2 are sublattice labels. The two blocks are connected to each other by spin inversion, ↑↔↓, which leaves all matrix elements of Ĥ(a) (k) and Ĥ(b) (k) unchanged except for a change in the sign of the SOC term, g k . However, as will be shown later, the Hall conductivity σ H (ω) is an even function of g k . Therefore we only need to focus on one block, say Ĥ(a) (k), and multiply the σ H computed for that block by a factor of two. An additional factor of 1/2, arising from the double-counting of degrees of freedom in BdG theory, will cancel this factor of 2. Hereafter, we drop the superscript (a) in Ĥ(a) (k) and simply denote it as Ĥ(k) for brevity. Note that this decomposition into two 4 × 4 blocks is only possible in the absence of the intralayer p-wave pairing. From Ĥ(k) one can obtain the Bogoliubov quasiparticle energies, which have line nodes on the k z = ±π plane that form six rings, as shown in Fig. The Hall conductivity σ H (ω) can be computed from the Kubo formula where π xy (q, ω) is the electric current density Ĵx -Ĵy correlator. At the one-loop level π xy is given by (setting e = = c = 1) where T is the temperature (set to T = 0 at the end of the calculation) and ω n = (2n + 1)πT and ν m = 2mπT are fermionic and bosonic Matsubara frequencies, respectively. Ĝ(k, iω n ) is the Green's function of the 4×4 block Hamiltonian Ĥ(k) with inverse defined by Ĝ From det Ĝ-1 (k, iω n ) = 0 one obtains the Bogoliubov quasiparticles energies of the Hamiltonian Ĥ(k). However, the equation to be solved is not a quadratic equation for ω 2 n but a quartic equation in ω n (see Eq. (A2) in App. A). Consequently, the analytic expressions for the quasiparticle energies as well as the final expression for σ H (ω) are quite lengthy, and these results are summarized in App. A in Eqs. (A4) to (A8b). From these expressions it is difficult to identify which ingredients are essential to obtain a nonzero σ H (ω), and so we also compute σ H perturbatively to obtain a much simpler expression that is valid at intermediate to high frequencies. We treat the d-wave component of the superconducting order parameter as a perturbation and write Ĥ(k) = Ĥ0 (k) + Ĥ (k) where Ĥ0 and Ĥ will be taken as the "unperturbed" and "perturbed" Hamiltonian, respectively. We choose this particular partition because it is precisely the d-component superconducting order parameter part that makes the Bogoliubov quasiparticle energy expression complicated (see Eq. (A2) in App. A) and also because, as we will see later, the leading order contribution to σ H is linear in d k . Since we are including the effect of Ĥ only perturbatively, the results are only reliable for sufficently large ω. Actually, the perturbative expansion is in ) in App. A for details). So, the perturbative results are reliable for ω β k ∼ (∆ 2 0 α) 1/3 , where α is the SOC strength. The full Green's function results and the perturbative results for σ H (ω), are compared in App. A in Figs. Here we discuss the perturbative calculation of σ H , with further details given in App. B. Quantities of different order in Ĥ are represented by superscripts (0), (1), • • • . First, consider zeroth order described by the Hamiltonian Ĥ0 (k). The Bogoliubov quasiparticle energies, E ± , are with which are slightly different from those of the full Hamiltonian Ĥ(k). However E -still has nodal rings on the k z = ±π plane that are almost identical to those obtained from the full Hamiltonian, Ĥ(k), plotted in Fig. with vy can be obtained from vx by the substitution: With vx , vy and Ĝ(0 xy (iν m ) from Eq. ( H (ω) ≡ 0. In other words, a chiral f -wave superconducting order parameter alone does not give rise to a non-zero anomalous Hall conductivity from the multiband mechanism if the two bands arise from ABAB stacking. The mixing between f -wave and d-wave components is crucial for a nonzero σ H and one needs to go to first order to calculate a nonzero σ H (ω). From the full Green's function Ĝ = Ĝ(0) + Ĝ(0) Ĥ Ĝ(0) + • • • , one can define the first order Green's function as Ĝ(1) = Ĝ(0) Ĥ Ĝ(0) and, from Eq. ( This (or, more precisely, π xy (iν m ) -π where for brevity we have suppressed the infinitesimal imaginary part, iδ, in ω + iδ. Ω xy is an anti-symmetrized velocity factor given by We have also introduced two frequency dependent functions in Eq. (24), which are defined as (for details see App. B) and with F 1 (k, ω), F 2 (k, ω) and F 3 (k, ω) given by The ≈ sign means only the leading order terms in f k and d k have been kept. There are seven frequency independent coefficients in the numerators of F 1 , F 2 and F 3 . Their expressions are The subscripts, {++, --, +-}, in these coefficients directly reflect the corresponding physical processes that they are associated with, which can be inferred from the denominator of each term in the expressions of F 1 (k, ω), F 2 (k, ω) and F 3 (k, ω). For example, the first term in F 1 (k, ω) with coefficient C ++ corresponds to a process where a Cooper pair, with momentum (k, -k), is broken and a Bogoliubov quasiparticle pair with energies, E + (k) and E + (-k), are excited by the incident photon with a frequency ω. The two Bogoliubov quasiparticles have the same momentum (k, -k) as the broken Cooper pair because the incident photon momentum q ≈ 0 relative to k. Energy conservation of this process requires Other terms in F 1 (k, ω), F 2 (k, ω) and F 3 (k, ω) can be interpretated in a similar way. Notice that in the expressions for F 1 (k, ω), F 2 (k, ω) and F 3 (k, ω) there is no term with a denominator ω 2 -(E + -E -) 2 , which would correspond to a T > 0 process where a preexisting Bogoliubov quasiparticle with an energy E -gets excited to a higher energy level of E + by the incident photon. Finally, as noted below Eq. (13b), we can see from Eqs. ( (1) H (ω) is an even function of g k , since the two functions S k (ω) and T k (ω) depend on k only through E ± , which are even in g k (see Eq. ( Next we evaluate the expression for σ (1) H (ω) in Eq. ( (1) where A 1 (k, ω) and A 2 (k, ω) are: The k summation in Eq. ( (1) H | is smaller, can be clearly seen. Im σ (1) H (ω) has several sign changes as a function of ω because the different factors in Eq. ( (1) H (ω) is non-zero for arbitrarily small ω since the external field can excite quasiparticle pairs at arbitrarily small energy near the line nodes in the superconducting gap. Although σ (1) H (ω) vanishes as ω → 0, this feature is not visible in Fig. The real part, Re σ H (ω), can be computed from the data for Im σ (1) where P stands for Cauchy principal value integral. The results for Re σ H (ω) are plotted in Fig. where [ Ĵx , Ĵy ] is an equal time commutator and the expectation value • • • is with respect to the ground state of the BdG Hamiltonian. In App. C, we compute [ Ĵx , Ĵy ] to first order in Ĥ and find [ Ĵx , Ĵy ] (1) ≈ -i 2.2×10 -5 t 2 e 2 /( d). Similar to Im σ (1) H (ω) has further structure at very low frequency, ω < 0.01t. It saturates to a constant with a zero slope as ω → 0. Again, due to the large frequency range in Fig. (1) H From Eq. ( (1) H to be nonzero. As emphasized previously, both the chiral f -wave and the chiral d-wave components need to be present. In particular, the dependence of σ (1) which is proportional to the chirality. Under time reversal, this combination, and consequently σ (1) H , changes sign. This can be seen explicitly from the fact that under time reversal, . This is the only combination quadratic in ∆ 12 and/or ∆ 21 that is odd under time-reversal. It is also this term that makes the order parameter ∆(k) nonunitary. The second important ingredient for σ H is the complex inter-sublattice hopping, k , since both velocity terms appearing in Eq. ( The two key ingredients identified above, the mixing of the chiral f -and d-wave order parameters and the complex inter-sublattice hopping, k , are both direct consequences of the non-symmorphic symmetry of UPt 3 . They would both be absent if the lattice were symmorphic. In this sense, the terms that we have identified for σ H are unique to non-symmorphic chiral superconductors. The two terms in Eq. ( H (ω). Left panel: small frequency regime; right panel: large frequency regime. Note that the scales of the vertical axis in the two figures are different. In the right figure the red dashed line is a high frequency asymptotic result. Parameters used are the same as in Fig. σ H (ω) also needs to obey the following two sum rules where Eq. ( (1) Lastly we mention that the Hall conductivity, quite generally, needs to satisfy several symmetry constraints. Under time reversal, all vertical mirror reflections, and particle-hole interchange, σ H must reverse its sign. Both σ (1) H given in Eq. ( From the numerical results of σ H (ω), the Kerr rotation angle, θ K , can be estimated using Eq. (1), which also involves the complex index of refraction, n(ω). Here we use our results to estimate the Kerr angle for UPt 3 , where θ K was measured 5 at a laser frequency ω ≈ 0.8 eV. We first estimate n(ω=0.8eV) from experimental data. By definition n(ω) = (ω), where (ω) is related to the conductivity, σ(ω), by (ω) = ∞ + i4πσ(ω)/ω and ∞ is the high frequency limit dielectric constant. We extract σ(ω=0.8eV) ≈ (1.7 + i 0.4) × 10 15 s -1 from the experimental data of Ref. 52. Taking ∞ = 1, we obtain (ω=0.8eV) ≈ -3.1 + i 17.5, which gives an index of refraction, To obtain a value for σ H (ω ≈ 0.8eV), we need to estimate the in-plane hopping parameter t in eV, since we have scaled all energies by t. This can be obtained by comparing the normal state band dispersions of our two-band model along the symmetry directions A -L -H -A in the k z = π plane to the corresponding first-principle calculation results from Ref. 53. The comparison gives t ≈ 36meV (for details, see App. D). This value of t corresponds to ω/t ≈ 22.2 at ω = 0.8eV. From our numerical results for σ H (ω) in Fig. where d = 4.9 Å is the c-axis lattice spacing of UPt 3 . From Eqs. (36), ( Our estimated θ K is about an order of magnitude smaller than the experimental value of about 350 nanoradians measured at the lowest temperatures 5 . However, it may still be a significant contribution to the explanation for the Kerr measurement on UPt 3 Ideally, one would like measurements of n(ω) on the same crystal used for the Kerr measurements. Other optical data on UPt 3 would give somewhat different results As to the band parameters, uncertainty comes both from the value of t and from the fact that a very simplified nearest-neighbour hopping model has been used to approximate the two bands which give rise to the starfish Fermi surface. This likely introduces a larger uncertainty than that from errors in the estimate of n(ω). The other parameter that can greatly affect the size of θ K is ∆ 0 , the amplitude of the gap function written in the orbital basis. Note that ∆ 0 is not the gap that one would observe in tunneling measurements. Defining ∆ g as the position of the coherence peak in the Bogoliubov quasiparticle density of states spectrum, one finds ∆ g ≈ 0.16 ∆ 0 (see Fig. Lastly there are several other Fermi surface sheets that we did not take into account, which might contribute to θ K . These additional contributions could either increase or decrease the total θ K , depending on their relative magnitude and sign. With these uncertainties in mind, we conclude that the θ K that we have identified here can be significant for explaining the Kerr measurement on UPt 3 , even if it is not large enough to account for the whole experimentally observed signal. Further experiments and theoretical studies are needed to resolve the above uncertainties. To summarize, by considering a simplified two band model that results from ABAB stacking for the starfishlike Fermi surface of UPt 3 , we have identified a contribution to the ac anomalous Hall conductivity for UPt 3 within the intrinsic multiband chiral superconductivity mechanism. The Kerr angle estimated from the com-puted Hall conductivity can be significant for understanding the Kerr measurement on UPt 3 . This mechanism requires non-zero interband pairing. Since intraand inter-band pairing are indistinguishable at the six points on the k z = ±π plane where the starfish-like Fermi surfaces of UPt 3 intersect, this is a useful model for studying the multiband chiral superconductivity mechanism. We have identified two crucial ingredients for the nonzero σ H : a complex inter-sublattice hopping between U sites and a novel superconducting order parameter that involves mixing between chiral f -wave and chiral d-wave pairing. Both of these are consequences of the nonsymmorphic group symmetry of the UPt 3 crystal lattice. If the inter-sublattice hopping is real or if one of the chiral f -and d-wave pairing components is absent, then σ H and θ K vanish. This is a generalization of, albeit somewhat distinct from, the multiband chiral superconductivity mechanism for the anomalous ac Hall effect in a chiral p-wave superconductor In our analysis we have identified two types of terms that contribute to σ H (ω) at each k point, as can be seen from Eq. ( We should mention that in our calculation we have neglected a small chiral p-wave component pairing in the original proposed superconducting order parameter of Ref. 35. This component is also symmetry allowed but is expected to be energetically less favorable compared with the dominant chiral f -and d-components. In the two band model we consider, this p-wave component alone can also give rise to a nonzero σ H (ω). This contribution relies on the nonunitary nature of the p-wave pairing (it pairs only one spin component if η = 1), and requires nonzero SOC and complex inter-sublattice hopping. Presumably the admixture of this neglected small p-wave component will not significantly alter the estimated Kerr angle simply because its pairing amplitude is thought to be very small.. Recently the authors of Ref. 59 suggested that the Kerr rotation in UPt 3 can not be understood without invoking pairing in completely filled or empty bands because the laser frequency used in the Kerr angle measurement First, since the incident photon breaks a Cooper pair and generates two Bogoliubov quasiparticles, the maximum energy cost is not the bandwidth, but twice the energy difference between the Fermi level and the bottom or top of the band (whichever is greater). From Ref. 60, this maximum energy along the symmetry direction A -L -H -A in the k z = π plane is about 0.68 eV, while from Ref. 53, this is about 0.84 eV. The latter (which we used to determine the hopping t in our model) allows energy-conserving transitions within the band at 0.8 eV. Second, both Re σ H (ω) and Im σ H (ω) can make significant contributions to θ K . Even if the laser frequency is larger than the excitation energy of two quasiparticles within the band, Re σ H (ω) will still be nonzero at ω = 0.8 eV. Consequently, the observation of nonzero θ K in UPt 3 at 0.8 eV may still be understood within a model of partially filled bands. Eq. (A2) is a quartic equation for ω rather than a quadratic equation in ω 2 due to the β k ω term. Because of this, the solutions E i do not occur as {+E, -E} particle hole pairs. However, this does not contradict the particle-hole symmetry of the full superconducting BdG Hamiltonian which is restored when Ĥ(a) is combined with the other 4 × 4 block Ĥ(b) (k), given in Eq. (12b), to form the full ĤBdG . Also, because of the β k ω term in Eq. (A2), the expressions for the E i , in terms of the three coefficients {α k , β k , γ k } are much more complicated than in the case of β k = 0. For brevity we will not present them here. With the coefficients {α k , β k , γ k } and E i defined above we can now write the final result for σ H (ω) as follows where Ω xy was defined in Eq. ( F 1 , F 2 and F 3 are connected to the three functions, F i (k, ω), that we introduced in our perturbative calculations, by where E ± are the two Bogoliubov quasiparticle energies of the zeroth order Hamiltonian(see Eq. ( The O h (k) F 2 (k, ω) term in Eq. (A4) contains terms of higher powers, fourth order in f k and d k , compared with the other terms that are second order in f k and d k (ignoring the f k dependence through the quasiparticle energies E ± ). This is clear from Eq. (A3b), the expression for β k , and from where we have introduced two additional antisymmetrized velocity products Ω (1) xy and Ω (2) xy , defined as follows From σ H (ω + iδ) in Eq. (A4) we can derive its imaginary part, Im σ H (ω). Then we can numerically evaluate Im σ H (ω) and compare the results with our perturbation results for Im σ (1) H (ω) in the main text. The comparison is given in Fig. We can also compute Re σ H (ω) by the Kramers-Kronig transformation and compare the results with Re σ (1) H , presented in the main text. This comparison is shown in Fig. H (thick black line) and that for Re σH (dashed red line). Left panel: small ω/t ≤ 14; right panel: large ω/t ≥ 10. Note that the vertical axis scales of the two panels are different. four indices, {α, β, α , β }, are different from each other; (2) the four indices consist of two identical pairs. However, the latter contribution is even with respect to the interchange x ↔ y and therefore contributes zero to F (1) xy after the antisymmetrization, -x ↔ y . Therefore the only non-zero contribution comes from the case with all four indices different. Because each of the indices,{α, β, α , β }, can take four possible values {0, +, -, 3} there are 4! = 24 different terms in total. However, half of them are zero because of the following three identities (1) Then we are left with In obtaining this equation we have used the trace identity Tr[σ 0 σ + σ -σ 3 ] = 2 as well as its permutations. Next we need to complete the the Matsubara summa-tion T ωn in Eq. (B1). This can be done for each of the three lines in Eq. (B12). The derivations are quite lengthy, and we do not present them here. The final results are: For brevity we have introduced two frequency dependent functions, S k (iν m ) and T k (iν m ), which are defined as where the ≈ sign means only terms of leading order in f k and d k have been kept. M 1 and M 2 are given by Notice that both the C +-term in Eq. (B16a) and the D +-term in Eq. (B16b) have a second order pole at ν m = ±i(E + + E -) on the complex ν m plane; while all other terms have first order poles. The second order poles appear only in the perturbative calculation but not in the full Ĝ calculation. Numerically we found that the second order pole contributions to σ H from Eq. (B16a) and (B16b) are negligible at ω α, where α is the SOC coupling strength. Hence we will ignore them hereafter. Performing a Wick rotation, iν m → ω + iδ, we see that S k (ω)/ω and T k (ω)/ω are given by Eqs. ( (1) xy in Eq. (B12) we obtain where we have used and also introduced a notation Ω xy for the following anti-symmetrized velocity factor With these compact notations one can substitute T n F (1) xy from Eq. (B18) back into Eq. (B1) and obtain the final expression for the Hall conductivity as a function of frequency given in Eq. (24). Eq. (12a) up to first order in Ĥ . Denote the basis of the Hamiltonian Ĥ(a) (k) from Eq. (12a) as Ψ ≡ (Ψ 1 , Ψ 2 , Ψ 3 , Ψ 4 ) T . Then the current operator can be written as Ĵi = k αβ Ψ † α (k) v i αβ Ψ β (k), with i = {x, y}. The velocity operator matrix v i αβ is given in Eq. (22). Using the fact that the equal time expectation value Ψ † α Ψ β = T n Ĝβα (k, iω n ), we obtain On the right hand side of Eq. (C1) all Green's function matix elements are evaluated at (k, iω n ). In Eq. (C1) if we use the zeroth order result, G αβ , for all the Green's function matrix elements then we obtain [ Ĵx , Ĵy ] (0) = 0. This is consistent with Eq. ( H (ω) ≡ 0. The nonzero [ Ĵx , Ĵy ] comes from the next order contribution: [ Ĵx , Ĵy ] ( where Ω xy is defined in Eq. (25). The remaining k summation in Eq. (C3) can be evaluated numerically and the final result is [J x , J y ] (1) ≈ -i 2.2 × 10 -5 t Then Eq. ( (1) It is also possible to perform the integral in Eq. ( (1) H (ω) from Eq. (30). The result is identical to -i times Eq. (C3). Similarly the integral of Eq. ( We note that the bands along Γ -M -K -Γ in Fig. FIG. 5. Numerical results for Re σ FIG. 8. Comparison between the numerical results for Re σ C. Kallin and J. Berlinsky, Reports on Progress in Physics 79, 054502 (2016). A. Kapitulnik, J. Xia, E. Schemm, and A. Palevski, New