The local atomic structure of superconducting NdO 1-x F x BiS 2 (x =0.2 and 0.4) is investigated using neutron diffraction and the pair density function analysis technique. In the nonsuperconducting x=0.2 composition, ferrodistortive displacements of the pyramidal sulfur ions break the tetragonal symmetry and a superlattice structure emerges with peaks appearing at h + k odd reflections superimposed on the even reflections of the P 4/nmm symmetry. In the superconducting x=0.4 composition, similar ferrodistortive displacements are observed but with different magnitudes coupled with in-plane Bi distortions. The distortions are indicative of charge fluctuations that may lead to charge localization and suppression of superconductivity. The new phonon mediated BiS 2 superconductors, LnO 1-x F x BiS 2 (Ln=La, Ce, Nd, Pr and Yb) It is understood by now that LnO 1-x F x BiS 2 (Ln = La, Nd, Pr, Ce and Yb) shows enhanced superconductivity either under high pressure synthesis during which crystallinity is suppressed or by introducing chemical pressure through substitutions at the Ln site. The nature of the crystal disorder is a key component to understand superconductivity in this system. Polycrystalline samples of NdO 1-x F x BiS 2 (x =0.2 and 0.4) were prepared using solidstate reaction using Bi grains, Bi 2 S 3 , Nd 2 O 3 , BiF 3 and Nd 2 S 3 powders. Stoichiometric amounts of each composition were ground, palletized and heated in an evacuated quartz tube at 700 • C for 15 hours. The synchrotron X-ray experiment on NdO 0.7 F 0.3 BiS 2 single crystal was performed at 11-ID-C using X-rays of 105 KeV at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. The data were collected at a wavelength of 0.11798 Å in transmission mode. The results from the Rietveld refinement of the diffraction data are provided in Table The NOMAD is a medium-range resolution instrument ( ∆d d ∼0.8%) . While their local structures are quite similar overall, differences can be seen between the two, especially in the 2.5-3.5 Å range that cannot be accounted for by the substitution of F for O. The x =0.2 data is compared to a model PDF calculated using the atomic coordinates and unit cell dimensions obtained from the Rietveld refinement corresponding to the average structure. As shown in Fig. The crystal structure of NdO 1-x F x BiS 2 is locally distorted. The distortions are centered around the Bi ion in the superconducting planes and they are very similar in nature to the distortions observed in LaO 1-x F x BiS 2 with the exception that Bi is displaced from its equilibrium position. The charge fluctuations around Bi observed indirectly by their effects on the lattice may have important implications on superconductivity. They may be the driving force for the sulfur displacements, the latter of which self organize into (x, y) modes, breaking rotational and the inversion symmetries. The questions to ask are does the superconducting state emerges from the collapse of a long-range CDW state and to what extent are the distortions relevant to pairing? It seems that even in the parent compound, the normal ground state consists of an underlying supperlattice structure that remains even when the system becomes superconducting.