Inelastic neutron scattering measurements on the itinerant antiferromagnet (AFM) CaCo2-yAs2 at a temperature of 8 K reveal two orthogonal planes of scattering perpendicular to the Co square lattice in reciprocal space, demonstrating the presence of effective one-dimensional spin interactions. These results are shown to arise from near-perfect bond frustration within the J1-J2 Heisenberg model on a square lattice with ferromagnetic J1, and hence indicate that the extensive previous experimental and theoretical study of the J1-J2 Heisenberg model on local-moment square spin lattices should be expanded to include itinerant spin systems. Magnetic frustration arises when competing interactions between magnetic moments (spins) cannot be mutually satisfied. It suppresses the development of longrange magnetic order, and often creates enhanced spin fluctuations, which can lead to a variety of novel phases including quantum spin liquids Compounds with the chemical formula ATM 2 As 2 , (with A = Ca, Sr, Ba and TM = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni), form a large class of quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) materials containing layers of T M ions on a square lattice, which are stacked along c. Despite the crystal structure being three dimensional, they are considered quasi-2D for magnetism, as the interactions between layers are much smaller than those within the layers. Much of the recent motivation for the study of these materials is due to the proximity of antiferromagnetic (AFM) order and hightemperature superconductivity in the doped variants of TM = Fe compounds Despite their itinerant nature, the magnetic structures and spin fluctuations can be minimally described by considering NN (J 1 ) and NNN (J 2 ) magnetic exchange interactions between magnetic ions on a square lattice The frustration parameter, η, can be determined experimentally by measuring the spatial anisotropy of the spin fluctuations using inelastic neutron scattering (INS). The spatial distributions of the spin fluctuations in different magnetic ground states depend strongly on η as illustrated in the Supplemental Information (Fig. Here, we report inelastic neutron scattering measurements of magnetic excitations in CaCo 2-y As 2 at T = 8 K, below the AFM ordering temperature T N = 52 K Single crystals of CaCo 2-y As 2 (y 0.14), were grown using Sn flux Figures To describe the scattering data, we consider two models for A-type AFM. Using values of J 1 and J 2 appropriate for an A-type AFM ground state, we first use the linear spin-wave theory approximation to the Heisenberg model to calculate the neutron scattering cross-section corresponding to the values of Q and E measured by INS. The details and results of the model calculations are shown in the Supplemental Material: Fig. We next consider a model more appropriate for itinerant systems close to magnetic order. In itinerant magnets, the electronic degrees-of-freedom can result in a significant degree of Landau damping of the spin fluctuations due to the scattering of electrons. A diffusive model that describes such overdamped spin fluctuations in a nearly ordered system has been used to describe INS data on weakly ordered and metallic Ba(Fe 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 where ξ 2 q q 2 = (4ξ/a) 2 η cos ( Here, χ 0 is the static uniform susceptibility, ξ is the magnetic correlation length, Γ is the Landau damping parameter, and the x and y directions correspond to the [1 0 0] and [0 1 0] directions of the tetragonal I 4/mmm crystal system, respectively. In the itinerant picture relevant for the iron arsenides, η arises from the spatial anisotropy of electronic velocities at the Fermi surface in terms of the magnetic correlation lengths in the LO and TR directions. The values of the parameters in Eqs. ( Also from the dispersion of A-type AFM in the TR direction Fig. Materials such as CaCo 2-y As 2 are considered quasi-2D because interactions between Co layers are much smaller than those within the layer. In the case of CaCo 2-y As 2 , frustrated interactions within the layer reduce the dimensionality even further, leading to effectively 1D behavior. This is most easily pictured by considering J 1 and J 2 interactions in a single square layer with the stripe-type AFM order, as shown in Fig. Starting from the FM side, the spin stiffness goes to zero in all directions as η → (-1) -, preserving the 4-fold symmetry of the ground state. However, similar to the stripe-type AFM order, the effective coupling between FM chains in the LO direction goes to zero, as shown in Fig. Highly-Frustrated Square-Lattice Itinerant Magnet CaCo 2-y As 2 Heisenberg Model: The dispersion relation of the A-type AFM order, associated with the Heisenberg Hamiltonian consisting of nearestneighbor (J 1 ), next-nearest-neighbor (J 2 ) and interlayer (J c ) exchange parameters in the I 4/mmm cell, is where q = Q -Q A is the reduced wavevector and B q = SJ c cos(πL) The neutron scattering cross-section can be written as Here, A is the overall scale factor, k i and k f are initial and final wavevectors, respectively, and S αβ is the response function or the dynamical structure factor describing spin-spin correlations. Considering only the transverse-component contributions to the neutron intensity, the response function can be described by the damped simple harmonic oscillator (DSHO) as where k B is the Boltzmann constant, Γ is the damping parameter, and S eff is the effective spin. From the dispersion relation of the A-type antiferromagnet, neglecting the interactions along c-direction, J 1 can be written in terms of the half width at half maximum (δ) along the TO direction at (H, K ) = (0.5, 0.5) as: where δ is in r.l.u. and from our data, for E = 55 meV, we get δ = 0.11 r.l.u. Substituting these values in equation ( 