Graphene nanoribbons with armchair edges are studied for externally enhanced, but realistic parameter values: enhanced Rashba spin-orbit coupling due to proximity to a transition metal dichalcogenide like WS2, and enhanced Zeeman field due to exchange coupling with a magnetic insulator like EuS under applied magnetic field. The presence of s-wave superconductivity, induced either by proximity or by decoration with alkali metal atoms like Ca or Li, leads to a topological superconducting phase with Majorana end modes. The topological phase is highly sensitive to the application of uniaxial strain, with a transition to the trivial state above a critical strain well below 0.1%. This sensitivity allows for real space manipulation of Majorana fermions by applying nonuniform strain profiles. Similar manipulation is also possible by applying inhomogeneous Zeeman field or chemical potential. Introduction.-Majorana fermions -particles which are their own anti-particles Apart from graphene's unconventional behavior In the present paper, we show that topological superconductivity can be realized in armchair graphene nanoribbons [Fig. Model and methods.-We model p z electrons in graphene with a tight binding Hamiltonian, where c † r,σ creates an electron with spin σ at site r of the honeycomb lattice, and the three vectors δ connect nearest neighbor atoms as shown in Fig. Strain is introduced through changes on the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian connecting nearest neighbor sites. For the hopping parameter the change reads where u is the deformation field, and Here we consider uniaxial strain applied along a direction specified by θ [see Fig. The topological and trivial phases are identified by: the presence of a finite gap, with a gap closing point separating the two phases; the presence or absence of zero energy states in finite length ribbons, where their presence signals a topological state; the topological invariant, ) which in this case can be chosen to be the Berry phase γ Here we consider the realistic Zeeman field V z ≃ 1.2 meV (the experimental realization is discussed below). Strain has a strong impact in the system, as shown in Fig. In the presence of a finite s-wave superconducting pairing ∆ the system becomes gapped, as shown in Fig. Manipulating Majorana zero modes.-The sensitivity to strain found in this work can be used for spatial manipulation of Majorana zero modes. This is demonstrated in Fig. where x is the coordinate along the armchair direction, as indicated in Fig. The advantage of graphene compared to other platforms is that not only strain but also other parameters - like the chemical potential μ and the Zeeman coupling V z -can be manipulated externally, and non-uniform profiles can also be realized for these cases. In particular, by applying a non-uniform chemical potential profile μ(x) according to the topological region can be confined to a region of length 2l instead of the ribbon's full size. In Fig. Experimental realization.-In order to realize Majorana zero modes in graphene using the standard scheme, and then manipulate them through strain, a sizable superconducting gap and Zeeman field are required, and also needed is a high enough Rashba SOC. We show here that such requirements are within experimental reach. Regarding the necessary superconducting state, induced superconductivity has been already demonstrated in graphene Even though superconductivity and moderate to high magnetic fields are usually not compatible, the 2D nature of graphene assures that only the perpendicular component may weaken the superconducting state. Such perpendicular component B ⊥ of the magnetic field B can be made extremely small in graphene, with B ⊥ 50 mT for B = 30 T, as shown in recent experiments The effect has been shown to be operative also on the surface of topological insulators Finally, the Rashba SOC can be enormously enhanced by proximity to WS 2 or other transition metal dichalcogenides, reaching values λ ∼ 1 meV Conclusions.-In the present work we have shown that topological superconductivity can be realized in armchair graphene nanoribbons with externally enhanced parameter values -but still within realistic conditions -using the standard scheme with Rashba SOC, Zeeman field, and s-wave superconductivity. A very high sensitivity to strain has been put forward. A non-uniform strain profile can be used to manipulate the position of the localized zero energy Majorana modes. A spatial variation of the chemical potential or Zeeman field can also be used to manipulate Majorana zero modes. Such nonuniform variation of parameters can in principle be easier to achieve in graphene than in other platforms. It would be interesting to investigate the impact of strain in two recent proposals for realizing Majorana fermions in graphene where SOC enhancement is not required 