A one-dimensional semiconductor nanowire proximitized by a nearby superconductor may become a topological superconductor hosting localized Majorana zero modes at the two wire ends in the presence of spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman spin splitting (arising from an external magnetic field). The hallmark of the presence of such Majorana zero modes is the appearance of a zero-temperature quantized zero-bias conductance peak in the tunneling spectroscopy of the Majorana nanowire. We theoretically study the temperature and the tunnel coupling dependence of the tunneling conductance in such nanowires to understand possible intrinsic deviations from the predicted conductance quantization. We find that the full temperature and the tunneling transmission dependence of the tunnel conductance does not obey any simple scaling relation, and estimating the zero-temperature conductance from finite-temperature and finite-tunnel-broadening tunneling data is difficult in general. A scaling relation, however, does hold at the extreme weak-tunneling low-temperature limit where the conductance depends only on the dimensionless ratio of the temperature and tunnel broadening. We also consider the tunneling contributions from nontopological Andreev bound states which may produce almost-zero-bias conductance peaks, which are not easy to distinguish from the Majorana-induced zero-bias peaks, finding that the nontopological almostzero-modes associated with Andreev bound states manifest similar temperature and transmission dependence as the topological Majorana modes. We comment on the Zeeman splitting dependence of the zero-bias conductance peak for finite temperature and tunnel coupling. In 2001 essentially simultaneous theoretical works predicted The important question is, of course, whether the observed ZBP in nanowire experiments is indeed the 'predicted' MZM signature, and this question has been (and continues to be) actively discussed in the theoretical literature One important point to emphasize right away is that at T = 0, the MZM zero-bias conductance must necessarily be quantized at 2e 2 /h, independent of tunnel coupling and Zeeman splitting values, although it is possible for the zero-bias conductance not to have a peak or maximum Our work is partially motivated by the appearance of a recent experimental paper (2) any scaling applies equally well to ZBPs arising from both MZMs and ABSs so that a clear distinction between topological and trivial physics is not feasible based only on such scaling plots although a distinction is possible, as a matter of principle, based on the absolute magnitude of the zero-temperature ZBP conductance value itself. We point out that the possibility that ABS might reflect similar scaling behavior for the subgap conductance as MZM is mentioned in Ref. We provide detailed numerical results for the calculated differential conductance properties as a function of electron temperature, intrinsic tunnel broadening, and Zeeman splitting for both MZMs and ABSs, and carefully investigate the scaling behavior of conductance with respect to temperature and tunnel broadening (i.e., whether the conductance can be expressed purely in terms of a single dimensionless parameter combining the two). In the current work, we critically investigate the extent to which the subgap conductance may be expressed in terms of a dimensionless scaling variable and the associated constraints on such a scaling behavior. We also numerically connect the intrinsic subgap tunnel broadening with the above-gap tunnel conductance since they both arise from the tunnel coupling properties. Experimentally, the tunnel barrier properties (i.e., the tunneling transmission coefficient or the tunnel barrier strength) are not known, and often the above-gap normal conductance is used (somewhat erroneously in our view We mention that dissipative broadening, arising from extrinsic (and unknown) sources (e.g., vortices in the environment, coupling to fermionic baths in the environment, stray nonthermal quasiparticles, etc.) also provide ZBP broadening, which has nothing whatsoever to do with the thermal and tunnel broadening being considered in the current work. Earlier works by us have considered the possible role of dissipative broadening in Majorana nanowires The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we begin by discussing the NS junction model and the numerical method used to calculate the differential conductance. We proceed to give the results of the differential conductance for an MZM in a semiinfi-nite nanowire in Sec. III for two cases, namely Zeemanindependent and Zeeman-dependent bulk superconducting gap. (The reason for choosing a magnetic-field dependent bulk superconducting gap here is that experiments often find that the bulk gap is suppressed by the applied magnetic field leading to its eventual collapse at a large enough field We consider a 1D NS junction where the normal region is a semiinfinite spin-orbit-coupled normal lead and the superconductor is a spin-orbit-coupled nanowire proximitized by an s-wave superconductor in the presence of an externally applied magnetic field creating a Zeeman spin splitting transparency The Hamiltonian of the junction in the particle-hole space is where the Nambu spinor is Ψ j (x) = (ψ j↑ (x), ψ j↓ (x), ψ † j↓ (x), -ψ † j↑ (x)) T with ψ † jσ (x) and ψ jσ (x) being respectively the operators that create and annihilate an electron with spin σ in region j = lead and j = NW (nanowire). The Hamiltonian of the normal lead and nanowire in the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) form are given by where μ lead (μ) is the chemical potential of the lead (nanowire), α is the strength of spin-orbit coupling, V Z is the spin-splitting Zeeman field, ∆ is the proximityinduced s-wave pairing potential from a parent superconductor, and σ x,y,z (τ x,y,z ) are the Pauli matrices in the spin (particle-hole) subspace. In the following, we will work in the unit where the reduced Planck constant , Boltzmann constant k B , and the spin-orbit length SO = 2 /(m * α) = 0.1 μm, which corresponds to the electron effective mass m * = 0.015m (the effective electron mass in InSb nanowires where r eh and r ee are the Andreev and normal reflection amplitudes, respectively. The constant 2 in Eq. ( The finite-temperature conductance is calculated by convoluting the zero-temperature conductance with the derivative of the Fermi function df /dE, i.e., Note that this finite-temperature convolution formula applies independent of the origin of the T = 0 subgap conductance G 0 (V ) in Eq. (3) -in particular, both MZM and ABS subgap conductances obey exactly the same convolutions and will thus manifest similar finite temperature behavior if G 0 (V ) is similar. In the following sections, we use Eq. ( In this section, we compute the differential conductance of a semiinfinite Majorana nanowire in the topological regime for two different cases, namely V Zindependent and V Z -dependent bulk superconducting gap. Our reason for considering a semiinfinite wire (in contrast to finite-length wires) is to avoid Majorana oscillations inherent in finite systems In this subsection, we focus on the case where the induced bulk superconducting gap is independent of the Zeeman splitting, i.e., ∆ = ∆ 0 ≡ ∆(V Z = 0). Figures 3 and 4 show the calculated differential conductance G for the nanowire in the topological regime (V Z > ∆ 2 0 + μ 2 ). The conductance decreases with increasing barrier strength Z, except the zero-temperature zero-bias conductance value which is quantized at 2e 2 /h [Fig. We quantify the ZBP width or broadening using the full width at half maximum (FWHM) which is defined as the distance between points on the conductance against bias voltage plot at which the conductance reaches the value (max(G) + min(G))/2 as shown in Fig. where G N ± are the conductances at positive and negative voltages above the gap (which are taken to be V = ±4∆ 0 throughout this paper). As seen in Figs. 5(e) and 5(f), the junction transparency G N is inversely related to the barrier strength Z. It turns out that for small Γ, i.e., in the weak tunneling Z 1 limit when the ZBP itself can be approximated as a Lorentzian [see Eq. ( where ∆ is the quasiparticle gap and the junction transmission coefficient τ is given in terms of the barrier strength Z by τ = 1/(1 + Z 2 ), implying τ lies between zero (for Z = ∞) and one (for Z = 0). Note that Eq. ( The above equation implies that Γ has the following limiting scaling forms; Γ ∝ 1/Z 2 for Z 1 and Γ ∝ 1/Z for Z 1. In Fig. Figure In the limit where Γ, T ∆, where ∆ is the induced quasiparticle gap in the nanowire at a given V Z , the ZBP can be approximated by a Lorentzian function with the zero-bias tunneling conductance given by where g is a scaling function that depends only on the ratio of temperature T to the tunnel broadening Γ. We emphasize that by definition this formula [Eq. ( form given by the first term inside the convolution integral in Eq. ( Above the critical Zeeman field at which the TQPT happens (V Zc = μ 2 + ∆ 2 ), the quasiparticle gap ∆ first increases sharply with increasing Zeeman field strength near the TQPT and then decreases slowly with increasing Zeeman field . This Zeeman-field dependence of the gap is reflected in the change of the ZBP width in the weak-tunneling limit where it first increases with increasing Zeeman field and then decreases with a further increase in the Zeeman field as shown in Fig. In the weak-tunneling limit (Γ ∆), Γ is related to the imaginary part of the normal-lead self-energy where τ is the junction transmission coefficient and φ(0) is the nanowire wave function at the NS interface. Since the isolated MZM wave function is approximately given by where ξ = v F / ∆ is the superconducting coherence length, we get In Figs. We show the plot of G S versus barrier strength Z and G S versus FWHM of the ZBP in Fig. In this subsection, we consider a more experimentally realistic scenario where V * Z is the critical field at which the bulk superconducting gap collapses. This appears to be a common experimental scenario tant quantitative differences since the effective topological gap is considerably suppressed in the presence of a V Z -dependent bulk gap, and consequently, all the energy scales are suppressed. Figure The ZBP width for the case of Zeeman-dependent bulk gap is smaller than that for the Zeeman-independent case with the same parameters, simply because the induced gap is smaller, which can be understood from Eq. ( Figure In Fig. The zero-temperature differential conductance plots for different Zeeman fields above the TQPT at several fixed tunnel barrier strengths are shown in Fig. Figure We plot the zero-bias conductance G S as a function of V Z in Fig. The plots of finite-temperature G S versus barrier strength Z and G S versus FWHM of the ZBP are depicted in Fig. In Sec. III, we examined the temperature and tunnel coupling properties of the MZM-induced ZBP, e.g., how the conductance varies with respect to temperature, tunnel barrier strength, and Zeeman field. In particular, we find that only in the low-temperature and weak-tunneling limit, i.e., T, Γ ∆, the zero-bias conductance for the MZM-induced ZBP scales with a single variable T /Γ, i.e., the ratio of temperature to zero-temperature half width at half maximum (i.e., intrinsic ZBP broadening Γ), according to Eq. ( For the simulation of the ABS-induced ZBPs, we follow Ref. where the BdG Hamiltonian is given in the same basis as Eq. ( 3.9. The precise value of V Z at which the ABS energy is zero varies slightly with respect to the tunnel barrier strength, since the barrier is also part of the quantum dot. However, the variation is tiny, and often it is less than 5% of the average V Z . (This also indicates that it may be tricky, although feasible as a matter of principle, to use any sensitivity to the tunnel barrier strength as a diagnostic tool to distinguish between MZM and ABS.) 23. (color online) Schematic of the NS junction for the ABS-induced ZBP. An extra and crucial ingredient in the NS junction here is the quantum dot between the normal lead and the proximitized nanowire. The quantum dot is a smooth confinement potential and is not proximitized by the parent superconductor. First, we examine how the profile of the ABS-induced ZBP varies with the tunnel barrier strength Z at fixed temperature, as shown in Fig. T /∆ 0 = 0.02 by two MZMs weakly coupled with each other, with each MZM contributing almost perfect Andreev reflection, independent of the tunnel barrier strength, to the conductance. The ZBP conductance, however, is not robust against temperature, as indicated by Figs. . For the finite temperature case, with the lowering of the tunnel barrier strength, both the ZBP conductance and the broadening increase. These features are qualitatively similar to our findings on MZM-induced ZBPs as presented in Sec. III. Figure . 25 shows more explicitly the effect of temperature on the ABS-induced ZBPs. In general, raising temperature would lower the peak conductance and broaden the width simultaneously. Furthermore, at higher tunnel barrier strength, the peak suppressing effect by the temperature is even more dramatic than that at lower tunnel barrier strength [compare the blue and green curves in both Figs. It is important to realize that although the trivial ZBP arising from the ABS has an arbitrary conductance value (> 2e 2 /h) at T = 0 for all values of Z, the ZBP conductance decreases quickly to 2e 2 /h or below already at rather low temperatures. This is particularly true when the tunnel barrier is not particularly weak, but even for Z = 4, the ZBP in Fig. In order to characterize some intrinsic properties of the ABS-induced ZBP, e.g., the intrinsic broadening width and the intrinsic peak value, we now focus on the zero-temperature ABS-induced ZBP. Here we obtain the width and peak value of the ZBP by fitting the zerotemperature conductance to the Lorentzian function: with two fitting parameters, i.e., the peak value G max at zero-bias voltage and half width at half maximum Γ. We note that in contrast to the MZM case where G max = 2e 2 /h, here the ABS-induced ZBP has a nonuniversal peak value G max which decreases with increasing barrier strength Z. The fitting result is shown in Fig. T /∆ 0 = 0.5 the peak value of the raw data. Thus, the Lorentzian fits lead to ABS ZBPs, which are very similar to the MZM ZBPs. Following the picture of two Majoranas forming the ABS, the combined peak is the sum of a wide peak and a thin peak, the wide one has a larger weight since it arises from the MZM located nearer to the NS junction. The Lorentzian function is thus mainly fitting the ZBP from the MZM, which couples more strongly to the lead, while ignoring the small peak on top of the wide ZBP, which is why the peak value of the fitting function is always smaller than the peak value of the raw data. This also has the immediate experimental implication that the thin and weak sharp peak may simply not be observable in the experimental tunneling data at finite temperature and finite energy resolution. Third, Figs. In Fig. We now investigate how the width of the ABS-induced ZBP gets broadened by temperature (i.e., in addition to the intrinsic T = 0 width Γ arising from tunnel coupling). As discussed in the previous section, finite temperature is introduced by the convolution between the zerotemperature differential conductance and the derivative of the Fermi-Dirac distribution [Eq. ( We now examine the scaling behavior of the ABSinduced ZBP. In particular, we study how the zero-bias conductance G S depends on the temperature and broadening. We also investigate whether G S could be written as a scaling function of a single variable T /Γ as implied by Eq. ( Figure We have described in depth the properties of the zerobias tunneling conductance for Majorana and Andreev bound states in proximity-induced superconducting semiconductor nanowires in the presence of spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman splitting, focusing on the temperature and tunnel coupling dependence of the subgap conductance. We establish that the general qualitative dependence of the zero-bias peak on temperature and tunnel coupling is similar for ABS and MZM, thus making a distinction between the two difficult based just on tunneling spectroscopy. In particular, both ZBPs show approximate scaling of the ZBP conductance at low temperature and tunnel coupling, but there is no scaling for larger temperature and tunnel coupling (and indeed, there is no reason to expect such a scaling). The MZM-induced ZBP has a quantized value 2e 2 /h at T = 0 for all tunnel couplings whereas the ABS-induced ZBP could have a conductance up to 4e 2 /h since the ABS is composed essentially of two strongly overlapping MZMs. Although this zero-temperature theoretical distinction is crucial between the trivial ABS and the topological MZM ZBPs, at finite temperature this distinction may be without any difference since the ABS ZBP quickly decreases to 2e 2 /h or below with increasing temperature, and obviously a strict zero-temperature experiment is impossible. In this context, it is crucial to emphasize that if a ZBP is manifesting a conductance value 2e 2 /h or above already at a finite temperature, it is doubtful that the corresponding origin could be the MZM (unless multichannel effects are substantial) simply because the likely zero-temperature extrapolated value of the corresponding conductance is likely to be > 2e 2 /h, making it an ABS candidate. The T dependence of the ZBP height is weak only for T Γ ∆, a regime almost never reached experimentally. We do find the interesting property that the MZM ZBP is more likely to reflect the 2e 2 /h value even at finite temperatures at stronger tunnel coupling, where the overall background conductance is high and the ratio of the peak conductance to the valley conductance is rather small. This should be contrasted with the weak-tunneling behavior, where the ZBP is very sharp with low background conductance (so that the peak to valley subgap conductance ratio is large), but in this case the corresponding ZBP conductance is likely to be much lower than 2e 2 /h even at rather low temperature. Thus, the ZBP conductance of ∼ 2e 2 /h may occur experimentally with a rather small peak over a broad background (i.e., strong tunneling) whereas a sharp ZBP with a pronounced peak over the background may reflect a lowconductance value (i.e., weak tunneling). Unfortunately, the ABS ZBP also reflects similar behavior since this behavior is rather generic for a peak with a finite width convoluted by the derivative of a Fermi function. Multichannel effects further complicate the comparison of conductances between theory and experiment. Indeed, the theoretical prediction of quantized conductance into an MZM is only valid for a single-channel or two-channel quantum point contact Many of the above ZBP properties have recently been observed experimentally We mention that dissipation has been left out of the theory whereas experimental systems are expected to have some dissipative broadening from unknown sources as discussed in Sec. I and in Refs. One serious problem in quantitatively comparing experiment and theory in Majorana nanowires is that many relevant parameters are unknown in the experiment. In fact, except for temperature (even ignoring the complication of the possibly unknown electron temperature) and the measured tunnel conductance itself, no other theoretical parameters of even the minimal model [Eq. (2b)] are really experimentally known. Even quantities as basic as the spin splitting (V Z ), the induced gap (∆), and the spin-orbit coupling (α) are unknown experimentally in the actual experimental structures. The tunnel transmission parameter (Z) is certainly unknown, and one could even question whether a single tunneling parameter is adequate in describing the tunnel barrier (as in the minimal model). The ZBP width or broadening is known at finite temperature, but its zero-temperature value (i.e., Γ, which is a key parameter in the theory describing the tunnel coupling itself) is unknown experimentally. One can measure the experimental ZBP FWHM at finite temperature, and obtain Γ by an extrapolation to T = 0, but the situation is subtle. In particular, the experimental scaling behavior in Ref. It may still be possible to distinguish ABS and MZM from ZBP behavior provided a great deal of data are available for many different sets of values of T , Z, V Z , and ∆ 0 in many different wires of various lengths through very careful quantitative analysis of the type we have done in the current theoretical work where the nature of the ZBP (i.e., ABS or MZM) is known by construction. However, such extensive data over large parameter sets are currently unavailable for drawing any firm conclusion. We believe that many more results are necessary, particularly in wires with much larger induced gap so that the dimensionless low-temperature regime (with very small temperature/gap values) can be explored quantitatively, before we can reach a firm conclusion on the nature of the ZBP which is ubiquitous in Majorana nanowires. Eliminating disorder from the wires has been a tremendous experimental accomplishment over the last five years, and hopefully, achieving large induced proximity gap even at relatively high applied magnetic field will be the next key accomplishment in order to make progress in the field. We believe that any eventual topological quantum computation carried out using Majorana nanowires necessitates substantial more materials science development leading to much larger robust induced superconducting gap in the nanowire at high applied magnetic field.