We report the effect of Se substitution on the crystal structure and superconductivity of BiCh2-based (Ch: S, Se) layered compounds Eu0.5Ce0.5FBiS2xSex (x = 01). Crystal structure analysis showed that both lattice constants, a and c, increased with increasing x, which is different from the related La-doped system, such as Eu0.5La0.5FBiS2xSex. This is due to Se substitution for both in-plane and out-of-plane Ch sites in the present Cedoped system. Zero resistivity was observed for x = 0.21 above 2 K. Superconducting properties of Eu0.5Ce0.5FBiS2xSex was investigated by magnetic susceptibility, and the highest superconducting transition temperature of 3.5 K was obtained for x = 0.6 with a large shielding volume fraction. The emergence of bulk superconductivity and metallic conductivity can be qualitatively described in terms of increased in-plane chemical pressure effect. A magnetic anomaly below 8 K, probably because of ferromagnetic order of magnetic moment of Ce 3+ ions, coexists with bulk superconductivity in BiCh2 layer. Since the effect of Se substitution on the magnetic transition temperature is ignorable, we suggest that the coupling between the magnetic order at the (Eu,Ce)F layer and superconductivity at the Bi(S,Se)2 layer is weak. There has been considerable interest in the study of BiCh2-based (Ch: S, Se) layered compounds because of their unique functionalities including superconductivity, thermoelectricity, and so forth As an example, LaOBiS2 is a semiconductor with a band gap value of 1 eV, and superconductivity is induced by F  -substitution for O 2 . This result suggests the conventional scenario that the emergence of superconductivity owing to electron carrier doping into the conduction band consisting of hybridized Bi 6p and Ch p orbitals Although electron carrier doping is believed to be essential to induce superconductivity in BiCh2-based compounds, optimally doped LaO0.5F0.5BiS2 only shows weak (filamentary) superconductivity rather than bulk superconductivity. To induce bulk superconductivity in this system, external pressure effects [1017] and/or element substitution at the La or S sites [1821], are available. These characteristics have been qualitatively described by sufficient orbital overlapping between in-plane Bi and Ch as a results of in-plane chemical pressure effect In the present study, we report the synthesis, crystal structure analyses, and superconducting properties of Eu0.5Ce0.5FBiS2xSex. It has been reported that Eu0.5Ce0.5FBiS2 showed the coexistence of superconductivity and magnetic order of RE moment We have demonstrated Se substitution successfully induced bulk superconductivity in Eu0.5Ce0.5FBiS2xSex, which was qualitatively described by an increase of in-plane chemical pressure, as the case of La-doped Eu0.5La0.5FBiS2xSex. Although magnetic order due to the Ce 3+ moment coexisted with superconductivity in BiCh2 layer, it was suggested that coupling between them was ignorable. Polycrystalline samples of Eu0.5Ce0.5FBiS2xSex with x = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1 were prepared by solid-state reaction of EuS (99.9%), Ce2S3 (99.9%), BiF3 (99.9%), Bi (99.999%), S (99.99%), and Se (99.999%). Stoichiometric mixtures of these starting materials were pressed into pellets and sealed in a sealed quartz tube. The heating temperature was optimized for each composition: the samples were heated for 20 h at 780 C for x = 0, at 700 C for x = 0.2 and 0.4, at 650 C for x = 0.6 and 0.8, and at 600 C for x = 1. The obtained product was ground, mixed, pelletized, and heated again under the same heating condition. The obtained samples were characterized using powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a CuK radiation (Rigaku, Miniflex 600 equipped with a D/teX Ultra detector). The XRD patterns were analyzed using the Rietveld method using RIETAN-FP code Oe after both zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC). The T dependence of electrical resistivity (ρ) was measured using a four-terminal method. Figure However, both of lattice constants a and c increase with increasing x, as shown in Figure As previously demonstrated, the in-plane chemical pressure (CP) of BiCh2-based layered compounds can be qualitatively described with the following equation: CP = (RBi + RCh1)/(BiCh1 bond distance), where RBi is obtained from the average BiS bond distance for LaO0.54F0.46BiS2 Figure Figure On the superconducting characteristics, the onset of the superconducting transition was evaluated to be Tc onset = 2.3 K for x = 0, although zero resistivity was not obtained down to 1.9 K, as shown in Figure A superconductivity phase diagram established using T and T plots are depicted in Fig. We have synthesized a new BiCh2-based superconductor system, Eu0.5Ce0.5FBiS2xSex. Polycrystalline samples for x = 01 were prepared by a solid-state reaction. Both lattice constants, a and c, monotonically increases with increasing x. This linear relationship between lattice constants and Se content is different from that of related compounds, such as Eu0.5La0.5FBiS2xSex. Crystal structure analysis by the Rietveld refinement showed that this is due to the indistinct site selectivity of Se substitution; namely, Se occupied both of in-plane Ch1 and out-of-plane Ch2 sites. The sample with x = 0 exhibited the semiconducting-like T and weak superconducting signals. Metallic-like conductivity and bulk superconductivity were induced by Se substitution. Such characteristics were qualitatively described in terms of increased in-plane CP, as in the case of related compounds. The highest Tc was 3.5 K for x = 0.6, and superconductivity phase diagram was established. Magnetic transition, probably due to ferromagnetic order of magnetic moment of Ce 3+ , coexists with bulk superconductivity in BiCh2 layer. The coupling between superconductivity and magnetic order is ignorable in Eu0.5Ce0.5FBiS2xSex. 