Recently, there have been increasingly hot debates on whether there exists a quantum spin liquid in the Kitaev honeycomb magnet α-RuCl3 in high magnetic field. To investigate this issue, we perform the ultralow-temperature thermal conductivity measurements on the single crystals of α-RuCl3 down to 80 mK and up to 9 T. Our experiments clearly show a field-induced phase transition occurring at Hc ≈ 7.5 T, above which the zigzag magnetic order is completely suppressed. The minimum of thermal conductivity at 7.5 T is attributed to the strong scattering of phonons by the magnetic fluctuations. Most importantly, above 7.5 T, we do not observe any significant contribution of thermal conductivity from gapless magnetic excitations, which puts a strong constraint on the nature of the high-field phase of α-RuCl3. In transition-metal compounds with partially filled 4d or 5d shells, various novel quantum phases of matter can be brought onto stage, depending on the delicate balance (or the disruption of it) among crystal-field effects, spinorbit coupling (SOC), and electronic correlation Despite its much smaller SOC strength (λ ∼ 0.1 eV) compared to iridates, α-RuCl 3 is a promising candidate for the realization of Kitaev physics and searching for a QSL state therein To access the potential QSL state in α-RuCl 3 , a reasonable practice would be to suppress the magnetic order by external tuning parameters, such as the magnetic field or pressure. When applying a magnetic field in the honeycomb plane, the zigzag magnetic order is fully suppressed by H c (∼ 8 T, the value varies slightly in different studies), and the high-field phase after the destruction of the zigzag magnetic order has become the research hotspot recently Thermal conductivity measurements have proven to be a powerful technique in probing the elementary excitations in QSL candidates In this Letter, we report the ultralow-temperature thermal conductivity measurements on a high-quality α-RuCl 3 single crystal down to 80 mK. A field-induced phase transition is clearly resolved at H c ∼ 7.5 T. More-over, in the high-field phase of α-RuCl 3 , no significant contribution to κ from magnetic excitations is detected. Instead, we find that magnetic excitations only affect the phonon thermal conductivity by scattering. We will discuss the implications of our findings on the high-field phase of α-RuCl 3 . Single crystals of α-RuCl 3 were grown by the chemical vapor transport method Figure Figure In Fig. Indeed, a field-induced gapped QSL state has been predicted in α-RuCl 3 in the field range of 8 ∼ 15 T by exact diagonalization and density-matrix renormalization group calculations for extended Kitaev-Heisenberg spin Hamiltonians We would like to discuss the gap amplitude near the critical field H c . The results of a previous thermal conductivity study and a specific heat study suggest that the loss of magnetic order at H c is accompanied by the closing of the magnetic excitation gap Note that there is also a more general theoretical scenario, ascribing the continuum observed by inelastic neutron scattering in α-RuCl 3 to incoherent excitations originating from strong magnetic anharmoniticity In summary, we have measured the thermal conductivity of a α-RuCl 3 single crystal down to 80 mK and up to 9 T. The field dependence of the thermal conductivity exhibits a minimum around 7.5 T, where the fieldinduced phase transition takes place. The extrapolation of the thermal conductivity down to zero temperature reveals no significant contribution from itinerant gapless fermionic excitations in the high-field phase. These results impose clear constraints on the nature of the highfield phase and are also expected to help distinguish between theoretical scenarios proposed recently. † Y. J. Yu, Y. Xu, and K. J. Ran contributed equally to this work.‡ E-mail: jwen@nju.edu.cn * E-mail: shiyan li@fudan.edu.cn