Superconducting bulk (RE)Ba 2 Cu 3 O 7-x materials (RE -rare earth elements) have been successfully used to generate magnetic flux densities in excess of 17 T. This work investigates an alternative approach by trapping flux in stacks of second generation high temperature superconducting tape from several manufacturers using field cooling and pulsed field magnetisation techniques. Flux densities of up to 13.4 T were trapped by field cooling at ~5 K between two 12 mm square stacks, an improvement of 70% over previous value achieved in an HTS tape stack. The trapped flux approaches the record values in (RE)BCO bulks and reflects the rapid developments still being made in the HTS tape performance. The power of electric motors and generators is linearly dependant on the magnetic flux density in the air gap between the rotor and the stator. Hence, by increasing the flux density beyond the values achievable by conventional ferromagnetic materials (1.5 T), one can increase both the power and power density of electric machine. The currently held record for the highest trapped flux density in a bulk (RE)BCO superconductor is an impressive 17.6 T by Durrell et al. Three sets of stacked tape samples were tested from Fujikura, SuperOx and SuperPower. Tape from Fujikura and Superpower were formed into stacks as loose layers compressed in the sample holder, whereas SuperOx tape was soldered into self-supporting stacks as described in The Field cooling experiments were performed in a 15 T Oxford Instruments superconducting magnet with a 25 mm diameter bore. A custom sample holder (see Figure The field cooling procedure involved heating the sample to above 100 K to ensure that the sample is no longer superconductive and applying magnetic field (larger than the expected trapped field). The sample was then cooled to the desired temperature, and the external magnetic field was ramped down to zero at a rate in the range of from 150 to 300 mT/min. The trapped flux density measurements were then taken 5 min after the end of the field cooling procedure (end of field ramp). Pulsed field magnetisation experiments were also performed for the three different types of tape. The purpose-developed magnetisation system used is described in detail in The results for the field cooling of HTS tape stacks from the three manufacturers are summarised in Figure It is evident that the extremely high engineering critical current density of SuperPower 35 μm thick tape gives a significantly higher trapped flux density values. In fact, an engineering critical current density of 107.1 kA cm -2 at 77 K and self-field is similar to values typical of bulk superconductors, even though the volume fraction of the superconductor is less than 6%. It is interesting to note that the trapped flux density is almost linear with temperature regardless of the manufacturer or the manufacturing process. The trapped field values for any temperature scale quite well with J e at 77 K and self-field (after correction by a factor of 1.2 for Fujikura tape due to smaller width). Another point to make is that the trapped field is limited by the critical current and not by mechanical properties or flux jumps down to liquid helium temperatures, unlike bulk superconductors The metallic substrate and highly thermally conductive stabilisation layers allowed for much faster field ramp rates than the typically used 1-2 T/h for bulk superconductors, and in the temperature range where the heat capacities are even lower. Even though a flux avalanche was observed near liquid helium temperatures, relatively fast ramp rates of 5-15 T/hr could be used for Fujikura and SuperOx samples and 10-15 T/hr for the SuperPower sample across all temperature ranges. The trapped flux density of 13.4 T at 5.1 K or 10 T at 20 K is still lower than the record trapped field for bulk superconductors, however it is worth noting that only a fraction of identically prepared bulk (RE)BCO samples can sustain flux densities of more than 10 T due to cracks present within the sample, even when external reinforcement is applied Figure The pulsed field magnetisation results for the three stacks are summarised in Figure The temperature rise is more evident at lower temperatures due to lower heat capacities at low temperatures and higher critical current. For the same reason, samples with higher J e , will exhibit more heating. Therefore, increasing J e does eventually lead to diminishing results for trapped field using PFM. Giant flux jumps beneficial to magnetisation observed in high J e bulk samples Field cooling of three different types of tape was performed, showing the current state of the art for trapped field in trapped field magnets made from 2G HTS coated conductor. A maximum field of 13.4 T was achieved at ~5 K in the best sample with the highest engineering critical current density J e . This is 70% higher than the previously reported No mechanical degradation was observed during multiple magnetic field ramps and temperature cycles. High thermal stability was shown by fast field ramps at very low temperatures. Unlike for bulk (RE)BCO, the performance is limited by the critical current, or rather the engineering critical current of the stack, hence the following approaches to further increase the flux density values are suggested: • Increasing the critical current of each tape layer -larger J c ; • Decreasing the overall tape thickness (most likely the substrate thickness) -larger J e ; • Increasing the width of the tape, and hence the size of the stack. On the other hand, for pulsed field magnetisation, the increase in J e does not give an equivalent increase in performance (compared to field cooling) at low temperatures, due to the increase in from rapid flux motion during PFM. Therefore, a reduction in temperature rise is the key point for increasing the trapped field. This can be achieved by extracting the heat more quickly by sinking the heat using thermally conductive materials, allowing more time for heat dissipation by extending the duration of the pulse itself, and optimising the applied pulse sequence. Alternatively, by tailoring the applied pulse shape flux jump assisted magnetisation can be investigated, which showed great results in PFM for bulk (RE)BCO 