We report the single crystal growth and characterization of the highest T c ironbased superconductor SmFeAsO 1-x H x . Some sub-millimeter-sized crystals were grown using the mixture flux of Na 3 As + 3NaH + As at 3.0 GPa and 1473 K. The chemical composition analyses confirmed 10% substitution of hydrogen for the oxygen site (x = 0.10), however, the structural analyses suggested that the obtained crystal forms a multidomain structure. By using the FIB technique we fabricated the single domain SmFeAsO 0.9 H 0.10 crystal with the T c of 42 K, and revealed the metallic conduction in in-plane (ρ ab ), while semiconducting in the out-of-plane (ρ c ). From the in-plane Hall coefficient measurements, we confirmed that the dominant carrier of SmFeAsO 0.9 H 0.10 crystal is an electron, and the hydride ion occupied at the site of the oxygen ion effectively supplies a carrier electron per iron following the equation: O 2-→ H -+ e -. Since the discovery of high critical temperature (T c ) superconductivity at 26 K in LaFeAsO 1-x F x at the end of February 2008, iron-based superconductors have attracted widespread research interests across fields of engineering and basic science, due to their promising characteristics for practical applications and puzzling electronic properties Particularly, the iron pnictides family consists of various structures by inserting alkali metal cation, alkaline earth metal cation, positively charged PbO-type layer, or perovskite-type block between the FePn layers to compensate the neutrality. A prototypical REFeAsO-type (RE = rare earth) material, abbreviated as 1111-type, crystallizes in a tetragonal lattice at room temperature (space group P4/nmm, a ~ 4 Å, c ~ 8-9 Å, and Z = 2), in which the conducting [FeAs] -and insulating [REO] + layers stack alternately along the crystallographic c axis (Fig. Carrier doping mode in 1111-type is categorized into four from a view of doping site and carrier polarity. Substitution for the site in conducting layer is called "direct doping", while that in insulating layer is called "indirect doping". Among those methods, the indirect electron doping has intensively been studied because it induces higher T c than the other methods due to less influence of structural randomness on the conduction plane, and the optimum T c exceeding 50 K in late RE-substituted 1111-type records the highest value in each of iron-based superconductors At the early stage, fluoride ion substation for the oxygen site (O 2-→ F -+ e -) was the standard way of the indirect electron-doping inducing superconductivity in the 1111-type compounds Moreover, density functional theory calculations and the Hall coefficient measurement confirm that the hydrogen in the oxygen site behaves as an anion, and supply an electron to the Fermi level composed mainly of Fe-3d orbitals Despite of these recent progress in the synthetic methods and the attracting physical properties, the single crystal growth of 1111-type compounds has been a difficult task because of a lack of effective flux and their severe synthesis condition requiring high temperature. Karpinski's group have adopted a high temperature and high pressure technique and succeeded in the growth of fluorine substituted 1111-type single crystals using NaCl/KCl as a flux Here, we report the flux growth and the characterization of crystal structure and physical properties of single crystals of the highest T c superconductor SmFeAsO 1-x H x . We undertake factors controlling the crystal growth, including the kinds of flux, synthesis pressure and starting chemical composition, and report the results of resistivity, susceptibility, and Hall coefficient measurements on the single domain crystal fabricated by the focused ion beam (FIB) technique. Single crystals of SmFeAsO 1-x H x were grown using a mixture of precursors, Sm 2 O 3 , SmH 2 , SmAs, Fe 2 As, and FeAs, according to the equation The precursors were grounded with Na 3 As, 3NaH + As, or their mixture flux in a dehydrated silica glass agate mortar for 1 hour inside an Ar-filled glovebox. The mixture was precompressed with a load of 4 MPa to form a pellet (6 mm in diameter and 2.5 mm in thickness) and afterward loaded into the sample units for the high pressure synthesis. and 1d provide the schematic illustration of the sample cell assembly for belttype high pressure apparatus used in this study. The sample cell is mainly composed of 90wt%-NaCl and 10wt%-ZrO 2 . The graphite sleeve is used as a resistance heater touching two Mo discs for electric lead below and above the cell. The boron nitride (BN) sleeve of 6 mm (7 mm) in inner (outer) diameter and 8 mm in length is inserted to the NaCl (+10wt%ZrO 2 ) tube, and the sample pellet is placed inside the BN crucible. For the single crystal growth using the Na 3 As flux and the synthesis of polycrystalline samples, two pellet (6 mm in diameter and 2 mm in thickness) of mixture of NaBH 4 and Ca(OH) 2 with a molar ratio of 1 : 2 was placed below and above the sample pellet (Fig. For the crystal growth using the 3NaH + As or Na 3 As + 3NaH + As flux, we adopted a more simple assembly shown in Fig. The temperature at the sample position was estimated by the predetermined relation between applied electrical power and temperature measured by Pt-PtRh thermocouples at 2.5 and 5.5 GPa, while the pressure calibration was conducted against the well-known phase transitions of Bi (I-II) at 2.55, Bi (II-III) at 2.69, and Ba (II-III) at 5.5 GPa at room temperature The chemical compositions of the SmFeAsO 1-x H x , except for hydrogen, were measured by an electron probe micro-analyzer (EPMA, JEOL JXA-8530F), while the hydrogen content was determined by the thermal gas desorption spectrometry (TDS, ESCO TDS-1400TV). The quantitative analyses using EPMA were conducted on the single crystal using the atomic number, absorption, and fluorescence (ZAF) correction method with the standard samples of SmP 5 O 14 for Sm, elemental Fe for Fe, LaAs for As, and Gd 3 Ga 5 O 12 for O. The TDS were performed on the grounded crystals picked up from each batch. For the estimation of hydrogen contents, we used a standard sample that implants 1.06 × 10 17 hydrogen ion into silicon wafer. The crystalline phase and the quality of the samples were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker AXS, D8 ADVANCE-TXS, source: CuKα radiated from a rotational anode, θ-2θ scan Bragg-Brentano geometry). The fluctuations of the crystallite orientations were characterized using the rocking curves of out-of-plane (2θ-fized ω scans) diffractions with a highresolution XRD apparatus (RIGAKU, SmartLab, source: CuKα 1 monochromated by Ge(220)). The in-plane orientation of the films was investigated using a pole figure geometry by the high-resolution XRD apparatus. Transport measurements were performed using a physical properties measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design, Inc.). The electrical resistivity, ρ, and Hall effect were measured using a four-probe and a five-probe techniques, respectively, in which the fifth voltage lead for the Hall measurement is attached in parallel to one of the other voltage leads to null an artificial voltage depending on the sample resistance and/or magnitude of the electric bias field. Conducting leads were deposited by FIB (JEOL JEM-9320FIB); W(CO) 6 gas was injected from the needle and adsorbs onto the sample surface. The Ga + beam decomposes the gas, which leaves a deposited layer of W, while the CO is removed through the vacuum system. Zero field cooling susceptibility was measured on the grounded crystals under the magnetic field (H) of 10 Oe using a magnetic properties measurement system (MPMS, Quantum Design, Inc.). Table Based on these results, we concluded that the Na 3 As flux is more efficient in obtaining bigger crystals, while it makes hydrogen doping more difficult. Thus, we tested the mixture flux (Na 3 As + 3NaH + As) to grow a higher-doped and larger-sized crystal (GC4). In Fig. Increasing the growth pressure from 3.0 GPa to 5.5 GPa promotes the hydrogen substitution to x = 0.16 for the condition using 3NaH + As flux (GC5) and 0.18 using the mixture flux (GC6), whereas it seems to interfere the growth of larger crystals with the lateral size over 100 μm (Fig. , where the y denotes the excess hydrogen contents (GC7-9). However, the actual hydrogen content in those crystals could not exceed the value of 0.18 obtained by the GC6. Next, we characterized the structure of the ~ 100 μm crystal obtained by GC4 by the XRD measurements. The out-of-plane θ-2θ scan clearly detected the 00l series diffractions (l = 3, 4, 5, and 6) (Fig. Since the grain boundary in crystal scatters the conducting electrons and inhibits to see the intrinsic transport properties, we employed the FIB technique to fabricate a single domain sample for transport measurements We analyzed the temperature dependence of ρ ab by fitting to a power law function: ρ ab = ρ ab 0 + AT n . The transport properties above T c of high-temperature superconductors have been intensively studied since the discovery of copper oxide superconductors The Hall coefficient, R H , of SmFeAsO 0.90 H 0.10 shows a negative sign above the T c , indicating that the dominant carrier in the normal conducting state is electron (Fig. the n e and μ e are the carrier concentration and mobility of electron, respectively, while the n h and μ h are those of hole, respectively. If we also adopt the high field limit condition, i. e., H → ∞ which is applicable for the R H of the polycrystalline LaFeAsO 1-x H x , the expression is reduced to . (2) lim In Fig. We applied the high-pressure synthesis method and carried out a systematic investigation of the factors controlling the crystal growth of the highest T c superconductor SmFeAsO 1-x H x , including the kinds of flux, synthesis pressure, and batch compositions of the starting material. The Na 3 As + 3NaH + As metal hydride fluxgrowth yielded sub-millimeter-sized crystals that can be readily separated. In comparison with the previous works using NaCl/KCl or NaAs/KAs flux, this mixture flux much efficiently grew the crystal, namely, very rapidly for just a half hour. The chemical composition analyses confirmed 10% substitution of hydrogen for the oxygen site (x = 0.10), however, the structural analyses suggested that the obtained crystal forms a multidomain structure. By using the FIB technique we fabricated the single domain SmFeAsO 0.9 H 0.10 crystal with the T c of 42 K, consistent with 43 K confirmed by the susceptibility measurement. The in-plane resistivity (ρ ab ) was metallic, while the outof-plane (ρ c ) semiconducting. The larger resistivity anisotropy (ρ c /ρ ab ) of 7.8 was obtained at T = 50 K compared with those of the 11 