Quantum anomalous Hall insulator/superconductor heterostructures emerged as a competitive platform to realize topological superconductors with chiral Majorana edge states as shown in recent experiments [He et al. Science 357, 294 (2017)]. However, chiral Majorana modes, being extended, cannot be used for topological quantum computation. In this work, we show that quasione-dimensional quantum anomalous Hall structures exhibit a large topological regime (much larger than the two-dimensional case) which supports localized Majorana zero energy modes. The non-Abelian properties of a cross-shaped quantum anomalous Hall junction is shown explicitly by timedependent calculations. We believe that networks of such quasi-one-dimensional quantum anomalous Hall systems can be easily fabricated for scalable topological quantum computation. Introduction. The search for Majorana zero energy modes which obey non-Abelian statistics has been one of the most exciting areas of research in the past decade A recent paper reported the realization of the effective p + ip wave superconductor with chiral Majorana edge states in quantum anomalous Hall/superconductor (QAH/SC) heterostructures, base on the observation of half-quantized conductance plateaus in two-terminal transport experiments In the following sections, we first demonstrate that quasi-1D QAH systems in proximity to an s-wave superconductor exhibits a large, experimentally accessible, topological regime, which supports localized Majorana zero energy modes. When the quasi-1D QAH system is narrow compared with the localization length of the edge modes, the two chiral edge modes of QAH are coupled to form a single helical conducting channel as shown in Fig. Model Hamiltonian. The effective Hamiltonian of QAH insulator can be written as Here, Ψ k = [ψ kt↑ , ψ kt↓ , ψ kb↑ , ψ kb↓ ] is a four-component electron operator with the momentum k, where t (b) denotes the top (bottom) layer of topological insulator surface and ↑ (↓) denotes the spin index. The Pauli matrices σ x,y,z operate on spin space and τ x,z operate on the layer index. Fermi velocity of the surface states is denoted by x + k 2 y ) describes the effective coupling between the top and bottom layers. M z denotes spin splitting in z-direction due to the magnetic doping in topological insulator and external magnetic field. To be specific, we set m 0 = -5meV and m 1 = 15eV• Å2 As described earlier, when the sample is narrowed down to a quasi-1D limit ( when the width of the sample is comparable to the localization length of the chiral edge modes), as shown in Fig. Localized Majorana modes in QAH/SC heterostructures. In proximity to an s-wave superconductor, the quasi-1D QAH/SC heterostructure Hamiltonian can be expressed as where Φ kx,ny =[Ψ kx,ny ,Ψ † -kx,ny ] T , and Ψ † kx,ny creates an electron at n y site with momentum k x . ∆ is the paring potential on the top surface due to the superconductor and I is the unit matrix. μ is chemical potential. m x = m 0 -m 1 (k 2 x + 2/a 2 ) and the size L y = N y a with lattice constant a. s x,y,z are Pauli matrices defined on particlehole space. The Hamiltonian respects a particle-hole symmetry PH BdG (k x )P -1 = -H BdG (-k x ) and a timereversal like symmetry T H BdG (k x )T -1 = H BdG (-k x ) with P = s x K and T = UK. Here K is the complex conjugate operator and the N y × N y anti-diagonal matrix U ij = δ i+j,Ny+1 is defined in real space with Kronecker delta δ i,j . As a consequence, H BdG satisfies a chiral symmetry CH BdG (k x )C -1 = H BdG (-k x ), and the system is in BDI class with T 2 = 1 and P 2 = 1, where C = PT = Us x . Therefore, the topological properties of the system is characterized by a topological invariant N BDI for BDI class Hamiltonians In Fig. To detect the Majorana modes, one may attach a macroscopic lead to the QAH system as shown in Fig. Non-Abelian braiding dynamics in QAH structure On the basis of the large topological region in the QAH structure above, we suggest to use a cross-shaped junction of the QAH/SC for braiding Majorana modes The effective Hamiltonian of the QAH cross-shaped junction can be written as where 1,2 are the coupling energies of Majorana modes. Here we ignore γ 5 and γ 6 in Hamiltonian, since they are well separated. Now, the system contains two fermionic modes c 1 = γ 1 + iγ 2 and c 2 = γ 4 + iγ 3 , and the low energy Hilbert space contains four qubit states |n 1 n 2 with particle number n 1,2 = 0, 1. The ground state is defined as c 1 |00 = c 2 |00 = 0. The braiding operator B(γ 2 , γ 3 ) = exp( π 4 γ 3 γ 2 ), transforms the Majorana modes as γ 2 → γ 3 and γ 3 → -γ 2 In the time-dependent simulations using a realistic Hamiltonian, γ 2 and γ 3 can be exchanged by taking three steps: first, move γ 2 upward by turning off G1 and then turning on G2; second, move γ 3 to the left by turning off G3 and then turning on G1; finally, move γ 2 to the right by turning off G2 and then turning on G3. Exchanging γ 2 and γ 3 twice yields a full braiding process. In Fig. Conclusion and discussion. In conclusion, we have shown that quasi-1D QAH/SC heterostructures exhibits a large, experimentally accessible, topological regime which supports localized Majorana zero energy modes. This quasi-1D topological superconductor phase does not require the superconducting paring gap ∆ to be larger than the QAH gap, as in the case of chiral superconducting phase in the QAH/SC heterostructures 