Superconducting bulks, acting as high-field permanent magnets, are promising for many applications. An important effect in bulk permanent magnets is crossed-field demagnetization, which can reduce the magnetic field in superconductors due to relatively small transverse fields. Crossedfield demagnetization has not been studied in sample shapes such as rectangular prisms or cubes. This contribution presents a study based on both 3D numerical modelling and experiments. We study a cubic Gd-Ba-Cu-O bulk superconductor sample of size 6 mm magnetized by field cooling in an external field of around 1.3 T, which is later submitted to crossed-field magnetic fields of up to 164 mT. Modelling results agree with experiments, except at transverse fields 50% or above of the initial trapped field. The current paths present a strong 3D nature. For instance, at the mid-plane perpendicular to the initial magnetizing field, the current density in this direction changes smoothly from the critical magnitude, Jc, at the lateral sides to zero at a certain penetration depth. This indicates a rotation of the current density with magnitude Jc, and hence force free effects like flux cutting are expected to play a significant role. Superconducting bulks are promising for permanent magnets. Bulks can trap higher magnetic field compared to ferromagnetic permanent magnets. However, they need to be cooled down below a certain critical temperature, T c . The world record of the trapped field is 17.6 T at 26 K There are many 3D modelling methods for superconductors, such as Finite Element Methods, FEM, and variational methods. There are several formulations of FEM like the H-formulation There are several studies of cross-field demagnetization. Those involve 2D FEM modelling using the H formulation and experiments Usually grown samples are cylindrical pellets. This motivated that all published works on 3D modelling and most experimental works are for this shape. However, many applications require to cut the original pellets into other shapes, such as rectangular prisms or cubes. At present, demagnetization by cross-field of a cubic sample is not well known. In this article, we study demagnetization of cubic bulks by experiment and by 3D modelling based on MEMEP 3D and H formulation FEM. In this study we measured demagnetization of superconducting cubic bulks due to applied magnetic fields transverse to the trapped field. A 10wt% Agcontaining GdBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ superconducting pellet was fabricated using the top- seeded melt growth (TSMG) process • The sample at room temperature, is inserted to the split coil electromagnet, which is ramped up to 1.3 T over 10 s. • The sample is cooled down by liquid nitrogen over 15 minutes. • The magnetic field is ramped down in the electromagnet over 100 s with rate 13 mT/s. The sample is magnetized parallel to the c-axis. After magnetization and a relaxation time of 900 s, we continue with crossfield demagnetization as follows: • We move the sample from the split coil electromagnet to the transverse applied field coil with maximum applied field B ax,max ∼200 mT. • We apply ripples of the magnetic field, B ax , with different amplitudes, according to the trapped field B t as B ax = B t /2, B t /4, B t /8 and frequencies 0.1 and 1 Hz. Where B t is trapped field measured 100 μm above the top centre of the sample. • We measure the demagnetization for another 10 minutes. The waveform of the applied magnetic fields is shown in Fig. We used a lock-in amplifier to generate the AC signal and measured the voltage across the 0.5 mOhm resistor. The generated signal was amplified with two amplifiers to generate an AC current, which was passed through the coil to generate the AC field. The trapped field was measured by a Hall probe array of 7 sensors Multi-7U For both modelling methods, MEMEP and FEM, we use the parameters listed in Table being more realistic than the critical state model, and E c is the critical electric field and J c is the critical current density. The model assumes constant J c . The model is based on the Minimum Electro-Magnetic Entropy Production in 3D The finite element method is based on 3D H-formulation 4 Results and discussion The 6 mm cubic sample was magnetized as described in Section II. The trapped field B t was 0.27 T. Demagnetization was done by ripples along the X axis (Fig. The trapped field at the centre of the top surface of the cube is shown in Fig. There is phase shift (180 • ) of trapped field for all measurements between the leftmost (1st) and rightmost (7th) Hall probe sensors. The most significant case is shown in Fig. The calculated trapped field B t at the centre of the plane 100 μm above the sample and the average magnetization inside the sample during the entire demagnetization process is shown in Fig. The usual peak of the trapped field profile after relaxation is on Fig. Next, we applied ripples parallel to the x axis, which demagnetized the sample and caused a decrease in the trapped field (Fig. The explanation of the asymmetry is in the shape of the current path. The screening current from the ripples changed the J y component into S-shape current fronts [Fig. Next, we compare measurements, MEMEP and FEM (see Fig. This article analyzed the demagnetization of GdBCO cubic bulks by transverse AC fields. The trapped field of a 6 mm sample was measured and calculated by two numerical methods, MEMEP 3D and FEM. The measurements confirm the asymmetry of the trapped field during the ripples with different amplitudes. The asymmetry comes from the 3D current paths inside the sample, which we explained by 3D model based on the MEMEP 3D variational method. The model showed reduction of |J| below J c in the places where ripples did not rewrite the previous state of current density. We saw as well sharp current fronts of current density after 10 cycles of ripples from positive to negative values of J. Both models show good consistency with each other. These models also agree with the measurements for low transverse fields, in spite of the simplification in the assumed superconductors properties (constant isotropic J c and n-value). Taking a more realistic n-value, the magnetic-field dependence of J c and anisotropy into account will provide better agreement also at high ripple transverse fields. The MEMEP 3D and FEM 3D models are useful tools to reveal all finite size effects of any model case and help explain 3D current paths.