We consider the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate, 1/T1T in superconductors with accidental nodes. We show that a Hebel-Slichter-like peak occurs even in the absence of an isotropic component of the superconducting gap. The logarithmic divergence found in clean, non-interacting models is controlled by both disorder and electron-electron interactions. However, for reasonable parameters, neither of these effects removes the peak altogether. Unconventional superconducting states are often defined by the breaking of an additional symmetry beyond global gauge invariance Starting from the SO(3)×SO( The symmetry of the superconducting order parameter provides important clues about the mechanism of superconductivity. As such the determination of the exact form of the superconducting gap is of significant importance. In practice, such a determination is not straightforward. The Josephson interference experiments responsible for unambiguously identifying the 'd x 2 -y 2wave' symmetry of the cuprates However, superconductivity is observed in many materials with rather low point group symmetries. Noncentrosymmetric materials are a prominent example. Here spin-orbit coupling can mix singlet and triplet superconducting states Emergent physics can also lower the symmetry of a material, for example, via electronic 'nematicity'. Indeed, in some cuprates, even if the crystal lattice is constrained to reduce this distortion, evidence of electronic nematicity has been observed in transport properties Superconductivity in materials such as the cuprate, organic, heavy fermion and iron-based families of unconventional superconductors, is widely believed to arise from electronic correlations. These unconventional superconductors share many similar properties, including complex phase diagrams with multiple phases and (spin singlet) superconductivity in particular proximity to some magnetically ordered phase. While the order parameter is believed to be anisotropic in the majority of these materials, disagreement remains over the exact form of the gap function in many materials. For example, in the organic superconductors, specific heat measurements have been taken to indicate nodeless ('s-wave') superconductivity There are important differences between accidental nodes and those required by symmetry. In the latter case, the location of the nodes is restricted to satisfy a symmetry constraint (for example, a reflection through the plane of the node line) and therefore the gap function transforms as a non-trivial representation of the point group. In the case of accidental nodes, the positioning of the nodes is unrestricted by symmetry requirements, and the gap function transforms as the trivial representation of the point group, the same representation to which an isotropic gap function belongs. This also allows the possibility of a mixed symmetry 's+d-wave' state Below we consider the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 in superconductors with accidental nodes. We show that in clean non-interacting models there is a logarithmic divergence 1/T 1 T as T → T c even if there is no isotropic component of the gap, ∆ k , i.e. d 3 k∆ k = 0, where T is the temperature and T c is the superconducting critical temperature. We show, numerically in a D 2h symmetric model -similar to those discussed above -that this divergence is controlled but not removed entirely by either disorder or electron-electron interactions, giving rise to a Hebel-Slichter-like peak. However, it shows some subtle differences from the true Hebel-Slichter peak both in its microscopic origin and in that it is not controlled by gap anisotropy. The spins of atomic nuclei relax by exchanging energy with their environment. In the case of a metal or superconductor this means the conduction electrons. Thus the relaxation rate of nuclei in an electronic environment is related to the transverse dynamic susceptibility of the quasiparticles, χ +-(q, ω) = χ +-(q, ω)+iχ +-(q, ω), via where γ e is the (electron) gyromagnetic ratio and A H (q) is the hyperfine coupling, which we approximate by a point contact interaction [A H (q) = A H ] for simplicity below. Neglecting vertex corrections, the dynamic susceptibility can be expressed in terms of the spectral density function, A k (E), where ξ k is the single particle dispersion, measured from the chemical potential, The coherence factors in the above expression arise naturally from the trace over Nambu spinors. From Eq. ( Inserting Eq. ( where Each term in Eq. ( The geometry of a system with accidental nodes. Arrows denote the gradients of the normal dispersion (vF ) and the gap function (v∆), in the local co-ordinate system defined at the node. The solid line denotes the Fermi surface and the dotted line the node location, while k and k ⊥ respectively denote the coordinates parallel and perpendicular to the Fermi surface. wrap around the entire Fermi surface, while for a gap with nodes, the contour will form closed surfaces around the nodes (for energies smaller than the maximum gap). Examples of these contours are shown in Fig. In the clean limit, the spectral functions are given by Dirac delta functions, each of which can be decomposed These delta functions then constrain k ⊥ to the value corresponding to the constant energy surface, k ⊥ (E). The gradient of the gap function is then, in terms of k ⊥ and a local (D -1)-dimensional manifold parallel to the Fermi surface, {k i }, given by where (v In general, the (v ∆ ) i and v ⊥ are functions of the position on the manifold. In the simplest, two dimensional, case (with k i = k ), this gives where θ is the angle between the nodal line and the normal to the Fermi surface (see Fig. In general, the gap function will be independent of the coordinate parallel to the node line. Importantly, in the accidental case this is not required to be normal to the Fermi surface, which results in a nonvanishing average of the gap over the Fermi surface. The Hebel-Slichter peak present in 1/T 1 T in an isotropic superconductor is a probe of this average gap where v F = ∇ k ξ k is the Fermi velocity and θ = φ + π/2, where φ is the angle between v ∆ and v F . Near the node the energy is then The delta function in Eq. ( Previous analyses As a first approximation, we perform a binomial expansion in Eqs. where E dk denotes the integral over the (D -1)dimensional surface in momentum space at energy E. In the terms depending on the gap, we approximate the gap function by a Taylor series in the momentum components parallel to the Fermi surface, near the node, in D-dimensions this is given by where k (0) = k(0) k (0) denotes the position of the node. In the case of D = 2 this gives Under this approximation for the gap, we arrive at where . . . E denotes the average over the contour(s) of energy E. Note that K 1 (E) depends on the difference between the averages taken on the segments of the energy contour with positive and negative superconducting gap, while K 2 and K 3 depend only on averages over the entire energy contour. The logarithmically divergent con-tributions arise due to the vanishing denominators in the expansion terms of Eqs. (11a) and (11c), while the terms with square roots in the denominator give a convergent contribution. In the general case of accidental node placement, the velocity magnitudes v ∆ and v F may vary freely across the energy surface, but as an demonstrative example, in the simplest case, v F and v ∆ are constant near the node, giving Both the linear correction to Eq. (11b) and the zero order contribution to Eq. (11c) vanish as the gap function is odd with respect to the position of the node, but higher order corrections will diverge, similar to the divergence encountered in Eq. (14c). In a more realistic model, the velocities v F and v ∆ , as well as the angle θ will depend on k, and so K 1 (E) may also be nonvanishing. In general, the node in an anisotropic gap function is not required to be near a portion of the gap function where a linear expansion in k is valid, in particular the presence of an isotropic component of the gap will shift the node position. Including higher order terms in either the Taylor series for the gap or the expansions of the K i is, however, insufficient to remove these divergences. If ∆ k transforms as a non-trivial representation of the point group, the nodes are required by symmetry. This implies that θ vanishes, as the gap function near the node is independent of the direction perpendicular to the Fermi surface. Further, as the node in this case is required to reside on a symmetry axis for the material, K 3 must vanish, given that an equal length of the contour is on either side of the node where the gap changes sign. In this case, K 2 [Eq. (11b)] again gives a non-divergent contribution with the form of the density of states, as the surface integral over the energy contour; and Eq. (11a) reduces to K 1 (E) = πE/ v ∆ v F . In this way, we recover the well known result In a purely isotropic gap superconductor, the gap function is independent of momentum, so v ∆ = 0 and ∆ k = ∆ 0 , and the momentum sums in the relaxation rate give the constant energy surface integral Thus, K 2 is once more non-divergent. The energy integrals over K 2 1 and K 2 3 result in a logarithmic divergence in the energy domain when E ∼ T → ∆, giving rise to the Hebel-Slichter peak. The divergence is in general controlled by one or more of gap anisotropy, the presence of impurities or strong coupling effects The classical s-wave Hebel-Slicter peak is controlled by disorder, electron-electron interactions, and gap anisotropy. The latter is necessarily present in the case of accidental nodes. Therefore, it is important to understand the affects of the former two effects in the current context. If we evaluate the energy integrals in Eq. ( where the remaining spectral function is evaluated nu-merically, by introducing a finite Lorentzian broadening, of width η. This is equivalent to introducing a finite lifetime to the familiar BCS susceptibility In order to investigate this behaviour numerically, we consider a simple tight-binding model on an orthorhombic lattice, with nearest neighbour couplings (t x and t y ) allowed to vary independently. The dispersion relation is thus where we have set a x = a y = 1 (where a x and a y are the lattice constants in the x and y directions, respectively). We consider two different symmetry states, a d x 2 -y 2 gap, with nodes located at k y = ±k x , given by and a d xy gap, with nodes located on the axes (k x = 0 and k y = 0) In both cases, the maximum magnitude of the gap is |∆ 0 |. The presence or absence of a divergent peak in the 1/T 1 T relaxation rate is dependent on the angle between the quasiparticle group velocity and the 'gap velocity' at the position of the node on the Fermi surface. This angle gives an approximate measure of the value of the superconducting gap averaged over the Fermi surface, which in turn controls the presence of a Hebel-Slichter divergence. In a material with symmetry required nodes, the angle vanishes, θ (xy) = 0 for this model, as does the average of the gap, resulting in an absence of the Hebel-Slichter peak. Near the k x = k y node of the d x 2 -y 2 symmetry gap, we find The above calculations estimate the parameters relevant to the divergence for specific 'd-wave' gap symmetries, as these are the focus in many families of unconventional superconductor, especially the cuprate and organic superconductors. If the nodes of the gap are accidental, by definition there is no preferred node placement on the Fermi surface and the above case is fine tuned. To explore the possibilities of other node locations, we include a finite isotropic component into the gap function. This results in a shift of the node position on the Fermi surface, while retaining the symmetry properties of the fully anisotropic gap. Additionally, such an isotropic component will alter the magnitude of the average gap on the Fermi surface, unless such effects are negated by the shifted node position. As an example, we consider a d x 2 -y 2 -wave gap with an isotropic component parametrised by a real coefficient, α, given by where α = ±1 corresponds to the conventional isotropic gap, α = 0 corresponds to the situations described in the previous section, and the absolute value of α is taken in the prefactor to the second term so that the magnitude of the maximum gap remains constant. We do not consider complex α as this would break time reversal symmetry and is hence detectable by other methods Notably, this expression is now explicitly dependent on k y , and therefore the shape and size of the Fermi surface, unlike in the α = 0 case considered previously. Additionally, it can be seen that, while the isotropic component may enhance the peak in the accidental node case, it can also potentially reduce the peak, depending on the relative magnitudes of the anisotropy t y /t x , the isotropic component α and the size and position of the Fermi surface, via k y . Eq. ( We take the temperature dependence of the gap to be given by given by the strong coupling BCS form: with ∆ 0 /2 = 2.5k B T c = 0.25t, typical of a number of unconventional superconductors B. Robustness of the Hebel-Slichter-like peak In Fig. It is interesting to note that the size of the peak varies smoothly with α, cf. Eq. To better understand the dependence of the peak magnitude on the Fermi surface anisotropy we show the α = 0 accidental node case for varying hopping anisotropy in Fig. At low temperatures increasing the anisotropy always increases 1/T 1 T , consistent with the changes in θ. For weak anisotropies the peak grows, consistent with this prediction. However, a maximum is reached at t y = 0.4t x , further increasing the anisotropy (decreasing t y ) decreases the peak immediately below T c . This behaviour is not explained by the variation of θ. The supression of the Hebel-Slichter-like peak for t y < 0.4t x is due to the presence of a van Hove singularity in the density of states which approaches the the Fermi energy at quarter filling as t y is reduced. Close to T c the gap is small, k B T ∆ 0 (T ), and contours with energy ∼ μ ± k B T wrap around a large segment of the Fermi surface. As a result, such contours include the region of the Fermi surface where the van Hove singularity is relevant, enhancing the spectral weight (density of states) in this region. This, in turn, affects the average of the gap within ∼ k B T of the Fermi surface. In the example FIG. enhancing the contribution for ∆ k < 0. As the accidental nodes are on the k x = ±k y diagonals, the average of the gap within ∼ k B T of the Fermi surface ∆ k μ±k B T > 0 is then reduced by the contribution due to the van Hove singularity. Thus, for temperatures close to T c , the enhancement of the spectral density at the van Hove point becomes significant, while it is less relevant at lower temperatures where the contours of energy ∼ k B T are further from the van Hove point. Such behaviour is not apparent from variation of θ (see Sec. III A), as the binomial expansion in the derivation of Eqs. In the low temperature regime, where the gap is maximal, the relevant contours are restricted to be near the nodes, well away from the van Hove singularity, and thus the relaxation rate increases smoothly as a function of decreasing t y . In the regime of smaller anisotropy (t y ≥ 0.4t x ), the effects of the van Hove singularity are not strong enough to overwhelm the effects due to the FIG. For all levels of anisotropy (t y < t x ), we find the qualitative features observed in the t y = 0.4t x case largely unchanged, though at very low anisotropy (t y 0.95t x ) the α = 0 peak is strongly suppressed and not clearly resolved in the numerics. Finally, to investigate the effects of including electronelectron interactions, we present results for the random phase approximation. The RPA for the magnetic susceptibility is the sum over ladder diagrams where χ +-(q, ω) is the magnetic susceptibility (in either the superconducting or normal state, as appropriate) in the absence of electron-electron interactions. For simplicity we limit our treatment to a Hubbard-like model with a contact interaction, U . As shown in Fig. Beyond vertex corrections electron-electron interactions lead to a temperature dependence for the quasiparticle lifetime. Including such effects, for example via the phenomenological form described in We have that there is a logarithmic divergence in 1/T T in superconductors with accidental nodes as T → T c from below. The microscopic origin of this divergence is distinct from that of the Hebel-Slichter peak familiar from s-wave superconductors. One signature of this is that the anisotropy in the gap, necessary for acci-dental nodes, does not control the divergence, as it does in the Hebel-Slichter case. We have confirmed that both impurities and electron-electron interactions can control the divergence, but for reasonable values these effects no not completely suppress the effect. Thus, we predict a Hebel-Slichter-like peak should be observed in superconductors with accidental nodes. This provides an important test for theories of superconductivity in low symmetry materials that predict the presence of accidental nodes.