We report on comprehensive results identifying the ground state of a triangular-lattice structured YbZnGaO4 to be spin glass, including no long-range magnetic order, prominent broad excitation continua, and absence of magnetic thermal conductivity. More crucially, from the ultralow-temperature a.c. susceptibility measurements, we unambiguously observe frequency-dependent peaks around 0.1 K, indicating the spin-glass ground state. We suggest this conclusion to hold also for its sister compound YbMgGaO4, which is confirmed by the observation of spin freezing at low temperatures. We consider disorder and frustration to be the main driving force for the spin-glass phase. Quantum spin liquids (QSLs) represent a novel state of matter in which spins are highly entangled, but neither order nor freeze at low temperatures In this Letter, we report comprehensive measurements on a closely related system, YbZnGaO 4 . We show that the most natural conclusion, that is consistent with the micro-and macro-scopic data presented here is that the system is a spin glass. We suggest this conclusion to be also true for YbMgGaO 4 , further supported by the observation of spin freezing at low temperatures. We believe disorder High-quality single crystals of YbZnGaO 4 were grown by the floating-zone technique, overcoming the problem caused by the volatile nature of ZnO We now explore the system by carrying out INS experiments, which reveal similar behaviors to YbMgGaO 4 (refs 5 and 6). In Fig. As is shown in refs 5 and 6, a QSL phase can give rise to the observed INS spectra. However, we notice that the cations in the nonmagnetic layers are randomly distributed We further show thermal conductivity (κ) results in Fig. T f is the peak temperature of the real part of the a.c. susceptibility (χ ) at 100 Hz. ∆P is the peak shift ∆T f T f ∆ lg(f ) from 100 to 10000 Hz. These two parameters for both YbZnGaO4 and YbMgGaO4 are obtained from our own measurements. *Note that in our discussions, we take J to be 2.83 K for YbMgGaO4, larger than the 1.5 K reported in ref. f changing from 100 to 10000 Hz. This value is close to those observed in other insulating spin glasses The strong frequency dependence evidences a broad distribution of the spin relaxation times around T f , typical for a spin glass We also measure the a.c. susceptibility for YbMgGaO 4 . As shown in Fig. The spin-glass phase identified from the a.c. susceptibility is a natural ground state for YbZnGaO 4 : i) Disorder and frustration, the two ingredients for a spin glass We also note that some findings in YbZnGaO 4 suggest deviations from a generic spin glass. For instance, T + is about 20 times of T f , much larger than that expected for a typical spin glass In summary, we have successfully grown high-quality single crystals for YbZnGaO 4 , and our comprehensive measurements on these crystals provide concrete evidence that it is a spin glass. We show this conclusion is also applicable to YbMgGaO 4 . We suggest that the spin-glass phase in both compounds is driven by disorder and frustration. Our work reveals the very similar characteristics between QSL and spin-glass phases, including the broad "continuum" of magnetic excitations and is a cautionary tale about labelling such materials without a full study of the spin system. acknowledge the Applications Group at Quantum Design for measuring the a.c. susceptibility. We thank Fengqi Song and Haijun Bu for the help in measuring the high-field magnetization. We are grateful for the stimulating discussions with Jia-Wei Mei, Shao-Chun Li, Weiqiang Yu, Lei Shu, D. Adroja, Guangyong Xu, and J. M. Tranquada. * , b * , c * ) =