The behavior of a disordered amorphous thin film of superconducting Indium Oxide has been studied as a function of temperature and magnetic field applied perpendicular to its plane. A superconductor-insulator transition has been observed, though the isotherms do not cross at a single point. The curves of resistance vs. temperature on the putative superconducting side of this transition, where the resistance decreases with decreasing temperature, obey two-dimensional Mott variable-range hopping of vortices over wide ranges of temperature and resistance. To estimate the parameters of hopping, the film is modeled as a granular system and the hopping of vortices is treated in a manner analogous to hopping of charges. The reason the long range interaction between vortices over the range of magnetic fields investigated does not lead to a stronger variation of resistance with temperature than that of two-dimensional Mott variable-range hopping remains unresolved. The superconductor-insulator-transition (SIT) of twodimensional (2D) or quasi-2D films is usually envisioned as a direct zero-temperature quantum phase transition tuned by disorder, magnetic field, or charge density. Because quantum fluctuations associated with a quantum critical point persist at nonzero temperatures, features of a zero-temperature continuous transition can be revealed through measurements of physical properties at accessible temperatures. The creep and flow of vortices have been subjects of intense study because they bring about nonzero electrical resistance even below superconducting critical temperatures and critical magnetic fields. Quantum variable-range hopping of bundles of vortices in disordered 2D superconductors at low temperatures and high magnetic fields was considered by Fisher, Tokayasu, and Young (FTY), who predicted a decreasing resistivity with decreasing temperature as ρ ∝ exp[-(T 1 /T ) p ], where p is in the range from 2/3 to 4/5, and T 1 is a characteristic temperature. where and g(μ) is the density of states of vortices at their chemical potential μ (see explanation below), a is the vortex localization length, and β ∼ 13 is a numerical coefficient. The InO x film under study was 55 nm thick, grown by electron-beam evaporation of In 2 O 3 . During deposition, an O 2 partial pressure of 6.7x10 -5 mbar was maintained in the chamber by bleeding the gas through a needle valve while continuing to pump. One can obtain a clearer picture of the various regimes of this film from a false color plot of dR/dT as a function of temperature and magnetic field, as shown in Fig. We then set about to determine whether we could understand the systematic behavior in the regime of positive dR/dT at fields B < B c , by plotting log R vs T -p , with p taking on various values such as 1, 2/3, 1/2, 1/3 and 1/4. Then, the fit of the low-field R vs. T data to the form R ∝ exp[-(T 0 /T ) p ] was evaluated by plotting log(R /Ω) vs. T -p for different values of p, and in each case fitting the data to a line. The quality of this linear fit was evaluated using χ 2 (a.k.a. reduced χ 2 ), the normalized sum of squared deviations between the data and fit function. fields for p = 1/3. This value of p was found to minimize χ 2 over these temperature intervals, as shown in Fig. The functional dependence of the resistance on temperature is that which was derived for the resistance due to VRH of vortices of a 2D superconductor by AAG. Atomic force microscope scans of the roughly 55 nmthick film reveal the presence of grain-like surface structures. A Bruker Nanoscope V Multimode 8 was used to image the surface of the film in several different, randomly-chosen locations. A representative micrograph is shown in Fig. Characteristics of the grains were determined by demarcating them on each of the AFM micrographs, such as is shown in Fig. Below we treat the film as an idealized random, densely packed two-dimensional array of superconducting spheres with diameters varying around 50 nm. The good match between the average lengthscale of the grains and the overall film thickness supports the single layer sphericalgrain model used in this paper. The height data presented above do not suggest that the film is comprised of literal spheres, but consistent with a granular structure that can be modeled in this way. The spheres in the model are barely touching each other and are connected via Josephson junctions of very small area. In such a Josephson junction array vortex cores are localized in empty spaces between spheres, which play the role of pinning sites for vortices. Selfenergies of vortices in such pinning sites ǫ vary due to a random distribution of Josephson junction strengths. We assume that pinning sites have the density of states g(ǫ) with a small characteristic width δǫ which we address later. We assume that the self-energy of a vortex carrying two flux quanta in one site (double vortex) is larger than this width and it, therefore, does not allow two quantum vortices to occupy a single pinning Thus, low temperatures, single quantum vortices occupy the sites. At B 0.2 are representative of the range of fields T 0 ∼ 1/B, the vortex spacing is greater, so no more than 13% of lattice pinning sites vortices. means that at T = 0 occupy only the low-energy tail of the g(ǫ) localized sites. The energy of the highest pinning occupied by vortex at T = 0 the role of vortex chemical potential μ. Vortex transport under the influence of a superconducting current can then be described as quantum hopping of vortices from occupied to empty pinning sites. At high enough temperatures, vortices hop to nearest neighbor sites. At lower temperatures, vortex transport is constrained to longer-distance hops with energies ǫ in a narrow band of energies around chemical potential μ. In a homogeneous bulk superconductor a vortex is a massive, almost a classical object with a very small localization length. But in a Josephson junction array where intergrain Josephson energy and the Coulomb charging energy are comparable, the localization length of a vortex a is of the order of the sphere diameter. Let us now show that the observed dependence T 0 (B) = C/B in small magnetic fields can be interpreted as a result of g(μ) growing linearly with B. Indeed, using a simple model of the low-energy tail of the density of states g(ǫ) = g 0 exp[-(ǫ 0 -ǫ)/δǫ], where ǫ 0 is average energy of the vortex and δǫ is the dispersion of the vortex self-energy, we find that the two dimensional concentration of vortices Combining Eqs. ( In principle, the localization length a depends on μ and, therefore, on B. However, the logarithmic dependence of μ on B is very weak and is ignored below. Although above we used a simple exponential tail for the density of states, one can easily show that our conclusion that T 0 = C/B is approximately (with logarithmic accuracy) correct for a Gaussian or other fast-decaying exponential tail. Let us now estimate the vortex self-energy dispersion δǫ. It is convenient to think about our disordered Josephson junction array as a thin film of thickness d made from a layer of material which has a 3D penetration length λ. where Here λ ⊥ = λ 2 /d is the Pearl penetration length of the film with width d in a magnetic field perpendicular to the film. It truncates the logarithmic divergence of ǫ 0 at large distances, while at small distances the divergence is truncated by the radius of the hole between neighboring spheres, which is of the order of sphere diameter d. For an ideally periodic Josephson junction 33 λ ⊥ = cφ 2 0 /(8π 2 I c ), where I c is the critical current of a junction, and Eq. ( Let us suggest an interpretation of the origin of the logarithm in Eq. ( Assuming that a ≃ d = 50 nm we arrive at the experimental value C = 60 TK if the penetration length λ ∼ 10 μm, which seems reasonable for such a weakly coupled granular superconductor. So far we have dealt with an analysis of the regime of low magnetic fields (positive dR/dT ). Let us now switch our attention to the high magnetic field side (B > B c ) of Fig. Above, in our discussion of T 0 in the region of dR/dT > 0, we ignored the interaction between distant vortices. This allowed us to arrive at a Mott law and interpret the dependence T 0 (B) observed in experiment. We do not understand why we do not observe the effects of the long range vortex interactions, which would lead to a temperature dependence of resistance that is stronger than Mott's law The symmetry requires the resistances at these fields, R sc (T ) ≡ R (B sc , T ) and R ins (T ) ≡ R (B ins , T ), to obey where R c is the critical sheet resistance of the film, and power P is some function of T . In the case of hopping conduction and this power-law behavior, Eq. 9 gives rise to The film under discussion does obey power-law behavior at the SIT, as can be seen in Fig. 