Roles of paramagnetic and diamagnetic pair-breaking effects in superconductivity in electric-fieldinduced surface metallic state are studied by Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation, when magnetic fields are applied parallel to the surface. The multi-gap states of sub-bands are related to the depth dependence and the magnetic field dependence of superconductivity. In the Fermi-energy density of states and the spin density, sub-band contributions successively appear from higher-level sub-bands with increasing magnetic fields. The characteristic magnetic field dependence may be a key feature to identify the multi-gap structure of the surface superconductivity. Electric-field-induced carrier-doping by the field-effecttransistor structure or the electric-double-layer-transistor (EDLT) structure A unique nature of the surface metallic state is that sub-bands are formed by the quantum confinement of carriers near the surface On the other hand, measurements of physical properties related to the pair-breaking by magnetic fields are important methods to know the character of each superconducting system. The surface superconductivity in the EDLT structure was identified as two-dimensional one, from the magnetic field orientation dependence of the upper critical field The purpose of this paper is to study the pair-breaking of the surface superconductivity when magnetic field is applied parallel to the surface, and to clarify how influences of the sub-band dependent multi-gap superconductivity appear in the magnetic field H. We calculate properties of the surface superconductivity by the BdG equation In this paper, we calculate the pair potential ∆(r), and the wave functions u (r), v (r) for the eigen-energy E by the BdG equation We set the vector potential as A = (0, A y , 0) with A y = -Hz, so that the magnetic field parallel to the surface is applied along the x direction, and the screening current flows along the y direction. In this situation, we can set ∆(r) = ∆(z)e i2qy and where S is unit area of surface. q is a constant relating to the current flow, where we assume that physical quantities do not have y-dependence. We do not consider the penetration of vortices. We decide q value from the current conservation, as explained later in this section. Thus the BdG equation is reduced to with the kinetic term where φ 0 is a flux quantum, and ±μ B H is Zeeman energy with the Bohr magneton μ B = 5.7883×10 -5 [eV/T]. The chemical potential μ (∼ E F : Fermi energy) is determined to fix n 2D . The eigen-states of Eq. ( for sub-bands coming from quantization by confinement in the z-direction. α is for two states of particle and hole branches. As the boundary condition at the surface, we set u (z) = v (z) = 0. In the following, energy, length, magnetic field, and local carrier densities are, respectively, presented in unit of meV, nm, T, and nm -3 . The pair potential is calculated by the gap equation with the Fermi distribution function f (E). In Eq. ( The local carrier density n(z , and spin current density J s (z) = J ↑ (z) -J ↓ (z) are calculated from up-and down-spin contributions Derivations of Eqs. ( To identify roles of paramagnetic and diamagnetic pair-breaking effects, calculations are performed in two cases. Case (i): Only the paramagnetic pair-breaking is considered by setting A y = q = 0. Case (ii): Both diamagnetic and paramagnetic pairbreakings are considered. We set A y = -Hz. From Eqs. ( First, we study influences of H on ∆(z). In Fig. The depth dependences of ∆(z) and the sub-band decomposition are presented in Figs. In the case (ii) including diamagnetic pair-breaking effect, screening current flows along the y direction parallel to the surface. In this section, we study the current, spin current, internal field, and diamagnetic magnetization. Figure From the total current J(z) in Fig. The H-dependence of diamagnetic magnetization M = ∞ 0 δM (z)dz is shown in Fig. As phenomena where contributions of multi-gap superconductivity in the sub-band system clearly appear, we study influences of magnetic fields in the electronic states. In Fig. x + k 2 y )/2m * in the case (i). For each sub-band i z = 1, 2, • • • , there exist two states of particle and hole branches. Line segments with positive (negative) slope are particle (hole) branches with , where main contributions come from up-spin electron's K + (down-spin hole's -K -). At the energy where particle and hole branches cross each other in the normal state as K + = -K -, superconducting gap opens at each sub-band. The gap amplitude becomes smaller in higher-level sub-band, indicating multi-gap superconductivity In Fig. These behaviors by the Zeeman shift are reflected also in the DOS N (E) in Fig. In Fig. If observations about the H-dependence of DOS in Fig. The sub-band contributions are also seen in paramagnetic spin density m(z). Due to the Zeeman shift of the paramagnetic effect, there appears finite m(z), corresponding to the Knight shift. Figure Next, we present H-dependences of total paramagnetic moment M s = ∞ 0 m(z)dz in Fig. Roles of paramagnetic and diamagnetic pair-breaking effects by parallel magnetic fields were evaluated in superconductivity of the electric-field-induced surface metallic state, based on calculations of the BdG equation. There the depth-dependences of pair potential, current, spin current, internal field, and paramagnetic spin density were understood by the sub-band contributions. With increasing magnetic fields H, electronic states of sub-bands become normal-state-like successively from higher-level sub-bands to lower-level ones, reflecting multi-gap superconductivity. This is reflected in the H-dependence of Fermi-energy DOS N (E F ) and total paramagnetic moment M s . We found that steps or peaks in the Hdependence due to the paramagnetic pair-breaking are smeared by the diamagnetic pair breaking effect, because superconducting gap in higher-level sub-bands becomes gapless by the contributions of the screening current. As only paramagnetic pair-breaking effect was studied without including diamagneitc effect in previous theoretical studies, the present study showed that diamagnetic screening current induces another important pairbreaking effect even under parallel magnetic fields. We expect that observation of the H-dependence, such as by point contact tunneling junction at the surface, may be a clue to examine the multi-gap structure and the pairbreaking effects by magnetic fields in superconductivity of the electric-field-induced surface metallic state. Substituting Eq. ( 