Superconductivity with exotic properties has often been discovered in materials with a layered (two-dimensional) crystal structure. The low dimensionality affects the electronic structure of materials, which could realize a high transition temperature (Tc) and/or unconventional pairing mechanisms. Here, we report the superconductivity in a layered tin arsenide NaSn2As2. The crystal structure consists of (Sn2As2) 2 bilayers, which is bound by van-der-Waals forces, separated by Na + ions. Measurements of electrical resistivity and specific heat confirm the bulk nature of superconductivity of NaSn2As2 with Tc of 1.3 K. Our results propose that the SnAs layers will be a basic structure providing another universality class of a layered superconducting family, and it provides a new platform for the physics and chemistry of low-dimensional superconductors with lone pair electrons. A layered crystal structure is an attractive stage to explore superconductors with a high transition temperature (Tc) and to discuss the mechanisms of unconventional superconductivity, as exemplified by the cuprates In this letter, we present a novel layered superconductor NaSn2As2 containing Sn 2+ ions with lone-pair electrons. NaSn2As2 crystallizes in a trigonal R3 ̅ m unit cell characterized by SnAs bilayers separated by six-coordinated Na + cations, as schematically shown in the inset of Figure 1 Single crystals of NaSn2As2 were synthesized by melting raw elements. Surface oxide layer of Na (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.9%) was mechanically cleaved before use. Sn (99.99%) and As (99.9999%) were purchased from Kojundo Chemical and used without further purification. The raw elements were handled in Ar-filled glovebox with a gas-purifier system. Stoichiometric ratio of Na, Sn, and As was sealed in an evacuated quartz tube, heated at 750 C for 20 h, and cooled to 350 o C in 10 h. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy shows the chemical composition of obtained products was Na : Sn : As = 1 : 1.89(8) : 2.12 Specific heat (C) versus T was measured by a relaxation method with PPMS. Figure Structural parameters obtained from single-crystal XRD are summarized in Table Basically, these structural parameters are in good agreement with the previous reports Here, Tc 90% is defined as the temperature where  becomes 90% of that at 3 K (normal states), as indicated with a dashed line in Fig. Although magnetic field was applied along the c-axis of the crystal, some parts of domain may tilt with respect to magnetic field. Another possibility is local inhomogeneity in the nanoscale, which is revealed for Li1xSn2+xAs2 by combinational analysis using nuclear magnetic resonance, transmission electron microscopy, and neutron diffraction where  * is defined as the Coulomb pseudopotential. Taking  * = 0.13 gives  = 0.44, which is consistent with weak or intermediate coupling strength of BCS superconductivity. As a result, a bulk nature of superconductivity at Tc = 1.3 K in NaSn2As2 has been confirmed from electrical resistivity and specific heat measurements. We briefly discuss the difference in crystal structure between NaSn2As2 and Li1xSn2+xAs2 by comparing the experiences on layered FeAs-based compounds LiFeAs In contrast, NaFeAs is almost stoichiometric and exhibits antiferromagnetic ordering, and Co-doped NaFe2xCoxAs2 becomes superconductive Here, we have demonstrated the discovery of the novel layered superconductor NaSn2As2. Because there exist various structural analogues containing SnPn layeres, superconductivity in the SnPn layers may generally emerge when carriers are doped in those SnAs-based layered compounds. Furthermore, three-dimensional Dirac semimetal state and non-tribial topological phase have been predicted in these compounds Our discovery presented here will open up a new platform of the physics and chemistry of low-dimensional superconductors and related notable phenomena. Table Figure 