Proximity-induced superconductivity in superconductor (S)-normal conductor (N) junctions has motivated a number of theoretical and experimental studies, since it leads to genuine superconducting states in the normal region 1,2 . Recently, interest in S-N interfaces was renewed by the observation of exotic proximity effects in various systems, including S/semiconductor 3 , S/ferromagnet 4 , S/topological insulator 5 , and S/graphene 6 structures. In general, the proximity effect is enhanced for transparent interfaces where coherent Andreev reflection is possible 7,8 . Also, it is generally believed that the proximity effect is, by definition, a localized phenomenon that can only be active in each S/N interface region. However, here we show that a three-dimensional (3-D) macroscale proximity effect is realized in a few-m-thick MgO/Mg 2 Si/MgB 2 nanocomposite layers with atomically smooth and clean heterointerfaces. We found from scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) microscopy measurements that the surface of the layer of more than 100100 m 2 undergoes transition into a bulk-like superconducting state although the layer contains only less than ~10 vol % of superconducting MgB 2 nanograins in a dispersed manner. In the proximity-induced superconducting region, vortex formation and annihilation processes as well as vortex-free Meissner regions were observed with respect to applied fields in a similar manner as Abrikosov vortices in type-II superconductors. Furthermore, we found that the induced superconducting layers exhibit an anisotropic magnetization behavior, in consistent with the formation of the 3-D superconducting coherence. This unusually extended proximity effect suggests that disorder-induced interaction of Andreev bound states, which are coherent superposition of time reversed electron hole pairs, are realized in the nanocomposite. Thus, the present result not only expands the limit of the proximity effect to bulk scales, but also provides a new route to obtain a proximity-induced superconducting state from disordered systems. The spontaneous emergence of macroscopic phase coherence is one of the most intriguing phenomena in physics, which includes Bose-Einstein condensation, superfluidity, superconductivity and lasing. In conventional lasers, emission is stimulated into well-defined resonant modes of a Fabry-Pérot (FP) optical cavity, resulting in a coherent light beam (Fig. Note, however, that the required feedback for laser action is provided also by light scattering of particles. In a strongly scattering medium, light can be trapped by recurrent multiple scattering events, leading to the formation of closed-loop paths and the related laser action called random laser If these loops further interact in phase with each other as a whole, macroscale superconducting coherence could be introduced. However, realization of such loops, or even a single ABS, would be quite challenging because ideal Andreev reflection requires the S/N interface to be in the clean limit Although the fabrication of high-quality heterointerfaces is rather a difficult task, we have recently proposed a method to synthesize dense insulator(MgO)/ semiconductor(Mg 2 Si)/superconductor(MgB 2 ) nanocomposites with atomically smooth interfaces by using solid phase reaction between metallic magnesium and a borosilicate glass One is scanning SQUID microscopy, and the other is magnetic anisotropy measurements. We prepared the MgO/Mg 2 Si/MgB 2 nanocomposite by solid phase reaction between Mg and a sodium borosilicate glass, according to the procedure reported previously High-angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) imaging of the MgO-rich layer (Fig. When we properly polished the surface of the composite in the direction parallel to the reaction layers, we can obtain the region where the polished top surface consists mostly of MgO (Fig. The above arguments are further confirmed by magnetic moment (M) measurements. In the temperature range from ~25 to 37 K, we obtained basically the same initial magnetization curves even when the direction of applied field H is changed from a perpendicular (H) to an inplane (H//) direction along the reaction layers (Fig. We further found that the irreversible temperature T irr , at which FC-and ZFC-M(T) curves begin to separate (see the inset in Fig. The power law coefficient n also exhibits anisotropy (Fig. Previously, an anomalously large proximity effect, extending over a length scale 100 times longer than the superconducting coherence length, has observed in atomically smooth S-N-S junctions where the component S is an optimally doped high-Tc cuprate and N is also of the same family, but in the underdoped normal state The MgO/Mg 2 Si/MgB 2 nanocomposite used in this work was obtained by reacting metallic Mg with a sodium borosilicate glass under argon environment Sodium was added in the form of Na 2 O, which facilitates stable glass formation. We 21 confirmed that Na 2 O was completely expelled from the reaction zone during reaction between Mg and the sodium borosilicate glass. Hence, the reaction products consist practically of MgO, Mg 2 Si and MgB 2 . The starting sodium borosilicate glass with a typical composition of On the other hand, a clear superconducting transition with near-zero resistivity was not observed when we used the glass with the B 2 O 3 /SiO 2 ratio is below ~0.3 (Extended Data Fig. Commercial powders of SiO 2 , B 2 O 3 , and Na 2 CO 3 were mixed and melted in a platinum-rhodium crucible at 14001500 C for 2 h. The melt was then poured onto a steel plate and was annealed at 600 C for 24 h. The resulting glass was cut into cubic pieces with a size of 101010 mm and polished with cerium oxide. Then, the cubic glass sample and ~1 g of Mg powders were put in a cylindrical alumna crucible with an internal diameter of 36 mm and a height of 27 mm. This crucible was located inside a larger rectangular (909050 mm) alumina crucible, which was closed with a 4-mm thick alumina lid. This set of crucibles was placed in a box-type electric furnace. The furnace was evacuated to a pressure down to ~30 Pa and purged with argon. In order to promote the reaction between Mg and sodium borosilicate glass, the temperature of the furnace was raised to 700 C at a rate of ~10 C/min and kept for 5 h under flowing argon environment. After the heating process, the reaction layer with a thickness of ~0.5 mm was developed at all the six surfaces of the cubic glass sample. We then mechanically removed the reaction layer from the unreacted region of the glass. For the SSM measurements, both the top and bottom surfaces of the thus removed sample were polished in the direction parallel to the layered structures with a diamond paste with an average particle size of 250 mm. For the XRD and density measurements, the samples were further crushed into fine powder. Characterization. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained with an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, SmartLab) using Cu K radiation (wavelength λ=1.5418 Å). The density of the sample was measured by a helium pycnometer (Shimadzu, AccuPyc II 1330). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy were conducted with a scanning electron microscope (JEOL, JSM-5610VS) with an EDX spectrometer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out with a XPS spectrometer (Ulvac-Phi, PHI X-tool) utilizing Al K X-rays (1486.6 eV). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) measurements were performed with a (scanning) transmission electron microscope (JEOL, JEM-2100F) equipped with an EDX spectrometer and a high angle annular dark field detector (HAADF) operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. An ion slicer was used to obtain a thin section for TEM measurements. A four-terminal contact configuration was used for temperature-dependent resistivity measurements of the periodic layered structure. Four-terminal contacts were fabricated on the cross section of the product along the direction parallel to the layered structure. During the resistivity measurements, the temperature was varied from 4.2 to 300 K using liquid helium. SSM measurements were conducted with a scanning SQUID microscope (SII Nanotechnology, SQM-2000) with a dc SQUID magnetometer consisting of Nb/Al-AlO x /Nb Josephson junctions and an inductively coupled pick-up loop of a Nb film A commercial SQUID magnetrometer (Quantum Design, MPMS-XL) equipped with the reciprocating sample option (RSO) was used for magnetization measurements. Magnetization (M) in a ZFC states was measured by cooling the sample initially in a zero field to 2K, and ZFC magnetization was recorded in an applied magnetic field as the temperature is increased. When the temperature reached 300 K, the sample was gradually cooled under the applied filed to obtain the FC magnetization. The M(H) shown in Methods, and neglect the contribution from the sodium-related materials, the resulting average composition of the product is 69MgO-23Mg 2 Si-8MgB 2 (mol. %) (or 43MgO-49Mg 2 Si-8MgB 2 in vol. %). This estimated average composition yields the ideal density of 2.72 g/cm Extended Data Figure Electrical resistivity of the cross section of the product as a function of temperature along the direction parallel to the periodic layered structure. The inset shows a magnified view around the transition region, demonstrating a two-step transition. The higher and lower-transition temperatures are referred to as T c1 and T c2 , respectively. T c2 is defined as the point where extrapolations of the linear portions of the resistivity curve intersect. The room temperature resistivity is ~0.03 cm, which is much lower than that (~5 cm) reported in our previous paper 