High-precision angle-resolved dc magnetization and magnetic torque studies were performed on a single-crystalline sample of URhGe, an orthorhombic Ising ferromagnet with the c axis being the magnetization easy axis, in order to investigate the phase diagram around the ferromagnetic (FM) reorientation transition in a magnetic field near the b axis. We have clearly detected first-order transition in both the magnetization and the magnetic torque at low temperatures, and determined detailed profiles of the wing structure of the three-dimensional T -H b -Hc phase diagram, where Hc and H b denotes the field components along the c and the b axes, respectively. The quantum wing critical points are located at μ0Hc ∼ ±1.1 T and μ0H b ∼13.5 T. Two second-order transition lines at the boundaries of the wing planes rapidly tend to approach with each other with increasing temperature up to ∼ 3 K. Just at the zero conjugate field (Hc = 0), however, a signature of the first-order transition can still be seen in the field derivative of the magnetization at ∼ 4 K, indicating that the tricritical point exists in a rather high temperature region above 4 K. This feature of the wing plane structure is consistent with the theoretical expectation that three second-order transition lines merge tangentially at the triciritical point. The discoveries of uranium-based ferromagnetic (FM) superconductors, as represented by UGe 2 We focus in this paper on the magnetic behavior of URhGe, which crystallizes in the orthorhombic TiNiSi structure with the space group P nma having a zig-zag chain of uranium atoms along the a axis Recently, a FM QPT in clean metals has attracted much interest because a first-order QPT is commonly observed It should be noticed that the RSC apparently emerges around the first-order FM transition region. A possible explanation of this unusual behavior is that URhGe might be close to a quantum TCP Single-crystalline URhGe was grown at JAEA, and cut into a rectangular shape with the 4.4 mg mass. The present sample does not show superconductivity. It has been recognized that superconductivity as well as RSC only appears in stoichiometric samples of URhGe with a very small residual resistivity DC magnetization measurements were performed by means of a capacitively-detected Faraday magnetometer A 3 He-4 He dilution refrigerator was used to cool the sample in the temperature range of 0.25 K ≤ T ≤ 6 K. The orientation of the URhGe crystal was precisely controlled in the bc and ab planes within an accuracy of less than 0.1 • using a piezo-stepper-driven goniometer (φ rotation) combined with a home-made tilting stage (θ rotation) ) are the rotation angle in the ab and the bc planes, respectively. Figure Figure These torque data thus directly probe the behavior of the OP across the transition, and can be used to construct the wing structure phase diagram for θ > 0.8 • . As mentioned above, however, the torque component is not so sensitive to the phase transition very close to θ = 0 • because of the domain formation. In order to explore the phase transition for θ ≈ 0 • , in particular the TCP, we evaluate the field variation of the magnetization in the following. Magnetization curves for various field angle θ near the b axis can be obtained from the capacitance data with G = 8 T/m by subtracting a torque background (G = 0 data), on the basis of the assumption that the torque contribution is the same for G = 0 and 8 T/m. In most cases, this condition holds with good accuracy. As explained later, however, we found it difficult to fulfill this condition at |θ| 0.1 • for a technical problem, and as a consequence some residual torque contribution remains in the magnetization curve at H H R for θ ≈ 0 • . For this reason, we denote the magnetization curve at θ = 0 • by M (H), and distinguish it from the M (H) data for θ > 0.1 • for which the torque component is properly subtracted. Figures Figure For comparison, M (H) and d M /dH for θ = 0 • are also plotted in these figures. Whereas M (H) agrees with M (H) for θ ≥ 0.79 • at fields above H R , an apparent disparity is evident below H R ; M (H) appears to be underestimated. We attribute this problem to an incomplete subtraction of the torque component in the θ = 0 • condition. A difficulty is that the vertical field gradient G produces a small c-axis component of the magnetic field on the sample In order to get a reliable estimation of the magnetization jump for θ = 0 • , we plot the metamagnetic jump ∆M for the field direction θ = 0.79 • , 1.65 • and 3.64 • in the inset of Figs. We employ these data of dM/dH and d(∆C τ )/dH for construction of the URhGe wing structure phase diagram. As H(θ) passes through the first-order wing plane at a fixed T in the T -H b -H c phase diagram (see Fig. Figure In a prototypical ferromagnet, a first-order transition changes into a second-order one at the edge of the wing plane. One therefore expects that |d(∆C τ )/dH(θ)|, the field derivative of the OP, becomes divergent on the line connecting TCP and QWCP where α and β are the coefficients of the M 2 b and the M 2 c M 2 b terms in the Landau free energy expansion, respectively. A first-order spin reorientation transition is predicted by this model when β exceeds a certain critical value with A being a constant Up to now, there have been a few reports regarding the location of TCP in URhGe. In the 73 Ge NMR spectra study performed in a field of 12 T applied parallel to the b axis, a phase separation of the FM and the paramagnetic states, the fingerprint of the first-order transition, can be seen at least up to 4.3 K, giving rather strong evidence that T TCP is well above this temperature Finally, some remarks are made regarding RSC in URhGe. The RSC in this system emerges not only near the quantum wing critical point, but also along the firstorder quantum phase transition line of the wing structure at T = 0. Indeed, the zero-resistivity state of RSC at 50 mK occurs along the first-order transition line in the H b -H c plane, terminating at QWCP We have investigated the quantum phase transition of an Ising ferromagnet URhGe by means of high-precision angle-resolved dc magnetization measurements in magnetic fields applied near the b axis. A first-order spin reorientation transition has been observed at low temperatures, accompanied by a small hysteresis in the critical field. The temperature and angular variations of the transition observed in the magnetization as well as in the magnetic torque allow us to construct the threedimensional T -H c -H b phase diagram, where H c ( c) is the conjugate field parallel to the order parameter and H b is the b-axis component of the field that tunes T C down to zero. The tricritical point T TCP is estimated to be located above 4 K in the H c = 0 plane. On cooling below T TCP , a wing structure develops by increasing |H c |. We have succeeded in directly determining the detailed profiles of the wing structure. The quantum wing critical points exist at H c = ±1.1 T and H b = 13.5 T. Three second-order transition lines meet at T TCP tangentially, so that a precise tuning of H along the b axis within 0.8 • is needed to correctly determine the position of TCP. The reentrant superconductivity in this system is not due to a quantum TCP 