We experimentally explore the topological Maxwell metal bands by mapping the momentum space of condensed-matter models to the tunable parameter space of superconducting quantum circuits. An exotic band structure that is effectively described by the spin-1 Maxwell equations is imaged. Three-fold degenerate points dubbed Maxwell points are observed in the Maxwell metal bands. Moreover, we engineer and observe the topological phase transition from the topological Maxwell metal to a trivial insulator, and report the first experiment to measure the Chern numbers that are higher than one. Discovery of new states of matter in condensed-matter materials or synthetic systems is at the heart of modern physics In this Letter, we experimentally explore an unconventional topological band structure, called Maxwell metal bands, with a superconducting qutrit via an analogy between the momentum space of the presented condensedmatter model and the tunable parameter space of superconducting quantum circuits. By measuring the whole energy spectrum of our system, we clearly image a new band structure, which consists of a flat band and two three-fold degenerate points in the 3D parameter space dubbed Maxwell points. The system dynamics near the Maxwell points are effectively described by the analogous spin-1 Maxwell equations. We further investigate the topological properties of Maxwell metal bands by measuring the Chern numbers ±2 of the simulated Maxwell points from the non-adiabatic response of the system. By tuning the Hamiltonian parameters, we engineer the topological phase transition from the Maxwell metal to a trivial insulator, which is demonstrated unambiguously from the evolution of tunable band structures and Chern numbers across the critical points. We realize the following model Hamiltonian in momentum space describing a free pseudospin-1 particle [32] where k = (k x , k y , k z ) denote the quasimomenta, R x = arXiv:1709.05765v2 [quant-ph] 3 Apr 2018 sin k x , R y = sin k y , and R z = Λ+2-cos k x -cos k y -cos k z are the Bloch vectors with a control parameter Λ, and S x,y,z are the spin-1 matrices. The resulting three bands can touch at certain points in the first Brillouin zone for proper Λ with a zero-energy flat band in the middle. For instance, when |Λ| < 1, the bands host two threefold degeneracy points at M ± = 0, 0, ± arccos Λ . Near M ± one has the low-energy effective Hamiltonian with α = √ 1 -Λ 2 and q = k -M ± for the two degeneracy points. Equation ( The spin-1 system described by Hamiltonian (1) has two different topological phases determined by the parameter Λ: the topological Maxwell metal phase with a pair of Maxwell points in the bands when |Λ| < 1 and the trivial insulator phase with band gaps when |Λ| > 1. At the critical point Λ = 1, the two Maxwell points merge and then disappear at the band center, indicating the topological transition. The phase diagram and typical band structures are illustrated in Fig. where Below we simulate the Hamiltonian (1) with a fully controllable artificial superconducting qutrit. The sample used in our experiment is a 3D transmon, which consists of a superconducting qutrit embedded in a 3D aluminium cavity In Then the probe microwave pulse pumps the system from |0 to the eigenstates when its frequency matches the level spacing. By sending a detect pulse to the cavity, we can readout the population in the eigenstates as resonant peaks. By collecting the resonant peaks we obtain the energy spectrum of the Maxwell metal. to generate transitions between the three levels, respectively denoted as R x , R y and R z . These transitions are equivalent to the rotations with respect to different axes. IQ mixers combined with arbitrary wave generators are used to control the amplitude, frequency, and phase of microwave pulses. For the microwave-driven qutrit system, the Hamiltonian with a tunable parameter k under rotating wave approximation can be written as Here we design the transition rates as {Ω 12 , Ω 13 , Ω 23 } = {R x , R y , R z } to mimic the model Hamiltonian in the parameter space, and I 3×3 is the 3 by 3 unit matrix. Diagonalizing H(k) yields three eigenstates |0 d and |± , with the corresponding eigen energies E 0 = ω 01 as the flat band and z as the upper and lowest bands shown in Fig. We directly measure the spectroscopy of the driven transmon and obtain the band structure of H(k). Without loss of generality, we always set k y = 0 in the bandstructure measurement. For given k x and k z , the dressed states under the microwaves are eigenstates |0 d and |± . A probe microwave pulse is used to pump the system from |0 to the eigenstates and the resonant peaks of microwave absorption are detected We detect the Chern numbers of the Maxwell points by dynamically measuring the Berry curvature in the parameter space from the non-adiabatic response in the quasi-adiabatic procedure [Fig. We here demonstrate that it can be generalized to a spin-1 system. Since the probe level is no longer needed in this measurement, we select the lowest three levels in the superconducting transmon [Fig. 