We measured the optical conductivity of superconducting single crystals of Ba1-xKxFe2As2 with x ranging from 0.40 (optimal doping, Tc = 39 K) down to 0.20 (underdoped, Tc = 16 K), where a magnetic order coexists with superconductivity. In the normal state, the low-frequency optical conductivity can be described by an incoherent broad Drude component and a coherent narrow Drude component: the broad one is doping-independent, while the narrow one shows strong scattering in the heavily underdoped compound. In the superconducting state, the formation of the condensate leads to a low-frequency suppression of the optical conductivity spectral weight. In the heavily underdoped region, the superfluid density is significantly suppressed, and the weight of unpaired carriers rapidly increases. We attribute these results to changes in the superconducting gap across the phase diagram, which could show a nodal-to-nodeless transition due to the strong interplay between magnetism and superconductivity in underdoped Ba1-xKxFe2As2. A fundamental question in the physics of superconductors is the nature of the electron pairing mechanism The change of the gap structure in underdoped materials was ascribed to the coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity The coexistence and competition between magnetism and superconductivity is a central point in the physics of BKFA There is few systematic optical data in the underdoped region We measured the optical conductivity of BKFA single crystals from the optimally doped material to heavily underdoped compounds. We observed isotropic superconducting gaps around optimal doping. In the heavily underdoped compounds, we found a residual lowfrequency optical conductivity that takes spectral weight from the condensate, hence suppressing the superfluid density. These results can be understood in the framework of an evolution of the superconducting gap across the phase diagram, in particular with respect to the presence of nodes, caused by magnetic order in the underdoped region. High quality Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 single crystals were grown by a flux method We measured the ab-plane reflectivity R(ω) at nearnormal incidence on Bruker IFS113v and IFS66v spectrometers between 30 and 15 000 cm -1 at the temperatures indicated in Fig. Figures Figures The normal state σ 1 (ω) of pnictides can be conveniently parameterized by a Drude-Lorentz model where Z 0 is the vacuum impedance. The first term describes a sum of free-carrier Drude responses, each characterized by a plasma frequency Ω 2 p = ne 2 /ε 0 m * , where n is the carrier concentration, m * the effective mass, and 1/τ the scattering rate. The second term is a sum of Lorentz oscillators, each having a resonance frequency Ω j , a line width γ j and a weight S j . Figures In the superconducting state, we parametrized the data by replacing the Drude term with a Mattis-Bardeen (MB) term Before examining the superfluid weight, we first discuss the strength of the electron-boson coupling in BKFA. Here, the utilization of the Mattis-Bardeen formalism assummes a weakly-coupled superconductor and the absorption edge occurs at E g = 2∆. In strongly coupled pnictides (2) g , are higher than the reported range for these materials (1) g , since it only associates the energy where σ 1 (ω) starts to rise. In addition, in the lower dopings, the coupling becomes weaker. As shown in Fig. g (0) also supports this doping evolution, in which the values for K40 and K27 are above the simple BCS calculation, suggesting a stronger coupling. Let us now discuss the superfluid weight in BKFA, obtained from the finite frequency σ 1 spectral weight lost below T c or, equivalently, the 1/ω contribution expected in the imaginary optical conductivity where Z 0 is the vacuum impedance. We took ρ n at T = 50 K with a cut-off frequency ω c = 400 cm -1 (indicated by the vertical dashed lines in Fig. In order to understand the doping evolution of the superconducting response in the underdoped BKFA, we consider the competition and coexistence between magnetism and superconductivity. The SDW magnetic order competes with superconductivity for the same electronic states To summarize, we performed a systematic optical study in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 from the optimally doped to heavily underdoped regimes. Near optimal doping, an isotropic and nodeless superconducting gap was observed. As the doping level x decreases, a residual Drude response and low-energy excitations emerge, suggesting the existence of unpaired quasiparticles in the region where magnetism and superconductivity coexist. Meanwhile, as the magnetic order is enhanced, the superfluid density is strongly suppressed and the scattering of carriers increases. These observations suggest that the competition and coexistence between magnetic order and superconductivity play an important role in the doping evolution of superconducting gap structure in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 , indicating a nodeless to nodal transition with decreasing doping. We acknowledge discussions with A. 