We report on the effects of hydrostatic pressure (HP) on the charge density wave observed in underdoped cuprates. We studied YBa2Cu3O6.6 (Tc=61 K) using high-resolution inelastic x-ray scattering (IXS), and reveal an extreme sensitivity of the phonon anomalies related to the charge density wave (CDW) order to HP. The amplitudes of the normal state broadening and superconductivity induced phonon softening at QCDW rapidly decrease as HP is applied, resulting in the complete suppression of signatures of the CDW below ∼1 GPa. Additional IXS measurements on YBa2Cu3O6.75 demonstrate that this very rapid effect cannot be explained by pressure-induced modification of the doping level and highlight the different role of external pressure and doping in tuning the phase diagram of the cuprates. Our results provide new insights into the mechanisms underlying the CDW formation and its interplay with superconductivity. The complex phase diagrams of correlated electron systems are shaped by the interplay between almost degenerate electronic states. In the high-T c superconducting cuprates, charge density wave (CDW) modulations have been ubiquitously observed, appearing as a generic feature of the moderately doped CuO 2 plane High pressures have been extensively used as a tuning parameter of the superconducting properties of the cuprates, and yielded the highest T c ever reported in these materials To address these issues, direct measurements of the pressure dependence of the CDW are needed, yet remain technically demanding. Resonant soft x-ray scattering which has been widely used to study the CDW is for instance not compatible with high pressure environments. Experiments with hard x-rays are impeded by serious difficulties arising from the weakness of the diffuse CDW features in underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x (∼10 -6 weaker than the (2 0 0) Bragg reflection To overcome these challenges, we turned towards high resolution inelastic x-ray scattering (IXS). Earlier investigations on underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 have revealed two striking phonon anomalies in the IXS spectra around the CDW wave vector Q CDW , which can be used to unambiguously determine the presence of the CDW. These are: i) a pronounced broadening of the acoustic phonon for T c < T < T CDW and ii) a strong softening of the low energy phonons below T c Here, we monitor these anomalies above and below T c as function of applied HP in underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 . Our results reveal that the CDW-related phonon anomalies respond strongly to the application of external pressure, with their amplitude rapidly decreasing under pressure and resulting in their complete suppression below ∼1 GPa. We further demonstrate that these effects cannot be solely attributed to pressure-induced doping effects, and conclude that the unusual pressure dependence of T c in this regime of doping cannot be fully attributed to presence of the CDW. The experiments were performed on high quality, detwinned single crystals of ortho-VIII-ordered YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 (p=0.12, T c =61 K) and ortho-III ordered YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.75 (p=0.134, T c =71 K), grown by a flux method as described elsewhere Following our earlier ambient pressure measurements, high pressure IXS spectra of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 were recorded in the Brillouin zone adjacent to the (0 0 6) Bragg reflection, across the [010] direction and close to the strong (0 0.31 6.5) CDW superstructure peak, probing transverse acoustic and optical phonons of the B 1 representation We first focus on the pressure dependence of the phonon behavior close to T c (the pressure dependence of T c is given in Fig. We now turn to the IXS spectra recorded in the superconducting state, where under ambient pressure conditions the acoustic phonon linewidths are resolution limited and the phonon dispersions exhibit a pronounced dip around Q CDW , with a softening of ∼1.3 meV upon cooling from T c =61 K to 45 K. While the softening is already reduced by 50 % at 3 kbar, the dispersion dip at Q CDW is clearly observed up to 7 kbar (Fig. The IXS data demonstrate that all CDW-related phonon anomalies observed at ambient pressure disappear at a modest pressure of less than ∼1 GPa. Earlier HP studies on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 have determined a pressureinduced effective doping of the CuO 2 planes in the range of ∼0.008-0.017 holes/GPa Doping dependent x-ray diffraction data on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x have however shown that the CDW intensity and correlation length are comparable for p=0.12 and p=0.134 To test this scenario we performed IXS measurements on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.75 (p=0.134), with T c = 71 K, very close to that of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 under ∼1 GPa (see also Fig. Having ruled out a pressure-induced modification of the doping level as the origin of the rapid pressure dependence of the CDW, we now discuss alternative scenarios. The strong competition between CDW order and superconductivity, which was previously inferred from temperature and magnetic field dependent measurements Regarding possible structural origins of the enhancement of superconductivity and the destabilization of the CDW under pressure, we note that early HP neutron diffraction experiments on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 have revealed an enhanced compression of the apical oxygen O(4) -planar copper Cu(2) bond length Next, we discuss the implications for the Fermi surface reconstruction revealed by quantum oscillations (QOs). Small electron pockets arising from a CDW-induced Fermi surface reconstruction have been suggested as the origin of the low frequency QOs observed in underdoped cuprates In summary, we have presented high quality IXS data on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.6 under HP, following the low temperature phonon linewidth and energy anomalies at Q CDW . The CDW-related phonon anomalies show an extreme fragility to the application of external pressure and disappear already below ∼1 GPa, suggesting the pressureinduced suppression of the CDW order. Parallel measurements on YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.75 exclude pressure-induced charge transfer as the origin of the CDW suppression and highlight the different effect of chemical doping and pressure-induced structural modifications in the underdoped cuprates. Instead, pressure-induced strengthening of superconductivity and/or subtle changes in the Fermi surface geometry may be responsible for this effect. In any case, the simultaneous application of pressure and magnetic fields opens up new opportunities for the quest to understand the origin of CDW formation and its influence on the transport properties of the cuprates.