The universal criteria for bosonization of Cooper pairs and novel Bose-liquid superconductivity and superfluidity in pseudogap matters (high-T c cuprates and other systems with low Fermi energies) are formulated by using the uncertainty principle and the composite-boson mean field theory. We have established that the often discussed s-or d-wave superconductivity occurring in the fermionic limit of Cooper pairs can exist in conventional superconductors (e.g., ordinary metals and heavily overdoped cuprates) with large Fermi energies but the Fermi-liquid (BCS-type) superconductivity is not characteristic of underdoped to overdoped cuprates with low Fermi energies. The unusual superconducting order parameter in high-T c cuprates and other pseudogap matters cannot be determined as the BCSlike (s-or d-wave) gap. We argue that many experimental data (including tunneling and angle-resolved photoemission data) are not accurate to identify the true superconducting order parameter in high-T c cuprates. We show that the unconventional superconductivity/superfluidity occurring in the bosonic limit of Cooper pairs would exist in low Fermi energy systems where the bosonic Cooper pairs are formed at a pseudogap temperature T * above the superconducting/superfluid transition temperature T c and then part of such Cooper pairs condenses into a Bose superfluid at T c . Diamagnetism of bosonic Cooper pairs exists in high-T c cuprates below T * . Upon lowering the temperature, the pair condensation of attracting bosons occurs first at T c and then their single particle condensation sets in at T * c lower than T c (in three dimensions (3D)) or at T = 0 (in two dimensions (2D)). The coherent single particle and pair condensates of bosons exist as two distinct superfluid phases and arise from an effective attraction between bosons in some domains of momentum space. By solving the mean field equations for high-T c cuprates, the novel superconducting states (i.e., a vortex-like state existing below the temperature T v = T 2D c lower than T * but higher than T c = T 3D c as well as two superconducting phases below T c ) and their properties characterized by the boson superfluid stiffness are self-consistently determined and compared with the key experimental findings. The mechanisms responsible for the novel Bose-liquid superconductivity and superfluidity could be common to a wider class of exotic superconductors/superfluids, including quantum liquids, atomic Fermi gases and low-density nuclear matter. The conventional superconductivity in simple metals with large Fermi energies ε F >> 1 eV and small phonon energies (Debye energies) ω D is well described in terms of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) condensation of weakly-bound (large) Cooper pairs After the discovery of high-T c superconductivity in doped copper oxides (cuprates), various mechanisms have been proposed for unconventional superconductivity, especially in the cuprates. Many of the proposed mechanisms for unconventional cuprate superconductivity are based on the BCS-like (s-or d-wave) pairing correlations and on the usual Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) of an ideal Bose-gas of tightly-bound Cooper pairs and other bosonic quasiparticles (e.g., bipolarons and holons) For a long time, the basic questions concerning the true origins of the unusual superconducting/superfluid states in high-T c cuprates and other exotic systems remain open. In these systems, unconventional interactions may take place between pairs of quasiparticles, leading to new and unidentified states of matter. Actually, the doped cuprates exhibit pseudogap phenomena There is now much experimental evidence that polaronic carriers are present in doped cuprates As the binding between fermions increases, Fermi gas of weakly-bound Cooper pairs evolves into Bose gas of tightly-bound Cooper pairs, as pointed out by where ∆x and ∆E are the uncertainties in the coordinate and energy of attracting polaronic carriers, ∆k is the uncertainty in the wave vector of polarons. The expression ( ∆k) 2 /2m p represents the uncertainty in the kinetic energy of polarons, which is of order ε F , whereas ∆k would be of the order of 1/R c . Taking into account that ∆x is of order a c and ∆E would be of the order of the characteristic energy ε A of the attractive interaction between polarons, Eq. ( This ratio is universal criterion for the bosonization of Cooper pairs in low Fermi energy systems, in particular, in high-T c cuprates (for which ε A is replaced by E p + ω 0 ) and other exotic superconductors, liq-uid 3 He and ultracold atomic Fermi gases. The criterion in Eq. ( (1) the BCS-type superconductivity and superfluidity would occur in the fermionic limit of Cooper pairs and could exist in high-density nuclear matter and conventional superconductors (e.g., ordinary metals and heavily overdoped cuprates) with large Fermi energies, where the pseudogap is absent and the superconducting state is characterized by the BCS-like order parameter and the onset temperature of Cooper pairing T * coincides with T c ; (2) the high-T c cuprates exhibiting pseudogap behaviors at ε F << 1 eV and other pseudogap matters (e.g., heavy-fermion and organic compounds, liquid 3 He, atomic Fermi gases and low-density nuclear matter) could be in the bosonic limit of Cooper pairs and the novel (non-BCS-type) superconductivity and superfluidity would occur in such systems, where the pseudogap coexists with the unusual superconducting order parameter below T c The repulsive interaction is less realistic for the problem of Bose superfluids (including 4 He). In unconventional superconductors/superfluids with ε F 2ε A , Cooper pairs behave as composite bosons and would undergo a BEC in the noninteracting particle approximation without superfluidity at T = T BEC >> T c . Here we show that the superconductivity/superfluidity in these systems is driven by the condensation of the attractive Bose gases of Cooper pairs with low densities. Such composite bosons repel one another at small distances between them and their net interaction is attractive at large distances. The Hamiltonian of a Bose gas inter-acting via a pair potential V B (kk ) has the form where εB (k is the creation (annihilation) operator of bosons with the wave vector k, Ω is the volume of the system. The Hamiltonian in Eq. ( the k = 0 and k = 0 terms in the summation of the equations for ∆ B (k), χ B (k) and ρ B are considered separately according to the procedure proposed in Ref. where ε BA and ε BR are the cutoff parameters for attractive V BA and repulsive V BR parts of V B (kk ), respectively. Then the three-dimensional (3D) equations for determining the coherence (e.g., superconducting order) parameter ∆ S C = ∆ B and the condensation temperature T c of attracting bosons can be written as: where where ρ B0 is the density of condensed bosons with k = 0 and ε = 0. Equations ( We now discuss the novel superconducting properties and show that the kink-like features of ∆ S C (T ) are responsible for the kink-like behaviors of the critical current J c (T ) and the critical magnetic fields (H c1 (T ) and H c2 (T )) near T * c , as observed in various high-T c cuprates where ρ s (T ) = ρ B -ρ n is the density of the superfluid part of condensed bosons, critical magnetic field H c1 is determined from the relation where is the coherence length of bosonic superconductors, H c (T ) = 4πRJ c (T )/c is the thermodynamic critical magnetic field, R is the radius of a superconducting wire, c is the velocity of light. The kink-like behaviors of H c1 (T ) (in YBCO) and upper critical magnetic field H c2 (T ) (in Bi 2+x Sr 2-x CuO 6 (Bi-2201) with T c 15 K) near T * c are shown in Fig. where a = 2(c 0 γ B T c ) -0.5 (ε BA /k B T c ) 0.25 and c 0 = π 3/2 /3.912. Therefore, the temperature derivatives of μB and ∆ B entering the expression for C v (T ) give rise to a pronounced λ-like divergence. By introducing the quantity of superfluid matter ν B = N B /N A (where N B is the number of attracting bosonic Cooper pairs and N A is the Avogadro number, which is equal to the number of CuO 2 formula unit per unit molar volume) and the molar fraction of the superfluid bosonic carriers defined by f s = ν B /ν (where ν = N/N A is the amount of doped matter), we now write the molar specific heat of the superfluid Bose-gas in high-T c cuprates as Here we have accounted for that Ω/ν B = N B v B /ν B = v B N A and v B = 1/ρ B . In doped cuprates the carriers are distributed between the polaronic band and the impurity band (with Fermi energy ε FI ) and the normal-state specific heat C n (T ) above T c is calculated by considering three contributions from the excited components of Cooper pairs, the ideal Bose-gas of Cooper pairs and the unpaired carriers bound to impurities Analytical solutions of Eqs. ( which is in an agreement with the result of Ref. It would also be interesting to discuss the conditions for (i) the diamagnetism in the pseudogap state and vortex formation observed above the bulk superconducting transition temperature T c in high-T c cuprates, (ii) the vortex formation observed above the bulk superfluid transition temperature T λ in liquid 4 He, and (iii) the gapless superconductivity and superfluidity observed in high-T c cuprates and other systems somewhat below T c or far below T c . We first discuss the origins of the gapless excitations and other effects observed in the superconducting/superfluid state of high-T c cuprates and related systems and then the vortex-like Nernst effect and diamagnetism observed above T c in high-T c cuprates and the vortex-like state observed above the λ-transition temperature T λ in liquid 4 He. So far, most researchers confuse the s-, p-and dwave pairing states of fermionic quasiparticles in high-T c cuprates and other exotic systems with the unusual superconducting/superfluid states. Therefore, in many cases the origins of the gapless superconductivity and superfluidity and gapless excitations, which are manifested in the power law temperature dependences of the superconducting/superfluid properties of high-T c cuprates and other systems, are rashly attributed to the nodes of p-and d-wave BCS-like gaps. From the above considerations, it follows that the unconventional superconductor/superfluid exhibiting a pseudogap behavior above T c at ε F << 1 eV is not in the fermionic limit of Cooper pairs but in the bosonic limit of Cooper pairs. We argue that the gapless superconductivity/superfluidity in high-T c cuprates and other related systems is associated with the gapless excitation spectrum of a superfluid 3D Bose-liquid of Cooper pairs below T * c and could not be explicable by the presence of the point or line nodes of the BCS-like gap. Actually, the BCS-like d-wave pairing model fails to explain the λ-like superconducting transition at T c and the experimental observation of the existence of gapless excitations below some characteristic temperature T * c << T c We now return to the issue of the vortex-like excitations above T c . In 3D high-T c cuprates with m p By taking γ B = 0.3 for quasi-2D grain boundaries, we find T 2D c 0.68T 0 143 K. Within the superfluid Bose-liquid model in the mean-field approximation, thus the highest T c is expected to arise in quasi-2D Bose systems. It follows that the superconducting transition temperature in the cuprates is higher at quasi-2D grain boundaries than in the bulk and the residual superconductivity persists at quasi-2D grain boundaries in the temperature range T c < T < T v (= T 2D c ), i.e., the stability of high-T c superconductivity in cuprates is greater in quasi-2D than in 3D systems. Therefore, the vortex-like Nernst signals observed in high-T c cuprates The undoped cuprate compounds are antiferromagnetic (AF) insulators. Because the strong electron correlations (i.e., the strong Coulomb interactions between two holes on the same copper sites) drive these systems into the AF Mott insulating state. However, the strong Coulomb interactions of the lattice scale disappear in doped cuprates The above results show that the high-T c cuprates are characterized by low density of condensing (attracting) bosons ρ B << n. Here the true superconducting transition temperature T c (the onset temperature of the λ-like second order phase transition) is determined by postulating that superconductivity in these systems originates from the superfluid condensation of a fraction of the normal-state Cooper pairs and is associated with a microscopic separation between superfluid and normal bosonic carriers. Such a microscopic phase separation will likely occur just like the phase separation into the regions of a Bose solid (high-density limit) and a dilute Bose gas (low-density limit) described in Ref. In this paper, we have studied the bosonization of Cooper pairs and novel superconductivity/superfluidity in high-T c cuprates and other pseudogap matters, which are characterized by low Fermi energies ε F << 1eV. We have shown that these phenomena would occur in doped cuprate compounds, heavy-fermion and organic systems, liquid 3 He and atomic Fermi gases under certain conditions. The universal and correct criterion for bosonization of Cooper pairs in such systems is formulated by using the uncertainty principle. We found that the condition ε F 2ε A is favorable for the formation of bosonic Cooper pairs and novel superconducting/superfluid states in low Fermi energy systems. By the use of this criterion, we might be able to realize an unconventional superconductor/superfluid not in the BCS-type but in the type of bosonic Cooper pairs. In this case the superconductivity/superfluidity is not simply caused by Cooper pairing on a Fermi surface and the formation of a BCS-like gap ∆ F does not necessarily lead the system to a superfluid state. Because the underlying mechanism of superconductivity/superfluidity in a Fermi system depends on the fermionic or bosonic nature of Cooper pairs. When the Fermi energy ε F becomes comparable with the characteristic energy ε A of the effective attraction between fermions, superconducting and superfluid matters are in the bosonic regime ε F 2ε A . The BCS-type superconductivity/superfluidity would occur in the fermionic limit of Cooper pairs (see also Ref. Clearly, the condensate and excitations of a Boseliquid are unlike those of a BCS-like Fermi liquid. Therefore, not all the experimental methods are able to identify the true superconducting order parameter in high-T c cuprates and other pseudogap matters. For example, the single-particle tunneling spectroscopy and ARPES provide information about the excitations gaps at the Fermi surface but fail to identify the true superconducting order parameter appearing below T c in non-BCS superconductors. Actually, a prolonged discussion of the origin of unconventional superconductivity in the cuprates on the basis of tunneling and ARPES data has nothing to do with the true mechanism of high-T c cuprate superconductivity. We note here that the superconducting/superfluid order parameter in high-T c cuprates and other pseudogap matters should not be identified as a BCS-like gap and the gapless superconductivity/superfluidity in these systems should also not be attributed to the point and line nodes of the BCS-like (p-and d-wave) gaps. There is now experimental evidence that the BCSlike fermionic excitation gap ∆ F exists as a pseudogap in high-T c cuprates Thus, the criterion for bosonization of Cooper pairs ε F 2ε A allows us to find the real applicability boundary (which up to now remains unknown) between BCS-type and Bose-type regimes of superconductivity/superfluidity. This criterion and other necessary and sufficient criteria formulated here should be satisfied for the occurrence of the unconventional superconductivity/superfluidity. The above theoretical predictions and their experimental confirmations speak strongly in favor of the existence of novel superconducting/superfluid states, which arise in high-T c cuprates and other pseudogap matters at single particle and pair condensations of attracting bosonic Cooper pairs. The critical behavior of a superfluid Bose liquid of Cooper pairs near T c is similar to that of liquid 4 He near the λ-transition. Within the mean field theory of a superfluid Bose-liquid, it is possible to describe the following unexplained features of unconventional superconductors and superfluids: (i) the key features of the phase diagrams of high-T c cuprates (e.g., vortex-like state existing at temperatures T c < T < T 2D c and two distinct superconducting phases below T c ), (ii) the two distinct superconducting phases in heavy-fermion systems below T c , (iii) the superfluid A and B phases in 3 He, (iv) the superfluid phase in 4 He below T λ and the vortex-like state existing at temperatures T λ < T < T 2D c in the crossover regime between the bulk superfluid liquid and thin 4 He superfluid film, (v) the unconventional superfluidity in ultracold atomic Fermi gases, (vi) the αclustering in nuclei (i.e. αparticle structure of nuclei) and high stability of magic and twice magic nuclei, which is associated with the single particle and pair condensations of attracting bosonic Cooper pairs of nucleons both in proton and in neutron subsystems. We have shown that this theory provides a consistent picture of the distinctive superconducting properties (e.g., λ-like second-order phase transition at T c , first-order phase transition and kink-like temperature dependences of superconducting parameters near T * c ) of high-T c cuprates and other related materials. c 1.135T BEC 91 K for γ B = 0.3 and ε BA /k B T BEC = 10.