Identifying novel functional materials with desired key properties is an important part of bridging the gap between fundamental research and technological advancement. In this context, highthroughput calculations combined with data-mining techniques highly accelerated this process in different areas of research during the past years. The strength of a data-driven approach for materials prediction lies in narrowing down the search space of thousands of materials to a subset of prospective candidates. Recently, the open-access organic materials database OMDB was released providing electronic structure data for thousands of previously synthesized three-dimensional organic crystals. Based on the OMDB, we report about the implementation of a novel density of states similarity search tool which is capable of retrieving materials with similar density of states to a reference material. The tool is based on the approximate nearest neighbor algorithm as implemented in the ANNOY library and can be applied via the OMDB web interface. The approach presented here is wide-ranging and can be applied to various problems where the density of states is responsible for certain key properties of a material. As the first application, we report about materials exhibiting electronic structure similarities to the aromatic hydrocarbon p-terphenyl which was recently discussed as a potential organic high-temperature superconductor exhibiting a transition temperature in the order of 120 K under strong potassium doping. Although the mechanism driving the remarkable transition temperature remains under debate, we argue that the density of states, reflecting the electronic structure of a material, might serve as a crucial ingredient for the observed high-Tc. To provide candidates which might exhibit comparable properties, we present 15 purely organic materials with similar features to p-terphenyl within the electronic structure, which also tend to have structural similarities with p-terphenyl such as space group symmetries, chemical composition and molecular structure. The experimental verification of these candidates might lead to a better understanding of the underlying mechanism in case similar superconducting properties are revealed. Since the first discovery of superconductivity within organic materials in the late 1970s In contrast to the small transition temperatures observed so far, it has been recently reported that potassium-doped p-terphenyl exhibits a superconducting transition temperature of 123 K which is comparable to transition temperatures of high-temperature superconducting cuprates The data mining is performed on electronic structure data of 11,512 organic crystals stored within the open-access Organic Materials Database (OMDB) Recently, a data mining approach was successfully applied, for example, for the search of stable nitride perovskites Even though important contributions towards ab initio description of superconductivity were achieved The paper is structured as follows. At the beginning, we give details on the implementation of the novel DOS similarity search tool within the OMDB. Afterwards, we illustrate the electronic structure of the prototype material p-terphenyl which was calculated in the framework of the density functional theory (DFT). Finally, we present results of the similarity search within the OMDB and list the 15 materials which are most similar to p-terphenyl. We developed a DOS similarity search tool which is freely available online at https: //omdb.diracmaterials.org/search/dos. It allows to retrieve materials from the OMDB with a DOS similar to the one of a provided reference material. The DOS search tool implementation follows the same line as the previously developed pattern search tool for electronic band structures within the OMDB The interface. At the current stage, the reference DOS uploaded by the user has to be either in the JSON format or in the DOSCAR format, which is the standard output of the VASP code DOS, the user specifies the part of interest, which is used as the search query. The specified part also defines the size of the moving window used for the search. Furthermore, an energy search range needs to be specified, which can either comprise the entire DOS available for all stored materials or it can be fixed to a specific value, as the minimum energy of the lowest conduction band as a lower bound or the maximum energy of the highest valence band as an upper bound of the search window. Search algorithm. Given the query DOS of length w, we employ a moving window approach, where DOS contained within the OMDB are scanned using a moving window of the same size w and stride s, which defines the number of data points the window jumps at each scanning step. Since s should be small with respect to w (which is of the order of eV), we set s = 0.02 eV. In the case the user specifies a fixed search bound, e.g., corresponding to the maximum energy of the highest valence band, only one search window for each material is used. Both the query DOS and the data points contained within the moving window (Fig. Due to high computational costs, a linear brute force solution, i.e., a sequential comparison of all data vectors to a search query, is not suitable for online implementations, where results are expected within a short amount of time. Therefore, we use the approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm as implemented within the ANNOY library. During an indexing step, ANNOY creates a forest of binary search trees by applying the random projection method, partitioning the d-dimensional search space. During the search step, the trees allow to find the closest vectors to a query vector within logarithmic time. Since this performance improvement comes in the expense of increased memory usage, only moving windows of 1 eV and 2 eV are indexed at the current stage and available for search. More details about the approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm and the ANNOY library can be found in Ref. Crystal structure and electronic structure The organic compound p-terphenyl or 1,4-Diphenylbenzene crystallizes within a monoclinic crystal structure obeying the space group P 2 1 /a The electronic structure of p-terphenyl for a nonoptimized unit cell with ionic positions according to Ref. The electronic structure of the reference material pterphenyl was calculated in the framework of the density functional theory The energy cut-off was set to 400 eV. Due to the light atoms involved, the calculations were performed spinpolarized but without spin-orbit coupling. For the integration in k-space, a 6 × 6 × 6 Γ-centered mesh accord-ing to Monkhorst and Pack To identify materials with similar electronic properties as p-terphenyl, the DOS similarity search tool was applied to 11,512 materials stored within the OMDB at the moment of writing. For each material, the search was performed separately for the region below the highest occupied state as well as above the lowest unoccupied state. We used the search window size of 2 eV with the maximum energy of the highest valence band / minimum energy of the lowest conduction band as an upper / lower bound of the search window (see also Fig. In general, a striking correlation between the crystal structure of the identified materials with the reference material can be observed. 8 out of 15 materials exhibit the same space group and one material belongs to the same crystal class. Additionally, 14 of the 15 materials contain aromatic rings and 10 of the 15 materials contain almost planar molecules comparable to p-terphenyl. The mechanisms guiding the high-temperature superconductivity in p-terphenyl are still unclear. The first attempts were reported by Mazziotti et al. Considering a BCS-type mechanism to induce superconductivity, the transition temperature T c increases with increasing DOS at the Fermi level N (E F ) and coupling constant g, T c ∼ e -1/|g|N (EF) . ( As shown before, pristine p-terphenyl is a large band gap insulator. However, according to Ref. We described the implementation of the novel density of states similarity search tool based on the approximate nearest neighbor method implemented in the ANNOY package. In connection to the present work, the search tool was released within the web interface of the OMDB, an open-access electronic structure database for previously synthesized organic materials. The approach presented in the current work is wide-ranging and can be applied to various problems where the density of states is (or might be) connected to the properties of interest. To propose a guidance in narrowing down the search space for novel organic high-temperature superconductors, we applied the novel search tool to query for organic materials with similar electronic properties to the reference material p-terphenyl. Under strong potassium doping, p-terphenyl was recently reported to exhibit a superconducting transition temperature comparable to those of known high-T c cuprates. Resulting from the data-mining exercise, we propose 15 materials as candidates to search for high-T c superconductivity (Table The experimental verification of the candidates presented within this paper under similar conditions as reported for potassium doped p-terphenyl might lead to a better understanding of the prospective hightemperature superconductivity within this material. To date, the mechanism driving the remarkable transition temperature remains under debate. Furthermore, the crystal structure and chemical composition of the final compound after p-terphenyl was exposed high temperatures as well as highly reactive potassium for several hours remains to be investigated. Therefore, we believe that the field will benefit from investigating additional materials with similar properties. (b) Similar materials within conduction bands