We report the occurrence of the zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP) in an InAs nanowire coupled to PbIn superconductors with varying temperature, bias voltage, and magnetic field. The ZBCP is suppressed with increasing temperature and bias voltage above the Thouless energy of the nanowire. Applying a magnetic field also diminishes the ZBCP when the resultant magnetic flux reaches the magnetic flux quantum h/2e. Our observations are consistent with theoretical expectations of reflectionless tunneling, in which the phase coherence between an electron and its Andreev-reflected hole induces the ZBCP as long as time-reversal symmetry is preserved. Nano-hybrid superconducting devices, which consist of low-dimensional nanostructures in contact with superconducting electrodes, provide a useful platform for developing novel quantum information devices. In particular, InAs nanowires (NWs) have attracted intense interests as a good material system for fabricating nano-hybrid superconducting devices owing to their outstanding electrical properties, such as high electron mobility, low effective mass, and relatively easy formation of low ohmic contacts. So far, a supercurrent transistor The superconducting proximity effect in nano-hybrid superconducting junctions can be understood with the Andreev reflection With a non-ideal N-S interface, there exists a finite probability for the incident electron to be partially reflected as an electron and also retro-reflected as a hole via the Andreev reflection. When the mirror-reflected electron undergoes several scatterings with disorder centers in the N region and is incident on the N-S interface again, an additional Andreev reflection can occur. This results in another retro-reflected hole tracing back the previous scattering paths and continuing successive Andreev reflections. This process, which is called reflectionless tunneling InAs NWs were grown on a Si substrate by ultrahigh vacuum molecular beam epitaxy with gold particles (~50 nm diameter) as the catalyst The 10 nm thick Au film was used as a capping layer. Figure The superconducting transition temperature and perpendicular critical field of the PbIn film were obtained as T C = 7.3 K and B C = 0.24 T, respectively Figure When the temperature was lowered below T C , the sample resistance started to increase and display an insulating R(T) behavior (see Figure where Z is a parameter characterizing the height of a presumable tunnel barrier at the N-S interface (Z = 0 for ideal transparency), V is the bias voltage, R N is the normal-state resistance, f 0 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function, A(E) is the probability of the Andreev reflection, and B(E) is the probability of the specular reflection. For E < Δ, A(E) is given by The R(T) curve near T C fitted well with the calculation result of (dI NS /dV) -1 using Z = 2 and Δ 0 = 1.14 meV as fitting parameters, as shown in Figure The differential conductance G = dI/dV was plotted as a function of V at the base temperature T = 2.4 K (see Figure We note that the ZBCP diminished at a characteristic voltage of V * = 0.22 mV. Increasing the lock-in bias voltage showed a similar suppression of the ZBCP, as shown in As we increased the temperature, the ZBCP height gradually decreased and disappeared at the characteristic temperature T * = 3.6 K, as shown in Figure When the magnetic field B was applied perpendicular to the substrate, the ZBCP was suppressed and eventually vanished at B * = 36 mT, as shown in Figure given by In conclusion, we observed ZBCP in an InAs NW contacting PbIn superconducting electrodes. The temperature, bias voltage, and magnetic field dependencies of the ZBCP were consistent with the theoretical expectations of the phase-coherent electronic transport via reflectionless tunneling. The characteristic energy for observing the ZBCP was determined by the Thouless energy of the NW, while the phase coherence between the electron and its retroreflected hole was preserved. Our experimental studies would provide clear criteria for discriminating between ZBCPs due to the Andreev reflection and due to Majorana fermions. 