Intra-unit cell magnetic order has been observed in four different families of high-temperature superconductors from polarized neutron diffraction experiments and supported by several other techniques. That order, which does not break translation symmetry, is consistent with the predicted orbital moments generated by two microscopic loop currrents in each CuO2 cell. Recently, using polarized neutron diffraction, Croft et al [Phys. Rev. B 96, 214504 (2017)] claim to find no evidence for such orbital loop currents in charge ordered YBa2Cu3O6+x. Their experiment is done with detwinned samples at least 100 times smaller than in previous experiments without counting much longer. We show by a detailed quantitative analysis of their data that contrary to their conclusion, the magnetic signal falls below their threshold of detection. None of the data reported by Croft et al challenge the universality of the intra-unit cell order in cuprates. I. In an extensive series of papers The PND experiment we discuss here is very challenging In a recent paper, Croft et al • First, the neutron intensity is proportional to sample mass. By using samples at least ∼ 100 times smaller than ours on a spectrometer with about 3 times larger neutron flux (at the used wavelength), Croft et al • Second, Croft et al • Third, the comparison with local probes results in The claimed upper bound for a possible magnetic moment is therefore not correct and should be disregarded. None of the data reported by Croft et al that the IUC magnetic order is universal in all cuprates. we compare the raw experimental data obtained by Fauqué et al As the IUC magnetic order does not break the symmetry of the lattice, one should study the inverse flipping ratio R -1 meas at a Bragg position where the signal is expected to highlight a possible magnetic intensity at low temperature. The inverse flipping ratio R -1 meas reads: where I N SF and I SF stand for the non-spin-flip and spinflip intensities, respectively. As regularly emphasized[3-5, 9, 10, 12, 14], R -1 meas is essentially a ratio of measured quantities and does not depend on any assumptions on nuclear structure factor or flipping ratio. Changes in R -1 meas for the same Bragg peak should be comparable among the different studies. The second part of Eq. 1 shows how the magnetic intensity I mag can be extracted by comparison with the bare inverse flipping ratio R -1 0 (background baseline) as it has been shown in several reports We report in Fig. Before showing alternative analyses of Croft et al • First, the ratio ∆R -1 mag = I mag /I N SF in Eq. 1 does not change appreciably versus doping for the Bragg peak (011) in the doping range of interest here (p=0.1-0.12). I N SF corresponds to the nuclear structure factor |F N | 2 where F N is given for instance by Eq. ( • Second, it should be noticed that the data shown for the Bragg peak (011) of sample C is the best example of a IUC magnetic signal ever reported in YBCO In [15], we show various points which can explain the discrepancy of Fig. Next, the dynamical nature of IUC magnetic signal as shown by recent muon spin resonance data Further, we turn to a consistent comparison of the magnetic signal reported by Fauqué et al The inverse of flipping ratio at the reflection (020) is linear in temperature with a positive slope as it has been shown to exist For clarity, the same error of δR -1 ≃ ± 0.1% is used for all plots. That error is typically equivalent to an error of ≃ ±2 on the flipping ratio or δI SF ≃ ±4% of the spinflip intensity. This uncertainty is not negligible as our best report of a magnetic signal is ∆R -1 mag ≃ 0.25% (Fig. In Fig. Following the various points discussed above and in line with the Fig. In conclusion, Croft et al The IUC magnetic signal has been well documented for the last decade using polarized neutron diffraction The experiment is highly non-trivial with many technical pitfalls to miss the genuine signal. Among other features, it requires sufficient data at high temperature for a proper knowledge of the background. The IUC magnetic signal falls below the experimental sensitivity of the experiment of Croft et al 