Using a wavefunction Dirac Bogoliubov-de Gennes method, we demonstrate that the tunable Fermi level of a graphene layer in the presence of Rashba spin orbit coupling (RSOC) allows for producing an anomalous nonlocal Andreev reflection and equal spin superconducting triplet pairing. We consider a graphene junction of a ferromagnet-RSOC-superconductor-ferromagnet configuration and study scattering processes, the appearance of spin triplet correlations, and charge conductance in this structure. We show that the anomalous crossed Andreev reflection is linked to the equal spin triplet pairing. Moreover, by calculating current cross-correlations, our results reveal that this phenomenon causes negative charge conductance at weak voltages and can be revealed in a spectroscopy experiment, and may provide a tool for detecting the entanglement of the equal spin superconducting pair correlations in hybrid structures. From the perspective of BCS theory, s-wave singlet superconductivity is a bosonic phase created by the coupling of two charged particles with opposite spins and momenta (forming a so-called Cooper pair) through an attractive potential On the other hand, the interplay of s-wave superconductivity and an inhomogeneous magnetization can convert the superconducting spin singlet correlations into equal spin triplets In this paper, we show that the existence of the equal spin superconducting triplet correlations can be revealed through charge conductance spectroscopy of a graphene based ferromagnet -Rashba SOC -superconductor -ferromagnet junction. We study all possible electron/hole reflections and transmissions in such a configuration and show that by tuning the fermi level a regime is accessible in which spin reversed cotunneling and usual crossed Andreev reflections are blocked while a conventional cotunneling and anomalous nonlocal Andreev channel is allowed. We justify our findings by analyzing the bandstructure of the system. Moreover, we calculate various superconducting correlations and show that, in this regime, the equal spin triplet correlation has a finite amplitude while the unequal spin triplet component vanishes. Our results show that the anomalous crossed Andreev reflection results in a negative charge conductance at low voltages applied across the junction and can be interpreted as evidence for the generation and entanglement of equal spin superconducting triplet correlations in hybrid structures in which ε is the quasiparticles' energy and T represents a time-reversal operator The magnetization h l,r in the ferromagnet segments are assumed fixed along the z direction with a finite intensity h l,r . λ is the strength of Rashba spin orbit coupling and U 0 is an electrostatic potential in the superconducting region. Previous self-consistent calculations have demonstrated that sharp interfaces between the regions can be an appropriate approximation To determine the properties of the system, we diagonalize the DBdG Hamiltonian Eq. (1) in each region and obtain corresponding eigenvalues: The associated eigenfunctions are given in appendix. The wavevector of a quasiparticle in region i is k i = (k i x , q n ) so that its transverse component is assumed conserved upon scattering. In what follows, we consider a heavily doped superconductor U 0 ε, ∆ which is an experimentally relevant regime Since the magnetization in F regions is directed along the z axis, which is the quantization axis, it allows for unambiguously analyzing spin-dependent processes. Therefore, we consider a situation where an electron with spinup (described by wavefunction ψ F,+ e,↑ ) hits the RSO interface at x = 0 due to a voltage bias applied. This particle can reflect back (ψ F,- e,↑(↓) ) with probability amplitude r or enter the superconductor as a Cooper pair and a hole (ψ F,- h,↑(↓) ) with probability amplitude r reflects back which is the so called Andreev reflection. Hence, the total wavefunction in the left F region is (see appendix and Ref. 54): The total wavefunction in the RSO and S parts are superpositions of right and left moving spinors with different quantum states n; ψ RSO n and ψ S n (see appendix): , respectively. The incident particle eventually can transmit into the right F region as an electron or hole (ψ F,+ e,↑↓ , ψ F,+ h,↑↓ ) with probability amplitudes t ↑↓ e and t ↑↓ h : (5) The transmitted hole is the so called crossed Andreev reflection (CAR). By matching the wavefunctions at F-RSO, RSO-S, and S-F interfaces we obtain the probabilities described above. Figure To have a strong anomalous CAR signal, we set L S = 0.4ξ S which is smaller than the superconducting coherence length and L RSO = 0.5ξ S α c e,↑ = arcsin These critical angles are useful in calibrating the device properly for a regime of interest. For the spin-reversed cotunneling, the critical angle is denoted by α c e,↓ while for the conventional CAR we show this quantity by α c h,↓ . Hence, to filter out these two tranmission channels, we set μ Fr = h r and choose a representative value 0.8∆ 0 . In this regime, we see that α c e(h),↓ → 0 at low energies i.e. μ Fr , h r , ∆ ε → 0 and thus, the corresponding transmissions are eliminated. This is clearly seen in Figs. To gain better insights into the anomalous CAR, we calculate the opposite (f 0 ) and equal (f 1 ) spin pair correlations in the F r region where K and K denote different valleys and β stands for A and B sub-lattices FIG. set of parameters where μ F l = μ Fr = h l = 0.8∆ 0 , while h r = 0.4∆ 0 . The opposite spin triplet pairing f 0 is now nonzero too. Therefore, at low voltages and the parameter set of Fig. We calculate the charge conductance through the BTK formalism: where we define G ↑↓ = 2e 2 |ε + μ l ± h l |W/hπ in which W is the width of the junction. Figures e,(h) , corresponding to the transmission coefficients t ↑↓(↑↓) e,(h) used in Eq. In line with the theoretical works summarized in Ref. ξ S , we expect that the negative conductance explored in this paper is experimentally accessible. In conclusion, motivated by recent experimental achievements in the induction of spin orbit coupling into a graphene layer Acknowledgments-We are grateful to M. Salehi for valuable and helpful discussions. M.A. also thanks K. Halterman for useful conversations. The eigenfunctions in the F regions can be expressed by: where 0 n is a 1 × n zero matrix and T is a transpose operator. The junction width W is assumed wide enough so that the y component of wavevector k y ≡ q n is conserved and we factor out the corresponding multiplication i.e. exp(iq n y). The α e(h) x,↑(↓) ) variables are the propagation angles for electron and hole excitations with a given spin orientation. The x component of wavevectors are not conserved upon scattering and is given by v F k F,e x,↑↓ = (ε The wavefunctions are not propagating for larger values of q n than a critical value q c . The critical values for electrons and holes with spin-up/-down are q c e,↑↓ = |ε The energy spectrum in the RSO region is gapless with a splitting of magnitude 2λ between its subbands. The eigenfunctions in the RSO part are: x , ψ RSO,± e,η=-1 (x) = ± f e -e ∓iθ e -, 1, -i, ∓if e -e ±iθ e -, 0 4 T e ±ik RSO,e x,- the x component of wavevectors are given by v F k x,η ). Here θ e(h) η are the electron and hole propagation angles in the RSO region. The wavefunctions in the superconductor part within the heavily dopped regime are given by: ψ S,± e,1 (x) = e +iβ , ±e +iβ , 0 2 , e -iφ , ±e -iφ , 0 2 T e ±ik S,e x x , ψ S,± e,2 (x) = 0 2 , e +iβ , ±e +iβ , 0 2 , e -iφ , ±e -iφ and the macroscopic phase of superconductor is shown by φ. Nonetheless, the phase of a single superconductor plays no role in the quantum transport and we therefore set it zero in our calculations. Here, we set μ Fr = μ F l = 0, μ RSO = 2.6∆0, λ = ∆0, LRSO = 0.5ξS, LS = 0.4ξS, h l = 0, and hr = 0.8∆0. In order to determine the origines of the abrupt changes and nonmonotonic behaviors seen in the charge conductance of Fig. We clearly see that by increasing eV , N Fr linearly increases whereas N Fr ↓ decreases with an offset equal to h r . The two DOSs are equal at h r /2 where the transmission through the spin-down subband is maximal. From Fig. FIG. To perform such analysis in the presence of nonzero chemical potentials, one needs to carefully account for these quantities and determine how the bandstructures change. We now proceed to analyze this more complicated case we employed in the main text. Figure The abrupt changes in the charge conductance occur when a hole passes from the valance band into the conduction band. In other words, as discussed earlier, when the voltage bias crosses a Dirac point, the corresponding DOS approaches zero and therefore, an abrupt change appears. In the latter set of parameters we considered, one can introduce three regimes: In regime i, an incident spin-up electron can be crossed Andreev reflected with spin-up and -down in the conduction and valance bands, respectively. By increasing the voltage bias eV , in regime ii, spin-up crossed Andreev reflected FIG. hole remains in the conduction band while the hole with spin-down moves into the valance band. In this case, we expect an abrupt change in the charge conductance because eV crosses a Dirac point with zero DOS. It is worth mentioning that, if the crossed Andreev reflected hole reisdes in the conduction band, the reflection is of the retro type whereas if the crossed Andreev reflected hole passes through the valance band, the reflection is of the specular type. In other words, crossed Andreev reflected holes with different spins move in different directions. In regime iii, both crossed Andreev reflected holes with spin-up and -down reside in the valance band. Therefore, one more abrupt change in the charge conductance occurs when passing to this regime and a Dirac point with zero DOS exists at |μ Fr + h r |. Considering the parameters of Fig. 