The results of chaos simulations in Josephson Fluxonic Diode (JFD) subject to the magnetic field, rf driving and dc biasing currents in the RCSJ model are reported. The dynamic behavior of this nonlinear device is mapped as a function of loss, bias, frequency and amplitude of rf excitation which leads to find sustainable fluxon oscillation regions in microwave application. As a result, chaos does not happen if either the dc bias or the rf excitation is below specific value, but the loss term can change this state without affected by rf frequency. An attempt is made to explain the boundaries of the chaotic region in terms of parameter maps. One of the most fascinating features of nonlinear physical systems is that they can exhibit spatial and temporal structures, which can be described both by their coherent and chaotic natures Simulation results of chaotic behavior in Long Josephson Junctions (LJJs) modeled by the perturbed sine-Gordon equation in constant magnetic fields showed that dc current bias cannot induce chaotic flux dynamics, while AC bias current can do In this paper Josephson fluxonic diode as dual of semiconductor p-n junction in superconducting electronics, is considered for its periodic and chaotic states at the presence of rf excitation. Periodic fluxon motion can be generated when a Josephson fluxonic diode is driven by a uniform dc bias with an external spatially reversing magnetic field called control current In this equation, the φ(x,t) is phase difference of JFD's electrodes and has soliton-like solutions which correspond to magnetic field quanta inside the JFD, normally called fluxon or vortices and dependents on McCumber hysteresis parameter (β), frequency (Ω), amplitude of radiation (ρ ω ) and finally applied dc control and bias current (ρ b +ρ c ). For simplicity, all length parameters are measured in units of the Josephson penetration depth λ J , time in units of 1/ω J where ω J is the Josephson plasma frequency and current amplitudes by maximum Josephson supercurrent I c . Typically, the Resistively and Capacitively Shunted Josephson Junction (RCSJ) model is found an appropriate approach to study φ(x,t) solutions for chaos examination in long Josephson junction which can be used for JFD as well The structure of this paper is as follows: In Section 2, we provide all the necessary preliminaries including the basics on Josephson fluxonic diode, the RCSJ modeling, chaos analyzes methods including Poincare map, bifurcation diagrams and power spectra which are described in continue. Section 3 contains the results and the discussion, and finally, Section 4 summarizes the main conclusions for this work. JFD is a long Josephson junction to which a spatially reversing magnetic field is applied represents the ideal behavior of a unit cell in JFD. However, the characteristics of JFD can accurately estimates according to an equivalent electrical model; namely RCSJ in which each Josephson junction unit cell is described by an ideal junction J shunted by resistance R n and capacitance C to form a parallel circuit. Series elements in this model rise from JFD superconductor's plate. The surface impedance of a superconductor plate can be expressed by a complex number whose imaginary part is positive. The real part of this impedance represents the electric loss which manifests itself as a series resistance R c in the line and its positive imaginary part shows that superconductor plate is inductive by L.The detailed study of chaos in JFD depends on the parameter values and on the boundary conditions, which will be introduced in the following for the particular conditions. When the applied rf excitation is symmetric on at both side, the boundary conditions for the first and last unit cell of JFD will be: where L is total length of JFD. In order to investigate how fluxon oscillations are affected by an rf bias and other parameters, circuit simulation were performed in which the steady-state behavior was determined for a selection of rf amplitudes and frequencies in the range 0.01 < ρ ω < 0.1 and 0.1 < Ω <1 respectively. At the beginning, the rest condition (ρb = ρ c =0) is considered. Then control current is fixed to ρ c =0.15 with -1.0 < ρ b < 1.0 and β varies to be 10,100 and 1000. For these values of dc bias, the JFD supports fluxon oscillations on different operating points and includes a frequency to be called the proper fluxon oscillation frequency. The algorithm includes totally 1000 unit cell for L=70λ J , J c =700 A/cm 2 and ω J =140 GHz at voltages below the energy gap. Also, the transition region is about 20λ J. In all cases the rf steady-state behavior is characterized by applying dc control and bias initially, then wait for a steady-state response and in continue, rf excitation will apply. So we inspect the solution over at least 10 rf periods, but in cases where chaos is present at least 50 rf periods will be computed and often computations extends to 100 rf periods. In practical chaotic circuit exploration, it is useful to have a detailed knowledge about the dynamical behavior of the system in different parameter ranges, so that one can avoid certain undesirable regions in the parameter space to optimize the performance. For that purpose, tools include in this study are: Poincare map in the phase space, and power spectra 22 . The Poincare map in phase space was displayed by having the φ t of simulation results (which is proportional to output voltage) and map the position in phase space for every rf cycle. In this way the order of a sub-harmonic oscillation was determined as the number of points in the Poincare map and chaos appeared typically as a strange attractor. More accurately, power spectra allow a non-periodic signal to be decomposed into harmonic signals by using spectrogram. The power spectrum of a periodic signal presents a sharp peak at the rf excitation frequency Ω and its harmonics, as well. Alternatively, a quasi-periodic signal will show several frequency peaks as well as their lineal combinations. However, a chaotic signal is characterized by a continuous power spectrum like that of a random noise source along the frequency. The solutions of the RCSJ model for JFD have been computed for different values of the parameters and initial conditions. It is worth pointing out that the simulations have been carried out via MATLAB. It contains an implementation with time-dependent simulation. Primarily, we compare the results for an ideal case, by choosing the rest parameters ρ b = ρ c = 0 and limit Ω to 0.1 for very low rf amplitude (ρ ω = 0.01). In this case, we have considered the β = 10. Fig. Base on the results, in non-chaotic Phase space plots (Fig 2 .a) the trajectory resembles an elliptical orbit repeating itself continuously, since it returns to the same point under the same conditions. On the other hand, Fig . ρ ω is selected slightly below ρ th at the edge of periodic to chaotic transition. In these cases, the phase space displays an orbit changing. Thus, the elliptical path stays periodic but repeats itself with a new period, having two orbits or more instead of only one. This phenomenon occurs in nonlinear systems by amplitude increasing, and consists of a bifurcation of the original loop as the number of time required to return to the original state changes. The ρ th for this bifurcation decrease as β increase (0.0895, 0.0855 and 0.0850 respectively for β=10 On the other hand, if the rest parameters change to a biased one (ρb ≠ 0, ρ c ≠ 0), JFD will forward biase to a voltage state or reverse to a short circuit mode. Principally, application of the bias sets solitons and antisolitons in motion by a Lorentz-type force and pushes or pulls them based on bias polarization. Depending on the level of loss, they remain stationary, pass through each other or annihilate with each other. In a low loss junction with β=1000, they move and pass through each other while in a lossy junction of β=10 the annihilating will happen In 