Despite the fact that 1111-type iron arsenides hold the record transition temperature of ironbased superconductors, their electronic structures have not been studied much because of the lack of high-quality single crystals. In this study, we compehensively determine the Fermi surface in the antiferromagnetic state of CaFeAsF, a 1111 iron-arsenide parent compound, by performing quantum oscillation measurements and band-structure calculations. The determined Fermi surface consists of a symmetry-related pair of Dirac electron cylinders and a normal hole cylinder. From analyses of quantum-oscillation phases, we demonstrate that the electron cylinders carry a nontrivial Berry phase π. The carrier density is of the order of 10 -3 per Fe. This unusual metallic state with the extremely small carrier density is a consequence of the previously discussed topological feature of the band structure which prevents the antiferromagnetic gap from being a full gap. We also report a nearly linear-in-B magnetoresistance and an anomalous resistivity increase above about 30 T for B c, the latter of which is likely related to the quantum limit of the electron orbit. Intriguingly, the electrical resistivity exhibits a nonmetallic temperature dependence in the paramagnetic tetragonal phase (T > 118 K), which may suggest an incoherent state. Our study provides a detailed knowledge of the Fermi surface in the antiferromagnetic state of 1111 parent compounds and moreover opens up a new possibility to explore Dirac-fermion physics in those compounds. Since the discovery of superconductivity at T c = 26 K in LaFeAs(O 1-x F x ) by Kamihara et al. There is a variant of the 1111 iron arsenides, i.e., CaFeAsF (or SrFeAsF) In this article, we report resistivity and magnetictorque measurements down to 0.03 K (0.4 K) up to 18 T (45 T) performed on high-quality single crystals of CaFeAsF. The temperature dependence of the resistivity is nonmetallic down to T s = 118 K and exhibits two clearly separated anomalies at T s and T N = 107 K, which are attributed to a structural and an antiferromagnetic transition, respectively. We observe clear quantum oscillations both in the resistivity and magnetic torque in the antiferromagnetic ground state. Two frequencies α and β are resolved, and their field-angle dependences indicate that they are from highly two-dimensional Fermisurface cylinders. From detailed analyses of the oscillation phases, we find a nontrivial Berry phase π associated with the α oscillation, demonstrating that the α cylinder is a Dirac-fermion cylinder. Our band-structure calculations indicate that the Fermi surface consists of a hole cylinder at the Γ point of the Brillouin zone and a symmetry-related pair of electron cylinders originating from Dirac lines located away from Γ. Thus the α and β cylinders are attributed to the electron and hole cylinders, respectively. The carrier density is extremely small, of the order of 10 -3 per Fe. Additionally, we report a nearly linear-in-B magnetoresistivity and an anomalous resistivity increase above about 30 T for B c. Among other things, our work opens up a new possibility to explore Dirac-fermion physics in a branch of the family of the iron-based superconductors with a simple band structure. High-quality single crystals of CaFeAsF were prepared by a CaAs self-flux method in Shanghai A 20-T superconducting magnet with a dilution refrigerator at the National Institute for Materials Science and the 45-T hybrid magnet with a 3 He refrigerator at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory were used. In either magnet, samples can be rotated in situ, and the field angle θ is measured from the c axis. Electrical resistivity ρ measurements were performed with a four-contact method both for current I ab and I c (see Fig. Fully relativistic electronic band-structure calculations with spin-orbit coupling were performed by using the WIEN2k code with the PBE-GGA potential Figure The resistivities decrease sharply below T s = 118 K and exhibit a kink at T N = 107 K as reported in The room-temperature in-plane and c-axis resistivities, averaged out over the three in-plane and three c-axis samples, are 1.9(8) mΩcm and 2.3(6)×10 2 mΩcm, respectively. The large errors can be ascribed to errors in the sample dimensions, irregular sample shapes and inhomogeneous current distribution. The large anisotropy ρ c /ρ ab of the order of 10 2 is broadly consistent with the large upper-critical-field anisotropy of 9 observed for CaFe 0.882 Co 0.118 AsF Quantum oscillation of the resistivity ∆ρ can be described by where ρ 0 is the background resistivity, C a positive coefficient, and we have neglected harmonics. We have tacitly assumed that σ = ρ/(ρ 2 + ρ 2 H ) ≈ ρ -1 since the Hall resistivity ρ H is much smaller than ρ In order to search for higher frequencies, i.e., larger FS pockets, we extended measurements up to B = 45 T by using the hybrid magnet. The inset of Fig. The main panel of Fig. We also measured magnetic torque [Fig. We now consider the spin reduction factors R s and oscillation phases by analyzing the waveform of the observed oscillations. To avoid ambiguity due to background subtraction, we subtract the same linear background a + bB cos θ with a = 260 μΩ cm and b = 89.9 μΩ cm/T from the raw ρ(B) data. The parameters were determined by fitting a line to the ρ(B) curve of Fig. For a 2D FS cylinder, the effective mass varies as 1/cosθ as the field direction θ is varied. R s varies accordingly and may cross zero to change sign. For such a "spin-zero" (R s = 0), gμ * = 1 + 2n where n is an integer. We begin with R s for the β oscillation. The Fourier transforms in Fig. Let us assume that the first spin-zero is at θ = 50 • , where μ * = 1.43 and hence g = 0.699(1 + 2n). If n = 2 (g = 3.49), the second and third spin-zeros occur at θ = 62.6 and 69.1 • , which are consistent with the experimental observations. No other choice of n is consistent with the experiment: n < 2 cannot explain the second spin-zero while n > 2 produces extra spin-zeros. Since μ * = 0.92 at θ = 0, πgμ * /2 = 1.61π and hence R s > 0. The conclusion R s > 0 at θ = 0 is confirmed by a more general analysis which shows that the experimental observations can be explained with a g value between 3.30 and 3.55, corresponding to the first spin-zero between 49.2 and 52.6 • . Since ∆ρ shows a maxima at F β /B = 3 at low angles where R s > 0 [Figs. We now consider φ D for the β orbit. Figure We next examine the α oscillation. Let us assume that it is at θ = 50 • , where μ * = 0.596 and hence g = 1.68(1 + 2n). For n 1, R s changes sign at least once between θ = 57.4 and 71.8 • , which is inconsistent with the experimental observation. Hence, n = 0, and R s > 0 at θ = 0 (πgμ * /2 = 0.321π). A more general analysis indicates that a g value between 1.41 and 1.73 can explain the experimental observation and confirms R s > 0 at θ = 0. Since the curve for θ = 0 shows a minimum near F α /B = 2 and maxima near F α /B = 1.5 and 2.5, φ B = π for the α oscillation. That is, the α cylinder is a Fermi surface of Dirac fermions. (It is difficult to determine whether φ D = 0 or ±π/4 for the α oscillation: the number of the observed oscillation periods is too small and the resistivity maxima and minima cannot be determined accurately because the oscillation is weak.) We now consider results of our band-structure calculations. Figure First of all, the standard band-structure calculations explain the Fermi surface in the antiferromagnetic state of CaFeAsF reasonably well despite the fact that they significantly overestimate the antiferromagnetic moment. This is very similar to what we saw in the case of the antiferromagnetic state of BaFe 2 As 2 It is interesting to note here that the Fermi surface in the low-temperature nonmagnetic state of FeSe strikingly differs from that expected from band-structure calculations The observed antiferromagnetic metallic state of CaFeAsF is unusual in a sense that the carrier density is as low as 10 -3 per Fe and that one type of the carriers is Dirac fermions. One may ask why CaFeAsF does not become an insulator after the antiferromagnetic ordering despite the strong antiferromagnetic interaction involving states far below E F . The unusual metallic state is actually a decisive demonstration of an early theoretical idea by Ran et al. The theory by Ran et al. is also applicable to the antiferromagnetic state of RFeAsO (R = rare earth) and AFe 2 As 2 (A = Ba, Sr, or Ca). The existence of Dirac fermions in those compounds has been suggested by magnetotransport It would be interesting if one could eliminate the hole cylinder by slightly electron-doping CaFeAsF. One could investigate transport properties of Dirac fermions. Further, one might be able to induce topological superconductivity of Dirac fermions. In the case of BaFe 2 As 2 , in addition to the Dirac electron pockets (the γ pockets in We have observed nearly B-linear magnetoresistance [Fig. The nonmetallic conductivity above T s is enigmatic. Band-structure calculations for the paramagnetic state predict a large Fermi surface similar to that in the paramagnetic state of other 1111 or 122 compounds We also note that the conductivity becomes metallic below the structural (nematic) transition at T s , not the antiferromagnetic one at T N . Since no band folding occurs at T s and the orthorhombic distortion is tiny (0.3%), almost no change is expected for the calculated Fermi surface at T s . This may indicate that the metallic conductivity below T s is owing to the suppression of nematic fluctuations, which in turn may indicate the importance of those fluctuations in driving CaFeAsF into an incoherent state. It is interesting to note that the conductivity near room temperature becomes metallic with Co doping: the resistivity of Ca(Fe 0.88 Co 0.12 )AsF decreases from room temperature down to about 100 K, where it exhibits a broad and shallow minimum Finally, we mention a very recent report of quantum oscillation measurements on SmFeAsO We have compehensively determined the Fermi surface of antiferromagnetic CaFeAsF: it consists of the β hole cylinder at the Γ point and a pair of the α Dirac electron cylinders symmetrically located at positions off Γ toward the antiferromagnetic direction. We have proved that a nontrivial Berry phase π is associated with the α Dirac cylinders. The carrier density is extremely small, of the order of 10 -3 per Fe. This unusual metallic state is a consequence of the previously studied topological nature of the band structure 