Majorana fermions are particles identical to their antiparticles proposed theoretically in 1937 by Ettore Majorana as real solutions of the Dirac equation. Alexei Kitaev suggested that Majorana particles should emerge in condensed matter systems as zero mode excitations in one-dimensional p-wave superconductors, with possible applications in quantum computation due to their non-abelian statistics. The search for Majorana zero modes in condensed matter systems led to one of the first realistic models based in a semiconductor nanowire with high spin-orbit coupling, induced superconducting s-wave pairing and Zeeman splitting. Soon, it was realized that size-quantization effects should generate subbands in these systems that could even allow the emergence of more than one Majorana mode at each edge, resulting in a zero bias peak on the differential conductance with a different shape from the predicted by simplified theoretical models. In this work, we provide a connection between a finitesize nanowire with two occupied subbands and a 2-band Kitaev chain, and discuss the advantage of a one-dimensional model to understand the phenomenology of the system, including the presence of a hidden chiral symmetry and its similarity with a spinfull Kitaev chain under a magnetic field. Q UANTUM computation presents a theoretical framework for efficiently solving hard computational tasks, e.g., factorization of large numbers using Shor's algorithm While in classical computers it is necessary to implement error correction, an alternative route on the quantum case for a fault-tolerant computer is the use of topological quantum computation A final ingredient needed in a topological quantum computer is a way of introducing unitary transformations as logic Antônio L. R. Manesco, Gabriel Weber, and Durval Rodrigues Jr. are with the Lorena Engineering School, University of São Paulo, Lorena, SP, 12600-970 Brazil (e-mail: durval@demar.eel.usp.br, antoniolrm@usp.br). The quantum gates. This can be done with non-abelian braiding statistics As introduced in a seminal paper by Alexei Kitaev, a onedimensional spinless p-wave superconductor (a.k.a. Kitaev chain) can host end modes that are non-abelian anyonic Majorana quasi-particles Due to the interest both in purely scientific as well as technological applications, a large number of realistic systems realizing the phenomenology of the Kitaev chain were proposed. Among these, the most studied, from both theoretical and experimental perspectives, are the semiconductor nanowires with high spin-orbit coupling in the presence of a magnetic field and in proximity to a s-wave superconductor In order to describe a semiconductor nanowire with dimensions L z ≪ L y ≪ L x such that L z is negligible, we use the Hamiltonian where Π i is the canonical momentum, m * is the effective mass, μ is the chemical potential and V (x, L x ; y, L y ) is the confinement potential for the non-interacting electron gas. For a phenomenology similar to the Kitaev chain, we also need to introduce a Rashba spin-orbit coupling and a Zeeman field Finally, a proximity induced superconducting s-wave coupling can be added by taking the total unpaired Hamiltonian and including a superconducting order parameter ∆ according to the mean field Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) prescription where T = iσ y K is the time-reversal operator and K denotes the complex conjugation operator. Now, in order to treat the emergence of subbands in this system, it is necessary to confine the electrons. Following the prescription given by Lutchyn et. al. where τ φ = τ x sin φ + τ y cos φ, E sb = 3π 2 /2m * L 2 y is the subband energy difference and E bm = 8λ/3L y is the band mixing energy. The superconducting order parameters depend on the order parameter of the first and second subbands, ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 , respectively. Also, ∆ 12 is the interband superconducting coupling. In the following, we will show that the Hamiltonian (6) can be mapped to a 2-band Kitaev chain by treating the spin-orbit effects as a perturbation in the weak coupling limit for the induced superconducting order parameter. To develop perturbation theory for the spin-orbit coupling, we take as the unperturbed Hamiltonian, and as the perturbation. For later convenience, we performed a π/2 rotation around the y axis to obtain equations ( Next, assuming that the Zeeman field is strong enough for only one spin channel to be close to the Fermi level, say the spin-up component, we can calculate the first order correction to the set of eigenvectors corresponding only to the spin-up eigenvalues in Having derived the first order corrections to the spin-up eigenvectors, we can compute the effective superconducting order parameters in the presence of a weak spin-orbit coupling: Similar calculations can be performed to project all other terms of the Hamiltonian on the spin-up channel. Finally, we project out the spin-down component by shifting the Fermi energy μ + B/2 → μ to obtain an effective spinless system, given by the following Hamiltonian: The Hamiltonian For the sake of the following discussion about topological invariants, it is convenient to define the quantities: so that, after the similarity transformation the effective Hamiltonian Next, to study the topological properties of the system and, therefore, properly define topological invariants to attest the presence of Majorana bound-states at both ends, it is necessary to account for all the discrete symmetries. Since charge conjugation (C) is manifestly preserved by the BdG theory, the presence of a time-reversal (or at least a pseudotime-reversal) symmetry T that squares to +1 (-1) implies the system is in BDI (DIII) class. In fact, for a system with two internal degrees of freedom, there are two distinct topological classifications given by the chiral symmetries The presence of chiral symmetry requires the Hamiltonian ( for a DIII system, and for a BDI system. In fact, the conditions for both topological classes are analogous to the results obtained by Dumitrescu et. al. To corroborate the influence of the direction of the d vector on the presence of a non-trivial topological BDI phase, we performed independent numerical simulations with the Kwant package with ρ γ = ρ i sin γ + ρ j cos γ, where ρ i and ρ j are arbitrary Pauli matrices in band space and m is the momentumindependent term of μ 12 (p z ) corresponding to the band mixing energy (the quadratic term in momentum was neglected). The results in Fig. to count the number of Majorana bound states hosted at the ends of the nanowire. In Fiq. 2 we show the resulting topological phase diagram as a function of the chemical potential μ and the band mixing m for a case in which the Hamiltonian (21) preserves BDI chiral symmetry. A winding number equal to 2 indicates that two pairs of Majorana excitations are present, one pair for each subband. Finally, we investigate the robustness of the system against disorder generated by charged impurities. This can be done by changing the chemical potential in (21) as where the local disorder potential is given by with a random distribution of charged impurities at the positions {z i }, a characteristic length associated with the disorder range ξ, and a function U i with random values between -U 0 /2 and U 0 /2. In Fig. We have shown that there is a mapping between finite size semiconductor nanowires with high spin orbit coupling and induced s-wave superconductivity to a 2-band Kitaev chain, i.e., a spinless 2-band p-wave superconductor. This is true provided that there are two subbands near the Fermi level and the Zeeman splitting is sufficiently strong to guarantee just one helicity in the limit of weak superconducting coupling and if the spin-orbit effects are small enough to be treated as perturbations. The results are equivalent to spinful p-wave superconductors, as there is a relation between the effects of the interband coupling and the Zeeman field on the breaking of chiral symmetry. Furthermore, the topological phase diagram corroborates the results on the literature regarding the possibility of existing multiple Majorana excitations at both ends of finite size nanowires when BDI chiral symmetry is preserved. We remark that this can be a suitable route for detecting more intense Majorana zero-bias conductance peak in nanowires. Finally, we have shown that the collapse of the bulk gap as a result of disorder generated by charged impurities does not depend only on the disorder amplitude, but it is also related to the range of the disorder. In other words, increasing the characteristic length of the disorder generated by charge fluctuations results in gap closings for lower values of the disorder amplitude.