We theoretically explore the superconducting critical temperature of hole doped blue phosphorene. Implementing the density functional theory calculations, we show that for the hole doped blue phosphorene, the isotropic superconducting state is induced owing to the quite strong electron-phonon coupling. The theory is based on the Migdal-Eliashberg formalism and the critical temperature is obtained through set-of-equations, self-consistency. In addition, we include a vertex correction diagram to the Migdal-Eliashberg formalism. The inclusion of the vertex correction beyond the Migdal-Eliashberg formalism changes the Tc about ±20K, depending on the level of the doping. Our accurate numerical results show that the superconducting critical temperature is still quite high, even in the cases that the vertex correction is implemented. Two-dimensional (2D) superconductivity has attracted much attention for the past decade and its explore has provided insight into a variety of rich physics occurs at the level of quantum phenomena. The fabrication of monolayer cuprate superconductors opens a new venue to investigate 2D materials and afterwards many new fabricated techniques such as molecular beam epitaxy together with the surface reconstruction process, mechanical exfoliation, and different methods for the production of field effect devices were introduced into the field of 2D supercondutors In a 2D material with N layers, the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory Black phosphorene (BP), a single layer analog of black phosphuros with puckered structure, has recently been exfoliated In pristine graphene, there are at least two features which are detrimental to superconductivity at arbitrary low temperatures. First of all, the presence of the zero DOS at the Fermi level and second, the occurrence of a horizontal mirror plane (σ h symmetry) in graphene. While the former is a prerequisite for the superconductivity, the latter only suppresses the EPC, i.e. the linear coupling to flexural modes is forbidden due to the symmetry considerations (the presence σ h symmetry) Compared to graphene, since pristine BLP is an insulators, the electron/hole doping is necessary to induce a critical superconducting state. The required doping could be achieved by the electrical doping or by dopant or adatoms In this paper, we carry out first-principles calculations to calculate the electron-phonon coupling of BLP to investigate the superconducting features of the system. Our theory is stemming from the multi-band Migdal-Eliashberg This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present the methodology used to calculate the superconducting state in the system and also describe second-order selfenergy as a vertex correction. A set-of-equations is solved self-consistency to calculate the energy gap and critical temperature of the system. In Sec. III we present and describe main results of the superconducting state in the system and finally, we conclude and summarize our main results in Sec. IV In order to compute the electronic and phononic band dispersions of the system, the density functional theory (DFT) and density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) We calculate the band structure and electronic DOS of BLP within two different approaches, i.e. a fully selfconsistent calculation and Wannier interpolated bands. Our numerical results show that those results are in very good agreement and thus the results within the Wannier interpolation method are shown in Fig. In Fig. In Fig. At the same time that the ZA modes have out-of-plane displacements for long wavelengths, however, for the BLP, the ZA mode acquires a tiny in-plane displacement as well, owing to its buckled nature. This small mixture be- The dispersion of the phonons and corresponding modes of BLP. In the low-energy, there are three different bands, two of these are characterized by the inplane displacements (acoustic modes) at longer phonon wave lengths. The other remaining mode has major out-of-plane displacement at longer wavelengths. This mode is softer than the other two modes and for a perfectly planar 2D material its energy dispersion acquires a ∼ q 2 dispersion relation. tween the in-plane and out-of-plane displacement results in a β 1 q + β 2 q 2 dispersion for ZA mode at the long-wave lengths, where β 1 is very tiny. In particular, β 1 is very sensitive to the values of the energy cutoff and the method used for imposing the acoustic sum rule In normal state, the Landau Fermi liquid theory appears to work well. The Coulomb interactions give rise to a well-defined quasiparticle with a proper energy dispersion near the Fermi surface and they are assumed to exist. However, the phase transition to the superconducting state invalidates the perturbation approach. Nambu In a system with N separated bands, one may extend the two-component spinor of the Nambu formalism to a 2N component spinor and write the total Hamiltonian in the basis. To commence with, we first drop the Coulomb interaction in the Hamiltonian and consider a system incorporates the itinerant electrons, phonons and the electron-phonon interactions. The reason to do so, is to explore the impact of different bands which are very close to the edge of the valence band maximum (see Fig. is the creation (annihilation) operator for an electron in the band i, reciprocal vector k and spin σ =↑, ↓. The Hamiltonian of the system is given by, where Ŝ, ĝν k ,k and εk are 2N × 2N matrices which elements of the Ŝ satisfies Ŝij = (-1) i-1 δ ij , elements of the matrices ĝν k ,k and εk satisfy the following relations, Here, i and j are band indexes, εk is the single-electron block energy relative to the Fermi level, with ε kiσ = εkiσ -E F , where εkiσ is the energy dispersion which is extracted from DFT calculations. In the following we will represent the Fermi energy shift (δE F ) corresponding to the VBM in the band structure calculation such that E F = E V BM + δE F . Notice, δE F is an input parameter which we use it for a rigid scan of the band structure and within the above mentioned definition of ε kiσ the chemical potential is readily set to zero. ω q,ν is the phonon energy of the wave vector q and mode ν and g νσ ki,k j is electron-phonon matrix element (for the accurate definition of g νσ ki,k j see Appendix. A). By imposing the time reversal symmetry, we thus have g ν↑ ki,k j = g ν↓ -ki,-k j = g ν ki,k j and ε ki↑ = ε -ki↓ = ε ki . Therefore, hereafter, we drop the spin index for the band dispersions and the electron-phonon couplings. The single-particle electronic Green's function is now a which its elements read as, where T is time ordering on the imaginary time axis with -β < τ < β where β is the inverse of temperature (k B = 1) and .... is grand canonical average. The Fourier components of the Ĝ and D, where D refers to the single particle phonon Green's function, are expressed as where ν n = 2nπ/β, ω n = (2n + 1)π/β with integer n are the Matsubara frequencies. Owing to the natural discretization of the Matsubara frequencies, it is more convenient to work with Matsubara frequencies. The matrix representation of the noninteracting Green's function in the Matsubara frequency and reciprocal space representation takes the following form for the electrons Ĝ0 (k, and for the phonons ¡ The fully interacting electron and phonon single particle Green's functions can be represented in terms of the noninteracting Green's function and the self-energy stem-ming from the Dyson equation through where Σ and Γ are the electronic and the phononic selfenergies. Migdal's theorem The self-energy is approximated by the first-order diagram (see Fig. where T is temperature and dk ≡ d 2 k. Apparently, the self-energy matrix is a 2N × 2N matrix as well. Carefully looking at the structure of the Green's function, one may represent it as a combination of the blocks of 2 × 2 matrices which are labeled by combined band indexes i and j. Notice that like Ĝ the self-energy matrix could be represented by a combination of blocks of 2 × 2 matrices. Neglecting the inter-band contributions, the self-energy matrix will be block diagonal and could be represented by 2 × 2 matrices which are labeled only by one band index, furthermore the Ŝ matrix is replaced by σ 3 with, σ 3 = 1 0 0 -1 , in this way the non-interacting In order to simplify the problem, we adopt the averaging procedure which has been applied to the single band case, and we only focus on quantities near the Fermi surface. To do so, we apply the averaging operator, i.e. 1 N i (0) dk (2π) 2 δ(ε ki ) (the averaging operator is band dependent and N i (0) is the contribution of the band i to the total DOS at the Fermi energy such that N (0) = N i (0)) on the both sides of the Eq. ( where Further simplification could be achieved by applying the averaging operator in integration over k on the righthand side of the Eq. ( This treatment relays on the fact that g ν ki,k j variations are smaller near the Fermi surface where Λ ij and Ĝj (ω n ) are defined as while α 2 F ij is not symmetric within the exchange of the indexes, Λ ij is a symmetric function within the exchange of i and j indexes. Considering only the first-order diagram, i.e. Σi (iω n ) = Σ(1) i (iω n ), the self-consistent solution of Eq. ( where unit matrix. In the following, we choose a gauge such that φi (ω n ) = 0 with . By using the mentioned parametrization of Ĝi (k, iω n ), considering the definition of Ĝi (iω n ) and implying the DOS, which is a constant for the bands at the Fermi energy, one may calculate the integral over ε (in Eq. ( Inserting the above equation back to Eq. ( with For the illustrative purposes, we compute the different projections of quantities like α 2 F and F. We define the projected phonon DOS F κ (ω) into the Cartesian coordinates κ, which represents the contribution of the phonons with polarization in the κ direction to the total phononic DOS. We consider only two major directions, an in-plane (xy) and out-of-plane (z), where κ = xy and z, P νq xy = s κ=x,y e qν sκ e qν * sκ and P νq z = s e qν sz e qν * sz , s is the atomic index in the unit-cell, and e qν is phonon polarization for branch ν and vector q (see Appendix A for the definition), and P νq κ satisfies κ=xy,z P νq κ = 1. Figure The second projected quantity is projected α 2 F into the Cartesian directions of the phonon displacements. The quantity is used to identify the contribution of the phonons with a specific character (here Cartesian displacement of phonons) in α 2 F and therefore λ, κ, κ = xy, z and g νxy ki,k j = κ=x,y g νκ ki,k j (for the definition of g νκ ki,k j see Appendix A). Hence, we have the following relations between the projected α 2 Fs as The total α 2 F reads The band projected mass renormalization factor is defined as the relation between total λ and λ ij is λ = In the following, we only focus on the band with the largest contribution on α 2 F (we will show that the main contribution comes from band 5, where band 5 is marked with green color in Fig. The Hamiltonian corresponding to the electronelectron interaction has the following form , c kσ (c † kσ ) annihilates (creates) electrons in band 5, reciprocal vector k and spin σ. being zero or a reciprocal lattice vector K. Considering the above Coulomb contribution to Ĥ0 and neglecting the contribution of the other bands, one may write the isotropic first order self-energy as follows, with VC = 1 and Ĝod holds for off-diagonal part of the Green's function. The reason of holding only the off-diagonal part of Green's function is the fact that the electron-electron interaction has already been considered for diagonal parts in DFT calculation of the electronic band structure In spite of the electron-phonon interaction kernel, the VC does not have any natural upper cutoff in energy summation in Eq. with E is the electronic bandwidth and ω D is the phonon energy scale which is as order of Debye energy is the Heaviside step function and ω c ∼ 5 -10 ω D . In order to achieve a common ground for comparison between the constant DOS approximation and that of variable DOS at the Fermi energy, in analogy with the constant DOS approximation, one may express Eq. (32) as Clearly, by using constant DOS approximation for Eq. ( When there is a flat band near the VBM (as is the case for us corresponding to the electronic structure of the BLP, see Fig. where ε k is the energy dispersion of band 5 relative to E F , ω ν is the phonon energy and g ν is the corresponding electron-phonon interaction. The interaction kernel of this model can be written as In the next step, we fit the kernel of the new system with that of the original system. Happily, we find that the kernel of the system with two phonon modes fits with great accuracy to the kernel of the original model. In order to include vertex corrections, therefore, we evaluate the second crossing self-energy diagram (see Fig. By averaging over the Fermi surface, the self energy is given by The evaluation of the Eq. ( Having calculated the first-and second-order self-energy, the total selfenergy is thus given by As usual, a self-consistency must be imposed between Eq. ( In this section we mainly consider the Migdal-Eliashberg formalism considering the first-order selfenergy. Eventually, we also include the vertex correction to the self-energy and only discuss the superconducting energy gap and critical temperature as well. We define ε k = εk -E F , where εk is the energy dispersion, which is extracted from DFT calculations. Once again, we investigate BLP under the rigid shift of the Fermi energy deep into the lower energies below the VBM. In particular, our analysis is based on δE F = -0.02, -0.055, -0.105, -0.155 and -0.205 eV. The corresponding hole densities are ρ h = 5.0 × 10 13 , 1.5 × 10 14 , 2.4 × 10 14 , 3.1 × 10 14 and 3.8 × 10 14 cm -2 , respectively, the DOS, S is the unit-cell surface area and N tot is the total holes in the valence band when The interpolation is performed for a range of fine meshes. In most critical cases, we use a fine 800 × 800 kmesh and 200 × 200 q-mesh, whereas in less critical cases, we use 200 × 200 k-mesh and 200 × 200 q-mesh. The delta functions are approximated by a Gaussian function as for calculating the α 2 F and λ. The convergence of the quantities is thoroughly checked for a range of σ, k-and q-meshes (see Appendix B). Particularly, the DOS, α 2 F and λ are insensitive to the electronic broadening for a range σ = 0.00125 -0.01 eV and the phononic broadening is set to be σ ph = 0.1 meV. Furthermore, due to the small energy scale of the out-of-plane acoustic mode, inaccuracies are inevitable. In order to filter numerical inaccuracies out, for actual calculations of λ and solutions of the Eliashberg equations a lower cutoff ∼ 1 MeV was considered such that below this cutoff the α 2 F is omitted. To further reduce the numerical complexity of the evaluation of Eq. ( As it is obvious from the inset of Fig. In order to disentangle the share of the N (0) and g for different λ as a function of δE F , in Fig. α 2 F(Ω)dΩ. By moving into the valence band states, the value of the g 2 suppresses. Hence, the reduction in the unit-less electron-phonon coupling as a function of the δE F is not only owing to the suppression of the DOS at the Fermi energy, but also the electron-phonon interaction is generally suppressed when one changes E F deeper into the valence bands. In order to observe which character of the system is responsible for a behavior of the λ as a function of the δE F , we look at the projected α 2 F into Cartesian directions of the phonon displacements. The quantities are already defined in Sec. II C. We consider two major projection directions, i.e. κ, κ = xy, z. In Fig. We have discussed total α 2 F so far and we have not considered the band anisotropy, in case when we increase |δE F | into the valence band states, the Fermi energy intersects with more than one energy band. To clarify the effects of band anisotropy, we plot the projection of the α 2 F in Fig. In order to calculate the energy gap, we do need to calculate the Green's function on the real frequency axis using the analytical continuation We are just interested in the critical temperature, which is also obtained by the zeroth of the energy gap along the imaginary frequency. By using the self-energy decomposition, the gap function, ∆(iω n ) is defined as Having calculated the α 2 F 55 which is almost identical to total α 2 F for all examined δE F (for example see Fig. In the following we solve Eliashberg equations within different approaches discussed in the text and are compared to each other. We consider, namely Migdal-Eliashberg + constant DOS approximation (Eqs. where ω in is the logarithmical averaged frequency. Hereafter, we set μ * c = 0.1. Vanishing the gap function ∆(iω) is the criteria for finding the T c . In Fig. The calculated T c for different δE F is presented in Ta-ble I which is our main results in this paper. Furthermore, in Table In conclusion, we have investigated a possible superconductivity of hole doped BLP. Owing to the mutual presence of nearly flat band near the VBM together with a breaking of σ h symmetry in BLP, a larger electronphonon interaction appears, upon the hole doping system. By projecting the α 2 F into different phonon deformations, it is revealed that the out-of-plane displacement of the phonons have the largest contribution to electronphonon interactions. For optical phonons, the contribu- tion of the in-plane displacements are increased upon furthering δE F into VBM states, where the electronic band structure near the Fermi surface acquires larger p x + p y character, leading to an enhanced coupling of the electrons to the modes with larger in-plane displacements. We have further examined different approaches calculating T c of the BLP for different shifts of E F . The brief description of the approaches we have used is as follows: (i) Allen-Dynes formula, (ii) the first-order self-energy diagram Our calculations, summarized in Table We have shown in this work that the high superconducting critical temperature occurs for a hole doped blue phosphorene ranging from 100 to 40K by considering the hole densities between 5 × 10 13 to 3.8 × 10 14 cm -2 and our prediction should be verified by current experiments. 