The London model describes strongly type-2 superconductors as massive vector field theories, where the magnetic field decays exponentially at the length scale of the London penetration length. This also holds for isotropic multi-band extensions, where the presence of multiple bands merely renormalises the London penetration length. We show that, by contrast, the magnetic properties of anisotropic multi-band London models are not this simple, and the anisotropy leads to the interband phase differences becoming coupled to the magnetic field. This results in the magnetic field in such systems having N + 1 penetration lengths, where N is the number of field components or bands. That is, in a given direction, the magnetic field decay is described by N + 1 modes with different amplitudes and different decay length scales. For certain anisotropies we obtain magnetic modes with complex masses. That means that magnetic field decay is not described by a monotonic exponential increment set by a real penetration length but instead is oscillating. Some of the penetration lengths are shown to diverge away from the superconducting phase transition when the mass of the phase-difference mode vanishes. Finally the anisotropy-driven hybridization of the London mode with the Leggett modes can provide an effectively non-local magnetic response in the nominally local London model. Focusing on the two-component model, we discuss the magnetic field inversion that results from the effective non-locality, both near the surface of the superconductor and around vortices. In the regime where the magnetic field decay becomes non-monotonic, the multiband London superconductor is shown to form weakly-bound states of vortices. The work by F. London and H. London that formulated hydro-magnetostatic theory of superconductivity is one of the most influential works in condensed matter physics. It demonstrated that the magnetic field in a superconductor is described by a massive vector field theory 1 One of the direct consequences is that an externally applied magnetic field decays in a superconductor exponentially at the length scale of the London magnetic field penetration length Λ: B ∝ B 0 e -r/Λ . The superconducting current J varies at the same length scale due to its relation to the magnetic field J = ∇ × B. The work also paved the way to Anderson's demonstration of the Higgs mechanism The range of validity of London electrodynamics is well understood in single component or single band superconductors and should not, in general, be applicable at the length scale ξ 0 associated with the superconducting carrier, namely the estimated Cooper pair size. In a weakcoupled BCS superconductor ξ 0 can exceed the magnetic field penetration length Λ, leading to markedly different electrodynamics. Such a state cannot be described by the local London model Λ is described by local London electrodynamics, which is typically applicable to extreme type-2 superconductors. In this paper we will only be interested in multiband anisotropic materials. Furthermore we focus on the case where ξ (α) 0 Λ, where α is a band index and therefore where one can neglect the effects that lead to Pippard electrodynamics. We will study how the crystal anisotropy of superconducting materials affects their magnetic properties even at the level of London's model. In a single component case, the anisotropy effects in London electrodynamics are well studied It is illustrative to view the London model as a constant density limit of the Ginzburg-Landau model for complex fields (although indeed the model is much more general and is valid at low temperatures). The simplest Ginzburg-Landau free energy density for an Ncomponent anisotropic system is given by where D = i∇ + 2πeA/c is the covariant derivative, e and c are the electron charge and light velocity respectively (hereafter we use the units with = 1), the fields ψ α = |ψ α | e iθα represent the different superconducting components. Greek indices will always be used to denote superconducting components and Latin indices will be spatial with the summation principle applied for repeated Latin indices. The inverse mass tensors λ -1 ijα represents a 3 dimensional diagonal matrix for each component, In Eq.(2) F p collects together the potential (nongradient) terms which can be any from a large range. The simplest example is the standard single band potential terms and the Josephson inter-band coupling term where ψ 0 α , γ α and η αβ are positive real constants. The second term above is the Josephson inter-band coupling, where θ αβ = θ α -θ β is the inter-band phase difference between components α and β. The simplest multicomponent system is the isotropic case λ α = I 3 without inter-band coupling η αβ = 0, which has the maximal symmetry U (1) × U (1)... = U (1) N . However the introduction of the simplest non-frustrated Josephson terms, that in the ground state locks all phase differences to zero, breaks this symmetry to a U (1) symmetry. In the isotropic case, the phase differences are neutral massive modes. In the absence of a coupling to the gauge field the phase sum gives rise to the massless Goldstone mode. In the presence of a gauge field coupling that mode is the massive London mode. As we are interested in strongly type 2 systems we neglect density variations, but, following Leggett, we retain the massive degree of freedom associated with the phase difference mode Here j α are the partial superconducting currents where Φ 0 = πc/e is the flux quantum, λk are coefficients characterizing the contribution of each band to the Meissner screening, A is the vector potential and J αβ the Josephson coupling. Parameters of the London model ( α , where the matrix indices are suppressed for λ. Considering the total current, which is a sum of partial current contributions from each band j = α j α we get an expression for the magnetic field, which provides an extension of the London theory in multicomponent systems where N is the number of components, λ2 L = ( α λ-2 α ) -1 and θ αβ = θ α -θ β are the relative inter-band phases. Expression (7) shows that the phase difference gradients in the second term can generate magnetic field in anisotropic materials. We will demonstrate that the coupling between magnetic field and interband phase differences leads to the non-local magnetic response. Importantly the non-locality here has nothing to do with the Pippards non-locality 12 associated with the Cooper pair dimension To connect the general model given by the Eqs. (5,6, 7) with real materials we can use the multiband weakpairing pairing models and express the Josephson couplings J αβ through the microscopic parameters, such as the pairing coefficients V ij , Fermi velocities in different bands and the lengths λk characterising magnetic responses of each band in Eq.( . This parameter does not depend on the anisotropy or condensate stiffness. Therefore it can be expressed through the weakcoupling pairing coefficients where ∆ i is the superconducting gap amplitude for the ith band. The density of states in the i-th band ν i can be found using the magnetic response length ( λ-2 , where v F α is the α-th spatial component of the Fermi velocity, and ... F S denotes the Fermi surface average. For the parameters The other example of multiband anisotropic superconductor is Sr 2 RuO 4 . The nature of the superconducting state for this material is still highly debated. In order to make one more estimate, we consider a weak-coupling three-band model from Ref. In this section we consider the system in the absence of vortices and demonstrate that the anisotropy qualitatively changes the electromagnetic modes in multiband superconductors. To obtain the equations of motion we rewrite the condensate phases in Eq.( where we have introduced the gauge invariant term p s = ∇θ Σ -2πA/Φ 0 . In the absence of phase singularities we can choose the gauge so that the common phase is constant α ∇θ α = 0 and therefore p s = -2πA/Φ 0 . For isotropic superconductors where the total current is j ∝ p s this choice corresponds to the London gauge. In the anisotropic case the relation between p s and the current is more complicated so that the gauge in general depends on the specific choice of the anisotropy parameters. To study the linear electromagnetic response we linearise the above equations of motion and switch to the momentum representation. Then we get the algebraic relation between the current and vector potential where Q is known as the polarisation operator and tells us how changes to the gauge field relate to the current. It is given to be, During the derivation we used the commutator λ-2 In the isotropic limit the kernel becomes local due to the second term in Eq.( The complicated structure of the second term in Q(k) points to some unusual magnetic properties of anisotropic multi-band superconductors. In particular, that it produces multiple magnetic modes in which the magnetic field and the inter-band phase difference are coupled. This is what has lead us to calling them magnetic phase difference modes. Let us consider the magnetic response of a two-band anisotropic superconductor. A good example of such a kind of material is the MgB 2 compound 28 which has two superconducting Fermi surfaces with the structure qualitatively similar to the one shown in Fig .(1)a. The twoband polarization operator (12) with N = 2 becomes FIG. In the limiting cases of large and small Josephson interaction (i) ) the response becomes local but with very different magnetic field penetration lengths. From Eq. ( In the first case the amplitude of θ 12 is small so that the condensate phases are effectively "glued together". In the second case θ 12 can be large due to negligible inter-band Josephson coupling. The coupling between θ 12 and magnetic field also leads to especially important consequences when In this case the magnetic response has multiple length scales. It means that the magnetic field penetration into such a superconductor is determined by the superposition of several fundamental modes, which can be found from Eq. 9, by linearising the Josephson term near the ground state value θ 12 = 0 and searching for solutions in the form of plain waves B, θ 12 ∼ e ik•r . Thus we obtain the linear system where we denote h = 2πB/Φ 0 . This system is of the sixth order, since magnetic field has only two independent components k • h = 0. Hence in general for each direction of k there exists three different solutions with Imk > 0. Therefore the system ( Lx and the magnetic field is decoupled from the phase θ 12 = 0. We call this magnetic mode the ordinary one. Alternately, let us consider the extraordinary modes B = B e , which are coupled to the inter-band phase. The magnetic field is perpendicular to both k and ẑ as shown in Fig. (1). In this case Eqs. (14,15) yield a finite coupling between the magnetic field and the inter-band phase difference. To analyse the extraordinary mode in detail we parametrize the wave vector components as k z = k sin θ, k x = k cos θ sin φ and k y = k cos θ sin φ where k ⊥ = k cos θ. The direction φ drops out from the equations due to the rotational symmetry in xy plane. Then we get the following relation between the interband phase and magnetic field amplitudes Note that in the isotropic case with λ 1⊥ = λ 1z and λ L⊥ = λ Lz Eq.( It has two complex solutions with Imk > 0 yielding two extraordinary magnetic modes with the polarization shown schematically in Fig. Here we assume that the first band is isotropic λ 1⊥ = λ 1z = λ. The second band has either a weak anisotropy with λ 2z = 0.8λ 2⊥ (Fig. (3) for large and small Josephson couplings, the wavenumbers of the two modes are quite different. One of them is proportional to k 2 0 and hence either diverges or goes to zero at k 0 → ∞ and k 0 → 0 respectively. At the same time the other one tends to the constant values corresponding to the local response approximation discussed above. The general solution of Eq.( where, There are a few interesting limiting cases for k 1,2 . First, the strong inter-band coupling 4ac and hence gives purely imaginary solutions, The weak inter-band coupling k 0 λ -1 i⊥ , λ -1 iz leads again to b 2 4ac giving slightly different purely imaginary solutions, The imaginary wavenumbers obtained in the limits considered above correspond to the real-valued masses or the inverse decay length-scales of the magnetic modes. A completely different regime is possible when the masses of magnetic modes become complex, resulting in damped oscillating behaviour of the magnetic field. Indeed in the range of parameters when b 2 < 4ac the solutions (18) have finite real parts, the examples of such solutions are shown in Fig. (3) where Rek 1,2 = 0 for an interval of k 0 which expands with increasing degree of anisotropy. Generically, this regime can be realised when a strong anisotropy is applied in each band in different directions, we obtain the wavenumber k 1,2 = (i ± 1)k 0 / √ 2 which has the amplitudes of real and imaginary parts. A. Flux expulsion in the Anisotropic two-band model We now consider the problem of magnetic field screening at the surface of an anisotropic multiband superconductor. Let us consider cylindrical geometry with magnetic field applied in the y direction B = H 0 ŷ parallel to the boundary of the superconducting sample as shown in Fig. (2)a. Unlike the usual isotropic superconductors, the boundary orientation with respect to the crystal axes is important and is considered by the angle θ in polar coordinates, introduced previously in considering the normal modes. The wave vectors of excited magnetic modes are directed perpendicular to the surface k = k(cos θ, 0, sin θ). We use r to indicate the coordinate orthogonal to the boundary, such that in the presence of two magnetic field penetration lengths, the magnetic field decay and phase difference follow a double-exponential law, (24) 12 e -r/Λ1 + θ where are two magnetic field penetration lengths. We have previously made the assumption that θ 12 is small and hence linear in nature. This does not necessarily have to be the case and indeed removing this assumption could lead to more unconventional physics e.g. oscillation of the inter-band phase difference parallel to the boundary. To discover if this has an effect one would have to consider the full equations numerically. For our 1-dimensional equation, the boundary conditions are given by the value of the magnetic field on the boundary due to the external field B 1 + B 2 = H 0 and the requirement for the normal current to vanish at the boundary n • j = 0. The contribution from each of the magnetic modes (24) to the normal current can be found as n The relation between phase difference and magnetic field in each of the mode is given by the Eq.( Then we get the following solution for the amplitudes B 1,2 in Eq.( Example solutions for various parameters are plotted in Figs. An interesting limit to consider is where the Leggett mode becomes massless, for example the zero Josephson coupling limit (k 0 → 0). As the Josephson coupling becomes smaller one of the magnetic field penetration lengths diverges Λ 1 → ∞. The physical consequence of a diverging magnetic field penetration length in our-twoscale system is markedly different from the divergence of magnetic field penetration length at T c in a singlecomponent system; namely in our case it doesn't imply absence of magnetic screening. This is due to the amplitude of the mode vanishing as the penetration length diverges (B 1 → 0). Simultaneously the other mode be-comes the isotropic case deformed by the anisotropy, as one would expect if the anisotropy in the different components matched and could hence be rescaled. This implies that in such a limit, most of the magnetic field's amplitude decays at the length scale Λ 2 along with an increasingly long-range penetration of a small "tail" of magnetic field. The situation should occur for example in multi-band systems close to s + is transitions where the Leggett mode becomes massless Finally, and rather interestingly, the multi-mode magnetic response implies that the magnetic field is not necessarily monotonic. This non monotonic behaviour can lead to field inversion for a range of parameters. This means interactions between vortices and boundaries and also inter-vortex interactions will be non-trivial. It is likely that should the external field be increased such that vortices enter into the sample, their position will be affected by the negative magnetic field which would attract the vortices. Again it should be emphasised that the field inversion here is not related to oscillatory behaviour of the magnetic field in the non-local Pippard's model. This field inversion can be seen most clearly in the plots of the solutions for various parameters below. In Fig. Finally we have considered the negative magnetic field at θ = π 4 for various strengths of k 0 , shown in Fig. We now perform a numerical simulation of the Meissner state of the two-band anisotropic full Ginzburg-Landau model (2). This was performed using the FreeFem++ numerical library , where H = H z e z in an external field, applied orthogonal to our 2D system, where we have chosen a finite domain with the boundary conditions ∇ × A = H and for the current to vanish n • j = 0. We then slowly increase the external field strength |H z | in steps of 10 -3 , through the various Meissner states. When the external field is below the 1st critical value we get the Meissner state solutions shown in Fig. In Fig. We also have depicted the Meissner state for anisotropy in only one band in Fig. Let us now consider how the multiple magnetic modes in anisotropic multi-band superconductors modify the vortex states in the London model. We begin by studying vortex solutions carrying a single flux quantum, where both components have 2π phase winding around the core. We later consider a solution for fractional flux vortex i.e. the vortex that has phase winding only in one phase and carries a fraction of flux quantum (for details of flux fractionalization and energetical preference of fractional and composite vortices in multiband systems see the discussions for isotropic systems The field distribution around a single vortex line can be found in the form of a Fourier transform, where r is a coordinate vector in the plane perpendicular to the vortex line and the 2D integration is done by the corresponding momentum space cross section. The components h(k) are now determined by the nonhomogeneous system where n v is the direction of the vortex line. The anisotropy in the plane perpendicular to the vortex line can be caused by two reasons. (i) When the magnetic field is directed along the c-axis, there can be anisotropy in the ab plane either if the crystal is biaxial or as a result of the strain-induced distortions. (ii) The effective anisotropy can be caused by a misalignment be- tween the external field and the anisotropy c axis. The distribution of the magnetic field around vortices will be different in these two cases since in (i) only two of the magnetic modes are excited and in (ii) the amplitudes of all three magnetic modes are non-zero. In this paper we consider in detail only the case (i) when the magnetic field around the vortex is h = h z z, where Here the poles k 1,2 are given by the Eq.( where h j (φ) = Res(h z (k, φ), ik j (φ)) is a residue of the function h z (k, φ) at the pole k = ik j (φ). For the angle integration we used an approximation k j r cos(θ -φ) ≈ k j r(1 -(θ -φ) 2 /2) which is valid provided k j r 1. In general due to the ab-plane anisotropy Eqs. (33,34) yield the expected fourfold magnetic field profile around a vortex. But the most important point is the nonmonotonic field behaviour with field inversion at some distance from the vortex center, as with the boundary problems. For this it is necessary and sufficient to satisfy two conditions: h 2 < 0 and k 1 > k 2 , so that the mode with negative amplitude can become dominating at some distance from the vortex. To demonstrate the possibility of field inversion we consider the parameters λ 1x = 0.7λ, λ 1y = 0.8λ, λ 2x = λ 2y = λ and k 0 = 0.7/λ which results in the correct fourfold magnetic field profile with field inversion far from the vortex core. The negative parts of field distribution B z -|B z | are shown in Fig. (10). Field inversion leads to a non-trivial four-fold non-monotonic interaction between vortices and thus bound states. This will be considered in more detail below in Sec.VI. Finally the above modifications to vortex solutions point towards a new mechanism for vortex stripe formation in multi-band superconductors. For fractional vortices we have a singularity appearing in just one of the components (chosen to be component 1 without loss of generality). It follows immediately that this will lead to a singularity appearing in θ 12 itself unlike in the composite case. This means the previous approach of linearising the equations and approximating sin θ 12 ≈ θ 12 is no longer valid. This is unsurprising as it is due to the presence of Josephson strings when the coupling is switched on. Here it is illustrative to consider the fractional vortex in the U (1) × U (1) model. We follow a similar procedure by Fourier transforming the equations of motion, however the singularity now exists in ∇θ 1 , allowing us to utilise the fact that p s -∇θ 12 /2 is singularity-free. The equations of motion can be rearranged to isolate the singularity and yield in the Fourier representation the following, If the magnetic field lies in the z-direction only h = h z ẑ the solution of this system is given by, where we have used k = k(cos θ, sin θ, 0) again. Using a similar method to before we can find the magnetic field to be, This illustrates that when interband Josephson coupling is zero k 0 = 0, the Leggett mode becomes non-magnetic and does not contribute to the magnetic response despite gradients of the phase difference. We now consider the numerical solutions for type 2 vortices in the full anisotropic Ginzburg-Landau equations. All numerical simulations were performed using the FreeFem++ numerical library We first consider the single-quantum vortex solution with weak anisotropy in one band λ 1x = λ 1y = λ 2x , λ 2y = 2λ shown in Fig. We now consider the effect of having anisotropy exhibited in both bands in a similar direction as shown in Fig. For anisotropy in different directions however, we see a more pronounced effect by the anisotropy, as can be seen in Fig. We now consider the effect of altering the Josephson coupling strength. If we increase the coupling to become very strong it leads to a diminished disparity of the magnetic field penetration lengths. Thus the magnetic field becomes more localized and the inversion less pronounced. If we take the Josephson coupling to be of a similar scale as the covariant derivative pre-factors, then the anisotropic effects are maximal, as predicted in the London model. Finally taking the Josephson strength to be small we observe the magnetic field becoming continually longer range and the field inversion less pronounced. In the limit of zero Josephson coupling the London model predicts that the Leggett mode decouples from the magnetic field. That is, as η 12 → 0 one of the modes becomes zero and the magnetic field decay is described by a single exponential, hence the London model predicts absence of magnetic field inversion. However this is not what is found in the full model as can be seen in Fig. The origin of this behaviour must be the interplay of anisotropy with an additional effect that appears beyond the London model. It has been proposed that in the isotropic Ginzburg-Landau model, the magnetic response has the form of a massive vector field coupled to Faddeev-Skyrme terms In this section we consider inter-vortex interactions, that are likely to lead to non-trivial multi-solitons, due to the non-monotonic nature of the magnetic field and the property of field inversion. If we return to the London-Leggett model energy formulated in Eq. ( We now want to find the interaction energy of two composite vortices with winding in both components in the London model. We assume that they are well separated, such that we can write the various terms as the sums of the tail interactions of the two solitons, B = B (1) +B s . If we then separate and integrate equation 41 by parts, we can use the equations of motion to reduce the interaction energy to the simple form, Hence, by substituting in the form of the parallel field around a single composite vortex given in Eq. ( We first consider the solutions for equal and opposite anisotropies for various strengths of anisotropy, some of which are plotted in maximises the total number of neighbours for all the vortices. This is no surprise, as the chosen anisotropy leads to a D 4 dihedral symmetry to the magnetic field density of the vortex. To minimise the form of the interaction energy 42, a good candidate is placing the vortex positions into the maximal negative magnetic field locations of the other composite vortices. This would suggest that local minima should appear for each of the various polyominoes in the London model. Similar types of interaction and corresponding minimal soliton configurations have been studied before in the baby Skyrme model Increasing the strength of the anisotropy to λ 1x = λ 2y = 0.3λ, λ 2x = λ 1y = λ and k 0 = 0.84/λ the polyominoes pattern no longer applies and the form of the minimal energy solutions are more complex, as can be seen in Fig. Finally if we increase the strength of anisotropy to extremely strong values, we get a continuation of the above to more extreme behaviours. This can be seen in Fig. If we now consider anisotropy in a single direction we get a very different result, as shown in Fig. If we were to consider more complicated forms of anisotropy it is likely the minimal energy solution will take some hybrid of the two presented above based upon the how warped the symmetry is away from the maximal D 4 . We can now compare this to the results of the Ginzburg-Landau field theory. We naturally start with the 2 quanta N = 2 solutions, shown in Fig. We now move onto the n = 3 quanta solutions, for equal anisotropies in opposite directions we are interested in stronger and weaker anisotropies and the effect on the minimal energy solutions. For weaker anisotropy, shown in Fig. For stronger anisotropy, shown in Fig. We finally show the local solutions for N = 4 for equal anisotropies in the bands in Figs. This means that for the type 2 regime, the London model is good at predicting the qualitative form for the higher quanta solutions. This is despite the fact that when one goes beyond the London limit, there appear additional terms that contribute to field inversion The magnetic response of isotropic single-component superconductors can be cast in the form of a massive vector field theory characterized by the London magnetic field penetration length. However superconducting materials are often multiband and anisotropic. We have demonstrated that this leads to deviation of the magnetic properties of the model from London's hydromagnetostatics even at the level of the anisotropic multiband London model. We showed that anisotropy leads to hybridization of the Leggett and the London modes, causing the gradients of the phase difference to create transverse charge currents, generating magnetic field. This in turn leads to the existence of several magnetic field penetration lengths (in general N + 1 magnetic field penetration lengths for an N -band London model) and also to a non-local magnetic response in the nominally local London model. For example in the case of the twoband anistropic Meissner state, the magnetic field, directed along one of the crystal axes, decays according to a double-exponential law. In the general case of arbitrary directions of such two-band case, there are three magnetic modes with different penetration lengths. In the limit of vanishingly small mass for the Leggett mode (e.g. near s + is transition, one of the magnetic field penetration lengths diverged, leading to long-range, smallamplitude penetration of magnetic field even far below the superconducting phase transition. Under certain conditions the magnetic field is described by a massive vector field theory with complex mass, which means that magnetic field decay cannot be entirely characterized by a real length scales but has oscillating behaviour. Moreover the combination of dif- ferent magnetic modes gives the overall magnetic field profile a non-monotonic form and even magnetic field inversion. This affects the nature of vortex states: the non-monotonic behaviour and field inversion leads to the formation of vortex bound states. The minimal energy bound states were shown to depend on the symmetry of the system and have forms of polyominoe vortex clusters and chains. A number of multiband superconductors are currently the subject of detailed experimental research. The examples studied in this paper give inverted magnetic field up to 10 -3 of applied magnetic field. Such field strength makes the effect in principle measurable either by SQUIDs or in muon spin rotation experiments. The interband coupling strength is often difficult to calculate precisely. Measuring the effect that we report for samples with different boundaries, cut relative to crystaline axises, can be used as a tool to experimentally assess interband coupling strength and relative anisotropies of bands. It can additionally be used to distinguish the vortex bound states that we report from vortex clusters and chains forming for different reasons. In anisotropic multiband systems, there are at least two other mechanisms for formation of vortex bound states. Inclusion of density variations in the theory yields "type-1.5" regimes where coherence lengths are larger than magnetic field penetration lengths and vortex bound states form due to core-core interaction 