Experimental evidence for Majorana bound states (MBSs) is so far mainly based on the robustness of a zero-bias conductance peak. However, similar features can also arise due to Andreev bound states (ABSs) localized at the end of an island. We show that these two scenarios can be distinguished by an interferometry experiment based on embedding a Coulomb-blockaded island into an Aharonov-Bohm ring. For two ABSs, when the ground state is nearly degenerate, cotunneling can change the state of the island and interference is suppressed. By contrast, for two MBSs the ground state is nondegenerate and cotunneling has to preserve the island state, which leads to h/e-periodic conductance oscillations with magnetic flux. Such interference setups can be realized with semiconducting nanowires or two-dimensional electron gases with proximity-induced superconductivity and may also be a useful spectroscopic tool for parity-flip mechanisms. Andreev bound states (ABSs) are coupled particlehole excitations of superconductors bound to impurities While the corresponding wave functions overlap in space in most cases, they can also be spatially separated for topological superconductors with triplet pairing Distinguishing MBSs from ABSs is one of the most urgent goals in Majorana research. What we refer to here as ABSs are modes with a large Majorana overlap. If ABSs are extended along the island, they may be discriminated from MBSs by probing a finite conductance in the middle of the island or by a strong response to a gate affecting the middle region. However, one cannot discriminte ABSs from MBSs in this way if there are two terminal ABSs, i.e., one ABS localized at each end of an island [Fig. In this Rapid Communication, we show how to distinguish the case of two terminal ABSs close to zero energy from the case of two terminal MBSs by embedding a Coulomb-blockaded island into an interferometric setup [Fig. We focus on the case when the charging energy E C is the dominant energy scale (besides the superconducting gap ∆) as in Majorana box qubits Toy model. Let us consider an island that hosts four Majoranas 1, . . . 4, two localized at each end [Fig. where we included the charging energy of the island Here, n is the number operator for the electrons on the island and n g describes the gating. The above toy model interpolates between the situation of two terminal ABSs and two terminal MBSs: When Ω ε, two ABS are at energy ≈ ε [Fig. Interferometer model. The interferometer is enclosed between two nonsuperconducting leads described by H 0 = rkσ (ε rk -μ r )c † rkσ c rkσ , where c rkσ denotes the annihilator for electrons in lead r = L, R in mode k with spin σ =↑, ↓. The leads are held at a common temperature T and are voltage-biased symmetrically: The tunnel Hamiltonian reads where φ denotes the superconducting phase on the island and m = 1, 2 enumerates the Majorana operators. In our toy model, we assume that lead r couples only to the two nearest MBSs [first line of Eq. ( In our model, a featureless reference arm connects the two leads [second term in Eq. ( Transport calculations. Our goal is to understand the behavior of the maximal interference contrast: Here, I(Φ) is the stationary current through the interferometer. Note that the maximal or minimal current may not necessarily flow for Φ = 0, π. Since interference requires coherent transport through the island, we constrain our calculations to the cotunneling regime. We set up a master equation ). Without loss of generality, we assume n 0 to be even. While our toy model neglects cotunneling through the quasiparticle continuum, quasiparticle states are included partially later on in the 2D island model. The cotunneling rates are computed with the T-matrix approach including terms of O(t 2 , t D ) into the T-matrix Details including an expression for general bias voltage are given in When Ω/ε 1 and Ω V b , T , the island resides mostly in its ground state, in which the parities of the modes 23 and 14 are even. Transport is predominantly carried by parity-conserving cotunneling processes: An electron incoming from one lead flips the parity of mode 14 and the outgoing electron flips it back. Such electrons interfere with electrons tunneling through the reference arm and lead to a large MIC [Fig. When Ω/ε 1, the MIC can be suppressed even if E max(V b , T ). The reason is that parity-conserving cotunneling is strictly forbidden in the limit Ω = 0: The left lead couples only to mode 12 , while the right lead only couples to mode 34 . A cotunneling process transferring an electron from one to another must therefore flip the parities of both modes and thus results in the final state being different from the initial state. Hence, there is no interference. When ε > T , the crossover from transport dominated by parity-conserving to parity-flipping processes happens when In experiments, this crossover may be influenced by other processes that can flip the parities of the ABSs, such as quasiparticle poisoning from the continuum The qualitative parameter dependence of the MIC remains in most cases unchanged if one considers the general case of λ = 0, β = 0, δ = 0. From numerical calculations, we find only a weak dependence of the MIC on δ except for special points 2D model for Majorana stripe. To see whether the simple toy model discussed so far indeed captures the main physics to contrast the cases of two MBSs and two ABSs, we next turn to a more sophisticated model for the island. Following In the second line, we added the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (with velocity α), the Zeeman energy (E Z ) due to a magnetic field, and the induced superconducting gap. The latter is nonzero where the electron gas is covered by the superconductor: ∆(x) = ∆Θ(W/2 -|x|). The Hamiltonian acts on the fourcomponent spinor [u ↑ (x, y), u ↓ (x, y), v ↓ (x, y), -v ↑ (x, y)] T containing the electron (u) and hole (v) components for spin σ =↑, ↓. The Pauli matrices τ i and σ i (i = x, y, z) act on particle-hole and spin space, respectively. Gates are used to confine the states in the transverse direction, Tuning from two MBSs to two ABSs. Accounting for an additional potential profile along the stripe, V W (y) = V W [1 + cos(2πy/L)], we can tune from the case of two MBSs to two ABSs by increasing V W . Computing the energy spectrum of the island [Fig. To compute the MIC using the 2D model, we include the 8 lowest modes into our master equation approach. We further extracted the parameters for the toy model from the energies (yielding Ω and ε) and wave functions (yielding the tunnel matrix elements) of the two lowest modes obtained for the 2D model. In this extraction procedure We finally discuss the magnetic-field dependence of the MIC [Figs. V b , T . However, when E Z is small, the Coulomb peaks are not 1e periodic For the case of two ABSs (V W = 0.4 meV), we find that the MIC is suppressed when there are two modes close to zero energy [Fig. A zero-bias conductance peak in transport spectroscopy of superconducting islands can arise due to MBSs as well as ABSs. While extended ABSs may be probed by a contact in the middle of a superconducting stripe, terminal ABSs cannot. We have shown that terminal ABSs can instead be distinguished from two terminal MBSs by an interference experiment. Such experiments may also be useful to probe quasiparticlepoisoning rates for nonisolated islands. Finally, the idea of our approach may be of interest for initial testing of the presence of MBS in Majorana-qubit devices Since we assume that the charging energy E C is the dominant energy scale, we work in the basis of manybody eigenstates denoted by |n, η η η . Here, n is the number of electrons on the island and η η η = (η 1 , η 2 , . . .) contains the occupations η l of the eigenmodes l of the island. These modes are found by solving for the eigenstates of the BdG Hamiltonian ( where ψ ψ ψ(x, y) = [ψ ↑ (x, y), ψ ↓ (x, y), ψ † ↓ (x, y), -ψ † ↑ (x, y)] T contains the electron field operators for spin σ =↑, ↓ at position (x, y). The energies of the many-body eigenstates read For a nonsuperconducting island, the occupations have to satisfy l η l = n. This condition is lifted in the superconducting case, where they only have to obey the constraint (-1) l η l = (-1) n . Since the modes l are electron-hole superpositions, the occupations η l thus only specify the fermion parity (-1) η l of mode l but not the charge associated with occupying this mode. To derive the left-right symmetry relation of the Majorana tunnel couplings in Sec. , we will need the eigenstates and eigenmodes of the toy model T contains the field operators of the modes α L = (γ 1 + iγ 2 )/2 and α R = (γ 3 + iγ 4 )/2. we can express the Hamiltonian as The field operators of the eigenmodes are again collected in a 4-component vector and r ± = 1 ± 1/ 1 + (Ω/ε) 2 /2, which satisfies the relation r 2 + + r 2 -= 1/2. Here, we explain how to extract the tunnel matrix elements from the 4-spinor components of the solutions of the BdG equation for our transport calculations. For the transport calculations for the 2D island model, we start from the standard bilinear tunnel Hamiltonian We use the same notation as in the main paper and introduced the field operator ψ † σ (x, y) creating an electron on the island at position (x, y) with spin σ. Inverting Eq. (S1) and using the particle-hole symmetry of H BdG , [P, H BdG ] + = 0 with P = σ y τ y K (K denotes the complex conjugation), yields The sum in Eq. (S7) includes every particle-hole conjugated mode pair only once. One is, in principle, free to chose which of the modes at energy ±ε l is used. The choice we use is that the sum runs only over modes l that are unoccupied at zero temperature. In the topologically trivial regime at zero magnetic field, these are all the modes with positive energy. However, when a mode crosses zero energy (such as a MBS), then the occupation of that state changes at zero temperature. When then use the mode at negative energy. We use this choice because then the correct electron-hole components will be used for the transport calculations when inserting Eq. (S7) into the tunnel Hamiltonian (S6): Here, p = ±, where we assume a point-contact coupling of the leads so that In Sec. , we show how to express the tunnel amplitudes to the right lead in terms of those to the left lead [Eqs. (S13) and (S14)] provided the island exhibits a spatial inversion symmetry along the stripe direction. For our transport calculations, we will consider only two relevant charge states n = 0 and n = 1 of the island. Projecting Eq. (S8) on the many-body basis |n, η η η introduced in Sec. , we obtain HT = rkση η ηiη η η f T η η η f η η ηi rσ c rkσ |1, η η η f 0, η η η i | + H.c., (S11) with tunnel matrix elements There are two contributions: The first one (∼ t + rlσ ∼ u * lσ ) describes a 'usual' tunneling process, which can also occur in a nonsuperconducting systems: An incoming electron occupies an empty mode l. The second one (∼ t + rlσ ∼ v lσ ) happens only in superconducting systems and describes the formation of a Cooper pair with the incoming electron, leaving the mode l empty in the final state. While Eq. (S8) is generally valid for any 2D island model, we use in our calculations a 2D island Hamiltonian [Eq. The unitary transformation V relates the wave-function components of an eigenstate on the left side of the island to that on the right side: Expressing χ χ χ l = (u l↑ , u l↓ , v l↓ , -v l↑ ) T , we obtain u lσ (x, y) = -iξ l σu lσ (x, -y), (S13) The tunnel couplings thus satisfy the left-right symmetry Toy model: Spatial inversion symmetry If the toy model is compatible with the 2D island model, then the tunnel couplings of the eigenstates of the toy model must also obey Eq. (S15). We next briefly explain how this translates into conditions for the Majorana tunnel couplings stated below Eq. ( In terms of the localized modes α p L = (γ 1 -ipγ 2 )/2 and α p R = (γ 1 -ipγ 2 )/2, the tunnel Hamiltonian can be expressed in the same form as Eq. (S8): Here we use the assumption that mode α r couples only to lead r. Exploiting the transformation β β β = U • α α α with U given by Eq. (S5) and expressing the field operators according to Eq. (S1), we find the relation (l = 1, 2) Using furthermore Eq. (S15), we obtain for with ξ = (ξ 1 -ξ 2 )/2 = ±1. We checked numerically that the inversion parities ξ l of the two lowest modes are always opposite for the cases we considered (similar to the two lowest modes in a potential well). Note that the sign of ξ does not matter for the calculations of the interference contrast under the assumptions employed in this paper and we therefore set ξ = 1. Using relation (S18) and expressing α p r in terms of Majorana operators, we arrive at Eq. ( with and t Rσm = (-1) m ξσt Lσ5-m (a similar relation has also been established in Ref. As mentioned in the main paper, the Majorana couplings can be parametrized in a simple way by applying a unitary transformation of the spin degree of freedom in the leads. Introducing c Lkσ = U σσ c Lkσ and t σm = U † σσ t σ m in Eq. (S19), we obtain a tunnel Hamiltonian of the same form with c → c and t → t . Defining U in the general form we can satisfy the conditions t ↑1 ∈ R, With this form of the Majorana couplings t σm , they can be parametrized as Omitting the prime from all quantities, we obtain the expressions stated in the main paper. Extraction procedure for toy model parameters from solutions for the 2D model We next explain how we extract the parameters of the toy model from the eigenenergies and eigenstates of the 2D model, which are found numerically. The first step is to consider only the two modes closest to zero energy and neglect all other modes: with . Matching the eigenenergies (S4) for the toy model to those obtained from the 2D model fixes the parameters Ω and ε to To obtain the tunnel amplitudes for the toy model, we rotate the modes β l such that the matrix representation of H 2D is given by Eq. (S3). This yields new modes αn whose wave function components yield the tunnel couplings as described in Sec. . Clearly, one unitary transformation that transforms Eq. (S30) on the desired form is given by α α α = U † β β β; however, this is not the only possible transformation. The most general transformation includes an additional phase factor in the definition of the modes β l , i.e., α α α = U † Wβ β β, where W = diag(e iφ2 , e iφ1 , e -iφ1 , e -iφ2 ). The transformation W leaves the form of Hamiltonian (S30) invariant. Note that the phase factors φ 1 and φ 2 correspond to phase choice for the eigenstates of H BdG and those can change randomly from one point to the next when applying a numerical diagonalization procedure. The inclusion of the phase factors is important since it influences where the two modes are localized within the stripe. Here, we use the components ũln n nσ and ṽln n nσ of the solutions of the BdG equation in the tight-binding approximation, where n n n = (n x , n y ) denotes the lattice point (|n x | ≤ N x /2, n y ≤ N y /2). Here, ψ n n nσ denotes the electron field operator with spin σ at lattice point n n n. We next introduce a normalized 1D cut of the wave function along the symmetry axis of the stripe, ũlnyσ = ũlnx=0nyσ / √ p l and . For this 1D cut, we consider the probability to find a quasiparticle in mode l in the right half of the stripe: It can be shown that P 2 (φ 1 , φ 2 ) = 1-P 1 (φ 1 , φ 2 ). Using a numerical optimization routine, we chose φ 1 and φ 2 such that P 1 (φ 1 , φ 2 ) is minimized. We emphasize that there is a freedom how to chose the phases φ 1 and φ 2 and this choice is therefore neither an approximation nor does it require any assumptions. For this specific choice of the phases, we identify α1 (φ 1 , φ 2 ) ≡ α L and α2 (φ 1 , φ 2 ) = α R . Up to this point, this procedure contains no other approximation than the restriction to the two lowest modes. In the toy model, we additionally neglect the tunnel couplings of mode α r to lead r. This is why it is important to use modes that are maximally localized at the two ends of the island. In this way, the toy model is a simplification as compared to a completely general model of a superconducting island with two modes. For the plots shown in the main paper, we find that the rotated modes with field operators α1 , α2 are well localized within one half of the stripe and therefore this approximation works very well. For the numerical diagonalization of the Bogoliubovde Gennes Hamiltonian (5), we use a tight-binding approach. The details are discussed in In this Section, we discuss the details of our transport calculations. We briefly describe our master-equation approach and the assumptions behind it. We further give important steps for the computation of the rates needed to set up the master equation and to compute the current. In terms of the many-body basis |n, η η η introduced in Sec. , the master equation takes the general form where P η η η = n, η η η|ρ I |n, η η η is the occupation probability of state |n, η η η for the reduced density matrix ρ I of the island. We do not take into account off-diagonal elements of the density matrix (coherences), which is a good approximation when Γ |ε n,η η η -ε n,η η η | for all states η η η, η η η within each charge state. As mentioned in the main paper, we focus on the cotunneling regime, i.e., when only one charge state n = n 0 is occupied. We take n 0 to be even. Furthermore, we consider gate voltages where only states with charge n = n 0 + 1 need to be included as virtual intermediate states, while the contribution from states with charge n = n 0 -1 may be neglected. We solve for the stationary solution Ṗ st η η η = 0 under the constraint η η η P st η η η = 1 and compute the stationary current as Here, Γ r r η η η η η η denotes a cotunneling process that transfers an electron from lead r to lead r , where Γ η η η η η η = rr Γ rr η η η η η η . In the case of the toy model, we restrict our calculations to two modes, which is a good approximation if cotunneling through the quasiparticle continuum can be neglected. This requires the island to be long (quantization energy π 2 /2m * L 2 > ∆ provided the island is nearly depleted, μ + E SO ∆) or the gap has to be large (min(ε, Ω), T, V b ∆). The tunnel rates are obtained from the T-matrix approach with the T-matrix In the above expression, η η η i (η η η f ) denotes the occupations of the island modes in the initial (final) state in charge state n = 0. Furthermore i (f ) refers to the initial (final) states of the lead, which we we sum over, weighted by the probability ρ i = e -βH0 / tr(e -βH0 ) for initial state i in the grand canonical ensemble. The many-body energies are given by E α = ω α + ε n0η η ηα , where H I |n 0 , η η η α = ε n0η η ηα |n 0 , η η η α (see Sec. ) and H 0 |α = ω α |α for α = i, f . The rates Γ r r η η η η η η (r = r) are obtained by accounting only for terms T , where H r T is the part of the tunnel Hamiltonian involving lead r. We include in Eq. (S38) terms of O(t D , t 2 ) and neglect higher-order terms, as well as terms of O(t, t 2 D ) [even though they formally appear in the perturbation expansion of the T-matrix up to O(H 2 T )]. The terms ∼ t can be omitted because they correspond to sequential electron tunneling processes that are exponentially suppressed in the cotunneling regime. The effect of terms ∼ t 2 D would be to add an additional contribution δI to the current. This corresponds to electron-pair tunneling through the reference arm, which does not exhibit a flux dependence as long as higher-order tunneling terms are neglected. An additional contribution δI would reduce the interference contrast in the MBS case somewhat but would not change the findings qualitatively. The contribution δI can, at least in principle, be made much smaller than the contributions we account for: Note that the largest interference contrast is given when t D ∼ t 2 /U , i.e., when the conductances through the two arms are matched. This means that terms ∼ t 2 D can be made smaller by scaling down t D and t while keeping t D ∼ t 2 /U . Evaluating Eq. (S37), we get for the inelastic cotunneling rates and for the elastic cotunneling rates (η η η t D (δ σσ + τ sf δ σ σ )T η η ηη η ηi * r σ T η η ηη η ηi rσ e iπΦ/Φ0 L(ε 10 η η ηη η ηi , μ r , μ r ) + η η ηη η η σσ T η η η η η ηi * r σ T η η η η η ηi rσ T η η ηη η ηi r σ T η η ηη η ηi * rσ M (ε 10 η η η η η ηi , ε 10 η η ηη η ηi , μ r , μ r )}, (S40) with with Fermi function f r (ω) = 1/(e (ω-μr)/T + 1) and the Bose function b(ω) = 1/(e ω/T -1). To simplify the calculation of the integrals (S43) and (S44), we set ω = 0 in the denominators. This is a good approximation when temperature and voltage bias are small compared to energy differences between the island states in different charge sectors (T, V b U ). We obtain the approximate expressions We next derive an analytic expression for the maximal interference contrast for the toy model in the case β = δ = 0. We consider here the case of general bias voltage V b and obtain the result (4) given in the main paper in the limit V b → 0. For the toy model, the master equation takes the simple form where P η denotes the occupation probability of state |n = n 0 , η 1 = η 2 = (1 + η)/2 . Note that there are only two states denoted by η = ± for each charge state because of the fermion-parity constraint (-1) η1+η2 = (-1) n0 . The stationary solution is simply given by So far, no approximations regarding the tunnel couplings have been made. We now limit our considerations to the case β = δ = 0. By computing the above sums over the tunnel matrix elements, it is straightforward to show that D r r η f ηi = |C r r η f ηi | 2 , C rr ηη = 1, C rr ηη = 0, C rr ηη = cos(ρ)e iηπ/2 and |C rr ηη | = sin(ρ) with Inserting the resulting expressions for the rates (S37) into the expression (S48) for the stationary occupations yields and the stationary current reads for τ sf = 1 and inserting this into Eq. (S59) yields Eq. ( As mentioned in the main paper, the case Ω = 0 combined with λ = 0 or ε = 0 is a pathological case of our model. The reason is that the mode 23 decouples from the leads. The occupation probability of mode 23 is then not determined by transport but by other parityswitching mechanisms not included in our model (e. g. quasiparticle poisoning). If this switching mechanism is much slower than the time window over which the current is averaged, one may measure a nonzero MIC. In this case, the parity of mode 23 is fixed during that time and only parity-conserving tunnel processes happen. The interference patterns are then shifted by π with respect to each other depending on the parity of mode 23 . This can be used to read out the parity of this mode as proposed earlier for Majorana box qubits In this Section, we discuss how the probability densities of the eigenmodes evolve when increasing the wire potential barrier V W [Fig. 