Cooper pairs in superconductors are normally spin singlet (spin antiparallel). Nevertheless, recent studies suggest that spin-triplet Cooper pairs (spin parallel) can be created at carefully engineered superconductorferromagnet interfaces Spin-triplet supercurrents combining superconducting and magnetic orders provide a great opportunity to enhance the functionality and performance of spintronic devices by offering the possibility of long-range spin-polarized supercurrents. As spin-one triplet Cooper pairs, unlike singlet pairs, can carry a net spin component, a spin-polarized current is naturally associated with the triplet supercurrents. Meanwhile, spin-one triplet Cooper pairs are immune to pair breaking by the exchange field in ferromagnets so that triplet Cooper pairs sustain long-range correlations in spintronic devices. To use such triplet supercurrents in spintronics it is necessary to effectively generate and manipulate triplet pairs in devices. In the past decade, a number of theoretical models have been proposed to explain how spinpolarized supercurrents can be created and controlled in S/F heterostructures A well-known and useful phenomenon in spintronics is the spin-transfer torque induced by spin-polarized currents, which has been widely used to switch magnetization and control magnetization dynamics In this work, we have investigated magnetization dynamics in a series of S/F/S Josephson junctions via FMR technique. The results demonstrate a significant influence of superconductivity on magnetization dynamics: the resonance field (Hr) shifts rapidly to a lower field below superconducting transition temperature Tc. In contrast, such an effect is absent in the control experiments performed on S/F bilayers and S/I/F/S multilayers where no supercurrents pass through the device. Therefore, our experiments provide an evidence for the spin-transfer torques induced by triplet supercurrents. The geometry of the ferromagnetic Josephson junctions and the schematic of FMR are shown in Fig. The shift of Hr to a lower field indicates that an effective inner magnetic field parallel to the external magnetic field is produced in the superconducting state. In other words, there should be an extra torque induced by superconductivity to assist the external field torque to keep the magnetization precession. As this extra torque below TC is observed in S/F/S junctions but not in the S/F bilayer, it implies that supercurrents passing through Josephson junctions, rather than a local effect at one S/F interface, could play a critical role. To verify this viewpoint, we have performed another control experiment in a S/I/F/S multilayer where the supercurrents are blocked by the insulating MgO layer. For typical S/MgO/S Josephson junctions, the thickness of MgO layer is usually below 2 nm. Above 2 nm the wave function can not overlap and tunneling supercurrents will be blocked. We then made a S/I/F/S multilayer with the thickness of insulating MgO layer of 10 nm. The FMR spectra of this insulating multilayer is presented in Fig. In the following, we discuss the mechanism of spin-transfer torques induced by triplet supercurrents in the S/F/S Josephson junctions. The FMR experiments in our study is a situation of ferromagnetic Josephson junctions with precessing magnetization. Several theoretical models In summary, our FMR experiments in a series of S/F/S Josephson junctions demonstrate a significant modification on magnetization dynamics induced by superconductivity. In contrast, such a phenomenon is absent in S/F bilayers and S/I/F/S multilayers. Therefore, these results provide a strong evidence for the existence of spin-transfer torques induced by long-range triplet supercurrents. The observation of spin-transfer torque associated with triplet supercurrents as well as its strong influence on magnetization dynamics paves a way to the applications of superconducting spintronic devices. μ 0 H (mT) 