It is widely perceived that the correlation effect may play an important role in several unconventional superconducting families, such as cuprate, iron-based and heavy-fermion superconductors. The application of high pressure can tune the ground state properties and balance the localization and itineracy of electrons in correlated systems, which may trigger unconventional superconductivity. Moreover, non-centrosymmetric structure may induce the spin triplet pairing which is very rare in nature. Here, we report a new compound ScZrCo1-δ crystallizing in the Ti2Ni structure with the space group of FD3-MS without a spatial inversion center. The resistivity of the material at ambient pressure shows a bad metal and weak semiconducting behavior. Furthermore, specific heat and magnetic susceptibility measurements yield a rather large value of Wilson ratio ~4.47. Both suggest a ground state with correlation effect. By applying pressure, the up-going behavior of resistivity in lowering temperature at ambient pressure is suppressed and gradually it becomes metallic. At a pressure of about 19.5 GPa superconductivity emerges. Up to 36.05 GPa, a superconducting transition at about 3.6 K with a quite high upper critical field is observed. Our discovery here provides a new platform for investigating the relationship between correlation effect and superconductivity. The discoveries of superconductivity in cuprate As cobalt is a typical 3d transition metal element and lies between iron and copper, the superconductors containing cobalt are generally interesting and unusual. Superconductors containing Co include compounds such as CeCoIn5, NaxCoO2•1.3H2O and Zr2Co. CeCoIn5 is a well-known unconventional heavy-fermion superconductor Characterization of the crystal structure and composition. Fig. . The first term of the equation arises from the local magnetic moments of the ions at paramagnetic sites, and the second one is the Pauli paramagnetic susceptibility term which is related to the quasiparticle density of states (DOS) at Fermi level Temperature dependence of resistivity under high pressure. The temperature dependence of resistivity for ScZrCo1-δ at various pressures is presented in Fig. To determine the superconducting critical transition temperature, we have adopted different criterions: the onset superconducting transition temperature Tc onset is determined from the very beginning of the deviating point of the normal state resistivity curve; the critical temperatures with 50%ρ4K and 90%ρ4K, where 4K is the resistivity at 4K. In Fig. From Fig. Upper critical field. In Fig. Specific heat measurements in ScZrCo1-δ indicate that the low temperature data deviates from the Debye model and exhibit a slight upturn in the low-temperature limit, which may demonstrate the possible correlation effect in our sample. Usually the Wilson ratio can be used to determine whether there is correlation effect in the system. By definition the Wilson ratio is expressed in the form Bad metal behavior. At ambient pressure, the resistivity curve behaves in a way of weak semiconducting, which is similar to some alloy materials such as Ti67Al33 (Ref. 29). With increasing pressure, the resistivity curve turns to a metallic behavior, but there is still a slight upturn in low temperature region. Large resistivity scale and absence of saturation in low temperature region are the typical characteristics of a bad metal. There are mainly two criterions to judge whether the resistivity scale is large or not: Ioffe-Regal limit 30 lkF -1 1, or Mooij limit 31 ρ0.15 mΩ cm. Here l is electron mean free path, kF is Fermi wave vector. The normal state resistivity of ScZrCo1-δ at 0 GPa is above 0.88 mΩ cm. Even at the highest pressure 36.05 GPa, it is still larger than the Mooij limit. Therefore we are confident that the system is a typical bad metal caused probably by the correlation effect. Superconductivity at high pressure. By applying high pressure, we have successfully tuned the ground state and induced the superconductivity above 19.5 GPa. The superconductivity emerges just after the rapid drop of normalized resistivity which is shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have discovered a new compound ScZrCo1-δ which has a cubic structure with the space group FD3-MS without a spatial inversion center. The ground state of this material is a bad metal showing a strange weak semiconducting behavior. By applying pressure beyond 19.5 GPa, the system becomes superconductive. A superconducting transition temperature at about 3.6 K can be observed under 36.05 GPa. The upturning of low temperature specific heat coefficient and large Wilson ratio suggest a ground state with correlation effect. This material provides a typical platform for achieving superconductivity by finely tuning the subtle balance between localization and itinerancy of d-orbital electrons. Sample preparation and characterization. The polycrystalline ScZrCo1-δ samples were fabricated by the arc-melting method. The raw materials scandium (Alfa Aesar, powder, purity 99.8%), zirconium (Aladdin, powder, purity 99.9%) and cobalt (Alfa Aesar, powder, purity 99.99%) were weighed in the mole proportion 1: 1: 0.9, mixed well, and pressed into a pellet in a glove box filled with argon (water moisture and the oxygen compositions in the glove box were both below 0.1 PPM). The pellets were put on the copper base of the Arc furnace filled with argon atmosphere. To ensure the homogeneity of the samples, we re-melted the pellets by turning up and down at least 5 times. Finally, we got the silver-shining polycrystalline samples. The Experimental data (emu/mol Oe) Temperature dependence of resistivity for the sample ScZrCo1-δ under the pressure of 36.05 GPa in the temperature region from 1.9 K to 4 K at various magnetic fields. The inset shows the upper critical field Hc2(T) determined by the criterions of 90%ρn and 50%ρn, and the fitting curves (see text). Table 