Josephson junctions made from aluminium and its oxide are the most commonly used functional elements for superconducting circuits and qubits. It is generally known that the disordered thinfilm AlOx contains atomic tunneling systems. Coherent tunneling systems may couple strongly to a qubit via their electric dipole moment, giving rise to spectral level repulsion. In addition, slowly fluctuating tunneling systems are observable when they are located close to coherent ones and distort their potentials. This interaction causes telegraphic switching of the coherent tunneling systems' energy splitting. Here, we measure such switching induced by individual fluctuators on time scales from hours to minutes using a superconducting qubit as a detector. Moreover, we extend the range of measurable switching times to millisecond scales by employing a highly sensitive single-photon qubit swap spectroscopy and statistical analysis of the measured qubit states. Tunneling systems (TS) are well known to govern the low-temperature properties of glasses, and a quite generally accepted description is provided by the standard tunneling model Coherent TS can thus be driven resonantly by high frequency elastic or electric fields between their ground and excited states which respectively correspond to symmetric and antisymmetric superpositions of the two localized wave functions. Incoherent TS or so-called two-level fluctuators (TLF) may be defined as being essentially localized in either potential well with a rather low probability of tunneling to the other well. The phase of the wave functions is destroyed between subsequent tunneling events Here, we employ a phase qubit Additionally, the energy of both TS and TLF can be tuned by a static strain field which we created by bending the chip with a piezo stack Changing the static strain by slightly increasing the voltage of the piezo stack results in E TLF = k B • 50 mK which indicates that E TLF depends on the asymmetry and is tunable by strain similar to coherent TSs The additional small drift of the resonance frequency of the TS in Fig. If a TLF switches between its states faster than the time τ M = 0.7 s required to measure the averaged qubit state probability, both resonance frequencies of the coherent TS appear simultaneously. Such a situation is depicted in Fig. The resulting change of the TS's hyperbolic trace corresponds to a shift along the strain axis, indicating that the coupling to the TLF only affects the TS's asymmetry and not its tunneling energy. For the two parallel TS resonances E 1 and E 2 (grey and black hyperbolas), which are simultaneously visible only in a small range of mechanical deformation (Fig. where is the occupation number in the energy basis (Fig. Although we can not resolve telegraph switching for this rather fast TLF there is a way to extract information about its switching rate using a statistical analysis of many subsequent individual qubit measurements. In principle the data can be analyzed as well in the framework of autocorrelation In the following, we present such a statistical analysis and a corresponding simulation using a sequence of N 0 = 50.000 successive single measurements. Figure The probabilities P (|1 ) and P (|0 ) to measure the excited or the ground state of the qubit, respectively, are given by a Bernoulli distribution with two possible outcomes and P (|0 ) + P (|1 ) = 1 where p is either P (|1 ) or P (|0 ) (Supplemental Material Analysis of a TS which is coupled to an incoherent TLF reveals a correlation of subsequent single measurements of the qubit state. The correlation manifests itself as a kink in the histogram of Fig. The extracted probability P TLF = (0.02±0.01) and the repetition rate of 1.2 kHz results with τ -1 TLF = 1.2 kHz • P TLF in a fluctuation rate of τ -1 TLF = 1/(38 ± 17) ms. ( The significance of this result has to be discussed briefly. When comparing the experiment with the coin toss simulation, the observation of the characteristic kink is crucial, and the position of the kink mainly depends on P TLF In conclusion, individual TLFs in the AlO x of Josephson junction tunnel barriers and their switching dynamics are measured through a two stage detection involving their coupling to a coherent TS which itself is coupled to a qubit. Various existing methods to characterize slow TLFs, e.g. conductance fluctuations, are limited to ≈ 1 Hz by the averaging time of the measuring system Within the single-photon swap spectroscopy the qubit is excited by a π-pulse, then it is brought into resonance with a TS for a certain time. In this time the excitation oscillates between qubit and TS. After the excitation of the qubit with a π-pulse one would expect a probability P (|1 ) = 1 measuring the excited state. In the experiment, the qubit already decayed by a certain degree after its preparation in the excited state until the time t 0 of the measurement. The probability to measure the excited state at a time t 0 therefore has a value between 1 and 0, depending on the relaxation rate T -1 1 of the qubit to the ground state. Each of the N 0 measurements are independent when the qubit is prepared again in the same state for each individual measurement. Let Q be a set of the outcome of N 0 Bernoulli experiments. We want to know how many subsets with exactly m successes (further denoted as |1 ) are in Q. Therefore we look at the probability of such a subset to contain exactly m times |1 . In the next step we expand by one element, which is |1 with probability p. Finding |0 on the other hand determines one end of the chain with probability 1 -p. Expanding in the other direction and finding |0 again determines the number of consecutive |1 to be m = 0. When finding |1 we go on to expand, where the probability of each step is p to find a |1 and 1 -p to find |0 . If we find |0 we expand the other end, until it hits a |0 as well. For a chain with m = 0 times |1 , which corresponds to the probability of two consecutive |0 is P (0) = (1 -p)(1 -p). For finding m = 1 times |1 which is separated from the rest by |0 , being exactly one consecutive |1 , is P (1) = (1 -p) 2 • p. For arbitrary m the probability of those minimal subsets that enclose exactly m times |1 is There are some subsets for which the probability is not P (m) = (1 -p) 2 • p m but P edge (m) = (1 -p) • p m as these two sets hit the border of the set Q and do not need to end with two |0 s. As long as m ≪ N 0 , their number is small compared to the total number of chains with length m and in our case they can be neglected. Finally we point out which timescales are resolvable with the simulation of coin tosses with two different biased coins modeling our correlated data. In Fig. 