We have performed Since the discoveries of unconventional superconductivity in heavy-fermion (HF) The first HF superconductor discovered in 1979 1 , CeCu 2 Si 2 , was also considered to be a nodal unconventional superconductor since the SC phase was located on the verge of the AFM phase. Moreover, the T 3 dependence of the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 , together with the absence of a coherence peak One difficulty in studying CeCu 2 Si 2 is that a stoichiometric CeCu 2 Si 2 is located very close to a magnetic quantum critical point, resulting in a ground state that is quite sensitive to the actual stoichiometry Another difficulty in studying CeCu 2 Si 2 is that large single-crystal samples showing superconductivity were not available before 2000, and thus, most measurements were performed on well-characterized polycrystalline samples. Consequently, axial-dependent and angle-resolved measurements have not been performed. However, large single crystals with well-defined properties have been synthesized and have recently been used for various experiments. In particular, recent specificheat measurements on an S-type CeCu 2 Si 2 single crystal down to 40 mK strongly suggested that CeCu 2 Si 2 possesses a full gap with a multiband character In this study, we have performed Single crystals of CeCu 2 Si 2 were grown by the flux method The The inset of Fig. where ν zz is the quadrupole frequency along the principal axis (c-axis) of the EFG, defined as ν zz ≡ 3e 2 qQ/2I(2I -1) with eq = V zz , and η is the asymmetry parameter of the EFG expressed as (V xx -V yy )/V zz with V αα , which is the second derivative of the electric potential V along the α direction (α = x, y, z). down to 50 K owing to a thermal lattice expansion and/or lattice vibrations Figure Figure In the SC state, 1/T 1 in all samples showed no clear coherence (Hebel-Slichter) peak just below T c , and 1/T 1 was proportional to T 3 at low temperatures down to 130 mK. The T 3 -dependence of 1/T 1 was consistent with the T -linear dependence of C/T in the intermediate temperature range between T c and 200 mK. Below 120 mK, 1/T 1 in the single-crystal sample deviated downward from the T 3 -dependence, which was consistent with the exponential behavior of C/T in the temperature region between 50 and 200 mK 27 . Low-temperature 1/T 1 below 90 mK could not be measured due to the limits of the refrigerator in our lab. Possible gap structure will be discussed based on the temperature dependence of 1/T 1 in the single-crystal sample later in the discussion part. For the NMR measurement, we applied magnetic fields to lift the degeneracy of the spin degrees of freedom, even though the nuclear-energy levels were already split by the electric quadrupole interaction. Total effective Hamiltonian could be expressed as where K is the Knight shift, and H is an external field. Four nuclear spin levels were well separated, and we observed three resonance lines for each isotope ( 63 Cu and 65 Cu) as shown in Fig. The misalignment of the c-axis with respect to the fieldrotation plane was estimated to be less than 2 o from the NMR spectrum analyses, and K was determined from the central line of the Figure where A hf,i , χ spin,i , and K orb,i are the hyperfine coupling constant, spin susceptibility, and orbital part of the Knight shift in each direction, and K orb,i is usually temperature independent. In the normal state, K ⊥ increased on cooling and became constant below 4 K. The temperature dependence of K c was similar to that of K ⊥ , with opposing sign due to the anisotropic A hf , which is understood by c-f hybridization. A. Spin dynamics in the normal state In general, 1/T 1 provides microscopic details about the low-energy spin dynamics, and thus, we analyze 1/T 1 to quantitatively discuss the character of low-energy spin dynamics of Ce moments. In temperatures higher than the coherent temperature T * , the Ce moments are in a well localized regime; thus, the observed 1/T 1 value in CeCu 2 Si 2 is approximately decomposed into conductionelectron and localized Ce f -electrons as where the former contribution can be approximately known from 1/T 1 of the LaCu 2 Si 2 In general, 1/T 1 is expressed as where A(q) is the q-dependent hyperfine coupling constant, and χ ′′ (q, ω) is the imaginary part of the dynamical susceptibility, and the sum is over the Brillouin zone. At higher temperatures, the spin dynamics are determined by independent Ce moments, and the local-moment susceptibility is given by 42 where χ 0 is the bulk susceptibility and Γ is the characteristic energy of spin fluctuations of Ce moments. We assume that the q-dependence of A(q) can be negligibly small, and the dynamical susceptibility is isotropic. Then, eq.( where (1/T 1 ) f is estimated by subtracting 1/T where K ⊥ is the Cu Knight shift perpendicular to the c axis. Here, A ⊥ is the hyperfine coupling constant perpendicular to the c axis, which is evaluated from the K-χ plot in the T range from 8 and 80 K 39 , since the bulk susceptibility is easily affected by an extrinsic impurity contribution. Figure As shown in Fig. Here, we discuss a plausible SC gap model for explaining the temperature variation of 1/T 1 at zero field. The 1/T 1 results showing T 3 dependence were considered to be evidence of the presence of a line node in CeCu 2 Si 2 , and these results can be reproduced by the two-dimensional d-wave model, as shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of 1/T 1 T in two-gap superconductors is calculated using the following equations: Here, N i s (E), M i s (E), ∆ i , δ i , and f (E) are the quasiparticle density of state (DOS), the anomalous DOS arising from the coherence effect of Cooper pairs, the amplitude of the SC gap, the smearing factor to remove divergence of N i s (E) at E = ∆ i , and the Fermi distribution function, respectively. The parameter n i represents the fraction of the DOS of the i-th SC gap, and two SC gaps are assumed for simplicity, thus n 1 + n 2 = 1. We multiply N i s (E) and M i s (E) by a Gaussian distribution function to suppress the coherence peak. We also calculate 1/T 1 T using a single-gap two dimensional d-wave model and a two-band d-wave model discussed in ref. 46 as follows: where N d s (E) is the quasi-particle DOS in a d-wave superconductor and ∆ 0 is the maximum of the SC gap. Figure In the plausible s ± state of CeCu 2 Si 2 , the sign of the SC gap would change at the electron Fermi surface that is located around the X point with a loop-shaped node. However, as suggested by Ikeda et al., because this nodal feature is not symmetry protected, the loop node can be easily lifted by the slight mixture of on-site pairing due to an intrinsic attractive on-site interaction, and the corrugated heavy-electron sheet becomes fully gapped with a small magnitude of the SC gap Recently, Yamashita et al. Finally, we illustrate the differences between 1/T 1 of CeCu 2 Si 2 and 1/T 1 of CeCoIn 5 in the SC state. Various experiments have suggested the presence of a line node in CeCoIn 5 not only from the temperature dependence but also from the field-angle dependence, and CeCoIn 5 is considered to be of d-wave symmetry In conclusion, we have performed 