The discovery of new families of unconventional superconductors is important both experimentally and theoretically, especially if it challenges current models and thinking. By using muon spin relaxation in zero-field, time-reversal symmetry breaking has been observed in Re6Hf. Moreover, the temperature dependence of the superfluid density exhibits s-wave superconductivity with an enhanced electron-phonon coupling. This, coupled with the results from isostructural Re6Zr, shows that the Re6X family are indeed a new and important group of unconventional superconductors. Superconductivity is a complex phenomenon, and provides a rich experimental and theoretical playground in which to investigate physics. To this date, our microscopic understanding is primarily built upon the theory of Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS), which describes how conventional superconductivity arises due to the coupling of electrons as spin-singlet Cooper pairs, mediated by the electron-phonon interaction The central principle of BCS theory is the formation of Cooper pairs at the superconducting transition temperature, T c . The superconducting ground state is described by a macroscopic wave function representing these Cooper pairs, which behaves like a thermodynamic order parameter. In order to satisfy the Pauli Exclusion Principle, this Cooper pair wavefunction should be antisymmetric under particle exchange. Thus, pairing states form in either spin-singlet configurations with even parity, or as spin-triplet pairs with odd parity TRSB remains an exceptionally rare phenomenon in this class of materials. It was concluded that only certain irreducible representation of the crystal point group will permit the pairing states with TRSB, whereas pairing states constructed from other irreducible representations, also with mixed parity, would not necessarily be expected to exhibit TRSB. This makes the occurrence of TRSB in NCS much more interesting. To date, the only NCS that have yet been reported to show TRSB are LaNiC 2 Muon spin rotation and relaxation (μSR) is one of the most direct ways of confirming the presence of an unconventional superconducting state In this paper, we report evidence for broken time reversal symmetry (TRS) in the superconducting state of the binary transition metal compound Re 6 Hf, which is isostructural to Re 6 Zr. Our results show that the TRSB signal in Re 6 Hf is very similar to the signal observed in Re 6 Zr, and shows that Re 6 X is an important family of unconventional superconducting materials, in which the effect of spin-orbit coupling on the superconducting ground state can be investigated. The preparation of the polycrystalline Re 6 Hf sample used in this work is described in Ref. Zero-field (ZF) muon-spin relaxation data were collected at several temperatures above and below T c . Figure where ∆ measures the width of the nuclear dipolar field experienced by the muons. The ZF asymmetry spectra are well described by the function where A 0 and A BG are the sample and background asymmetries, respectively. The exponential relaxation rate, Λ, ) 1. (a) ZF-and LF-μSR spectra collected above (circles) and below (squares) Tc with least-squares fits using the model of Eq.2 (solid lines). In ZF there is a clear difference between the spectra, indicating the presence of spontaneous fields in the superconducting state. The effect of applying a small LF field of 10 mT is also shown (diamonds). (b) Temperature dependence of the Gaussian relaxation parameter, ∆, which clearly shows spontaneous fields appearing below Tc ∼ 6.0 K. (c) The electronic relaxation rate, Λ, exhibits a weak temperature dependence, with no appreciable change at Tc. is typically associated with dynamic electronic moments, which fluctuate on a timescale that is much faster than the muon lifetime. Above model fits poorly above 10μs. It might be due to an additional contribution, or the exact model of the Kubo-Toyabe is not correct in the present case. The temperature dependence of the fit parameters ∆ and Λ are presented in Fig. The shape of ∆(T ) has been empirically modelled by a generic N -fluid equation of the form ∆(T )/∆(0) = 1 -(T /T c ) n -shown as the solid line in Fig. The nature of the relaxation signal can be further probed by the application of a longitudinal field (LF), as this allows the magnitude of the internal field to be estimated. When μ 0 H app ≈ 10B int , the muon spins become fully decoupled from a static internal field -experimentally we observe this as a flat asymmetry spectra. This is exactly what we see upon application of a small LF of 10 mT, as depicted by the blue diamonds in Fig. where γ μ /2π = 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio. Subtracting the high temperature value of ∆ from the low temperature value yields the change δ∆ = 0.0052(1) μs -1 , which together with Eq. ( The structure of the superconducting gap in Re 6 Hf was determined by measuring the superfluid density using transverse field μSR (TF-μSR). A magnetic field of 25 mT was applied above T c , before cooling through the superconducting transition to a temperature of 300 mK, in order to stabilize the flux line lattice in the mixed state of the superconductor. Typical muon asymmetry signals are presented for temperatures above and below T c in Fig. In this equation, A i , σ i , and B i correspond to the asymmetry, depolarization rate, and field of the i'th oscillating component, φ is a shared phase offset, and γ μ /2π = 135.5 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio. To fit the low temperature data adequately, n = 3 oscillating components were required. Above T = 4 K, the signal from one of the components had become negligibly small, and the number of oscillations was reduced to n = 2. The depolarization rate of the i = 1 oscillating component was fixed to σ 1 = 0 throughout the fitting procedure, which accounts for muons stopping in the silver sample holder as they do not appreciably depolarize over the time-scale of the experiment. Furthermore, the value of A 1 = 0.0871 determined from the lowest temperature measurement was kept fixed. The second-moment method, described in Ref. Below about 1.5 K, σ is once again temperature independent, which suggests that the superconductivity should be well described by a fully-gapped, s-wave model. For a single-gap s-wave superconductor in the dirty limit, the temperature dependence of the superfluid density, ρ s , is given by where ∆(T ) is the BCS approximation for the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap energy, and ∆ 0 is the low temperature value of the gap energy. The dirty limit is used when the BCS coherence length, ξ 0 , is of a similar order of magnitude to the electronic mean free path, l. The justification for using the dirty limit arises from a calculation of ξ 0 /l = 1.08, based on the experimental data in Ref. Combining eqs. ( where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. This gives λ(0) = 462(1) nm, which is slightly larger than the value found in Ref. It should be noted that in the case of dirty limit superconductors there is a possibility that the actual temperature dependence of the superfluid density might be smeared out due to scattering from defects or impurities. This particular remark was also made in CaIrSi 3 The point group analysis of Re 6 Zr Another thing to consider is the comparative effect of spin-orbit coupling between Re 6 Zr and Re 6 Hf. Since Hf is more massive than Zr, the spin-orbit coupling is expected to be stronger, as it increases with Z 4 . However, the TRSB signal observed in ZF in Re 6 Zr is remarkably similar to that seen in Re 6 Hf -The magnitude and shape of the increase in signal from the muon results is nearly identical. This indicates that the mechanism for superconductivity in both these materials is the same, and that the increased spin-orbit coupling does not lead to an increase in the strength of the spin-triplet channel. The conclusion is that, while ASOC is required in order to allow spin-singlet/triplet mixing, it does not affect the underlying electronic characteristics of the spin-triplet channel, which exists regardless of whether a strong ASOC is present. In conclusion, we have determined that the super-conducting ground state in Re 6 Hf breaks time reversal symmetry. However, the TF data suggest that the superconducting order parameter is described well by an isotropic gap with s-wave pairing symmetry and enhanced electron-phonon coupling, similar to that of Re 6 Zr. The current results suggest a complex superconducting ground state of a dominant s-wave component with a smaller triplet component. Further experimental work on single crystals, coupled with theoretical work, is required to fully determine the nature of the superconductivity in this important family of materials.