Topological superconductors are an intriguing and elusive quantum phase, characterized by topologically protected gapless surface/edge states residing in a bulk superconducting gap, which hosts Majorana fermions. Unfortunately, all currently known topological superconductors have a very low transition temperature, limiting experimental measurements of Majorana fermions. Here we discover the existence of a topological Dirac-nodal-line state in a well-known conventional hightemperature superconductor, MgB 2 . First-principles calculations show that the Dirac-nodal-line structure exhibits a unique one-dimensional dispersive Dirac-nodal-line, protected by both spatial inversion and time-reversal symmetry, which connects the electron and hole Dirac states. Most importantly, we show that the topological superconducting phase can be realized with a conventional s-wave superconducting gap, evidenced by the topological edge mode of the MgB 2 thin films showing chiral edge states. Our discovery may enable the experimental measurement of Majorana fermions at high temperature. Superconducting and topological states are among the most fascinating quantum phenomena in nature. The entanglement of these two states in a solid material into a topological superconducting state will give rise to even more exotic quantum phenomena, such as Majorana fermions. Recently, much effort has been devoted to searching for topological superconductors (TSCs). The first way to realize a TSC phase is by proximity effect via formation of a heterojunction between a topological material and a superconductor (SC) 1-3 . Cooper pairs can tunnel into a topological surface state (TSS), forming a localized state that hosts Majorana bound states at magnetic vortices 1-3 , or into a spin-polarized TSS leading to half-integer quantized conductance Here, we discover the existence of a topological phase in a conventional SC of MgB 2 with a T c of ∼40 K, the highest transition temperature known for a bulk BCS SC. Based on firstprinciples calculations, we demonstrate a topological Dirac nodal line (DNL) MgB 2 has the AlB 2 -type centrosymmetric crystal structure with the space group P6/mmm (191). As shown in Fig. To reveal the electronic and topological properties of MgB 2 , its electronic band structure is calculated with and without spin-orbit coupling (SOC) (see Supplementary Information). Remarkably, the Dirac bands are also dispersive along the K-H directions, so that we have a dispersive Dirac-nodal-line structure [Fig. We define two independent topological Z 2 indices denoted by ζ 1 and ζ 2 as a line integral along a closed path, where A( k) is the Berry connection, A( k) = i n|∇|n . The simplest Hamiltonian near the where σ i are Pauli matrices. For any path in the (k x ,k y )-plane that goes around the Dirac line, the index ζ 1 is 1, which means the Dirac lines are stable against perturbations. For the topological invariant of the Dirac nodal line, one can calculate the index ζ 2 using the flow of Wannier charge centers on a set of loops covering the enclosing manifold To further reveal the topological nature of the Dirac-nodal-line-semimetal (DNLS) state in MgB 2 , we also calculate the surface states. The existence of TSSs and Fermi arcs is one of the most important signatures of DNLS. Fig. On the one hand, our discovery of topological state in MgB 2 might not appear surprising from the theoretical point of view, because of its similarity (B hexagonal plane) to graphene/graphite. One the other hand, it is quite surprising from the experimental perspective, considering the fact that MgB 2 has been studied for over decades but none of the experiments has detected any topological signature. This is because there are some fundamental differences between MgB 2 and graphene/graphite based systems as we have revealed here. In particular, we show that in order to detect the topological signatures in MgB 2 , one has to do experiments differently from before, e.g. by measuring angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy on the (001) instead of commonly used (111) surface and magnetoresistance in the doped sample instead of intrinsic one. However, our most important discovery is possibly the topological superconducting state in MgB 2 as we discuss below. We now consider the superconducting effect on DNLS. MgB 2 is a conventional BCS superconductor with two superconducting gaps, ∆ σ and ∆ π , which arise from the σ and π bands of the B electrons, respectively. The magnitude of the energy gap ranges from 1.5 to 3.5 meV for π band and 5.5 to 8 meV for σ band Because the charge distribution of the σ-bonding states is not symmetrical with respect to the in-plane positions of boron atoms, the σ-bonding states couple very strongly to the in-plane vibration of boron atoms To realize the TSC state, we now focused on the MgB 2 thin films. It was predicted that the MgB 2 thin films are mechanically stable and could be grown owing to self-doping effect where c † iα (c iα ) is the creation (annihilation) operator on site i with spin α, and σ are the Pauli matrices. The i, j represents the nearest-neighboring (NN) sites. The first term is the NN hopping term in boron layer. The second term is the Rashba SOC arising from a perpendicular electric field to the B layer adjacent to substrate, with λ R and d i,j representing the coupling strength and a unit vector from site j to site i, respectively. The V z (∆ π ) in the third (fourth) term corresponds to the exchange field (superconducting gap of π band). The μ in the last term is chemical potential. We can transform the Hamiltonian of Eq. (3) to the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian H BdG in the momentum space (see Supplementary Information). If neglecting the Rashba and exchange field term, the system is topologically trivial with s-wave superconducting gap same as the bulk DNL state. As expected, the superconducting gap mixes the Dirac states, resulting in the disappearance of gapless edge modes. When the Rashba and exchange field are turned on, spin-up and spin-down bands are split and mixed. The 2D BdG Hamiltonian with broken time-reversal symmetry belongs to the topological class D 50 , which is characterized by an integer number. The Chern number C 1 can be calculated by 51 where f xy ( k) is the Berry curvature Here, u m k (E m k ) is the m-th eigenvector (eigenvalue) of H BdG ; f m is Fermi occupation factor. Interestingly, we found that the boron layer of MgB 2 thin film is topologically nontrivial in the case of |V z | ≥ |∆ π | with the Chern number C 1 =4. We note that this criterion does not depend on the value of the Rashba coupling. edge near the K and K points. We found that there exist two zero-energy states in each valley with same propagation direction (v F <0), which is in agreement with C 1 =4. This indicates that these zero energy states are topologically protected Majorana edge states. Armchair edge also exhibits four protected bands crossing zero energy (Fig. Finally, we address the experimental feasibility of the TSC from a quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) phase of graphene having a similar structural system with boron layer. Graphene on the magnetic insulator, such as BiFeO We performed first-principles calculations within the framework of density-functional theory (DFT) using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof-type generalized gradient approximation (GGA) for the exchange-correlation functional, as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package topological superconducting phase in an unprecedented high temperature and may offer a promising material platform to building novel quantum and spintronics devices. It will stimulate future studies of topological phases in a broader range of superconducting materials, such as honeycomb lattice layered structure. Sasaki S. et al. Topological superconductivity in Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 . Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 217001 (2011). Bzdušek T., Q. Wu, Rüegg A., Sigrist M., and Soluyanov A. A. Nodal-chain metals. Nature Eskildsen M. R. et al. Vortex imaging in the π band of magnesium diboride. Phys. Rev. Lett.