Due to competing long range ferromagnetic order, the transition metals Fe, Co and Ni are not superconductors at ambient pressure. While superconductivity was observed in a nonmagnetic phase of Fe, stabilized under pressure, it is yet to be discovered in Co and Ni under any experimental conditions. Here, we report emergence of superconductivity in the recently discovered high-density nonmagnetic face centered cubic phase in Co thin films below a transition temperature (T c ) of ~5.4 K, as revealed in experiments based on point-contact spectroscopy and resistance, and four-probe measurements of resistance at ambient pressure. We confirm the non-magnetic nature of the dense fcc phase of Co within first-principles density functional theory, and show that its superconductivity below 5 K originates from anomalous softening of zone-boundary phonons and their enhanced coupling with electrons upon biaxial strain. pressures between 15 and 30 GPa Stimulated by the discovery of the HDNM -cobalt, we took up an exploration of superconductivity in HDNM Co, and report here its superconducting ground state that remains stable up to unusually high T c of about 9.5 K at ambient pressure. Superconductivity is revealed in the zero-bias conductance enhancement and its systematic evolution with magnetic field in mesoscopic point-contacts between normal non-superconducting elemental metals and the HDNM Co sample. An independent confirmation of superconductivity is obtained from the resistance drop at T c and the suppression of T c with applied magnetic field in both point contact measurement and standard four-probe measurement under ambient pressure. A thin film (nominal thickness 25 nm) of Co was deposited on HF-etched clean Si In the resistance versus temperature (R-T) data, obtained in point-contact measurements on a Ag-tip/HDNM-Co contact (Fig. The dI/dV spectra, obtained in the point contact spectroscopy (PCS) measurements, of the HDNM-Co/Ag contact (Fig. shows that the estimate of H C is consistent with the R-T and dI/dV -V measurements, although the data (Fig. It should be noted here that Andreev reflection could not be observed in our PCS experiment due to low mean free path of the film, which prohibited us from making point contacts in the ballistic regime. We observe some variation in the results for the Ag tip and the Pd tip, for example in the width of the peak and the value of T c . This is not unexpected as there is a dependence on the junction-type, and the junction size which include the tip material and the type of contact As our nonmagnetic superconducting Co layers are polycrystalline with relatively small grains (typically ~ 10 nm) (4) (Fig. The T-dependent resistance obtained from the four-probe measurements under ambient pressure (see Fig. To connect closer with the HDNM fcc phase of Co in the thin films studied here, we determined the effects of volume preserving anisotropic strain in the HDNM fcc structure that is expected to occur in a film. We used a body centered tetragonal unit cell (Fig. We have observed superconductivity in a Co thin film containing high-density nonmagnetic (HDNM) Co. The superconducting state has been identified via observations of (i) field dependent transition in R-T, (ii) zero-bias conductance peak and its field evolution and (iii) conductance dips symmetric about V = 0 and their field evolution. The Co film is polycrystalline and the HDNM Co is in the form of nanoscale grains. There is a density, and possibly strain, distribution among the grains. That is why measurements of superconducting transition temperature on different spots on the sample show little variation in results (T C : 9.2-9.8 K). Fourprobe measurements have provided somewhat smaller value of T C (4.4 -5.4 K). In point contact measurement, generation of some nonhydrostatic pressure on the sample at the point contact cannot be avoided. This might be the reason for the higher value of T C compared to the fourprobe measurement. Our first-principles calculations confirm the nonmagnetic nature of Co (in the dense fcc phase) and show that a volume conserving strain in the HDNM fcc Co results in a remarkable enhancement in its superconducting T C ( > 5 K) due to anomalous softening of zone boundary phonons and their enhanced coupling with electrons. Co at the middle of the structure is hexagonal close packed (hcp), whereas the HDNM Co is face-centered cubic (fcc) (4). The circuit diagram for the point contact measurements in shown in Fig. The layer structure in the sample, as obtained from XRR and PNR analysis in Ref. The circuit for the point contact measurements The observed value of T c for the nonmagnetic Co is strikingly similar to that of bulk Nb (9.26 K). This is apparently a coincidence. In thin films of Nb the value of T c depends on the film thickness and is much smaller compared to bulk Nb. For Nb films on Si, T c is 9.21 K for a film thickness of 214 nm and it reduces to 5.35 K for a film thickness of 22.5 nm For the four-probe measurements, contacts have been made on the top surface of the sample using an In x Ag y contact material. (Contacts made with Ag paint did not survive at low temperature). This contact material was made from 70 wt. percent of In and 30 wt. percent of Ag by arc melting. Dimensions of the contacts are about 1 mm and the separation between successive contacts is 1 mm. In Fig. For a reference sample, a Cu/Co multilayer , the resistance (R) versus temperature (T) plot at zero applied magnetic field is shown in Fig. As the Cu/Co material between the contacts is normal metal, zero resistance below the transition is not expected. Measurements on the HDNM Co samples at zero field shows a superconducting transition at 5.4 K, in addition to the one at 3.7 K (Fig. We determined electronic structure of fcc Co within first-principles density functional theory as implemented in QUANTUM ESPRESSO package Dynamical matrices and phonons were determined at wave vectors (q's) on 4×4×4 meshes in the Brillouin Zone using density functional perturbation theory (QUANTUM ESPRESSO (19) implementation). Dynamical matrices at other q-points were obtained from Fourier interpolation of those obtained at q's on 4×4×4 mesh. In addition, we used 64×64×64 meshes of k-points (electrons) and 4×4×4 meshes of q-points (phonons) to compute electronphonon coupling matrix elements. Superconducting T C was estimated within the BCS theory (11) (Bardeen, Cooper and Schriefer) using Mcmillan's equation where λ is the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling constant and μ* is the Coulomb pseudopotential where ω's are the frequencies of phonon modes. α 2 F(ω) is the Eliashberg spectral function. We used experimental lattice parameters of Co (a = 3.17 Å) in the fcc structure in our simulations. Electronic structure and phonon dispersion results are shown in Fig. To investigate the effect of strain on superconducting T C , we consider body centered tetragonal unit cell (see Fig. where N(ε F ) is the density of states at the Fermi level, and , 's are the electron-phonon coupling matrix elements. ω qν is the frequency of the ν th phonon mode at wave vector q. Phonon modes with low frequencies (phonons at N and X points) contribute much more to λ (Eq. 3) compared to high-frequency modes. It should be noted here that the theoretical calculations are for materials of uniform density. In this case a parabolic relationship between H C and T is expected for BCS superconductivity. In the experiment the sample is composed of high density grains with some variation in density of the grains These high density grains are also surrounded by normal metal. The sample is as if superconducting grains are embedded in a normal metal. This is likely to be the reason for the deviation of the H C -T relationship from parabolicity.