We study the formation of Majorana states in superconductors using the Majorana polarization, which can locally evaluate the Majorana character of a given state. We introduce the definition of the Majorana polarization vector and the corresponding criterion to identify a Majorana state, and we apply it to some simple cases such as a one-dimensional wire with spin-orbit coupling, subject to a Zeeman magnetic field, and proximitized by a superconductor, as well as to an NS junction made with such a wire. We also apply this criterion to two-dimensional finite-size strips and squares subject to the same physical conditions. Our analysis demonstrates the necessity of using the Majorana polarization local order parameter to characterize the Majorana states, particularly in finite-size systems. Majorana fermions have been attracting a lot of interest recently ; these atypical fermionic particles have been predicted long time ago by E. Majorana as real solutions of the Dirac equation A simple manner to think about the possibility of the realization of Majorana states in a condensed matter system is to imagine a setup in which the elementary excitations are equal combinations of electrons and holes. Thus the reality condition, implying that a given excitation is identical to its hermitian conjugate, is automatically satisfied. Such excitations made of combinations of electrons and holes appear naturally in superconductors, and thus we expect that the superconductors would be the ideal ground to start looking for Majoranas. However, in regular s-wave superconductors the natural excitations (Bogoliubov qausiparticles) are made up of electrons and holes with opposite spins, that are not self-adjoint due to their spin structure. To have a true self-adjoint state one would require a p-wave superconductor, but such superconductors are rare and their p-wave character not fully agreed upon (e.g. Sr 2 RuO 4 Thus, among the most studied Majorana proposals, both theoretically and experimentally, are one-dimensional (1D) systems with a strong spin-orbit coupling such as InAs and InSb wires The goal of the present work is to introduce a new tool to study Majorana fermions in condensed matter systems. We show here that a fundamental ingredient in studying these excitations is lacking, and we present this missing piece and prove its importance. We thus introduce the generalized Majorana polarization (MP) Having access to such a local measure can allow one to understand the evolution of the Majorana states through a phase transition, their dependence on specific particularities of the system such as size, disorder, inhomogeneities, etc., as well as how one can manipulate them. We show that the calculation of the MP allows one to write down a topological criterion and assign a global topological character to a given state. When the criterion of zero energy for a given state cannot be strictly applied (e.g infinitesimally small but non-zero energies), having access to a local order parameter is a sufficient and versatile criterion for such a distinction. This allows for an accurate determination of the topological phase diagram from numerical calculations. In what follows we write down the generalized MP definition and apply it to a few examples, such as a one-dimensional wire with Rashba, Zeeman and SC proximity, as well as to NS junctions made with such wires. Also, we apply it to two-dimensional finite-size strips and squares with open boundary conditions. The paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we present the Majorana polarization, in section 3 we introduce the most general model Hamiltonians for the systems studied, in section 4 we apply the MP criterion to the simple case of a one-dimensional wire, in section 5 we consider an NS junction, while in section 6 we study two-dimensional finite-size systems. We conclude in section 7. Since Majorana fermions are their own anti-particles γ † = γ, where γ † is the creation operator for a Majorana fermion. In condensed-matter systems in which the elementary excitations are electrons (c † ) and holes (c), Majorana states can be achieved as collective excitations, in particular as superpositions of electronic and hole states (γ = (c ± c † )/ √ 2), superpositions that can satisfy the self-adjoint-conditions. Such superpositions can occur naturally in superconductors, with equal superpositions of electrons and holes being predicted at zero-energy. However, regular superconductors would pair electrons and holes of opposite spins (vc ↑ + uc † ↓ ), while Majorana states require superpositions of electrons and holes with the same spin ( . It has been proposed that they can arise naturally in one-dimensional wires with strong spin-orbit coupling in the presence of a Zeeman field and in the proximity of a regular superconductor. To quantify such superpositions we introduce the Majorana polarization To take a more specific example we consider first a spinless model for which the most general solution for a given state is a combination of electrons and holes Ψ = uc † + vc. We can see here that such a state is purely electronic or purely hole if either u or v is zero, and it is a Majorana if |u| = |v| = 1/2. We introduce the Majorana polarization vector that characterizes the electron-hole overlap as or equivalently, in vector notation P = (P x , P y ) with P x = 2Re(uv) and P y = 2Im(uv). We note that P is indeed zero for either u = 0 or v = 0, while for a Majorana state, for which |u| = |v| = 1/2, or equivalently Ψ M = e iφ (c † +e iθ c)/2, then P = e 2iφ e iθ . This has indeed the absolute value of 1. The resulting phase has two components, e 2iφ comes from the overall arbitrary phase factor of the wave function and it is generally irrelevant, and can be gauged away. The second phase factor e iθ has however a physical significance since it captures the information about the relative phase between the electron and hole component. As we will see in what follows it does not have to be spatially uniform and its spatial structure is crucial in the study of a given Majorana state. The simplest example underlying the importance of this phase factor is that of a one-dimensional wire in which the right-end Majorana has θ = π, while the leftend one has θ = -π (in the literature the corresponding Majoranas are usually denoted . We should note that for any given closed system the distribution of θ needs to satisfy the condition that the integral of the MP vector over the entire system For a spinful model for which a given wavefunction has the most general form ↓ the MP can simply be generalized to or equivalently P = (P x , P y ), with To understand how the definition of the MP works for an extended system we consider a two-dimensional lattice for which the MP needs to be defined on each site r = (x, y) (see Fig. Additionally, in a region R where such a Majorana state is localized, its wavefunction must satisfy where Ψ j (r)|Ψ j (r) is the electronic density at position r for the eigenstate j. For a system with two Majoranas localized each on a different edge of the system, R can simply be taken to be half the system. To obtain the topological phase diagram we first find the lowest energy states of the given system. If these states have energies close to zero they may be MBS. We divide our system into two halves (along the shorter length), and we compute the integral of the MP vector in each of these halves defined by r ∈ R for each 'zero'-energy state. The states that have C = 1 are MBS, and those with C = 0 A few examples of typical MP configurations are given in Fig. In what follows we apply this definition and the MP criterion to test the formation of Majorana states in a few particular situations of one-dimensional and two-dimensional lattices. We consider a tight-binding Hamiltonian, with a Rashba spin-orbit coupling α, subject to a magnetic field B( r) and brought in the proximity of a superconducting substrate which is assumed to induce an on-site SC pairing. We write down the corresponding Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian in the Nambu basis, Ψ j = (ψ j,↑ , ψ j,↓ , ψ † j,↓ , -ψ † j,↑ ) T , where j denotes the corresponding site. The full Hamiltonian is The first term of the Hamiltonian is given by where μ is the chemical potential, t the hopping strength, i,j denotes summing over nearest neighbors, and ∆ the induced superconducting pairing. We set t = h = 1 throughout. We also take the distance between nearest neighbours a = 1. The second term in Eq. 5 describes the effect of the Zeeman magnetic field of strength B and is given by While this is the most general form describing a magnetic field pointing in an arbitrary direction and that can vary spatially, in most of what follows we will consider a uniform field pointing in the z direction. The term corresponding to the effective Rashba spin-orbit interaction of strength α can be written as: We first consider a one-dimensional wire (see Fig. We focus on using a one-dimensional wire such as the one described in the previous section to make an SN long junction. Thus, as described in Fig. By diagonalizing the Hamiltonian of this system we find that its spectrum also exhibits two zero-energy modes. In Fig. We note that the use of the MP local order parameter is crucial to understand the physics of this system. Without it one cannot say for sure if the zero-energy states are Majoranas, nor that the Majorana character is uniform and that the Majorana state extends thus over the entire normal region. Such observation about the localization of a Majorana state is very important for the detection and the manipulation of Majorana states in NS junctions. In what follows we consider finite-size systems with open boundary conditions in both directions (see Fig. To understand the nature of these states we focus on the local structure of the MP. A Majorana state must have an integral of the MP over a spatial region R equal to the sum of the LDOS over the same region. This can be achieved only if at each site the MP is equal to the DOS (perfect local Majorana character), as well as if the MP local vectors are all aligned inside R ('ferromagnetic' MP structure). In Figs. 10-11 we plot the MP for a variety of different low energy states. In Fig. In Fig. Finally in Fig. It appears that the existence of the 'yellow' phase is due to the shape of the system, i.e to the fact that the length and the width become comparable. If the length is increased the yellow phase is diminishing and the phase diagram converges towards the phase diagram calculated analytically in the previous section. This observation has been made also for the Kitaev model We have introduced the Majorana polarization vector and we have shown that it can be used as a local order parameter to characterize a given eigenstate. We have shown that using a criterion based on the MP (the sum of the MP vectors over a given region is equal to the sum of the LDOS) allows one to distinguish Majorana states from non-Majorana states. We have implemented Here, and in what follows, by the 'integral' of the MP vector quantity over a given region we denote the absolute value of the sum of the MP vectors for all the lattice sites inside the corresponding region.