We present magnetic penetration depth and electrical transport data in single crystals of quasione-dimensional (q1D) Tl2Mo6Se6, which reveal a 1D→3D superconducting dimensional crossover. The c-axis penetration depth shows the onset of superconducting fluctuations below T ons 1D = 6.7 K, whereas signatures of superconductivity in the ab-plane penetration depth -a uniquely sensitive probe of the transverse phase stiffness -only emerge below T ons 3D = 4.9 K. An anomalously low superfluid density persists down to ∼3 K before rising steeply, in agreement with a theoretical model for crossovers in q1D superconductors. Our data analysis suggest that a sequence of pairing and phase fluctuation regimes controls the unusually broad superconducting transition. In particular, the electrical resistivity below T ons 3D is quantitatively consistent with the establishment of phase coherence through gradual binding of Josephson vortex strings to form 3D loops. This dimensional crossover within the superconducting state occurs despite the relatively large transverse hopping predicted from band structure. Our results have important consequences for the low-temperature normal state in Tl2Mo6Se6 and similar q1D metals, which may retain one-dimensional behavior to lower temperatures than expected from theory. Quasi-one-dimensional (q1D) materials can be regarded as arrays of parallel one-dimensional (1D) chains with a weak transverse coupling between chains. Although long-range electronic order would be suppressed by fluctuations in a perfectly 1D material Several compelling reasons exist to study such crossovers. For example, q1D materials provide a unique experimental access to theoretically tractable models for electron-electron (e --e -) correlations in higher dimensions Dimensional crossover out of a 1D state is primarily governed by the transverse electron hopping integral t ⊥ If superconductivity in a q1D material emerges directly from a normal state which is a 1D electron liquid, the superconducting transition is expected to be radically different from the narrow mean-field transitions observed in 3D materials Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 was the first superconducting member of M 2 Mo 6 Se 6 to be discovered A serious challenge to this two-step scenario is posed by DFT calculations, which yield t // ∼ 12000 K, t ⊥ ∼ 230 K in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 To resolve these puzzles, we track the evolution of the anisotropic phase stiffness in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 using a uniquely sensitive tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) technique. The normalized superfluid densities ρ s ab,c ∝|Ψ| 2 are proportional to the phase stiffness and can be extracted from the measured temperature-dependent magnetic penetration depths λ ab,c (T ). Our main discovery is that interchain phase coherence only emerges at a temperature T ons 3D = 4.9K which is lower than the onset of local intrachain coherence at T ons 1D = 6.7 K. This supports the presence of a 1D→3D dimensional crossover at T x2 ≡ T ons 3D in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 , in spite of the large t ⊥ . Our observations are qualitatively consistent with a theoretical study of superfluid density within a fully microscopic effective model, which incorporates a strong anisotropy between in-plane and c-axis hopping integrals. Comparing penetration depth and electrical transport data suggests that the superconducting transition in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 comprises a sequence of fluctuation regimes. Notably, the resistivity displays signatures of an exponentially-diverging correlation length below T ons 3D , implying that vortex binding plays an important role in a topological 3D phaseordering process. Our paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we describe the application of our penetration depth technique to q1D superconductors, before presenting our results for the anisotropic λ ab,c (T ), ρ s ab,c (T ) and a representative calculation for the theoretical superfluid density in a q1D material. We correlate these data with c-axis resistivity measurements in Sec. III, and we discuss the phase ordering below the dimensional crossover in Section V. Our findings are summarized in Sec. V, where we briefly outline the consequences of our results for the normal state in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 and other q1D metals. TDO techniques The TDO functions as an extremely sensitive ac susceptometer, whose resonant frequency changes due to flux exclusion from a superconducting sample placed inside a detection coil. Below the superconducting transition temperature, it can be shown that the change in the diamagnetic susceptibility ∆χ(T ) = χ(T ) -χ (0.35 K) is related to the change in the oscillator resonant frequency ∆f (T ) as follows: which in turn gives where ∆λ(T ) = λ(T ) -λ(0.35 K) is the change in the magnetic penetration depth. We measure relative to λ(0.35 K) since this is the minimum temperature achievable in our apparatus. G is a calibration factor depending on the solenoid and sample geometry, which is determined by comparison with a reference Al sample TDO penetration depth measurements were performed on a needle-shaped Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 single crystal, with length ∼1.5 mm and diameter ∼0.070 mm. The crystallographic c-axis corresponds to the morphological needle axis. The crystal growth and characterization procedures have been described previously TDO resonant frequency shift ∆f (T ) using Eq. ( This observation is consistent with a two-step transi- T ) data for Tl2Mo6Se6, obtained by our TDO technique. Dashed lines correspond to the three key temperatures separating the various regimes within the superconducting transition: T ons 1D = 6.7 K (onset of the transition in ∆λc), Tp ∼ 5.9 K (point of inflexion in ∆λc) and T ons 3D = 4.9 K (onset of the transition in ∆λ ab ). T ons 1D (T ons 3D ) is defined as the intersection point of the extrapolated linear regions immediately before and after ∆λc(T ) (∆λ ab (T )) starts to fall from its normal state value. Close inspection reveals a very faint anomaly in ∆λ ab (T ) at T ons 1D : less than 1% of the total ∆λ ab . This is likely due to an error in the crystal alignment with the ac excitation field, whose accuracy we estimate to be within ±1% in our apparatus. The inset shows the anisotropic magnetic susceptibilities 4πχ(T ) for H//c and H//ab, obtained using Eq. ( Converting our ∆λ(T ) data to normalized superfluid densities ρ s (T ) = [λ 2 (0)/λ 2 (T )] using λ ab (0) = 1.5 μm and λ c (0) = 0.12 μm (obtained from earlier magnetic and thermodynamic data 26 ), we plot ρ s ab,c (T ) in Fig. where is the Bogoliubov quasiparticle energy. We consider a Bardeen-Cooper Schrieffer (BCS) Normalized low temperature superfluid densities ρ s ab,c (T ) for Tl2Mo6Se6, extracted from ∆λ ab,c (T ) in Fig. temperature dependence for the gap ∆(T ) of the form 53 where for ∆λ ab and ∆λ c respectively (Fig. To partially overcome the limitations imposed by a uniform 3D model, we have developed a single-band microscopic tight-binding model for a q1D s-wave superconducting array. Anisotropy is introduced by varying the ab-plane and c-axis hopping integrals t ⊥ , t // , as well as the pairing interactions within and between q1D chains, g intra , g inter . Within our model, the crossover temperature is controlled by the strength of a proximity effect whose energy scale is represented by the inter- , so the calculated ρ s ab,c (T ) overlap. In the calculations, the energy and temperature are measured in units of t // = 1. The in-plane nearest-neighbor hopping and on-wire pairing interaction are fixed at t ⊥ = 0.1, and gintra = 2. In the ab-plane, the area ratio of wire to non-wire region is 4/9. The calculated ratios of c-axis to in-plane absolute superfluid densities near zero temperature are 186, 191, 196, and 214 for ginter=2.0, 1.75, 1.5, and 1.0, respectively. These values lie close to the λ 2 ab (0)/λ 2 c (0) ∼ 156 estimated from experiments wire pairing interaction g inter -this corresponds to the Josephson energy in a q1D superconductor such as Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 . The model Hamiltonian was diagonalized by self-consistently solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations in real space, and the superfluid density then evaluated in terms of the BdG eigenfunctions Figure It is important to note that our microscopic model does not include phase fluctuations, since these are computationally prohibitive. For this reason, we cannot reproduce all the attributes of our experimental dataset, in particular the anisotropic onset temperatures T ons 1D , T ons for ρ s c , ρ s ab . Our low temperature data also suggest that the normalized intra-chain phase stiffness is lower than the inter-chain stiffness, since ρ s c (T ) < ρ s ab (T ) for 0.75 K T 3.0 K. This initially seems surprising, given that signatures of intra-chain coherence develop at higher temperature than inter-chain coupling (T ons 1D > T ons 3D ). We will consider the possible origins of this feature while discussing the phase ordering mechanism in Sec. IV. The 1D→3D crossover exposed by our ∆λ ab,c (T ) data implies an important role for fluctuations below T ons 1D . We explore these by measuring the c-axis electrical resistivity R c (T ) of the same crystal discussed in Figs. For the lowest bias current I = 0.05 mA, the transition in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 is unusually wide, stretching from 4.4 K to 6.7 K. The existence of a broad regime of 1D fluctuations is supported by the 1D Ginzburg-Levanyuk criterion where we set S as the cross-sectional area of a (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ filament, ∆C is extracted from our fit to ρ s c (T ) (Fig. Hints of multiple energy scales also emerge as bumps and points of inflexion in R c (T ), unlike the sharp drops to zero seen in the resistivity of 3D superconductors. We recall that low-dimensional or inhomogeneous superconductors can exhibit sequences of fluctuation regimes with differing physical origins or dimensionalities, even within sub-kelvin temperature ranges • T ons 1D = 6.7 K is the onset temperature for the transition seen in both ∆λ c (T ) and R c (T ). • T p ∼ 5.9 K corresponds to a point of inflexion in both ∆λ c (T ) and R c (T ). • T ons 3D = 4.9 K (the onset temperature for the transition seen in ∆λ ab (T )) corresponds to a kink in R c (T ), i.e. a discontinuity in dR c /dT . Near this temperature, R c (T ) also starts to exhibit a strong current dependence which is absent closer to T ons 1D . The zero resistance state associated with long range order in q1D superconductors is primarily destroyed by thermal phase fluctuations, since the transverse phase stiffness is the smallest energy scale which can perturb the ground state As the temperature falls below T ons 3D ∼ 4.9 K, the phase slip fits fail due to a pronounced "hump" in R c (T ). Similar humps have previously been observed in a variety of q1D and 2D superconductors as well as Josephson junction arrays; they are usually interpreted as a combination of inhomogeneity and pair-breaking effects in materials where phase coherence is established via a vortex-binding transition Having provided evidence for 1D superconducting fluctuations below T ons 1D , we finally examine the establishment of 3D superconductivity below T ons 3D . We consider Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 as an array of Josephson-coupled superconducting chains, which can be modelled within a coarsegrained lattice approximation as follows where ij denotes a sum over neighbouring lattice sites i, j and 0 < θ i < 2π is the phase of the superconducting wavefunction at site i which satisfies XY symmetry. J ij is an anisotropic energy scale describing the phase stiffness: for i, j within the same chain, J ij ≡ J // ∝ ρ s c , whereas J ij ≡ J ⊥ ∝ ρ s ab for i, j on neighbouring chains. In the limit J ⊥ J // , we recover the well-known 3D XY model which describes phase transitions in many q2D materials Vortex loops in a q1D superconductor are ellipses, whose axes are oriented at an angle α to the c-axis. The two limiting cases α = 0, π/2 are depicted in Fig. The interaction potential between two antiparallel vortex strings diverges logarithmically with their separation, just like the interaction between vortices and antivortices in the 2D XY model leading to the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition. This logarithmic dependence creates an exponential divergence in the correlation length, which results in an exponential dependence of the electrical resistivity above the phase ordering temperature. In a q1D superconductor, exponential behavior will only be visible within a narrow temperature range above T c , with a lower cut-off due to finite size effects limiting the divergence of the phase correlation length ξ ⊥ In Fig. We anticipate that sufficiently large currents may break vortex loops even at temperatures below the dimensional crossover, leading to a characteristic powerlaw "rounding" in V (I) curves for Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 An additional factor likely to contribute to the anomalously low superfluid density for T 3 K is the ratio of λ ab to the crystal dimensions. Vortex binding transitions in superconductors may only be observed when 2λ the sample width: if this condition is not fulfilled, vortices are unable to interact at large length scales and so a finite population of unbound vortices/antivortices may persist even below the nominal phase-ordering temperature Magnetic penetration depth measurements in q1D Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 are consistent with a two-step superconducting transition, in which local phase coherence within individual 1D superconducting filaments is established at a higher temperature than global (inter-chain) coherence, i.e. T ons 1D > T ons 3D . A 1D→3D dimensional crossover therefore occurs within the superconducting state. The measured superfluid density remains small at temperatures well below the onset of superconductivity before rising steeply at lower temperature, consistent with our calculations using a q1D microscopic model. Electrical transport measurements provide further support for 1D superconductivity above T ons 3D , and suggest that homogeneous q1D crystals exhibit a similar sequence of fluctuation regimes to those expected in nanowire arrays. We identify T ons 3D as the two-particle mediated dimensional crossover temperature T x2 , i.e. below T ons 3D , power-law V (I) curves and an exponential resistivity regime indicate that global phase coherence is established via a topological process in which c-axis vortex strings are bound to form 3D loops. The broad two-step transitions which we observe orig-inate from the extreme uniaxial anisotropy of the crystal structure in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 rather than any extrinsic mechanism. In particular, inhomogeneity or random disorder (which are common causes of anomalous broadening in superconducting transitions) can be excluded. Macroscopic inhomogeneity cannot be reconciled with our single-gap BCS fits to ρ s ab,c (T ), the smooth evolution in ∆λ ab,c (T ) or the weak current dependence of R(T ) close to T ons . Moreover, random effects are inconsistent with the robust observation of similar two-step transitions in multiple Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 crystals (and Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 ) spanning a decade Our discovery of a two-particle superconducting dimensional crossover within the superconducting state implies that coherent single-particle inter-chain hopping is suppressed in the normal state. Several causes for such a suppression may be envisaged. Firstly, the true inter-chain hopping integral t ⊥ could be far smaller than that predicted by DFT calculations, and/or the e --e - interactions much stronger. However, the dimensional crossover temperatures in Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 and Na 2-δ Mo 6 Se 6 lie close to the DFT-calculated values of t 2 ⊥ /t // 24 , which provides a good estimate for the Josephson coupling temperature in an anisotropic superconductor Very recently, Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 is firmly back in the spotlight thanks to an exciting prediction of topological superconductivity Finally, our work indicates that in addition to showcasing a highly-unusual dimensional crossover from 1D to 3D superconductivity, q1D superconductors such as Tl 2 Mo 6 Se 6 provide a unique environment to study topological phase ordering in systems obeying XY symmetry. Here, comparison with theory and experiment in analogous cold atom models may prove especially fruitful Thermally-induced pairing fluctuations in a superconductor create a paraconductivity described by the Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) model where ∆σ = σ(T ) -σ N (T ) is the excess conductivity relative to the normal state, A is a constant, T c is the mean-field transition temperature and λ describes the dimensionality D of the superconducting phase, with λ = 2 -D/2 = 1.5 for 1D AL fluctuations. σ N (T ) is obtained from a linear fit to σ(T ) from 7-10 K and A = e 2 ξ 0 / X can be evaluated from the crystal cross-sectional area X. The concept of a mean-field T c has no meaning in a two-step superconducting transition where pairing is established before phase coherence. Determining the appropriate temperature to use as T c in an AL fit to our data is therefore not obvious: we must identify the highest temperature at which electrons are paired and locally phase coherent within individual (Mo 6 Se 6 ) ∞ chains. Below this temperature, the transition is broadened by intra-chain phase slips and (eventually) inter-chain phase fluctuations. The point of inflexion T p = 5.9 K is an appealing candidate for this crossover between pairing and phase fluctuations: this choice is eventually justified by our observation of AL scaling above T p and 1D phase slips at lower temperature. We first determine the presence and dimensionality of AL fluctuations by setting T c ≡ T p in Eqn. 7, then plotting ln(∆σ) vs. ln(T /T p -1) (Fig. Phase slips are topological excitations unique to 1D superconductors, in which the amplitude of the order parameter |Ψ| 2 fluctuates to zero over a lengthscale ξ // (T ) with a concomitant "jump" in the phase by 2π where the attempt frequency is given by and τ GL = [π /8k B (T * -T )] is the GL relaxation time. Following a development of the energy barrier by Lau et al. where C is a dimensionless parameter relating the energy barrier for phase slips F to the thermal energy near T onset and is defined as, Here, R q = h/4e 2 = 6.45 kΩ is the resistance quantum for Cooper pairs and R F the normal state resistance of the entire nanowire 2. Quantum phase slips (QPS) QPS are expected to become relevant only when k B T < ∆(T ) where A Q and B Q are constants. In a similar manner to the TAPS contribution, we treat our crystals as macroscopic arrays of nanowires and rewrite Eq. ( The solid curves in Fig. L ef f /ξ(0) AQ BQ 0.05 5.89±0.02 (1.44±0.12)×10 -4 0.43±0.04 (20±2.2)×10 -4 0.10 6.02±0.02 (1.08±0.07)×10 -4 0.45±0.04 (40±3.1)×10 -4 0.20 6.16±0.02 (7.82±0.52)×10 -5 0.52±0.05 (70±5.3)×10 -4 0.50 6.00±0.08 (5.71±0.36)×10 -5 0.92±0.04 (70±20)×10 