We investigate the interplay between charge order and superconductivity near an antiferromagnetic quantum critical point using sign-problem-free Quantum Monte Carlo simulations. We establish that, when the electronic dispersion is particle-hole symmetric, the system has an emergent SU(2) symmetry that implies a degeneracy between d-wave superconductivity and charge order with d-wave form factor. Deviations from particle-hole symmetry, however, rapidly lift this degeneracy, despite the fact that the SU(2) symmetry is preserved at low energies. As a result, we find a strong suppression of charge order caused by the competing, leading superconducting instability. Across the antiferromagnetic phase transition, we also observe a shift in the charge order wave-vector from diagonal to axial. We discuss the implications of our results to the universal phase diagram of antiferromagnetic quantum-critical metals and to the elucidation of the charge order experimentally observed in the cuprates. The phase diagrams of a number of strongly correlated materials display putative quatum critical points (QCP), in which the transition temperature of an electronically ordered state is suppressed to zero. In systems displaying antiferromagnetic (AFM) order, such as heavy fermions, cuprates, and iron pnictides, unconventional superconductivity (SC) is found to emerge near the QCP In this paper, we employ the determinantal Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) method to address these questions. We consider the two-band version of the spin-fermion model, for which the QMC does not suffer from the fermionic sign-problem Here, we report QMC results on the spin-fermion model showing the existence of an SU(2) symmetry between CO and SC near the AFM-QCP when the noninteracting band structure has particle-hole symmetry. This SU(2) symmetry implies a degeneracy between SC and CO, manifested by a sharp enhancement of both susceptibilities as the AFM-QCP is approached. This result demonstrates the non-trivial mechanism of magneticallymediated CO, and establishes that the same interaction that promotes SC in the spin-fermion model is also capable of promoting CO. As the particle-hole symmetry of the non-interacting band dispersion is broken, however, we find that while the enhancement of the SC susceptibility is preserved, arXiv:1710.02158v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 5 Oct 2017 the CO susceptibility shows a very weak enhancement near the QCP. Furthermore, near the onset of SC, the CO susceptibility is even suppressed with respect to its noninteracting value, signaling a strong competition between these two states already in the fluctuating regime. This happens even though the SU(2) symmetry is preserved locally at the hot spots. The fragility of the CO-SC degeneracy implies that CO near an AFM-QCP is not a universal phenomenon, but instead requires a fine-tuned band structure that goes beyond just hot-spot properties. We also investigate the wave-vector for which the CO susceptibility is maximal. When CO and SC are degenerate, the wave-vector is diagonal, in agreement with the analytical approximations. However, once CO and SC are no longer degenerate, the wave-vector tends to change from diagonal to axial as the AFM-QCP is approached. This is consistent with theoretical proposals that axial CO is favored over the diagonal one if the anti-nodal region of the Brillouin zone is gapped The spin-fermion model is a low-energy model describing electrons interacting via the exchange of AFM fluctuations. In its two-band version (whose physics has been argued to be similar to the one-band version Here, τ,r is shorthand for dτ r , τ ∈ [0, β) is the imaginary time, and β = 1/T is the inverse temperature. The action S ψ describes the fermionic degrees of freedom, with the operator ψ i,rα annihilating an electron of spin α at site r and band i. Summation over α, β is implied. There are two different bands, labeled c and d. The band dispersion is parametrized by the chemical potential μ and the hopping amplitudes t i,rr . Here, we consider only nearest-neighbor hopping and set t c,x = t d,y ≡ t x and t c,y = t d,x ≡ t y to enforce the system to remain invariant under a 90 • rotation followed by a c ↔ d exchange. The action S φ describes the spin degrees of freedom, with the bosonic field φ denoting the antiferromagnetic order parameter with ordering wave-vector Q AFM = (π, π), and σ denoting Pauli matrices. The parameter r 0 tunes the AFM transition to T = 0 at r 0 = r c , whereas v s and u describe the stiffness of AFM temporal and amplitude fluctuations, respectively. To save computational time, we follow previous works and consider easy-plane antiferromagnetism, i.e φ = (φ x , φ y ) where Q CO is the CO wave-vector. Analytical studies of the spin-fermion model found a special symmetry relating the SC and CO order parameters under an approximation that focuses on the hot spots of the model, i.e. the Fermi surface points separated by Q AFM = (π, π) We choose as our starting point the parameters for which the symmetry of the low-energy hot-spots model discussed above is promoted to an exact lattice symmetry. This corresponds to the case where the c and d bands are particle-hole symmetric, i.e. μ = 0. This allows us to systematically study the effect of breaking the particlehole symmetry at the lattice level. For μ = 0, the electronic action for a given AFM field configuration -corresponding to the S ψ and S λ terms of the action in Eq. ( T . In this representation, when μ = 0, the Hamiltonian commutes with all all SU(2) generators τ in particle-hole space. Importantly, the SC and CO order parameters form a three-component vector Φ ≡ (Re∆, Im∆, ρ) in this space, which couples to the elec- , enforcing ρ to be real. As a result, an enhancement of the SC susceptibility also implies an equally strong enhacement in the CO channel, since the two order parameters are related by rotations in the SU(2) particle-hole space, and the Hamiltonian is invariant under these rotations. This symmetry is analogous to the degeneracy between SC and CO observed in the half-filled negative-U Hubbard model To demonstrate the existence of this SU(2) symmetry for μ = 0, we perform QMC simulations on a square lattice of size L = 12. Additional details of the QMC procedure can be found elsewhere We now proceed to investigate whether there is a remnant near-degeneracy between SC and CO when particlehole symmetry is broken (μ = 0). In this case, although there is no lattice SU(2) symmetry, an approx-imate SU(2) symmetry of the low energy theory near the hot spots is preserved Another important result from our QMC simulations is that, when the AFM hot spots are near the antinodal region of the Brillouin zone (i.e., (π, 0) / (0, π)), the CO wave-vector tends to shift from diagonal to axial inside the AFM phase. To illustrate this, in Fig. In summary, we showed that the spin-fermion model (b) Ratio of the maximum values of χCO (q) along the diagonal direction, q = (q, q), and along the axial direction, q = (q, 0), for different inverse temperatures β (inset), as function of the distance to the QCP at r0 = rc. with particle-hole symmetric bands has a global SU The applicability of these results to specific materials -and particularly the cuprates -remains an open question. On the one hand, the CO observed in most cuprates only acquires a substantially long correlation length once SC is fully suppressed, and CO fluctuations are found to be suppressed by the onset of SC We attribute the qualitative differences among the maximal wave-vectors of different chemical potentials to the location of the AFM hot spots. For Q 0 = 5π/6 and Q 0 = 2π/3, the hot spots are located near the diagonal directions. For Q 0 = π/2 and Q 0 = π/3, however, the hot spots are closer to the antinodal region of the Fermi surface. As a result, the AFM order can have a stronger effect on the electronic states along the diagonal or axial directions depending on the chemical potential. The diagonal-axial asymmetry of the reconstructed Fermi surface is thus responsible for the position of the maximal CO wave-vector. To show that the choice of one-dimensional band dispersions is not responsible for the observed lifting of the SC-CO degeneracy and for the observed shift of the CO wave-vector from diagonal to axial, here we present results for a slightly curved band dispersion. In particular, we consider the parameters t y = 0.1t x and μ = -√ 3 + 2t y . This choice generates a small curvature to the Fermi surface while retaining the momentum points π 6 , 0 / 0, π 6 on the Fermi surface. In Fig. 