Measurements of the high-frequency complex resistivity in superconductors are a tool often used to obtain the vortex parameters, such as the vortex viscosity, the pinning constant and the depinning frequency. In anisotropic superconductors, the extraction of these quantities from the measurements faces new difficulties due to the tensor nature of the electromagnetic problem. The problem is specifically intricate when the magnetic field is tilted with respect to the crystallographic axes. Partial solutions exist in the free-flux-flow (no pinning) and Campbell (pinning dominated) regimes. In this paper we develop a full tensor model for the vortex motion complex resistivity, including flux-flow, pinning, and creep. We give explicit expressions for the tensors involved. We obtain that, despite the complexity of the physics, some parameters remain scalar in nature. We show that under specific circumstances the directly measured quantities do not reflect the true vortex parameters, and we give procedures to derive the true vortex parameters from measurements taken with arbitrary field orientations. Finally, we discuss the applicability of the angular scaling properties to the measured and transformed vortex parameters and we exploit these properties as a tool to unveil the existence of directional pinning. Material anisotropy, which characterizes many superconductors of wide interest High frequency measurements of the electric transport properties in the mixed state provide a powerful tool to investigate the vortex motion dissipation, related to the vortex viscosity (or viscous drag), and vortex pinning, related to the Labusch parameter and the creep factor When anisotropic properties are investigated, measurements are performed by tilting the applied static magnetic field H with respect to the anisotropy axes and the current direction. Then, a complicated tensor model emerges, and the analysis of the data is not straightforward. Previous works addressed separately the flux-flow regime (pinning neglected) and the pinned regime. The d.c. flux flow regime has been thoroughly investigated, so that the flux flow resistivity tensor and the related vortex viscosity tensor are well characterized In In this paper we address another important issue: we develop a model for the tensor complex resistivity in the high-frequency range (typically rf and microwaves), where both dissipation (flux-flow) and pinning give comparable contributions and must be considered at the same time. We also include the effect of flux-creep, that can give a detectable effect The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2.1 we recall the well-known scalar model for the a.c. vortex motion resistivity. Section 2.2 concisely reports the formulation of the tensor model in the Campbell regime for the introduction of the vortex parameters. The complications of the tensor model for uniaxial superconductors with a field applied in an arbitrary orientation are introduced in Section 2.2, limited to the pure (flux flow or Campbell) regimes. We devote particular care to the identification of the experimentally obtainable parameters and to the comparison with theoretical quantities. Vortices nucleated from the magnetic induction B and subjected to a current field J experience a force (per unit length), so that fluxon motion arises. The scalar force equation for the vortex velocity v in an isotropic superconductor with isotropic (point) pinning and B perpendicular to J is, in the harmonic regime e iωt where η is the drag coefficient (vortex viscosity) and k p is the pinning constant (Labusch parameter). Together, they define the (de)pinning angular frequency ω p = k p /η and the depinning characteristic time τ p = ω -1 p . F therm is a stochastic thermal force causing thermal depinning (vortex creep) with an activation characteristic time τ th dependent on the activation energy U . Different approaches where the latter equality defines a complex viscosity η C . In the generalized Equation (2), χ(U/K B T ) is a creep factor, and the characteristic frequency ω 0 → ω p for χ → 0. In the specific model developed by E. H. Brandt for the complex viscosity, with the characteristic angular frequency ω 0 = τ -1 th + τ -1 p and the creep factor χ = 1/(1 + e U/KBT ). For U → ∞ the creep is negligible, χ → 0 and ω 0 → ω p , so that (2) becomes: where ρ ff = Φ 0 B/η and ρ C = ωΦ 0 B/k p are the flux-flow and the Campbell resistivity, respectively. This limit corresponds to the Gittleman-Rosenblum (GR) model which, if creep is negligible (GR limit), yields: The r parameter can be directly computed from the complex resistivity ρ v and it is unaffected by any systematic scale factor in the experiments. Physically, it allows to easily evaluate whether the vortex dynamics is in the pinning (r ≫ 1) or flux flow (r ≪ 1) dominated regime. We treat the case of a superconductor with uniaxial anisotropy along the c-axis. We choose a reference frame such as x ≡ a, y ≡ b and z ≡ c. Vectors are denoted as A = u A A, where u A and A are the unit vector and the modulus, respectively. A tensor/matrix is denoted as A. Vector orientation can be identified by means of the polar θ and azimuthal φ angles. Figure Figure We briefly recall the notation and the results of Vortices moving with a given velocity v (⊥ B) induce (Faraday's law) an electric field E = B × v which determines a response transport current density J T = σE, where σ represents the "intrinsic", material dependent conductivity -1 are related by (we neglect Hall effect) where B × = ǫ ijk u B , and ǫ ijk is the permutation (Levi-Civita) tensor In the pure flux flow regime, the force equation (in tensor form) reads: where the full theoretical expression of σff = ( ρff ) -1 (the subscript "ff " refers to flux flow regime related quantities) can be computed within the Time Dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory Expressions analogous to (9) can be obtained where σC = ( ρC ) -1 are the Campbell conductivity and resistivity intrinsic tensors. The field and temperature dependent explicit expressions for the above pinning tensors can be worked out within the theory for collective point pinning in anisotropic superconductors It is possible to further elucidate the angular dependence of the intrinsic quantities even without explicitly writing down the full theoretical expressions. Indeed, the largely used Blatter-Geshkenbein-Larkin (BGL) scaling theory where γ 2 = m c /m ab is the mass anisotropy factor and is the angular-dependent anisotropy parameter. Hence, the combination of We here extend the model to the case of simultaneous relevance of both fluxflow and elastic recall regimes. For the sake of clarity, we neglect temporarily the thermal effects (flux creep), that we reintroduce later on. The force equation in anisotropic superconductors including both viscous drag and pinning is: By defining a complex viscosity tensor as: the above equation can be recast as: The force equation ( Equations ( Substituting (12b) and (13b) into ( It is evident that ηC inherits the angular dependencies and anisotropic properties from η and kp , represented by M and by the scaling law. Moreover, by computing which holds for i = 1...3 (all the principal axes directions). That is: contrary to the viscosity or the pinning constant, the pinning frequency is a scalar quantity, and it is affected by the direction of the magnetic field with respect to the crystal axes only through the rescaled field Bǫ(θ). This fact implies that, whichever orientation is set for B and J, the vortex system will always have the same pinning frequency at fixed B/B c2 (θ). The property exemplified by ( A third result is that, with point pinning, the vortex complex resistivity tensor retains the same anisotropic behavior as the flux-flow or Campbell resistivity tensors. In fact, the conductivity and resistivity tensors are: Using It can be noted that, thanks to the scalar nature of the pinning angular frequency ω p , the tensors ρv (B, θ) and ρff (B, θ) differ by a scalar quantity, (1iω p (B, θ)/ω). Thus, similarly to ηC , ρv retains the same anisotropy of the flux flow and pinning tensors, given by the mass anisotropy tensor M alone. Moreover, it satisfies the same angular scaling law, shown in the last equality, as ρff and ρC . It is important to remember that ρv of ( where M B (θ, φ) = -B × M -1 B × has been introduced for the sake of compactness. From Consequently, the scalar vortex motion resistivity with flux creep (2) can be generalized to the anisotropic case in the same way as in the creep-free case. One obtains the same (23a) and ( where ω 0 and χ are scalar as in the isotropic case. Hence, the tensors ρv (B, θ) and ρff (B, θ) differ by a scalar factor as in the zero creep case. This property will prove important in the interpretation of the experiments. It is worth stressing that the choice of the pinning constant relaxation as a model for flux creep In this Section we consider explicitly some typical experimental configurations and we derive specific expressions relating measured and material intrinsic quantities. We assume to be deep in the mixed state, but far from pair-breaking effect, so that the contribution of the coupled superconducting and normal microwave currents is negligible. In this case, the change in the response due to the application of the magnetic field is due to the vortex motion: superfluid and quasiparticle contributions give a nearly field-independent contribution that can be easily subtracted out. Moreover, we assume the superconducting material to be a thin film, a sample geometry widely used in microwave experiments The frequency range where both flux-flow and Campbell contributions have a similar weight is around the pinning frequency ω p /2π. For example, in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ ω p /2π = 1 ÷ 30 GHz It can be seen that the effective, measured vortex motion resistivity consists in the product of two terms: the first is the resistivity ρv,11 only, which in particular obeys the angular scaling law; the second one, denoted in the equation as f L (θ), is an additional angular dependence which arises from the Faraday and Lorentz actions. Consequently, as already anticipated commenting the whole tensor ρ v , the experimentally measured quantity does not obey the scaling law. Therefore care must be taken in separating the intrinsic material property from the contribution given by the setup geometry before proceeding with the physical interpretation of the data. The most important results coming from Another commonly used current pattern consists in straight currents. The obvious advantage of probing individual spatial orientations is counterbalanced by the reduced sensitivity that can be achieved with resonators supporting the required electromagnetic field geometry. The full derivation of the relevant expressions, leading to results analogous to those of It is interesting to note that in a typical GR (no-creep) model analysis for an isotropic superconductor the vortex parameters ρ ff , r and k p are extracted from the complex measured ρ v following (4), yielding: On the other hand, when performing measurements on an anisotropic superconductor probed with rotational symmetric current patterns leading to It can be seen that the parameter r = ω p /ω is directly obtained from the measured quantities: this is an interesting result, which allows a direct evaluation of the material anisotropy of the system without the need to deal with Lorentzdependent contribution f L (θ). On the other hand, both ρ ff ,eff and k p,eff show an additional angular dependence through f L (θ). Therefore, in the analysis of angular data care must be devoted in correctly extracting the intrinsic quantities, as opposed to effective quantities. This requires to evaluate the f L (θ) function, which in turn requires the knowledge of the anisotropy factor γ. Further information can be gained through a discussion of the quantities (29) in terms of angular scaling. First, we note that the experimental r eff (B, θ) coincides with the intrinsic material property, independent on the field-currentcrystal angle (f L (θ)). Thus, in absence of directional effects other than the mass anisotropy, it should scale as r eff (B, θ) = r eff (Bǫ(θ)). If it does not, directional pinning is likely to exist. This is a direct test of the presence of directional pinning in the flow+Campbell regime. A complete picture is obtained once the intrinsic ρff ,11 is obtained. If ρff ,11 is found to satisfy the scaling, and in the same time r or, equivalently ρC,11 , is not, this result would constitute evidence for the presence of directional pinning contributions such as extended defects. This type of analysis was performed in references Thus, the application of the results of this paper to angular measurements provides useful tools to ascertain several issues linked to the anisotropy of superconducting materials: from the identification of directional pinning, to the determination of the mass-anisotropy γ factor and of geometry-independent quantities (such as r or ω p ). In this paper we have developed a tensor model for the full a.c. vortex motion complex resistivity, which includes free flux-flow, elastic recall from pinning centers, and flux creep. The model takes into account the effect of a magnetic field applied to an arbitrary angle with respect to the crystal directions of a uniaxially anisotropic superconductor and with respect to the applied current density. We have shown that intrinsic vortex parameters ("material properties") and directly measured vortex parameters may differ due to the geometry of the experiment. We have developed a procedure to extract the intrinsic properties from experiments, and we have shown the main differences in several commonly used experimental geometries. Finally, we have shown that a combination of angular measurements and an analysis in terms of the present model joint to the angular scaling prescription can give a large amount of relevant information, including direct evidence of directional pinning. Future extensions of this work are (i) the derivation of the full surface impedance expression in the mixed state including both the anisotropic complex vortex resistivity tensor here presented and the contribution of the quasi-particles and Cooper pairs; and (ii) the determination of the pinning constant tensor when extended pinning centers are present, a matter of large interest within the present research focused on the addition of artificial pinning centers in High-T c superconductors. v (B, θ, φ) = ρv,11 (B, θ)f Lφ (θ, φ) (30a) f Lφ (θ, φ) = γ -2 sin 2 θ sin 2 φ + cos 2 θ γ -2 sin 2 θ + cos 2 θ (30b) In practical cases, two particular configurations deserve some discussions. First, in the so-called "maximum Lorentz force configuration", where the applied field is always perpendicular to the current (φ = π/2, see Fig. The derivation in a scalar problem has been discussed since longtime J (flowing in the ab-plane) is perpendicular to the ab plane, see Fig.3b. In this case one has clearly an angle-dependent Lorentz-force contribution, and f L (θ) = 1/(γ -2 tan 2 θ + 1). For θ = π/2 (no Lorentz force) one has f L = 0, recovering the known results for scalar models. However, when the field is at an arbitrary angle, the widespread habit is to consider the variable Lorentz force as an additional cos 2 θ term