We consider a dissipative evolution of parametrically-driven qubits-cavity system under the periodical modulation of coupling energy between two subsystems, which leads to the amplification of counterrotating processes. We reveal a very rich dynamical behavior of this hybrid system. In particular, we find that the energy dissipation in one of the subsystems can enhance quantum effects in another subsystem. For instance, optimal cavity decay assists to stabilize entanglement and quantum correlations between qubits even in the steady state and to compensate finite qubit relaxation. On the contrary, energy dissipation in qubit subsystem results in the enhanced photon production from vacuum for strong modulation, but destroys both quantum concurrence and quantum mutual information between qubits. Our results provide deeper insights to nonstationary cavity quantum electrodynamics in context of quantum information processing and might be of importance for dissipative quantum state engineering. Hybrid light-matter systems are considered as promising candidates for the implementation of quantum information and computation devices Macroscopic quantum systems and especially superconducting Josephson qubits coupled to microwave transmissionline cavities are characterized by a high degree of tunability and flexibility -various effective parameters of a hybrid system can be made even dynamically tunable in-situ For the construction of quantum computation and simulation devises, it is necessary to have at least few qubits, the entanglement between them being a key resource Indeed, it was recognized some time ago In this paper, we consider parametric process which is generated by the periodic modulation of the qubit-cavity coupling and in presence of energy dissipation. This parametric driving is able to greatly enhance certain quantum effects, such as parametric qubit excitation via counterrotating wave terms of the Hamiltonian bringing weaklyinteracting system effectively to the regime of strong light-matter coupling We consider a system of two identical qubits in a circuit QED architecture. These qubits are coupled to a singlemode quantum resonator. Qubits interact with each other only through a photon degree of freedom. The Hamiltonian of a hybrid qubits-resonator system can be represented as where j labels qubits, a † and a are secondary quantized photon creation and annihilation operators, σ j,+ , σ j,-are Pauli operators related to qubit degrees of freedom, while G j (t) is the interaction constant between a given qubit and photon field. We assume that constants G j (t) are dynamically tunable. Such a modulation can be achieved using different schemes and, in principle, various physical platforms. For example, it is possible to use flux qubits with an additional SQIUD or two strongly coupled charge qubits (transmons) based on which a single effective twolevel system can be created, see, e.g., Refs. (1), which describes the interaction between subsystems, contains both contributions known as rotating wave term, In order to take into account decoherence effects on simplest grounds, we address dissipative evolution by solving numerically the master equation where ρ(t) is a density matrix of qubit and photon subsystems. The matrix Γ[ρ] depends on rates of energy dissipation in the cavity κ, in each of the two identical qubits γ, as well as on pure dephasing rate γ φ . It is given by Γ[ρ] = κ(aρa † -{a † a, ρ}/2) + j=1,2 (γ(σ j,-ρσ j,+ -{σ j,+ σ j,-, ρ}/2) + γ φ (σ j,z ρσ j,z -ρ)). Relations between κ and γ can be very different for various realizations of hybrid qubit-photon systems. For instance, in the state-of-art superconducting qubits coupled to microwave resonators the pure decoherence rate γ φ is typically of the same order as relaxation γ, while both these quantities are significantly larger than the relaxation rate in a cavity, γ κ. For NV-centers, as well as for other microscopic realizations of hybrid systems, the situation is just the opposite -relaxation rate of cavity is typically much larger than decoherence rates of the two-level systems. In this article, we are mainly focused on such characteristics of qubit subsystem, as quantum concurrence C, which is a measure of entanglement between qubits, and quantum mutual information I, which is a measure of correlations between them. Since our system consists of two qubits and photon subsystem, the latter degree of freedom has to be somehow eliminated in order to quantify an entanglement of qubits based on two-qubit density matrix ρ qq of size 4 × 4. We perform such an elimination in two ways. According to the first algorithm, we simply trace out photons ρ qq = Tr ph ρ and then find a concurrence of qubits C based on the obtained ρ qq . Within the second approach, we treat ρ qq as a block of size 4 × 4 of full density matrix ρ related only to states with fixed and given number of photons i. We then find a 'conditional concurrence' C i corresponding to given i. In both cases, C or C i is evaluated from ρ qq in a standard way being defined as provided C is positive and zero otherwise, where λ i are sorted in descending order eigenvalues of matrix ρ qq σρ * qq σ, σ = σ y ⊗ σ y . For the von Neumann entropy we also use a standard definition S = -Tr ρ ln ρ. An important quantity in the case of a bipartite system is quantum mutual information, I. It is defined as , where S 12 is entropy of a whole system, while S 1 and S 2 stand for two subsystems. The entropy S 1 (S 2 ) is calculated by tracing out degrees of freedom for subsystem 2 (subsystem 1). We use a similar definition for the quantum mutual information between two qubits in presence of a photonic subsystem. Photonic degree of freedom thus must be also traced out when finding S 12 , S 1 , and S 2 . We assume that in the initial moment qubits are uncoupled from the resonator, so both qubit and photon subsystems are in their ground states, | ↓↓, 0 . At certain moment, interaction constant G(t) starts to be modulated periodically in time. Under these conditions, counterrotating terms responsible for the dynamical Lamb effect For a single qubit coupled to the resonator, strongly enhanced occupation of qubit excited state is achieved, when qubit is in a resonance with the cavity and when the modulation frequency of coupling constant is twice the cavity frequency, which dramatically enhances a transition from | ↓, 0 to | ↑, 1 bringing the occupation of | ↑, 1 to large values of the order of 1 even if |G(t)| ω These fast oscillations are eliminated by a time averaging procedure Under these conditions and in the limit |G(t)| ω, system's dynamics is governed by two Fourier components where averaging is performed with respect to the time period π/ω, while it is also assumed that G(t) is symmetrical with respect to the time reversal. It is convenient to recast p and q as p = gθ, q = g(1 -θ), where 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1. The parameter p provides a strength of the interaction in the Tavis-Cummings channel, which conserves excitation number, while q is responsible for the counterrotating processes changing excitation number by ±2. Note that θ < 0.5 corresponds to sign-alternating G(t) oscillations. Let us stress that we only focus on the case G(t) = G(-t). Thus, we consider a Hamiltonian in the interaction picture, the coupling between the qubit and photon subsystems being which is not dependent explicitly on time. We then analyze system dynamics after the sudden switching of the coupling constant from zero to g, the initial state of the system being | ↓↓, 0 . Before considering the dynamics of the system with energy dissipation, it is reasonable to explore its evolution without decoherence. It can be addressed using a solution of the Schrödinger equation numerically. Explicit results can be obtained at special points θ = 0, 1/2, and 1. The analysis for these three points is presented in Appendix A. Our results show that the parametric driving leads to the generation of a rather significant quantum concurrence between initially independent qubits. Fig. In Fig. Let us begin our analysis with the situation when there is only cavity relaxation in the system. In the opposite situation, when there is only qubit relaxation, this decoherence channel along easily suppresses quantum concurrence between the two qubits, so that no entanglement survives at t → ∞. These two situations correspond to systems which are characterized by the separation of time scales for energy dissipation in their photon and qubit subsystems. Such a separation is indeed common for various physical realizations of qubit-photon hybrid systems. Thus, by ignoring the energy dissipation in one of the subsystems, we can trace a time evolution within some initial period until decoherence effects in another subsystem come into play. We now address the effect of cavity decay. Fig. We see that the oscillations of C persist, but they become smeared as κ increases. Again, it can be realized that not so high time precision is needed to attain regions with high quantum concurrence due to the smearing and elongation of patterns along the time axis. Now let us take into account qubit relaxation γ, which plays a destructive role for the entanglement between qubits. Typical maps for the time evolution of the quantum concurrence are shown in Fig. Interestingly, nonzero γ tends to destroy the concurrence at the steady state, while nonzero κ can restore it. This result is intriguing because in this case decoherence assists purely quantum effects to be amplified, which is definitely a counterintuitive result. Remarkably, the effect of the enhancement of quantum effects in one subsystem due to the increase of decay rate in another subsystem occurs also in the domain θ < 1/2 -finite relaxation rate in a qubit leads to the amplification of photon generation from vacuum. In this case, we deal with the enhancement of quantum effects in a photon subsystem due to the finite decay rate in qubit subsystem. The explanation is that fully polarized states | ↑↑, n cannot be driven towards larger n's by V 2 , since for this at least one of the qubits must be in its ground state. Thus, some upward paths in energy ladder become blocked. However, if a finite γ is present in the system, one of the qubit can be deexcited, and then excited again via V 2 to the state with n + 1 photons. This leads to the occupation of both subsets of energy levels with even and odd excitation numbers. It turns out that for a strong (sign-alternating) modulation, i.e., when θ < 0.5, such γ-assisted excitation becomes very efficient and it overcomes Tavis-Cummings processes generated by V 1 . However, quantum correlations in qubit subsystem in this case become suppressed. Due to the resulting intensive photon production, the concurrence between the qubits is suppressed, since all possible states of qubit subsystem become populated. Note that previously we have found a similar effect of enhanced photon generation from vacuum for a single qubit coupled dynamically to the resonator Nevertheless, the role of finite γ in the case of general N is similar. Thus, this effect is rather generic and it is linked to the two-level nature of individual qubits. C. Quantum concurrence and quantum mutual information in the steady state In order to more deeply analyze the effect of dissipation-assisted quantum concurrence stabilization at θ > 0.5, let us consider the steady state of the system, i.e., the state at t → ∞ after the beginning of the parametric driving. conclusion is that the quantum concurrence of qubits in a certain domain of parameters survives for an infinitely long time despite of the finite energy dissipation rate both in qubit and cavity subsystems. This is a consequence of a special parametric driving, which allows to keep quantum nature of the system under the consideration 'forever'. It is quite remarkable that highest C and I are attainable at some optimal κ, which is not too high or too small. Thus, the phenomenon we reveal indeed can be refereed to as the dissipation-induced quantum concurrence. Figure In order to see correlations between quantum concurrence and mutual information from one side and mean photon number and qubits excited states occupation from another side, in Fig. More close examination involving computation of conditional concurrences C i shows that the finite quantum concurrence between the two qubits is mainly caused by the states with zero photon number. Thus, a qualitative explanation of the effect of dissipation-induced quantum concurrence can be as follows. The analytical derivation, presented in Appendix A for decoherence-free system, shows that at θ small a nonzero concurrence is generated by the piece of the total wave function, which is a superposition of | ↓↓, 0 and | ↑↑, 0 . A nonzero κ allows to create a kind of a circle consisting of three processes. Namely, the system is excited from the lowest-energy state | ↓↓, 0 to the state . This is why some optimal κ is needed to stabilize finite quantum concurrence in the steady state. At the same time, if the efficiency of V 2 is too high, excitation | ↑↓, 1 + | ↓↑, 1 to the states with higher photon numbers can be too significant, so that small values of θ do not support finite concurrence in the steady state and some optimal θ does exist. Thus, finite quantum concurrence appears as a result of a subtle balance between different processes. We would like to stress that there is no optimal qubit relaxation rate for steady-state concurrence, since energy dissipation in one channel destroys quantum effects in the same channel. As a result, the best qubit relaxation rate for the steady-state quantum concurrence is zero. An engineering of the photonic 'reservoir' offered by our results might be perspective in the context of quantum information processing. Indeed, a presence of a additional bosonic subsystem with well defined discrete energy levels allows to activate various nontrivial correlations between the qubits by utilizing special types of parametric drivings. We also analyzed the effect of a pure dephasing. Nonzero pure dephasing rate γ φ tends to destroy the quantum concurrence in the steady state. However, the effect survives provided γ φ γ, although the concurrence becomes smaller. For example, if we assume γ φ = γ, the steady-state concurrence becomes suppressed by the factor of nearly 1.8 for the parameters of Fig. Previously, a positive role played by a decay of a bosonic mode which mediates qubit-qubit interaction, was demonstrated for various realizations of hybrid systems mostly under the direct external pumping acting on qubit occupations, which is able to compensate the depopulation of upper levels, see, e.g., Refs. The entanglement of qubits induced by several parametrical processes was addressed in Refs. The subject of a very recent paper Conditional concurrences corresponding to different photon numbers can behave in a distinct way compared to the behavior of the total concurrence. For instance, in Fig. We see that in this case the situation with θ < 0.5 is preferable since it allows to generate a higher concurrence within certain time intervals. Thus, this regime with θ < 0.5 is not useless for the purpose of entanglement engineering, it can be of importance if we desire to design conditional concurrences. It is also evident from this figure that the conditional concurrence is nonzero at θ = 0.5 in a certain time domain, while the total concurrence is identically zero there. We studied a dynamics of a two-qubit system coupled to the single-mode quantum resonator at zero temperature under the periodic modulation of a coupling constant between cavity and qubits subsystem. Such a parametric driving leads to activation of counterrotating processes which can be usually neglected in a resonant case and for weakly- interacting and close-to-equilibrium hybrid systems. They are responsible for the parametric qubit excitation and simultaneous photon creation from vacuum. Our main finding is the effect of energy dissipation in these parametrically-driven hybrid systems can be highly nontrivial leading to counterintuitive results. Particularly, we have demonstrated that dissipation does not necessarily lead to the suppression of quantum effects, but such effects in one subsystem can be greatly enhanced by finite decay rate in another subsystem. For example, nonzero and optimal cavity decay leads to the stabilization of both the quantum concurrence and quantum mutual information of two qubits. Surprisingly, finite quantum concurrence can survive even in the steady state despite of the finite qubit relaxation rate. In this case, counterrotating processes compensate qubits excited states depopulations by qubit excitation and photon creation. The efficiency of such an excitation is controlled by the balance between two first Fourier harmonics of modulation signal. In the case of strong, i.e., sign-alternating modulation the excitation becomes very efficient, while finite decay rate in qubit subsystem leads to the amplification of photon generation from vacuum. Thus, quantum effects in photon subsystem become enhanced, but the price is the suppression of both the quantum concurrence and quantum mutual information between two qubits in the steady state. The results we obtained shed a new light on nonstationary cavity QED phenomena. They might be of importance for quantum bath engineering and for the full control on qubits-cavity quantum states. Perhaps, parametrical driving can be used as an alternative or, at least, complementary to error-correction codes approach for maintenance of quantum nature of superconducting circuits. no. SP-2044.2016.5). Yu. E. L. acknowledges a support from RFBR (project no. 17-02-01134). Appendix A: Solvable limits and perturbation theory It is obvious that if θ = 1, i.e., in the Tavis-Cummings regime, no dynamics is imposed because of the absence of the counterrotating terms. It is however possible to construct a perturbation theory in this case, starting from θ = 1, which is going to indicate a trend as θ decreases. We can also consider the situation with θ = 0, which can be referred to as Anti-Tavis-Cummings regime. In this case, only counterrotating terms are present in the Hamiltonian making it exactly solvable in a closed analogy with the usual Tavis-Cummings model (up to the replacement σ j,+ ↔ σ j,-). It is also possible to construct a perturbation theory in this case, as θ increases. Surprisingly, it turns out that in the special case θ = 0.5 a solution to the Schrödinger equation can be expressed in the compact form. Below we provide all these three solutions and discuss crossovers between them. The Hamiltonian in the interaction picture within leading order in small parameter δ = 1-θ 1 can be represented as The second term can be treated as a perturbation. The time evolution of the wave function is determined by the Schrödinger equation where τ = gθt. Let us solve this equation by using perturbation theory. The total wave function can be represented as The zero-order solution corresponding to the initial condition |Ψ (0) (0) = | ↓↓, 0 obviously reads as In the first order, it is easy to get equations for amplitudes i ∂α 2,0 . The solution is The concurrence of two qubits in leading order in (1 -θ) is given by It is easy to see that it is produced by a superposition of | ↓↓, 0 and | ↑↑, 0 . The Hamiltonian in the interaction picture within leading order in small parameter θ 1 is In order to determine wave function evolution we should solve the Schrödinger equation where τ = g(1 -θ)t. The zero-order solution for the initial condition In this order, the concurrence is identically zero. In the first order, the equations for amplitudes are i ∂α 2 + 2γ It is not difficult to find a solution which reads The resulting concurrence between two qubits in leading order in θ is given by Using these relations, we can represent the wave function as It is easy to see that the quantum concurrence of this state is identically zero for any time instance. For the mean photon number, we have a growing in time solution These results are in a full agreement with the results of numerical solution of time-dependent Schrödinger equation. Thus, we see that C is identically zero at the ends of the interval θ ∈ [0, 1] as well as precisely in the middle of it at θ = 0.5. However, we were able to show that C becomes nonzero and maximum C(t) grows as θ is tuned from the ends of the interval towards θ = 0.5. Thus, there should be two domains, 0 < θ < 0.5 and 0.5 < θ < 1, where highest C(t) can be achieved. This is exactly what we see in our numerical simulations, as Fig. 