The recent discovery of superconductivity in a metallic aromatic hydrocarbon, alkali-doped p-Terphenyl, has attracted considerable interest. The critical temperature T c ranges from few to 123 K, the record for organic superconductors, due to uncontrolled competition of multiple phases and dopants concentrations. In the proposed mechanism of Fano resonance in a superlattice of quantum wires with coexisting polarons and Fermi particles, the lattice properties play a key role. Here we report a study of the temperature evolution of the parent compound p-Terphenyl crystal structure proposed to be made of a self-assembled supramolecular network of nanoscale nanoribbons. Using temperature dependent synchrotron radiation x-ray diffraction we report the anisotropic thermal expansion in the ab plane, which supports the presence of a nanoscale network of one-dimensional nanoribbons running in the b-axis direction in the P21/a structure. Below the enantiotropic phase transition at 193 K the order parameter of the C-1 structure follows a power law behaviour with the critical exponent α = 0.34±0.02 and the thermal expansion of the a-axis and b-axis show major changes supporting the formation of a two-dimensional bonds network. The large temperature range of the orientation fluctuations in a double well potential of the central phenyl has been determined. Using different procedures of alkali doping it has been recently found that p-Terphenyl K x C 18 H 14 shows a transition from an insulating transparent phase to an inhomogeneous metallic black phase which shows a superconductive behavior with critical temperature T c ranging from few degrees up to 123 Kelvin in different samples In the continuously growing field of quantum materials, high interest is addressed to the manipulation of the ultrastructure of p-Terphenyl units for design of novel quantum organic materials where high temperature superconductivity could emerge Derivatives of p-Terphenyl are aromatic biological molecules present in edible mushrooms and have pharmaceutical interest for their use as immunosuppressive, anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor agents and sunscreen lotions. Moreover polyphenils have applications as laser dye in photon detectors and in lightemitting devices. The structure of undoped parent compound (crystalline p-Terphenyl) has been object of a long standing interest In order to develop the material design of superconducting organic systems Here we use synchrotron X-ray diffraction to monitor the temperature range of the lattice fluctuations of the crystal structure around the order-disorder enantiotropic phase transition and to get the different anisotropic lattice thermal expansion above and below the phase transition temperature at around 193 K. We have found a highly anisotropic thermal expansion of the ab plane in the P21/a structure, which supports the presence nanoscale p-Terphenyl one-dimensional nanoribbons running in the b-axis direction .We have also determined the temperature range with large orientation fluctuations of the central phenyl ring in the proximity of the enantiotropic phase transition. The order parameter of the low temperature C-1 structure follows a power law behaviour with the critical exponent α = 0.34. In this structure the orientation fluctuations of the central phenyl are frozen and the anisotropy of thermal expansion in the ab plane becomes much smaller. The p-Terphenyl samples, with linear formula C 6 H 5 C 6 H 4 C 6 H 5 and molecular weight 230.30, have been synthesized in the CNR-ISM laboratories in Rome starting from p-Terphenyl powder produced by Sigma-Aldrich T3203 ≥99.5% (HPLC). The powder was dehydrated by several argon/vacuum washings at 100°C and then sealed in a Pyrex ampoule under vacuum. The ampoule was transferred in an oven and the dehydrated powder was heated up to 269°C. The temperature, controlled by means of a thermocouple positioned near to the Pyrex ampoule, was raised slowly in 5 hours and the system was maintained at 269°C for 48 hours. After completion, the ampoule was gradually cooled until reaching room temperature over a span of 7 hours. Synchrotron diffraction experiments have been carried out in the ELETTRA synchrotron radiation facility in Trieste (Italy), at the beam line XRD1 Images were collected with a 2M Pilatus silicon pixel X-ray detector (DECTRIS Ltd., Baden, Switzerland) at a distance of 230 mm from the sample, giving the pattern a maximum resolution of 2 Å. Data were calibrated by means of a LaB6 standard, images taken at the same temperature were averaged and then integrated using the software FIT2D The x-ray diffraction patterns were recorded on the x-ray diffraction beam-line XRD1 at the Elettra synchrotron radiation facility in Trieste in the temperature range between 300 and 120 K. The XRD diffraction pattern shows the monoclinic P21/a space group symmetry above the critical temperature T c =193 K and the low temperature triclinic C-1 space group below T c . The lattice parameters of the room temperature P21/a space group, and of the low temperature triclinic C-1 space group are in agreement with the literature. The high temperature phase has lattice parameters a = In the low temperature C-1 phase the thermal expansion coefficient in the a-axis direction decreases and at around 150 K it becomes similar to the thermal expansion in the b-axis direction C a =C b =5.8 ± 0.5 10 -5 K -1 . The anti-correlated thermal behavior of the a-axis and b-axis around the enantiotropic transition from P21/a to C-1 structure occurs in a wide temperature range between 240K and 160K, indicated by the shaded area in Figure . 2. In Figure [020] peaks in the C-1 and P21/a symmetry, respectively. Figure [512] reflection in the C-1 space group, as a function of temperature. At the disorder-to-order transition we observe an strong increase of both and amplitude and FWHM of [0k0] peaks, as shown in Figure [512] monoclinic reflections diverges at T c , as expected at a phase transition. This type of transition is well In the C-1 space group symmetry we associate the lack of thermal expansion anisotropy with the disappearing of the nanoribbons in the b-axis direction and the formation of similar arrays of bonds in the a-axis and b-axis direction in the ab plane. We present the temperature evolution of p-Terphenyl structure by means of synchrotron X ray diffraction. We collected XRD patterns during a cooling ramp from 300K down to 120K. Monitoring the lattice parameters behavior we got evidences of an anomalous thermal expansion which is quasi uniaxial at high temperatures, above T c , while becoming biaxial at low temperature, below T c . This transition takes place in a wide temperature range following a power law behavior below T c . The understanding of structural elastic properties of p-Terphenyl is one of the most important issue to control the doped metallic p-Terphenyl and to design new supramolecular organic superconducting systems. In fact the control of supramolecular selfassembly of a given molecular building block provides a road map for material design of intricate structures containing 3D networks made of 1D organic quantum wires, opening new venues for modern nanotechnology. Soft and biological matter provide a wide landscape of multiscale supramolecular selfassembly of quantum nano-scale modules therefore it represents a promising roadmap to get room temperature superconductors. Quantum coherence at high temperature shown in high temperature superconductivity has found to emerge in different supramolecular arrays of metallic quantum wells, like in diborides The simplest case of high temperature superconductivity driven by shape resonance is provided by MgB 2 It was known that the central ring of each p-Terphenyl molecule lies at an angle to a plane defined by the outer rings just because of the competition among inter-ring H-H bonds with ortho-hydrogens which force the adjacent rings to be non-coplanar, and π orbitals on the phenyl rings which prefer a coplanar arrangements. In the ab plane there are two possible conformations: one with the central ring of the p-Terphenyl molecule twisted in one sense, and the other twisted oppositely. This order doubles the C-1 cell along a and b respect to the high temperature P21/a cell. Above T c , our results also support the formation of 1D nanoribbons so that the average structure unit cell is the P21/a cell, but the two senses of twisting give a dynamical fluctuation in a double well potential. In the low temperature triclinic C-1 space group the p-Terphenyl nano-ribbons are broken by freezing the oscillations of the central phenyl group at different tilting angles. This makes the studied transition from the high temperature symmetry P21/a to the low temperature C-1 symmetry quite complex. Here we have shown that networks of one dimensional (1D) nanoribbons in p-Terphenyl in the P21/a structure are characterized by an unusually large anisotropy of the thermal expansion in the ab plane in agreement with anisotropic pressure compressibility Work is in progress to measure the temperature dependent supramolecular self-assembled superstructures of alkali doped organic of polyphenyls determined by potassium dopant interactions with p-Terphenyl and intermolecular C-H p bonds.