We present an exactly solvable model of a spin-triplet f -wave topological superconductor on the honeycomb lattice in the presence of the Hubbard interaction for arbitrary interaction strength. First we show that the Kane-Mele model with the corresponding spin-triplet f -wave superconducting pairings becomes a full-gap topological superconductor possessing the time-reversal symmetry. We then introduce the Hubbard interaction. The exactly solvable condition is found to be the emergence of perfect flat bands at zero energy. They generate infinitely many conserved quantities. It is intriguing that the Hubbard interaction breaks the time-reversal symmetry spontaneously. As a result, the system turns into a trivial superconductor. We demonstrate this topological property based on the topological number and by analyzing the edge state in nanoribbon geometry. Introduction: Topological superconductors have been investigated intensively in this decade A Kitaev spin liquid In this paper, we investigate interacting two-dimensional topological superconductors on the honeycomb lattice. Our observation is that the exactly solvable condition is the emergence of perfect flat bands at zero energy. The operator degrees of freedom associated with the perfect flat bands become C-numbers, and generate infinitely many conserved quantities. The resultant Majorana fermion model is transformed into a free Majorana fermion model. We explicitly analyze a Kane-Mele model with the spintriplet f -wave superconductor, since the f -wave superconducting pairing is compatible with the honeycomb lattice structure [Fig. Model: We start with the Kane-Mele model with arXiv:1710.10762v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 30 Oct 2017 where c † is creates an electron with spin polarization s at site i, and i, j / i, j run over all the nearest/next-nearest neighbor hopping sites. We adopt the convention that s =↑, ↓ in indices and s = +1, -1 in equations for the up and down spins. We explain each term: (i) The first term of the Hamiltonian H KM represents the usual nearest-neighbor hopping with the transfer energy. (ii) The second term of the Hamiltonian H KM represents the Kane-Mele spin-orbit coupling, where σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the Pauli matrix of spin, with ν ij = +1 if the next-nearest-neighboring hopping is anticlockwise and ν ij = -1 if it is clockwise with respect to the positive z axis. (iii) The first/second term of the Hamiltonian H SC represents the nearest/next-nearest neighbor f -wave superconducting pairings. The system has the time-reversal symmetry. Non-interacting case: First we investigate the noninteracting case; U = 0. The Hamiltonian is block diagonal with respect to the spin; H = H ↑ + H ↓ . In order to study superconductivity, we use the Bogoliubov de Gennes formalism. The honeycomb lattice is bipartite, which consists of the A and B sublattices. The nearest neighbor superconducting pairing occurs between the A and B sublattices, while the next-nearest neighbor superconducting pairing occurs within one sublattice: See Figs. In the Nambu spinor basis the Hamiltonian H s has the form with The eigenvalues read It is remarkable that perfect flat bands emerge when As we verify later, the emergence of perfect flat bands generates infinitely many conserved quantities and make one species of the Majorana fermions inactive in the theory with the interaction (U = 0): See (21). In the following, we investigate the system by requiring this condition. When λ = 0, the gap closes linearly at the K and K points. It is a Dirac nodal superconductor: See Fig. where 2 at is the Fermi velocity and ξ = 1 for the K point and ξ = -1 for the K point. The Berry curvature is calculated as with the Berry connection and hence we obtain by adding the contributions from the K and K points. Consequently, the system is topological for λ = 0. We note that the Z 2 index is identical to the spin-Chern number provided that the time-reversal symmetry is present and that the spin is a good quantum number. We may explicitly confirm the Chern number, C = C ↑ + C ↓ = 0, as required by the time-reversal symmetry. Interacting case: It is in general a very hard task to solve the problem involving the Hubbard interaction H Hubbard , since it is not a quadratic interaction. However, as we soon see, the Hubbard interaction can be rewritten in the quadratic form under the flat band condition (9). We introduce Majorana fermion operators η and γ for each sublattice defined by for fermions on i ∈ A and j ∈ B sublattices. The Hamiltonian (1) is rewritten in terms of these Majorana fermions as with The time-reversal symmetry T acts as (20) It is remarkable that the η Majorana fermions are decoupled from the Hamiltonians ( This Hamiltonian is exactly solvable for any fixed set of D i , since it is quadratic in terms of the fermion operators γ. A set of D i serves as infinitely many conserved quantities that make the system exactly solvable. There are two possibilities in the choice of the ground state with respect to the η Majorana fermions. One is the ferroorder where the sign of D i is the same between the two sublattices D i = 1/2, while the other is the antiferro-order where the sign of D i is opposite between the two sublattices D i = (-1) i /2. The D i = 1/2 and D i = -1/2 are related by the interchange of U and -U . Consequently, the time-reversal symmetry is spontaneously broken by a particular choice of D i for the ground state. In the basis Ψ = (Ψ ↑ , Ψ ↓ ), the Hamiltonian is written in the form with where the sign is + for the ferro-order andfor the antiferroorder. For the ferro-order, the eigenenergy is given by and for the antiferro-order, it is given by where the spectrum is doubly degenerated. By using the relation, we find that the antiferro-order is the ground state in the second order of U . Actually this is the case for arbitrary U by numerically evaluating the energies and comparing them. The gap closes for the ferro-order with λ = 0. The system is a loop-nodal superconductor: See Fig. Edge states: In order to verify whether the system is topological or not, we calculate the band structure for nanoribbon geometry. The band structure of nanoribbons is given in Fig. First, we investigate the case with λ = 0. There are partial flat bands connecting the K and K points in addition to the perfect flat bands. These partial flat bands move away from zero energy once the interaction is introduced, as shown in Figs. Next, we investigate the case with λ = 0. When U = 0, there are helical edge states, as shown in Fig. where v is the velocity of the helical edge. The eigenenergy reads which well describes the anticrossing of the helical edge states: See Figs.3(e) and (f). We note that the anticrossed edge states are almost the same between the ferro-order and the antiferro-order although the bulk spectrum is different, which implies the above low-energy theory is valid. We have constructed exact solvable models on twodimensional topological superconductors. The exact solvable condition is the emergence of perfect flat bands at zero energy, generating infinitely many conserved quantities and making one species of the Majorana fermions inactive. This method will be a guideline for searching further exact solvable models. The author is very much grateful to N. Nagaosa for many helpful discussions on the subject. This work is supported by the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from MEXT KAK-ENHI (Grant Nos.JP17K05490 and 15H05854). This work is also supported by CREST, JST (JPMJCR16F1).