Fluorescent Microthermographic Imaging, a method using rare-earth fluorescent coatings with temperature-dependent light emission, was used for quench investigation in high temperature superconductors (HTS). A fluorophore was embedded in a polymer matrix and used as a coating on top of an HTS tape, while being excited with UV light and recorded with a high-speed camera. Simultaneously, the tape was pulsed with high amplitude, short duration DC current, and brought to quench with the help of a localized defect. The joule heating during a quench influences the fluorescent light intensity emitted from the coating, and by recording the local variations in this intensity over time, the heating of the tape can be visualized and the developed temperatures can be calculated. In this paper, the fluorophore Europium tris[3-(trifluoromethylhydroxymethylene)-(+)-camphorate] (EuTFC) provided sufficient temperature sensitivity and a usable temperature range from 77 K to 260 K. With the help of high-speed recordings, the normal zone development was imaged in a 20 μm copper stabilized HTS tape held in a liquid nitrogen bath, and using a calibration curve, the temperatures reached during the quench have been calculated. High temperature superconductors (HTS), are promising for electrical applications, such as motors, generators, cables and high field magnets However, a problem associated with HTS applications is the behaviour of the conductor when part of it reverts from the superconducting state back to its normal conducting state due to some initial disturbance The NZPV is a crucial aspect for the thermal stability of the tape, since a slow speed means that a small portion of the tape is bearing the full heating power, whereas a larger normal zone has an extended surface that can dissipate the heat more effectively to e.g. a liquid nitrogen bath. Generally speaking, one would want a fast NZPV to avoid the conductor being damaged by excessive local heating. For this reason, it would be very useful to be able to monitor the temperature of the tape when designing a new device that is prone to quenching. However this has proven to be challenging to over large areas and with sufficient temporal resolution. In this work, a new optical method is presented for the measurement of quench propagation and NZPV in HTS tapes. In addition to imaging the quench itself, the method allows measuring the spatial temperature profile on the surface of the sample. The capability of mapping the temperature distribution over a 2D surface at high speeds (millisecond time scale) constitutes the main novelty of the method. The technique is based on the temperature dependent light emission of a rare-earth fluorophore in conjunction with a high-speed camera, capable of recording thousands of images per second. Together, these allow for direct observation of dynamic events, such as the quench, in the time range of milliseconds. Using the light intensity of each pixel in the recording and adequate post-processing steps allow for the extraction of thermal data. Hence, the measurements provide both qualitative and quantitative temperature information, which can be used to compare quench behaviour of various tapes and architectures. This work shows a proof of concept of the developed method together with preliminary results of quench propagation measurements in a copper stabilized HTS tape. Fluorescent Microthermographic Imaging (FMI) was developed in 1982 by Kolodner et al. In this paper, Europium tris[3-(trifluoromethyl-hydroxy-methylene)-(+)-camphorate], abbreviated EuTFC, was used for high-speed fluorescent thermal imaging The results are shown in figure where I 0 is the intensity of the incoming light and I 1 is the intensity of the light measured after passing through the sample. Hence, an absorbance of 1 means that 90% of the light is absorbed by the sample, whereas an absorbance of 3 would mean that 99.9% is absorbed. Over 90% of the light between wavelengths of 360 nm and 400 nm is absorbed with the absorbance peaking at 376 nm. Figure The emission peak shown in figure In order to generate the data shown in figure Previous measurements have often used Hg-Xe lamps The light intensity is one of the key aspects that make such a measurement work. In static measurements, the exposure time of the camera can be arbitrarily chosen. Furthermore, additional post-processing can be applied to improve the final image quality. Haugen et al. Achieving the same image quality and thermal resolution in the time frame of a few tens of milliseconds is more challenging. The exposure times are limited by the transient effect to be recorded. As a consequence, the detected fluorescence is much fainter. In order to reach acceptable emission levels at frame rates between 500 and 2500 pictures per second, first a total of 4 UV LEDs (and eventually 8) were used in close proximity of the sample Note that although the optical density of liquid nitrogen is different than that of air, it was found that UV light can still propagate through lengths of tens of centimetres without considerable attenuation in this medium. While fluorescent thermographic imaging has been previously used in microscopy applications (see • Digital resolution (in bits) • Recording speed (in frames per second, fps) • Recording resolution Digital resolution defines the number of discrete levels available for the digitalization of the analogue light signal. Our Memrecam HX3 camera can operate with 12-bit digital resolution, meaning that 4096 different light intensity levels can be recorded at any chosen recording speed. This directly defines the maximum theoretical temperature resolution of the measurement. If the maximum light intensity of the CCD chip, i.e. the value 4095, is achieved at the temperature of 77 K, and if the sensor records a value of 0 at the maximum temperature (260 K), then the theoretical maximum temperature resolution is, (260 -77)/(4095 -0) = 0.0447 K. This is, however, unrealistic, mainly due to noise in the CCD sensor, which reduces the effective digital resolution. Sufficiently high recording speed and resolution are required for capturing the quench itself and having a sharp enough image. From experience, a recording speed of 2500 fps (one image every 0.4 ms) allows clearly seeing the quench propagation in HTS tapes. Anything beyond that is not strictly necessary, however it can be useful for obtaining smoother recordings. The HX3 camera can maintain an HD resolution of 1280 × 720 pixels at 10,000 fps; hence the speed and resolution are not limiting the accuracy of the measurement. Nevertheless the resolution of the area of interest (only the tape) is not necessarily available in high-definition due to the used lens and optics of the setup. Being at the minimum working distance of the current camera lens, the recorded images are approximately 200 × 500 pixels, or roughly 1 Megapixel. Additionally a 610 nm central wavelength bandpass filter with a 10 nm bandwidth was used to filter out any light not resulting from the temperature-dependant fluorescence. Since the central wavelength of such filters shifts with the light incidence angle, mounting the filter in front of the camera lens (as in traditional photography) was unfavourable. Furthermore, these filters are made in small diameters and are mainly used for experiments in traditional optics. Here, a custom 3D printed frame was made for the bandpass filter, which could hold it between the lens and the camera's standard C-mount. This allowed all the light to first pass through the camera's lens, and then through the filter. This is illustrated in figure A 12 mm wide HTS tape sample from SuperPower was cut into a final length of 15 cm. The fluorophore was mixed with Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and dissolved in acetone in a ratio of 1.3 wt%, 1.7 wt% and 97 wt% of fluorophore, PMMA and acetone, respectively The solution, which is mostly acetone, is brought onto the surface of a sample tape using simple droplet deposition. As the acetone covers the tape and forms a thin layer, it evaporates rapidly and leaves behind a layer of fluorophore and PMMA mixture. Finally, in order to mechanically stabilize the layer and the photoluminescence itself, the sample is heat treated at 175 • C for 30 minutes It has been previously shown that a thin layer of insulator between an HTS tape and a cooling bath can influence the heat transfer properties A schematic of the experiment is shown in figure Since the amount of light varies based on the temperature of the sample, recording these changes allows calculating the temperatures, based on the previously determined calibration curve. If the temperature calibration is done on the exact same setup as the measurement, with the exact same conditions, then the measurement results could be simply interpolated using the calibration curve to extract the exact temperatures. However, this is generally not the case, as it is rather difficult to accurately control the temperature of the sample for calibration in the same setup where the measurements will be performed. Furthermore, if not recorded by the same camera, the arbitrary units of measurements cannot be compared directly. A solution to this problem was introduced by L. D. ( In order to remove all optical artefacts, one can create a relative scale instead of the absolute measurement and divide the hot (biased) image, S H (x, y), by the cold (reference) image, S C (x, y), to get the ratio S R (x, y), i.e. ( Since only the quantum efficiency of the fluorophore depends on the temperature, all other optical artefacts cancel out. Hence, the local variations in e.g. optical collection efficiency or excitation light intensity are no longer a concern. This allows the calibration to be done on a different measurement device as the actual measurement. The complete calibration process works as follows: firstly, the calibration curve is normalized around 77 K as shown in figure Figure Figure In this paper, we introduced a high-speed fluorescent thermal imaging technique aimed at measuring temperatures in HTS tapes during a quench. Using a high-speed camera and EuTFC as a fluorophore, quench temperatures could be observed at high speeds in HTS coated conductors immersed in liquid nitrogen. Recording speeds of 2,500 frames per second were found sufficient, as well as UV LED arrays with a total light emission of approximately 12,800 mW placed up to 30 cm away from the sample. With EuTFC and sufficient calibration, the temperature range from 77 K to 260 K can be imaged with reasonable accuracy. It was found that liquid nitrogen does not block considerable amounts of UV light, hence the method works well even in this medium, despite the slight distortion induced by bubbles. In a copper coated HTS tape, a gradual overall heating was observed over a 3 cm by 3 mm section. This indicates a strong current sharing between the superconducting layer and the copper coating. During the current pulse, the tape has reached the limit of temperature sensitivity, 260 K, in about 60 ms, and heated even further.