The issue on the effect of interactions in topological states concerns not only interacting topological phases but also novel symmetry-breaking phases and phase transitions. Here we study the interaction effect on Majorana zero modes (MZMs) bound to a square vortex lattice in two-dimensional (2D) topological superconductors. Under the neutrality condition, where single-body hybridization between MZMs is prohibited by an emergent symmetry, a minimal square-lattice model for MZMs can be faithfully mapped to a quantum spin model, which has no sign problem in the world-line quantum Monte Carlo simulation. Guided by an insight from a further duality mapping, we demonstrate that the interaction induces a Majorana stripe state, a gapped state spontaneously breaking lattice translational and rotational symmetries, as opposed to the previously conjectured topological quantum criticality. Away from neutrality, a mean-field theory suggests a quantum critical point induced by hybridization. Topological states are currently the focus of intensive research In this Rapid Communication, we study a square lattice of interacting MZMs, which may emerge at vortices in 2D topological superfluid and superconductor At the non-interacting level, the system is described in the long-wavelength limit by the Fu-Kane Hamiltonian where σ (τ) is the Pauli matrix in the spin (Nambu) basis, μ F is the chemical potential, ∆(r) is the proximity-induced pair potential, and v F is velocity of the surface Dirac mode when ∆ = 0. The distribution and structure of vortices are encoded in ∆(r). The neutrality condition corresponds to μ F = 0, which has a significant consequence on the emergent symmetry of the effective Hamiltonian Assuming the simplest, quartic local interaction of the vortex Majorana modes on the square lattice, we consider the following Hamiltonian Ĥ = Ĥg where γr is the Majorana fermion operator at site r satisfying γ † r = γr and {γ r , γr } = 2δ r,r and the summation runs over elementary plaquettes; 1 -4 are four corners of a plaquette, 2 = 1b, 3 = 1 + a, and 4 = 3b, with a and b the primitive lattice vectors [Fig. As the hybridization term allowed for μ F 0 which has a uniform π flux per plaquette because of the underlying vortices. Equation (3) preserves the full symmetry of the square lattice (e.g., the translation in the b direction is accompanied by a gauge transformation). By continuity, we expect |t| |g| for small μ F . We assume g, t > 0 unless otherwise mentioned. We start from Ĥ = Ĥg (2). Assuming a periodic (open) boundary condition in the a (b) direction, we map it to a spin model by using a 2D Jordan-Wigner (JW) transformation. We define a complex fermion ĉr σ = 1 2 (γ r σ ,1 + iγ r σ ,2 ) by introducing an artificial (but arbitrary) pairing convention [Fig. , where σα (α = x, y, z) are Pauli matrices. We find γr σ ,2 γr σ ,1 γr σ +a,2 γr σ +a,1 =σz r 1 σz r 1 +a , γr σ ,1 γr σ ,2 γr σ +a,1 γr σ +a,2 =σx with r σ = r σ + 2b, where the number of pairs involved in the interaction is two and four, respectively [Fig. with J = P = g, which combines the Ising coupling J on the horizontal bonds and a transverse four-spin term P associated with plaquettes ( σ ) of σ spins [Fig. To elucidate the nature of the low-T phase and the transition, we show that Ĥg,σ (hence, Ĥg ) is dual to decoupled two copies of a square-lattice quantum compass model with r τ = r σ + a 2 , by which the J and P terms become an effective magnetic field and a four-spin interaction for τ spins, respectively. We find that the new four-spin interaction does not mix τ spins in even and odd columns, e.g., σx with To complete the mapping, we introduce "μ spins" at the midpoint of each vertical link (r τ , r τ + 2b) for τ spins, such that μx The total Hamiltonian is Ĥg,μ = Ĥe g,μ + Ĥo g,μ . The most crucial input from the duality transformation is that the compass model with J = P = g is known to undergo a "nematic" transition in the Ising universality class at a finite temperature g,μ or Ĥo g,μ and ĤB g does to the other. In fact, each Isinglike bond interaction in Ĥ e(o) g,μ We confirm this Majorana stripe order by evaluating the order parameter by QMC. is the order parameter in the σ-spin representation. We find that the temperature dependence of |D| is consistent with the transition into the Majorana stripe phase (the nonmonotonic Finally, we consider the effect of the nearest-neighbor hybridization Ĥt (3) on the Majorana stripe phase. The finitetemperature Ising transition implies a first-order transition line in the extended T -∆g phase diagram [Fig. We are grateful to Sharmistha Sahoo for useful discus- Here we provide some details of the two-step duality transformation that we invoked to derive the compass model from the effective spin model Ĥg,σ [Eq. ( The first step is to introduce "τ spins" represented by Pauli matrices τx,y,z r τ , which reside at the midpoint r τ = r σ + a 2 of every horizontal link (r σ , r σ +a) of a pair of σ spins [diamonds in Fig. where This is a standard Kramers-Wannier transformation. Noting that no spin operators at site r σ , r σ + a, . . . are contained in Qr σ , we can immediately check the spin commutation relations for τ spins as follows: It is also straightforward to verify that τ spin operators at different sites commute. The second step to complete the transformation is to introduce "μ spins." This is another Kramers-Wannier transformation though with the "column-major" ordering ñCM (r σ ) illustrated in Fig. Our derivation of Ĥg,σ in the main text assumes an even number of rows in the square lattice of Majorana fermions. Because of the open boundary in the b direction, this means there are an odd number of plaquettes in this direction. However, since the low T phase spontaneously induces a modulation of energy density associated with the plaquette interaction g, a particular type of the modulation is favored in such a setup, even if there are an even number of plaquettes in the a direction. To avoid a resulting finite-size effect in the QMC simulation, we consider the lattice with an even number of plaquettes in the b direction, hence, an odd number of rows of Majorana fermions [Fig. A faithful spin representation can be derived also in this case. To combine the Majorana fermions in pairs properly, we add an additional row of fictitious MZMs as shown in Fig. where L a and L b are the size of the lattice of σ spins in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively, and Dσ (r σ ) is given in Eq. ( Here we present the details of our zero-temperature MF calculation of the Majorana stripe phase. To consider the more general situations, we introduce two coupling constants g and g for plaquettes on the even and odd-numbered rows, respectively, of the square lattice (they correspond to P and J, respectively, in the main text). The difference ∆g ≡ gg serves as a symmetry-breaking field. As a result of this explicit breaking of translation symmetry along the vertical di- where τ x,y,z are the Pauli matrices and we have used the relation δ = -δ we found numerically. The MF band structure of Majorana fermions is shown in Fig. x + a 2 y + a 2 z , and always appears in ± pairs. The energy gap for t < t c corresponds to the minimum of ε gap = min(ε + k -ε - k ) occurs at k = (0, 0), (π, 0), (0, π), and (π, π). In the symmetric point g = g , the spectral gap is related to the stripe order parameter The energy gap as a function of the hybridization is shown in Fig. k H MF Ψk with Ψk ≡ (γ k,1 , γk,2 ) T and