Motivated by the recent theoretical and experimental progress in the heavy fermion system UCoGe, we study ferromagnetic chiral superconductors in the presence of magnetic domains. Within mean field approximations, it is shown that chiral superconducting domains are naturally induced by the ferromagnetic domains. The domain wall current flows in the opposite direction to the naively expected one as in 3 He-A phase due to contributions from "unpaired electrons". Consequently, the domain wall current flows in the same direction with that of surface currents when the magnetic domain wall lies parallel to the sample surface, and therefore they contribute to the net current along the whole sample. We find that, due to the non-cancellation between the domain wall current and surface current, a Fulde-Ferrell-like superconducting state can be stabilized in an anisotropic sample for all the temperatures below the superconducting transition temperature. Interplay of ferromagnetism (FM) and superconductivity (SC) has been a central issue in the study of magnetic superconductors. A FM order generally breaks Cooper pairing through Zeeman coupling and Lorentz force, and therefore it is usually difficult to realize coexistence of FM and SC orders. However, in a spin triplet pairing state, weakness of Pauli depairing effect could allow microscopic coexistence of the two seemingly antagonistic orders. Indeed, it is expected that pseudo-spin triplet states in the presence of FM orders are realized in the family of uranium based ferromagnetic superconductors UGe 2 , URhGe, and UCoGe In addition to the momentum space topology in a ferromagnetic topological superconductor, FM degrees of freedom gives rise to real space non-trivial structure defined by magnetic domains in the ordered states. Experimentally, FM domains have been observed in UCoGe by scanning SQUID at ambient pressure, and the domain wall (DW) width was estimated to be very small, ∼ 0.1-1nm, as expected from the strong Ising anisotropy of UCoGe In this study, motivated by the theoretical identification of chiral superconductivity and the experimental observation of magnetic domains in UCoGe, we investigate a ferromagnetic chiral superconductor, especially focusing on interplay between real space FM domains and momentum space topology of SC when the system is in a Meissner phase. In such a set up, one would expect that chiral SC domains are induced by FM domains since the magnetic flux density arising from the FM order may stabilize one of the chiralities of Cooper pairing In this study, we consider a simple model of ferromagnetic chiral superconductors. Although we take UCoGe as a prototypical example of ferromagnetic chiral superconductors and use a specific model which is relevant to UCoGe, we will discuss their general properties based on the concrete model. Our results are basically applicable also to other chiral superconductors/superfluids such as The on-site level scheme of UCoGe due to the spinorbit interaction and crystal electric field has not been identified experimentally, and the calculated band structure looks very complicated where For simplicity, we consider a layered square lattice with equal lattice spacing for all the directions and i, j represent the site positions. Since the z-direction degrees of freedom is not important for our study, we suppress the z-index. The first term is hopping between the nearest neighbor sites only within a two-dimensional xy-plane and also includes chemical potential t ii = μ. Introduction of z-direction hopping does not change our main results. The hopping integral includes a classical vector potential t ij = t exp(i Ãij ) where Ãij = (e/c )A((i + j)/2) • (i -j) with the electron charge e. The vector potential is simply determined by Maxwell equation with a suitable boundary condition. Gauge fluctuations are completely neglected in this study for which conventional BCS theory works well, although inclusion of gague fluctuations would modify the standard BCS description To describe a FM domain structure, we consider a simple functional form of h ex i , for which the DW is on the yz-plane located at x = x DW with the width d DW . The position x DW is assumed to be the center of the system in the x-direction. Since UCoGe has strong Ising anisotropy, the DW could be well described by the above function. Experimentally, the DW width in UCoGe is estimated as d DW ∼ 0.1-1 nm, and typical domain size is ∼ 1-10 μm We consider an anisotropic system with an open boundary condition for x-direction and periodic boundary conditions for y, z-directions as shown in Fig. For a given vector potential, we use a mean field approximation for the conventional order parameter In the presence of translational symmetry in the Meissner state, ∆ x/y iσ depend only on x and the mean field Hamiltonian reads where ) and H BdG is the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian. E c = ij σ g ij /4| c iσ c jσ | 2 is the condensation energy. Then we compute lattice electric current where e < 0 is the electric charge and a is the lattice constant. Similarly, z-component of the spin current is defined as We choose a gauge among the Landau gauge ∇ • Ã = 0 so that Ãi,i+x = Ãi,i+ẑ = 0, where ∇ is the lattice dimensionless derivative. The magnetic flux density for each plaquette Biz = ( ∇× Ã) iz = Ãi+x+ŷ,i+x -Ãi+ŷ,i is calculated by the lattice Maxwell equation in a dimensionless form, where φ 0 = c /|e| and jtot = j + ∇ × M spin . The lattice spacing for the z-direction has been taken to be the same value as those in x, y-directions, a. We use a boundary condition on B so that Bi,z = 0 just outside the sample, which corresponds to zero external magnetic field. The dimensionless current and spin magnetization are defined as j = j /(|e|at) and M spin i,z = -2 S z i where we have simply assumed g eff = 2 for the effective g-factor. This equation reduces to the conventional Maxwell equation when the lattice dimensionless derivative ∇ is replaced by the derivative operator in the continuum multiplied by the lattice constant a. The dimensionless numerical factor ε CR ≡ at/φ 2 0 is estimated to be ∼ 3 × 10 -6 for t = 0.2eV and a = 5 Å. When we use this value in numerical calculations, the resulting penetration depth λ is found to be of the order 100a = 50nm or even longer. Since the effective hopping t should be regarded as a renormalized quantity and be smaller than 0.2eV when considering UCoGe, one might obtain λ ∼ 1μm as evaluated experimentally if a more realistic value of t were used. In the present study, however, we use a large ε CR = 1500×3×10 -6 to have a short λ since it is numerically difficult to treat such a long penetration depth. We have confirmed that our main conclusions are essentially independent of the numerical value of ε CR by repeating the same calculations for several different values of ε CR . Although one of the two possible chiralities will be chosen by the magnetic flux density arising from M spin , the chirality selection is a subtle issue, since there are several competing effects, Landau diamagnetism, Meissner effect, orbital magnetization of the Cooper pair field x/y i so that the resulting magnetic response becomes paramagnetic, we find that the paramagnetic solutions have slightly lower energies than the diamagnetic solutions. These complicated behaviors may be due to the above mentioned competing effects. In the following numerical calculations, we consider only the lower energy solutions of ∆, i.e. paramagnetic solutions. It is noted that, even if we use diamagnetic solutions, our main conclusions on the stability of SC domain walls and the resulting FF-like state essentially holds true. Although we focus only on the Meissner state in the present study, detailed structures of the gap functions around vortices will become important for the chirality selction in the possible spontaneous vortex state For the moment, in order to understand the physics step by step, we do not take into account Ã and B. Since a chiral SC domain is not induced without B, we introduce an initial configuration of ∆ i with a SC domain which is consistent with the solutions under B = 0. Inclusion of Ã and B leads to Meissner effect, and it will be discussed later. The parameters are fixed as g = 5t, filling n = 0.5 and h ex 0 = 0.1t, d DW = a for which the superconducting transition temperature is evaluated to be k B T sc ≃ 0.13t. We can estimate the coherence length of the SC at k B T = 0.001t to be ξ 0 ≃ 6a from the calculated spatial profile of ∆ i near the surface/DW fitted by tanh(x/ξ 0 ). Although the value of ξ 0 would be too small compared to the real values in chiral superconductors such as UCoGe, a large coupling constant g = 5t simplifies our discussions. Our main conclusions are essentially independent of absolute values of ∆ i . In the following, we fix k B T = 0.001t if not specified. A. pxipy/ -pxipy domains When a chiral superconducting DW is formed along the yz-plane by some reasons, there will be two locally stable structures according to the previous Ginzburg-Landau (GL) study on 3 He-A phase We show the gap function averaged over spins, ∆ x/y i = Re σ ∆ x/y iσ /2 in Fig. We also show quasi-particle spectrum in Fig. zero in contrast to the charge current, although the net spin current along the whole sample vanishes. We now discuss Meissner effect in this state by solving Maxwell equation together with the gap equation. A computed current profile is shown in Fig. As mentioned before, the p x -ip y / -p x -ip y odddomain is metastable and the p x -ip y /p x + ip y even-DW has a lower energy in the case of 3 He-A phase within the GL theory where the unpaired electrons are not taken into account Figure where In the odd-DW case, ∆ x changes its sign at the DW and ∆ x (x = x DW ) = 0 is satisfied as in Fig. This explains the essential difference in the DW modes for the two domain structures. Generally, spectrum of surface/DW modes are neither protected by symmetry nor an intrinsic bulk property but are sensitive to boundary conditions. Topological arguments ensure only the existence of symmetry-protected surface/DW modes. In the present system, the spectrum of the DW modes strongly depend on details of SC domain walls and are modified by the change in Hamiltonian δH MF = H even MF -H odd MF as shown in Fig. Although the p x -ip y /p x + ip y even-DW is more stable, the charge current profile of this state is rather current is essentially the same as that in the previous p x -ip y / -p x -ip y odd-DW case, the DW current flows in the opposite direction to the previous one. Such reversal of the current direction has been discussed previously, and is possible in other systems The counter-intuitive charge current can be attributed to the previously mentioned "unpaired electrons" which arise from an implicit pair breaking effect where {E n (k y )} are the eigenvalues of the BdG Hamil- We also discuss finite temperature effects for the even-DW. Our numerical calculations show that the DW current is parallel to the surface current and the resulting net paramagnetic current is negative for all 0 ≤ T < T sc (not shown). This can be explicitly shown within a quasi-classical calculation for the continuum model which linearizes the derivative, (k where ∆ is the gap amplitude in the bulk. These spectrum are good approximations of our numerical results Fig. The unpaired electrons can be directly found in the ground state wavefunction of the mean field Hamiltonian when J p y 0 = 0 arising from non-trivial η(k y ) = 0. It can be shown that the ground state wavefunction is given by the tensor product of for each σ (σ-index has been suppressed for simplicity), where |0 is the vacuum of c-operators. c ′ -operators are given by superpositions of c-operators and F nn ′ (k y ) can be calculated from the unitary matrix which diagonalizes the BdG Hamiltonian Since formation of Cooper pairs usually reduces energy in superconductors, one may think that unpaired electrons would increase energy and eventually destabilize the even-DW. Indeed, in some simple examples, unpaired electrons can appear only in extreme parameter regions where pair breaking effects are so strong that the superconductivities become unstable where β is the inverse temperature. As shown in Fig. Our numerical calculations would imply that DW energies are mainly determined by spatial profiles of ∆ x/y i and quasi-particle contributions do not change the stability of the even-DW, although their contributions to the energy would be of the same order O(L y ). Indeed, by comparing ∆ i for the two DWs (Figs. The net charge current along the y-direction is nonzero in the present gap function. Generally such a current carrying state is not forbidden for example in threedimensional toroidal geometry which may be mimicked by a periodic boundary condition We consider a FF-like stripe state with where Q y = 2πn y /L y (n y =integer) is the center of mass momentum of a Cooper pair and ∆ x/y iσ depend only on x. Here, we have assumed the same oscillation periods for ∆ x and ∆ y , Q xy = Q yy ≡ Q y , since Q xy = Q yy would lead to additional chiral SC domain walls in the y-direction, which increases energy. The negligibly small factor e iQy a/2 has been introduced for the later convenience. We minimize the free energy density δf (Q y ) Eq. ( The coincidence between the values of Q y for the vanishing total current and free energy minimum is of course not accidental, and is related to Bloch's theorem on the absence of bulk current at equilibrium = -log tr(e -βUHMF(Qy+δQ ′ y )U † ) + log tr(e -βHMF(Qy) ) = β( /e)tr(J y e -βHMF(Qy) )δQ where J y = i j i,y is the total current operator. Here, we have assumed that the mean field solutions depend weakly on Q y , i.e. ∆ x/y i . The first term is estimated as O(L y δQ y ) = O(1) since the current density is localized near the surface/boundary or vanishingly small in the bulk as implied by Bloch's theorem As seen in Fig. In the presence of the FF modulation Q y , the paramagnetic current operator does not commute with the mean field Hamiltonian H MF in the continuum limit. Instead, the combination J p y ≡ J p y -Q y N/2 now commutes with H MF , where N is the total number operator N = xkyσ c † xkyσ c xkyσ . Therefore, J p y 0 can be written in terms of the spectral asymmetry, This quantity gives a deviation of the paramagnetic current from the naively expected value (e /m)Q y N 0 /2 in the FF-like state, and a non-zero J p y 0 implies existence of normal state components, i.e. unpaired electrons is non-zero and the unpaired electrons still exist in the FF-like state. Indeed, the ground state wavefunction of the mean field Hamiltonian now contains where all the parameters can be calculated from the unitary matrix which diagonalizes the BdG Hamiltonian. Since the reversal of the DW current is due to the unpaired electrons, the emergence of the FF-like state is also a direct result of such hidden components. Although impacts of unpaired electrons on physical quantities such as edge currents have been discussed previously The current profile without Meissner effect now satisfies the continuity equation ∇ • j = 0 when we consider an open boundary in the y-direction. Such a current can be naturally screened by Meissner current if we solve the Maxwell equation self consistently. We show calculation results in Fig. Finally, as a straightforward extension of the above results, we consider a sequence of FM domains as in Fig. We have studied general properties of the ferromagnetic chiral superconductors by using the specific model of UCoGe in the Meissner phase, with focusing on interplay between momentum space topology and real space structure of FM domains. We confirmed that, within the mean field approximation, the chiral SC domains are naturally induced by the FM domains because of Lorentz force arising from the FM order which favors one of the two possible SC chiralities. Besides, it was found that the relative stability among the different SC domain walls discussed in the previous GL theory without the unpaired electrons holds true also in our system where the unpaired electrons are explicitly taken into ac-count. In the metastable SC domain state, the current profile is simply a global circulation along the surface and the DW. On the other hand, the DW current is reversed in the more stable SC domain as in 3 He-A phase, and the surface current and DW current do not cancel. Because of this non-cancellation, the FF-like modulated SC state with vanishing net current can be stabilized for all the temperatures below the superconducting transition temperature. In a microscopic point of view, the emergence of the FF-like state can be attributed to the hidden normal state components, i.e. the unpaired electrons. Our study is the first example where the unpaired electrons affect the underlying gap functions from which they arise. These results hold true also in other chiral superconductors/superfluids in the presence of chiral domains. UCoGe provides a good platform for studying such physics. Although we have used the mean field approximations in the present study, mean field approximations usually overestimate stabilities of ordered states. Rigorously speaking, one-or two-dimensional systems do not exhibit superconductivity at finite temperature and a net current carrying state in two-and three-dimensions is not forbidden at least by Bloch's theorem 