In the present report, we investigate various properties ofthe Nb 2 PdS 5 superconductor. Scanning electron microscopy displayed slabs like laminargrowth of Nb 2 PdS 5 while X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy exhibited the hybridization of Sulphur (2p) with both Palladium (3d)and Niobium (3d). High field (140kOe) magneto-transport measurements revealed that superconductivity (T c onset =7K and T c  = 0 = 6.2K) of the studied Nb 2 PdS 5 material is quite robust against magnetic field with the upper critical field (H c2 ) outside the Pauli paramagnetic limit. Thermally activated flux flow (TAFF) of the compound showed that resistivity curves follow Arrhenius behaviour. The activation energy for Nb 2 PdS 5 is found to decrease from 15.15meV at 10kOe to 2.35meV at 140kOe. Seemingly, the single vortex pinning is dominant in low field regions, while collective pinning is dominant in high field region. The temperature dependence of AC susceptibility confirmed the T c at 6K, further varying amplitude and frequency showed well coupled granular nature of superconductivity. The lower critical field (H c1 ) is extracted from DC magnetisation measurements at various T below T c . It is found that H c1 (T) of Nb 2 PdS 5 material seemingly follows the multiband nature of superconductivity. Recently, (Nb/Ta) 2 Pd(S/Se/Te) 5 series is gathering the interest of researchers due to their intriguing properties like robustness against the magnetic field and formation of the linear Pd(S/Se/Te) chain along one direction The band structure calculations revealed that Fermi surface of Nb 2 PdS 5 consists of a set of electron-like flat sheet and hole like cylinders In this shortarticle, we present some yet missing but interesting properties of one of the (Nb/Ta) 2 Pd(S/Se/Te) 5 series compound, i.e., Nb 2 PdS 5 . Here, we present thermally activated flux flow energy, thetemperature dependence of AC susceptibility with varying amplitude and frequency along with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of Nb 2 PdS 5 sample. The temperature dependence of lower critical field is suggestive of the multiband nature of superconductivity in studied Nb 2 PdS 5 . XPS studies exhibited the hybridization of Sulphur (2p) with both Palladium (3d) and Niobium (3d). High field magneto transport studies revealed that single vortex pinning is dominant in the low field region, while the collective pinning is dominant in high field regions. The Nb 2 PdS 5 sample was synthesized using standard solid state reaction route. The details of synthesis and structural characterization of Nb 2 PdS 5 are given elsewhere Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried using ZEISS-EVO scanning electron microscope. High resolution transmission electron microscopy was employed using HRTEM, modeloperated at300 kV electron accelerating voltage.X-ray photoelectron was carried using Omicron multiprobe surface analysis system equipped with Monochromatic Al-K source having excitation energy of 1486.7eV. The electrical and Magnetic measurements were recorded using a quantum design physical property measurement system (PPMS) equipped with thesuperconducting magnet of 140 kOe. The AC magnetization measurements were also performed on PPMS in zero DC field and AC amplitude of 5-15Oe along with varying frequency from 333 to 9999Hz. The room temperature XRD of Nb 2 PdS 5 revealed monoclinic structure with space group C2/m, details are reported by us elsewhere From the contrast developed over a region of about 1.5m and 1.2m in dimension (Fig. The resultant XPS core level spectra of Niobium (Nb), palladium (Pd) and Sulphur is given in Fig3. The Nb(3d) XPS (Fig. Similarly, Fig. Here, we mainly focus on thermally activated flux flow (TAFF) analysis of the magneto transport properties of the bulk polycrystalline Nb 2 PdS 5 compound in its superconducting regime, i.e., below the onset of T c . According to the TAFF theory, the relationship between ln and 1/T can be described using Arrhenius relation, ln(T, H) = ln o (H)-U o (H)/T,where ln o (H) = ln of + U o (H)/T c is temperature independent and U o is apparent activated energy AC susceptibility measurement is a technique used to extract superconducting properties like magnetization and critical current etc Therefore, it can be seen that the value of T p is strongly dependent upon amplitudes of applied magnetic field. Figure Interestingly enough, in contrast to ref. 13 and 14, the SR Summarily, we have synthesized bulk polycrystalline form of Nb 2 PdS 5 sample via solid state reaction route. We have studied detailed resistivity and magnetic measurements for as synthesized Nb 2 PdS 5 sample. The thermally activated flux flow analysis provided the value of activation energy, which decreases with increasing magnetic field. The AC susceptibility is dependent on amplitude, while independent on frequency. This implies prominent pinning losses in Nb 2 PdS 5 sample. The temperature dependence of lower critical field showed the signature of multiband superconductivity in Nb 2 PdS 5 sample. (Oe)