Starting from an ab initio-derived two-site dimer Hubbard hamiltonian on a triangular lattice, we calculate the superconducting gap functions and critical temperatures for representative κ-(BEDT-TTF)2X superconductors by solving the linearized Eliashberg equation using the Two-Particle Self-Consistent approach (TPSC) extended to multi-site problems. Such an extension allows for the inclusion of molecule degrees of freedom in the description of these systems. We present both, benchmarking results for the half-filled dimer model as well as detailed investigations for the 3/4filled molecule model. Remarkably, we find in the latter model that the phase boundary between the two most competing gap symmetries discussed in the context of these materials -dxy and the recently proposed eight-node s+d x 2 -y 2 gap symmetry -is located within the regime of realistic model parameters and is especially sensitive to the degree of in-plane anisotropy in the materials as well as to the value of the on-site Hubbard repulsion. We show that these results provide a more complete and accurate description of the superconducting properties of κ-(BEDT-TTF)2X than previous Random Phase Approximation (RPA) calculations and, in particular, we discuss predicted critical temperatures in comparison to experiments. Finally, our findings suggest that it may be even easier to experimentally switch between the two pairing symmetries as previously anticipated by invoking pressure, chemical doping or disorder effects. Among the classes of quasi two-dimensional organic charge transfer salts, the κ-(BEDT-TTF) 2 X family, often abbreviated as κ-(ET) 2 X, is of special interest since its members exhibit rich phase diagrams with antiferromagnetic Mott insulating, superconducting (SC), and spin-liquid states Measurements of electronic properties such as specific heat, conductivity or magnetic susceptibility 1 evidence a strong anisotropy between the stacking direction and the two-dimensional ET-planes, which may even become superconducting below transition temperatures of about 10 K In a recent study All the previously mentioned analyses were based on weak-coupling RPA calculations. Since providing an accurate location of the boundary between the two gap symmetries may help to unveil the origin of apparent contradicting experimental observations in the κ-(ET) 2 X family, in the present work we go beyond RPA and reanalyze the superconducting properties in these materials. We employ the linearized Eliashberg theory combined with an extension of the single-band intermediatecoupling Two-Particle Self-Consistent (TPSC) approach introduced by Vilk and Tremblay As the electronic properties of the κ-(ET) 2 X systems, such as the conductivities, are highly anisotropic with the largest contribution within the ET planes, it is justified to focus only on these two-dimensional planes. The κ packing motif allows for two distinct model descriptions with different degrees of approximation. The dimer model constitutes the strongest simplification, in which the center of two parallel ET molecules is taken as a single lattice site, resulting in a half-filled anisotropic triangular lattice model with two dimers in the crystallographic unit cell Using the projective Wannier function method as implemented in FPLO, the hopping amplitudes between the localized molecular orbitals have been calculated then given by where t ij,αβ are the hoppings from site α in unit cell i to site β in unit cell j, μ is the chemical potential, c † ασ ( r i ) creates an electron in unit cell i at site α with spin σ while c ασ ( r i ) annihilates an electron in unit cell i at site α with spin σ. The parameters of the dimer model can be derived using the geometrical relations The tight binding dispersions can be easily determined analytically through the four matrix elements between the two dimer states |α = 0 and |α = 1 in the dimer model, and six distinct contributions between the four molecule states for the molecule model where a and b are lattice constants of the twodimensional ET plane and the remaining matrix elements are obtained from H = H † . Note that the chemical potential was determined numerically to ensure the correct filling in both models. Due to the similarity of the phase diagram of cuprates and κ-(ET) 2 materials we can assume a spin-fluctuation based mechanism for the superconductivity. We will use an extension of the Two-Particle Self-Consistent (TPSC) approach as introduced by Vilk and Tremblay where U is the Hubbard on-site interaction and n iασ is the number operator for electrons in unit cell i at site α with spin σ. Note that the on-site U term in the dimer model corresponds to the Coulomb interaction in the dimer where one can approximate 2,32 U dim ≈ 2t 1 , while the on-site U in the molecule model corresponds to the Coulomb interaction in the molecule U mol . In the present work we do not include inter-site Coulomb contributions We define the non-interacting multi-site Green's function where μ, ν are site indices, k is a two-dimensional reciprocal lattice vector, and ω n = (2n + 1)π T are fermionic Matsubara frequencies at temperature T . Moreover, we calculate the non-interacting susceptibility χ 0 where matrix elements a μ,a as well as energy eigenvalues a ( k) are obtained by diagonalization of the tight-binding Hamiltonian H kin . In order to facilitate the assignment of indices, we will follow the convention that greek letters denote site indices and latin letters denote band indices. Moreover, the susceptibility depends on the difference of the thermal occupation probability f (x) = 1 1+e x/(k B T ) , which follows from Fermi-Dirac statistics, and bosonic Matsubara frequencies iq m = 2mπ T . For iq m = 0, the denominator becomes divergent for equal band energies, which we treat by means of the rule of l'Hospital. Due to the fact that the considered Hamiltonians bear no nonlocal interactions, for susceptibilities of the form χ μμνν (see below) we can reduce the tensor product of vector spaces from Spin and charge fluctuations within TPSC are treated by spin and charge susceptibilities (χ sp and χ ch respectively) from linear response theory. The renormalized irreducible vertices in the spin channel U sp and in the charge channel U ch are determined by local spin and charge sum rules where the spin vertex U sp is calculated from an ansatz equation that is motivated by the Kanamori-Brueckner and the diagonal elements of the charge vertex U ch μμ are directly calculated from the local charge sum rule while off-diagonal elements are zero. Correlation effects within the Green's function G are taken into account using a single-shot self-energy Σ and incorporated by the Dyson equation In this framework, we employ Migdal-Eliashberg theory to calculate the superconducting gap ∆ μν ( k, iω n ). We restrict our calculations to singlet and even-frequency and -orbital solutions, i.e. The linearized Eliashberg equation takes the form where the temperature at which the largest positive eigenvalue λ becomes unity indicates the onset of superconductivity. The singlet pairing potential is calculated within the Random Phase Approximation (RPA We enforce singlet solutions by symmetrization of the gap (G∆G) entering on the right-hand-side of the linearized Eliashberg equation (Eq. 15). For the numerical evaluation of the non-interacting susceptibility we employed adaptive cubature based on a three-point formula for triangles with an integration tolerance of 10 -6 . The interacting susceptibilities are strongly peaked when approaching the critical temperature. Therefore they were calculated on a 200 × 200 k grid for the molecule model and 300 × 300 k grid for the dimer model, while all other quantitities were well-converged on 70 × 70 grids. For the evaluation of Eqs. 12 and 15, we additionally employed fast Fourier transforms and the circular convolution theorem for a highly efficient implementation. The summation over Matsubara frequencies was performed for N Mats = 40 • (0.025/T ) points, whereas high-frequency corrections up to the order of 1 ω 2 were included by extrapolation. Although the insufficiency of the dimer model for capturing the physics of the κ-(ET) 2 X systems has been discussed In the context of the high-Tc cuprate superconductors it is already well known that the half-filled single-band Hubbard model on the square lattice stabilizes d x 2 -y 2 pairing solutions. Introducing anisotropic diagonal cou- plings t one expects superconductivity to become unstable for high values of the frustration t /t, while the d-wave solution will be retained for intermediate frustration strengths, as it is the case for the half-filled singleband triangular lattice model for κ-(ET) 2 X. In order to compare the results of this section to the molecule model considered in the following section, we have to transform this solution to the physical Brillouin zone (BZ) of the κ-(ET) 2 X (corresponding to two dimers per crystallographic unit cell), which is half as large as of the single-band model. Folding the BZ corners and rotating by 45 Finally, we calculate critical temperatures for eight representatives of the κ-(ET) 2 X family for U dim ≈ 2t 1 (see Tab. I). We observe no obvious relation to the measured critical temperatures. However, plotting the calculated critical temperatures against the corresponding We consider now the proposed four-parameter molecule model In the molecule model, the center of each ET molecule constitutes a lattice site in the tight binding model yielding a three quarter filled four-band system (four molecules per unit cell). Compared to the dimer model two additional degrees of freedom are accessible: the strength of the intra-dimer hopping and the in-plane anisotropy. In a previous study As the previous static RPA approach may only give qualitative results on the gap symmetry, in this study we apply the above introduced combination of the linearized Eliashberg equation, the RPA expression for the pairing vertex and the TPSC self-energy corrected Green's func- FIG. The four band model based on the largest hopping elements is not sufficient to reproduce the trends of Tc. tions and renormalized vertices. Interestingly, the gap symmetries calculated with the more advanced TPSC approach differ from the RPA predictions. For moderate on-site molecule U mol values, only κ-(ET) 2 Cu(NCS) 2 and κ-(ET) 2 Cu[N(CN) 2 ](CN), with the highest in-plane anisotropies feature s ± +d x 2 -y 2 symmetry (see Fig. To summarize, we have applied a combination of TPSC and the Eliashberg framework for superconductivity in order to derive the gap symmetries and trends for the critical temperatures in the dimer and molecule models for several superconducting κ-(ET) 2 X materials. Within the dimer model we find that the critical temperatures only reflect the frustration of the system but do not reproduce the experimental trends. Our calculations for the molecule model confirm previous findings that the additional degrees of freedom, i.e. the intra-dimer hopping and the in-plane anisotropy, are decisive for the gap symmetry and can result in s ± + d x 2 -y 2 solutions. However, we find that the s ± + d x 2 -y 2 gap is further stabilized by increasing correlations and may therefore be realized within the range of realistic model parameters. These three tuning parameters are known to be very sensitive to pressure or strain as well as to endgroup disorder. Switching between the different gap symmetries may therefore be easily realizable and should be observable in f.i. state-of-the-art scanning tunneling spectroscopy measurements. Our combined TPSC and Eliashberg framework allows us to track the gap symmetry and the corresponding eigenvalue at temperatures above the superconducting transition. Interestingly, we find that at high temperatures, T T c , all materials yield a d xy symmetry. Only at temperatures close to the superconducting transition, the materials with high in-plane anisotropy and/or large correlations undergo a transition to the extended s+d x 2 -y 2 symmetry accompanied by a change of the slope and a non-monotonous jump in the Eliashberg eigenvalue, as shown in Fig. 