Line nodes in the superconducting gap are known to be a source of Majorana flat bands (MFBs) in time-reversal-invariant superconductors (SCs). Here, we extend this relation to all symmetryprotected line nodes where an additional constraint arising from a symmetry of the crystal destabilizes or hides the existence of MFBs. By establishing a one-to-one correspondence between group theoretical and topological classifications, we are able to classify the possible line-node-induced MFBs, including cases with (magnetic) non-symmorphic space groups. Our theoretical analysis reveals a new type of MFB, i.e., MFBs in antiferromagnetic SCs. Over the last few years, the study of the nodal gap structures of superconductors (SCs) has experienced renewed interest due to the fact that they can reveal novel kinds of topological objects In materials with strong spin-orbit interactions (SOIs), e.g., heavy fermion SCs, the formation of Cooper pairs is constrained by the underlying crystal structure because a group operation is followed by the spin operation In this letter, we unify the topology of symmetryprotected line nodes and MFBs. By taking the general symmetry constraints affecting line nodes into account, we show that symmetry-protected line nodes host two different kinds of topological numbers: a zero-dimensional (0D) topological number that describes the topology of the symmetry-protected line nodes, and a 1D topologi-cal number that reflects the MFBs. The two topological numbers are intrinsically related to each other and the relationship between them fills the gap between the symmetry-protected line nodes and MFBs. Our topological argument allows us to categorize line nodal SCs into three different classes with respect to the MFBs: (i) odd-parity SCs with TR or a magnetic translation symmetry, (ii) even-parity SCs with TR symmetry, and (iii) even-parity SCs with a magnetic translation symmetry. The three classes are directly linked to the symmetry-protected line nodes, as shown in Table Irreducible representations of Cooper pairs-First, we revisit the group theoretical results. In materials with strong SOIs, electron states respect the symmetry of the crystal structure and are thus characterized by its IRs. Therefore, the possible formation of Cooper pairs is determined by the IRs of the electron states. For clarity, let γ k (m) be an IR of the symmetry group m ∈ G k for an electron with momentum k, where G k is the little group of k. When electrons at k and -k form a Cooper pair, it can be represented by , where d is a symmetry operator satisfying dk = -k. Therefore, P k is an induced representation in G k + dG k , and such anti-symmetrized IRs can be systematically calculated using the Mackey-Bradley theorem where χ is a character of the representation. In the following, we apply Eq. ( The characters of P k can thus be obtained using Eq. ( In the basal plane (BP) (k ⊥ = 0, where k ⊥ is the momentum normal to the mirror plane), the symmetry operators have the common expected characters in all cases, but on the Brillouin ZF (k ⊥ = π), the characters in each case are different. Comparing these characters with those of the IRs in Table Topology of symmetry-protected line nodes-Let us now discuss the symmetry-protected line nodes from the viewpoint of topology. Such topological properties are of importance in identifying the bulk-boundary correspondence, i.e., the line-node-induced MFBs. We can formulate the topology of line nodes using the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian, Here, H(k), ∆(k), and μ are the normal Hamiltonian, gap function, and chemical potential, respectively. We note that this Hamiltonian exhibits particle-hole (PH) symmetry since C H(k)C † = -H(-k), where C = τ x K is the anti-unitary operator, τ is the Pauli matrix in Nambu space, and K is the complex conjugate. We choose a periodic Bloch basis so that H(k) = H(k + G), where G a reciprocal lattice (RL) vector. First, we consider how the symmetry operations affect the BdG Hamiltonian. The creation operator of an electron satisfies , where {p|a p } = P, M, or Ĉ2 . If the BdG Hamiltonian is invariant with respect to the symmetry operations, Eq. ( Here, η p = ±1, where the choice of sign is the same as the sign of the character of p in the IR of ∆(k). In addition, T acts on the creation operators in a similar way to TR symme-TABLE III. (Color online) Topology of the symmetryprotected line nodes, labeled by the symbol M p q g(u) . The superscripts p, q are defined by p = e -iGσ •tσ ησ h ηI,σ h and q = e -iGσ •t θ ησ h η θ,σ h , respectively, while the subscript g(u) indicates whether the SC has even (g) or odd (u) parity. The bottom table shows the comparison between Table II and the 0D topological numbers, where Ag(Bu) and Bg(Au) in the BP correspond to the M ++ g(u) and M -- g(u) classes, respectively. The labels (i)-(iii) indicate the SC class of the MFBs. try, and is thus accompanied by an additional momentum factor for t θ = 0, i.e., T c † k,α Next, we clarify the relations between the symmetry operations. On the mirror plane, the PH operator satisfies while U (σ h ) k , U (I) k , and U (θ) k satisfy where we have used U (pp ′ ) k = η p,p ′ U (p ′ p) k and the additional phase factor e i(σ h k-k)•t θ (called the factor system where G σ is the RL vector normal to the mirror plane. Since Ũ (σ) 2 k = -e -iGσ •tσ , the sign of the squared operator may also change at the ZF. We conveniently fix the sign by defining M k ≡ e iGσ •tσ /2 Ũ (σ) k which satisfies M 2 k = -1. Using Eqs. ( while the commutation relation between T k and M k can be determined from Eq. ( First, let us consider the 1D topological number. Since C 2 k = η I , even-parity SCs (η I = 1) and odd-parity SCs (η I = -1) belong to different topological classes, and only even-parity SCs can support a non-zero 1D topological number Next, we consider the 0D topological number, for which we refer to the topological periodic table presented in respectively, where ñ(k) λ is the number of occupied states with momentum k, C k = (L k,λ ⊕ L k,-λ )K, and k in(out) is the momentum inside (outside) of the nodal loop. In the weak coupling limit, i.e., ∆(k) → 0, Eqs. ( If we define N λ = n(k out ) λ -n(k in ) λ in the normal Hamiltonian to be the topological number of the Fermi surface in the mirror sector with eigenvalue λ, Eqs. ( which implies that a nodal loop is only topologically stable if N λ = 0. We have summarized the possible topological numbers in Table Thus, we are now in a position to elucidate the relationship between the group theoretical and topological classifications outlined above. For convenience, we assume that η I,σ h = η θ,σ h = 1 so that almost all SCs qualify for our description. The IRs A g , A u , B g , and B u then correspond to the topological classifications labeled by M ++ g , M -- u , M -- g , and M ++ u in the BP. Moreover, the MR symmetry classes in the ZF depend on [t σ ] ⊥ and [t θ ] ⊥ due to Eq. ( Possible MFBs-Finally, we consider the connection between symmetry-protected line nodes and MFBs, which are characterized by 0D and 1D topological numbers, respectively. As was discussed above, a 1D topological number exists when η I = 1, so MFBs only appear in the case of even-parity SCs. In such even-parity SCs, the topological numbers are intrinsically related to one another and satisfy [52] which implies that the 1D topological number is always associated with the existence of symmetry-protected line nodes. We note also that the 1D topological number survives even when the MR symmetry is absent, which reflects the strong stability of the line nodes. Using Table antiferromagnetic phase of this material is specified by the magnetic space group P b 2 1 /m, and the two U atoms are situated at the (0, 0, 0) and (0, 0, 1 2 ) positions in the magnetic unit cell. Taking a single orbital at each U site into account, the tight-binding model can then be given by where ǫ(k 2 , and σ x (k z ) ≡ cos kz 2 σ x + sin kz 2 σ y . The constants t xy , t ′ z , and t z are hopping parameters and δ M represents the molecular field in terms of the magnetic moment. For simplicity, the gap function is assumed to be given by the s-wave spin-singlet pairing, ∆ 0 is y , and the symmetry operators are then given by C k = e i kz 2 (cos kz 2 σ 0i sin kz 2 σ z )τ x K, T k = e i kz 2 iσ x s y K, Γ k = -σ x (k z )s y τ x , and M k = iσ x s z τ z , where σ and s are the Pauli matrices in the sublattice and spin spaces, respectively. This model is known to host two nodal loops in the k z = π plane However, when we add an MR-breaking distortion term, e.g., 2t xz sin k x sin kz 2 σ x (k z ) to the Hamiltonian, the nodal loop escapes from the mirror plane and a gap opens on the k z = π plane. In this case, the surface state can be numerically determined and the MFBs are revealed by the MR-breaking distortion, as shown in Fig. Concluding remarks-We have established the relationship between symmetry-protected line nodes and MFBs using a topological argument. As revealed in Tables II and III, the 0D topological number not only reflects the group theoretical results, but also relates to the 1D topological number that ensures the existence of MFBs. By analyzing the relationship between the two topological numbers, we can categorize the symmetryprotected line nodes into three distinct classes, which we label Classes (i)-(iii), as summarized in Table 