The coupled dynamics of the two-fluid model of superfluid 4 He is numerically studied for quantum turbulence of the thermal counterflow in a square channel. We combine the vortex filament model of the superfluid and the Navier-Stokes equations of normal fluid. Simulations of the coupled dynamics show that the velocity profile of the normal fluid is deformed significantly by superfluid turbulence as the vortices become dense. This result is consistent with recently performed visualization experiments. We introduce a dimensionless parameter that characterizes the deformation of the velocity profile. Introduction.-When a fluid system consists of several continuous fields, their interaction as well as the generation mechanism of ordered or disordered states is complex. Such complex systems are ubiquitous in nature The system most characteristic of the two-fluid model is thermal counterflow in superfluid 4 He, which exhibits a typical stage of quantum hydrodynamics and quantum turbulence Two kinds of experiments in counterflow require theoretical and numerical approaches beyond the present state. One is the recent visualization experiments Based on the experiments, we consider two important effects from theoretical and numerical perspectives. First, we consider the boundary effects of the channel walls. A few studies simulated the VFM under the prescribed normal fluid-velocity profile between two parallel plates or in a square channel to find inhomogeneous vortex tangles affected by the boundaries Coupled dynamics of two fluids.-We used the VFM for quantized vortices and the Navier-Stokes equations for normal fluid, then connected them by mutual friction The dynamics of the normal fluid obeys the Navier-Stokes equations where ∇p/ρ = ∇P /ρ + ρ s S∇T /ρ n is the sum of the pressure gradient and temperature gradient, η n is the viscosity of normal fluid, and F ns is the mutual friction force per unit volume. We close these equations using the incompressible condition ∇ • v n = 0 for Eq. ( Normal fluid has two dimensionless parameters: one is a Reynolds number Re = ρ n v n D/η n , and the other is a parameter φ characterizing the mutual friction. Here, v n is the streamwise component of v n , v n is the averaged value of v n over the channel cross-section, and D is the half width of the cross-section. The parameter φ is introduced as follows. When the mutual friction is negligible, Eq. ( is satisfied, and we can use the Gorter-Mellink relation F ns = gρ s καLv ns To calculate the value of Eq. ( Figure The deformation of the normal fluid velocity profile can be measured by the reduction of the normal fluid velocity v n,c at the center (y, z) = (0.5 cm, 0.5 cm) of the channel cross-section. By increasing the mean relative velocity v ns,a = v nv s,a = ρv n /ρ s , the eventual vortex line density increases according to the stationary solution of Vinen's equation This instability is systematically understood by the di- We define the values of φ at the onset time as its critical value for the velocity deformation. The points at the onset time are marked by the green circles in Fig. In order to investigate the velocity profile in the defor- mation state, we multiply F ns by a scale factor c ≥ 1 in Eq. ( Conclusions.-The coupled dynamics of two fluids has been the frontiers of low temperature physics. We constructed the numerical method of the coupled dynamics, and performed the numerical simulation of the thermal counterflow in a square channel. To study systematically the deformation of the normal fluid velocity profile, we introduced the dimensionless parameter. Using this parameter, we analyzed the extent of the deformation and the critical values for the instability. The significantly flattened velocity profile of the normal fluid was obtained when the mutual friction force was sufficiently strong. These results are consistent with the recent visualization experiments. We would like to acknowledge W. F. Vinen and W. Consider the mutual friction force in quantum turbulence on the scale larger or smaller than the inter-vortex spacing of the superfluid. On a small scale, the superfluid vorticity ω s is localized only on the position s of the vortex filaments as where δ(x) is the Dirac delta function. Because the mutual friction force is the interaction between the normal fluid and the vortex filaments, it works only on the position s(ξ) of the vortex filaments. On a larger scale, the mutual friction force can be regarded as a coarse-grained averaged quantity over the local sub volume larger than the vortex spacing. The coarse-grained mutual friction force is where f is the mutual friction force per unit length, and is defined as Here, Ω (x) is the local sub volume at x, and the integral path L (x) is the filament in Ω (x). The Lagrangian coordinate ξ, which is advected by the flow, is the arclength along the vortex filaments, and f (ξ) is defined on the filaments. During the coarse-graining process of Eq. (S.2), the mutual friction force is spatially averaged, and it is converted to the quantity with Cartesian coordinates x. In this study, because the Navier-Stokes equations are solved using the Cartesian coordinates, the expression of Eq. (S.2) is a suitable formulation. The treatments of Eq. (S.2) in the numerical simulation are described below. The schematics of the coarsegraining procedure are shown in Fig. We check the condition that the coarse-graining procedure of the mutual friction is valid, namely the sub volumes for the coarse-grained mutual friction have more than a few number of the discretized points of the vortex filaments. In our formulation, because the mutual friction is averaged over the flow direction x, the sub volume of the mutual friction is 2D x dydz, where 2D x is the length in the x direction of the computational box. Here, dy and dz denote the sub volume widths in the y and z directions, respectively. We define N v (y 0 , z 0 ) as where y 0 and z 0 are the positions of the discretized points of the normal fluid. Figure We performed another longer simulation for 0.7 mm/s with a larger time resolution ∆t = 0.004 s. Figure The state of the superfluid is characterized by the dimensionless mutual friction parameter φ because it is proportional to the vortex line density L. The value of φ is shown in Fig. Under these conditions, the statistically steady state of the normal fluid is found to be the parabolic flow of the normal fluid. During the early period, the deformation of the normal fluid velocity occurs with increasing mutual friction. In the middle period, the normal fluid velocity profile is flattened, whereas the mutual friction force rapidly increases and becomes saturated. Eventually, the normal fluid velocity has a parabolic profile with a statistically steady quantum turbulence. The flattened flow will be statistically steady when the mutual friction force becomes much stronger. Vinen proposed the equation of motion of the vortex line density L, namely the vortex line length in a unit volume, in homogeneous thermal counterflow Here, χ 1 and χ 2 are coefficients. Vinen's equation has the analytical solution (S.6) describes the growth of L from some finite initial value L 0 . This initial density L 0 may be attributable to remnant vortices that survive even in standing superfluid helium. If we assume L eq > L L 0 , the analytical solution is reduced to the solution This characteristic time is related to the "adjustment time" required for vortices to grow up when the relative velocity is suddenly increased from some initial value to another larger one From the result in Fig. The flattened velocity profile with the amplified mutual friction is an important result because the profile is consistent with the recent visualization experiments 