The two-dimensional Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+y (Bi2212), the most studied prototype cuprate superconductor, is a lamellar system made of a stack of two-dimensional corrugated CuO 2 bilayers separated by Bi 2 O 2+y Sr 2 O 2 layers. While the large majority of theories, proposed to interpret unconventional high T c superconductivity in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+y, assume a centrosymmetric tetragonal CuO 2 lattice for the [CuO 2 ]Ca[CuO 2 ] bilayer here we report new compelling results providing evidence for local non-centrosymmetric symmetry at the Cu atom. We have measured polarized Cu K-edge XANES (x-ray absorption near edge structure) and the K-edge X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) of a Bi2212 single crystal near optimum doping. The Cu K edge XMCD signal was measured at ID12 beamline of ESRF with the k-vector of x-ray beam parallel to c-axis i.e. with the electric field of x-ray beam E//ab, using a 17 T magnetic field parallel to the c-axis of a Bi2212 single crystal. Numerical simulations of the XMCD signal of Bi2212 by multiple scattering theory have shown agreement with the experimental XMCD signal only for the local structure with non-centrosymmetric Bb2b space group of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+y . Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+y (Bi-2212) is considered the prototype of copper-based high-temperature superconductors in which all key features of these systems are clearly manifested. The crystal structure of Bi2212 is made of superconducting CuO 2 bilayers which are separated by oxide insulating layers SrO 2 BiO 2+y layers forming a superlattice of quantum wells with a 3 nm periodicity. While Bi2212 has been object of many experimental investigations spanning about three decades its structure has remained enigmatic. The earliest space-group assignment for the Bi2212 structure was the tetragonal I4/mmm with a=b=0.3817 nm, c= 3.06 nm Two different space groups for the average structures of Bi2212 have been proposed in the literature: first, noncentrosymmetric Bb2b or A2aa space group After thirty years of intense studies till date there is no consensus on the crystallographic space group of Bi2212. Therefore we have carried out x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) measurements at the Cu K-edge x-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra which can select between the two proposed space groups: non-centrosymmetric versus the centrosymmetric. Cu K-edge XANES spectra in a range of 30 eV above the absorption threshold are determined by the multiple scattering resonances of the excited photoelectron with p orbital symmetry excited from the 1s core level of the absorbing atom The technique is based on the fact that the absorption coefficient of the material under study depends on the helicity of the absorbed light. As a rule we have registered two sets of XMCD spectra for an external magnetic field being parallel or antiparallel to the x-ray beam to rule out possible instrumental artifacts since the variation of the XANES spectrum for the two opposite helicities of the incident beam is very small. A previous investigation of the XNCD of a cuprate superconductor has been reported in Ref. XMCD at the Cu L 2,3 -edges of x-ray absorption spectra in both undoped La 2 CuO 4 and doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 films with T c =90K have been reported We report here measurements of x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) at Cu K-edge of the Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+x (Bi2212), a sample close to optimal doping with T c = 87K. Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+x (Bi2212) is a very complex material with a misfit strain between the metallic atomic layers and the spacer layers The metallic 2D layers of Bi2212 are decorated by 1D quantum wires The misfit strain modulation and the charge density wave modulation induce local lattice fluctuations revealed by anisotropic response of photoemission There is a large interest today in superconductivity in noncentrosymmetric materials Here we have investigated Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+x single crystals grown by traveling-solventfloating-zone method. Lamellar samples of mm thickness and lateral dimensions of few mm 2 with the orientation of the surface plane (001) have been selected. The single crystallinity of the samples was confirmed by XRD analysis. The oxygen content is hard to determine directly in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+y however magnetic susceptibility measurements have shown that the temperature of superconducting transition of the selected sample, is 87 K which corresponds to doping close to the optimum doping. The studies were performed at the ESRF beamline ID12 (Grenoble, France). A singlecrystal sample was attached on a cold finger of a helium continuous flow cryostat and mounted so that the incident x-ray beam was perpendicular to the sample surface in order to have the wave vector parallel to the crystallographic axis c. The size of the beam at the sample was 0.4x0.3 mm 2 . A magnetic field of 17 T was applied parallel to the incident beam, and measurements were made for two opposite directions of the magnetic field. The XANES spectra were recorded in the fluorescence detection mode at the K edge of Cu. The measurements were carried out at sample temperatures of 50K, 80K, 100K and 200K. The XMCD spectrum is the difference between two XANES spectra collected with two opposite circular polarizations of the incident beam. In the experiment, as a rule, such a spectrum is obtained by consecutive switching the polarization of the incident beam (+) (-), obtaining a XMCD spectrum from each pair of XANES spectra and repeating the procedure until the required signal-to-noise ratio is obtained. Since the magnitude of the expected XMCD signal was not more than 10 -4 , another approach was used to reduce various instabilities and drifts, which may not be eliminated by averaging. Each individual XMCD spectrum was obtained by processing a group of four successively taken XANES spectra, for which the polarization of the incident beam varied as (+) (-) (-) (+), a magnetic field was also changed and then this acquisition sequence was repeated several times for two opposite magnetic field directions. As the result of the accumulation of several such spectra (their number varied from 40 to 100), the measurement error was lower than 2 ́10 -5 . The polarized E//ab Cu K-edge XANES spectra of the Bi2212 crystal are shown in Fig. XANES spectra probe the structure of a nanoscale cluster centered at the absorbing Cu atom The experimental data have been interpreted by theoretical calculations performed using FEFF9 code, which uses full multiple scattering theory (FMST) and self-consistent field method (SCF) with the muffin-tin approximation for the atomic potential. The Hedin-Lundqvist exchange-correlation potential was selected for correction. The radii of atomic clusters around the central absorber atom were 10 and 5 Å for FMST and SCF respectively. The atomic cluster shown in Fig. Our calculations confirmed that this is the case for Bi2212. The simulated XMCD spectra for different diffraction data refinements together with the experimental XMCD spectrum measured at 100K in a magnetic field of μ 0 H=17 T are presented in If we compare then the experimental XMCD spectrum with simulated ones based on different Bb2b refinements we point out that in spite of a discrepancy in the magnitude, the version of structural data given by Bordet et al. We have reported a study of x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) at the K edge of Cu in the high-temperature superconductor Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+x (Bi2212). The measurements revealed a XMCD signal with magnitude about 8 ́10 -4 a.u. in a magnetic field of 17 T. Numerical simulations of the XMCD signal for a series of BSCO lattice distortions showed that only the local noncentrosymmetric structure is the responsible of the non-zero XMCD signal in Bi2212 for our measurement layout. Therefore, this experiment supports the early assignment of the non-centrosymmetric Bb2b space group for the Bi2212 crystal structure. Moreover, we propose that the local noncentrosymmetric structure in the Cu site could be driven by sawtooth modulations of the oxygens in the Bi 2 O 2 slabs 