ąÉn exact correspondence is established between mathematical description of the single "elementary vortex" (EV) velocity on the sphere The problem of the existence of the isolated Dirac magnetic monopole (DMM) is fundamental for the theoretical physics Nevertheless, significantly later in Herein, we show that EV velocity field, corresponding to a single EV stream function, cannot be a solution to the stationary hydrodynamics equations of the ideal incompressible fluid in the extremely thin spherical layer, considered in According to (2.1) However, from (2.1), it follows a requirement on the absence of the magnetic charges: 2) In that relation, in For DMM having the charge g and placed at the coordinate system origin, the magnetic field is (see (2.4) For the divergence of field (2.4) we have: In (2.6) Such a potential defines a string extending from the coordinate system origin to infinity along the direction specified by the angle 0 ’ĆĮ ’ü▒ (i.e. directed from the sphere center to its North poleangle ’ü▒ is the complement to the latitude and is measured from the direction on the North pole). Another variant of the DMM vector potential considered in ( There is incompliance of (2.4) with respect to (2.6) (or (2.7)) on the DMM string. Representation (2.4), actually, is not exact for any angle ’ü▒ and is defined only with accuracy up to a contributor proportional to the Dirac delta-function, ) (’ü▒ ’üż , characterizing singularity of the magnetic field in the points of the string. Actually, the magnetic field value defined from (2.1) for the potential (2.6) has the following form different from (2.4) (see Appendix): ( In (2.8), it is assumed that the operation of the limit finding is performed only after integration in the definition of the Dirac delta-function as a generalized function. Note that the magnetic field in (2.8), contrary to the representation (2.4), already has zero-valued integral over a sphere of radius r . Relationship (2.8) is proved in Appendix (see of the vector potential in (2.6) via the function (2.9) Actually, integral over entire sphere of radius r for the magnetic field in (2.8) is equal to zero in accordance with the Gauss theorem: (2.10) If considering in (2.7) the charge of the opposite sign with respect to that in (2.6) (i.e. replacing in (2.7), g g ’ĆŁ ’é« ), then for (2.7), it can be introduced a function similar to (2.9) of the following form: (2.11) Taking this into account, from (2.1) and (2.7) (using the substitution in (2.7), g g ’ĆŁ ’é« ), we get for the magnetic field of a DMM located in the coordinate system origin and having the opposite sign charge (with respect to the charge creating the magnetic field (2.8)): (2.12) Integral over entire surface of the sphere of radius r of (2.12), similar to (2.10), is zero: It is clear that for the sum of the fields, (2.8) and (2.12), For . (2.15) From (2.15), it is defined also the vector potential of the total magnetic field of the point magnetic dipole being the sum of two DMM's of the opposite signs having the following form Divergence of the magnetic field of the point magnetic dipole according to (2.14) is (2.17) From (2.17), it follows already also that the integral ’ü▓ contrary to the integral for the magnetic field divergence in (2.5). The distribution of magnetic field (2.12) is different from the field which is produced by the small ring current on a large distance from it. Let us show that it is necessary considering not EV For the single vortex on the sphere, the stream function has , where ’üć is the circulation value. Then for the velocity field (on the sphere of radius r and with zero radial velocity component), from (2.9), we get the following expressions for the tangential velocity components: coinciding with the expression (2.6). Velocity field potential, corresponding to (3.1), has the following form (since It is clear that (3.2) does not correspond to zero velocity component ’Ć½ ’ü▒ V as in , correspond to the vorticity distribution which is different from zero outside of the localization point of the point vortex 0 ’ĆĮ ’ü▒ . In the result, for the stream function of type (2.9), it is not possible introducing of conjugated with it velocity potential for which contour lines (where the potential is constant) must be strictly orthogonal to the stream lines (where the stream function is constant) For example, the contour line corresponding to the constant potential value 4 described by the function (see Fig. Thus, potential contour lines (3.2) are not, as noted above, orthogonal to the stream lines corresponding to the constant values of the function (2.9) at const ’ĆĮ ’ü▒ . On the other side, for the velocity field following from (2.15) and (2.16) , of the velocity potential which are actually orthogonal to the stream lines corresponding to the constant values of angle ’ü▒ in (2.15). Existence of the non-local vortex field distribution corresponding for the velocity field (3.1) (coinciding with (2.8) with accuracy up to a constant factor) is defined by existence of dependence of the velocity field circulation (on the latitude circle) from latitude. For the fixed value of the sphere radius, r , the value of the velocity field circulation (3.1) on the latitude circle defined by the angle value ’ü▒ is 2 cos ) ( sin in the decomposition of the right-hand side of (3.6) to the power series of’ü▒ . In that limit, the stream function (2.9) and velocity field (2.6) correspond to the point vortex field on the plane for which the circulation value does not depend on the distance of the integration contour from the point vortex. From the other side, the velocity field and does not depend on the angle ’ü▒ now for any value of the angle. In (3.8) The condition of compatibility of the equations (3.7) and (3.8), that is , is: It is possible checking that the velocity field of a single EV (3.1) does not meet (3.9) and hence cannot correspond to any stationary solution of the hydrodynamics equation of the ideal incompressible fluid in the thin spherical layer. At the same time, the velocity field (3.4), corresponding to the antipodal pair of point vortices on the sphere, already exactly satisfies (3.9) and hence is the solution of the hydrodynamics equations. Analogy between hydrodynamic and electric phenomena was noted by Helmholtz (1858) and by G. Maxwell who used assumption of hypothetical fluid dynamics when defining his theory Relatively recent works also use different variants of analogy between the Maxwell equations modifications and compressible medium hydrodynamics equations In the present work, for the first time, we state an exact mathematical correspondence between the velocity field (3.1) and magnetic field vector potential In that relation, we guess impossibility of existence of isolated DMM based on the obtained in the Section 3 proof of impossibility of existence of an isolated EV on the sphere surface. At the first glance, the guess of impossibility of existence of isolated EV contradicts existing observation data on long-life isolated vortices in the atmosphere of Earth and other quickly rotating planets. However, from the other side, there are direct data that coincides with the famous Dirac's quantization condition, where e is the electron charge. Note that up to now, any theoretical arguments in favor of absence of isolated DMM have not been defined. Importance of the guess obtained in the present paper can be illustrated by citation from A proof (see Section 3) is given of the absence of the hydrodynamics equations solution in the form of EV velocity field (3.1) introduced in From (2.1) taking into account (2.9), one gets (A.10) From (A.10), after opening the brackets, one gets (2.8).