Systems that simultaneously exhibit superconductivity and spin-orbit coupling are predicted to provide a route toward topological superconductivity and unconventional electron pairing, driving significant contemporary interest in these materials. Monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductors in particular lack inversion symmetry, enforcing a spin-triplet component of the superconducting wavefunction that increases with the strength of spin-orbit coupling. In this work, we present an experimental and theoretical study of two intrinsic TMD superconductors with large spin-orbit coupling in the atomic layer limit, metallic 2H-TaS2 and 2H-NbSe2. For the first time in TaS2, we investigate the superconducting properties as the material is reduced to a monolayer and show that high-field measurements point to the largest upper critical field thus reported for an intrinsic TMD superconductor. In few-layer samples, we find that the enhancement of the upper critical field is sustained by the dominance of spin-orbit coupling over weak interlayer coupling, providing additional platforms for unconventional superconducting states in two dimensions. Cooper pairing in type-II superconductors is typically destroyed by external magnetic fields due to coupling between the applied field and electron orbital and spin degrees of freedom. For fields applied in the plane of sufficiently thin superconductors, orbital effects are suppressed due to the reduced dimensionality, providing some protection for superconductivity at enhanced fields. In this limit, the dominant mechanism for breaking superconducting order is Pauli paramagnetism, in which the upper critical field H c2 is given by the Chandrasekhar-Clogston (or Pauli) limit of H c2 = H P ≡ βT c0 at T = 0, with β = 1.84 T/K and superconducting transition temperature T c0 In atomically-thin TMD superconductors, there are many other effects that can complicate this basic picture of Ising superconductivity in monolayers: (i) Additional Cooper pair channels allowed by the band structure beyond K and K pairing, (ii) coupling between the layers in few-layer samples, (iii) Rashba SOC, which competes against Ising SOC to tilt the electron spins in-plane In this work, we study 2H a -TaS 2 , an intrinsic TMD superconductor with the same crystal symmetry and similar electronic structure as NbSe 2 , but with stronger SOC. Experimentally, we compare the superconducting properties of atomically thin 2H a -TaS 2 , with a large atomic SOC contribution from the heavy Ta atoms, with those of 2H a -NbSe 2 (hereafter TaS 2 and NbSe 2 , respectively). We isolate ultrathin TaS 2 to the monolayer limit, confirming for the first time that there is in fact a stable 1H polytype with a superconducting phase, and extend existing measurements We fabricated several multiterminal transport devices from TaS 2 and NbSe 2 exfoliated from bulk crystals, capped with boron nitride (BN) inside a nitrogen-filled glove box, and contacted with graphite in series with Cr/Pd/Au leads (more details are in the Methods). Figure TaS 2 is known to exhibit a surprising trend in the superconducting critical temperature T c as a function of thickness For a given layer number N , there is significant amount of scatter in the T c0 data for both TaS 2 and NbSe 2 . For example, for bilayer NbSe 2 , measurements of T c0 from this work and from Refs. 4 and 15 span the range from 4.9 K to 5.3 K. This variation within a given N may be due to effects from the substrate or to varying amounts of disorder from sample to sample. An effect that can have a much larger impact, particularly in the case of TaS 2 , is intercalation by organic and non-organic molecules To obtain the cleanest results possible, the data shown in Fig. We turn now to our investigation of atomically-thin TMD superconductors in the presence of magnetic fields perpendicular and parallel to the 2D plane. Figure ), which allows us to estimate the coherence length ξ GL (0) ≈ 20 nm for the 3L TaS 2 and 10 nm for the 2L NbSe 2 . In both of these samples, and indeed in all of the devices that we have studied, at finite perpendicular fields less than H ⊥ c2 , the resistance of the devices does not go to zero as T → 0 but rather saturates to a finite value (Fig. In Fig. In monolayer TaS 2 , we find that for T < 2 K, the upper critical field in the parallel orientation is larger than the highest field available (34.5 T; Fig. In the absence of orbital effects and spin-orbit coupling, the upper critical field H c2 is determined by comparing the superconducting condensation energy E c = 1 2 N (0)∆ 2 0 with the Pauli paramagnetic energy E P = 1 2 χ n (H ) 2 , which coincide when H = H c2 (≡ H P , the Pauli limit). Here, ∆ 0 is the zero-temperature superconducting gap and N (0) is the density of states at the Fermi level. The Pauli paramagnetic susceptibility of free electrons, χ n = 2μ 2 B N (0), can be significantly modified in the presence of the SOC field H so = |B so |/μ 0 . In the limit of H so H , the in-plane magnetic moment operator (∝ σ x ) can be treated as a perturbation to the spin-orbit coupling (∝ τ σ z ). The in-plane magnetic moment is then zero in leading order but equal to μ = μ B (H /H so ) in second order; the spin splitting is correspondingly increased by an amount μ B H 2 /H so . (This second-order perturbative determination of μ is similar to 7. van Vleck paramagnetism Close to T c0 , the pair-breaking equation can be approximated as which reflects the usual square-root dependence of twodimensional Ginzburg-Landau theory , where ∆ so ∝ H so is the spin-orbit splitting between the spin-up and spin-down bands at the Fermi level, estimated by averaging the k-dependent spin-orbit splitting ∆ VB (k) over the Fermi surface, ∆ so ≡ ∆ VB (k F ) k . A simple estimate from the DFT bands presented in Fig. However, the value of H so = 815 T determined from our fit for monolayer TaS 2 suggests a spin-orbit splitting at the Fermi level of ∆ TaS2 so = 2μ B H TaS2 so = 94.4 meV, implying an overestimate by the DFT-computed splitting around K by 2.5× the measured valued of 94.4 meV. From the band structure calculations shown in Fig. The pair-breaking equation with α = μ B (H ) 2 /H so , with H so as a fitting parameter, does a reasonable job of fitting the measured H c2 (T ), but H so is nevertheless smaller than expected from our band structure calculations. One effect that can reduce H c2 is Rashba SOC due to an out-of-plane electric field. The Rashba SOC tends to tilt the electron spins in-plane and therefore competes with the Ising SOC, an effect considered in the studies of electrolyte-gate-induced superconductivity in MoS 2 In bilayer crystals the broken inversion symmetry of the monolayer system is restored, with an inversion center appearing between the layers of the bilayer. In trilayers, global inversion symmetry is broken again; restored in four-layer crystals, and so on. One might thus expect oscillatory behavior in the strength of Ising superconductivity as a function of the number of layers, however this is not what we observe in few-layer samples. Despite the restored global inversion symmetry in, for example, bilayer NbSe 2 , the upper critical field remains much higher than the Pauli paramagnetic limit, approaching 29 T (3.5 times H P ) as T → 0 (Figs. The lack of dependence on layer number parity can be understood in terms of weak coupling between the layers. In the limit of zero interlayer coupling, each layer superconducts independently and the strength of Ising SOC is equivalent to the monolayer system (Fig. To gauge the strength of this effect, we consider an interlayer hopping energy t ⊥ extracted from DFT bands for 2L, 3L, and 4L TaS 2 and NbSe 2 without including SOC (Fig. In terms of the underlying crystal symmetries, we interpret the measured weak dependence of H c2 (N ) on N > 1 to reflect the staggered non-centrosymmetric structure of 2H-TaS 2 and NbSe 2 , wherein the individual layers lack local inversion symmetry despite globally possessing inversion centers between the layers. This type of structure is also found in the layered superconductor SrPtAs, which exhibits a similar enhancement of the paramagnetic limit despite having a global center of inversion Finally, we comment on the striking difference in T c0 (N ) between TaS 2 and NbSe 2 . Upon reducing the thickness of TaS 2 in the few-layer limit, we find that T c0 increases from the bulk value of ≈ 800 mK up to 3 K in 1L TaS 2 (Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that encapsulated TaS 2 is stable in its monolayer 1H phase, and that its upper critical field H c2 is larger than that of NbSe 2 by an amount that is well predicted by a phenomenological pair-breaking model including the effect of intrinsic spin-orbit coupling. Band structure calculations of the total spin-orbit coupling around the Fermi surface point to the importance of the pockets around the K and K points, as well as the Γ point in the metallic TMD superconductors. Because of the larger spin-orbit coupling in TaS 2 relative to NbSe 2 , many phenomena such as spin-triplet superconductivity and modulated superconductivity may be more readily studied in atomically-thin TaS 2 , especially the monolayer, which even in absolute terms appears to possess the largest H c2 recorded for any thickness of either material. We create devices from few-micron-sized flakes of TaS 2 and NbSe 2 exfoliated from bulk 2H a -polytype crystals. Because both compounds are susceptible to degradation in ambient conditions, we exfoliate the crystals inside of a nitrogenfilled glove box and encapsulate the exfoliated flakes with hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) in the same environment. To rule out a crystallographic phase change of the few-layer crystals upon exfoliate from the bulk 2H a form, we consider both the anisotrpy of the upper critical field and the polarization of the second harmonic generation. For example, the enhancement of H c2 in 1L TaS 2 over 10× the Pauli field limit relies on the lack on inversion symmetry in the monolayer crystal, ruling out the 1T phase, which is fully centrosymmetric within each layer. Second harmonic generation of all TaS 2 devices in the study exhibits a six-fold rose pattern in the azimuthal angle, reflecting the underlying three-fold symmetry of the 1H phase and ruling out monoclinic 1T and orthorhombic T d phases. To make electrical contact to the crystals, we transfer fewlayer graphite, which is similarly exfoliated from bulk, and overlap with part of the TMD crystal to create areas with an atomically-smooth interface for electrical contact. The overlapping region of graphite/TMD (entirely encapsulated by h-BN on top) is then etched into separate channels to allow 4terminal measurements of the superconducting TMD alone (see Fig. Magnetotransport measurements were made using standard low-frequency AC lock-in techniques with SR8x0 series lockin amplifiers and a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter. The samples were measured in a dilution refrigerator to a minimum temperature of 25 mK and maximum field of 12 T, as well as at the National High Magnetic Field Lab in Tallahassee, Florida in a He-3 refrigerator to a minimum temperature of 300 mK and a maximum field of 34.5 T. In parallel field: This measurement is obtained by first fixing the temperature and the magnetic field and then varying the angle between the magnetic field and the sample until a minimum in the resistance is achieved, allowing us to precisely locate the parallel configuration. We then sweep the magnetic field at fixed temperature T and extract H c2 (T ) as the value of the field for which R = R n /2, as in Fig. The calculations for the first-principles part was performed using the projector augmented wave After obtaining the ab initio wave functions from a selfconsistent calculation the corresponding Fermi-surface was computed utilizing the Wannier interpolation approach The interlayer coupling in multilayers were obtained by calculating the dispersion (total splitting) of the bands in the outof-plane direction without including spin-orbit coupling In two of our devices (1L and 4L TaS 2 ), broken contacts forced us to measure R total (B , T ) in a three-terminal geometry (e.g. Fig. Without a direct measurement of the MR of graphite as a function of B and T , we generate a surface R graphite (B , T ) by interpolating between two curves: (i) R(B , T > T c ), where the total resistance is the graphite MR at T > T c plus a constant offset (R n of the superconductor in the normal state, with negligible MR), and (ii) R(B , 0), where the device is superconducting for low fields. For the latter, a reasonable guess can be generated for R graphite (B , 0) by fitting the lowfield portion of R total (B , 0) to a polynomial, or in the case of the 1L TaS 2 data, by simply using the R total (B , 0) curve as R graphite (B , 0) since the device does not go normal for any field in this limit. Since the background curves are relatively insensitive to temperature (Fig. In some devices that we studied, the enhancement of T c above the bulk value may be due to another mechanism besides the reduction in layer number N . For example, it is well known that intercalation of TaS 2 with certain organic molecules and elemental metals can both increase T c and enhance H c2 Second-harmonic generation (SHG) is a sensitive probe of inversion symmetry breaking, since the second-order nonlinear susceptibility is only nonzero for noncentrosymmetric crystals 