The effect of the Coulomb repulsion of holes on the Cooper instability in an ensemble of spin-polaron quasiparticles has been analyzed, taking into account the peculiarities of the crystallographic structure of the CuO2 plane, which are associated with the presence of two oxygen ions and one copper ion in the unit cell, as well as the strong spinfermion coupling. The investigation of the possibility of implementation superconducting phases with d-wave and s-wave pairing of the order parameter symmetry has shown that in the entire doping region only the d-wave pairing satisfies the self-consistency equations, while there is no solution for the s-wave pairing. This result completely corresponds to the experimental data on cuprate HTSC. It has been demonstrated analytically that the intersite Coulomb interaction does not affect the superconducting d-wave pairing, because its Fourier transform Vq does not appear in the kernel of the corresponding integral equation. Analysis of specific properties of the normal phase of high-temperature superconductors (HTSCs) leads to the conclusion Another solution to the problem of superconducting pairing with high T c was proposed in The single-orbital Hubbard model, which basically reflects the role of the SEC in the properties of the ground state and makes it possible to analyze new mechanisms of Cooper instability in an ensemble of strongly correlated fermions, disregarded specific features of the crystalline structure of HTSCs. As a result, important properties of the Fourier transforms of the matrix elements for the intersite Coulomb repulsion, which are inherent in the actual HTSC structure, were lost. This gave rise to the problem (see below) associated with the strong suppression of the superconducting phase with the d-wave type of the order parameter symmetry in the case when the Coulomb repulsion of fermions located at the nearest crystal lattice sites is taken into account. The model reflecting the actual structure of the CuO 2 plane was formulated in In the so-called Emery model that is used most frequently Presuming that an effective Hubbard model or its low-energy versions in the SEC limit must ultimately appear, most papers devoted to the HTSC problem were based on the t -J model on a simple square lattice. In such an approach, the same fermions formed both the charge and the spin subsystems, and the exchange and spin-fluctuation mechanisms initiated Cooper pairing in the d-wave channel Therefore, it seemed that the origin of the effective attraction between the Hubbard fermions had basically been revealed. However, the problem associated with the intersite Coulomb repulsion of holes at oxygen remained unsolved. As a matter of fact, the Cooper instability in the Hubbard model As a result, the following problem obviously arose: the superconducting d-wave phase required for explaining experimental results was strongly suppressed by the Coulomb repulsion of holes located at the nearest sites. Note that argumentation associated with the screening of the Coulomb interaction, which is sometimes used in this connection, appears as unconvincing in the given case because the repulsion of holes at the shortest distances was considered The problem of neutralization for the Coulomb repulsion of holes at oxygen has required the revision of the existing theories of Cooper instability in HTSCs. It should be noted in this connection that an analogous problem also existed in the theory of classical supercon-ductors. Its solution had become possible after it was shown It was shown in our recent paper It was demonstrated in This article is organized as follows. In Section 2, the Emery model for cuprate superconductors is formulated. In Section 3, the spin-fermion model is described, which follows from the Emery model in the SEC regime. Section 4 is devoted to the derivation of the equations for the normal and anomalous Green functions. The system of integral equations for the superconducting order parameter components is given in Section 5. In Section 6, the influence of the Coulomb interaction on the evolution of the Cooper instability in a spin-polaron ensemble is analyzed. The stability of the superconducting d-wave pairing towards the Coulomb repulsion of holes at the same and adjacent oxygen ions is demonstrated. The competition between the d-wave and s-wave pairings is investigated based on the calculated concentration dependences of the superconducting transition tempera- ture. In the concluding section, the results of this study are discussed. For convenience of presentation of the results, cumbersome analytic expressions are given in Appendix A and Appendix B. It is well known that the main features of the electronic structure of the CuO 2 plane in HTSCs is correctly described by the Emery model Here d † f σ (d f σ ) and p † lσ (p lσ ) are the creation (annihilation) operators for the d-and p-fermions, respectively, at copper f and oxygen l sites with spin projections σ = +1/2, -1/2. One of the four vectors connecting the copper ion with the oxygen ions in the CuO 2 plane is denoted by δ = {±x/2, ± y/2}, where x = (a, 0) and y = (0, a), a being the unit cell parameter. Vector δ connects the copper ion at site f with the oxygen ions in the position l = f + δ (Fig. By ε d and ε p we denote the bare on-site energies of fermions on copper and oxygen ions, respectively. Parameters U d and U p in the Hamiltonian indicate the Coulomb repulsion energy for two particles with opposite spin projections at a copper and an oxygen site, respectively; V pd is the Coulomb repulsion energy for fermions at the copper and oxygen ions, and V pp is the parameter of the Coulomb interaction of fermions at oxygen ions. By t pd we denote the hopping integral for a charge carrier from an oxygen ion to a copper ion. Function θ(δ) takes into account the effect of the relation between the phases of copper and oxygen orbitals on the hybridization processes. For the orbital profiles shown in Fig. The Hamiltonian of the Emery model is a typical Hamiltonian in the multiband theory of metals in the tight-binding approximation. It belongs to the Hubbard type (the Emery model is often referred to in the literature as the three-band or extended Hubbard model) because it describes both intraatomic Coulomb correlations and hopping between one-ion states of copper and oxygen. However, the Emery model is more realistic as compared to the Hubbard model because it takes into account the chemical composition of copper oxides. According to experimental data, in the undoped state with one hole per unit cell, the system is in the state of a Mott-Hubbard insulator ( These inequalities require, on the one hand, that the Coulomb correlations at the copper ion be taken into account correctly; on the other hand, these inequalities make it possible to carry out the reduction of the Hamiltonian in the Emery model and to obtain the SFM where The relation between the operators of the oxygen subsystem in the initial Emery model and the secondary quantization operators in the SFM in the momentum representation is established by the relations Operators a kσ and b kσ correspond to the annihilation of a hole with momentum k and spin projection σ, respectively, in the x-and y-sublattices of the oxygen ions. In the expression for the Hamiltonian Ĥh , we have introduced the functions where μ is the chemical potential and parameter τ = t 2 pd /∆ pd . The function describes the hybridization processes in the second order of perturbation theory (parameter τ ) as well as direct hopping of holes between the oxygen ions (parameter t). The dependence for the sign of the hopping integrals on the direction of vector ∆ leads to the emergence of function ψ k in expression For brevity, the momenta over which the summation is performed are denoted by 1, . . . , 4. The delta function δ 1+2-3-4 in the above expressions takes into account the momentum conservation law. For operator Vpp of the intersite Coulomb repulsion, we take into account the interactions only between the nearest oxygen ions. The intensity of these interactions is characterized by parameter V 1 . Function φ k in Vpp is defined as Operator Ĵ describes in the k representation both spincorrelated hopping of holes between oxygen ions and the exchange interaction of a hole at the oxygen ion with the spins at the nearest copper ions. Parameter J of this interaction is defined as J = 4t 2 pd /∆ pd . In operator Ĵ, S f denotes the vector operator of the spin localized at site f , while vector operator σ is composed of the Pauli matrices: σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ). For brevity of notation, we have introduced in expression (7) the operator The last term Î in the Hamiltonian (3) appears in the fourth order of perturbation theory and describes the exchange interaction of spins localized at copper ions. The Hamiltonian in the SFM in the momentum representation was considered earlier in When deriving expression (3) for the Hamiltonian in the SFM, we assumed that the Coulomb repulsion parameter for holes at copper ions was U d = ∞. In further analysis of the conditions for the evolution of the Cooper instability in the SFM, we will use the wellestablished values of parameters for the Emery model An important feature of the SFM is that the exchange coupling between localized spins and the spins of holes turns out to be strong: J = 1.88 eV ≫ τ ≈ 0.47 eV. This means that when describing the oxygen ion subsystem, the strong coupling between holes at oxygen ions and the subsystems of spins at copper ions must be taken into account exactly. For this purpose, it is convenient to use the Zwanzig-Mori projection method For taking into account the aforementioned strong spin-charge coupling, it is necessary to introduce one more operator into the basis set of operators (apart of operators a kα and b kα ), viz., For analyzing the conditions for Cooper instability, we must supplement the above set of three operators with three extra operators The addition of these operators to the basis makes it possible to analyze not only normal, but also anomalous thermodynamic means using a unified approach. The exact equations of motion for the first three basis operators have the form i dL k↑ dt = qβ (S k-q σ ↑β ) ξ qx s q,x + t q s q,y a qβ + ξ qy s q,y + t q s q,x b qβ where , and invariant γ 1p of the square lattice will be defined later (see relation Within the projection method where the matrix retarded Green function is defined by elements G ij (k, ω) = A ik |A † jk ω , and the elements of the energy matrix D(k) and the normalization matrix K(k) are defined as Operators A ik on the right-hand sides of these expressions run through a set of six basis operators and the angle brackets in relation ( Evaluating elements Here, we have introduced the following notation for the normal Green functions: Functions G i2 and G i3 (i = 1, 2, 3) are defined analogously, the only difference being that instead of a † k↑ , we have operators b † k↑ and L † k↑ , respectively. The anomalous Green functions are defined as For F i2 and F i3 (i = 1, 2, 3), we are using the same notation for the second subscript. When writing system of equations ( where , and γ jk denote invariants of the square lattice: For the components of the superconductor order parameter, which are defined as we obtain N q (ξ(q x )s q,x + t q s q,y ) a q↑ L -q↓ where I k = 4Iγ 1k , and the mean is given by When deriving expressions ( where r j is the coordinate of the copper ion in the jth. coordination sphere. In this case, When deriving the fifth equation in where summation over indices α and β is implied. Relation ( The contributions to ∆ 5k from the intersite Coulomb interaction immediately after the evaluation of the commutators have the form Since the operators in the mean cannot be reduced to basis operators even when relation ( Analysis of system of equations and contains three branches: ǫ 1k , ǫ 2k and ǫ 3k Lower branch ǫ 1k is characterized by a minimum near point (π/2, π/2) of the Brillouin zone and is separated considerably from the two upper branches ǫ 2k and ǫ 3k . The lower branch appears due to the strong spin charge coupling that induces the exchange interaction between holes and localized spins at the nearest copper ions, as well as spin-correlated hopping. At low doping levels, the dynamics of holes at oxygen ions is determined predominantly by the lower branch ǫ 1k . For analyzing the conditions for the Cooper instability, let us express the required anomalous Green functions in terms of parameters ∆ * lk . in the linear approximation. These functions have the form The Green functions required for analyzing the conditions for the emergence of superconductivity are Using the spectral theorem where the following functions have been introduced: -2 (ξ(q x )s q,x + t q s q,y ) M (l) 31 (q) -2 (ξ(q y )s q,y + t q s q,x ) System of equations ( It can be seen from system (33) that the kernels of integral equations are uncoupled; therefore, the solution to this system can be sought in the form where eleven amplitudes B j (j = 1, 1φ, 1ψ, ...) determine the contribution of the corresponding basis functions to the expansion of the order parameter components. Substituting these expressions into Eqs. The second subsystem of equations defines the remaining eight amplitudes B j , which can be conveniently written in the form of a column vector -y 2 -wave pairing, obtained for the model parameters J=1.88, τ =0.47, t=0.12, I=0.136. Curves 1 and 2 describe Tc(x) for Up = 0 and Up = 3, respectively. The inclusion of intersite Coulomb interaction V1 does not influence on these dependencies. All energy parameters are given in eV. In matrix form, the system of eight equations can be written as where components of eighth-order matrix Ŵ can be calculated using the expressions and functions w ij (q) are given in Appendix B. To determine the dependence of superconducting transition temperature T c on doping level x for different types of the order parameter symmetry, we should solve Eq. ( where f (E) = (e E/T + 1) -1 is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. The results of numerical self-consistent solution of system of equations An important aspect of the approach developed here is that the inclusion of Coulomb interaction V 1 of fermions located at the nearest oxygen ions does not affect the T c (x) dependence for the superconducting d x 2 -y 2 -wave pairing: curve 1 in Fig. Since for the d-wave pairing for U p = 0, amplitudes B cx and B cy in the equation for ∆ 5k are determined not by parameter V 1 , but by the exchange coupling constant I alone, we arrive at the conclusion that the Coulomb repulsion of holes located at neighboring oxygen sites do not suppress the superconducting phase with the d x 2 -y 2 -wave order parameter symmetry This equation implies, in particular, that the exchange interaction of spin moments of the copper ions, which is transformed into effective attraction as a result of the strong spin-charge coupling, is the mechanism of the Cooper instability. The results of solution of Eq. (41) and system (37) for the d-wave pairing and U p = 0 obviously coincide and correspond to solid curve 1 in Fig. In contrast to the intersite interaction, the allowance for the Coulomb interaction U p of two holes at oxygen ion leads to the suppression of the superconducting dwave phase. However, as it follows from comparison of the curve 2 (U p = 3 eV) and the curve 1 (U p = 0) in Fig. From the system of integral equations Calculations show that for all realistic parameters of the model there is no non-trivial solution. Consequently, in the SFM, when the strong coupling of holes on oxygen ions with spin moments of copper ions is correctly taken into account, the superconducting phase with the s-wave symmetry of the order parameter is not realized. This is the main difference between the theory of HTSC developed here and the approaches based on the effective single-band models of strongly correlated fermions on the square lattice, in which along with the superconducting d-wave pairing there is always a solution for the superconducting s-wave pairing. The main results of this study can be formulated as follows. (1) It has been shown that the neutralization for the negative effect of the intersite Coulomb interaction of holes in the oxygen subsystem on the Cooper instability in the d-wave channel occurs as a result of two factors. The first factor is associated with the analysis of the actual crystallographic structure of the CuO 2 plane, according to which the Coulomb repulsion of fermions in the oxygen sublattice is determined by the Fourier transform of intersite interaction V q = 4V 1 cos(q x /2) cos(q y /2). The second factor is associated with the electron correlations leading to the emergence of strong coupling between the localized spins of copper ions and holes at the oxygen ions. As a result, the spin-polaron quasiparticles are formed and move over the copper ion sublattice; in the ensemble of these particles, the Cooper instability evolves. The Coulomb repulsion between bare holes with the Fourier transform V q is renormalized into the interaction between spin-polaron quasiparticles so that the momentum dependence of this effective interaction corresponds to the structure of the copper ion sublattice. As a result, the situation takes place, when the effective repulsion between the spin po-larons falls out of the equation for the superconducting order parameter with the d-wave symmetry. At the same time, the contribution of such an effective repulsion remains for the Cooper instability in the s-wave channel. (2) The solution of the system of self-consistent integral equations for superconducting phases showed that in the spin-fermion model only the phase with the d-wave symmetry of the order parameter is realized, whereas solutions for the s-wave pairing are not available for all the admissible levels of doping. These results completely correspond to the experimental data on cuprate superconductors. In this connection, we note that within the t-J model, the superconducting s-wave pairing is realized, and the critical temperature corresponding to this phase is much higher than T c for the d-wave pairing. Concerning the differences that arise, it is appropriate to point out that in our approach the spin subsystem of copper ions, separated from the hole subsystem, plays an important role, whereas within the t-J model the electron and spin degrees of freedom are due to the same electrons. (3) The effect of Coulomb repulsion U p for quasiparticles at the same oxygen ion on the dependence of the superconducting transition temperature for superconducting phase with the d-wave symmetry of the order parameter on the doping level has been analyzed. It is shown that taking U p into account leads to decrease in the superconducting transition temperature, but this temperature remains within the limits that are observed experimentally. It should also be noted that the different contributions of the Coulomb interaction to the conditions of realization of the superconducting phases with different symmetries of the order parameter are manifested, for example, in the Kohn-Luttinger theory of superconductivity 