A three-orbital model derived from the two-dimensional projection of the ab initio Hamiltonian for alkaline doped fullerene A3C60 with A=Cs,Rb,K is studied by a variational Monte Carlo method. We correctly reproduce the experimental isotropic s-wave superconductivity around the ab initio parameters. With narrowing the bandwidth, the transition to an insulator is also reproduced, where orbital symmetry is found to be spontaneously broken with emergence of an excitonic Mott insulator for two orbitals and an antiferromagnetic insulator nearly degenerate with a spin liquid for the third orbital. The superconductivity is a consequence of exciton melting. Introduction.-High critical temperature (high-T c ) superconductivity induced by strong electronic correlations is one of the central topics in condensed matter physics and it has been intensively studied since its discovery in a family of cuprate compounds In the alkali-doped fullerides A 3 C 60 (A=K, Rb, Cs), low-energy physics is also described by degenerate orbitals -each alkaline atom donates one electron to the three-fold degenerate lowest unoccupied molecular orbital with the t 1u symmetry at the fullerene atom. Thus the three t 1u orbitals become half filled on average. The unique feature of the solid A 3 C 60 in comparison to the above cuprates and the iron-based superconductors is a small band width (∼ 0.7 eV) ascribed to small overlap of molecular orbitals each at the neighboring fullerene atoms, while the largest Jahn-Teller H g phonon frequency coupled to the t 1u orbitals is comparable and as large as 0.2 eV. It makes the role of phonons substantially large. The discovered superconductivity with the highest T c ∼ 40K is believed to have the isotropic s-wave symmetry supporting the crucial role of phonons The superconductivity is, however, found next to the Mott insulator, suggesting the role of electron correlation as well. In addition, the superconductivity is found when the three orbitals are half-filled, in sharp contrast to the cuprates and iron-based superconductors, where typically the carrier doping into half filled bands is re-quired for the superconductivity. It was proposed that the relatively strong Jahn-Teller electron-phonon coupling in the alkali-doped fullerides leads to an effectively negative (inverted) Hund's rule coupling (IHRC) In general, superconductors with T c relatively high in the ratio to the energy scale of electron band width is found exclusively in strongly correlated systems and their small coherence lengths require serious account of spatial correlation effects, while DMFT does not consider them. Furthermore, severe competitions with magnetic and charge orders known in the cuprates and the ironbased superconductors urge us to seriously examine the spatial correlation and fluctuation effects. In this Letter, we employ the many-variable variational Monte Carlo (mVMC) method We reveal the conditions for enhancing superconductivity: First a realistic unique three-orbital structure, Here, μ half is the chemical potential at half filling . The amplitude of the charge gap ∆c is denoted by arrow. Because the first-order phase transitions between orbital-polarized phase and the superconducting phase occurs at finite doping region (see where the electronic transfer at each nearest-neighbor atomic bond is governed by only one orbital-diagonal transfer, depending on the bond direction, is important to reproduce the s-wave superconductivity in the realistic parameter region. The superconductivity is replaced by the excitonic Mott insulator with antiferromagnetic order in the strong coupling region near the ab initio parameters and replaced by excitonic insulator without antiferromagnetism in the two-orbital model. The superconductivity is universally stabilized through the melting of the excitonic insulators realized by the carrier doping. The excitonic insulator is the mother state of the superconductivity in the multi-orbital models with the IHRC and offers the clue for obtaining higher-T c superconductivity in fullerides and/or other multi-orbital systems with the IHRC. Model and Method.-We first study three-orbital low-energy ab initio Hamiltonian for triangular-lattice cross section of fcc-fullerides, which is defined by where c † iνσ (c iνσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator on the νth orbital with spin σ at ith site and n iνσ = c † iνσ c iνσ and n iν = n iν↑ + n iν↓ are the number operator. The transfer integrals t ij in the fullerides are given by 3×3 matrices In this study, we use the ab initio parameters for fcc-Cs 3 C 60 , which shows maximum T c , denoted by fcc-Cs(V opt-S ) in the literature ), F 3 is 0.0372 eV and we take this value as energy unit. Other hopping parameters are given as According to the ab initio calculations In the mVMC method |0 , where f ij denotes the variational parameters. For details of wave functions, see Refs. Results.-First, we examine the stability of the superconducting phase at half filling in the twodimensionally projected ab initio Hamiltonian (we call this model full model). To detect the superconductivity, we calculate the isotropic s-wave superconducting correlations, which is defined as We also calculate the average value of P 1s,ν (r) at long distance (|r| ≥ 4), which is denoted by P1s,ν . As shown in Fig. Next, we systematically study the interaction dependence. As shown in Fig. To analyze the nature in the strong coupling region, the doping dependence of the chemical potential defined by μ Here, E(N 1 ) is the total energy at filling N 1 and N = (N 1 +N 2 )/2. The insulating phase indicated by the gap ∆ c in μ appears in the strong coupling region. In Fig. hand, we note that IHRC is required to keep a value comparable to the ab initio value ∼ 0.5F 3 to stabilize the superconductivity even for the present model on the two-dimensional triangular lattice. To further examine the nature of the insulating phase, we show the orbital occupancies and orbital-dependent doublon densities as a function of U ′ in Fig. In this orbital-differentiated Mott insulator, two orbitals are disordered and the antiferromagnetic order exists only in one orbital with the small doublon density [see the inset in Fig. We further note that a genuine orbital-differentiated Mott insulator without any spin symmetry breaking exists as a low-energy excited state and it's energy relative to the antiferromagnetic ground state is very small (∼ 0.04F 3 ) (see [21], S.5). This near degeneracy of the magnetically ordered and disordered states is consistent with the experimental results where the antiferromagnetic transition occurs at a very low temperature for fcc-Cs 3 C 60 (T N ∼ 2K) Next, to capture the essence of the superconductivity and the insulating phase found in the full model, we study a simplified model. One characteristic feature of the transfer matrices in the full model is that the directions of the largest hopping F 3 depend on the orbitals. If we consider only the largest hopping F 3 , the three orbitals form three chains as shown in Fig. To reveal the multi-orbital effects on the superconductivity, we also consider a two-orbital model on the square lattice analogously to the F 3 model. In the two-orbital model, the orbital 0 (1) has hopping only in the In the case of the two-orbital model, insulating charge gap opens for any positive U ′ as shown in an example in Fig. By doping carriers into the excitonic (bosonic) Mott insulator, the superconducting phase immediately appears as shown in Fig. Discussion and Summary.-In the three-orbital models (full and F 3 models), because the three electrons occupy a site at half filling at large U and U ′ , an exciton (one doublon and one holon) formation leaves one electron unpaired at the third orbital. This introduces much larger charge fluctuations than the two-orbital model. We find that this charge fluctuation easily causes charge melting of the excitonic Mott insulator phase found in the twoorbital model and the superconductivity appears even at half filling. If the local repulsions U and U ′ become sufficiently strong, in the full model, one unpaired orbital finally becomes the antiferromagnetic Mott insulator and other orbitals with Frenkel exciton forms an excitonic insulator similarly to the two orbital model. This phase may be called an orbital-differentiated Mott insulator. A similar phase in a three-orbital model was discussed before In the three-orbital model, a disordered state exists as a low-energy excited state in the strong coupling region, where spin order is absent. Since the averaged electron filling per unit cell is odd (three), this spin-disordered state is a genuine Mott insulator, which is not adiabatically connected to the band insulator. In other words, this phase is a promising candidate of quantum spin liquid if its energy can be lowered below the antiferromagnetic state and further detailed study of tuning is an intriguing issue but left for future studies. A 3 C 60 forms a fcc or A15 structure instead of the 2D lattice considered here. We expect that the essential physics is the same because each bond has basically only one dominant diagonal hopping F 3 and the same excitonic Mott insulator is likely located nearby. Detailed study on the real lattice structure is an important future issue. In summary, for the two-dimensional version of the ab initio Hamiltonian (full model) for the alkaline doped fullerene, we have found that the isotropic s-wave superconducting phase becomes the ground state in the realistic parameter region. In stronger coupling region, a superconductor-insulator phase transition occurs, where the insulating phase is interpreted as an orbital differentiated Mott insulator consisting of a two-orbital excitonic Mott insulator and a one-orbital antiferromagnetic insulator. The antiferromagnetic insulator in the third orbital is nearly degenerate with the spin-liquid phase. To extract the essence, we have also analyzed simple three-and two-orbital models, consisting of network of chains with orbital-dependent anisotropic transfer. The comparison of the two-and three-orbital models suggests that the melting of the excitonic insulator by the carrier doping or by introducing the third frustrating orbital stabilize isotropic s-wave superconductivity. Although the origin of the superconductivity is ascribed to the strong attractive force arising from the IHRC, the attractive force generally induces the insulating phase at half filling. To melt the insulator at half filling, the odd number of orbitals is helpful. Our study on the multi-orbital systems with the IHRC shows a new route to obtain stable superconductors as well as a quantum spin liquid in the systems with the IHRCs. In the main text, we show that the superconducting correlations are mainly governed by the IHRC. The IHRC consists of two parts, i.e., the exchange Hund's rule coupling J ex , and the pair hopping term J pair in Eq. ( We show the doping dependence of the orbitaldependent doublon densities D ν in Fig. In Fig.S 3, we show the spin structure factors in the strong coupling region for several different systems sizes. For small system sizes (L = 6, 8), we find that the spin structure factors have peak at q = (π, π) while they have peak at q = (0, π), (π, 0) in large system sizes (L = 10, 12). Although it is hard to perform calculations for larger system sizes, it is plausible that stripe magnetic order (q peak = (0, π), (π, 0)) becomes stable in the thermodynamic limit. The size extrapolation of the spin structure factors is shown in Fig. The spin and charge structure factors are shown in Fig.S 7. We do not find any significant peak in the structure factors. We note that orbital differentiation of doublons does not occur in the two-orbital model, i.e., D 0 = 0.487 