Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) have an absolute advantage over other types of single photon detectors except the low operating temperature. Therefore, many efforts have been devoted to find high-temperature superconducting materials that are suitable for preparing SNSPDs. Copper-based and MgB2 ultra-thin superconducting nanowires have been already reported. However, the transport properties of iron-based ultra-thin superconducting nanowires have not been studied. In this work, a 10 nm thick × 200 nm wide × 30 μm long high quality superconducting nanowire was fabricated from ultrathin BaFe1.84Co0.16As2 films by a lift-off process. The precursor BaFe1.84Co0.16As2 film with a thickness of 10 nm and root-mean-square roughness of 1 nm was grown on CaF2 substrates by pulsed laser deposition. The nanowire shows a high superconducting critical temperature T zero c =20 K with a narrow transition width of ΔT=2.5 K and exhibits a high critical current density Jc of 1.8×10 7 A cm -2 at 10 K. These results of ultrathin BaFe1.84Co0.16As2 nanowire will attract interest in electronic applications, including SNSPDs. Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) demonstrate a distinct advantage over other types of single-photon detectors, which have generated tremendous interest in the scientific community For this reason, exploring iron-based superconducting films applications in the field of micro-electronics or nano-electronics only was limited to a relatively thick scale In this work, we report the first fabrication of superconducting nanowire from PLD prepared Ba122:Co films in 10 nm thick by micro-nanofabrication technologies. From the transport measurement, the obtained 200 nm wide BaFe1.84Co0.16As2 nanowires show T zero c =20 K, transition width ΔT=2.5 K, and exhibit a high critical current density Jc of 1.8×10 7 A cm -2 at 10 K, suggesting their potential in making iron-based SNSPDs with high operating temperatures. Although MgO, (LaAl)0.7(SrAl0.5Ta0.5)0.3O3 (LSAT), LaAlO3 (LAO), SrTiO3 (STO) and CaF2 single-crystalline substrates are often used to prepare Ba122:Co superconducting films, high-performance superconducting films with thickness less than 30 nm have not yet been prepared The thermal relaxation capacity of SNSPD depends on the heat capacity and heat transfer between film and substrate However, complete superconducting transition was not observed down to 5 K for film with a thickness of 10 nm. The above results indicate that Ba122: Co films grown on MgO substrate and STO substrates are unable to meet the requirements of the SNSPDs. Fortunately, iron-based superconducting films grown on CaF2 substrates tend to exhibit excellent superconducting properties It is exciting that the Ba122:Co films on the CaF2 substrates not only have high superconducting transition temperature and narrow transition width, but also show superconductivity in films with thickness much less than those fabricated on other substrates. As shown in Figure The superconducting films used to prepare high-performance SNSPD require not only a sufficiently thin thickness but also extremely low surface roughness. In order to investigate the surface morphology and surface roughness of Ba122:Co thin films, AFM studies were performed . Figure The AFM image was clearly divided into the left and right part, which are the surface topography of CaF2 substrate and Ba122:Co film, respectively. The surface topography of the film shows more or less round islands shape, not as smooth as the CaF2 substrate. As shown in Figure To further characterize the transport properties of the Ba122:Co nanowire, the currentvoltage (I-V) measurements were performed to determine the critical current (Ic) and the critical current density (Jc) as a function of temperature. Figure The inset of Figure The I-V of Ba122:Co nanowires shows flux-flow type behaviors which were also observed in the early YBa2Cu3O7-δ nanowires For the first time, the 10 nm thick Ba122:Co films were successfully prepared by PLD . Furthermore, we succeeded in developing Ba122:Co nanowires fabrication processes and fabricating superconducting nanowires in 200 nm wide × 30 μm long on Ba122:Co films. The nanowires show T zero c =20 K, ∆Tc=2.5 K and Jc=1.8×10 7 A cm -2 at 10 K. Based on the current results, we believe that the ultra-thin Ba122:Co nanowires will attract interest in electronic applications, including SNSPDs. 