We propose a paring mechanism between holes in the dilute limit of doped frustrated Mott insulators. Hole pairing arises from a hole-hole-magnon three-body bound state. This pairing mechanism has its roots on singlehole kinetic energy frustration, which favors antiferromagnetic (AFM) correlations around the hole. We demonstrate that the AFM polaron (hole-magnon bound state) produced by a single-hole propagating on a field-induced polarized background is strong enough to bind a a second hole. The effective interaction between these threebody bound states is repulsive, implying that this pairing mechanism is relevant for superconductivity. The long-sought resonating valence bond (RVB) superconductor Nagaoka's theorem reveals a striking interplay between magnetism and electronic kinetic energy in slightly doped Mott insulators As shown in Fig. over, our Density Matrix Renormalization Group (DMRG) results reveal a repulsive interaction between AFM bipolarons, implying that these composite Cooper pairs should condense in the dilute limit. We start by considering a Hubbard model on a triangular lattice with NN hopping t 1 and the third NN hopping t 3 : where n σ (r) = c † rσ c rσ , μ the chemical potential and H the external magnetic field. We will initially consider the U/|t 1 | → ∞ limit. The ground state is fully polarized for H > H sat . In this regime the holes become non-interacting fermions with dispersion The minimum energy of the single-hole spectrum k is 0 = -6|t 1 | for t 1 < 0 and ±K = -3|t 1 | for t 1 > 0 (frustrated case) with K = ( 4π 3 , 0). AFM polaron. The single-hole ground state is no longer fully polarized for H < H sat = -∆ hm b , where ∆ hm b is the holemagnon binding state energy. As anticipated, this bound state forms to suppress the destructive interference (frustration) of the single-hole motion. This idea can be illustrated with a simple variational wave function for the relative coordinate r of the hole-magnon pair: Here, m = 0, ..., 5 is the crystal angular momentum following from the C 6 symmetry of H H , θ = nπ/3 (0 ≤ n ≤ 5) is the relative azimuthal angle and φ is the phase difference between the two particles separated by one and two lattice spaces a. We are also assuming that the total momentum of the twoparticle system is equal to zero. Minimization of E(α)/t 1 = (cos α) 2 2 cos( mπ 3 ) + cos(mπ) + sin 2α cos(φ) for t 1 > 0 gives m = 3, φ = π, cos α = 0.3907 and Ẽmin = -3.3028t 1 , which is already quite close to the exact ground state energy E G = -3.4227t 1 . The binding energy, min k∈BZ ( k ) -E G , is 0.4227t 1 , indicating a strong effective attraction between the magnon and the hole. The correlation function c h-m (r) = r n h (rr )n ↓ (r ) , shown in Fig. The lowest energy magnon-hole pair can also have finite center of mass momentum. Fig. From now on, we will use the notation mHnS to denote states with m holes and n flipped spins. We will consider bound states of one hole (m = 1) and n ≥ 1 flipped spins. Fig. Hole paring-An important consequence of the effective hole-magnon attraction is the possibility of indirect hole-hole pairing via formation of a three-body bound state of two holes and one magnon (2H1S ). This state can be regarded as an -0.16 -0.12 -0.2 as a function of t 3 /t 1 . The two kinks of ∆ p-h b arise from a change in the center of mass momentum of the AFM polaron (at t 3 = 0.175t 1 ) and the AFM bipolaron ( at t 3 = 0.11t 1 ). (b) Hole-hole, c h-h (r) and hole-magnon, c h-m (r), correlation functions for different values of t 3 /t 1 (L = 26). (c) Dispersion relation of the bipolaron (2H1S bound state) for t 3 = -0.2t 1 obtained from solving the LS equation (line) and from ED of an L × L lattice with L = 24 (circles). The effective mass, m 2H1S , is extracted by fitting the the long wavelength region with a parabola. (d) Stability region of 2H1S state in the Ht 3 /t 1 phase diagram (U → ∞ limit). AFM "bipolaron" or "spin-bag": the two holes share the same AFM region to lower their kinetic energy at a minimum Zeeman energy cost. Its wave function is also obtained by solving the LS equation in the thermodynamic limit The two holes and the magnon indeed form a tight bound state for t 1 > 0. The lowest energy 2H1S bound state has center of mass momentum Q = 0 for t 3 < -0.116t 1 (t 1 > 0). The binding energy between a 1H1S polaron and a second hole is defined as . It is also useful to introduce the binding energy of the three-body bound state relative to three non-interacting particles: . Both binding energies are shown in Fig. 1 and m ⊥ 2H1S 66.67t -1 for the parallel and perpendicular directions relative to the M point. As shown in Fig. ) is the binding energy between the AFM bipolaron and the second magnon. The critical field boundary shown in Fig. Interaction between AFM bipolarons-Given that hole pairs are actually 2H1S bound states, we will further elucidate that AFM bipolarons interact repulsively with each other, instead of forming larger bound states with multiple holes and magnons. This is demonstrated by solving the sixbody 4H2S problem. Fig. is positive for finite L and it extrapolates to zero in the L → ∞ limit, confirming the repulsive nature of the effective interaction. We note, however, that the two AFM bipolarons form a bound state when t 3 /t 1 approaches -0.1, i.e., in the region of strongest hole-magnon pairing according to Figs. Effect of spin exchange-Our next step is to analyze the effect of a finite, but still large, U/|t 1 | 1. The low-energy sector of the Hubbard model is now described by the t -J model: The XY part of the AFM exchange interactions, J 1 and J 3 , generate a finite magnon mass, while the Ising part induces a repulsive interaction between any pair of particles (magnons or holes). Consequently, a finite U/|t 1 | should reduce the binding energy of the AFM polaron and bipolaron bound states. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 1 and H H sat . In a pure 2D scenario, the AFM bipolarons must undergo a Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition Finally, the pairing symmetry is determined by the irreducible representation of the single AFM bipolaron (2H1S ) ground state. For t 3 /t 1 = -0.2 (t 1 > 0), the wave function of the 2H1S bound state has zero total momentum and it belongs to the B 2 representation of the D 6 space group ( f 2wave) Discussion-The possibility of generating an effective at-traction between electrons out of the bare Coulomb repulsion is a long sought-after goal of the condensed matter community It is important to clarify that a saturation field of order |t 1 |/2 is much higher than the maximum fields that can be generated in the laboratory. Moreover, such a large external field would produce a huge orbital effect that is not included in our analysis. For charged systems, like electrons in a solid (Na x CoO 2 is a well-known realization of a triangular lattice Hubbard model We include analytical solutions of the two and three-body bound state problems via the Lippmann-Schwinger equation. For states with more than three particles N p = N h + N s (N h is the number of holes and N s is the number of flipped spins relative to the fully polarized state), we used exact diagonalization (ED) and density matrix renormalization group (DMRG). We include a finite size scaling analysis of these results, as well as real space correlations functions revealing the repulsive nature of the interaction between antiferromagnetic (AFM) bipolarons. Below we derive the Lippmann-Schwinger equation in the U → ∞ limit. The extension to finite U is straightforward. The wave function of the hole-magnon bound state, |ψ = |R, R+ r , can be obtained by solving the Lippmann-Schwinger equation: where e ν are (bond) vectors connecting nearest and thirdnearest-neighbor sites. The hard core constraint of spins and holes (a flipped spin and a hole cannot occupy the same site) is imposed by including an infinitely repulsive on-site interaction V → ∞. The hole-magnon Green's function is: The hole-magnon hard-core interaction implies After applying this condition, the Lippmann-Schwinger equation (4) becomes By setting r = e η , we obtain twelve coupled linear equations for ψ Q (e ν ), which determine ψ Q (r) through Eq. ( The wave function for two holes and one magnon is: The fermionic statistics of holes implies ψ Q (r 1 , r 2 ) = -ψ Q (r 2 , r 1 ). The two-hole wave function with total momentum of Q can be re-expressed as a function of the position r of one hole and the momentum p of the second hole: The Lippmann-Schwinger equation becomes: where G (3) QE is the non-interacting three-body Green's function of the non-interacting hole-hole-magnon system: . The hard-core constraint gives a boundary condition at r = 0: By setting r = e η , we obtain a system of twelve coupled integral equations for the functions ψ Q ( p, e ν ), which in turn determine the three-body wave function ψ Q (p, r). The other three-body bound state of one hole and two flipped spins (1H2S) is obtained in a similar way. The binding energy and various correlation functions for n holes and m flipped spins (nHmS ) are calculated by the Lanczos method on finite triangular lattices of L×L sites. The finite size correction for bound states of linear size ξ L is exponentially small in ξ/L. This can be verified for the two-body and three-body bound states, whose solutions are obtained by FIG. solving the Lippmann-Schwinger equation in the thermodynamic limit . Finite size corrections become more important for bound states composed of more than three particles because ξ increases, while the maximum accessible lattice size decreases. To extract the error due to finite size effects, we perform a finite size scaling analysis of the numerical data. We fit the ground state energy E G (L) for a finite L × L lattice size using the formula The factor (-1) L accounts an oscillation between even and odd linear system sizes, arising from kinetic energy frustration on finite lattices. As an example, Fig. Finding the interaction between AFM bipolarons (2H1S bound states) requires to solve the six-body 4H2S problem, which restricts the ED calculations to small system sizes . To reach large enough system sizes, we use the DMRG algorithm For the DMRG method to be applicable to our problem, the maximum values of L x and L must be bigger than the linear size ξ of the three-body bound state. The following verifications indicate that the DMRG method is indeed applicable to our problem. (I) Comparing the ground state energy with ED. Tab. I provides a comparison between the DMRG and ED results on the same lattice size. The difference between the energy values obtained from both approaches is negligibly small. (II) Finite size scaling along the L direction. When using the DMRG method, the length L x can be made much larger than the size ξ of the bound state. The main limitation arises from the width L. To verify that the finite width L is not introducing a significant size effect, we performed a finite size scaling study of the ground state energy E G as a function of L. The results are shown in the Fig. For the few-body problem, the DMRG algorithm works very well on a very wide stripe geometry, which is crucial for illustrating the formation and interaction of the bound states on a two-dimensional lattice. In this section, we extend the simulation of the 4H2S system to a lattice of size L x × L = 30×16. The new results are consistent with those obtained from simulations of the 8×120 strip shown by Fig. 