We study the effect of superconducting fluctuations on the conductivity of metals at arbitrary temperatures T and impurity scattering rates τ -1 . Using the standard diagrammatic technique but in the Keldysh representation, we derive the general expression for the fluctuation correction to the dc conductivity applicable for any space dimensionality and analyze it in the case of the film geometry. We observe that the usual classification in terms of the Aslamazov-Larkin, Maki-Thompson and density-of-states diagrams is to some extent artificial since these contributions produce similar terms, which partially cancel each other. In the diffusive limit, our results fully coincide with recent calculations in the Keldysh technique. In the ballistic limit near the transition, we demonstrate the absence of a divergent term (T τ ) 2 attributed previously to the density-of-states contribution. In the ballistic limit far above the transition, the temperature-dependent part of the conductivity correction is shown to grow as T τ / ln(T /Tc), where Tc is the critical temperature. Superconducting transition is a second-order phase transition, with pairing correlations emerging in a continuous fashion when the temperature T passes through the critical temperature T c . In the mean-field description, Cooper pairs appear only below T c , since their formation is energetically unfavorable above the transition. Nevertheless they can emerge as virtual excitations also for T > T c , due to thermal fluctuations. Fluctuation formation of Cooper pairs in the normal state is known as superconducting fluctuations. They manifest themselves in various physical properties, which acquire a temperaturedependent correction growing at T → T c The study of the effect of superconducting fluctuations on transport properties began with observation of fluctuation corrections to conductivity In 1980-ies, the theory of fluctuation conductivity was extended to large temperatures above T c In the presence of a magnetic field H, the superconducting transition takes place at the line H c2 (T ), above which superconducting fluctuations modify the normalstate conductivity. They have been studied in Ref. Though the physical picture of superconducting fluctuations is rather well understood, their analytical description is a sufficiently complicated task. Despite half a century of studies, the dependence of the fluctuation conductivity on varius parameters is still debated: two recent papers Motivated by existing discrepancies, in this paper we derive a general expression for the dc conductivity correction for an arbitrary temperature, T > T c , and disorder strength measured by the parameter T τ , assuming an arbitrary space dimensionality d. The final analysis will be performed in the experimentally relevant twodimensional (2D) case corresponding to the film geometry. The existence of the exact expression interpolating between the four limiting cases discussed above provides us a tool for a critical review of previous results. Our approach is based on the diagrammatic technique in the Keldysh representation. The use of the diagrammatic language makes a bridge with the majority of previous calculations and allows us to compare individual contributions. On the other hand, the use of the Keldysh technique is crucial for accurate disorder averaging beyond the diffusive limit. Otherwise the number of terms with different analytic structure makes the routine procedure of analytic continuation extremely sophisticated. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we formulate the model, discuss the main ingredients of the technique and present the general expression for the conductivity correction. In Secs. III and IV we analyze dc conductivity in the diffusive and ballistic regimes, respectively. The crossover between the diffusive and ballistic regimes in the vicinity of the transition is studied in Sec. V. In Sec. VI we summarize our results and discuss them in the context of previous approaches. Finally, numerous technical details are relegated to several Appendices. We consider a disordered s-wave BCS superconductor described by the second-quantized Hamiltonian where ψ α (r) is the fermionic field, with α = ↑, ↓ labeling the spin degrees of freedom, λ 1 is the dimensionless interaction strength, and ν is the density of states at the Fermi energy (per one spin projection). The single-particle Hamiltonian has the form: where μ is the chemical potential. We will consider the system at zero magnetic field, and the vector potential a will play the role of a source field to generate current and will be set to zero afterwards. The disorder potential U (r) is assumed to be a Gaussian white noise specified by the correlation function where τ is the mean-free time. We assume that disorder is weak, with the quasiclassical parameter μτ 1. This inequality allows us to apply the usual diagrammatic cross technique for disorder averaging. We also assume that the system is far from the metal-insulator transition, such that the weaklocalization and interaction In order to calculate the conductivity σ, we use the Keldysh technique for superconducting systems with the effective action (5) Here Tr is the full operator trace, and Ǧ-1 is an operator in the Nambu and Keldysh spaces. Its structure in the Nambu space has the following form: The operator Ȟ0 is obtained from Eq. ( where σ i stand for the Pauli matrices in the Keldysh space. In the normal state (∆ = 0), the Green function becomes diagonal in the Nambu space, with the particle (G) and hole ( G) components: At equilibrium with the temperature T , the particle component is diagonal in the energy space with: with F E = tanh(E/2T ) being the fermionic equilibrium distribution function. The hole component has the same structure in the Keldysh space and is related to the particle component by the energy inversion: Gaussian fluctuations of the order parameter field governed by the action (5) are described by the fluctuation propagator Its structure in the Keldysh space at equilibrium reads: where B(ω) = coth(ω/2T ) is the bosonic equilibrium distribution function, and In the Keldysh formalism, the linear response conductivity tensor is calculated by taking the second derivative with respect to the source fields a: FIG. The fluctuation correction to conductivity in the oneloop (with respect to the fluctuation propagator) approximation is given by the three standard skeleton diagrams shown in Fig. The most complicated technical part of the calculation is the procedure of disorder averaging that is discussed in Appendices A and B. The general expression for δσ will be presented in Sec. II E, and meanwhile we introduce the necessary ingredients. The general expression for the fluctuation correction involves two basic ingredients: the fluctuation propagator L R (ω, q) and the functions f m (ω, q), g m (ω, q) obtained from disorder averaging of the blocks of Green's functions in Fig. Fluctuation propagator is defined as the sum of diagrams shown in Fig. where is the primitive step of the ladder. In the limit q p F , it is Vertex correction γ due to the impurity ladder. Black dotted lines denote the impurity correlator given by where the averaging is taken over the unit d-dimensional vector n, l = v F τ is the mean-free path and v F is the Fermi velocity. Explicit expression for f 1 depends on the space dimensionalilty. In the 2D and 3D cases, it is given by In what follows we will work in the 2D case and use the corresponding expression for f 1 . The retarded fluctuation propagator L R (Ω, q) can be written as the sum over Matsubara energies ε n = 2πT (n + 1/2) It's worth emphasizing that Eq. ( • In the diffusive limit (ql 1 and Ωτ 1), the function f 1 is close to unity, f R 1 (ω, q) ≈ 1 -iωτ + Dq 2 τ , and the fluctuation propagator takes a simple form: where ψ(z) is the digamma function. • Near the transition (T → T c ), the main contribution to conductivity comes from small momenta and frequencies. The fluctuation propagator then takes the so-called local form regardless of the value of T τ where ξ(T τ ) is the disorder-dependent coherence length. It interpolates between the dirty, ξ 2 d = πD/8T , and clean, ξ 2 c = 7ζ(3)D/16π 2 τ T 2 , limits according to the general expression where the function F is defined as Note that ξ(T τ ) remains finite at T → T c . It is the correlation length ξ(T τ )/ √ [see Eq. The procedure of disorder averaging of the blocks of electron Green's functions is outlined in Appendix B. In calculating the integrals over the Fermi sphere, one encounters the following expressions: The functions f m (ω, q) are generalizations of the function f 1 (ω, q) in Eq. In the zero-frequency limit, the general expression for the conductivity correction can be conveniently represented as a sum of the contributions with one and two fluctuation propagators: δσ = δσ (1) + δσ (2) . ( The term with one proparator, δσ (1) , accounts for the DOS and MT diagrams and also contains a part of the AL diagram (AL1) naturally transformed to a single L via integration by parts, as described in Appendix C. The remaining part of the AL correction (AL2) yields a two-propagator contribution δσ (2) . After some algebra, the expression for δσ (1) can be conveniently represented as where Σ R,Z (Ω, q) denote blocks of electron Green's functions averaged over disorder. The square block of the DOS diagram (a) in Fig. The functions Σ R,Z (Ω, q) are given explicitly by the following expressions: where the arguments of functions f m , g m and γ are f m (2E -Ω, q), etc., and ∂ q = ∂/∂|q| is the derivative with respect to the absolute value of the momentum. The blocks absent in the list Remarkably, the two-propagator contribution, δσ (2) = δσ AL2 , can be expressed solely in terms of two L's and their derivatives [which generate the blocks, according to Eq. (C3)]: Equations ( In this Section we analyze the fluctuation correction at arbitrary temperatures in the diffusive regime, T τ 1 [regions (a) and (b) in Fig. Then the integrals over E in Eqs. ( In the two-dimensional case, the fluctuation correction to the conductivity can be written as where the dimensionless variables x and y are related to the momentum and frequency of the fluctuation propagator as Following Ref. which determines both the fluctuation propagator, and the blocks Σ in Eqs. where is the dimensionless dephasing rate, and primes indicate derivatives with respect to the corresponding argument. We see that the mathematical structure of the expressions for the DOS, RMT, DOS(C), MT(C), and AL1 contributions is similar. Therefore we find it natural to combine them into a single quantity which after partial cancellations acquires a fairly simple form: As a result, the total correction can be written in the form where ς REG , ς AL2 , and ς AMT are given by Eqs. ( Our expression for the fluctuation correction in the 2D diffusive case [given by Eqs. ( In the language of the Keldysh sigma model, the fluctuation conductivity was studied by Petković and Vinokur Finally, we mention the work by Glatz et al. In the vicinity of T c [region (a) in Fig. where the numerical constant κ = 0.1120 and the function h(x) is given by The coefficient in front of ln(1/γ) in the AMT correction In the relevant case of weak phase breaking, γ 1, we find for the total correction: Here the first term is the sum of the standard AL and AMT corrections in the leading approximations, and the coefficient c = -21/2 in front of the subleading term Equation ( In this Section we present our results in terms of δσ REG , δσ AL2 , and δσ AMT , due to their compact analytical form. One can easily show that the initial diagrams produce the following contributions to the coefficients in front of the logarithmic term: (where c RMT = -7 and c AMT = -7/2). In the standard diagrammatic calculation in the Matsubara technique the contribution of the MT diagram is often represented as a sum of the regular and anomalous terms, δσ MT,reg and δσ MT,an . Such decomposition is purely technical, naturally arising in the process of analytic continuation. It is similar but yet different from our splitting of the MT diagram into the RMT and AMT terms, which is also a matter of technical convenience. In the vicinity of the transition, δσ MT,reg grows logarithmically with c MT,reg = -14, leading to the doubling of the DOS correction At high temperatures, = ln(T /T c ) 1 [region (b) in Fig. In the ballistic region, as we will see in Sec. IV A, the ultra-violet divergency becomes even stronger, leading to a large but temperature-independent and therefore unmeasurable contribution. The functions ς AMT and ς AL2 are proportional to b , therefore the corresponding conductivity corrections come from x ∼ 1 and y ∼ 1. Hence they are additionally suppressed in the parameter 1/ compared to δσ REG : where a large factor ln 1/γ in the AMT correction is due to the singularity at small momenta, and a numerical constant κ = 0.0150 is determined by the integral For the sake of comparison with previous diagrammatic studies, it is instructive to look at the full contribution of the AL diagram, δσ AL = δσ AL1 + δσ AL2 . In our representation, the term δσ AL1 relegated to δσ REG appears to be much larger than δσ AL2 and thus determines the leading asymptotics of the AL correction: Fluctuation conductivity at T > T c was first considered in Ref. Consider now the fluctuation correction in the ballistic regime, T τ 1, corresponding to the inequality l ξ c [regions (c) and (d) in Fig. In the two-dimensional case considered hereafter, the general expression where b(y) = coth 2πy, as in Sec. III A. Let us analyze the behavior of δσ (1) in the limit τ → ∞. The blocks f n and g n defined in Eqs. where we have employed the identity AL1 . The two-propagator AL2 contribution The analytic structure of the integrands in Σ R and Σ Z [Eqs. 5. Singularities of the term f A 1 (ω , q)γ R (ω , q)γ A (ω , q) in the integrand of Eq. (26g) in the plane of complex frequency ω = 2E -ω: branch cuts of f R,A in the AMT term Σ Z AMT . Indeed, the singularities due to f R,A 1 and γ R,A in all the terms except for the AMT term are located either above of below the real axis and therefore can be avoided by a proper deformation of the integration contour. The corresponding integral over E is then determined by the poles of F E . On the contrary, the AMT term (26g) contains the product f A 1 γ R γ A which has singularities both above and below the real axis: the branch cuts of f R,A 1 and the poles of γ R,A , see Fig. Since in the ballistic case the poles of F E are located much further from the real axis than other singularities in Σ Z AMT , it is natural to separate the AMT term into the contribution of the poles of the distribution function, Σ Z,AMT tanh , and the singularities of f A 1 γ R γ A , Σ Z sing . Hence we have three contributions: Σ R , Σ Z tanh (which includes Σ Z,AMT tanh and all other Σ Z ) and Σ Z sing . The functions Σ R [Eq. (F6)], Σ Z tanh [Eq. (F11)] and Σ Z sign [Eq. (F9)] are evaluated in Appendix F in the leading order in τ . Since both Σ R and Σ Z tanh scale as 1/τ 2 , the resulting δσ is proportional to τ , analogously to the bare Drude conductivity. Below we analyze the fluctuation correction near the transition and at high temperatures. The fluctuation propagator in the ballistic regime is given by Eq. (F1). In the limit T → T c [region (c) in Fig. which is the ballistic limit of the general expression It is instructive to trace this cancellation in terms of particular diagrammatic contributions: Here cancellation of the quadratic terms (T τ ) 2 is a general feature of the ballistic correction discussed in Sec. IV A, whereas cancellation of the linear terms T τ takes place only for the leading ln 1/ contribution in the vicinity of the transition. The remaining δσ tanh = O(1) ln(1/ ) will be discussed in Sec. V B. Cancellation of the linear in T τ terms in Eqs. (57) forces us to analyze the singular part of the AMT contribution. The function Σ Z sing (Ω, q) behaves differently for small and large momenta. In the diffusive limit (ql 1), only the poles of cooperons γ R,A are important. In the ballistic limit (ql 1), it is given by Eq. (F9). Thus we find Σ Z sing (Ω, q) ≈ - As mentioned above, the form of the propagator (56) sets the temperature-dependent coherence length ξ c / √ as the relevant spatial scale. Depending on its relation to l one should distinguish between the two limiting regimes: the moderately clean case, ξ c l ξ c / √ [region (c )], and the superclean case, ξ c / √ l [region (c ) in Fig. • In the moderately clean case, the relevant momenta belong to the diffusive region, ql 1. In this regime we can simply use the diffusive result for the AMT contribution where γ -1 = [16π 2 /7ζ(3)](T τ )(T τ φ ). The parameter γ is related to its diffusive counterpart γ via γ /γ = (ξ c /ξ d ) 2 , see Sec. V C. • In the superclean case, one should take both the contributions from the diffusive and ballistic momenta into account. The diffusive contribution is given by Eq. ( The second term in Eq. ( Finally, there is the AL2 term Hence we see that in the ballistic limit in the vicinity of T c the fluctuation correction to conductivity is determined by the interplay of the AMT [Eqs. (59) or (60)] and AL2 [Eq. Our results are in contradiction with the conclusion of Ref. The correction diverges in the ultraviolet for all space dimensionalities d ≥ 1 [for d = 1, δσ ∝ ln ln q max due to the logarithmic dependence of the fluctuation propagator omitted in Eq. ( Such a behavior should be compared with the situation at T T c in the diffusive regime [region (b) in Fig. Three interrelated properties of the fluctuation propagator simplify the analysis at large temperatures (T T c ): (i) its smallness, L R < 1/ 1, (ii) its logarithmically weak dependence on Ω and q, and (iii) the fact that Im L R Re L R . Consider first the contribution of Σ R to Eq. ( where J 0 (z) is the Bessel function, and S 0 (z) = sin(z)/z. Next we integrate over y neglecting a logarithmically weak dependence of L R on y: (63) As already discussed in Sec. IV C 1, this integral diverges in the limit x → ∞. Since large x correspond to small t, one can replace (t/4) 2 / sinh 2 (t/4) by 1, and the integral over t gives (1 -π/2)/x. Then cutting the remaining integral over x at x = x max 1 we obtain in accordance with the estimate (61). The key point is that this divergent correction is temperature independent and hence can be absorbed into the Drude conductivity The temperature-dependent contribution to the fluctuation conductivity is given by the subleading term in Eq. ( The final integration gives the leading T -dependent correction: A more accurate estimate of the integrals as well as account for Im L R would generate smaller terms of the order of T τ O(1/ 2 ). The interaction correction to the conductivity of clean normal metals has been studied in Ref. Now we turn to the analysis of the contribution from Σ Z = Σ Z tanh + Σ Z sing to Eq. ( tanh and δσ Z sing is quite straightforward. Using Eqs. ( where α p = 0.458 and α c = 0.190 are the numeric values for the integrals (F12) and (F13). Taking into account Eqs. (66), ( Keeping the term (67) in the resulting expression is beyond the accuracy, as it is of the same order as the subleading term from Eq. (66) also proportional 1/ 2 . However the AMT term ( This Section reviews the behavior of the fluctuation correction in the vicinity of the transition (T → T c ) for an arbitrary disorder strength characterized by the parameter T τ . The resulting expressions will describe the crossover between the dirty [region (a) in Fig. The two-propagator AL2 contribution Here the crossover function s(T τ ) can be expressed in terms of the function F introduced in Eq. ( This is a monotonous function interpolating from s(0) = 0 in the diffusion limit [in accordance with Eq. ( The contribution of the poles of F E in Eqs. (26a), (26b), (26g) and (26h) is proportional to ln(1/ ). The corrections with an additional cooperon, Eqs. (26c)-(26f), are not singular near T c and will be disregarded. Evaluating the functions Using then Eq. ( This crossover formula interpolates between the diffusive and ballistic regimes: In the notations of Sec. III C, the diffusive limit of Eq. ( The analysis of this term has already been performed in Sec. IV B. The only difference is in the form the fluctuation propagator Therefore we conclude that both in the diffusive and moderately clean cases (when T τ 1/ √ ) one can use the result (59), provided γ is replaced by γ(T τ ): This function interpolates between γ in the diffusive regime and γ in the ballistic regime. In the superclean case (T τ 1/ √ ), there is an additional contribution from high momenta given by the second term in Eq. (60). In this work, we have studied the Cooper-channel contribution to the fluctuation conductivity of disordered swave superconductors above the transition temperature. Working in the leading, one-loop approximation in the fluctuation propagator, we have derived the general expression for the fluctuation correction valid for arbitrary temperatures T > T c and disorder strengths characterized by the parameter T τ . The result obtained for an arbitrary space dimensionality is then analyzed in the experimentally relevant 2D case. Our approach is based on the usual diagrammatic technique Our analysis demonstrates that the standard classification of the diagrammatic contributions involving the AL, DOS and MT terms does not unambiguously reflect the underlying physical processes. We see that the resulting expressions for different disorder-averaged diagrams contain a number of similar fragments. Therefore it is natural to split them and rearrange the terms according to their mathematical structure. In particular, we split the AL contribution into AL1 (one fluctuation propagator) and AL2 (two fluctuation propagators), with the AL1 term partially cancelling the contribution of the DOS and MT diagrams. This illustrates the fact that each of the individual AL, DOS and MT diagrams can hardly be ascribed a well-defined physical meaning. It is the sum of all diagrams that contains the effects of paraconductivity, DOS suppression and scattering on superconducting fluctuations, and these physical processes cannot be uniquely associated with the standard AL, DOS and MT diagrams. This circumstance has been recognized in a number of recent publications The derived analytical expression is used to critically revise previous results for the fluctuation correction. The majority of these results was obtained with the help of the Matsubara diagrammatic technique and are available only in the four asymptotic regions (close to T c /far above T c and in the diffusive/ballistic limit) shown in Fig. In the diffusive limit (T τ 1), the full temperature dependence has been recently addressed in Refs. In the ballistic limit (T τ 1), we provide the first analytical description of the fluctuation correction at arbitrary temperatures. Here we observe a significant discrepancy with previous calculations obtained within the Matsubara technique. Our main conclusions can be summarized as follows: • In the vicinity of T c [region (c) in Fig. • At high temperatures (T T c ), we find that the fluctuation correction contains a formally divergent temperature-independent term that should be incorporated into the bare conductivity. The remaining temperature-dependent correction grows as T τ up to some logarithmic factors, see Eq. (69). This result is consistent with Ref. In Fig. film obtained numerically for different disorder strengths (here we recover the physical units). As the correction diverges in the ultraviolet (see discussion in Sec. IV C 1), δσ is determined up to a temperature-independent constant chosen arbitrarily in Fig. Two features of the temperature dependence of δσ are to be pointed out. First, we see that near the transition the correction grows with τ . Since Fig. As an open question we would like to mention the sensitivity of the fluctuation correction to microscopic details of the disorder potential that become important in the ballistic limit. In our analysis, we assumed the simplest form of a weak Gaussian disorder [see Eq. ( Finally, we mention an interesting direction of generalizing the developed theory for the fluctuation conductivity to the case of unconventional superconductors. In these materials nonmagnetic disorder is known to acts as an effective pair breaker Expressions for the kernels (A1)-(A3) should be averaged over disorder. Using Eqs. ( Various blocks and the ways they should be averaged over disorder are shown in Fig. where ξ(p) = p 2 /2m -μ Consider, for example, the averaging of a typical block of Fig. where v x is the x-component of the velocity, and the sign is due to its opposite directions at the left and right current vertices. After averaging one obtains two generalized cooperons: γ A 2E-2ω-Ω (q) and γ A -2E+Ω (q) in the lower and upper corners, respectively. Integrating first over ξ and then averaging over the directions of momentum at the Fermi surface with the help of Eq. (23a), one gets: . (B3) The part with the propagator and distribution functions corresponding to the block of Fig. In the ballistic limit, the function f R 1 defined in Eq. (23a) scales as 1/τ , and the fluctuation propagator • • • = (• • • )dθ/2π stands for the angular averaging in 2D. Equation (F1) can be brought to a form more suitable for further evaluation with the help of the integral representation for the digamma function b. Function Σ R In the leading order in τ → ∞, Σ R is given by Eq. ( On the other hand, in order to calculate Σ R (2) we find it more convenient to keep f 2 in the original form (23a), that allows to perform integration over E similar to Eq. (F4): where the angular averaging is still to be done. Since Σ R = Σ R (11) + Σ R (2) , it is convenient to bring Eqs. (F4) and (F5) to a similar form. That can be done with the help of Eq. (F2), leading to where S 0 (z) ≡ sin(z)/z. The terms with J 0 and S 0 correspond to Σ R (2) and Σ R (11) , respectively. c. Function Σ Z In the leading order in τ → ∞, Σ Z is given by Eq. (55). In this approximation we neglect cooperons and therefore a special region of low momenta, ql 1, shown in Fig. 