Despite almost 40 years of research, the origin of heavy-fermion superconductivity is still strongly debated. Especially, the pressure-induced enhancement of superconductivity in CeCu 2 Si 2 away from the magnetic breakdown is not sufficiently taken into consideration. As recently reported in CeCu 2 Si 2 and several related compounds, optimal superconductivity occurs at the pressure of a valence crossover, which arises from a virtual critical end point at negative temperature T cr . In this context, we did a meticulous analysis of a vast set of top-quality high-pressure electrical resistivity data of several Ce-based heavy fermion compounds. The key novelty is the salient correlation between the superconducting transition temperature T c and the valence instability parameter T cr , which is in line with theory of enhanced valence fluctuations. Moreover, it is found that, in the pressure region of superconductivity, electrical resistivity is governed by the valence crossover, which most often manifests in scaling behavior. We develop the new idea that the optimum superconducting T c of a given sample is mainly controlled by the compound's T cr and limited by non-magnetic disorder. In this regard, the present study provides compelling evidence for the crucial role of critical valence fluctuations in the formation of Cooper pairs in Ce-based heavy fermion superconductors besides the contribution of spin fluctuations near magnetic quantum critical points, and corroborates a plausible superconducting mechanism in strongly correlated electron systems in general. Superconductivity (SC) in heavy fermion (HF) systems is most often considered as being mediated by critical spin fluctuations Selected examples of p-T magnetic and superconducting phase diagrams of Ce-based HF superconductors are represented schematically in Fig. As a matter of interest, the CVF mechanism shares common aspects with the d-p charge transfer instability in high-T c cuprates, which has been proposed to be at the origin of marginal Fermi liquid and non-Fermi liquid properties, and the pseudo-gap state Moreover, valence fluctuations of Pu ions have been advocated as the source of "high-T c " in PuCoGa 5 The microscopic-theoretical basis of the CVF scenario results from the inclusion of the FIG. Examples of schematic p-T magnetic and superconducting phase diagrams of Ce-based HF superconductors. Symbols stand for representative data points from CeRhIn 5 additional term H U fc = U fc ∑ N i=1 n f i n c i in the periodic Anderson model, where U fc is the Coulomb repulsion between f and conduction electrons Five years ago, thanks to an experimental progress Figure We underline that all samples with T c > 2 K are found to exhibit -15 K < T cr < 0 K and emphasize the striking relationship between the superconducting T c , the parameter T cr of the valence transition CEP, and pair breaking due to non-magnetic impurities (ρ 0 ). We introduce the expression "high-T c " to refer to the fact that the compounds with the highest T c amongst the Ce-based HF superconductors are especially well represented in Fig. For a detailed analysis, the p-dependence of ρ * = ρ-ρ 0 at several temperatures is derived from ρ(T ) of successive pressure runs, as shown for CeAg 2 Si 2 in Fig. , where p VCO is the pressure of the mid drop of ρ * , is calculated for each temperature. After identifying T cr , one can apply the scaling treatment developed in Ref. This means that for the generalized distance h/θ from the CEP, the ρ norm isotherms behave in a unique manner, which strongly supports the existence of the valence CEP at (p cr , T cr ). Note that in terms of universal scaling theory of critical phenomena the equation ), with the critical exponents γ and δ (mean-field approach: (Supplementary Fig. We now discuss the pair-breaking effect by disorder, which is quantified by the residual resistivity ρ 0 . Figure independent pressure experiments done in Geneva with ρ 0 < 50 μΩcm (see Supplementary Fig. A similar trend is observed for the CePd 2 (Si/Ge) 2 family, where bulk SC vanishes completely for ρ 0 higher than 3 μΩcm (see Supplementary Fig. The critical resistivity ρ cr 0 ≈ 46 μΩcm of the "high-T c " HF superconductors is far larger than that expected in the conventional case of weak-coupling SC but is compatible with the generalized AG theory Figure with T cr = -3.7 K, the error is within the symbol size. Despite reliable small T cr and moderate ρ 0 , CeCu 6 (no SC) and CeCu 5 Au (partial SC at 0.11 K) clearly lie below the general trend. From a literature review, small T cr values should also be expected for some compounds including CeAl 2 However, SC has never been observed in these cases. We have no satisfactory explanation yet for this discrepancy. The dashed red curve for T cr → 0 in Fig. This aspect has also been verified by the density-matrix-renormalization-group calculation for the 1D model The systematic behavior of T c versus ρ 0 and T cr points to a possible maximum T c ≈ 2.5 K in Ce-based HF superconductors and strongly supports that CVF provide the dominant pairing mechanism. Although, the relation between T c and T cr was already inferred in the pioneer work of Onishi and Miyake Let us now comment some generalities about magnetism and superconductivity in HF compounds. A hallmark is the merging close to p cr of the two maxima in ρ(T ) [see Fig. , which indicates that the rapidly rising Kondo energy starts to exceed the first crystalfield-splitting energy Although pressure is a clean tuning parameter, clear evidence of a second-order magnetic transition down to zero temperature and a resulting quantum critical point is not well established from pressure investigations on pure lattices. In the particular case of CePd 2 Si 2 , results of Refs. The overlap of magnetic order and SC in CeRhIn 5 We now have shown that this theory is able to explain salient experimental features in a multitude of systems, corroborating CVF as a plausible Cooper pairing mechanism. Concretely, the present study provides striking evidence that the optimum superconducting T c in many Ce-based HF superconductors is essentially controlled by the strength of CVF and by non-magnetic disorder. Furthermore, we believe that CVF-induced SC is connected to a much wider part of non-trivial physics in strongly correlated electron systems including high-T c cuprates The above presented results are based on electrical resistivity data obtained on 17 single crystals from 9 different Ce-based HF compounds (see Supplementary Table The Supplementary Material follows after the bibliography: • Table From the "raw" resistivity isotherms * (obtained in steatite p-medium) it is obvious that the resistivity collapse is slower than in the other compounds (see main text Fig. With a CEP at very negative temperature in CePd2Si2, the decrease of * is extended over a larger pressure scale compared to e.g. CeCu2Si2. For T > TN, the decrease of * sets in already at pressures well below pc. We have chosen pin with the condition pin > pc to go as low as possible in temperature to get the closest to the CEP. We have verified that the conditions pin < pc and T > TN give similar results, with Tcr values within the error bar. From fit with 0+AT n (1 < T < 5 K)