Recently a big number of works devoted to search for new hydrides with record high-temperature superconductivity and at the same time the successful synthesis of potential high-TC superconducting FeH5 was reported. We present a systematic search for stable compounds in the Fe-H system using variable-composition version of the evolutionary algorithm USPEX. All known (FeH, FeH3, FeH5) and several new Fe3H5, Fe3H13 and FeH6 iron hydrides were found to be stable, resulting in a very complex phase diagram with rich structural relationships between phases. We calculate electronic properties of two potentially high-TC FeH5 and FeH6 phases in the pressure range from 150 to 300 GPa. Indeed, hydrogen-rich FeH5 and FeH6 phases were found to be superconducting within Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory, with TC values of up to 46 K. Theoretical searches for new iron hydrides attracted attention of the scientific community since 1970s when the phase transitions in the Fe-H system were firstly experimentally investigated under pressure. Iron is a distinctive element for superconductivity. It was assumed for a long time that magnetism of iron makes superconductivity impossible. However, in 2001 the superconductivity from non-phonon mechanism of interaction was discovered in nonmagnetic ε-Fe with TC ~ 2.3 K at 15 GPa. In the last years many developments have been made in order to extend the scope and predictive power of the USPEX code. One of them was the implementation of variablecomposition search We performed variable-composition searches for stable compounds in the Fe-H system at pressure of 0, 50, 100 and 150 GPa using the USPEX By definition, a thermodynamically stable phase has the lowest Gibbs free energy (or, at zero Kelvin, lowest enthalpy) among any phase or phase assemblage of the same composition. Thermodynamic convex hill construction compactly presents information about all possible formation and decomposition reactions; phases that are located on the convex hull are the ones stable at given pressure. Stable structures of elemental Fe and H were taken from USPEX calculations and from Refs. Electronic band structures of FeH5 and FeH6 were calculated using both VASP and QE, and demonstrated good consistency. Comparison of the phonon densities of states calculated using finite displacement method (VASP and PHONOPY The superconducting transition temperature TC was estimated by using two equations: "full" -Allen-Dynes and "short" -modified McMillan equation while the modified McMillan equation has the form as: The EPC constant λ and logarithmic average frequency ωlog were calculated as: and and μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential, for which we used widely accepted lower and upper bound values of 0.10 and 0.15. Crystal structures of the predicted phases were generated using VESTA software. 57 In order to predict stable phases in the Fe-H system we performed variable-composition evolutionary searches using the USPEX algorithm Further detailed investigation is devoted to stability, electronic and superconducting properties of Fe-H phases at 150 GPa. We built the convex hull for the Fe-H system at 150 GPa (see Fig. Crystal structures of FeH, FeH2, FeH3, FeH5 and FeH6 are shown in Fig. Our main interest here is in hydrogen-rich FeH5 and FeH6, and their potential superconductivity in view of recent synthesis and investigations of various superconducting hydrides We have calculated band structures and electronic densities of states of FeH5 and FeH6 phases at 150 GPa (see Fig. Both crystal structure and electronic properties of FeH5 and FeH6 phase display strong resemblance. We have calculated the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) coefficient λ, logarithmic frequency ωlog and TC using both Allen-Dynes and McMillan formulas 56 as a function of pressure (Table Using evolutionary crystal structure prediction algorithm USPEX we have uncovered unexpectedly complex chemistry of the Fe-H system at pressure range from 0 to 150 GPa. We confirmed the atomic structure of the experimentally synthesized FeH2, FeH3, FeH5 and predicted new Pmmm-Fe3H5, Immm-Fe3H13, I4/mmm-FeH5 and Cmmm-FeH6 phases to be stable at 150 GPa. All predicted new phases belong to the same polysomatic series formed by the FeH-and FeH3-type blocks. More detailed calculation of P-V equation of states allows us to determine the crystal structure of experimentally found FeH~2 phase as I4/mmm-FeH2. Determined crystal structure of hydrogen-rich phases allowed us to perform theoretical calculations of electron DOS and superconducting properties within BCS theory. We showed that both FeH5 and FeH6 demonstrate electronic behavior corresponding to two-dimensional metals. EPC coefficient and DOS at Fermi level increase with decreasing of ωlog in the pressure range from 150 to 300 GPa, which leads to decrease of TC. Thus, TC values for both I4/mmm-FeH5 and Cmmm-FeH6 do not exceed 46 K at 150 GPa.