Superconducting (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Se films are attractive for both the basic research and practical application. However, the conventional vapor deposition techniques are not applicable in synthesizing the films of such a complex system. So no intrinsic charge transport measurements on the films are available so far to reveal the nature of charge carriers, which is fundamental to understanding the iron-based superconductivity mechanism. Herein we report a soft chemical film technique (matrix-assisted hydrothermal epitaxial growth), by which we have succeeded in growing a series of (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Se films covering the whole superconducting regime, with the superconducting transition temperature (T c ) from 4 K up to 42 K. This film technique opens up a new way for fabricating other complex functional materials as well. Furthermore, our systematic transport investigation on the film samples indicates that both the electron and hole carriers contribute to the charge transport, with the scattering rates deviating from the Fermi liquid. We find that the superconductivity occurs upon the electron and hole mobility becoming divergent. And in the high T c samples, the electron carriers are found much more mobile than the holes, a feature distinct from the low T c samples. Hence, our transport results provide key insights into the underlying physics for iron-based high-T c superconductivity. Iron-based superconductor films are emerging as a hot topic with regard to the experimental studies on the superconductivity mechanism and possible applications. First of all, the MAHEG technique is capable of producing high-quality single-crystalline (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Se films and manipulating the T c in a wide range from ~4 K up to ~42 K. This film technique opens up a new way for fabricating other complex functional materials as well. Secondly, the high-quality film samples can be well cleaved and patterned into standard Hall bars of a small thickness (~100 nm) that cannot be achieved on single crystal samples (tens of microns). So, a much higher signal-to-noise ratio, improved by two to three orders of magnitude, can be attained. These favorable sample conditions are vital for extracting the transport information essential for understanding the mechanism of iron-based unconventional superconductivity. Actually, we find that both the electron and hole carriers contribute to the electrical transport and their mobilities become diverging as approaching the superconducting transition temperature. Particularly in the high T c samples, the electron carriers are found much more mobile than the holes. Thirdly, the high-T c FeSe-11111 film by MAHEG has shown a large critical current density 12 over 0.5 MA/cm 2 and high upper critical fields, Figure Five typical FeSe-11111 film samples denoted as SC42, SC35, SC30, SC20 and SC04, respectively, were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The formation of (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Se phase, characteristic of a primitive lattice, and a single preferred (001) orientation are confirmed by the measurements of θ-2θ scan (Supporting Information Figure The superconductivity of the films was characterized by in-plane electrical resistivity  xx (Figure The superconducting transition temperature T c at zero resistivity is determined as 42.2 K for SC42, 35 K for SC35, 30 K for SC30, 20 K for SC20 and 4 K for SC04. As seen from Figure For all the film samples, the Hall angle tan is proportional to B at all measuring temperatures (Figures Actually, a proportional MR  B 2 holds for all our samples in the normal state up to 80 K (Figures The temperature dependences of the mobility for the two types of carriers are plotted in Figure In addition, the curves of Hall coefficient R H vs. temperature T display a broad dip feature, with a minimum R H at a characteristic temperature T * (Figure Finally, we make further discussions taking account of the recent high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) experiments on high-T c FeSe-11111 single crystals 