The superconductor-insulator transition in two dimensions has been widely investigated as a paradigmatic quantum phase transition. The topic remains controversial, however, because many experiments exhibit a metallic regime with saturating low-temperature resistance, at odds with conventional theory. Here, we explore this transition in a novel, highly controllable system, a semiconductor heterostructure with epitaxial Al, patterned to form a regular array of superconducting islands connected by a gateable quantum well. Spanning nine orders of magnitude in resistance, the system exhibits regimes of superconducting, metallic, and insulating behavior, along with signatures of flux commensurability and vortex penetration. An in-plane magnetic field eliminates the metallic regime, restoring the direct superconductor-insulator transition, and improves scaling, while strongly altering the scaling exponent. As temperature is lowered, two-dimensional (2D) materials may become superconductors, or, if highly disordered or in a strong magnetic field, may become insulators, with resistance diverging with falling temperature. Despite decades of work on this topic Within conventional frameworks, the 2D supercondutor-insulator transition (SIT) is driven either by phase fluctuations of the superconducting order parameter, leading to localized Cooper pairs, or reduction in the superconducting pairing amplitude due to unscreened repulsive interactions. In either case, theory suggests a direct quantum phase transition between superconductor and insulator as a function of disorder, magnetic field, or carrier density, with no metal phase. Much of the experimental literature has focussed on the direct SIT, often finding good agreement with scaling theory Here, we experimentally investigate the transition from superconductor to insulator in a highly controllable system based on a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) formed in a semiconductor heterostructure with an epitaxial Al layer The heterostructure material consist of a 7 nm InAs quantum well, separated by a 10 nm InGaAs barrier from a 7 nm epitaxial Al layer, grown by molecular beam epitaxy We use the dependence of R s on temperature, T , at the lowest measured temperatures to distinguish insulating, metallic, and superconducting regimes. R s (T ) over a range of top-gate voltages, V G , is shown in Fig. with a scaling function F (x) that depends on distance from the critical gate voltage, V * G , temperature, T , and the product of scaling exponents, zν. Experimentally, we plot R s (V G , T ) as a function of (V G -V * G )T -α , treating V * G and α as fit parameters optimized to yield the best collapse of data across a range of temperatures and gate voltages. An alternative procedure Motivated by the theoretical phase diagram for the dirty boson model of the SIT Plots of R s in three B ⊥ -T planes are shown in Fig. Further characteristics of the superconducing, insulating, anomalous metal, and normal metal regimes can be found in nonlinear transport. Differential resistance dV /dI as a function of applied dc current I DC is shown in Figs. Transport in the weakly insulating regime is well described by Efros-Shklovskii variable range hopping, R(T ) ∝ exp(T 1 /T ) 1/2 We next investigate flux effects at low fields, both commensuration features associated with the periodic array, and flux penetration of individual Al islands. Both are evident in the three panels of Fig. The insulating regime [Fig. Because the epitaxial Al layer is thin (7 nm), the critical in-plane field is large, typically around 2 T The ability to repeatably and accurately control the crossover from superconducting to insulating behavior using a gate voltage enables new ways of investigating the SIT and the long-debated anomalous metal state. A novel physical system comprising epitaxially grown semiconductor-superconductor heterostructures that makes these investigations relatively straightforward experimentally. In the present study, the device geometry itself is simple; we have not yet considered the wealth of new device geometries that become possible using range of materials and arbitrary lithographic patterning. The thinness of the epitaxial superconductor also makes in-plane field studies readily accessible, opening the door, for instance, to topological superconductivity Besides the observed scaling in the vicinity of the critical R s , yielding a scaling exponent zν ∼ 1.4, and a phasediagram-like plot of R s in the space of T , B ⊥ , and V G , we observed an anomalous metallic regime, with saturating sheet resistance at low temperature, resembling similar behavior reported previously in a variety of systems The wafer structure was grown by molecular beam epitaxy to obtain 7 nm InAs quantum well with a 10 nm InGaAs upper barrier and 7 nm of Al grown in situ. The epitaxial grown Al results in a pristine superconductor/semiconductor interface The devices were fabricated with first electron beam lithography to define the mesas with a Hall-bar geometry and etched using a wet etch solution of H 2 O : citric acid : H 3 PO 4 : H 2 O 2 in the ratio 220 : 55 : 3 : 3. The Al layer on each mesa was then selectively etched using Transene type-D to pattern it into a 40×100 array of square islands A separate Hall bar with all Al removed was used to characterize the 2DEG and partially depleted to enter a density regime with a single subband occupied, reached at a gate voltage value V G ∼ -2 V. Results yielding a maximum mobility of μ = 20, 000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at a sheet density of n e = 1 × 10 12 cm -2 , corresponding to a mean free path l e = 300 nm, comparable to the separation between islands. In addition, the epitaxial Al film has been characterized, yielding a superconducting transition temperature T c = 1.5 K. In-plane and out-of-plane critical field values were measured to be B ||,c ∼ 1.6 T and B ⊥,c ∼ 30 mT respectively Measurements were carried out in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 25 mK. The four-terminal voltage, V 4t , and current, I, through the device were directly measured with AC voltage bias in all cases kept below 5 μV, using standard low frequency lock-in techniques. Series resistance in the lines were in the range of a few kilohms, creating an effective currrent bias in the low-resistance regime and voltage bias in the highresistance regime. In-plane field was precisely aligned with the plane of the array using a three-axis vector magnet by maximizing the critical current while trimming out-of-plane field coils. The experimental scaling exponent, α, used to collapse data in Figs. G , as a function of temperature, T , yields a value for α as the slope of that best-fit line, Data and best-fit lines are shown in Fig. Application of an in-plane magnetic field, B , reduces the crossover temperature to the anomalous metallic (M * ) regime, where scaling fails [see Fig. The estimate 3 K is obtained by taking the coherence length, ξ, as the size of the plaquette, ξ ∼ a = 1μm, and a Same data as Fig. 