We study numerically the superconductor-insulator transition in two-dimensional inhomogeneous superconductors with gauge disorder, described by four different quantum rotor models: a gauge glass, a flux glass, a binary phase glass and a Gaussian phase glass. The first two models, describe the combined effect of geometrical disorder in the array of local superconducting islands and a uniform external magnetic field while the last two describe the effects of random negative Josephson-junction couplings or π junctions. Monte Carlo simulations in the path-integral representation of the models are used to determine the critical exponents and the universal conductivity at the quantum phase transition. The gauge and flux glass models display the same critical behavior, within the estimated numerical uncertainties. Similar agreement is found for the binary and Gaussian phase-glass models. Despite the different symmetries and disorder correlations, we find that the universal conductivity of these models is approximately the same. In particular, the ratio of this value to that of the pure model agrees with recent experiments on nanohole thin film superconductors in a magnetic field, in the large disorder limit. Models of phase coherence in inhomogeneous superconductors, which incorporate gauge disorder, have been widely used to study the vortex glass transition of type II superconductors driven by thermal fluctuations Very recently In this work, we study numerically the SI transition in two-dimensional inhomogeneous superconductors described by random gauge models. Four different quantum rotor models are considered: a gauge glass, a flux glass, a binary phase glass and a Gaussian phase glass. The first two models, describe the combined effect of geometrical disorder in the array of local superconducting islands and a uniform external magnetic field while the last two describe the effects of randomness in the Josephson couplings alone, allowing for negative couplings. Monte Carlo simulations in the path-integral representation are used to determine the critical exponents and the electrical conductivity at the transition. We find that the gauge and flux glass models display the same critical behavior, within the estimated numerical uncertainties. Similar agreement is found for the binary and Gaussian phaseglass models. Despite the different symmetries and disorder correlations, the universal conductivity of these models is approximately the same. We compare the results for gauge and flux glass models with recent experiments on nanohole thin film superconductors in a magnetic field with controlled amount of gauge disorder We consider models which describe two-dimensional superconductors as an array of Josephson junctions, allowing for charging effects and gauge disorder The first term in Eq. ( For the gauge and flux glass models, A ij represents the line integral of the vector potential A ij = 2π Φo j i A • dl, due to an external magnetic field B = ∇ × A. For the gauge-glass model, we set E ij = E J (uniform) and choose A ij as a random variable uniformly distributed in the interval [-π, π] but uncorrelated in space. It may describe, for example, the limit of very large disorder in the positions of the superconducting grains. In the flux-glass model, the variation of the magnetic flux δf p = BδS p /Φ o in a plaquette of area S p , in units of the flux quantum Φ o = hc/2e, is the spatially uncorrelated random variable, which we choose to be uniform in the interval interval [-1, 1]. This could represent a large disorder in the size of the grains, which induces uncorrelated variations in the magnetic flux at different plaquettes or randomness in the plaquette areas. The flux-glass model can also be regarded as a gauge-glass model with a particular longrange correlated disorder the binary phase-glass model can also be regarded as a gauge-glass model with a binary distribution of phase shifts A ij = 0 or π. The quantum phase transition at zero temperature can be conveniently studied in the framework of the imaginary-time path-integral formulation of the model where e ij = E ij /E J and τ labels the sites in the discrete time direction. The ratio g = (E C /E J ) 1/2 , which drives the SI transition for the model of Eq. ( For the driven MC method, the layered honeycomb model of Eq. ( The MC simulations are carried out using the Metropolis algorithm and the time dependence is obtained from the MC time t mc . When J x = 0, the system is out of equilibrium since the total energy is unbounded. The lowerenergy minima occur at phase differences θ τ,i+x -θ τ,i , which increase with time t mc , leading to a net phase slippage rate proportional to V x =< d(θ τ,i+x -θ τ,i )/dt mc >, corresponding to the average "voltage" per unit length. The measurable quantity of interest is the phase slippage response ("nonlinear resistivity") defined as Similarly, we define R τ as the phase slippage response to the applied perturbation J τ in the layered (imaginarytime) direction. Above the phase-coherence transition, g > g c , R x should approach a nonzero value when J x → 0 while it should approach zero below the transition. From the nonlinear scaling behavior near the transition of a sufficiently large system, one can extract the critical coupling g c , and the critical exponents ν and z. A first estimate of the critical coupling g c and dynamical exponent z can be obtained using the driven MC dynamics method presented in Sec. II for large system sizes. We illustrate the method for the gauge-glass model. Figs. 1 shows the behavior of the nonlinear phase slippage response R x and R τ for the gauge-glass model as a function of the applied perturbation J x and J τ , respectively. The behavior for different values of g is consistent with a phase-coherence transition at an apparent critical coupling in the range g c ∼ 1.63 -1.67. For g > g c , both R x and R τ tend to a finite value while for g < g c , they extrapolate to low values. Assuming the transition is continuous, the nonlinear response behavior sufficiently close the transition should satisfy a scaling form in terms of J x , J τ and g. The critical coupling g c and critical exponents ν and z can then be obtained from the best data collapse satisfying the scaling behavior close to the transition. Details of the scaling theory can be found in ref. 41. R x and R τ should satisfy the scaling forms where z o is an additional critical exponent describing the MC relaxation times, t r mc,x ∼ ξ zo and t r mc,τ ∼ ξ zo τ , in the spatial and imaginary-time directions, respectively, and ξ = |g/g c -1| -ν . The + and -signs correspond to g > g c and g < g c , respectively. The two scaling forms are the same when z = 1, corresponding to isotropic scaling. The joint scaling plots according to Eqs. (4) are shown in Figs. To obtain the estimates above, it was implicitly assumed that he system is sufficient large and the coupling parameter is not too close to g c , allowing the finite-size effects to be neglected. Having obtained an estimate of z, we can now consider the finite-size behavior of the phase stiffness in the imaginary time direction γ τ , using equilibrium MC simulations, and improve the determination of g c and ν. The phase stiffness γ τ , which is a measure of the free energy cost to impose an infinitesimal phase twist in the time direction, is given by 42 where τ = τ,i cos(θ τ,i -θ τ +1,i ) and I τ = τ,i sin(θ τ,iθ τ +1,i ). In Eq. ( where F (x) is a scaling function and δg = g -g c . This scaling form implies that data for γ τ L 2-z as a function of g, for different system sizes L, should cross at the critical coupling g c . Fig. Here S(k) is the Fourier transform of the correlation function C(r) and k 0 is the smallest nonzero wave vector. For g > g c , this definition corresponds to a finitedifference approximation to the infinite system correlation length ξ ( g) 2 = -1 , taking into account the lattice periodicity. For the random-gauge models considered here, it is convenient to define the correlation function in terms of the overlap order parameter 44 q τ,j = exp(i(θ 1 τ,j -θ 2 τ,j )), where 1 and 2 label two different copies of the system with the same coupling parameters. The correlation function in the spatial direction is obtained as and the analogous expression is used for the correlation function C τ (r) in the time direction. For a continuous transition, ξ(L, g) should satisfy the scaling form where F (x) is a scaling function. Figures We have also determined the universal conductivity at the critical point from the frequency and finite-size dependence of the phase stiffness γ(w) in the spatial direc- tion, following the scaling method described by Cha et al. where σ Q = (2e) 2 /h is the quantum of conductance and γ(iw n ) is a frequency dependent phase stiffness evaluated at the finite frequency w n = 2πn/L τ , with n an integer. The frequency dependent phase stiffness in the x direction is given by τ,j e i,j+x cos(∆ x θ τ,j ), and ∆ x θ τ,j = θ τ,j -θ τ,j+x -A j,j+x . At the transition, γ(iw n ) vanishes linearly with frequency and σ assumes a universal value σ * , which can be extracted from its frequency and finite-size dependence as 42 The parameter α is determined from the best data collapse of the frequency dependent curves for different systems sizes in a plot of σ(iwn) . The universal conductivity is obtained from the intercept of these curves with the line x = 0. The calculations were performed for different system sizes with L τ = aL z , using the above estimates of z and g c . From the scaling behavior in Fig. The results for the critical properties of the different random gauge models are summarized in Table The results for the gauge and flux-glass models can be compared with experimental observations of the SI transition on thin superconducting films with a pat- tern of nanoholes Recent numerical simulations of a Josephson-junction array model suggests that the large disorder regime should correspond to a vortex glass We studied the superconductor-insulator transition in two-dimensional inhomogeneous superconductors with gauge disorder, described by four different models: a gauge glass, a flux glass, a binary phase glass and Gaus-sian phase-glass model. The first two models, describe the combined effect of geometrical disorder in the array of local superconducting islands and a uniform external magnetic field while the last two describe the effects of randomness in the Josephson couplings alone, allowing for negative couplings. We found that the gauge and fluxglass models display the same critical behavior, within the estimated uncertainties, and similar behavior is observed for binary and Gaussian phase-glass models. The value of the conductivity at the transition is a factor of 2 larger than for the pure model, which agrees with recent experiments on nanohole thin film superconductors 