In-plane longitudinal and transverse thermoelectric phenomena in two parent compounds of iron-based superconductors are studied. Namely, the Seebeck (S) and Nernst (ν) coefficients were measured in the temperature range 10 -300 K for BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2 single crystals that were detwinned in-situ. The thermoelectric response shows sizeable anisotropy in the spin density wave state (SDW) for both compounds, while some dissimilarities in the vicinity of the SDW transition can be attributed to the different nature of the phase change in BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2. Temperature dependences of S and ν can be described within a two-band model that contains a contribution from highly mobile, probably Dirac, electrons. The Dirac band seems to be rather isotropic, whereas most of the anisotropy in the transport phenomena could be attributed to "regular" hole-like charge carriers. We also observe that the off-diagonal element of the Peltier tensor αxy is not the same for the a and b orthorhombic axes, which indicates that the widely used Mott formula is not applicable to the SDW state of iron-based superconductors. In solid state physics nematicity is understood as a tendency of an electronic system to organize itself in a way that breaks rotational symmetry. This is caused by correlations rather than the anisotropy of the underlying crystal lattice In this Rapid Communication we report anisotropic behaviour of the thermoelectric response in parent compounds of the iron-based superconductors above and below their magnetic/structural transitions at Ttr. The thermal gradient was applied in turn along the a or b orthorhombic axes of the BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2 single crystals. They were detwinned by cooling below Ttr under uniaxial pressure and the transport coefficients determined for these two configurations are clearly distinct. However, we do not see a nematic behaviour above Ttr in CaFe2As2. Changes below Ttr are consistent with a multiband picture where one of the bands is characterized by the Dirac-fermion energy spectrum. Such a Dirac cone was postulated to occur in the spin density wave (SDW) state of iron based superconductors The high-quality BaFe2As2 single crystals were grown using a self-flux method During the experiment a sample, which was mounted between two clamps made of phosphor bronze, was subjected to a uniaxial pressure by a beryllium copper spring controlled with a stepper motor. For the resistivity (ρ) measurements, the electrical contacts were placed at the corners of a sample and the orientations of the voltage and current leads were switched repetitively during the experiment. This allowed the electrical resistivities ρa and ρb to be determined using the Montgomery method Changes in the temperature dependences of the electrical resistivity along a (long) and b (short) orthorhombic axes resulting from the increasing uniaxial pressure along b are in good agreement with previously reported data The Seebeck coefficient presented in Fig. The Nernst coefficient presented in Fig. There is a kind of incongruity between the Nernst and resistivity results. Namely, at low temperature both quantities are larger along b axis, i.e. ν b > ν a as well as ρ b > ρ a (thus the electrical conductivities σ b < σ a ). This might seem contradictory, since within the semi-classical approximation ν = π 2 k B 3e k B T ε F μ Because of a high mobility of Dirac fermions, which was observed for example in EuFe2As2 ii) If anisotropy of the Dirac (electron-like) band is more pronounced then again one will observe ν b < ν a , since the numerator of Eqn. 1 will be dominated by the varying σ e ν e term; iii) In contrast, if the Dirac band is isotropic, whereas anisotropy can be attributed to the holelike band than for ν e ≫ ν h (and independently of the signs of ν e and ν h ) the denominator in Eqn. 1 will decrease faster than the numerator leading to the "reverse" relation, i.e. σ b < σ a and ν b > ν a . Therefore, our results not only indicate a presence of at least two bands in the SDW phase of 122 compounds, but primarily suggest that the Dirac band is rather isotropic, whereas anisotropy should be attributed to the regular hole-like carriers. Subsequently, since the Dirac band seems to be very sensitive to a shift of the chemical potential Here we would like to focus on another important conclusion having general repercussions for analysis of the thermoelectric data in the iron-based superconductors. We start with realisation that the Nernst coefficient is in fact composed of two contributions. This is sometimes called the Sondheimer cancellation, that in an anisotropic material takes a form: (α yx is the off-diagonal element of the Peltier tensor, σ xy is the Hall conductivity), as long as σ xx ≠ σ yy , σ yy ≫ σ xy and σ xy = -σ yx . The last condition results from the Onsager reciprocal relation σ xy (B) = σ yx (-B) in a system obeying the reflection symmetry (which applies also to the SDW phase of the iron-pnictides). The S σ xy σ yy ⁄ term can be calculated using previously reported data for the Hall coefficient 