We consider superconducting circuits for the purpose of simulating the spin-boson model. The spin-boson model consists of a single two-level system coupled to bosonic modes. In most cases, the model is considered in a limit where the bosonic modes are sufficiently dense to form a continuous spectral bath. A very well known case is the ohmic bath, where the density of states grows linearly with the frequency. In the limit of weak coupling or large temperature, this problem can be solved numerically. If the coupling is strong, the bosonic modes can become sufficiently excited to make a classical simulation impossible. Here, we discuss how a quantum simulation of this problem can be performed by coupling a superconducting qubit to a set of microwave resonators. We demonstrate a possible implementation of a continuous spectral bath with individual bath resonators coupling strongly to the qubit. Applying a microwave drive scheme potentially allows us to access the strongcoupling regime of the spin-boson model. We discuss how the resulting spin relaxation dynamics with different initialization conditions can be probed by standard qubit-readout techniques from circuit quantum electrodynamics. The spin-boson model studies dynamics of a two-level system interacting with a bosonic environment Certain limits of the spin-boson problem are however well understood. In the limit of weak system-bath coupling, perturbative methods such as the Born-Markov master equation A commonly used strategy of obtaining new insight into many quantum models, or to test previous theoretical predictions, is the approach of quantum simulation The computational complexity of model Hamiltonians is connected to the mutual coupling strengths of the individual elements relative to the subsystem energies. Reaching the strong-coupling regime between a qubit and a resonator in a superconducting microwave circuit, described by the Jaynes-Cummings model, has enabled the reproduction of many fundamental phenomena from cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) and has led to the development of novel quantum systems and applications The spin-boson model is a generalization of the singlemode quantum Rabi model to a continuous-mode environment. Near the coupling regime that exhibits Kondo physics and localization-delocalization transitions Besides increasing the coupling strength via sample design, it also can be effectively increased by creating a Hamiltonian in the rotating frame, based on the application of Rabi drives In this article, we study theoretically a realization of the spin-boson model with strong system-environment couplings using a superconducting qubit coupled to an engineered environment of bosonic modes. In analogy to the approach described in Refs. We also discuss how the resulting spin dynamics can be probed by standard readout techniques from circuit QED. In particular, the down-conversion of system frequencies allows for tracking the spin-relaxation dynamics in real time. We also discuss an experimental implementation, where the bosonic environment and the qubit are fabricated on two separate chips in a modular approach. This setup allows for probing the system more rigorously, by characterizing both the qubit and the environmental properties in separate experiments. The article is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we introduce the spin-boson problem in the notation widely used in literature, and how it maps to the notation and methods used in this article. We briefly go through central results and predictions of the spin-boson model. In particular, in Sec. II C, we show how the effective spin-boson coupling strength can be tailored by two-tone driving. In Sec. III, we introduce an implementation of the spinboson model by a superconducting transmon qubit coupled to a microwave circuit. We show how the impedance of the environment is related to the spectral density in the spin-boson model and discuss in detail how the impedance affects to transmon. In Sec. IV, we analyze how a set of microwave resonators can be used to tailor an ohmic spectral density in the rotating frame with Kondo parameter α ∼ 1. In Sec. V, we provide a description of an experimental realization based on a modular flip-chip approach and introduce measurement pulse sequences that can be used to probe spin dynamics with different initial conditions. Conclusions and discussion are given in Sec. VI. We start our analysis by introducing the Hamiltonian and the spectral function of the spin-boson problem. After this, in Sec. II B, we go through central results and predictions of spin-boson problem obtained in literature Here, we introduce the spin-boson Hamiltonian in the notation as widely used in earlier literature. After this we discuss how it maps to the notation used in this article. The notation and methods used throughout the remainder of this article matches to the standard one used in superconducting microwave circuits and therefore more directly allows us to relate properties of the spin-boson model to proposed experimental realization. In earlier literature, the spin-boson model is often introduced by starting from the Hamiltonian The two-level system, described by the Pauli matrices σi , may be regarded as two trapped positions of a virtual particle in a certain potential landscape. The variable q 0 denotes a trapping distance, ∆ a hopping rate, and characterizes the energy difference. The environment perceives the location of the particle and thereby couples to σz . The free evolution of the environmental coordinate operators xi is defined by the quadratic harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian Ĥbath . A central function of the theory is the spectral density of the environment, defined formally as The spectral function S(ω) of the collective bath operator, is a function of temperature T and J(ω), and reads Together with the parameter q 0 , see Eq. ( When superconducting qubits are capacitively or inductively coupled to microwave cavities, their dipole moment couples to the electric or magnetic field of the cavity. Since the dipole coupling is considered transversal, it is intuitive to write the coupling term proportional to a σx operator. Therefore, even though circuit QED systems consisting of a superconducting qubit coupled to a set of microwave resonators are described by the spin-boson Hamiltonian in Eq. ( To keep the notation comparable with Sec. II A 1, we define the system parameters analogously as above. We then consider establishing the spin-boson Hamiltonian using a superconducting qubit with energy splitting ∆, coupled to a set of microwave resonators, described by the total Hamiltonian This corresponds to the case = 0, which is the regime that shows the physically most relevant and non-trivial behavior We note that the coupling parameter q 0 could also be incorporated in the definition of the coupling strengths g i . Our separation is meaningful only when the variables c i xi = g i bi + b † i correspond to certain physical quantities. In this article, we fix the bath coordinates xi to correspond to voltage fluctuations across the two capacitors of the qubit, Therefore, q 0 has the dimension of charge. It describes an effective charge shift of the artificial atom between its two states as seen by the environment. The variable q 0 then absorbs all the information of the qubit and how it couples to the voltage fluctuations: the following results are thereby valid, in principle, for arbitrary superconducting qubits with appropriate adaptations of coupling parameter q 0 . Within this identification we then write, following from Eq. ( In the following, we briefly go through some central predictions made for the spin dynamics when interacting ). The probability P (t) corresponds in the proposed system to the expectation value P (t) = σx(t) , when initialized to the +1 eigenstate of σx at t = 0. For α < 0.5, (damped) oscillations prevail when ∆rn αkBT , but change to incoherent relaxation when ∆rn αkBT (exponential decay to zero). Localization effect leads to a decay of P (t) towards a finite value and occurs for α ≥ 1 and T = 0. In other regimes, the system exhibits incoherent relaxation with subtle forms of the decay rate with bosonic environments of different spectral functions. We explain how these predictions correspond to dynamics in the considered circuit QED system. A more detailed explanation of an experimental realization is given in Sec. V. Central predictions for an ohmic environment are summarized qualitatively in Fig. In the spin-boson model, a widely studied effect is the hopping dynamics between the two trapped positions of the fictitious particle (connected by the hopping amplitude ∆) under a perturbation caused by coupling to the environment. Here, we are not interested in the environment itself, but in the short and intermediate time-scale evolution of the system when subjected to a certain initial condition. The long-time behavior is also interesting to study but can be much more challenging to observe in experiment. The theoretical restrictions to small and intermediate time scales practically correspond to the experimental restrictions due to the finite initialization time and finite decoherence time of the superconducting qubit, correspondingly. We consider now the notation introduced in Sec. II A 2 and follow the discussion given in Ref. Ideally, in the absence of interaction, we get (defining the left-hand side as +1 eigenstate of σx ) When interacting with the environment, the hopping can become damped, over-damped, or even totally forbidden (localization). We note that in our realization, we are naturally not restricted to the theoretical scenarios in the literature: one can probe both σz and σx with different initialization conditions, for the two-level system as well as for the bath (see Sec. V). The exact initialization of the bath affects the results essentially in the case of strong couplings, while it is not a requirement for the observation of the following effects (in particular the localization). A central example of the spin-boson model is the ohmic environment, which is described by a linear spectral density Here we have introduced a cut-off function F c (ω). For instance, this can be an exponential drop F c (ω) = e -ω/ωc or a sharp cut-off F c (ω) = Θ(ω c -ω), with cut-off frequency ω c , respectively. An important parameter describing the coupling between the system and the environment in the ohmic case is the Kondo parameter It can be qualitatively interpreted as an environmentinduced decay rate Γ normalized by the internal precession frequency ∆, α ∼ Γ/∆: In the limit α 1, it directly corresponds to an inverse quality factor of the weakly perturbed two-level system, as derived in Sec. III D, and a similar result can also hold for the quantum two-level system with α ∼ 1 It has been understood that we have practically two independent variables that define the solution of the problem: the interaction strength α and the (bath renormalized) two-level system energy ∆ rn It can be helpful to mention that the localization mechanism in the spin-boson model is closely related to Coulomb blockade effect in superconducting tunnel junctions, i.e., Cooper-pair tunneling across a Josephson junction that is voltage-biased in series with an electromagnetic environment. When the environmental (zero-frequency or characteristic resonator) impedance is comparable with the resistance quantum R Q = h/4e 2 , the system enters the Coulomb blockade regime, where charge tunneling is strongly suppressed or even completely prohibited The model for general power-law behavior of J(ω) is conveniently written in the form Here, the case s < 1 is called the sub-ohmic regime and s > 1 is referred to as the super-ohmic regime. In particular, s = 0 with T > 0 has been used as a model for 1/f noise Here, we show how to establish an effective spinboson Hamiltonian in the rotating frame by additional microwave driving. We take use of modified interaction during driven evolution of the two-level system Following Refs. where the drive is accounted for by the term Here Ω i is the amplitude and ω i the frequency of the drive i. To obtain an immediate feeling of the drive frequencies and amplitudes we use, we note that in the following scheme we consider a situation where ω 1 ω 2 and Ω 1 Ω 2 . During the derivation, also the condition ω 1 -ω 2 = Ω 1 is taken to obtain the desired form of the Hamiltonian (see below), and we will have ω i Ω i . The drive frequency can be assumed to be the qubit frequency in the lab frame, ω 1 = ∆. We enter now a rotating frame with respect to the stronger transverse drive by performing a unitary transformation according to This is a combined rotating frame of the two-level system and of all the bosonic modes. The Hamiltonian becomes now We have neglected the contributions + Ω 2 2 σ+ e i(ω1+ω2)t + H.c. . This can be done if oscillations with the frequencies 2ω 1 and ω 1 + ω 2 are much faster than frequencies Ω 1 and Ω 2 . In addition, coupling to modes in the bosonic bath, with couplings q 0 g i / , is negligible if the bath will include only modes in a small frequency range ω c 2ω i . In Hamiltonian of Eq. ( We also choose Ω 1 = ω 1 -ω 2 , which leads to Ĥ2 = ( We have again neglected fast oscillating terms, - The first three terms on the right-hand side can be easily dropped with similar assumptions as above. The implications due to dropping the fourth term need to be analyzed more carefully, done below in Sec. II D. We note that the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( where the new parameters have the form We see that the two-level system and bosonic energies are tunable by the external drives. Since the coupling has kept its form (up to a factor of 2), this allows for tailoring essentially stronger relative couplings between the system and the environment We also have a new coordinate operator of the environment. To determine its properties we first write down the solution in the rotating frame Here the energies ω i -ω 1 are the effective energies in the rotating basis, which can be negative. The population of these modes can be determined from the thermal population in the laboratory frame. Using the spectral density in the original frame, J(ω), we get for the thermal average of the correlation function The temperature T is the real temperature of the bath. In the following, it is safe to assume that the real bath is at the zero temperature since practically ω 1 k B T / . We have then In order to have an exact connection between the effective system in the rotating frame and the spin-boson model, the created correlation function in the rotating frame has to simulate a finite temperature bath. To construct a specific spectral function in the rotating frame with an effective temperature T eff , the spectral density in the laboratory frame is required to have a contribution (δω > 0) below the frequency of the rotating frame, If this is satisfied for certain T eff , we have Veff (t), Veff (0) where we have defined the effective spectral density in the rotating frame For T eff = 0 we have simply We note that even though the connection between these two systems might seem trivial, just a frequency shift due to the external drive, it is quite remarkable since it connects two completely different many-body physics problems: one problem including emission and absorption of photons with same bosonic modes, and another problem which includes only dissipation to two different set of bosonic modes. The only property that needs to be satisfied to connect these two problems is the effective detailed balance, Eq. (30). Here, we sum up the restrictions and the size of errors in the quantum simulation that appear due to the taken approximations when deriving the effective rotating-frame Hamiltonian. Errors occur from dropping the terms in Eqs. Most terms in Eqs. ( This sets a limit to the spectral width and the cut-off of the bath. This is since the term probes the bath in a completely similar way as the central term in the effective Hamiltonian of Eq. ( To be more quantitative, let us assume that we have a residue bath density at frequencies close to Ω 1 , which we now write in the form The dimensionless variable ᾱ then compares the effective qubit frequency Ω 2 /2 to the spectral density at frequency Ω 1 . This gives a bath-induced decoherence rate In order to have a negligible contribution within the time scale of the effective two-level system oscillations, 1/Ω 2 , we demand ᾱ 1. Similarly, also a finite internal lifetime of the two-level system, due to internal decay mechanisms, limits the simulation length. Let us denote this rate by Γ internal . Ideally, we would then like to engineer a bath which does not limit the decay and dephasing times of the qubit itself, i.e., we would like to be in the regime Γ < Γ internal Ω 2 /2. The second important restriction to the parameter regime is the finite anharmonicity of the qubit. The anharmonicity is defined as the difference between the first and second energy-level splittings, Too strong drive can induce transitions to the third state of the artificial atom. The probability for the artificial atom contributing through the third excited state is roughly Therefore, a large anharmonicity qubit is favorable in order to avoid a strong additional upper bound in Ω 1 . The qubit anharmonicity depends on the experimental realization. Flux-based qubits can easily reach anharmonicities higher than the lowest energy-level splitting ∆ an > ∆. In this article, we consider a realization based on a transmon qubit with ∆ an ∆ for its simple operation without the necessity of biasing Later, in Sec. IV, we show how to build such a bath from a set of microwave resonators. In this section, we study how a superconducting qubit connected to a dissipative microwave-circuit element can be used to realize the spin-boson Hamiltonian. We consider explicitly the case of a transmon qubit. Our main goal is to determine how the parameters of the spin-boson model, the spectral density S(ω), the coupling q 0 , and the qubit energy ∆, depend on the properties of the microwave circuit. Section III A briefly sums up the central results. In Sec. III B, we describe how to determine the effect of capacitance renormalization in circuits considered in this article. In Sec. III C, we detail the derivation of the spin-boson parameters q 0 and ∆, and in Sec. III D, we show the derivation of the Kondo parameter α. The approach we use is based on a linear circuit analysis, but the results can also be derived by an exact Lagrangian quantization Our superconducting qubit couples to environmental voltage fluctuations V (t), that causes dissipation. The quantity that describes its effect is the spectral density S(ω) = V (t) V (0) ω . There are several equivalent ways of determining this quantity for microwave circuits, which basically all seek for the eigenmodes of the relevant (non-interacting) linear system. In this article, we assume that we know the impedance Z(ω) of the linear circuit connected to the superconducting qubit, an example being the circuit we consider in Sec. IV. Guidelines for a determination of the spectral density in open circuits is given in Appendix A as well as in other Refs. In this free evolution solution, where the transmon island charge is set to zero (see below), the impedance Z(ω) sees a parallel capacitance C int , which is the effective qubit capacitance C J and C g denote the capacitances of the Josephson junction and the capacitance to ground, respectively. The effective impedance of the environment, to be used in Eq. ( The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. We also note that the scenario where a bath circuit is used to tailor a dissipative qubit environment is fundamentally different from the case where a certain impedance is used to filter microwave transmission. The reason is a different boundary condition at the qubit: In the case of the tailored bosonic environment, radiation reflects at the capacitor C int , whereas in the case of a microwave filter, we would have an impedance-matched load and no reflection. A direct comparison of Eqs. ( This equation is central for experimentally tailoring a bosonic environment, relating the effective impedance to the resulting spectral density J(ω). It has also been shown recently that the parallel contribution C int in the spectral density is indeed an essential quantity for a consistent description of such systems in all parameter regimes In the considered circuit, the transmon interacts with the environmental voltage fluctuations through the operator Here Q is the charge operator of the transmon island. The interaction charge, Qint , accounts for an internal transmon-qubit capacitive shunting through parameter β, reducing the coupling to the island charge Q Here, the characteristic impedance of the transmon is defined as , where E J is the Josephson coupling energy, E C = e 2 /2(C J + C 0 g ) the charging energy, and the effective ground capacitance C 0 g depends on the realization (see Sec. III B). In the simplest case C 0 g = C g . Finally, the normalized two-level system energy ∆ for typical transmon parameters becomes In the following section, we show how to determine E C and demonstrate that the given identifications are consistent with the alternative approach of including the interaction term of Eq. ( The impedance Z(ω) can affect to the Hamiltonian of the transmon. The effect is generally twofold: it renormalizes (i) the effective transmon capacitance and (ii) the Josephson coupling energy E J . The effect (i) is analogous to mass renormalization in the spin-boson model The Hamiltonian of a superconducting artificial atom can be derived by applying a Lagrangian formalism to electric circuits The first term on the right-hand side describes Cooperpair tunneling across the superconducting junction as a function of the superconducting phase difference φ across the Josephson junction. The second term describes the capacitive (Coulomb) energy related to the island charge Q. In this isolated circuit, the effective island capacitance is the sum of C J and C g . The phase and the charge are conjugated variables, The commutation relation is presented in this (periodic) form since the island charge takes only values that are multiples of 2e, or equivalently, the phase distribution is here by definition 2π-periodic. FIG. Finding the capacitance renormalization is analogous to identifying the 'counter-term' in general systemreservoir models where then In addition to the qubit, bath, and interaction Hamiltonians, we have introduced a term Ĥct , counteracting to the qubit Hamiltonian renormalization (coherent embedding of the environment) coming from the interaction term Ĥint . It is here the interaction-normalized Hamiltonian Ĥ0 tr that should be used when theoretically reducing the transmon to a two-level system and whose dynamics is observed in the experiment. Strictly speaking, the renormalization is determined theoretically by first evaluating Hamiltonian of Eq. ( • The solution when the resistivity is put to zero, giving H 0 tr . • The solution when the resistive part is disentangled from the circuit, for example, with an additional capacitor C dis → 0 in series with the resistor, giving H tr . To illustrate the mathematics of this approach, let us consider the simple case of a bare ohmic impedance Z(ω) = R. We then first identify the Hamiltonian of the circuit when resistivity is set to zero. This fully coherent system corresponds to the one in Eq. ( In the second stage, we identify the transmon Hamiltonian when disconnected from the resistor lead, which has the form (Appendix A) Using this we then find for the difference Let us then consider the circuit shown in Fig. where In the second stage, we get for the Hamiltonian corresponding to the disconnected resistor where we have defined an effective gate capacitance This is since C appears in series connection with C g . To evaluate the counter-term, let us consider explicitly the case C → 0. (The analysis of this section also holds also for C = 0.) We get for the difference To show that the above results are sound, we can estimate the embedding due to the interaction term Ĥint = Qint V by an alternative method, using a Born-Markov master equation. Such an approach assumes that the effect of the environment (beyond the counter-term) is weak, but its result is valid also more generally since the embedding of the environment is the same for all R. Here we start from the Hamiltonian Ĥtr , where the re-sistor lead is decoupled from the transmon, and estimate the renormalization explicitly. Considering the circuit of Fig. where Re[Z(ω)] = R/[1 + (ω/ω c ) 2 ], and Ψ(ω) is defined by a digamma function The other (and possibly large) imaginary term is independent of the resistance at usual frequencies which are well below ω c and produces a constant -i/2C int . As this enters to a master equation through the matrix elements of Qint , one obtains finally a coherent renormalization term Q 2 int /2C int , as obtained also in Eq. ( After theoretically indentifying the capacitance renormalization caused by the environment to the superconducting artificial atom, we do the reduction of the transmon to a two-level system using Hamiltonian Ĥ0 tr , Eq. ( Here, for example, for Hamiltonian of Eq. ( This variable will play an important role in a practical realization, since the drive amplitudes Ω i of Eq. ( Applying the result of Eq. ( where now Here again β = C g /(C J + C g ), where the ground capacitance is the unnormalized (original) one, C g , whereas in the definition of the charging energy and system energy levels the effective ground capacitance C 0 g appears. A central situation in the spin-boson theory is the case of an ohmic environment. Assuming an ohmic impedance, Re[Z eff ] = R, we have J(ω) = Rω ≡ ηω. This yields a Kondo parameter The coupling α scales linearly with R and is reduced by the capacitive shunting by the ground capacitance (β < 1). The relevant quantity to compare R is the characteristic impedance of the Josephson junction, Z J . The size of α when realized in the rotating frame is studied in Sec. IV. Moreover, for a transmon qubit and for α 1 (weakcoupling limit) there is a direct connection between α and the quality factor of the qubit. A golden rule calculation gives here for the decay rate The limit β = 1 (no shunting of voltage fluctuations) is the result for a dissipative classical resonator. This direct connection appears since we have treated the transmon as a harmonic oscillator, with weak non-linearity, which is a good approximation since E J E C . The relation between the energy decay rate Γ ↓ and the spin-boson parameter α has been studied recently in Ref. We note that if we would consider the Cooper-pair box qubit, working in the limit E J E C , we would have q 0 = 2e, leading to α = R/R Q . There, a resistance R = R Q is then needed to reach α = 1. In this section, we consider constructing an ohmic bath in the rotating frame from multiple microwave resonators with broadening. Each such resonator can be, for example, a superconducting lumped element LC resonator integrated with a resistive element R, or a superconducting coplanar resonator with a leakage to an open transmission line. After a qualitatively analysis of the achievable Kondo parameter α, Sec. IV A, we introduce our method and show a numerical example of the bath construction, Sec. IV B. Analytical relations for bath properties are derived in Sec. IV C and robustness against parasitic coupling between neighboring resonators is analyzed in Sec. IV D. Let us first apply the idea presented in Sec. II C to realize an effective ohmic environment in the rotating frame. We first note that in our effective system where ω 1 is the dominant Rabi frequency, which is tuned to the energy of the superconducting qubit, ∆ ∼ 2π × 7 GHz, and the cut-off frequency ω c 2π × 100 MHz. This means that we practically need a linearly increasing impedance to create a linearly increasing J eff (ω), since here Let us now assume that a parameter R = η in some ohmic environment of the original system describes also the maximum value of the spectral density in the constructed effective system. Practically, such a parameter corresponds to a characteristic impedance of the microwave transmission line or resonator. In this discussion, for simplicity, we neglect the factor 4 difference between the laboratory-frame and the rotating-frame spectral densities. Let us denote ω q as the frequency where the maximal impedance is reached in the effective system and the two impedances meet, so we have J(ω q ) = Rω q , as depicted in Fig. The individual multiplied contributions play an important role in determining the magnitude of α eff . The term β 2 /4π reduces the coupling at least by an order of magnitude. Also the (maximal) resistivity needs to be relatively small, R/Z J < 1. If we assume that these two contributions reduce the coupling by two-to-three orders of magnitude, then (in this example) it is the role of the term 1 + ω 1 /ω c ≈ ω 1 /ω c to counteract this contribution. For example, we would need ω 1 /ω c ≈ 10 2 in order to reach very strong couplings α eff ∼ 0.1 -1. This corresponds to a relatively narrow-bandwidth environment, ω c 2π × 100 MHz. This qualitative demand should be considered together with the restriction to drive strengths Ω 1 that are much weaker than the transmon qubit anharmonicity, ∆ an 2π × 350 MHz, and that the Rabi frequency has to be above the cut-off of the effective environment, Ω 1 > ω c , see Sec. II D. In this work, we consider constructing the environmental impedance by using a set of LCR resonators, each of them coupled through a coupling capacitor C ci , as shown in Fig. the spacings between the resonance frequencies. A general recipe that can be implemented in an experiment is the following: • Realize all resonators with slightly different frequencies, by varying their inductances L i and/or capacitances C i . • Shape the spectral function by changing individual coupling capacitances C ci and/or resonancefrequency spacing. The resonator broadenings, defined by variables R i , can be used to shape the spectral function of the bath as well, but more importantly, it is closely connected to the achievable Kondo parameter α, as shown below. A practical example of bath shaping using our approach is shown in Fig. More fundamental connections between the chosen parameters and the achievable spectral density exists. Below, we first show analytically how the broadening and coupling of individual modes relate to α. After this we consider explicit formulas for the the size of the individual couplings and study how the size of the constructed (smooth) impedance depends on resonator properties and the resonance-frequency density. We also estimate the size of the transmon-capacitance renormalization. Let us first analyze how the linear increase of spectral density relates to the coupling to individual broadened resonators. It is reasonable to assume that the steepness of the spectral density at low effective frequencies (see for example Fig. We then evaluate the decay rate of the qubit due to single environmental broadened resonator. According to the golden rule, the decay rate is where γ is the width (decay rate) of the resonator, ω the frequency with respect to the resonance frequency, and g ≡ q 0 g i / the total coupling. The result for the decay rate is strictly valid for small couplings g γ, but this formula indeed provides a general connection between an individual resonator spectral density and a coupling to the qubit. The derivative of the golden rule decay rate is This has a maximal value (g/γ) 2 . Assuming that we synthesize a linear increase of the spectral density which qualitatively follows this steepness, we can relate this directly to the parameter α, We then find that for couplings α ∼ 1 at least some of the resonators are in the strong-coupling regime (g ∼ γ). It is, however, not needed that individual resonators are in the ultra-strong coupling regime. This seemingly fundamental result states that the onset of the single-resonator strong-coupling regime, which comes together with non-Markovian system-environment interaction, is closely related to the strong-coupling in the spin-boson model (α ∼ 1), when the environment is constructed from multiple resonators. Let us consider now how the coupling to an individual resonator, g, relates to the system parameters. A Hamiltonian for the qubit coupled to a single (non-dissipative) resonator with inductance L 1 and capacitance C 1 is here of the form ), and we have assumed that C c C J , C 1 , C g . For equal system frequencies, ∆ = ω 1 , we get A practical example is β = 1/ √ 2, C c = 0.1 fF, C +C int = 70 fF, C 1 = 2C T = 200 fF, and ∆/2π = 7 GHz, which gives g/2π = 5 MHz. In the rotating frame the coupling is halved to 2.5 MHz When constructing the spectral density using multiple resonators with internal losses, the coupling to individual resonators is reduced. This is due to the collective capacitance due to all other resonators We assume here N 1 so that the considered resonator can be included in the sum with negligible error. The effect to coupling to a single resonator is the same as increasing the extra capacitance to ground as C → C + C total c . The coupling to qubit is then approximately Here also Let us now study the size of impedance synthesized within our method. For this we consider first establishing a rectangular impedance between certain frequencies ω 1 and ω 1 + ω interval . Two parameter-limits lead to simple analytical formulas: (i) when the collective coupling Let us first consider the case C total c C int + C. In this case, the effective parallel capacitive shunting is not due to the qubit or the capacitance C, but due to all the other resonators. Here, assuming the same coupling capacitance C ci = C c for all N resonators, we get a reduction of the impedance seen by the qubit of one resonator (due to shunting of the other resonators) by a factor Each resonator contributes to the real part of the effective impedance (before the considered reduction) with a Lorentzian of area ω i Z LCi and a width δω where the characteristic impedance of resonator i is Then, the average value of the real part of the environmental impedance is (assuming a nearly constant characteristic impedances and an interval ω interval ω 1 ) We see that a fundamental limit is set by the characteristic impedance of the resonators. Indeed, for a typical set of parameters we find numerically that However, the effect of such impedance to the transmon is actually large, since the transmon impedance is usually of the same magnitude, which is not the regime we want to be in. In the case C total c C int + C, the effective parallel shunting is due to the qubit contribution C int and capacitance C. This is practically the regime of our proposed system. Here, the preceding results are valid with an additional reduction factor [N C c /(C int + C)] 2 . We then estimate for the (rectangular) impedance achieved by the considered method, In this regime, the size of the dimensionless coupling parameter α can then be controlled by the capacitance C, which is done in the simulation of Fig. The environmental impedance can affect the qubit parameters through a capacitance renormalization. Applying the approach described in Sec. III B, we identify the Hamiltonian of the circuit when resistances are put to zero. Here the parallel LCR circuits becomes effectively shorts. The environmental capacitance as seen by the qubit is then This fully coherent system corresponds to the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Depending on the size of the term of Eq. ( Here, we numerically study deviations in the spectral function due to a parasitic mutual coupling of bosonic FIG. • Coupling between the qubit and at least some of the resonators has to be in the strong-coupling limit, g ∼ γ. • Parasitic coupling between resonators should be maximally of the same order as the maximal coupling to the qubit, g. In this section, we provide a brief description of an experimental realization of a spin-boson quantum simulator based on a modular flip-chip approach. In addition, we discuss experimental protocols that allow one to access interesting quantities of the two-level system in the spin-boson simulator. They include the bath initialization, qubit-state preparation, and the qubit-state measurement. In our preliminary experimental realization of the spinboson model, we place the two-level system and the bosonic bath on two physically different chips. Both samples are mounted in a specifically designed sample box on top of each other in a flip-chip fashion We implement a bosonic bath formed by N = 20 lumped-element resonators that individually couple to the qubit via coupling antennas. The resonators are equipped with resistive elements that allow us to tailor their internal dissipation such that they overlap in a restricted frequency band and form a bosonic bath of a smooth spectral function. A shaping of the bosonic bath impedance Z(ω) is achieved by adjusting the individual coupling strengths between qubit and the bosonic resonator modes, as described in Sec. IV. The two-level system is formed by a concentric transmon qubit In a preliminary experiment, we have demonstrated that the qubit decay rate can be dominated by the engineered bosonic bath in a spectral range of ∼ 500 MHz. The bath-induced qubit decay rate at different frequencies corresponded here directly to the noise at different frequencies in the spin-boson model (α 1), and thereby shows that quantum simulation using the flip-chip approach is possible. A more detailed description of this experiment is provided in Ref. In order to experimentally observe specific dynamics of the spin-boson model, we propose two possible pulse sequences that allow us to access the expectation values of σx [well population function P (t)] as well as of σz (energy decay) with different bath initializations. A brief description for the expected behavior of the wellpopulation dynamics, function P (t), is given in Sec. II B 2 and in Fig. Observing the time evolution of the expectation values σz or σx can be performed with an extension of the measurement protocol applied in Ref. Within the above formalism we are able to probe the relaxation of qubit excitations for both σz and σx . For a direct comparison with the spin-boson theory, for example presented in Ref. In order to observe the well population function P (t) as discussed in Ref. with Ĥeff given in Eq. Dissipation of the bosonic bath can be implemented by adding an ancillary transmission line, providing a loss channel for bath excitations If we assume that the coupling between the drive and the bath is mediated by the qubit, the effective drive of the environment is of an approximate amplitude (C ci /C int )Ω 1 per resonator i. Each resonator will couple to the drive with separate coupling. In the system considered in Sec. IV, each resonator has an approximative width γ i 2π × 5 MHz. Considering explicitly the highest-energy resonator, with the off-resonance drive ω i -ω 1 ∼ 2π×50 MHz, we get an average photon number in this resonator This leads to photon dissipation rate Γ dis = γ i ni 1 MHz. Due to the specific form of the designed impedance, the result is approximately the same for all individual resonators. The length of the one measurement process is roughly 1 μs, which implies that during one measurement each on-chip resistor absorbs on average less than 1 photon. The effect of this to the temperature of each resistor is small, but can set a minimal (cooling) time interval between two successive measurement protocols. Specific pulsing schemes that relax the environmental resonators to their ground states just before the quantum simulation can also be used In conclusion, we have shown that a quantum simulation of the spin-boson model can be performed in a wide parameter range using a superconducting qubit connected to a microwave circuit. In order to probe numerically difficult parameter regimes, we considered an extension of the driving scheme proposed in Ref. We discussed how to experimentally probe the well population dynamics P (t) under different initialization conditions of the bosonic bath. For this purpose, we provided concrete measurement pulse sequences, based on well-established control and detection schemes from circuit QED. In the considered system, probing the well population dynamics corresponds to measuring the expectation value of the σx (t) operator. It is also straightforward to study other two-level system correlation functions, such as of the σz (t) operator, as well as the effect of bath initialization. The proposed approach allows for engineering a rather arbitrary spectral function in a restricted frequency range. We estimated that for a realization with a transmon qubit the spectral width of the environment must be in the range of 100 MHz. By controlling the drive and qubit frequencies, we can adjust the zero-frequency condition of the tailored bosonic bath, which allows us to choose the effective system temperature T eff . By controlling the amplitude of the weaker Rabi drive, Ω 2 , we can tune the effective two-level system energy relative to the temperature and the cut-off frequency ω c , which is of central importance in the spin-boson theory. In particular, Kondo physics can be observed for an effective temperature below the Kondo temperature T K . At the Toulouse point (α = 1/2) one can estimate /ω c , which can be adjusted by Ω 2 . Hence, our system can access a large parameter space of the spin-boson model via experimental drive control. The proposed experimental approach, based on the flip-chip technique, also features a modularity that allows to probe various fabricated bosonic environments with the same qubit in successive experiments. The inverse transformation has the form Φi≥2 = P i δxC (A8) Our Lagrangian corresponds to the Hamiltonian where Here we have defined the series capacitance as seen by the resonator, 1/C p1 ≡ 1/C c + 1/C J . If we identify C c = C g (as in the main part of the article) we have C p1 = C int . As the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian terms for Q 0 are the same as for Q 1 , within the swap C J ↔ C 1 , we must have where analogously 1/C p0 ≡ 1/C c + 1/C. The junction and resonator capacitances are now renormalized as expected. The interaction term gets the form We note that in the main part of the article the operator Q0 is marked simply Q. the peak that matters, where we have used the information that in the considered case the integration over J(ω) is proportional to the characteristic impedance Z LC . Here the values g 2 i form a peak around the central frequency ω r , describing a broadened resonator. We then obtain a connection between the single-mode and the continuous-mode treatments of the same peak in the spectral density We see that the (squared) total effective strength is proportional to the sum of the squared strengths of individual modes. Note also that in comparison to couplings g i , the coupling g is normalized by ω r , which means that it depends only on the characteristic impedance of the resonator, see Eq. (B1). We could also interpret such a single-mode peak as a single slice of an ohmic spectrum, at frequency ω r , with width dω, and total coupling g. This interpretation gives a relation The variable dω is so far arbitrary, and stands here for the width of the chosen slice of the ohmic spectrum. Also the variable g is not fixed. If we decide to fix the frequency-normalized coupling g (not ω r g), i.e., keep the characteristic impedances independent of frequency of the chosen slice, then the frequency interval between resonators, dω, has to decrease with the position ω r . This can be interpreted as that the quality factors of individual resonators need to be identical: The resonators are equivalent up to a frequency conversion. On the other hand, if we decide to fix dω, we obtain that the coupling needs to behave as g 2 ∝ αdω/ω r . This increases when decreasing ω r . However, equivalently, the un-normalized couplings should behave as (ω r g) 2 ∼ g 2 i ∼ αω r dω. This then shows that the actual (squared) couplings g 2 i need to increase lin-early with frequency, as expected. It should be noted that when contructing an effective bath at high frequencies instead, the contributions of individual resonator frequencies ω i in the effective couplings ω i g can be treated as a constant. The bath can then be constructed by varying the resonator density, or by manipulating couplings g by additional coupling capacitors, as described in the main part of the article. 1 The relative voltages V i /V can then be solved straightforwardly numerically using matrix inversion. The impedance Z is solved using the relation which then leads to equation for impedance Z, As discussed in the main text, the total effective impedance includes also capacitors C and C int . The answer for the total effective impedance is then