We study the low energy spectrum of a correlated quantum dot embedded between the normal conducting and superconducting reservoirs and hybridized with the topological superconducting nanowire, hosting the Majorana end-modes. We investigate the leaking Majorana quasiparticle and inspect its interplay with the proximity induced on-dot pairing and correlations. In particular, we focus on the subgap Kondo effect near the quantum phase transition/crossover from the spinfull (doublet) to the spinless (BCS-type singlet) configurations. Treating the correlations perturbatively and within the NRG approach we study its signatures observable in the Andreev (particle-to-hole conversion) tunneling spectroscopy. We find, that the leaking Majorana mode has a spin-selective influence on the subgap Kondo effect. Intensive studies have been recently devoted to quasiparticles, resembling the Majorana fermions Inspired by the work by M.T. Deng et al. The quantum dot (QD) embedded between a superconducting (S) and metallic (N) leads and side-coupled to the Majorana nanowire (Fig. Correlations and the Majorana mode have been already studied for QD embedded between the metallic For junctions, comprising the normal and superconducting electrodes a relationship between the Majorana quasiparticle with the subgap Kondo effect is much less explored The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we formulate the microscopic model. In Sec. III we study the subgap QD spectrum and the tunneling conductance, neglecting the correlations. Next, in Sec. IV, we consider the correlated QD in the subgap Kondo regime. In Sec. V we summarize the main results. Appendices provide details, concerning influence of the magnetic field, finite polarization of Majorana modes, their overlap, etc. Empirical realizations of the topological superconductivity in the semiconducting wires Our setup (Fig. where .) refers to s-wave superconducting substrate and electron energies ξ kβ are measured with respect to the chemical potentials μ β . The correlated QD is described by where denotes the energy level and U stands for the repulsive interaction between opposite spin electrons. The QD is coupled to both external reservoirs via , where V kβ denote the matrix elements. In a wide bandwidth limit, it is convenient to introduce the auxiliary couplings Γ β = 2π k |V kβ | 2 δ(ω -ξ kβ ), which we assume to be constant. It can be shown . We make use of this low energy model, whose extension to arbitrary values of ∆ has been discussed for instance in Ref. The zero-energy end modes of the topological nanowire can be modeled by the following term with the hermitian operators η i = η † i , where m corresponds to their overlap. We recast these Majorana operators by the standard fermionic ones so that (2) can be expressed as where t m = λ/ √ 2. We first consider the case of uncorrelated QD (U = 0). Let us calculate the Green's function ). For m = 0 (i.e. without any overlap between the Majorana modes) the Green's function (4) simplifies to where . These Green's functions ( (5)- Figure Upon increasing the coupling t m we observe a gradual splitting of the Andreev quasiparticles, leading to emergence of the effective 'molecular' structure. We can notice some differences appearing in the spectrum A σ (ω) of ↑ and ↓ electrons, especially in the low energy region. Low energy quasiparticles of the QD, which is sideattached to the Majorana mode, can be probed in our setup (Fig. where is the Fermi distribution. The energy-dependent transmittance describes a probability of electron (from STM tip) with spin σ to be converted into a hole (reflected back to the STM tip) with an opposite spin σ, injecting one Cooper pair into the superconducting substrate. Similar expression Figure FIG. They originate from the Andreev states mixed with the Majorana quasiparticle (see Fig. In N-QD-N junctions with the side-attached Majorana nanowire the weak coupling t m leads to the Fano-type interference patterns We now analyze the correlated quantum dot, focusing on the subgap Kondo effect originating from the Coulomb potential U and the coupling Γ N to the normal STM tip. It has been emphasized Our main purpose here is to examine how this subgap Kondo effect (appearing at zero energy) gets along with the leaking Majorana mode. Some earlier studies of the correlated quantum dot coupled to both normal (conducting) electrodes in presence of the side-attached Rashba chain indicated a competition between the Kondo and Majorana physics When the correlated quantum dot is embedded between the metallic and superconducting leads (N-QD-S) the eventual subgap Kondo effect is controlled by U/Γ S ratio and 2 ) the BCS singlet is realized for U < Γ S , whereas the doublet is preferred for U > Γ S To study the correlation effects we start by treating the Coulomb term U n ↓ n ↑ in a perturbative manner. We compute the self-energy matrix Σ(ω) of the single particle Green's function from the Dyson equation -1 -Σ(ω) within the second-order perturbation theory (SOPT) The imaginary parts of the second-order contributions Σ (2) ij (ω) are expressed by the convolutions where (ω )ρ (ω )ρ and ρ ± ij (ω) ≡ -1 π Im G 0 ij (ω +i0 + )f (±ω) denote the occupancies obtained from the uncorrelated Green's functions (4), taking into account the effective dot level and influence of the superconducting electrode Let us inspect the spectral function of the correlated quantum dot for each spin separately. Figure In the presence of the side-attached nanowire we notice, that the Majorana mode has completely different influence on each spin channel (panels b and c in Fig. The subgap QD spectrum can be probed by the Andreev scattering which would engage both the spin components, we hence display (Fig. For reliable analysis of the correlations, the induced electron pairing and the leaking Majorana quasiparticle, we have also performed calculations, based on the numerical renormalization group (NRG) algorithm This Hamiltonian ( Figures FIG. the weak Majorana-dot coupling regime (b & c panels) we assign such effect to the destructive quantum interference The spin ↓ sector (Fig. Our numerical results obtained by the unbiased NRG calculations qualitatively agree with the selfconsistent perturbative treatment. For the Majorana mode weakly coupled to the QD, both methods show its detrimental influence on the subgap Kondo effect of ↑ spin and less severe (almost neutral) effect on ↓ spin sector. In the latter case the Kondo peak seems to be robust (it merely broadens). On the other hand, for the QD strongly coupled to the nanowire we find influence of the leaking Majorana mode on both spin sectors, where it redistributes the overall quasiparticle spectra. Under such circumstances the Kondo state is no longer evident. Verification of the above mentioned effects could be possible by measuring the Andreev current, cf. ( FIG. ure 8 shows the variation of the differential Andreev conductance G A (V ) with respect to the Coulomb potential U for the weak (b) and strong (c) coupling t m limits, respectively. Due to technical limitations (related with numerical precision for computation of the real part of the anomalous Green's function) we show here the results obtained within the perturbative scheme. In the weakly correlated case these plots resemble the results presented in Fig. In the absence of the Majorana mode (t m = 0) the differential conductance is characterized by two peaks at bias V , coinciding with energies of the Andreev states. The additional zero-bias enhancement is due to the subgap Kondo effect, appearing in the doublet region (i.e. for U ≥ Γ S ). Within the generalized Schrieffer-Wolff approach adopted for the N-QD-S setup we have previously estimated In particular, it yields enhancement of T K with respect to Γ S upon approaching the doublet-singlet transition. This unique behavior is valid for arbitrary ∆, as has been found by the NRG studies Leakage of the Majorana mode on the QD remarkably affects the mentioned behavior. In the weak coupling limit (middle panel of Fig. We have analyzed the spin-resolved spectroscopic features of the quantum dot side-coupled to the topologically superconducting nanowire, hosting the Majorana quasiparticles. Focusing on an STM-type geometry we have investigated its subgap electronic spectrum which can be probed by the Andreev tunneling, that simultaneously involves the particle and hole degrees of freedom. In the uncorrelated case (U = 0) the presence of the Majorana quasiparticle induces either the zero-energy peak or dip in the QD spectral density, depending on the spin (Fig. We have also inspected the correlated quantum dot (U = 0) case, addressing interplay between the on-dot pairing with the Kondo effect in the presence of the leaking Majorana quasiparticle. The Coulomb interaction along with the proximity induced electron pairing lead to the quantum phase transition from the spinless to spinfull configurations This spin-dependent influence of the Majorana mode on the subgap Kondo effect shows up in the low-energy spectrum of the QD. Such property can be added to the previously reported examples of: spin-selective Andreev processes Our study of the Kondo state vs Majorana mode relationship is different from the previous considerations of the topological Kondo effect that could be realized in the correlated nanowires 12. The total spectral function of the half-filled quantum dot coupled only to the normal lead (ΓS = 0). Results are obtained by NRG for various Coulomb potentials (indicated in the legend) and several couplings to the Majorana mode tm/ΓN = 0, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.8, assuming M = 0. The other parameters are the same as in Fig. value of the zero-bias peak approaches 4e 2 /h for U ≈ Γ S . For U < Γ S , we observe two Andreev and two other Majorana-Andreev hybrids, appearing in the differential conductance. With increasing U , the Andreev peaks evolve into the central peak, appearing at V = 0. On the other hand, for the short nanowire ( m = 1.5Γ N ) and at small voltages, the differential conductance G A (eV ) is similar as for N-QD-S system t m / N =0 0 0.5 FIG. It might be instructive to give a comparison of the correlated quantum dot spectrum (discussed in Sec. IV) with the one, when on-dot pairing is absent. We present here such results for the half-filled QD obtained by the nonperturbative NRG calculations. Figure This can be contrasted with our N-QD-S setup, taking into account the proximity induced on-dot pairing Γ S = 0. For each spin sector we have discussed already the corresponding spectra in Sec. IV B. Let us briefly comment on the total spectral function presented in Fig. In realistic situations the Majorana end-modes emerge in the proximized nanowire only above some critical magnetic field on the order of 1 Tesla Here we consider a different N-QD-SC setup, in which the quantum dot develops its initial Andreev states owing to the proximity with the superconducting substrate. The side-attached nanowire contributes the Majorana mode, which modifies the QD spectrum. Obviously, the magnetic field would strongly affect the subgap spectrum of such 'proximitized' QD. Within our model described by the low-energy Hamiltonian (1,2) we can consider the magnetic field through the spin-dependent energy levels To present this influence of magnetic field we focus on the strongly asymmetric coupling Γ S = 4Γ N , when the bound states are well pronounced (their broadening is then rather narrow). For brevity we show in Fig. For the correlated case (bottom panel), the optimal differential conductance (which is G A < 4e 2 /h) occurs at the renormalized Andreev energies. Again, the magnetic field has quite similar influence on G A (V ). The emerging ZBCP shows at 2V Z + U ≈ Γ S . We thus conclude that, in our N-QD-SC system with the side-attached Majorana wire, the ZBCP can be induced above some critical magnetic field and its value depends on the Coulomb potential U . Such appearance of the Majorana quasiparticles from the coalescing Andreev states is more exotic than in 'normal' quantum dots coupled to the Majorana modes. Influence of the magnetic field on the subgap Kondo effect shall be discussed elsewhere, because there are a few characteristic energy-scales controlling this effect. In realistic situations the spin-orbit coupling along with the Zeeman effect break a spin-rotational symmetry of the system. Formally, spin is hence no longer a good quantum number. Physically it means, that such nanowire with the strong spin-orbit interactions brought in contact with superconductor develops the intersite pairing of equal but 'tilted' spins. Nevertheless one can project such pairing onto ↑ and ↓ components. In each of these sectors the intersite-pairing is characterized by different amplitudes, depending mainly on the magnetic field. In practice, the Majorana quasiparticles appear simultaneously in both spin channels, but with different spectral weights. This polarization of the Majorana modes has been recently considered by one of us Since magnetic polarization of the Majorana modes is in fact relevant, we have considered the coupling of both QD spins to Majorana modes For the uncorrelated quantum dot the Green's function takes the following form For specific calculations, we have assumed imposed where p accounts for the asymmetric coupling of each spin component. Fig. To gain some insight into the singlet-doublet quantum phase transition (discussed in main part of this paper), let us first consider the limit Γ S Γ N , assuming Γ N = 0 + . Influence of the Coulomb repulsion U on the subgap Andreev states in such 'superconducting atomic limit' has been first addressed by E. Vecino et al Finally let us check, if the leaking Majorana mode can affect the opposite ↓ spin of the proximized correlated quantum dot. We compare the spectra of both spins in Fig. 