Superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs) have advanced various frontier scientific and technological fields such as quantum key distribution and deep space communications. However, limited by available cooling technology, all past experimental demonstrations have had ground-based applications. In this work we demonstrate a SNSPD system using a hybrid cryocooler compatible with space applications. With a minimum operational temperature of 2.8 K, this SNSPD system presents a maximum system detection efficiency of over 50% and a timing jitter of 48 ps, which paves the way for various space applications. Superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs) outperform their semiconducting counterparts with a higher system detection efficiency (SDE) To extend the use of SNSPDs to satellite-and space-based applications, a compatible cryocooler needs to be developed. Because the performance parameters, such as the SDE and DCR, of SNSPDs is extremely sensitive to the operational temperature In this paper, we present a hybrid cryocooler that is compatible with space applications, which incorporates a two-stage high-frequency pulse tube (PT) cryocooler and a 4 He Joule-Thomson (JT) cooler. To make a practical SNSPD system for space applications, we chose a superconducting NbTiN ultrathin film, which can operate sufficiently well above 2 K, to fabricate the SNSPDs, instead of using WSi, which usually requires sub-1-K temperatures The SNSPDs were made of an NbTiN film deposited on a 2-inch double-sided thermaloxidized Si substrate. Before the NbTiN deposition, an anti-reflection coating with dielectric layers was ion-beam-assisted deposited on the backside of the substrate; this provides better transmission than a conventional SiO2 layer with a thickness of a 1/4 wavelength. The nominal NbTiN film thickness was determined by the sputtering rate and time. Here the target nominal thickness of the NbTiN film was empirically chosen to be 5 nm. Subsequently, a meandered nanowire covering a circular area with a diameter of 15 μm was structured into the NbTiN film using e-beam lithography and reactive ion etching. The linewidth and the period of the nanowire were 70 nm and 160 nm, respectively. To form the top optical cavity to enhance the absorption, a 200-nm-thick SiO layer was deposited on top of the nanowire as a dielectric material and then a 5-nm/100-nm-thick Ti/Au film was deposited on the SiO layer to create a mirror for the cavity. The detailed design fabrication has been described elsewhere To optically couple the SNSPD to the fiber, we adopted a backside optical coupling package. A lensed single-mode fiber was manually aligned with the active area of the SNSPD from the backside of the chip with an alignment error of less than 3 μm. Then, the packaged detector was mounted and characterized inside either a conventional G-M cryocooler or the hybrid JT cryocooler described in Section 3. To measure the SNSPD, a bias-tee and a low noise amplifier (LNA) were adopted at room temperature. An isolated voltage source in series with a resistor (20 k) provided a stable current bias to the detector. The bias current was fed into the device through the dc port of the bias-tee and the electric response pulses of the SNSPD were extracted from the ac port of the bias-tee and amplified by the LNA. The amplified pulse signals could be monitored via an oscilloscope or counted via a photon counter. The fiber laser source was connected with two variable attenuators and a polarization controller in series. The performance of the SNSPD is described in detail in Section 4. The hybrid cryocooler is composed of two thermally coupled parts: a two-stage highfrequency PT cryocooler and a JT loop, as illustrated in Fig. Because the lowest temperature of the hybrid cryocooler (2.8 K) is higher than that of a conventional G-M cryocooler (2.1 K), performance differences of SNSPDs cooled with the two different cryocoolers are expected. The SNSPD was first measured using a conventional G-M cryocooler for reference and then measured using the hybrid cryocooler. The characteristics of the SNSPDs were measured and are discussed in comparison. The detector has a superconducting transition temperature of 7.9 K. Fig. We have demonstrated the operation of an SNSPD cooled with a hybrid cryocooler that is compatible with space applications. In addition, we believe that the performance of the system can be further improved. First, the optimization of the JT compressors and the PT coolers can decrease the temperature to less than 2.5 K, which will further improve the performance of the SNSPD. Furthermore, temperatures lower than 2 K can be readily achieved by replacing the working medium of the JT loop with 3 He for space applications, where the cost is not the chief limiting factor. However, there is still room for improvement considering the SWaP of the present cryocooler. Second, previous studies on SNSPDs have focused on improving the performance at 2.1 K and even lower temperatures. It would be interesting to optimize the performance of the SNSPD at a higher temperature that the hybrid cryocooler can reach, for example, 2.5 K, 2.8 K, or even higher. Therefore, we may be able to relax this stringent requirement for the cryocooler. In addition, advancing technologies in the detector's design and fabrication may further improve its performance. For example, we may increase the SNR, then decrease the timing jitter by parallelizing the nanowires We have successfully demonstrated a NbTiN SNSPD cooled with a hybrid cryocooler that is compatible with space applications. The hybrid cryocooler reached a minimum temperature of 2.8 K using 319.8 W of electrical power, while the total weight was 55 kg. The key technologies used in the precooling PT cryocooler and the JT compressor were flight-proven 