While charge density wave (CDW) instabilities are ubiquitous to superconducting cuprates, the different ordering wavevectors in various cuprate families have hampered a unified description of the CDW formation mechanism. Here we investigate the temperature dependence of the low energy phonons in the canonical CDW ordered cuprate La1.875Ba0.125CuO4. We discover that the phonon softening wavevector associated with CDW correlations becomes temperature dependent in the hightemperature precursor phase and changes from a wavevector of 0.238 reciprocal space units (r.l.u.) below the ordering transition temperature up to 0.3 r.l.u. at 300 K. This high-temperature behavior shows that "214"-type cuprates can host CDW correlations at a similar wavevector to previously reported CDW correlations in non-"214"-type cuprates such as YBa2Cu3O 6+δ . This indicates that cuprate CDWs may arise from the same underlying instability despite their apparently different low temperature ordering wavevectors. Strongly correlated materials, such as the high temperature superconducting cuprates, exhibit remarkably rich phase diagrams, due in large part to strong coupling between their charge, spin and lattice degrees of freedom. Measuring how phonons are modified in the presence of CDWs can therefore provide compelling insights about the detailed CDW properties Here we report phonon dispersion measurements of archetypal CDW ordered La 2-x Ba x CuO 4 , x = 0.125 and x = 0.095 An IXS measurement of the dynamic structure factor, S(Q, ω), of La 1.875 Ba 0.125 CuO 4 along with the phonon mode dispersion predicted using Density Functional Perturbation Theory (DFPT) (App. I-II and Supp. I) are shown in Figure In order to examine the temperature dependence of the signal, we plot the imaginary part of the phonon dynamic susceptibility χ (Q, ω) in Fig. Panels a-c show spectra at K = 0.09, 0.23 and 0.31 r.l.u., respectively. A strong softening of M2 with decreasing temperature is seen at Q CDW , which is reduced or absent at other Q. To extract the momentum and temperature dependent phonon properties, we fitted all measured IXS spectra along (0, K, 14.5). Phonon modes are represented by standard damped harmonic oscillator functions Figure In view of the fact that M2 couples more strongly to the CDW than M1, we re-examined the displacements associated with these modes using DFPT (Supp. I). Although at half integer L, neither M1 nor M2 can be assigned to a purely longitudinal or transverse mode, we find that M2 has a larger component of c-axis displacements compared to M1. We therefore suggest that c-axis atomic displacements couple most strongly to the CDW. Due to the quasi-two-dimensional electronic structure of the cuprates, c-axis displacements are expected to be much more weakly screened out facilitating this stronger coupling. This conclusion is also consistent with studies that have associated cuprate CDWs with out-of-plane oxygen displacements How do we relate these anomalies in the lattice dynamics to the underlying CDW correlations in the cuprates? Upon cooling, La 1.875 Ba 0.125 CuO 4 goes through a transition at T CDW = 55 K below which long-ranged (∼210 Å) static CDW order emerges Phonon softening and broadening is, however, already apparent at temperatures well above T CDW . This has led previous La 1.875 Ba 0.125 CuO 4 studies to speculate that the high temperature phonon softening is associated with precursor CDW correlations, i.e. intrinsic fluctuating correlations that condense into the ordered state upon cooling Our results paint a different picture to conventional CDW systems row temperature window around the transition. In some cases these effects are reasonably well understood. For example, DFPT including strong electron-phonon coupling and phonon anharmonicity reproduces the phonon anomaly in NbSe 2 , including its broad momentum dependence, which has similar momentum-width to that observed here A notable difference between La 1.875 Ba 0.125 CuO 4 and other cuprates is the wavevector of the CDW correlations. "214" type cuprates have wavevectors close to 0.25 r.l.u. whereas other 1/8 doped cuprates, tend to have higher wavevectors such as 0.3 r.l.u. for YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+δ In cuprates, the origin of the CDW is under debate between reciprocal space pictures such as Fermi-surface nesting and real space pictures with strong magnetic and Coulomb interactions. In the first class of scenarios, the most important property of the ground state is the wavevector which nests regions with a high density of states on the Fermi-surface such as the anti-nodal Fermi-surface Since underdoped cuprates have a large magnetic energy scale and a relatively small electronic density of states at the Fermi level, much of the early work on CDW and SDW ordered phases in the cuprates assumed a dominant spin degree of freedom Here we see that the CDW incommensurability increases with temperature. From previous inelastic neutron scattering measurements of La 1.875 Ba 0.125 CuO 4 , we know that the SDW incommensurability decreases with temperature Our phonon dispersion measurements of La 1.875 Ba 0.125 CuO 4 reveal two CDW-related phonon anomalies: a phonon softening associated with precursor CDW fluctuations as well as small phonon narrowing associated with CDW-ordering. The phonon softening associated with precursor correlations occur at a temperature-dependent wavevector changing from 0.238 to 0.3 r.l.u. as the system is heated from 12 to 300 K. These results indicate that the strong precursor-CDW reflects the intrinsic property of the CDW correlations that is similar in all underdoped cuprates, while the ordered phase reflects coupling between charge and spin correlations that locks the CDW and SDW together at low temperatures into a state that is particular to cuprates without a spin gap. refection of silicon as a monochromator and analyzer. The instrumental resolution was found to be well described by a pseudo-Voight function where α is confined between 0 and 1 and controls the relative fraction of the Lorentzian and Gaussian functions and σ and γ characterize the width of the two functions, respectively. The overall width of this function was ∼ 1.5 meV full width at half maximum (FWHM), which varies slightly depending on the analyzer. The sample was mounted with the H and L reciprocal lattice vectors close to the horizontal scattering plane. In this configuration a vertical column in the two-dimensional (4 × 6) analyzer array closely traced our desired (0, K, 14.5) trajectory in reciprocal space 