Recent experiments in iron pnictide superconductors reveal that, as the putative magnetic quantum critical point is approached, different types of magnetic order coexist over a narrow region of the phase diagram. Although these magnetic configurations share the same wave-vectors, they break distinct symmetries of the lattice. Importantly, the highest superconducting transition temperature takes place close to this proliferation of near-degenerate magnetic states. In this paper, we employ a renormalization group calculation to show that such a behavior naturally arises due to the effects of spin-orbit coupling on the quantum magnetic fluctuations. Formally, the enhanced magnetic degeneracy near the quantum critical point is manifested as a stable Gaussian fixed point with a large basin of attraction. Implications of our findings to the superconductivity of the iron pnictides are also discussed. Introduction.-Magnetism in the iron pnictide superconductors remains an intensely studied subject, not least due to its impact on unconventional superconductivity Several microscopic mechanisms have been proposed to explain their origin In this paper, we argue that this behavior is not a result of fine-tuned interactions, but instead is a universal property of the magnetism of the iron pnictides, provided that SOC and fluctuations are taken into account. Although this result is complementary to previous works on this topic, it provides a significant departure from the interpretation that the C 2 -C 4 magnetic degeneracy arises solely from band structure effects. Universal properties are naturally described in terms of the renormalizationgroup (RG) approach, which we employ throughout this paper. The RG flow describes how the system's meanfield parameters are renormalized by fluctuations. This allows us to assess the ground states and the character of the corresponding phase transitions. The main results of our RG analysis near the putative magnetic QCP are shown schematically in Fig. Renormalization group flow of the isotropic case.-Magnetic order in the iron pnictides is characterized by two distinct ordering wave-vectors Q 1 = (π, 0) and Q 2 = (0, π) (using single iron Brillouin zone notation). The relative orientations and amplitudes of the magnetic vector order parameters M i allows three types of order This phase is realized in Ni-doped CaKFe 4 As 4 To discuss the universal properties of the magnetic phase diagram, we introduce the magnetic action in terms of M 1 and M 2 The coefficient of the quadratic term, r 0 (k) = r 0 + k 2 + γ|ω n |, is the inverse bare susceptibility, with r 0 ∝ x -x c denoting the distance to the mean-field QCP x c . Here, k is the momentum, ω n = 2πnT is the bosonic Matsubara frequency with temperature T , and γ is the Landau damping coefficient arising from the decay of magnetic excitations into particle-hole pairs. Note that k = (iω n , k) and x = (τ, r) with k ≡ T ωn The quartic coefficient u > 0 penalizes strong amplitude fluctuations and ensures that the free energy is bounded. The quartic coefficient g favors either single-Q or double-Q configurations depending on whether it is positive or negative, respectively. Similarly, the quartic coefficient w favors collinear (w < 0) or coplanar (w > 0) double-Q configurations. The mean-field phase diagram, obtained from straightforward minimization Microscopic calculations are needed to obtain the coef-ficients for specific materials. Different approaches have been proposed, from first-principle to low-energy model calculations To investigate this possibility, and go beyond the mean-field analysis of previous works, we take into account the effects of fluctuations via a renormalizatongroup (RG) calculation. In this approach, the microscopic results discussed above provide the starting point, which are the "bare" (i.e. mean-field) values of the quartic coefficients u 0 , g 0 , and w 0 . Upon integrating out the high-energy magnetic fluctuations from the cutoff energy scale Λ to the energy E, these coefficients are renormalized, and become functions of the ratio Λ/E, often expressed in terms of the variable ≡ ln Λ E . Near the putative magnetic QCP, the two-dimensional system is at its upper critical dimension, and we can use standard techniques The RG equations of Eq. ( Thus, fluctuations move the system deep into one of the ordered phases, lifting any near-degeneracy between the C 2 and C 4 phases obtained from microscopic models in the mean-field level. This makes it difficult to explain the proliferation of coexisting C 2 and C 4 phases near the different optimal-doped compounds. Furthermore, the action becomes unbounded at the fixed trajectories, indicating a first-order quantum phase transition, and thus no quantum critical fluctuations. Renormalization group flow of the anisotropic case.-A crucial ingredient missing in the analysis above is the spin anisotropy that is generated by the spin-orbit coupling present in these systems The physical interpretation of each term is apparent: a small α 1 favors in-plane moments parallel to the wavevector directions; a small α 2 favors in-plane moments perpendicular to the wave-vector directions; and a small α 3 favors out-of-plane moments. While the SSDW supports any of these three magnetization directions, SVC is only compatible with the α 1 and α 2 terms, and CSDW only with the α 3 term. Thus, the presence of spin anisotropies makes it impossible for the three magnetic ground states to be nearly degenerate, but they do allow, in principle, for SSDW to be near-degenerate with either CSDW or SVC. Note that the anisotropy in the quadratic terms generates anisotropies in the quartic terms. While a full solution of the RG equations is presented in Ref. Let us first consider the case of dominant inplane anisotropy, where initially α 1 ( = 0) < α 2 ( = 0) , α 3 ( = 0). The possible ground states are the phase with moments pointing parallel to the ordering vectors and the (hedgehog)-SVC phase In the case of dominant out-of-plane anisotropy, α 3 (0) < α 1 (0) , α 2 (0), the effective action has the same form as Eq. ( The main result of our analysis is the appearance of an attractive Gaussian fixed point in the RG flow of the anisotropic spin action. To understand its significance, we first note that it signals a second-order quantum phase transition (and thus quantum critical fluctuations), in contrast to the case of fixed trajectories, which signals first-order transitions. More importantly, at the Gaussian fixed point, the SSDW state is degenerate with one of the C 4 phases -either the SVC phase for dominant in-plane anisotropy or the CSDW phase for dominant out-of-plane anisotropy. This degeneracy is due to the fact that, when g = w = 0 in the action (1), the energies of the C 2 and C 4 magnetic ground states have the same value. The fact that the Gaussian fixed point has a wide basin of attraction implies that, even if the bare (meanfield) values of g and w are not near the phase boundary between the C 2 and the C 4 phases, quantum fluctuations will bring the system to this special point of the phase diagram. Discussion.-Our results provide a compelling scenario to explain the experimentally observed proliferation of C 4 phases in close proximity to the C 2 symmetric SSDW phase as optimal doping is approached in different iron-based compounds An important question is how this emergent C 2 -C 4 near-degeneracy impacts superconductivity. Several works have proposed an s +-state driven by fluctuations of the SSDW state 