Crystal structure searching and ab initio calculations have been used here to explore low-energy structures of boron carbides under high pressure. Under pressures of 85-110 GPa, a metastable B 6 C with R 3 m symmetry is found to be energetically more stable than the mixture of previous B 4 C and elemental boron. This B 6 C is a rhombohedral structure and contains mooncake-like B 24 clusters with stuffing of C 2 pairs. The mechanical and dynamical stabilities of this structure at ambient pressure are confirmed by its elastic constants and phonon dispersions. The bulk modulus and shear modulus of this newly predicted B 6 C at ambient pressure reach high values of 291 GPa and 272 GPa, respectively. The Vickers hardness is calculated to be around 48 GPa, and its melting temperature at ambient pressure is estimated to be around 2500 K, indicating that this metastable B 6 C is a potential superhard material with very good thermal stability. Interestingly, this superhard B 6 C structure is also found to be superconducting and its superconducting critical temperature (T c ) is evaluated to be around 12.5 K at ambient pressure by electron-phonon coupling. Boron and a large number of boron-rich materials exhibit outstanding mechanical, electronic and refractory properties, which makes them widely used in electronic and engineering fields To overcome the shortcoming of diamond which reacts with ferrous materials in cutting For instance, taking into consideration the ionicities of boron-boron bonds in B 12 icosahedra of α-boron, the hardness of typical boron-rich solid B 13 C 2 , is validly calculated to be 44 GPa The hard B 4 C and superhard B 13 C 2 can be synthesized under ambient pressure. For example, B 4 C can be obtained with hot-pressing at temperatures above 2200 ○ C Elemental boron exhibits rich structural phase transitions under the HPHT condition In this work, we have extensively explored the B-C system by applying ab initio random structure searching (AIRSS) Due to the reason that the van der Waals (vdW) corrections seem to be important to describe the Boron element Recently, the τ-B phase where H(B x C y ), H(B), and H(C) are enthalpies for B x C y formula unit, stable elemental boron (α-B 12 , γ-B 28 , and α-Ga phases), and graphite or diamond-structured carbon respectively. The enthalpy difference between various compounds is calculated by equation mixed with energetically stable element under certain pressures, i.e. where Here H(B x/y C) represents the enthalpy for one B x C y formula unit if x/y < 1. As shown in Fig. (layered hexagonal) and BC 5 (diamond-like) We find that the B 6 C compound predicted in this work, as shown in Fig. The space group of the predicted shown in the lower panels in Fig. It is noticed that elemental boron, carbon and their compounds are widely used as superhard materials for their excellent mechanical properties The van Hove singularity and cylinder-like Fermi surface along the L-Γ direction inspired us to explore the electron-phonon coupling and the possible BCS superconductivity of B 6 C. As shown in Fig. and the frequency-dependent electron-coupling (λ(ω)) (dashed line) are exhibited in the right part of up panels in Fig. ), where ω n represents the nth sequence of average frequencies ω n ≡ , together with a commonly used effective Coulomb repulsion parameter μ * = 0.10, we estimated the T c of B 6 C at 0 GPa to be around 12.5 K. The electron-phonon properties at 100 GPa are also computed, as shown in down panels of Fig. Using crystal structure searching based on ab initio calculations The elastic constants (Cij (GPa)), bulk and shear moduli (B and G (GPa)) and Vickers hardness of α-B 12 , diamond and boron carbides from our DFT calculations under ambient pressure, compared with others' works. The elastic constants in this work were calculated by the VASP code C12 C13 C33 C44 C66 B G Hvc [55] Hvg [16] Hv (C 11 -C 12 ), respectively. For the computations of Vickers hardness, here we applied two different models from Chen et al. a