We study spin-polarized quasiparticle transport in a mesoscopic superconductor with a spinsplitting field in the presence of co-flowing supercurrent. In such a system, the nonequilibrium state is characterized by charge, spin, energy and spin energy modes. Here we show that in the presence of both spin splitting and supercurrent, all these modes are mutually coupled. As a result, the supercurrent can convert charge imbalance, that in the presence of spin splitting decays on a relatively short scale, to a long-range spin accumulation decaying only via inelastic scattering. This effect enables coherent charge-spin conversion controllable by a magnetic flux, and it can be detected by studying different symmetry components of the nonlocal conductance signal. The nonequilibrium states in superconductors can be classified in terms of energy and charge modes 1,2 , as direct implications of the particle-hole formalism in the BCS theory. In magnetic systems the relevant nonequilibrium modes are related to the quasiparticle spin. In spin-split superconductors all these modes need to be considered, and the quasiparticle diffusion couples pairs of modes The spin-charge conversion studied here occurs only under non-equilibrium conditions (∇μ (s) = 0 or ∇T (s) = 0) and does not require spin-orbit interaction. Therefore it is qualitatively different from the direct The supercurrent-generated coupling between different nonequilibrium states can be understood with the schematic Fig. In the absence of spin splitting, h = 0, the combination of these two effects allows for the creation of charge imbalance proportional to v s ∇T . p -∆ 2 /E p have an excess temperature T L as compared to that of the right-moving particles T R . From Fig. Below, we quantify the physics described above using the kinetic equations 3 based on the quasiclassical Keldysh-Usadel formalism for superconductors with a spin-splitting field h, to study the spin accumulation generated by the charge imbalance gradients. For concreteness, we consider the structure in Fig. To study the properties of a mesoscopic superconductor with Zeeman splitting, we start from the Usadel equation where D is the diffusion constant, ǧ is the quasiclassical Green's function and the covariant gradient operator is ∇ = ∇ -iA[τ 3 , •]. In the commutator Λ = i τ 3 -i(h • S)τ 3 -∆, is the quasiparticle energy, h is the spinsplitting field, S = (σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 ), and the Pauli matrix τ j (σ j ) is in Nambu (spin) space. The exact form of the spin-splitting field term, as well as of the pair potential ∆ depends on the chosen Nambu spinor. We choose it as where T denotes a transpose. The advantage of using this spinor is that the Nambu structure has the same form for each spin component. The superconducting pair potential ∆ = ∆σ 0 should be obtained self-consistently (see appendix A for details). We denote the Nambu-space matrix ∆(x) = |∆|e iφ(x)τ3 τ 1 where x is the coordinate along the wire. Due to supercurrent, the phase φ becomes position dependent. We assume that the quasiparticle currents within the wire are so small that we can disregard the ensuing position dependence of |∆|. The last three terms in the commutator are Σso = (8τ so ) -1 (SǧS), Σsf = (8τ sf ) -1 (Sτ 3 ǧτ 3 S) and Σorb = τ -1 orb τ 3 ǧτ 3 , representing spin and charge imbalance relaxation due to the spin-orbit scattering, exchange interaction with magnetic impurities and orbital magnetic depairing, respectively. The corresponding relaxation rates are τ -1 so , τ -1 sf and τ -1 orb . We use the real-time Keldysh formalism and describe the quasiclassical Green's function as ǧ = ĝR ĝK 0 ĝA , where each component is a 4×4 matrix in the Nambu ⊗ spin space, ĝR(A) is the retarded (advanced) Green's function, and ĝK is the Keldysh Green's function describing the nonequilibrium properties. It can be parameterized in the case of collinear magnetizations by ĝK = ĝR ff ĝA , where the distribution matrix f = We consider the Eq (1) in the presence of the superconducting current along the wire. Removing the phase of the order parameter by gauge transformation allows us to write Eq. ( where Î is the matrix spectral current. We formulate the Keldysh part of this equation in terms of spectral currents: charge j c = Tr(τ 3 Î), energy j e = Tr(τ 0 Î), spin j s = Tr(σ 3 Î) and spin energy j se = Tr(σ 3 τ 3 Î). Kinetic equations derived from Eqs. (4, 5) for these currents can be written in a matrix form where The kinetic coefficients D L/T /T 3/L3 , R T /L3 and S T 3/L3 are defined in terms of the components of ĝR and ĝA (see appendix B and more details in Ref. In equilibrium f L = tanh( /2T ) ≡ n 0 and other modes are absent. Then the spectral current terms yield nonzero charge supercurrent I s and spin-energy current I se as where G ξ0 = e 2 Dν F A/ξ 0 is the normal-state conductance of the wire of one superconducting coherence length ξ 0 = D/∆, with normal-state density of states ν F and cross section A. We assume that the phase gradient is small so that I s is much below the critical current of the wire. The equilibrium spin-energy current, Eq. ( Schematic picture illustrating the non-zero spin energy in the ground state of a spin-singlet superconductor with spin splitting. N ↑,↓ (ε) are the spin-up/down densities of states as functions of the energy ε. The relative Zeeman shift of the electronic bands is 2h. The case of T = 0 is shown, so that all states below the Fermi level εF are occupied. Out of equilibrium, the matrix in Eq. ( Kinetic theory developed in the previous section can be applied to predict the experimentally measurable consequence of charge-spin conversion effect in the non-local spin valve setup shown in Fig. Consider a non-ferromagnetic injector electrode attached at x = 0. We describe the injection of matrix quasiparticle current using the boundary conditions at the tunnelling interface Here the left hand side of Eq. ( The right hand side of Eq. ( between the superconductor and normalmetal electrodes. The response matrix is here described by the spin polarization P and the energy-symmetric and energy-antisymmetric parts of the density of states, N + = Tr Re(τ 3 ĝR ) and N -= Tr Re(σ 3 τ 3 ĝR ). In our particular case the normal-metal injector is characterized by the Fermi distribution function shifted by the applied bias voltage V inj . Therefore we have The solutions of Eqs. (6,10) can be used for calculating the tunnelling current I det measured by a spin-polarized detector 4 with spin-filtering efficiency P det The contributions from the different nonequilibrium modes to μ and μ z can be read off from the different symmetry components of I det with respect to the injection voltage V inj and the detector polarization P det . The non-spin-polarized injector generates charge f T and energy f L modes 32 , which are odd and even in the injection voltage, respectively. In spin-split superconductors the energy mode is coupled to the spin accumulation producing a long-range spin signal with the symmetry 4 μ z (V inj ) = μ z (-V inj ). The supercurrent converts part of the charge imbalance to long-range spin accumulation with the opposite symmetry μ z (V inj ) = -μ z (-V inj ). Below we concentrate on the details of this mechanism. At first, we solve the kinetic equations using a perturbation expansion in the small parameter ξ 0 q s where ξ 0 = D/∆ is the coherence length. For simplicity, we disregard inelastic scattering that would add an energy-non-local term in Eq. ( When q s = 0 we find f T and f L3 modes generating the charge imbalance μ. For q s = 0 [see Eq. ( First, even in the absence of the supercurrent there exists a long-range contribution related to the already known heating effect where α heat = N + n + /D L . Besides that the long-range contribution excited due to the supercurrent is given approximatively by The amplitude α super depends on the strength of relaxation described by R T /L3 and S T 3/L3 in Eq. ( Note that the spatial structures of ( To gain further insight, we first study the spin accumulation using a numerical solution of the kinetic equations. In Figs. A. Case without spin relaxation (ST 3,L3 = 0) The discussed mechanism of spin-charge conversion does not require any non-conservation of spin. This makes a qualitative distinction with previously discussed direct and inverse Edelstein effects which rely on the spinorbit interaction. (16) Here u 0 (x) = -u 0 (-x) is a function that decays linearly from unity close to the injector (x = 0) to zero at the reservoirs and n -= [n 0 ( + V inj ) -n 0 ( -V inj )]/2. Equation ( /2 with γ σ = Γ/(∆ + σh). Therefore the integrand scales as (8γ σ ) -3/2 , whereas the width of the peak is ∝ Γ. Overall, this means a diverging integral scaling like ∼ Γ -1/2 . Similar divergence was found in Ref. 6 for the supercurrent induced charge imbalance in the absence of spin splitting. In practice, the relevant depairing mechanism in the presence of spin splitting and supercurrent is the orbital depairing due to the combined effect of the supercurrent itself and of an in-plane magnetic field B on the spectrum of the superconductor Spin-flip and spin-orbit relaxation affect both spectral and nonquilibrium properties of the superconductor. For the spectral properties, spin-flip relaxation breaks the time-reversal symmetry and suppresses the superconducting pair potential and critical temperature, while spin-orbit scattering reduces the effect of the exchange field without suppressing the pair potential (17) Here the linear function u 1 (x) = -u 1 (-x) ≈ u 0 (x) for |x| > λ cr . However, the effects of spin-flip/spin-orbit scattering on the spectral functions also affect the resulting μ z . The effect depends strongly on the type of scattering. For pure spin-flip relaxation, contribution of f L increases as a function of the spin relaxation rate, and diverges when the strong relaxation completely kills superconductivity. This can be seen in the relaxation rate dependence of μ z in the linear response regime in Fig. The charge-spin conversion can be detected by inspecting the non-local conductance g nl = dI det /dV inj in the presence of the supercurrent I s driven across the wire. Without supercurrent, this quantity was measured in Refs. 25-27. We show an example of g nl in Fig. where g αe/o (V inj ) = ±g αe/o (-V inj ) and α = e/o describe the symmetry vs. P det . Since the derivative of the detector current with respect to V inj flips the parity of the terms, the conductance due to the pure charge imbalance is even in both V inj and P det and hence is described by g ee . The term g oo = g heat is the long-range spin accumulation due to the heat injection The term g super should be compared to the contribution determined by effective heating 4 (14) where u 3 (x) = u 3 (-x) is a linear function interpolating from unity at the injector to zero at the reservoirs and n + = (n 0 ( + eV ) + n 0 ( -eV ) -2n 0 )/2. For T → 0, ∂n ± /∂V inj approaches a δ-function at = ±eV , and we can estimate the integrals by the values of the kinetic coefficients at those energies. For eV ≈ ∆ ± h where the main signal resides, g super ≈ 2ξ 0 g heat /L for ξ 0 ∇φ ≈ τ -1 orb ∆ + τ -1 sf + τ -1 so , i.e., when the supercurrent starts affecting the density of states. At higher temperatures and lower voltages eV k B T , where quasiparticle effects are visible even at linear response, g super can dominate over g heat . In conclusion, we have shown how the nonequilibrium supercurrent in a spin-split superconductor can partially convert charge imbalance to spin imbalance. The resulting spin imbalance is long-ranged, decaying only due to inelastic scattering. Here we have concentrated on a setup with collinear magnetizations. We expect that the generalization of our theory to the case with inhomogeneous magnetization would shed light on the possible coherently controllable nonequilibrium spin torques. We also expect to find analogous effects in superconducting proximity structures in the presence of spin splitting, i.e., combining the phenomena discussed in Refs. +β Re(g 31 ) 2 -Re(g 01 ) 2 + Re(g 32 ) 2 -Re(g 02 ) There are also two more coefficients in Eq. ( These two terms are related to the nonzero charge supercurrrent and spin-energy current. Here and below we assume that the wire is in the x direction and all changes in the phase φ and the distribution functions take place in that direction. Appendix C: Perturbation theory solutions of kinetic equations in the linear order by ξ0∇φ. The general solution of the kinetic equations in Eq. ( C1) where v T 0 = (1, 0, 0, 0) T , k L , k T 1 and k T 2 are the energy dependent inverse length scales, the other v T i s can be determined numerically, and C i s can be determined from the boundary conditions (10). For a small phase gradient, we can determine these coefficients analytically. Below we concentrate in particular on the solutions of the modes related to the supercurrent induced spin imbalance and treat the supercurrent as a perturbation in the kinetic equations. In the zeroth order Eq. ( In what follows, we choose ∆ 0 as the reference energy scale, and therefore the coherence length ξ 0 = D/∆ 0 becomes the reference length scale. That means, for example, that the dimensionless quantities describing spin relaxation are of the form τ sf ∆ 0 and τ so ∆ 0 . Using the boundary conditions (10), we obtain for κ I L 1 where the inverse length scales , and the coefficients For the perturbed terms of f L and f T 3 , we get another set of kinetic equations Using the solution in Eq. (C3), we obtain where the inverse length scale , and the coefficients . The spin accumulation generated from the supercurrent is In the extreme limit of τ -1 sn → 0, this result can be reduced to a simpler form. In this case, S T 3 and S L3 terms in the kinetic equations are zero, therefore, e -k L x/ξ0 term is replaced by a linear term with same coefficients with δf L . For the linear response regime n -( , V inj ) = V inj ∂n 0 /∂ , we get where the ↑ and ↓ quantities are the addition and subtraction of the singlet and triplet components of the spectral quantities, j ↑/↓ s = j E ± j Es , N ↑/↓ = N + ± N -, D ↑/↓ L = D L ± D T 3 , and R ↑/↓ = R T ± R L3 . It is straightforward to see that μ z = 0 for h = 0, since the quantity N 2 j s /(D L R T ) is equal for both spin species. For nonzero h the difference of this quantity for different spin species gives the spin accumulation. However, without relaxation, this quantity is proportional to 1/ √ Γ, which describes the broadening of the spectral quantities. In practice, the relevant broadening renormalizing μ z comes from the orbital effect due to either a magnetic field or the phase gradient itself Here, except the density of states, the triplet component of other spectral quantities do not contribute to the spin accumulation. The difference of the density of states for two spin species behaves differently for spin-orbit and spin-flip relaxations. Spin-orbit relaxation does not affect the pair potential but tries to lift the effect of the spin-splitting field. Therefore, μ z approaches zero for very strong relaxation (S4(c)). In the case of spin-flip relaxation, it suppresses the pair potential, therefore, spin-accumulation diverges the strong spin-flip relaxations destroys the superconductivity (S4(b)). * faluke.aikebaier@jyu.fi † mikesilaev@gmail.com ‡ tero.t.heikkila@jyu.fi 1 M. Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity(Courier Corporation, 1996).