Systems of disordered interacting bosons with particle-hole symmetry can undergo a quantum phase transition between the superfluid phase and the Mott glass phase which is a gapless incompressible insulator. We employ large-scale Monte Carlo simulations of a two-dimensional site-diluted quantum rotor model to investigate the properties of the superfluid density and the compressibility at this transition. We find that both quantities feature power-law critical behavior with exponents governed by generalized Josephson relations. The physics of systems as diverse as cold atoms in disordered optical lattices Because of the disorder, the conventional bulk phases, viz., superfluid and Mott insulator, are separated by a quantum Griffiths phase The zero-temperature quantum phase transition between superfluid and Mott glass was recently investigated by large-scale Monte Carlo simulations In the present paper, we focus on the behavior of two experimentally important quantities, the superfluid density ρ s and the compressibility κ, at this quantum phase transition. By means of Monte Carlo simulations, we establish that both quantities a e-mail: vojtat@mst.edu arXiv:1712.08245v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 21 Dec 2017 feature power-law critical behavior. The corresponding critical exponents fulfill generalized Josephson relations We consider a square-lattice site-diluted quantum rotor model defined by the Hamiltonian Here, ni denotes the number operator of lattice site i and φi the canonically conjugate phase operator. U and J are the charging energy and the Josephson coupling, respectively, and ij denotes pairs of nearest neighbor sites. The site dilution is implemented via the independent quenched random variables i that can take the values 0 (vacancy) with probability p and 1 (occupied site) with probability 1 -p. If the filling, i.e., the average particle number n , is an integer then the Hamiltonian is particle-hole symmetric, which is the case we focus on in the following. The qualitative behavior of the rotor model ( We now map the quantum rotor Hamiltonian (1) onto a classical (2+1)-dimensional XY model Here i denotes a position in two-dimensional real space, and t is the "imaginary time" coordinate. S i,t is an O(2) unit vector. The values of the classical interactions J s /T and J τ /T depend on the parameters of the quantum Hamiltonian (1). The classical temperature T differs from the real physical temperature T Q which is zero at the quantum phase transition. As the critical behavior is expected to be universal, we fix J s = J τ = 1 and tune the transitions by varying the classical temperature T . Under the quantum-to-classical mapping, the compressibility κ = ∂ n /∂μ of the quantum rotor Hamiltonian (1) maps onto the spinwave stiffness in the imaginary time direction of the XY model (2) (up to constant factors). Here, L τ is the system size in imaginary time direction, and f is the free energy density for twisted boundary conditions (the XY spins S i,t at t = 0 make an angle of Θ with those at t = L τ ). Analogously, the superfluid density ρ s of the quantum rotor model maps onto the spinwave stiffness in the space direction of the XY model, with L being the spatial linear system size. (The twisted boundary conditions are now applied in x or y direction.) We perform Monte Carlo simulations of the classical XY model (2) combining Wolff We compute the temporal and spatial stiffnesses ρ cl,τ and ρ cl,s by employing numerical estimators that can be evaluated in conventional Monte Carlo runs without actually having to apply twisted boundary conditions We now turn to the main results of this paper, viz., the behavior of ρ cl,τ and ρ cl,s in the disordered case, p = 1/3. As the disorder breaks the symmetry between space and imaginary time, L and L τ are not equivalent, and we need to perform anisotropic finite-size scaling. The optimal sample shapes for the present simulations as well as the value of the critical temperature, T c = 1.577, are taken from Ref. To determine the critical behavior of the stiffnesses ρ cl,τ and ρ cl,s quantitatively, we analyze their system-size dependence at the critical temperature T c = 1.577 in Fig. where ν = 1.16 Couched in terms of the original disordered boson problem, i.e., the quantum rotor Hamiltonian (1), our findings can be summarized as follows: Close to the superfluid-Mott glass quantum phase transition, the compressibility and the superfluid density display power-law critical behavior, κ ∼ L -yτ and ρ s ∼ L -ys . The scale dimensions y τ = 0.53(5) and y s = 1.47(6) fulfill the generalized Josephson relations, y τ = d -z and y s = d + z -2, within their error bars. Combining these results with the critical exponents determined in Ref. ρ s (r, T Q , L) = b -ys ρ s (rb 1/ν , T Q b z , Lb -1 ) . Here, b is an arbitrary length scale factor. (Recall that T Q is the physical temperature of the quantum system, not the classical temperature T appearing in the mapped classical XY model.) Potential experimental realizations of Mott glass physics can be found, e.g., in granular superconductors, ultracold atoms, and certain magnetic systems 