Fisher information, Shannon information entropy and Statistical Complexity are calculated for the interface of a normal metal and a superconductor, as a function of the temperature for several materials. The order parameter Ψ(r) derived from the Ginzburg-Landau theory is used as an input together with experimental values of critical transition temperature Tc and the superconducting coherence length ξ0. Analytical expressions are obtained for information and complexity measures. Thus Tc is directly related in a simple way with disorder and complexity. An analytical relation is found of the Fisher Information with the energy profile of superconductivity i.e. the ratio of surface free energy and the bulk free energy. We verify that a simple relation holds between Shannon and Fisher information i.e. a decomposition of a global information quantity (Shannon) in terms of two local ones (Fisher information), previously derived and verified for atoms and molecules by Liu et al. Finally, we find analytical expressions for generalized information measures like the Tsallis entropy and Fisher information. We conclude that the proper value of the non-extensivity parameter q ≃ 1, in agreement with previous work using a different model, where q ≃ 1.005. Fisher information I F can also be written in terms of the so called Fisher information density i(x) = 1 i.e. I F = i(x)dx. The FIM, according to its definition, is an accounter of the sharpness of the probability density. A sharp and strongly localized probability density gives rise to a larger value of Fisher information. Its appealing features differ appreciably from other information measures because of its local character, in contrast with the global nature of several other functionals, such as the Shannon Very interesting applications of Fisher information have been made in quantum systems Next, we calculate the Shannon information entropy This letter is organized as follows. In section 2 we review briefly the Ginzburg-Landau theory for inhomogeneous systems. In Section 3 we present the Fisher information measure using a probability distribution related with the order parameter. In section 4 we calculate and discuss some additional information and complexity measures including generalized ones. In section 5 we demonstrate Liu's identity, while in section 6 we discuss the possibility of alternative probability distributions. Finally, section 7 contains our concluding remarks. The Ginzburg-Landau theory is a theory of second-order phase transition, where one introduces an order parameter Ψ(r) which is zero above the transition temperature T c , but takes a finite value for T < T c and uses the symmetry of the relevant Hamiltonian to restrict the form of the free energy as a functional of Ψ(r) where F s is the superconducting free energy density and F n is the normal-state free energy density. In eq. ( To obtain the total free energy we must integrate this over the system According to Eq. ( The above conditions can be satisfied only when Ψ(r) obeys Equation ( in the region x > 0 with the boundary condition Ψ(0) = 0, eq. ( Fig. Considering that ξ(0) ≡ ξ 0 is the value of ξ for T = 0 the above relation is rewritten as The quantity ξ has dimensions of length and is known as the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length or healing length. The physical significance of this length, in the condensed phase, is that it is a measure of the minimum distance over which one can "bend" the order parameter either in magnitude or in phase, before the bending energy becomes comparable to the condensation energy 3 The Fisher information measure as a functional of the order parameter The next step is to construct a bridge to connect the order parameter Ψ(r) with the Fisher information measure. At this point it will be helpful to follow the related discussion of Leggett The probability distribution P (x) as a function of the distance x is displayed in Fig. The integral is easily calculated and gives the factor 1/3. In total, the FIM exhibits the following analytical and very simple relation with the coherence length ξ The above dependence is displayed in Fig. The FIM attains its maximum value I max F = -2α 0 T C /3γ at temperature T = 0, that is for ξ = ξ 0 , while it becomes zero when the superconducting phase disappears (for T ≥ T c ). It is worth to point out that the FIM is connected with some experimental quantities specifically the critical temperature T c as well as the values of ξ(0) = ξ 0 . In particular, the zero temperature value of ξ in BCS theory is related with the size of a single Cooper pair Moreover, the Fisher information related with the free energy characterizes a superconductor. In particular, the surface free energy F surf (T ) is the difference between the condensation free energy F s (T ) -F n (T ) defined in Eq.( Now, by combining Eqs.( Eq. ( It is instructive to calculate the Shannon entropy where s(x) = -P (x) ln P (x) is the Shannon information density. Using the probability distribution Relations The disequilibrium D defined as D = [P (x)] 2 dx is given by D is the disequilibrium of the system i.e. the distance from its actual state to equilibrium. The quantity D is an experimentally measurable quantity i.e. in quantum chemistry The statistical measure of complexity C introduced by Lopez-Ruiz, Calbet and Mancini (LMC) It is noted that C cannot be measured experimentally, but it is possible to calculate it, starting from a reasonable probabilistic definition (e.g. LMC The LMC complexity C = S • D is a product of two global information quantities S and D. It is appropriate to examine C = S • I F as well which is defined as a product of one global quantity S by a local one, specifically the Fisher information I F . Finally, we find that the statistical complexities C and C are given by The dependence of C on T is seen in Fig. It is worth to extend also our study by including a generalization of the Shannon Entropy and Fisher measure in the framework of the nonextensive statistical mechanics. This is based on the generalization of the definition of the logarithm according to the expression In view of the above definition, the Fisher information I q and the Tsallis entropy T q (a generalization of the Shannon entropy) are defined as and Our results are and where Γ(x) is the usual gamma function and and 2 F 1 (a, b, c, x) is the corresponding hypergeometric function. The statistical complexity, in the framework of the nonextensive statistical mechanics, is given by It is noted that Eqs. ( Under the condition, for systems such as atoms and molecules whose asymptotic density decays strongly, Liu et al. Integration of both sides gives The above equations are identities. Here and We also have The densities i F (r), i ′ F (r) are different functions of the vector r, but their integrals are equal, as expected. For a strongly decaying local quantity q(r) the authors of Ref. Liu's identity can be written in compact form: quite a remarkable decomposition of a global information quantity S in terms of (two) local ones, I F and I ′ F . In our present work we show that an analogous relation holds for the special case of the one-dimensional density P (x) and verify it in superconductivity. Again, we checked that P (x) satisfies the same criterion of strong decay for x → ∞. In particular we start from the identity q(x) ≡ q(0) which holds under the condition dq(x) dx x=0 = 0. Now, we define the local Shannon information density s(x) = -P (x) ln P (x) Now, according to the identity and using Eq. ( where Finally, integrating Eq. ( where Equation ( The question naturally arises if instead of P (x), relation diverges. We may try a cutoff, i.e. integrate from 0 to nξ, where n = 1, 2, 3, . . . . We note that it is not possible to know in advance or a priori the correct upper limit if such a limit does exist. We see that for n = 5, x = 5ξ: for any material. Hence we define The normalization condition nξ 0 P (x)dx = 1 leads to The Shannon entropy and the Fisher information take the analytical forms where Li n (x) is the dilogarithm (or Spence's function) which is defined for |x| ≤ 1 either a) by a power series in Concluding, we note that the Fisher information is a qualitative as well as a quantitative measure of the superconducting phase between a normal metal and a superconductor. It shows a simple analytical dependence on experimentally measurable quantities like the correlation length ξ and consequently the critical temperature T c . Some useful insights have been obtained by calculating a few information and complexity measures. Our formalism allows us to verify an identity derived previously by Liu et al. A planned future work will extend our study to include other phases of superconductors in connection with the Fisher information measure (including surfaces, defects, vortices e.t.c). A final comment seems appropriate, quoting One of the authors (Ch.C.M.) would like to thank Dr. S. Tserkis for useful discussions in the early stage of the present work. Table 