In many superconducting devices, including qubits, quasiparticle excitations are detrimental. A normal metal (N ) in contact with a superconductor (S) can trap these excitations; therefore such a trap can potentially improve the devices performances. The two materials influence each other, a phenomenon known as proximity effect which has drawn attention since the '60s. Here we study whether this mutual influence places a limitation on the possible performance improvement in superconducting qubits. We first revisit the proximity effect in uniform N S bilayers; despite the long history of this problem, we present novel findings for the density of states. We then extend our results to describe a non-uniform system in the vicinity of a trap edge. Using these results together with a phenomenological model for the suppression of the quasiparticle density due to the trap, we find in a transmon qubit an optimum trap-junction distance at which the qubit relaxation rate is minimized. This optimum distance, of the order of 4 to 20 coherence lengths, originates from the competition between proximity effect and quasiparticle density suppression. We conclude that the harmful influence of the proximity effect can be avoided so long as the trap is farther away from the junction than this optimum. Unwanted quasiparticle excitations can degrade the performance of superconducting devices. For example, they can be a limiting factor for superconducting detectors used in astronomy Normal-metal quasiparticle traps consist of a normal metal (N ) in tunnel contact with a superconductor (S): quasiparticles that tunnel from the superconductor into the normal metal can either tunnel back, or lose energy to a level below the superconducting gap, in which case cannot return back to the superconductor. A model for the effective quasiparticle trapping rate has been presented theoretically and tested experimentally in Ref. The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we review qubit relaxation due to quasiparticles and summarize the model of normal-metal quasiparticle trapping. In Sec. III we use the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity to study first a uniform normal-superconductor bilayer. Then (Sec. III B) we consider a non-uniform sys-arXiv:1712.05235v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 22 Dec 2017 tem which models quasiparticle traps; we present both numerical self-consistent solutions for the spatial variation of superconducting order parameter and singleparticle density of states as well as approximate analytical expressions for the latter. In Sec. IV we study the qubit decay rate taking into account the proximity effect. We summarize our work in Sec. V, while Appendices A through E contain a number of derivations and mathematical details. Superconducting qubits can store quantum information in a collective degree of freedom, the phase difference φ across a Josephson junction. Such a phase difference induces a dissipationless supercurrent carried by Cooper pairs tunneling through the junction. However, the presence of quasiparticles (due to unpaired electrons) opens an unwanted decay channel: a quasiparticle that tunnels can exchange energy with the qubit and cause its decay. The effects of the qubit-quasiparticle interaction have been studied in detail theoretically in Ref. where |0 (|1 ) denotes the ground (excited) state of the qubit, and ω 10 is the qubit frequency. The excitation rate Γ 01 is obtained by replacing ω 10 → -ω 10 . The matrix element can be expressed in terms of the transmon parameters as with E C the charging energy and E J the Josephson energy; this expression is valid in the transmon regime E J E C . The spectral density takes a simple form under certain conditions that are often satisfied, namely: a hard gap ∆ 0 in the superconductor which is larger than the qubit frequency, 2∆ 0 > ω 10 ; quasiparticles that are "cold", meaning that their typical energy δE (or effective temperature) above the gap is small compared to qubit frequency, δE ω 10 . Then we have and S(-ω 10 ) S(ω 10 ). In this expression, the prefactor proportional to E J accounts for the tunneling probability via the Ambegaokar-Baratoff relation E J = ∆ 0 g T /8g K , where g T is the conductance of the junction and g K = e 2 /2π is the conductance quantum. The central factor x qp is the density of quasiparticles normalized by the Cooper pair density, with f ( ) the quasiparticle distribution function and n( ) the normalized density of states (DoS), which for a BCS superconductor is The square root factor in Eq. ( Equations ( A way to suppress x qp is by introducing normal-metal islands, in tunnel contact with the superconducting electrodes, which can trap quasiparticles. A model that accounts for the interplay between superconductor-normal island tunneling, energy relaxation in the normal metal, and diffusion in the superconductor was developed theoretically and tested experimentally in Ref. where D qp is the quasiparticle diffusion constant, and the area function a( r) equals 1 for coordinate r in the superconductor-normal metal contact region and 0 elsewhere. The quasiparticle generation rate g phenomenologically accounts for all processes creating quasiparticles. The effective trapping rate Γ eff is determined by the balance between tunneling from superconductor to normal metal, the inverse escape process, and the energy relaxation of excitations in the normal metal. Experimentally, relaxation is the bottleneck limiting the effective trapping rate, see Ref. All the works summarized so far rely on the hard-gap assumption. As mentioned in the introduction, and as we will explain in more detail in Sec. III, due to the proximity effect the BCS peak in the density of states broadens and a finite subgap DoS is induced in the superconductor. Therefore, in this paper we want to relax the hard-gap assumption. As a first step, we consider how to generalize the expression for the qubit decay rate, Eq. (1); the appropriate generalization is presented in Ref. where we distinguish two contributions, S t due to single quasiparticle tunneling and S p originating from Cooper pair processes. In terms of the distribution function f they are, for positive frequency ω > 0, with The density of states n( ) appearing in this expression does not necessarily take the BCS form. Both n( ) and the pair amplitude p( ) can be calculated within a Green's function approach, and in a normal/superconductor bilayer depend on parameters such as film thicknesses and interface resistance, as we explain next in Sec. III. Here we point out that the combinations of n and p account for both the quasiparticle density of states and so-called coherence factors, while whether a process involves single quasiparticles or pairs is manifest in the combination of distribution functions: f (1 -f ) for single quasiparticles, (1 -f )(1 -f ) or f f for pair breaking or recombination processes, respectively. Finally, the spectral density S at negative frequencies is obtained by replacing f → 1 -f in Eqs. ( For pair processes, this implies that S p (ω > 0) accounts for pair breaking by qubit relaxation, while S p (ω < 0) for qubit excitation by quasiparticle recombination. The goal of this section is to arrive at expressions for the functions n and p in Eq. ( The Usadel equation must be supplemented by the selfconsistent equation for the order parameter ∆(r), which assuming thermal equilibrium at temperature T reads where ν 0S is the density of states per spin at the Fermi energy in the normal state of the superconductor, and λ is the effective coupling strength of the attractive electron-electron interaction responsible for superconductivity. This formalism is applicable to non-uniform superconductors -this enables us to study the behavior of the superconductor near the edge of a trap. However, we first consider proximity in a uniform bilayer. In a uniform bilayer a superconducting film of thickness d S is fully covered by a normal metal of thickness d N , with both thicknesses smaller than the superconducting coherence length at zero temperature ξ. This implies that spatial variations across the films thicknesses can be neglected. Moreover, because the system is uniform in the plane of the films, the pairing angle is independent of position and the Usadel equations take the form (see Ref. where we have introduced a pairing angle θ N for the normal layer and ∆(T ) must be calculated self-consistently using Eq. For high interface resistance, such that τ S ∆ 1 but finite, a weak-coupling regime is possible. On the other hand, for a good contact between N and S [or sufficiently close to the critical temperature, where ∆(T ) → 0] the coupling can be strong, τ S ∆ 1. In this section we focus on the weak-coupling case τ S ∆ 1 with τ N ∼ τ S ; some considerations on the strong-coupling one can be found in Appendix B 2. In the normal film, the main consequence of the contact with the superconductor is the opening of a so-called minigap in its density of states. The minigap energy E g is always small compared to the gap in the bulk superconductor, and in the weak-coupling regime is given by as already shown in the seminal work of McMillan This expression is valid below the gap, ∆, but it fails close to the minigap, as noted in Ref. Moreover, the the position of the minigap is more accurately given by and just above it the density of states has a square root threshold behavior, n( ) n t ( ) ≡ 1 an expression valid for In the inset of Fig. We now turn our attention to energy well above the minigap, g . In this energy range a broadening of the BCS peak was qualitatively predicted A similar result was found for the case of a short S wire between two N leads from the following approximate expression for the pairing angle [deviations from these formulas can arise for In the main panel of Fig. with ∆ 0 the bulk value of the order parameter. Note that Eq. ( A normal-metal trap in general covers only part of a superconducting electrode [cf. Eq. ( To study the proximity effect near such an edge, we must allow for spatially dependent paring angles. Due to translational symmetry in the y direction, they are functions of coordinate x only; they satisfy Usadel equations that generalize Eqs. ( where D S is the diffusion constant for electrons in the normal state of S and H(x) is the step function [H(x) = 1 for x > 0 and 0 otherwise], and for x > 0 with D N the diffusion constant for electrons in N . As before, the superconducting order parameter ∆(x) is to be found self-consistently using Eq. ( the distribution function in the superconductor -information that is lost in considering the density x qp -and this usually results in D qp D S . In general, the system of Usadel plus self-consistent equations must be solved numerically. In Fig. Moreover, for energies large compared to the minigap, g , we can neglect θ N in comparison to θ S at leading order in 1/τ N ∆ 0 1. Hence we can approximate sin[θ S -θ N ] ≈ sin θ S , and at this order Eq. ( -4 arctan e - Here, we define the coherence length as ξ = D S /∆ 0 , introduce the dimensionless functions 2 /∆ 0 , and θ 0 ( ) is the (unknown) value of θ S at the trap edge x = 0. By construction this expression for θ S is continuous at x = 0, but it should also be continuously differentiable. Equating the left and right derivatives at the edge gives us a condition that implicitly defines θ 0 : In the weak-coupling regime we are considering, we have Therefore, except in a narrow energy region near ∆ 0 , Eq. ( Finally, in the energy range where our approximations apply (energy above the minigap and not too close to ∆ 0 ), θ Su is well approximated by θ Dy of Eq. ( In Fig. In the next section we will be interested in the spatial evolution of the normalized density of states and pair amplitude away from the normal-metal trap. In order to find analytical formulas for these quantities, we further approximate Eq. ( for ∆ 0 -1/τ S and g , and for -∆ 0 1/τ S . Note that for energies above the gap the corrections to the BCS formulas are always small by construction. Moreover, both above and below the gap the corrections are small in 1/τ S ∆ 0 and decay exponentially with distance over an energy-dependent length scale which is of the order of the coherence length ξ away from the gap, but longer than ξ close to the gap. We have now all the ingredients needed to estimate the quasiparticle-induced transition rates for a qubit with a trap, which is the focus of the next section. As discussed in Sec. II, the qubit decay rate due to quasiparticle tunneling is proportional to the spectral density S(ω), see Eq. x/ξ = 3.0 0 1 2 x/ξ = 1.0 0 1 2 x/ξ = 0.1 FIG. to show that the changes in the spectral density due to the proximity effect do not significantly harm the qubit if the trap is sufficiently far from the junction. In contrast, in Sec. IV B we will account in a phenomenological way for the spatially dependent suppression of the quasiparticle density caused by the trap. In this more realistic scenario, we will find an optimal position for the trap, which balances between the density suppression and the enhancement of the subgap density of states, two effects that have opposite influence on the qubit relaxation rate. Throughout this section, we assume that the qubit has reflection symmetry with respect to the junction, as in experiments The assumption of thermal equilibrium means that the distribution function has the Fermi-Dirac form, with T the quasiparticle temperature. It then follows from Eqs. ( We assume that the quasiparticles are "cold", T ω 10 , and therefore we can neglect the qubit excitation rate in comparison with the decay rate, since Γ eq 01 /Γ eq 10 = e -ω10/T 1. In presence of a trap, since n and p at the junction position depends on its distance x from the trap, the quantity A defined in Eq. ( S eq aa (ω, x) where x eq qp = 2πT /∆ 0 e -∆0/T coincides with the equilibrium value of the quasiparticle density in the absence of the trap. A spatial dependence in principle arises from the corrections terms in Eqs. ( The small factor 1/τ S ∆ 0 and that exponentially decaying with distance account for the smallness of the initial density of states. In contrast, the final factor is large because the initial occupation probability is exponentially larger at lower energies. Thus at sufficiently low temperature this term can become larger than S aa of Eq. ( Here the small factor 1/τ S ∆ 0 is squared, and the exponential decay with distance is faster than in S eq ba of Eq. ( In addition to the single quasiparticle tunneling, pair events can take place. In particular, since the density of states is finite (albeit small) down to the minigap energy g , so long as ω 10 > 2 g a pair breaking process is possible, in which the qubit relaxes by breaking a Cooper pair and exciting two quasiparticles above the minigap (but well below the gap). From Eq. ( The spectral density does not vanish even at T = 0, as there is no need for thermally excited quasiparticles to be present; in fact, the spectral density decreases linearly with increasing T because the increased occupation of the final states suppresses this process. Interestingly, this linear in temperature term cancels with S bb , Eq. ( (49) Assuming that the trap is next to the junction, x = 0, in Fig. A trap can be beneficial to a qubit primarily by suppressing the quasiparticle density at the junction where the effective chemical potential is a function of position, μ = μ(x), while the effective temperature T is homogeneous and does not necessarily coincides with the phonon bath temperature. Indeed, typical quasiparticle densities in the absence of traps are in the range x qp ∼ 10 -7 -10 -5 , corresponding to effective temperatures (at μ = 0) from ∼ 145 mK to ∼ 200 mK, much higher than both the usual fridge temperature (10-20 mK) and the typical qubit temperature which is of order 35-60 mK The assumption made above gives a restriction on the range of allowed effective temperatures, 2π T /∆ 0 x 2 qp , which is however not relevant in practice since usually we have x qp < 10 -4 [10] and 2π T /∆ 0 > 10 -2 (since T should be at least comparable to the fridge temperature). This restriction also implies μ < ∆ 0 . We will assume that in general the quasiparticle density x qp (x) is larger than the thermal equilibrium value at temperature T , so that μ > 0. Note that for a given x qp , μ is a decreasing func-tion of T , while for a fixed T it is an increasing function of x qp . With the approach described above, given the quasiparticle effective temperature T and the density profile x qp (x), one can calculate the effective chemical potential μ(x) using Eq. ( and (53) Here we assume that ω > 0 and ∆ 0 -μ -ω T ; validity conditions for the approximations employed are discussed in more detail in Appendix E 2. For the term Sbb we have different regimes depending on the ratio between ω and μ: For this term the similarity with thermal equilibrium is recovered only for μ T . This is the case also for the pair process contribution Sp : However, a partial cancellation between Sbb and Sp takes place so long as ω -2μ T , in which case we find as in thermal equilibrium [compare to the second term in Eq. ( Turning now to the spectral density at negative frequencies, we note that a relation similar to Eq. ( follows from Eqs. ( (58) Therefore the rate of qubit excitation induced by quasiparticle recombination can become exponentially larger than qubit relaxation by Cooper pair breaking if 2μ-ω T . We next apply these results to a model of an actual qubit. 1 As a concrete example, we consider the qubit geometry depicted in Fig. To find the quasiparticle density x qp (x) at the Josephson junction, we proceed as in Ref. Here A R = W (L + l -x -d) + L 2 pad is the uncovered area to the right of the trap and A c = 2W c L c is the area of gap capacitor. Equation (59) makes it clear that the closer the trap is to the junction, the more the quasiparticle density is suppressed, and that significant changes in the density take place over the length scale given by λ tr . We can now proceed as outlined above: namely, we first calculate the effective chemical potential μ for different effective temperatures T . In Fig. Next, we calculate the qubit transition rates using the thus found chemical potential. We perform the calculation in two ways: we substitute the chemical potential into Eq. ( In Fig. In this work we investigate the proximity effect between a normal-metal quasiparticle trap and the superconducting electrode of a qubit. On one hand, a trap can prolong the relaxation time of the qubit by suppressing the quasiparticle density. On the other hand, the proximity effect induces subgap states which can shorten the relaxation time. To quantify the competition between these two phenomena, we start by considering a uniform superconductor-normal metal bilayer; at relevant energies, the density of states takes the Dynes form, Eq. ( While we focused here on a transmon qubit, our findings may prove useful in designing traps for other systems as well. For example, quasiparticle poisoning could be a significant hurdle for nanowire-based realization of Majorana qubits the solution to Eq. ( This gives the minigap energy at E g = 1/τ N while the DoS above it is given by Eq. Since both terms in the left hand side must be small, we arrive at Eq. ( To study the DoS at energies below 1/τ N , we must remove the assumption (B4), while still maintaining X 1. Then, we can expand Eq. (B3) with respect to X, and keeping terms up to the cubic order we can write that equation in the form Depending on its coefficient, a third order polynomial can have either three real roots, or one real and two complex conjugate roots. For the DoS not to vanish, we need X to be complex, so the minigap is identified as the energy at which the type of roots changes from purely real -this happens when the polynomial has a minimum so that the two real roots are degenerate, giving the condition Vanishing of the derivative requires [one can check that the second solution, X( g ) = /∆, leads to the unphysical result g = 0]. Substituting Eq. (B9) into Eq. (B8) and solving for g at leading order in the small parameters (τ N ∆) -1 and (τ S ∆) -1 , we arrive at Eq. ( To find the DoS above the minigap, we expand X and τ N around the minigap energy; we take X = X( g )+δX and = g + δ and expand Eq. (B8) up to first order in δ and second order in δX (the lower orders vanish by construction): If the last term can be neglected, solving F(X, ) = 0 for δX in terms of δ clearly gives immediately a square root threshold behavior; the coefficients are given explicitly in Eq. ( We now consider energies much higher than the minigap, g . In this case we assume and Eq. (B3) simplifies to -∆ + X √ 1+X 2 = i τ S ∆ . Solving this equation for X we arrive at the Dynes-like formula given in Eq. We now consider the case of low resistance at the N S contact interface, such that at least one the two dimensionless coupling parameters τ S ∆ and τ N ∆ is small compared to 1. We start again from Eq. (B3) and make the assumption Using this assumption we simplify Eq. (B3) to -∆ + X √ 1+X 2 = τ N τ S ∆ ; solving for X, we find the DoS in the BCS-like form where the (approximate) minigap energy in this limit is ̃ gs = τ S ∆ τ S +τ N ; these results agree with those reported in Ref. Requiring the assumption (B13) to be valid as → ̃ gs , we find the conditions The first condition can be rewritten as 1/τ N ∆+1/τ S ∆ 1 and it is indeed satisfied under the assumption made at the beginning of this subsection. The second condition indicates that the BCS-like behavior is not valid close to the minigap, similar to the weak-coupling regime. Therefore, to find a more accurate position for the minigap and the behavior of the DoS near it, we take an approach similar to that of the previous subsection. Namely, let us introduce the new variable η = 1/X, and make the assumptions Then Eq. (B3) can be rewritten as G(η, ) = 0 with, keeping only next to leading order terms, Here the quadratic term can be neglected in comparison with the cubic one, see Eq. (B16). The resulting third order polynomial can be studied following the same procedure as for the weak coupling case. We then find for the minigap valid when this condition follows from the first inequality in Eq. (B16). To find the density of states just above the minigap, we perform an expansion as in Eq. (B10) and finally arrive at In Fig. For reference, we report in Fig. In concluding this Appendix, we mention that the treatement presented here for the strong proximity effect may become invalid: we have used the Kuprianov-Lukichev boundary conditions, Eq. (A6), which however are valid only in the limit of low contact transparency where we used Eq. ( Substituting this expression into Eqs. (D1) and (D2), we find Eqs. ( Appendix E: Spectral function in the presence of a trap Here we present in some detail the derivation of the formulas for the spectral functions reported in Sec. IV. As in that Section, we distinguish between the thermal equilibrium case and the non-equilibrium one, which accounts for the suppression of the quasiparticle density by the trap. In both cases, our starting points are Eqs. ( We assume a thermal equilibrium distribution function, Eq. ( Let us consider first the highest energy integration region, for which we have approximately (E1) The approximations employed here are two: first, in the function A of Eq. ( Here we have included a factor of 2 due to the presence of two identical traps symmetrically placed with respect to the trap, as discussed at the beginning of Sec. IV; since we are considering small, linear-order corrections [cf. text above Eq. ( Performing the integration, we finally arrive at Eq. ( where again we have taken into account the presence of two identical traps [while use of Eqs. where we used the assumption T g to set the lower integration limit to 0. After integration, we obtain Eq. In contrast to quasiparticle tunneling, the pair process contribution to the spectral function, S p of Eq. which we obtain after substituting Eqs. For T ω, the integral in the second line gives ω -2T ln 2, thus proving Eq. We have remarked above that the condition is necessary for S p to be finite, and we have shown in Fig. |x| ξ (ω -2 g ) θ (ω -2 g ) , (E9) and using this expression in Eq. We now consider the case in which we account for the suppression of the quasiparticle density by the trap using the distribution function of the form in Eq. ( The calculation of Sbb is more involved, as different parameter regimes must be distinguished. The simplest case is that of μ ω; then we can proceed as in the above derivation of S eq bb , the only difference being that we have to explicitly keep both f ( ) and f ( + ω), without approximations. This way we find that the expression for Sbb is obtained by the replacement T → T ln[(1 + e μ/ T )/(1 + e (μ-ω)/ T )]/ ln 2 in the formula Eq. ( 