Understanding of the precise mechanisms of high-temperature superconductivity is elusive. In particular, in order to solve the puzzle of the pairing mechanism, it is important to understand the detailed nature of the excitations at energies around the superconducting gap. While measurements of the dynamics of excited electronic populations have been able to give some insight, they have largely neglected the intricate dynamics of quantum coherence. Here, we apply multidimensional coherent spectroscopy for the first time to a prototypical cuprate and report unprecedented coherent dynamics persisting for ∼500 fs, originating directly from the quantum superposition of optically excited states separated by 20 -60 meV. These results reveal the correlation between high and low energy excitations, and indicate that the interplay between many-body states on different energy scales conserves phase coherence. In revealing these dynamics we demonstrate that multidimensional coherent spectroscopy can address electronic correlations and interrogate many-body quantum systems in unprecedented ways. In conventional superconductivity, electronic excitations are "glued" into Cooper pairs by lattice vibrations In order to address the interactions that lead to superconductivity in cuprates, a variety of pump-probe time-resolved experiments have been performed Pump-probe experiments are a subclass of transient four-wave mixing (FWM) techniques that have been used for decades to measure dynamics The third pulse converts this population into a coherent quantum superposition, which relaxes back to the ground state emitting the signal. (In pump-probe measurements the third pulse is the probe, the signal is emitted in the same direction as the probe, and the interference between them gives the change in probe intensity). For more complex samples which cannot be described as two-level systems, other pathways become possible, for example, instead of the first two pulses combining to excite a population, they can excite a coherent superposition of closely spaced energy states, in much the same manner as a coherent Raman experiment Other FWM approaches, however, can probe directly the coherent dynamics of quantum superpositions Multidimensional coherent spectroscopy (MDCS) Through the direct measurement of the phase information in MDCS it becomes simpler to disentangle different pathways, allowing a greater level of control and insight into the interactions in strongly-correlated electronic materials. Pathway-selective MDCS provides additional capability to separate different contributions: by controlling the spectral phase and amplitude of the excitation pulses, one can trigger and probe specific components or pathways of the non-linear response of a material, such as pure quantum-coherent signals Experimental description. The experiment is described schematically in Fig. For the purposes of our discussion here we focus on the state of the system after the first two pulses, at which point, the sample is in a coherent quantum superposition of states separated by 20 -60 meV. The third pulse, with energy 1.54 eV and wave-vector k3, then interacts with this coherent superposition, leading to the 3 rd order signal emitted in the phase-matched direction ks=-k1+k2+k3, with central energy expected at ∼1.505 eV. The emitted signal is overlapped with the local oscillator and sent to a spectrometer where a spectral interferogram is measured and analysed to provide the amplitude and phase of the signal. To probe the evolution of the coherent superposition excited by the first two pulses, the delay between the second and third pulse, t2, is scanned and the evolution of the signal amplitude and phase is measured. The sample was at a nominal temperature of 12 K but quantitatively consistent results were also obtained at 66 K (Fig. The real part of the measured signal is shown in Fig. By windowing the data in the t2 domain we can separate the response during pulse overlap, which contributes the broad part of the 2D spectrum, from the response after pulse overlap, as shown in Fig. The 2D spectrum corresponding to the signal persisting beyond pulse overlap (Fig. However, the results show that right across the distribution of coherence energies there is a component that remains coherent for over ∼500 fs, generating the narrow peak elongated along the diagonal in Fig. The narrow diagonal peak is reminiscent of what is obtained in photon echo measurements, where rephasing of different frequency allows homogeneous linewidths to be measured even in the presence of significant inhomogeneous broadening Comparison with vibrational coherence. 2D spectra obtained for samples with clear discrete vibrational modes, as is the case for coherent optical phonons, show narrow peaks in E2 which are spread across a range of E3 values, as shown in Fig. Model. Traditional analysis of MDCS data uses a perturbative approach to solve the Liouville variant of the Schrodinger equation in a single particle framework, with discrete states For strongly correlated materials, such as optimally doped LSCO, the many-body nature of the different excitations and states should be taken into account for a full description and understanding of the experimental results. However, as we show below, a single particle picture can still qualitatively reproduce the results and provide some physical insight into the correlations of this material. Here we consider a modified three-level system, where each level is broadened, but the broadening between the top and bottom level is correlated, as shown in Fig. Signal origin. The equilibrium band structure of optimally doped LSCO reveals a continuous density of states from well-below the Fermi energy level (EF) to well above it Previous Raman measurements on similar samples revealed a smooth, essentially featureless spectrum over the range of E2 energies probed here Here we applied MDCS to the prototypical cuprate superconductor LSCO and found novel quantum signatures: a 500 fs long coherent signal originating from the superpositions of many-body states at low energy. We found a strong correlation between the energy of this coherence and the optical energy of the emitted signal, proving there is interplay between the quantum superpositions at low and high energy in these systems. We stress that this kind of quantum signal, characterized by a continuum distribution of coherence energy and a narrow elongation, has, to our knowledge, never been observed before in any other material. A fundamental concept valid for correlated electronic materials, which is at odds with singleparticle theories, is that when the number of available excitations change by e.g. chemical substitution Our results demonstrate that MDCS is a powerful and novel tool to study electronic correlations and opens the door to addressing directly the quantum-coherent state of manybody matter. Sample details. The crystal was grown by using the flux technique. Stoichiometric amounts of high purity (>99.99%) La2O3, SrCO3 and CuO chemicals were mixed. Further 75 mole percent of CuO was added as flux. These powders were placed in a platinum crucible and covered tightly with a platinum lid and heated in a chamber furnace. The crucible was heated to 1250 °C and kept there for 10 hr, then it was slowly cooled down to 1100 °C at a rate of 2 °C/hr. After the growth, the flux was separated by inverting the crucible when it was at 1100 °C. Finally the furnace was cooled down to room temperature at the rate of 50 °C/hr Measurements details. The transient FWM experiments were performed using the experimental apparatus described previously The signal generated in the phase matched direction -(-k1+k2+k3) is spatially overlapped with the LO, which co-propagates into a spectrometer where a spectral interferogram is detected, providing details of the signal amplitude and phase. Other signals originating from different wave-mixing are emitted in very different directions and are not detected. An 8-step phase cycling procedure is used to isolate the signal from background scatter and enhance the signal to noise ratio. In the measurements reported here, data is acquired by setting the delay between the first and second pulses to zero (t1=0) and increasing the delay of the third pulse (t2) by controlling its spectral phase. From this series of interferograms the time resolved signal can be obtained as shown in Fig. Additional measurements at different intensities were performed to ensure these experiments are being done in a third-order regime. The linear polarization dependent experiments were performed by introducing a half-wave plate and linear polarizer into each beam and setting the polarizations accordingly. For the circularly polarized experiments (Fig. The laser polarization is in the copper-oxygen a-b plane of LSCO, and the signal is independent of the sample orientation in the a-b plane (e.g. if the laser fields are parallel, perpendicular, or in between a and b). Simulation. We simulate the nonlinear response of LSCO by numerically solving the Liouville variant of the Schrodinger equation for the three level system described in Fig. where εε ii is the energy of state i, μμ iiii is the transition dipole moment for the transition between state i and j; γγ iiii is the phenomenological decay rate for each term in the density matrix, ρρ iiii , which corresponds to a population lifetime where ii = jj , and decoherence time where ii ≠ jj. EE(kk, tt) is the electric field of the excitation pulses given by EE(kk, tt) = EE 1 (tt)ee ii(kk 11 .rr-ωω 1 ii) + EE 2 (tt)ee ii(kk 22 .rr-ωω 2 ii) + EE 3 (tt)ee ii(kk 33 .rr-ωω 3 ii) where kk ii is the wave-vector, ωω ii the frequency, and EE ii (tt) the envelope function of pulse ii. The electric field is treated perturbatively, and the system of equations expanded up to 3 rd order, with the emitted signal being proportional to the third order polarization, corresponding to μμ 13 ρρ 13 , with wavevector -kk 11 + kk 22 + kk 33 . The resultant set of interdependent differential equations is solved numerically to facilitate the use of realistic pulses with finite duration. We take the dipole moment for the transition between states 1 and 3 (μ13) to be the same as the one between states 2 and 3 (μ23). The homogeneous linewidths of these transitions (γ13 and γ23) were set to 80 meV, such that the ∼1.55 eV coherent superpositions decay within the pulse duration, as observed in the projection of the 3D spectrum onto the one-quantum 2D spectrum shown in Supplementary Fig. Possible pathways for excitation of the 40±20 meV coherent superpositions Heating effects due to laser excitation Emission at negative times Correlations between E1, E2, and E3 Fourier transform of the data with respect to t2 yields the 2D spectrum, where E2 corresponds to the coherence energy i.e. the energy difference between the states in the quantum superposition. By windowing the data using the window functions shown in (c), the response at pulse overlap (e) and after pulse overlap (f) can be isolated. In (f) the diagonal peak shape corresponding to the extended signal becomes clear. In the insets of (d -f) a cross-diagonal slice of the respective 2D spectrum is plotted. shows discrete narrow peaks corresponding to the discrete vibrational modes 