We investigate the impact of spin anisotropic interactions, promoted by spin-orbit coupling, on the magnetic phase diagram of the iron-based superconductors. Three distinct magnetic phases with Bragg peaks at (π, 0) and (0, π) are possible in these systems: one C2 (i.e. orthorhombic) symmetric stripe magnetic phase and two C4 (i.e. tetragonal) symmetric magnetic phases. While the spin anisotropic interactions allow the magnetic moments to point in any direction in the C2 phase, they restrict the possible moment orientations in the C4 phases. As a result, an interesting scenario arises in which the spin anisotropic interactions favor a C2 phase, but the other spin isotropic interactions favor a C4 phase. We study this frustration via both mean-field and renormalizationgroup approaches. We find that, to lift this frustration, a rich magnetic landscape emerges well below the magnetic transition temperature, with novel C2, C4, and mixed C2-C4 phases. Near the putative magnetic quantum critical point, spin anisotropies promote a stable Gaussian fixed point in the renormalization-group flow, which is absent in the spin isotropic case, and is associated with a near-degeneracy between C2 and C4 phases. We argue that this frustration is the reason why most C4 phases in the iron pnictides only appear inside the C2 phase, and discuss additional manifestations of this frustration in the phase diagrams of these materials. The phase diagrams of the iron pnictide superconductors display a rich structure, exhibiting, in addition to superconductivity, a multitude of magnetic phases The crystal structure of the pnictides in the paramagnetic phase is tetragonal and inelastic neutron scattering experiments reveal peaks at Q 1,2 = (π, 0), (0, π) in the 1Fe/unit cell. This motivates considering two magnetic order parameters, M 1,2 , with ordering vectors Q 1,2 related by C 4 symmetry. The condensation of only M 1 or M 2 leads to the SSDW phase mentioned above, and the choice of either Q 1 or Q 2 implies the breaking of tetragonal symmetry, leading to a preemptive or simultaneous * mchrist@umn.edu nematic transition On the other hand, the possibility that both order parameters condense simultaneously leads to two additional options for the magnetic order The fact that the moment direction seemingly depends on the type of magnetic order hints at the importance of spin anisotropy in these systems. Indeed, both polarized inelastic neutron scattering measurements In this paper we study the impact of spin anisotropies on a phenomenological description of the magnetic phase diagram, both at the mean-field level and beyond. The main results can be summarized as follows: • In the vicinity of the magnetic transition temperature, the system can exhibit phases in which two or more of the original phases, SSDW, CSDW, and SVC, coexist at a microscopic level. This results in e.g. double-Q phases which break C 4 symmetry. These are stabilized by SOC-induced spin anisotropic terms in the action. The presence of such spin anisotropic terms may cause frustration between the possible types of magnetic order. Frustration occurs when the magnetic ground state, which is determined by interactions (i.e. quartic coefficients of the action), becomes incompatible with the spin anisotropies imposed by SOC. Thus, the ground state obtained in the absence of spin anisotropy can be incompatible with the moment direction imposed by the SOC. Near the magnetic transition temperature the spin anisotropy due to SOC is dominant and the frustration is therefore lifted. These results are discussed in detail in Sec. III. • Degeneracies between different magnetic orders emerge close to the magnetic quantum critical point (QCP) due to the SOC. In the FeSC, a putative QCP is found as magnetism is suppressed by doping, although it is typically hidden by the superconducting dome. We demonstrate this phenomenon using a renormalization group (RG) approach. The SOC-induced spin anisotropy is a relevant perturbation and leads to a drastic modification of the RG flows. The enhanced magnetic degeneracy appears due to the Gaussian fixed point being stable for a large range of system parameters. This is in contrast to the spin isotropic case, in which the Gaussian fixed point is unstable. The RG approach is discussed in Sec. IV and a concise account of these results was given in Ref. In addition to the main results discussed in Secs. III and IV, in Sec. II we introduce the model and provide further background, while in Sec. V we discuss the implications of our results. In Appendix A we provide further details for the derivation of the RG flow equations. (Color online) Possible commensurate magnetic ground state configurations m(R) obtained from the free energy. Only Fe sites are shown. Note that, in the absence of spin anisotropy, the free energy only fixes the relative orientation of the magnetic moments. The directions were chosen to match those observed in experiments. Here, SSDW denotes the stripe spin density wave phase, CSDW the charge-spin density wave phase and SVC the spin-vortex crystal phase. Many of the parent compounds of the iron pnictides are striped antiferromagnets with ordering vectors Q 1,2 = (π, 0), (0, π) in the 1Fe/unit cell. Hence, in the ordered phase, the magnetic moment at each Fe-site is Prior to the formation of magnetic order the systems exhibit tetragonal symmetry. Together with time-reversal symmetry this restricts the form of the action, which can be written as where q = (iω n , q) and x = (τ, x) with the integrals q ≡ T ωn Here we consider a two-dimensional system, as the coupling between neighboring FeAs-layers is weak. The quadratic coefficient, r 0 (q) = r 0 + q 2 + γ|ω n |, is the bare inverse susceptibility with bosonic Matsubara frequency ω n = 2πnT and Landau damping parameter γ. In the high-temperature classical limit, r 0 has the form where a > 0 and T mag is the mean-field magnetic transition temperature in the absence of SOC. In the T = 0 case, r 0 tunes the distance to the mean-field QCP. Damping of the magnetic fluctuations in these metallic systems occurs via excitations of particle-hole pairs and is thus (Color online) Mean-field phase diagram of the action in Eq. ( Ohmic and described by a dynamic critical exponent of z = 2. The free energy is obtained through Encouraged by experimental results, we focus on homogeneous and commensurate phases. In this case three separate minima are possible. These correspond to the three magnetic states, SSDW, CSDW, and SVC, which are depicted in Fig. • The SSDW phase is selected for g > 0 and -w < g. The free energy functional is bounded for u > g. • The CSDW phase is selected for g < |w| and w < 0. The free energy functional is bounded for u > -w. • The SVC phase is selected for g < 0 and w > 0. The free energy functional is bounded for u > 0. Other than having to fulfill the above stability requirements, u does not play a role in determining the magnetic order. The leading instabilities can thus be described entirely in terms of g and w, as seen in Fig. In the absence of SOC, the O(3) spin rotational symmetry and the lattice symmetries are completely decoupled. The moment direction is thus independent of the lattice wavevectors Q i and is spontaneously chosen within the full O(3) manifold. In the presence of a finite SOC this is no longer the case and the O(3) symmetry is broken down already by the presence of the lattice, leading to spin anisotropy. In the pnictides, the staggering of the As atoms along with the observation that the moments are centered on the Fe sites lead to a specific anisotropy Evidently, the relative values of the coefficients α 1 , α 2 and α 3 control the direction of the magnetic moments. For α 1 < α 2 , α 3 the moments are in-plane, along the direction of the ordering vector, M 1 x and M 2 ŷ. For α 2 < α 1 , α 3 the moments are also in-plane, however, they are perpendicular to their respective ordering vectors, i.e. M 1 ŷ and M 2 x. Finally, if α 3 < α 1 , α 2 , the moments point out-of-plane, M i ẑ. The coefficients α i were calculated in Ref. 28 using a low-energy model based on a k • p-expansion around the Γ, X, and Y points. They were shown to be proportional to the SOC strength and Hund's coupling, α i ∝ λ 2 J H , while the ratios between the αs depend on the bandstructure and vary with doping. A more recent treatment considered the appearance of spin anisotropic terms in realistic band structures with SOC The quartic terms of the free energy are also modified by the finite SOC. Such modifications are proportional to λ 2 as well, but within our mean-field approach it is well-justified to neglect SOC anisotropies in the quartic coefficients. The reason is that close to T mag it is the quadratic coefficients that select which order parameter components condense and anisotropies in the quartic coefficients only become relevant at much lower temperatures. At low temperatures, we fully take the resulting anisotropies into account within our RG approach, discussed in Sec. IV. The SOC contribution to the free energy given in Eq. ( Hence, if α 1 < α 2 , α 3 , only M x,1 and M y,2 can condense in the vicinity of T mag thus leading to either an SSDW or SVC phase. This is at the core of the frustration mentioned above. The ground state in the spin isotropic case can be incompatible with the moment direction enforced by the SOC. For instance, in the case above, the CSDW phase is ruled out by the SOC (see also Fig. Before discussing the general case of the full free energy in the presence of SOC let us first consider the limiting cases of α 1 α 2 , α 3 and α 3 α 1 , α 2 . The case α 2 α 1 , α 3 is analogous to the first one and the same phases appear, only with moments pointing in different directions. In the case of α 1 α 2 , α 3 the degrees of freedom M y,1 , M x,2 , M z,1 , and M z,2 are quenched and the free energy takes the simple form Note that the w-term drops out as the only non-zero spin components are M x,1 and M y,2 . Evidently, when g > 0 an SSDW phase emerges, while if g < 0 an SVC phase is preferred. Here and throughout we use to refer to phases with in-plane moments and ⊥ to phases with outof-plane moments. Additionally, to ensure a bounded free energy, we require u > g in the former case, while u > 0 in the latter. This is summarized in Fig. M y,2 , are quenched, and the free energy can be written as Here, an SSDW ⊥ phase appears for g + w > 0, while boundedness again requires u > g. On the other hand, if g +w < 0 a C 4 phase emerges, although in this case it is a CSDW ⊥ phase. For g + w < 0 we require that u + w > 0 for the free energy to remain bounded. Fig. We proceed to consider temperatures well below T mag and in this way move beyond the leading instabilities. We examine several values of the quartic coefficients, indicated by the points {A, B, C, D, E} shown in Figs. A full analytical minimization of the free energy is difficult in the absence of spin rotational invariance. Instead, we carry out a numerical minimization of the free energy in the cases {A, B, C, D, E}. In case A we supplement the discussion of the numerical results by an analytical treatment based on physically motivated expressions for the magnetic order parameters. While such a study is possible in all five cases, we focus on one of them for brevity, as this is sufficient to convey the main idea. Throughout this section we vary the ratio of α 1 /α 3 with fixed α 2 . In practice this is accomplished by fixing α 3 /u = 0.03 and varying α 1 . Below we consider two cases. In one case, α 1 , α 3 α 2 , and we take the limit α 2 → ∞ (moderate anisotropy). The spin components associated with α 2 can thus be safely ignored. In the other case, α 1 , α 3 α 2 , and we take α 2 /u = 0.06 (weak anisotropy). In this situation the spin components associated with α 2 will affect the magnetic phase diagram, as we illustrate below. We take a/u = 5. As depicted in Fig. To understand these observations in further detail we consider the free energy for a number of different types of magnetic order. We begin with the case in which α 1 , α 3 α 2 , in which case the spin components associated with α 2 are quenched. The leading instabilities associated with Figs. CSDW ⊥ : SSDW +CSDW ⊥ : Let us first consider the mixed case. The free energy is A coupling between M SSDW and M CSDW arises from the term u 2 (M 2 1 + M 2 2 ) 2 , while the remaining terms only involve either M SSDW or M CSDW . Due to the restrictions imposed on u to ensure a bounded free energy [cf. the discussion following Eq. ( which cannot be satisfied for any u simultaneously fulfilling u > g and u > -w. Thus, when α 1 , α 3 α 2 no mixed phase will exist, regardless of the temperature or the value of α 1 /α 3 . For the SSDW and CSDW cases we find ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ and the final expressions for the free energies are Recall r 0 = a(T -T mag ) and we can compare the above expressions along with the free energy for the paramagnetic state, F PM = 0. This yields lines of primary and secondary transitions identical to those obtained from the numerical results presented in Fig. Let us now analytically consider the case α 1 , α 3 α 2 , implying that the spin components associated with α 2 cannot be set to zero. This situation is slightly more complicated due to the presence of these additional spin components. The mixed phase SSDW +CSDW ⊥ is ruled out by arguments identical to the ones presented above, i.e. the energy cost of the crossterm outweighs the energy gained from the remaining coefficients. However, when α 2 is comparable to α 1 and α 3 , a phase consisting of the superposition of an SSDW phase with moments parallel to the ordering vector and an SSDW phase with moments perpendicular to the ordering vector must be considered. In addition, the in-plane SSDW phase and the out-of-plane CSDW ⊥ phase are expected to be present. Once again, any SVC phases are precluded due to the choice of quartic coefficients. Hence we start from the expressions SSDW : CSDW ⊥ : SSDW +SSDW : In constrast to the case above, the free energy for the mixed phase contains multiple terms coupling M SSDW1 and M SSDW2 : In contrast to the case with SSDW +CSDW ⊥ the system can now take advantage of the cross term due to the presence of the additional coefficients g and w. In this case, a coexistence phase is possible if Evidently, this is satisfied in the triangle in which A is located in Fig. For this point, the quartic coefficients are g/u = -0.25 and w/u = -0.25. Similarly to case A this predicts a CSDW phase in the spin isotropic case. The difference comes from the location of the point B in Fig. ▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ in Fig. Figs. The quartic coefficients in this case are g/u = -0.25 and w/u = 0.125. In the spin isotropic case they give an SVC phase. In the presence of spin anisotropy with α 1 < α 2 , α 3 this matches expectations based on Fig. Here we have chosen the state in which M x,1 condenses. The state with non-zero M y,2 (and M z,1 ) is related to the above by a C 4 rotation. The system spontaneously selects one of the two. The SVC components are favored by the quartic coefficients while the SSDW component appears as the x-and z-components cannot be identical due to the spin anisotropy. Evidently, this phase can be seen as a modified out-of-plane SVC phase with These arguments also apply to the case where α 1 , α 3 α 2 . In this case however, the system exploits the presence of an additional soft in-plane direction to form two intertwined out-of-plane SVC ⊥ +SSDW ⊥ phases. One is the same as appears when α 1 , α 3 α 2 . The second SVC ⊥ +SSDW ⊥ phase has the form and arises as the system attempts to balance the finite α 2 , which allows for non-zero M x,2 and M y,1 , with the fact that w < |g|. The relative size of the quartic coefficients implies that the system prioritizes minimizing For spin anisotropic systems a balance is struck between the quadratic and quartic coefficients. The result is that the system can gain energy by having both M 2 1 -M 2 2 = 0 and M 1 • M 2 = 0. We therefore find the total magnetic order parameter in the yellow ( ) region in Fig. The intricate evolution of this order as a function of temperature is captured in the inset of Fig. ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼ The transition between CSDW ⊥ and SVC ⊥ +SSDW ⊥ features a reorientation of the magnetic moments and is first-order. In contrast, if α1, α3 α2 the system can go from CSDW ⊥ to SVC ⊥ +SSDW ⊥ through an intermediary phase, which is accessed through second-order transitions, see the inset in (d). Phase transitions are denoted by lines in (b) and (d), dotted lines indicate second-order transitions while dashed lines are first-order transitions. cases A and B above. Instead, the in-plane components condense via a second-order phase transition while the out-of-plane components split, with one going smoothly to zero. This is in contrast to the direct transition between the CSDW ⊥ and SVC ⊥ +SSDW ⊥ phases depicted in Fig. Here the quartic coefficients are g/u = -0.125 and w/u = 0.25, also indicating an SVC phase in the spin isotropic case. However, the relative magnitude of g and w play an important role, as is evident from Fig. This point corresponds to g/u = 0.25 and w/u = 0.25 and for spin isotropic systems it lies deep in the SSDW phase. Generally, all points in the isotropic SSDW phase of Fig. The magnetic phase diagram is substantially modified in the presence of SOC, as revealed by Figs. ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲▲ ▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼ ▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼ We now study the phase diagram beyond mean-field theory, employing an RG approach. The RG analysis is carried out at T = 0 as the effects of spin anisotropy on the quartic terms are most pronounced there. In addition, at T = 0 and d = 2 the system lies at the upper critical dimension allowing for a well-controlled RG calculation. In Ref. For the purpose of deriving the RG equations, it is convenient to rewrite the action of Eq. ( M i,1 (q 1 )M i,2 (q 2 )M j,1 (q 3 )M j,2 (-q 1 -q 2 -q 3 ) , here i, j = x, y, z and we defined ri, The quartic terms are written in momentum space. At T = 0, the integrals q ≡ |q|<Λ d 4 q (2π) 4 , as d + z = 2 + 2 = 4. In this case, the T = 0 Matsubara summation can be converted to a 2-dimensional momentum integral, placing the system at the upper critical dimension. Here, Λ is the upper cut-off. The indices of the quartic coefficients anticipates the fact that the anisotropy of the quadratic coefficients will generate anisotropies in the quartic coefficients. The coefficients λ ij 1 and λ ij 2 are related by C 4 symmetry: where x = y, ȳ = x, and z = z. Additionally, they are symmetric matrices In contrast, under a C 4 rotation ρ ij transforms according to i.e. ρ xx = ρ yy , but ρ xy and ρ yx are unrelated, see Eq. and is also symmetric: Hence, the number of independent quartic coefficients is 16, which, along with the three independent quadratic coefficients, yields a total of 19 coupled flow equations. Thus, despite the isotropic initial conditions imposed on the quartic coefficients, anisotropic terms are generated under the RG flow. Here we review the renormalization of the propagator and quartic vertices up to one-loop. As a first step the magnetic degrees are separated into slow modes, M < , and fast modes, M > , i.e. M(q) = M < (q) + M > (q) where and > 0. The fast modes are integrated out yielding where S int expresses how the high-momentum fast modes affect the relevant slow modes. Here • >,0 refers to an average with respect to the Gaussian term of the fast modes. Terminating the expression at second order in S int corresponds to a one-loop approximation. To ensure that the action describes the original physical system a subsequent momentum rescaling, q = e q < , and field rescaling, M < (q < ) = ζM(q), is required. We follow the usual convention that the coefficient of the kinetic term q 2 should remain unchanged under such a rescaling. Considering the isotropic case for simplicity, we find for the Gaussian part of the action and we choose ζ = e 3 . The factor of e 2 remaining in front of r 0 leads to the factor of 2 appearing in the first term in Eqs. ( The term S int >,0 , with the appropriate momenta and field rescalings, yields the one-loop renormalization of the quadratic terms and the tree level renormalization of the quartic terms. Similarly, S 2 int >,0 -S int 2 >,0 yields the one-loop renormalization of the quartic terms. A detailed presentation of the appropriate diagrams contributing to the flow equations is given in Appendix A. Using the results presented there we find the flow equations -8 ρ jj w ij (r j,1 + 1)(r j,2 + 1) Here we rescaled ri,1 and ri,2 by a factor of Λ 2 such that the ultraviolet cut-off is encountered when ri,μ reaches unity. Note that rx,1 = ry,2 , rx,2 = ry,1 and rz,1 = rz,2 due to C 4 symmetry. In the following we will therefore only discuss ri,1 . The coupled non-linear differential equations ( The isotropic limit of the above equations provides a good reference point for subsequent discussions. It can be achieved by having isotropic initial conditions for the quadratic coefficients: 0 . In this case there are only three coupled equations governing the flow of the quartic coefficients. In terms of the original coef-FIG. ficients we thus obtain ṙ0 = 2r 0 + 16 where the dot denotes differentiation with respect to . Various aspects of these equations have been studied previously, see Refs. In this case the Gaussian fixed point is unstable except for flows with fine-tuned initial conditions which we discuss below. The RG flows are instead governed by a number of fixed trajectories. These are trajectories for which the ratio of two coefficients tends to a constant although the coefficients themselves might diverge at a finite value of = c . These fixed trajectories are SSDW: CSDW: SVC: For each fixed trajectory there are associated basins of attraction and basins of repulsion. In these regions the flows are either attracted or repelled by the fixed trajectories. Focusing first on the (g, w)-plane we consider each of the fixed trajectories in turn. A straightforward stability analysis reveals that the fixed trajectory identified with the SSDW phase is indeed attractive for g > 0 and repulsive for g < 0. The g > 0 branch of the fixed trajectory thus acts to ensure that the flows within the SSDW region are attracted to the (w/g) * = 0 line. This is the reason for associating the fixed trajectory with the SSDW phase, the stable part is depicted by a dark blue line in Fig. separatrix between the CSDW and SSDW phases, coinciding with the mean-field phase boundary between the two. Thus, attractive and repulsive branches of the fixed trajectories act in tandem to prevent the occurence of any accidental near degeneracies in the system. This implies that the mean-field phase diagram is stable against fluctuations. The behavior described can be seen in Fig. The fixed trajectories involving u serve a different purpose. A stability analysis similar to the one above shows that for the SSDW phase the fixed trajectory (u/g) * = -1 is stable for g > 0 and u < 0. Combining this with the fact that u( → c ) → -∞, as shown in Fig. Finally, we briefly comment on the fate of the Gaussian fixed point in the isotropic case. As explained above, the RG flows are governed by the fixed trajectories and will approach the stable branches asymptotically as → c . However, a different behavior emerges if the initial conditions, g (0) and w (0) , lie on one of the trajectories (w/g) * = 0, (g/w) * = 0 or (w/g) * = -1. If the initial conditions are on one of the unstable branches of the fixed trajectories, the flow is towards the Gaussian fixed point, i.e. u = g = w = 0. This occurs regardless of the initial condition for u, as long as the free energy is initially bounded. Note that for initial conditions on the unstable branches, two of the magnetic phases are accidentally degenerate. It is unlikely that such a scenario would occur in realistic systems however. Even if the initial conditions could be fine-tuned, any infinitesimal perturbation would displace the flow from the unstable branch of the fixed trajectory. For initial conditions on the stable branches of the fixed trajectories, there is no accidental degeneracy. In these cases the flows are directed along the fixed trajectories towards a first-order transition, and away from the Gaussian fixed point. The strongly anisotropic cases can be studied in a similar manner. Here we review our results presented in Ref. where u α1 = ρ xy + λ xx 1 and g α1 = ρ xy -λ xx 1 . Note that this forms a closed set of equations signalling a decou-pling of the order parameters. The flow equations governing the remaining spin components are zero due to the initial conditions imposed by the bare free energy Eq. ( To see the origin of the stable Gaussian fixed point, let us assume that we are right at the magnetic transition, r(0) x,1 = rc x,1 such that ṙx,1 = 0, and consider the fixed trajectories of Eqs. ( A stability analysis shows that (u α1 /g α1 ) * = 2 is repulsive for g α1 > 0 while (u α1 /g α1 ) * = -1 is repulsive for g α1 < 0. Hence, for u (0) α1 > 0, flows within the fan formed by (u α1 /g α1 ) * = 2 and (u α1 /g α1 ) * = -1 can only flow to the Gaussian fixed point. This is similar to the N = 1 case studied in Ref. The case with rz,1 rx,1 , ry,1 , i.e. α 3 α 1 , α 2 , behaves in a similar manner. Here, the bare action is given in Eq. ( ġα3 + ẇα3 = -24 The specific forms of the equations have been chosen to highlight the fact that there are only two independent quartic coefficients in this case, just as for the α 1 α 2 , α 3 case above. Here, however, u α3 = ρ zz + λ zz 1 , g α3 = ρ zz -λ zz 1 and w α3 = w zz . Note that Eqs. (59)-(61) have identical structure to Eqs. ( α3 > 0, implying that flows within this fan terminate at the Gaussian fixed point. We summarize the above findings in Fig. The case where only one α-coefficient is dominant seems contrived given that SOC is small and of the or- x,1 -r(0) z,1 )/u (0) = 0.1 with g (0) /u (0) = 0.3 and w (0) /u (0) = -0.4. In (c) r(0) x,1 = -0.44859, (r y,1 -r(0) x,1 )/u (0) = 0.05 and (r z,1 -r(0) x,1 )/u (0) = 0.1 with g (0) /u (0) = -0.4 and w (0) /u (0) = 0.6. der ∼ 10 meV Here we consider the full numerical solution of the general RG equations ( The above decoupling is a consequence of the RG rel- 1 (we take u0 = 0.1). In (a) the flow of the quartic coefficients (u + w) zz = uα 3 + wα 3 and (g + w) zz = gα 3 + wα 3 is depicted. In (b) the flows of the coefficients (u + w) ij and (g + w) ij are shown, with uα 3 +wα 3 and gα 3 +wα 3 highlighted in black. The dashed lines denote the flows of the quartic coefficients associated with spin components with diverging quadratic terms. In (c) and (d) the initial conditions are (u + w) (0) = 0.07 and (g + w) (0) = -0.01, which lie inside the Gaussian basin of attraction. In this case the flows of uα 3 + wα 3 and gα 3 + wα 3 terminate at the Gaussian fixed point. The spin anisotropy is the same as in (a) and (b). evance of the quadratic terms, as the presence of spin anisotropy reduces the symmetry of the from O(3) × O(3) in the isotropic case, to Z 2 × Z 2 in the anisotropic case. This implies that the flow diagrams of Fig. In Fig. Similarly, in Fig. In general we find that the strongly anisotropic flow diagrams of Fig. We considered the impact of SOC on the magnetic phase diagrams of the iron pnictides. The presence of a sizeable SOC is attested both by direct measurements Going beyond mean-field theoy, we took into account the effect of magnetic fluctuations by adopting an RG approach. To ensure that the RG procedure is controlled we considered only T = 0. In the absence of SOC, magnetic fluctuations leave the mean-field phase boundaries intact. In fact, we find that the mean-field phases become more robust; the stable parts of the fixed trajectories are located deep within each phase. Additionally, the magnetic quantum phase transitions become first order under the RG flow. This is in stark contrast to the situation when SOC is included and the quadratic terms become anisotropic. Since the anisotropies are relevant under the RG flow we find a rapid decoupling of the spin components. Thus, only a subset of these condense at the magnetic transition. This has several important consequences. It leads to a basin of attraction for the stable Gaussian fixed point, which covers a large range of initial conditions. This implies that the Gaussian fixed point can play a role for a wide range of initial conditions and is thus less sensitive to details of the system. The Gaussian fixed point results in an enhanced degeneracy between the C 2 and C 4 magnetic states and higher-order coefficients are required to break this degeneracy. Furthermore, depending on which SOC-induced coefficient α i is the smallest, one of the C 4 phases is ruled out, implying a connection between the direction of the spin anisotropy (in-plane or out-of-plane) and the type of C 4 order possible. Most importantly, these results provide compelling evidence that the proliferation of magnetic phases in the vicinity of the putative magnetic QCP is due to the interplay between SOC and magnetic fluctuations. In Ba 1-x Na x Fe 2 As 2 such a proliferation of magnetic phases was recently observed Additionally, the frustration provides an explanation of why, in most iron-based superconductors, the magnetic C 4 phase only appears inside the magnetic C 2 phase These effects highlight the importance of SOC when considering the magnetic order of the iron pnictides and additionally provide an interesting avenue of future research into the impact of anisotropic magnetic fluctuations on superconductivity. FIG. integral enters: Here we used the fact that d + z = 4 such that the integrals become four-dimensional. Ω 4 = 2π 2 Γ(2) is the area of a 3-sphere, and we have rescaled the quartic coefficients by a factor of Ω d /(2π) 4 . In the evaluation we assumed to be infinitesimal that the integration is over a shell of thickness Λ , within which the variation of q can be neglected. Note that the factor of Λ 2 in Eq. (A1) serves to ensure that a similar rescaling can be carried out for the terms in the flow equations not involving a momentum integration, such as the term originating from Eq. The diagrams contributing to the renormalization of the quartic coefficients can be divided into two classes: One obtained from combining identical bare vertices (Fig. For the diagrams in the first class we omitted diagrams containing λ 2 2 . These can be obtained by switching 1 ↔ 2 in the diagrams (1a) in Fig. Diagrams containing contributions from λ1(2ρ) and λ1(2w). As in Fig. Diagrams with contributions proportional to (2ρ)(2w). In evaluating the diagrams in Figs. 17-19 we make use of the integral Ω 4 (2π) 4 Λ Λe - dq q 3 (r i,A + q 2 ) (r j,B + q 2 ) = Ω d (2π) 4 1 (r i,1 + 1) (r j,1 + 1) . (A4)