We present results from light scattering experiments on tetragonal FeS with the focus placed on lattice dynamics. We identify the Raman active A1g and B1g phonon modes, a second order scattering process involving two acoustic phonons, and contributions from potentially defect-induced scattering. The temperature dependence between 300 and 20 K of all observed phonon energies is governed by the lattice contraction. Below 20 K the phonon energies increase by 0.5-1 cm -1 thus indicating putative short range magnetic order. Along with the experiments we performed latticedynamical simulations and a symmetry analysis for the phonons and potential overtones and find good agreement with the experiments. In particular, we argue that the two-phonon excitation observed in a gap between the optical branches becomes observable due to significant electronphonon interaction. In the iron based superconductors (IBS) magnetic order, structure, nematicity and superconductivity are closely interrelated. Upon substituting atoms in the parent compounds the properties change in a way that the shape of the Fermi surface is generally believed to play a crucial role. Yet, the magnetic properties were found recently to be more complex and to depend also on the degree of correlation in the individual d orbitals contributing to the density of states close to the Fermi surface. Here, we choose a slightly different approach and do not look directly at the electronic but rather at the lattice properties in FeS close to potential instabilities and use the Raman-active phonons as probes. We identify the A 1g and B 1g modes, a two-phonon scattering process and a fourth mode from either defect-induced scattering or second-order scattering as well. These results are in good agreement with numerical calculations. Furthermore the temperature dependence of all phononic modes supports the results reported in Refs. 21 and 22 where emerging short range magnetic order at approximately 20 K was reported. Single crystals of FeS were synthesized as described elsewhere. The observed phonon lines were analyzed quantitatively. Since the phonon lines are symmetric and Γ L (T ) ω(T ) the intrinsic line shape can be described by a Lorentz function with a central temperature dependent energy ω(T ) and a width Γ L (T ) (FWHM). The widths turn out to be comparable to the resolution σ of the spectrometer. Therefore, the Lorentzian needs to be convoluted with a Gaussian having width Γ G ≡ σ. The electronic structure and the phonon dispersion were calculated using density functional theory (DFT) and density functional perturbation theory (DFPT), respectively, 24 within the QUANTUM ESPRESSO package. The phonon dispersion and the density of states were calculated on a 6 × 6 × 6 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh, and the dispersion is interpolated along the chosen line. The calculated phonon dispersions of the experimental and relaxed structures qualitatively coincide and display similar shapes and a gap. Discrepancies only appear in the absolute energies. The selection rules for two-phonon processes were calculated using the modified group projector technique, (MGPT) Raman spectra of FeS for four linear polarization configurations at a sample temperature of T = 80 K are shown in Fig. For properly assigning all observed modes and for getting access to putative phase transitions we studied the temperature dependence. Figure The shift and narrowing of all modes can be explained in terms of lattice contraction using a constant Grüneisen parameter γ and anharmonic decay into other phonon modes, respectively. The change in the (Lorentzian) line width Γ L (T ) is given by, 30 The zero temperature limits Γ L,0 and ω 0 were obtained by extrapolating the respective experimental points of Γ L (T ) and ω(T ) in the range 20 ≤ T ≤ 50 K to T = 0 (Fig. V (T ) and V 0 are the volumes of the unit cell at temperatures T and T → 0, respectively. The numbers for the calculations are taken from Ref. 20. The second term describes the effect of phonon damping on the line position in the harmonic approximation. Using λ ph-ph from Eq. 1, the Grüneisen parameter γ is the only free parameter and is assumed to be constant. The temperature dependence ω(T ) resulting from the fits are plotted in Fig. Below 20 K and around 50 K anomalies are found in the experimental data: (i ) At 50 K the peak energies of all four modes deviate significantly from the otherwise smooth temperature dependence. The nearly discontinuous increase in energy could be reproduced for the A 1g phonon and peak P2 in multiple measurements. For the B 1g phonon and mode P1 the anomaly is not as clearly reproducible. The energy anomalies do not have a correspondence in the line width. As there is neither an abrupt change in the lattice constants Phonon energy (cm However, the anomaly at 20 K coincides with the emergence of short range magnetic order as inferred from two μSR studies. Very recently commensurate magnetic order with a wave vector of q = (0.25,0.25,0) was found in FeS below T N = 116 K using neutron powder diffraction. Based on the energies, the selection rules, and the temperature dependence we first clarify the phononic nature of the two lines P1 and P2 which cannot as straightforwardly be identified as lattice vibrations as the inphase sulfur and out-of-phase iron vibrations at 305.3 and 215.8 cm -1 . Second we derive their origin from the phonon density of states (PDOS) calculated for the zerotemperature limit. All experimental energies for T → 0 were derived from the points at low temperature as described in subsection IV B (see also Fig. The unidentified peaks P1 and P2 appear in the spectra measured with aa polarization, where none of the electric fields has a projection on the c-axis. Thus they cannot have E g symmetry obeying ca and cb selection rules. In addition, the observed energies would be relatively far off of the calculated energies (see Table In the second step we try to identify the phonon branches which P1 and P2 can be related to. To this end the full phonon dispersion and density of states (PDOS) were derived as described in section III and are plotted in Fig. Independent of using the relaxed or experimental structure, P1 is located in the gap of the (theoretical) PDOS and cannot result from first order defect-induced Raman scattering. What alternatives exist for explaining P1? If we exclude exotic explanations such as a collective mode for the reasons given above the energy of ω P1 = 265 cm -1 can only be obtained by the sum of two phonon modes having equal energy ω P1 /2 and momenta k and -k (for maintaining the q ≈ 0 selection rule). As shown for various transition metal compounds including TiN, ZrN or NbC second-order phonon Raman scattering can occur in the presence of defects. From the phonon dispersion alone several phonon branches having k and -k and energies in the range around ω P1 /2 could add up to yield 265 cm -1 [see Fig. Peak P2 cannot be explained in terms of one of the two E g phonons either. As opposed to P1 it is not inside the gap of the PDOS and thus can originate from either first or second order scattering. If P2 originates in second order scattering in the same fashion as P1 there are five possibilities yielding A 1g +B 1g but not E g selection rules. As explained in the last paragraph only the branches ∆ = Γ -X and U = Z -R may contribute. For the low PDOS there we consider also first order defect-induced scattering for P2 to originate from. In fact, the PDOS possesses its strongest maximum 5 cm -1 below the (theoretical) A 1g phonon exactly where P2 is found. In spite of the very high PDOS here, the peak is weak explaining the negligible contributions from first order defect-induced scattering at lower energies. The high PDOS between 300 and 325 cm -1 may also be an alternative yet less likely explanation for the weak con-tributions in crossed polarizations in the energy range of the A 1g phonon (Fig. Finally, we wish to clarify whether the large phononphonon coupling λ A1g ph-ph found for the A 1g Raman-active mode (see Table We have studied and identified phonons in tetragonal FeS by Raman scattering. For the A 1g sulfur and B 1g iron mode the DFT and DFPT calculations agree to within a few percent with the experiment. A third observed peak within a gap in the theoretical phonon density of states can be identified as a second order scattering process involving two phonons. Both the selection rules, based on the modified group projector technique, and the energy are in agreement with experiment. A fourth mode identified close to the A 1g sulfur can be traced back to the biggest maximum of the PDOS and is most likely activated by a small amount of defects. The temperature dependence of all four modes is governed by the contraction of the lattice, but shows anomalies at 50 K and below 20 K. The anomaly observed at 20 K has a correspondence in the thermal expansion The appearance of two-phonon scattering indicates strong phonon-phonon scattering which is likely to originate from an electron-phonon interaction being enhanced in comparison to other pnictides and chalcogenides. We argue that in FeS the T c can in principle entirely result from electron-phonon interaction. Appendix A: Magnetization measurements Fig. Appendix B: Decomposition of the line at 305 cm -1 The peak at 305 cm -1 at low temperatures shows a significant asymmetry towards lower energies (see also Fig. T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) shaded light gray. As explained in section IV B all four modes show an increase in energy below 20 K instead of the expected saturation, indicative of the putative onset of short range magnetic order. This effect manifests itself also in an incipient decrease of the unit cell volume where R is the Raman tensor. This matrix element should be a scalar, or should transform as unit representation of the system space group S. The standard approximation for the Raman tensor in infinite wavelengthlight approximation for the non-resonant case is the polarizability tensor, which transforms as (symmetrized) square of the vector representation, D R (S). Decomposition of D R (S) gives irreducible representations of the Raman active modes. The ground vibrational state transforms as unit representation, whereas the final two-phonon state transforms as symmetrized square, [(D μ (S)) 2 ], of the corresponding irreducible representation D μ (S) (overtones) or the direct product of two irre-ducible representations D μ (S) ⊗ D μ (S) (combinations). Symmetrization in the case of overtones comes from the bosonic nature of phonons. The matrix element (equation F1) transforms as reducible representation [(D μ (S)) 2 ] ⊗ D R (S), for overtones, or D μ (S) ⊗ D μ (S) ⊗ D R (S), for combinations. (F2) It is a scalar if the decomposition of the representations shown above contains the unit representation, or equivalently, if the intersection of decompositions of [(D μ (S)) 2 ] or D μ (S) ⊗ D μ (S) and D R (S) is a nonempty set. To obtain selection rules for two-phonon processes, following Birman's original method, Here S is the number of group generators, F (X) is the projector on the subspace of the fixed points of the operator X, and Tr is the matrix trace (sum of the diagonal matrix elements). Consequently, the problem is reduced to calculation of the S + 1 projector to the fixed points. Technically, one looks for the eigenspaces for the eigenvalue 1 of each of the operators D(s i ) ⊗ D (μ) * (s i ), finding projectors on them, then multiplies the corresponding projectors, and repeats the procedure for the whole product from Equation F3. The trace of the final projector gives the corresponding frequency number.