We study the two-dimensional Hubbard model with the Rashba type spin-orbit coupling within and beyond the mean-field theory. The antiferromagnetic ground state for the model at half-filling and the Cooper pairing induced by antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations near half-filling are examined based on the random-phase approximation. We show that the antiferromagnetic order is suppressed and the magnetic susceptibility turns out to be anisotropic in the presence of the spin-orbit coupling. Energy spectrums of transverse spin fluctuations are obtained and the effective interactions between holes mediated by antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations are deduced in the case of low hole doping. It seems that the spin-orbit coupling tends to form s+p-wave Cooper pairs, while the s+d-wave pairing is dominant when the spin-orbit coupling is absent. Spin fluctuations may result in effective attractive interactions between fermions, and this mechanism plays an important role in understanding unconventional superconductivity Similarly, antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin fluctuations can also give rise to Cooper pairing. Schrieffer, Wen and Zhang have proposed an AFM spin fluctuation mechanism, the spin-bag model The AFM order is also present in many other superconductors or their parent materials, including heavyfermion and iron-based superconductors. For instance, the SC phase of the heavy fermion material CePt 3 Si has been proved to coexist with antiferromagnetism One more important issue is that the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) may be present in some of forgoing superconductors. Particularly, the SOC is inevitably resulted from the lack of structure inversion symmetry and therefore it must be considered in the non-centrosymmetric (NCS) superconductor Due to the effect of SOC on spin states, it is infered that SOC could affect the spin fluctuations and influence the orbital symmetry of Cooper pairs mediated by spin fluctuations. Various models were studied to discuss the role of SOC in the orbital symmetry. Some papers employed a two-band model and stated that SOC could split the degeneracy of p-wave states In this paper, we investigate the half-filled Hubbard model with the Rashba SOC in a two-dimensional (2D) square lattice. The central issue of this paper is to examine the influence of SOC on the Cooper pairing intermediated by the AFM spin fluctuations. Our model is a singleband model, which suggests both AFM order and superconductivity are originated from one-band electrons. It is might help for understanding the magnetic properties and pairing symmetry of some quasi two-dimensional layered superconductors with SOC, for instance, iron-based superconductors The paper is organized as follows. The model is described in Section II. Ground state properties for the model at half-filled are studied based on the mean-field approximation and the RPA. The sublattice magnetization, the spectrum of transverse spin excitation and the ratio of transverse versus longitudinal spin susceptibility at (π, π) are calculated. Section IV discusses effective interactions between holes induced by the AFM spin fluctuations in the case of weak hole doping, with the emphasis on pairing effects in the s, p, and d channels. The conclusions are given in the last section. We start from a single-band half-filled Hubbard model with SOC in a two-dimensional square lattice. where ε k = -2t(cos k x a + cos k y a) is the kinetic energy arising from electron hoping between the nearest neighbours with a being the lattice constant. The second term of Hamiltonian describes the spin-orbit coupling with α being the coupling strength. Here the type of SOC takes the form as , where v x,y ( k)=∂ε k /∂k x,y . With the definition, the g vector, which is (-2t sin k y a, 2t sin k x a, 0), protects the symmetry and periodicity of the Brillouin zone. In the following, we assume a = 1 for simplicity. By introducing v( k)=-2t sin 2 k y + sin 2 k x , the term of SOC, -2tα k (sin k y ± i sin k x ) can be denoted as α k v( k) exp(±iφ k ), where φ k =arctan (sin k x / sin k y ). In this case, the Hamiltonian has the form, In the case of AFM, by using the mean-field approach (MFA), the interaction term can be written as and |G is the ground state of the model. Therefore, the AFM order can be studied consistently. When the spin-orbit coupling is ignored, |G is the same as the ground state of the antiferromagnetism defined as in Ref. [8]. Through introducing new fermion-operators f k,η (η = 1, 2, 3, 4), the Hamiltonian can be diagonalized via the Bogliubov transformation. In the process of diagonalization, some equations between k and k + Q are: i) the nesting Fermi surface results in . The relationship between electron operators and the quasi-particles operators is expressed as, where, The diagonalized Hamiltonian can be formed as below, where ′ represents the summation extending over the magnetic zone without SOC displayed in Fig. and f v k,-are valence bands which are full filled by particles, so the ground state can be defined as: To quantitatively study the effect exerted by SOC on the AFM order, we employ the foregoing definitions of ground state to obtain the self-consistent equation of the sublattice magnetization S: We show the relationship between S and the Hubbard interaction U/t in Fig. where ρ q = k,α c † k+q,α c k,α is the charge density operator, and S i q = k,α,β c † k+q,α σ i αβ c k,β is the spin density operator. |G is the ground state defined by Eq. ( where, t < t 1 . The reason lies in that a particle only annihilates firstly, then creates in the fulled valence bands and the process is just the opposite one in the empty conduction bands. Based on the transformation, Eq. ( The singularity of χ00 0f i is in the lower half plane when t > 0. When t < 0, the singularity is in the upper half plane. The longitudinal spin correlation function, We can find that χzz 0 (q, ω) is different from χ00 0 (q, ω), other than the case without SOC, where χzz 0 (q, ω)= χ00 0 (q, ω). This is because G 0 ↑↓ and G 0 ↓↑ are non-zero as the spins mixed by SOC. The transverse spin correlation function are presented as follows, χ+- In the limit of α = 0, all the correlation functions are the same as Ref. (8). The subscript o and Q in Eq. ( is a 2 × 2 matrix. With RPA, the susceptibility is obtained by the following formulas, To investigate the effect of SOC on the spin fluctuations, the energy spectrum of transverse spin fluctuations is deduced by calculating the pole of transverse dynamical spin susceptibility, as shown in Fig. With ignoring fluctuations, we define the single Green function with respect to the ground state, |G , In this case, which is the same as the result of the MFA, Eq. ( When the fluctuations are considered in our model, the full Green's function can be obtained by Dyson's equation with the self-energy which is established by Eq. (16-18). where k ′ = k + Q. Replacing G 0 by the full Green func- tion G in Eq.( Our calculation shows that 1) the ratio is 1 when α=0, that is the spin fluctuations are isotropic in the absence of the spin-orbit coupling; 2) the ratio is larger than 1 with the increasing of the coupling, which indicates that the spin-orbit coupling can result in an anisotropy of the spin-fluctuations which agrees with Ref. [37]; 3) ratio decreases with the Hubbard interaction decreased when we fix the strength of coupling. In the absence of SOC, the anti-ferromagnetic fluctuations of the weak holes doped Hubbard model favors d-wave paring, which has been used to give an interpretation on the cuprates superconductors 8 . In this section, the effective interaction intermediated by antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations with SOC is studied and the symmetry of Cooper pairs is discussed. We now assume that the system is weak holes doped. At halffilling, the valence band is full and the conduction band is empty. The electrons of the top of the valence band are removed in the case of weak hole doping, and the system can emerge a metallic behavior and superconductivity resulted from the holes. First, the BCS type Hamiltonian is, where V c (k ′ , k) is induced by charge-fluctuations and V z (k ′ , k) and V +-(k ′ , k) are caused by longitudinal and transverse fluctuations, respectively. It is well known that the symmetry of pairs can be shown by the energy gap of superconductors, ∆ SC , defined by BCS theory as, Based on Eq. ( where, θ and φ are solid angles of -→ k . Our model is two dimensional, so we have to use Legendre Polynomials P l (x) to express the interaction. where, cos θ = k x / k 2 x + k 2 y . According to the BCS-type Hamiltonian, the interactions can be obtained as follow, The spin-singlet interaction V S l and triplet V T l , which consist of the interactions arising from the charge, longitudinal and transverse spin fluctuations, can be obtained by, To study the effect of SOC on V l , we numerically calculated the strength of l = 0, 1, 2, that is s-, p-and d-wave channel of interaction, with the strength of SOC α=0.01, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0. The relation of the strength of partial wave for interaction to SOC has been shown in Fig. For the s-and p-wave, the strength of interaction decreases with the increasing of SOC when the strength is strong. It implies that the large SOC might be bad for the superconductivity. However, the interaction increases initially with SOC and decreases afterwards. It seems that the SOC suppresses the magnetization, which possibly enhance the spin fluctuations. Furthermore, the interaction induced by spin fluctuations is promoted. When the strength of SOC is very large, all the pairing potentials are suppressed by SOC. It indicates that large SOC is bad for superconductivity which is agreed with the dependence of critical temperature on SOC In summary, we have studied the ground state of the two-dimensional Hubbard model with Rashba SOC on a square lattice. Both the results obtained by MFA and RPA show that the sublattice magnetization decreases with the increasing of SOC for a fixed Hubbard interaction. Moreover, the magnetization for RPA is smaller than MFA with the same U and α. The suppression of AFM order caused by SOC might be resulted from that SOC broadens the sub-Hubbard bands. Besides, a gapped energy spectrum of transverse spin fluctuations and an anisotropy of spin susceptibility, which are brought about by SOC, are present. Furthermore, we have discussed the effective pairing interactions between electrons mediated by AFM spin fluctuations in the case of weak hole doping. The calculations about the partial waves of interactions indicate that p-wave potential can be induced by SOC. The dwave potential which is dominant without SOC is suppressed by SOC. Moreover, the strength of s-wave always exists whether SOC is present or not. It seems that the SOC tends to form s+p paring rather than s+d pairing. Note added. We are just aware of a numerical work studying the mechanism of p-wave Cooper pairs 