In order to understand the mechanisms behind the emergence of superconductivity by the chemical pressure effect in REO0.5F0.5BiS2 (RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd), where bulk superconductivity is induced by the substitutions with a smaller-radius RE, we performed synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction, and analyzed the crystal structure and anisotropic displacement parameters. With the decrease of the RE 3+ ionic radius, the in-plane disorder of the S1 sites significantly decreased, very similar to the trend observed in the Se-substituted systems: LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex and Eu0.5La0.5FBiS2-xSex. Therefore, the emergence of bulk superconductivity upon the suppression of the in-plane disorder at the chalcogen sites is a universal scenario for the BiCh2-based superconductors. In addition, we indicated that the amplitude of vibration along the c-axis of the in-plane chalcogen sites may be related to the Tc in the BiCh2-based superconductors. BiS 2 -based layered compounds have been extensively studied owing to the discovery of superconductivity in electron-doped phases and their relatively high transition temperatures (Tc), as high as 11 K In order to induce bulk superconductivity in LaO1-xFxBiS2, high pressure effects can be employed. The application of an external pressure induces bulk superconductivity with a Tc of ~10 K Another approach to induce bulk superconductivity in the LaO1-xFxBiS2 system is to introduce a chemical pressure by an isovalent substitution, such as Ch (Ch: S, Se) and/or RE site substitutions. In LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex, the substitutions of Se for the S sites induces bulk superconductivity with a Tc of ~3.8 K The emergence of the bulk superconductivity in the LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex system was explained by the decrease in the in-plane disorder of the chalcogen sites with the increase of the Se content, which was detected through a crystal structure analysis of the synchrotron X-ray diffraction (SXRD) pattern For both systems, the Se substitutions induced a metallic electrical conductivity. Therefore, the inplane disorder of the in-plane chalcogen sites is the factor that prevented the emergence of superconductivity and metallic conductivity in LaO1-xFxBiS2. Therefore, we expect that a similar suppression of the in-plane disorder at the in-plane S sites (S1 site in Fig. Polycrystalline samples of REO0.5F0.5BiS2 with RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd were prepared using the solid-state-reaction method 22, the essential factor for the emergence of superconductivity in the REO0.5F0.5BiCh2 systems is the in-plane chemical pressure. In the considered REO0.5F0.5BiS2 system, the amplitude of the in-plane chemical pressure is directly determined by the in-plane Bi-S1 distance. Therefore, we can analyze the relationship between the chemical pressure, superconductivity, and in-plane disorder using the considered samples. We performed Rietveld refinements with anisotropic displacement parameters U11 and U33 for the in-plane Bi and S1 sites. Figure In conclusion, we investigated the crystal structure and anisotropic displacement parameters of REO0.5F0.5BiS2 with RE = La, Ce, Pr, and Nd, where bulk superconductivity is induced by substitutions with a smaller-radius RE, such as Pr or Nd. With the decrease of the RE 3+ ionic radius, the lattice constant a and in-plane Bi-S1 distance monotonically decreased, which generated the in-plane chemical pressure effect. With the decrease of the RE 3+ radius, the in-plane disorder of the S1 sites significantly decreased. This trend is very similar to those observed for Se-substituted LaO0.5F0.5BiS2-xSex and Eu0.5La0.5FBiS2-xSex. Therefore, the emergence of bulk superconductivity upon the suppression of the in-plane disorder at the Ch1 sites seems to be a universal scenario for the BiCh2based superconductors. The analyses of the displacement parameters along the c-axis indicated that the amplitude of the one-dimensional vibration of S1 (or Ch1) along the c-axis was correlated with Tc in the BiCh2-based superconductors. Table SI. Crystal structure parameters for REO 0.5 F 0.5 BiS 2 obtained by the Rietveld refinements. The atomic coordinate for the oxygen (fluorine) site is (0, 0, 0), and the Uiso is fixed as 0.013 Å 2 . The atomic coordinate for other sites is (0, 0.5, z). 