By simultaneously coupling multiple two-level artificial atoms to two superconducting resonators, we design a quantum switch that tunes the resonator-resonator coupling strength from zero to a large value proportional to the number of qubits. This process is implemented by engineering the qubits into different subradiant states, where the microwave photons decay from different qubits destructively interfere with each other such that the resonator-resonator coupling strength keeps stable in an open environment. Based on a three-step control scheme, we switch the coupling strength among different values within nanoseconds without changing the transition frequency of the qubits. We also apply the quantum switch to a network of superconducting resonators, and demonstrate its potential applications in quantum simulation and quantum information storage and processing. Superconducting circuits are of increasing importance in simulating many-body quantum physics As an elementary component, coplanar stripline resonator plays a central role in microwave photon storage and transmission Architectures with two To engineer quantum states in superconducting circuits, tunable coupling between different components is usually required in design. Quantum switches between two qubits The idea behind can be dated back to the 1950s, when Dicke found that collective two-level atoms may exhibit new features that do not appear in a single atom or an ensemble of atoms with independent environments The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Secs. II and III, we derive the relation between the R-R coupling strength and the collective states of the qubits, and introduce a three-step method to engineer the qubits into different subradiant states. In Sec. IV, we use the quantum switch to connect multiple superconducting resonators and demonstrate its possible applications in quantum simulation and quantum information. Section V studies the function of the quantum switch in an open environment and simulates the master equation of a three-resonator chain as an example. Finally, we draw conclusions and present further discussions in Sec. VI. As schematically shown in Fig. ground state. As will be explained in Sec. III, we assume that the atoms can only interact with those in the same pair, such that the Hamiltonian can be written as where a (a † ), b (b † ), and c k (c † k ) are the annihilation (creation) operators for the resonators A (blue), B (yellow), and the kth transmon qubit (green), respectively. α k describes the self-Kerr interaction (nonlinerity) of the kth transmon mode, χ ac k (χ bc k ) the cross-Kerr interaction between the cavity and the transmon modes. Interaction between the two qubits in the same pair is described by K 2k-1,2k . For convenience of discussion, we assume that all the transmon qubits have the same frequency ω q , and they are equally coupled to the two resonators. This assumption can be realized by optimizing the locations of the individual qubits with respect to the two resonators where Suppose that g a (g b ) is the coupling strength between a single transmon qubit and the resonator A (B) then according to the commutation relation the operators J x , J y , and J z can be simply treated as angular momentum for the quantum switch, called the collective angular momentum where j = 0, • • • , N/2 is related to the total angular momentum, m = -j, • • • , j is the angular momentum in the z direction, J ± = (J x ± iJ y ) /2 is the raising/lowing operator of all the N qubis. According to the fourth term in the dispersive Hamiltonian H (1) , the effective coupling strength between the two resonators A and B can be varied from -N g ab through zero to N g ab when the qubits are engineered at different collective states. In principle, the R-R coupling strength can be rather strong if the qubit number N is very large and the qubits are prepared at the state |N/2, ±N/2 with m = ±N/2. It can also be switched off when the qubits are prepared at the state |j, 0 with m = 0. Thus, coupling between the two superconducting resonators can be tuned in a rather wide range by engineering the collective states of the artificial atoms. As will be explained in Sec. V, we consider the engineering of the subradiant states of the collective qubits. The subradiant states are defined as the eigenstates of the collective angular momentum operators J z and J -, i.e., process, where we have grouped the qubits in pairs. Started from the initial state |j , the R-R coupling strength is switched from -2j g ab to -2(j -j ) g ab after the first control step, and the qubits are engineered at |ψ1 . The following two steps engineer the qubits within the subspace expanded by |j -j , m with m = -(j -j ). The state |ψ2 is generated after the second process, then the third step is applied to correct the relative phase in the first j qubit pairs and finally prepare the target state |j-j for the qubit collection. The light color qubit is always stayed at the ground state, which represents the case with odd number of qubits in a quantum switch. where |j is an abbreviation of the state |j, -j with m = -j. Given N qubits in the same environment, the collective angular momentum j can take N/2 values. When j varies from zero to N/2, the effective R-R coupling strength varies from zero to -N g ab . Since the subradiant states are degenerate for each j = N/2, those composed of the direct product of twoqubit states is enough to describe all the possible R-R coupling strengths √ 2 is the singlet state composed of two qubits. The sequence of the state |gg and |φ - is trivial since we can always relabel the qubit pairs and write the collective state in the form of Eq. The engineering of the subradiant states requires the multi-qubit interactions among the qubits. However, the qubit-qubit interactions are usually rather small in the dispersive regime so that the switch of the coupling strength could be very slow. Here we propose a three-step control scheme that switches the R-R coupling strength and the subradiant state separately, and thus accelerates the control of the quantum switch by a large extent. As schematically shown in Fig. Because |ge corresponds to zero collective angular momentum in a qubit pair, the total collective angular momentum is decreased by j after the first step, i.e., the R-R coupling strength is switched from -2j g ab to -2(j -j ) g ab . The following operations aim to prepare the subradiant state |-(N ) j-j while keeping the R-R coupling strength achieved in step-one unchanged. This can be realized by taking advantage of the free evolution of the system. According to the commutation relation J z , J +-= 0, where U (t) is the unitary operator generated by all the other terms in H (1) . Since the collective angular momentum is conserved in free evolution and |ψ 1 is an eigenstate of J z , the unitary operator U (t) acts only on the two oscillating modes a and b but not on the qubits. For the two resonators, they interact with each other according to the R-R coupling strength achieved in the first step, and the interaction is not influenced by the evolution of the qubits. For the qubits, the operator J +-couples only those in the same pair, i.e., where |φ + = (|eg + |ge )/ √ 2, N is a normalization factor. After a time duration t = π/4 (χ a + χ b ), the qubits evolve into the following entangled state which is shown in the third row in Fig. Finally, we apply single-qubit rotations in the first j qubit pairs to correct the relative phase between |ge and FIG. (Color online) Schematic diagram of the programmable coupling network for multiple superconducting resonators. The resonators are connected with each other by the quantum switches shown in Figure |eg . For each qubit pair, this process is described as follows |ψ 3 (pair) = e -i(σz⊗1)π/4 (|ge + i|eg ) = |φ -. Under typical parameters in superconducting circuits, frequencies of the resonators and the qubits are in GHz, while the coupling strength between them are MHz in the dispersive regime. Thus, the first and third steps can be implemented within nanoseconds by using the local microwave drives (purple lines in Fig. Using the quantum switch we designed, programmable coupling among multiple superconducting resonators can be realized in an architecture illustrated in Fig. Suppose that the three resonators are resonant with each other with frequency ω r , the effective Hamiltonian of the system can be derived by using the same procedure as in Eq. ( where a k (a † k ) are the creation (annihilation) operators for the resonators A (red), B (yellow), and C (blue); 2 ) are the collective angular momentum operators for the two quantum switches α (orange) and β (green). For k = 1, 2, the R-R coupling between the kth and (k + 1)th resonators is described by k , g (2) k being the coupling strength between the the kth resonator and the two quantum switches. When the two qubit collections are prepared at the subradiant states, the last three terms of in Eq. ( For a more general case with m resonators in a chain, interaction between any two adjacent resonators can be derived as follows As demonstrated in Refs. Let us now study the non-resonant case where the two high-quality resonators A and C with the frequency ω s are far detuned from the low-quality bus resonator B with frequency ω b . To manifest the effective interaction between the two storage resonators, we apply the following transformation on Eq. ( where ∆ sb = ω s -ω b . Using the Baker-Hausdorff lemma and omitting the higher-order terms, we obtain the following effective Hamiltonian where or the same reason as in the derivation of Eq. ( where For simplicity, we suppose that every qubit collection consists of N artificial atoms, thus the R-R coupling strength between the two distant storage resonators can be varied from zero to -N m-1 g 1,m by controlling the quantum switches. Even if g 1,m is usually very small in the dispersive regime, the distant R-R coupling strength can still be comparable to the nearby R-R coupling strength g k,k+1 as long as N ≥ ∆ sb /g k,k+1 . Thus, this architecture not only enables quantum information storage in the individual storage resonators when any of the corresponding quantum switches are turned off, but also fast quantum information processing between two distant storage resonators when all the switches are turned on. Combined with the state preparation Let us study the environmental effects on the system made of superconducting resonators and quantum switches. We assume that κ r is the decay rate of the rth resonator a r , γ k and γ k are the energy and phase relaxation rate of the kth quantum switch, the master equation for the system reads where are two-qubit operators of the kth qubit pair, D [X] = 2XρX † -X † Xρ -ρX † X is the Lindblad superoperator. We have assumed in Eq. ( Thus, the status of the quantum switches are not influenced by the energy and phase relaxation in an open environment, and the R-R coupling controlled by the quantum switch is rather stable in an open environment. Figure The initial state of the three resonators are prepared at |2 , |0 , and |0 , and the parameters are chosen to meet the requirement of dispersive coupling ∆ s (∆ b ) ∼ 10g s (10g b ), ∆ sb ∼ 10g 1,2 (10g 2,3 ). As expected, the exchange of microwave photons between the two storage resonators can be effectively controlled by the quantum switch, i.e., by engineering the subradiant states of the two qubit collections. When the two switches are turned on, the coupling strength between the two storage resonators achieves ∼ 0.4g 1,2 with N = 2. This coupling strength can be further enhanced by increasing the number of qubits in the quantum switch. For example, the distant coupling reaches ∼ 0.9g 1,2 when N = 3, which is comparable to the coupling strength between two adjacent resonators. As we can see, the Rabi flopping between the two storage resonators decays with time, which is mainly caused by the unwanted coupling to the low-quality bus resonator. This phenomenon shows a trade-off between increasing the R-R coupling ratio g 1,3 and increasing the frequency difference between the bus and the storage resonators ∆ sb . However, because that the R-R coupling is quadratic to the qubit number N but only linear to the frequency difference ∆ sb , the relaxation can be effectively suppressed by increasing the frequency detuning while the coupling strength maintained or even enhanced by increasing the qubit number. When the quantum switche α is turned off, the storage resonators A and C cannot interact with each other so that the photons are stored in the individual resonators. However, photon number in A still decays slowly with time due to the environmental effects. Compared with the decay rate of a bare storage resonator, the photon leakage we have observed is mostly caused by the intrinsic decay of the resonator κ s . The quantum switch does not influence the life time of the microwave photons stored in the storage resonator, so that the the quantum information is well protected in the individual resonators. To conclude, we propose a quantum switch that can tune the coupling strength between two superconducting resonators in a wide range. This switch consists of a collection of two-level artificial atoms that are coupled simultaneously to two superconducting resonators. By preparing the qubits at different states with different collective angular momentum, the resonator-resonator coupling strength varies from zero to N g which is proportional to the number of qubits N (suppose g is the coupling strength between the qubits and the resonator). Consider the dissipation of the qubits in an open environment, we group the qubits in pairs and propose a three-step control scheme to engineer the qubits into different subradiant states. These subradiant states are free of decoherence by assuming that the two qubits in each pair share the same environment, and the coupling strength can be switched within nanoseconds. In addition, we use the quantum switch to connect multiple resonators with a programmable network topology, in which the interaction between any two resonators can be adjusted in situ. According to the situation whether the resonators are on resonant or largely detuned from each other, this resonator network can be used to simulate various quantum many-body physics in superconducting circuits, or store and process quantum information in a scalable manner. Although transmon qubits are addressed in this paper, other types of superconducting qubits such as charge, flux, and phase qubits can also be used with little modification. Natural qubits such as neutral atoms, ions, and spins should also be available. This type of hybrid quantum system would benefit from the long coherence time of the natural qubits as well as the uniform coupling between the resonators and the qubits, and thus results in a more reliable quantum switch than that designed in this paper. However, this proposal may be limited by the weak coupling strength between the natural qubits and the superconducting resonators 