We construct a two-parametric family of integrable models and reveal their underlying duality symmetry. A modular subgroup of this duality is shown to connect non-interacting modes of different systems. We apply this solution and duality to a Richardson-Gaudin model and generate a novel integrable system termed the s-d wave Richardson-Gaudin-Kitaev interacting chain, interpolating sand d-wave superconductivity. The phase diagram of this model has a topological phase transition that can be connected to the duality, where the occupancy of the non-interacting mode serves as a topological order parameter. Introduction. Integrable models (IM) play a crucial role in our understanding of low-dimensional statistical systems and condensed matter physics. One fundamental example of exactly-solvable many-body systems is the model of a one-dimensional Bose gas interacting via a short-range (delta-function) contact potential, the so-called Lieb-Liniger (LL) model The models mentioned above are defined in a continuum, while important models on a one-dimensional lattice play, perhaps, an even more fundamental role. In particular, the Hubbard model Another broad class of solvable many-body models, the so-called Richardson-Gaudin models Integrable models have attracted increasing interest in contemporary field and string theory. This interest emerged in a 2D context Motivated by these developments, we here investigate a basic integrable model from the duality point of view and reveal a symmetry which is reminiscent of the duality in certain string theories Integrability and the Yang-Baxter equation. A key ingredient of the integrability of all these models is the fact that any three-body scattering factorizes into twobody scatterings, which obey the Yang-Baxter equation (YBE). Individual two body scatterings are parameter-ized by S-or R-matrices where the latter used in the case of integrable lattice models. Integrability conditions on the R-matrices are given by the celebrated Yang-Baxter equation, R 12 (u, v)R 13 (u, w)R 23 (v, w) = R 23 (v, w)R 13 (u, w)R 12 (u, v), which expresses a factorization property of scattering between three particles (labeled by 1, 2, 3) with respective rapidities u, v, w. The simplest known solution, suggested by Yang where I 12 and P 12 are the identity and permutation operators acting in the direct product of the two Hilbert spaces for particles 1 and 2, with the rational functions defined as depending on a free parameter η ∈ C and satisfying b(u, v) + c(u, v) = 1. The Richardson-Gaudin limit is defined as η → 0, where the inclusion of inhomogeneities can be used to obtain a non-trivial limit. In this paper we are interested in the general two parameter solution for the R-matrix of the rational form. For that we parametrize it as [58] Substituting this ansatz into the YBE leads to the following functional equation for Manifestly, the well-known form (2) for is a direct solution of this equation. We found a general two parameter solution [59] to Eq. ( Generalization of the known solution. Since we are looking for a rational generalization of Eq. ( where the coefficients c p,q are to be determined. Here the order N of the polynomial is assumed to be finite The first observation is the following. A combination of analytical and numerical checks leads to the following general solution of Eq. ( where c 0 and c 1 are free parameters (trivially related to c p,q in (5)). Polynomials of higher order in u, v do not provide a solution to Eq. ( the solution ( Here, the unimodularity condition αδ -γβ = 1 is essential. The rapidities k = (u, v) are, in principle, allowed to take arbitrary complex values, so the parameters α, β, γ, δ could be complex as well, thus transforming under the group SL k (2, C) (the subscript k denotes that they act on the rapidities). While at the moment the couplings c 0,1 can be considered complex as well, we however restrict ourselves to the real domain. While this symmetry is preserved at the level of the scattering matrix and the YBE equation, it acts however nontrivially on a system with fixed external boundary conditions (say, periodic). The condition of singlevaluedness of the wave function then leads to the Bethe equations, which are derived in the general form in the Supplementary material. The solutions of the Bethe equations are then not symmetric with respect to the transformations ( It is important to note that there are special points in the space of rapidities when the scattering matrix trivializes and R(u, v) ≡ 1. This happens when some of the radidities satisfy u = -c 0 /c 1 . In this case the Bethe equations reduce to quantization conditions for non-interacting particles. This observation combined with the SL(2, R) duality implies that a subgroup of the latter, the modular group SL(2, Z), connects, in a sense of duality transformation all free, noninteracting modes of the model. Richardson-Gaudin limit. Starting from a solution to the Yang-Baxter equation, exactly solvable models can be constructed containing either bosonic or spin degrees of freedom, depending on the representation of the algebra. In this regard, a solution to the functional equation ( Richardson-Gaudin models are characterized by a set of conserved charges with the demand [Q i , Q j ] = 0 leading exactly to Eq. ( A large variety of resulting integrable Hamiltonians can be obtained depending on the parametrization and the choice of a Hamiltonian, but we will illustrate some of the resulting physics with a specific model based on the Richardson-Gaudin-Kitaev chain describing topological superconductivity in fermion chains for one-dimensional fermions with momentum k and single-particle spectrum k = -2t 1 cos k -2t 2 cos 2k, and interactions modulated by η k = 4 sin 2 (k/2)(t 1 + 4t 2 cos 2 (k/2)) with interaction strength G. These are related to the previous parametrization through This model is integrable for any choice of the momentum k-distribution, and describes a chain with either nearest neighbour-interactions (t 2 = 0) or long-range interactions (t 2 = 0) in real space, on top of which pairing interactions (C † C) and long-range interactions (B) have been added. This model can be seen as a variant on the Richardson-Gaudin-Kitaev chain existence of non-interacting modes in Richardson-Gaudin models has previously been linked to the existence of Majorana fermions in particle-number conserving models Furthermore, this is a phase transition between a topologically non-trivial phase (G > G c ) and a topologically trivial phase (G < G c ). This can be obtained from mean-field theory in the thermodynamic limit This transition can be understood through symmetry arguments. The Hamiltonian undergoes a quantum phase transition at G -1 c =k η k , which can be mapped back to a limit where c 1 → ∞ while c 0 /c 1 remains fixed. In this limit, the conserved charges reduce to those of the Gaudin model, which has an additional su(2) total spin-symmetry compared to the Richardson-Gaudin models Discussion and conclusions. In this paper we presented a general rational solution of the Yang-Baxter relation in the fundamental (spin-1/2) representation. A hidden duality of this solution was demonstrated, connecting different models, and a modular subgroup SL(2, Z) of this duality connects special non-interacting modes of different systems. Constructing a Richardson-Gaudin model from this solution, it was shown how in these models the noninteracting modes serve as a topological order parameter and are responsible for a topological phase transition. While here we mostly focused on a Gaudin-Richardson limit of this solution it can be directly extended to inhomogeneous spin chains, Lieb-Liniger type models, and higher spin models. with The Hamiltonian can now be rewritten by associating a one-dimensional (positive) momentum k with each level and mapping the su(2)-algebra to a quasispin algebra, introducing the fermion pair operators S z k = The sum over k = k has been extended to include k = k by adding and subtracting the Casimir operators of the spin algebras from the Hamiltonian, since these only lead to a global shift in the energy and can be absorbed in the constant term. By grouping terms together, we can get Since the total number of fermions k (n k + n -k ) is a symmetry of the system, this term also reduces to a constant, and this total operator can be divided by 1 2 1 + c1 2 k (c 0 + c 1 k ) , resulting in the proposed Hamiltonian with k = -2t 1 cos k -2t 2 cos 2k, 2(t 1 + t 2 ) = c 0 /c 1 and G -1 = 2c -2 1k η k . At the phase transition c 2 1 → ∞ with c 0 /c 1 fixed, which is reflected in G -1 c =k η k . The solutions to the Richardson-Gaudin equations for the ground state of the presented Hamiltonian are given in Fig. 