The Holstein Model (HM) describes the interaction between fermions and a collection of local (dispersionless) phonon modes. In the dilute limit, the phonon degrees of freedom dress the fermions, giving rise to polaron and bipolaron formation. At higher densities, the phonons mediate collective superconducting (SC) and charge density wave (CDW) phases. Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations have considered both these limits, but have not yet focused on the physics of more general phonon spectra. Here we report QMC studies of the role of phonon dispersion on SC and CDW order in such models. We quantify the effect of finite phonon bandwidth and curvature on the critical temperature T cdw for CDW order, and also uncover several novel features of diagonal long range order in the phase diagram, including a competition between charge patterns at momenta q = (π, π) and q = (0, π) which lends insight into the relationship between Fermi surface nesting and the wavevector at which charge order occurs. We also demonstrate SC order at half-filling in situations where nonzero bandwidth sufficiently suppresses T cdw . Introduction: Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods have evolved into a powerful tool to understand the physics of strongly interacting quantum systems. Nevertheless, many qualitative questions remain largely unaddressed concerning electron-phonon models. One of the most prominent concerns is the origin of chargedensity wave (CDW) formation, especially in dimensions greater than one. Increasingly attention has turned to alternatives to the original Peierls picture The Random Phase Approximation (RPA) criterion, 4g 2 q /ω(q) > 1 / χ 0 (q), suggests that the shape of the bare phonon dispersion, ω(q), should affect charge ordering, and hence be important to the analysis of the second class of CDW above. In view of this, here we explore a new scenario in which phonon dispersion plays a primary role in determining the CDW ordering wavevector and critical -π π 0 -π π 0 q y q x ω(q) -π π 0 -π π 0 q y q x ω(q) -π π 0 -π 0 q y q x ω(q) temperature, and where SC can supplant diagonal long range order. We extend QMC simulations is one of the simplest tight binding descriptions of the electron-phonon interaction. A single electronic band, with fermionic creation (destruction) operators at site i, d † i,σ (d i,σ ), couples to independent oscillator degrees of freedom Xi , P i . We consider here a square lattice with periodic boundary conditions, nearest neighbor (NN) electron hopping t = 1 (to set the scale of energy), chemical potential μ, electron-phonon coupling λ, and local phonon frequency ω 1 . We generalize Eq. ( We will allow for both signs of this intersite term, i.e. for cases where the sign between neighboring sites i, j in the x and ŷ directions are equal or different. Physically, the minus sign is the more natural one: forces on atoms depend on their relative displacement. On the other hand, as we discuss below, the positive sign gives a mode with a downward bending momentum 0 to π, the more typical behavior for high frequency optical modes. The inclusion of NN coupling ω 2 = 0 leads to a finite phonon bandwidth ∆ω. In the absence of the electronphonon coupling, the quadratic bosonic Hamiltonian can be solved exactly, with bare phonon dispersion relation and ∆ω/ω0 = 0 (black squares), 0.04 (red triangles), 0.08 (orange diamonds) and -0.08 (blue circles). The energy scale is fixed for all cases, with β ≈ 5 3 βc (i.e. β = 10, 12, 15 and 8, respectively). Negative and positive signs for the bandwidth ∆ω correspond to ω(π, π) < ω0 and ω(π, π) > ω0, respectively. Inset: Inverse critical temperature as a function of ∆ω. Here, and in all subsequent figures, when not shown, error bars are smaller than symbol size. Positive signs reduce ω(π, π), making it energetically less costly to create a phonon at the M point, while negative signs favor modes at the zone center Γ point, ω(0, 0) [hereafter ω 0 ]. A mixed sign breaks rotational symmetry, producing a phonon in the X (or X ) point, ω(π, 0) [or ω(0, π)]. These three cases, as depicted in Fig. To facilitate discussion of the physics, we introduce dimensionless parameters: (i) the adiabaticity ratio ω 0 /t; (ii) the phonon bandwidth ∆ω/ω 0 ; and (iii) the dimensionless electron-phonon coupling, which is the polaron binding energy in units of half electronic bandwidth. Here N = L 2 is the number of sites, while the electronic bandwidth is W = 8t. One can show, through an appropriate particle-hole transformation and shift of the phonon origin, that a half-filled electronic band occurs at μ = -λ 2 /ω 2 0 , for any dispersion relation ω(q). We introduce μ = μ + λ 2 /ω 2 0 so that ρ = 1 at μ = 0. In what follows, the Hamiltonian parameters λ, ω 1 and ω 2 will be adjusted in order to fix the dimensionless ratios, ω 0 /t, ∆ω/ω 0 and λ D . We examine the features of this generalization of the HM using Determinant Quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) while pairing features are analysed by the s-wave superconducting pair susceptibility with ∆(τ ) = i c i↓ (τ )c i↑ (τ ). Before presenting our main results on the effects of phonon dispersion on charge and pairing order, we revisit the dispersionless (ω 2 = 0) HM. Quite remarkably, it is only very recently that early simulations This striped phase, with q cdw = (0, π) = 2 k F , provides an explicit and quantitative illustration of a non-Peierls CDW instability. Recent experiments have exposed a similar behavior in a variety of materials, i.e. a charge order arising away from 2 k F and whose origin can not be related to the FSN, such as in the quasi-2D materials NbSe 2 , CeTe 3 , Cr, and U, and also in one dimensional model systems like Au/Ge(001) We now turn to SC order. As noted earlier, it is uncommon for ODLRO to appear in fermionic models at half-filling in bipartite geometries like the square lattice which instead favor diagonal order. Nevertheless, the data of Fig. To address this, we increase the SC scale of energy and consider phonon frequency ω 0 /t = 4. For this case, we obtain T cdw ∼ 1/13 for the dispersionless HM (ω 2 = 0), without SC; see Supplemental Material. However, for the dispersive case, S(π, π) is strongly suppressed at ∆ω/ω 0 0.05, while P s is enhanced and grows with lattice size, as displayed in Fig. with η = 1/4 and The inset of Fig. Conclusions: This paper has provided a significant extension of QMC simulations of electron-phonon Hamiltonians by evaluating the effects of phonon dispersion on charge and pairing order in the Holstein model. The results offer several interesting features, including a CDW-SC transition at half-filling and transitions between CDW phases at different ordering momenta, which are controlled by the bare phonon dispersion. Our findings of non-Peierls CDW phase, despite of existence of FSN on the bare electron dispersion, is of particular interest given recent work calling into question the traditional view of CDW formation Supplemental Material for: Phonon dispersion and the competition between pairing and charge order Phonon dispersion and electron-phonon coupling: Including momentum dependence in the phonon dispersion relation has some qualitative connections to a momentum-dependent electron-phonon coupling, but is rather different when considered in detail. This can be seen, for instance, through a calculation of the lowest-order electron self-energy Σ(k, ω) in Fig. where Σ g and Σ ω are the forms for g(q) and ω(q) respectively. In the ν → 0 limit, where the phonon carries no energy, we have that Σ g = Σ ω under the condition |g(q)| 2 /ω 0 = |g| 2 /ω(q). However it is evident that for nonzero ν the two self-energies are not equal. Such difference is even more accentuated in the phonon self-energy. For phonon dispersion case, Fig. while for the momentum-dependent electron-phonon coupling case, Fig. We have written these expressions in conventional real time notation. The expressions appropriate for DQMC are the imaginary-time (Masubara frequency) analogs, but the point, that Σ g and Σ ω as well as Π ω and Π g are in general inequivalent, is the same. At higher order, e.g. in vertex corrections, the differences between ω(q) and g(q) approaches will become even more complex. Determinant Quantum Monte Carlo: We examine the features of the Holstein model (HM) using Determinant Quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) simulations Here d{x i,l } is the integral over the (continuous) spaceand imaginary time-dependent phonon field. S B is the bosonic action. The determinant appears as a square because the two fermionic species σ =↑, ↓ experience the same phonon field and contribute identically to Z. An important consequence is the absence of a sign problem at any filling. The matrices B l are each a product of an exponential of the hopping term in Eq. ( The physical quantities of interest are obtained by sampling the phonon fields {x i,l } and measuring combinations of the equal time fermion Green's function . We keep ∆τ small enough (in most of cases ∆τ = 0.1) so that Trotter errors are less than the statistical errors from the Monte Carlo sampling. We should stress that, in addition to local moves of single phonon coordinates, we also implemented global moves with η = 1/4 and ν = 1. Fixing these exponents, the data collapse is presented in Fig. To this end, we need to perform an analytic continuation of the imaginary-time dependent Green's function by This task can be performed by using the Maximum Entropy Method (MEM) On the other hand, the s-wave pair susceptibility exhibits very little dependence with lattice size, as displayed in Fig. 