We study the spectrum of Andreev bound states and Josephson currents across a junction of N superconducting wires which may have s-or p-wave pairing symmetries and develop a scattering matrix based formalism which allows us to address transport across such junctions. For N ≥ 3, it is well known that Berry curvature terms contribute to the Josephson currents; we chart out situations where such terms can have relatively large effects. For a system of three s-or three p-wave superconductors, we provide analytic expressions for the Andreev bound state energies and study the Josephson currents in response to a constant voltage applied across one of the wires; we find that the integrated transconductance at zero temperature is quantized to integer multiples of 4e 2 /h, where e is the electron charge and h = 2π is Planck's constant. For a sinusoidal current with frequency ω applied across one of the wires in the junction, we find that Shapiro plateaus appear in the time-averaged voltage V1 across that wire for any rational fractional multiple (in contrast to only integer multiples in junctions of two wires) of 2e V1 /( ω). We also use our formalism to study junctions of two p-and one s-wave wires. We find that the corresponding Andreev bound state energies depend on the spin of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles; this produces a net magnetic moment in such junctions. The time variation of these magnetic moments may be controlled by an external voltage applied across the junction. We discuss experiments which may test our theory. Josephson junctions have constituted a fascinating aspect of superconducting systems from the very beginning; see, for example, Ref. 1. Such junctions exhibit a variety of phenomena, such as the dc Josephson effect (a constant current flows in the absence of any voltage biases between the different superconductors), the ac Josephson effect (an alternating current flows in the presence of constant voltage biases), and Shapiro steps (these appear as plateaus in plots of the average voltage versus average current when the currents are made to vary periodically). The physics of such junctions is known to rely crucially on the pairing symmetry of its constituent superconductors. For example, a junction of two p-wave superconductors exhibits a fractional Josephson effect 2,3 which manifests itself in a fractional Josephson frequency ω J = eV / or the absence of odd-integer Shapiro steps. The latter property of such junctions has been used experimentally for the detection of Majorana modes In recent years, topological phases of matter have also been studied extensively In this work we develop a scattering matrix based approach which allows us to address transport properties of multi-wire Josephson junctions involving both s-and p-wave superconducting wires; our work therefore constitutes a generalization of similar multi-wire junctions involving only s-wave superconductors. The plan of our paper and the key results obtained are as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the model of N superconducting wires with either s-or p-wave symmetries meeting at a junction which is characterized by a scattering matrix S; we obtain an expression for the Andreev bound-state energies presented in terms of S and the pairing phases We consider a system consisting of N wires which meet at a junction; a schematic picture for N = 3 is shown in Fig. We will be interested in both s-and p-wave superconductors. We therefore recall the following facts about such SCs; see, for instance, Ref. 23. In terms of the spin Pauli matrices σ x,y,z , the pairing part of the Hamiltonian of an s-wave SC has the second-quantized form Equation (1) describes Cooper pairs which are in the spin-singlet state | ↑↓ -| ↓↑ . In a p-wave SC, the pairing part of the Hamiltonian is given by (2) gives ±1 if we consider electrons near the Fermi momenta ±k F ). We will restrict ourselves to the case where all p-wave superconducting wires have the same orientation of d. In the absence of an external magnetic field, we can then choose d ẑ without loss of generality. In this case, Eq. (2) takes the form Thus the Cooper pairs are in the spin triplet state with S z = 0; hence Cooper pairs in s-and p-wave SC wires will have the same value of S z . This will make it possible to study a system with both s-wave and p-wave SC wires since all the wires will be compatible with each other at the junction where an electron or hole from one of the wires can scatter into another wire. We note that the choice of pairing in the S z = 0 channel for all the pwave SC wires in the junction does not lead to a loss of generality for the following reasons. First, for junctions with a single p-wave wire, the choice of pairing in the S z = 0 sector is merely a choice of the spin quantization axis to be along d ẑ24 ; it does not alter the physical properties of the junction. Second, the choice of the same direction d for the different p-wave wires is not artificial. It is well known that the direction of d depends on the material properties and geometry of the wires; hence multiple wires constructed out of the same material are expected to have d in the same direction. Finally, a junction between two p-wave superconductors with orthogonal d-vectors is known not to support a Josephson current at zero temperature We first consider a system of N wires which are all s-wave SCs. For spin-up quasiparticles, the annihilation operators are given by superpositions of Ψ ↑ and Ψ † ↓ , and we will denote the corresponding wave functions by ψ e↑ and ψ h↓ . For spin-down quasiparticles, the annihilation operators are superpositions of Ψ ↓ and Ψ † ↑ , and the corresponding wave functions are ψ e↓ and ψ h↑ . We introduce a symbol σ = +1 (-1) to denote spin up (spin down) respectively, and σ = -1 (+1) if σ = +1 (-1). Hence, the wave function of a spin-σ quasiparticle is given by a combination of ψ eσ and ψ hσ . For a spin-up electron, let φ i be the phase of the SC pairing amplitude ∆ i on wire i, namely, ∆ i = ∆e iφi . We will take the magnitude of the pairing, |∆ i | = ∆, to be the same in all the wires. Due to the spin-singlet nature of the Cooper pairs in an s-wave SC, spin-down electrons will have the pairing amplitude ∆ i = -∆e iφi ; this is clear from Eq. (1). We can therefore write the pairing amplitude as σ∆e iφi for spin-σ electrons on wire i. We now recall the derivation 20 of the energy E σ of an Andreev bound state (ABS) which lies in the SC gap, i.e., |E σ | < ∆. To this end, we assume that the normal region lying at the center of the system (i.e., the orange region in Fig. the incoming and outgoing hole wave functions, ψ in hσi (E σ ) and ψ out hσi (E σ ), are related as and electron and hole wave functions are not coupled to each other through S. Next, when an outgoing electron (hole) in the normal region in wire i strikes the junction with the SC at x i = δ, it is Andreev reflected back to the normal region as an incoming hole (electron). Namely where (Note that we are ignoring any phases picked up by the electrons or holes while propagating between the junction at x i = 0 and the SC at x i = δ due to the approximation e ikF δ = 1). In Eq. ( S ij e iφj S * jk e -iφ k ψ out eσk (E σ ). (8) Introducing an N -dimensional column ψ σ (E σ ) whose entries are given by ψ out eσi (E σ ), a diagonal matrix e iφ whose diagonal entries are given by e iφi , and its inverse matrix e -iφ , Eq. ( It is clear from Eq. ( ∂ψ σ ∂φ i = 0, and We will use this symmetry to set one of the phases (for example, φ 3 for a three-wire system) equal to zero in many of the calculations. Equation (9) implies that We note that Eq. ( Next, we discuss a system in which some of the SC wires are s-wave and the others are p-wave This leads us to define a diagonal matrix η whose i-th diagonal entry η ii is equal to +1 (-1) if the i-th SC wire is s-wave (p-wave). To go from spin-up quasiparticles to spin-down quasiparticles, we have to change e iφi → -η ii e iφi and e -iφi → -η ii e -iφi on wire i. We thus see that to account for spin, it is useful to consider a diagonal matrix which is equal to -η. We then find that the ABS energy is given by the eigenvalue equation for spin-up quasiparticles (σ = +1), and for spin-down quasiparticles (σ = -1). We then see that for each value of σ, the ABS energies have an E → -E symmetry only if all the SC wires are s-wave or all are p-wave. If some of them are s-wave and some are p-wave, there is no E → -E symmetry in general. We now note that Eq. ( Hence, if there is an ABS at energy E with wave function ψ σ (E) for spin-up quasiparticles, there must be an ABS at energy -E with wave function ψ σ (-E) = Se iφ ψ * σ (E) for spin-down quasiparticles. Thus the combined energy spectrum for spin-up and -down quasiparticles will always have an E → -E symmetry, even if the spectra for spin-up or spin-down quasiparticles separately do not have such a symmetry. In this subsection, we consider a two-wire system to show that our formalism reproduces the known result for both conventional (two s-wave wires) and unconventional (one s-and one p-wave wire or two p-wave wires) junctions. To this end, we first note that the unitarity of the 2 × 2 scattering matrix implies that We then find the following results for the two ABS energies. For two s-wave SC wires, the ABS energies are given by for both spin-up and -down quasiparticles. For two pwave wires, the ABS energies are for both spin-up and spin-down quasiparticles. If one wire is an s-wave SC and the other is p-wave, the ABS energies are where sgn denotes the signum function. To compare the expressions in Eqs. (17-19) with those given in Ref. 3, we have to note the following. At a point x in a SC wire, an s-wave SC has a pairing of the form given in Eq. (1) while a p-wave SC has a pairing of the form given in Eq. (2). On comparing the two expressions, we see that an s-wave pairing phase φ is insensitive to the sign of the coordinate x while a p-wave pairing phase depends on the sign of x because of the ∂/∂x. As mentioned at the beginning of this section, we are taking the coordinates x i in every wire to increase from zero at the junction; this is a convenient choice for three or more wires. However, for a two-wire system, it is conventional to take x to go from -∞ to ∞ with the junction being at x = 0; hence the coordinate increases from zero to ∞ in one of the wires and decreases from zero to -∞ in the other wire. We can change our notation to agree with this convention by changing the coordinate in, say, wire 1 from x 1 → -x 1 . If wire 1 has p-wave pairing, this must be compensated by changing the phase φ 1 → φ 1 + π. No such change in the phase is required if wire 1 has s-wave pairing. Hence, for two s-wave SC wires the ABS energies are still given by Eq. ( If wire 1 is s-wave and wire 2 is p-wave, we do not have to change φ 1 and φ 2 , and the ABS energies are again given by Eq. ( Returning to the case of N wires, we now look at the wave function ψ n,σ (E n,σ ) = ψ out e,n,σ (E n,σ ) given by Eq. ( This is a real antisymmetric matrix with the following properties. Equation (11) implies that each row and each column of B n,σ,ij adds up to zero, i.e., These identities along with the antisymmetry imply that, for each value of n and σ, the matrix B n,σ,ij contains only (N -1)(N -2)/2 independent real parameters which we can take to be the values of B n,σ,ij for 1 ≤ i < j ≤ N -1. Thus the Berry curvature can be non-zero only if N ≥ 3. We note here, that in contrast to junctions of all swave wires or all p-wave wires, the Berry curvature for a mixed s -p junction depends on σ. In this paper, we will use the technique discussed in Ref. 26 to calculate the Berry curvature. [Note that Eq. ( Holding the phases φ 3 , φ 4 , • • • , φ N fixed, we can define a Chern number Ch n,σ,12 by integrating B n,σ,12 over φ 1 and φ 2 , This is always quantized to have integer values. Following Eq. ( , where E > 0. Let us denote the j-th component of the wave function ψ n,+1 (E) by ψ n,j , where [We will see later that the last two terms in Eq. ( . Equation ( For any value of the pairing phases φ i , we can derive a sum rule for the ABS energies and Berry curvatures of all the bands and the two possible spins. According to Eq. ( Furthermore, since the energies of the σ = +1 bands have opposite signs to the energies of the σ = -1 bands (Eq. ( We now consider a situation in which a voltage V i is applied to wire i; the phase φ i then varies in time according to where φi ≡ dφ/dt. Next, the contribution of a particular ABS with energy E n,σ to the Josephson current in the i-th wire is given by 6 (The prefactor of 1/2 has been included to avoid double counting of spin; see Ref. 3). Note that while summing over n and σ, we have included the effect of a temperature T through the Fermi function where β = 1/(k B T ), k B is the Boltzmann constant, and we have taken the chemical potential to lie at the center of the SC gap; this will be discussed in detail in Sec. III. We can see that Eq. ( In this section, we study the ac Josephson effect in these junctions. To this end, we first note that if V i = 0, the φ i 's are constant in time and we get constant currents given by This is called the dc Josephson effect. The Berry curvature does not contribute in this case. To study the ac Josephson effect, we first take the V i to be time-independent non-zero constants leading to φ i = (2e/ )V i t and These currents vary with time since φ i and therefore B n,σ,ij vary with time. Equation ( Let us consider the case where only V 1 = 0 and are some constants. Since the system remains invariant when φ 1 → φ 1 + 2π keeping the other φ i 's fixed, we see that E n,σ and B n,σ,ij vary in time with a period T = 2π /(2eV 1 ). Equation (32) implies that the total charge flowing in wire i in one time period T is given by The average current flowing over time T is then given by (We are interested in I i since it gives the dc part of the current). Since E n,σ is a periodic function of φ 1 , and φ 1 varies linearly in time with a period T , we see that This equation, along with B n,σ,11 = 0, implies that Q 1 = 0; hence I 1 = 0. For the case of two wires (N = 2), the facts that E n,σ is a function of φ 1 -φ 2 and B n,σ,ij = 0 can be used to analytically show that I 1 = I 2 = 0. But for N ≥ 3, we find numerically that I i is generally not equal to zero for i = 2, 3, • • • , N . Thus the application of a constant voltage bias on one wire produces a constant current in all the other wires (in addition to a time-dependent current which gives zero when integrated over time T ). This phenomenon of transconductance (defined as G ij = I i /V j where i = j) has been studied earlier If we hold φ 3 , φ 4 , ... fixed, the invariance of E n,σ under φ 2 → φ 2 + 2π implies that 2π 0 dφ 2 ∂E n,σ /∂φ 2 = 0, while the linear variation of φ 1 with t implies that (1/T ) T 0 dtB n,σ,12 = (1/2π) 2π 0 dφ 1 B n,σ,12 . Using Eqs. ( where h = 2π , and we have used Eq. ( In this section, we consider a sinusoidal applied voltage, which, for two-wire junctions, is well known to lead to Shapiro plateaus 1, where we have used the fact that B n,σ,ij = 0 if i = j. For convenience, let us assume that R ij = R and C ij = C for all pairs of leads. Using Eq. ( We now consider the case where and in time, while φ 1 will vary with time. Equation (39) then gives where N is the number of wires, and for j = 1. We observe that Eq. (41) does not contain any Berry curvature terms; this is therefore the simplest equation to solve. Given some initial values of φ 1 and φ1 at time t = 0, we can solve this numerically. We can write Eq. (41) in the form 21 where γ = 1/(RC) is a positive quantity. We will now present a perturbative argument to understand how Shapiro plateaus can arise from Eq. ( and φ 0 is an arbitrary constant. We can now use the above result to put back the third term on the left hand side of Eq. ( where The Fourier coefficients c l are functions of φ 2 , φ 3 , • • • . (The coefficient c 0 must be equal to zero since we know that 2π 0 dφ 1 ∂E n,σ /∂φ 1 = 0. Also, since ∂E n,σ /∂φ 1 is real, we must have c -l = c * l ; this implies that |c -l | = |c l | for all values of l). Substituting Eq. (44) in Eq. (45) and using the identity 28 where J m (z) denotes the Bessel function of order m, we obtain For a function f (t), we define the long-time average value as Using the result lim we find from Eqs. (45-47) that whenever α = -(m/l)ω for a pair of integers m and l, and is equal to zero otherwise. On the other hand, Eqs. ( Next, if Eq. ( The discussion presented above and the expression in Eq. (50) imply that the width of the plateau at (2e/ ) V 1 = -(m/l)ω will be proportional to the Fourier coefficient c l multiplied by J m (la). We thus expect that c l can give an idea of the plateau widths at integer multiples of ω/|l|. The numerical results presented in Sec. IV confirm this expectation. The above arguments imply that in contrast to the standard Josephson junctions made out of two wires, junctions of multiple wires exhibit Shapiro plateaus for drive frequencies for which 2e V 1 /( ω) is a rational number m/l ( where m and l are integers). Since there is a rational number lying between any two rational numbers, there should be a plateau lying between any two plateaus leading to a a devil's staircase structure We first consider a system of three s-wave SC wires. (We will only consider spin-up quasiparticles here; the ABS energies, wave functions and Berry curvature are identical for spin-down quasiparticles in this case). Equation (9) implies that 1/a 2 σ (E σ ) is an eigenvalue of Se iφ S * e -iφ , and there must be three such eigenvalues. The E → -E symmetry implies that two of the ABS must have energies ±E σ (which are generally not equal to either zero or ±∆), while the third ABS must have E σ equal to either zero or ±∆. To see which of these two possibilities occur for the third ABS, we first consider the trivial case S = I. It is then clear that all the ABS energies lie at ±∆. If we now smoothly move S away from I, the E → -E symmetry implies that two of the ABS can move away from ±∆ as a pair, but the third state must remain fixed at E 2 σ /∆ 2 = 1 (which is not a bound state). We thus conclude in general that one of the eigenvalues of Se iφ S * e -iφ must be equal to 1, while the other two eigenvalues form a complex conjugate pair a 2 σ (E σ ) and a * 2 σ (E σ ). Using the fact that the sum of the eigenvalues of a matrix is equal to its trace, we find that the energies of two of the ABS are given by 15 If the matrix S is symmetric, Eq. ( A general parametrization of 3 × 3 unitary matrices S has been given in Ref. 17. Instead of looking at the most general case, however, we will first consider a special family of matrices which is completely symmetric under all possible permutations of the three wires. Apart from an overall phase (which is unimportant since it cancels out between S and S * in Eq. ( The physical significance of λ is that it is the strength of a barrier between the three wires For λ = 0, we get E σ /∆ = ±| 3 i=1 e iφi |/3, while λ → ±∞ gives E σ /∆ → ±1. To understand the form of E σ /∆ better, it is useful to study the function We can show that F = 0 if the three phases φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 are 2π/3 apart. For instance, if we set φ 3 = 0, we get F = 0 if (φ 1 , φ 2 ) is equal to either (2π/3, 4π/3) or (4π/3, 2π/3). If we expand around one of these points, say, φ 1 = 2π/3+ δφ 1 and φ 2 = 4π/3 + δφ 2 , we obtain to first order in δφ 1 , δφ 2 . Equation ( (57) We can think of Eq. (57) as the energy-momentum dispersion of a particle moving in two dimensions with momentum k x = √ 3(δφ 1 -δφ 2 ) and k y = δφ 1 + δφ 2 ; the dispersion has the relativistic form are the 'velocity' and 'mass' respectively. The situation described above similar to what happens in graphene close to the two Dirac points 30 ; a mass term can be induced there by applying a sublattice potential or a spinorbit interaction. Turning to the Berry curvature matrix B n,σ , we find that Eqs. (22) and the antisymmetry imply that the matrix is described by a single real parameter b n,σ as The value of b n,σ depends on the φ i 's, S and the particular ABS band n and spin σ which is being considered. FIG. Typically, we find that the Berry curvature is large near those values of the φ i 's where two of the ABS are almost degenerate in energy. In the rest of this section, we will set φ 3 = 0 for convenience. For the S-matrix given in Eq. ( If S is not a symmetric matrix the Chern number Ch n,σ,12 can be non-zero (We again set φ 3 = 0). We see that the Berry curvature has a peak with a negative sign at (φ 1 , φ 2 ) = (2.04, 1.57), and Ch σ,12 is equal to -1. Large λ limit of the symmetric S-matrix: It is interesting to consider what happens if we take the parameter λ to be large in Eq. (53); as mentioned there, this corresponds to having a large barrier at the junction between the three wires. Keeping terms only up to order 1/λ, we find that r ≃ -1 -2i/λ and t ≃ -2i/λ. The operator in Eq. ( where I 3 is the 3×3 identity matrix and M is a Hermitian matrix. The eigenvalues of M turn out to be zero and (62) It follows from Eqs. ( up to terms of order 1/λ 2 . For the ABS with negative energy, Eq. ( We thus see that the contribution of this term to the current (in Eqs. ( It is clear from Eqs. ( We first consider a system in which all the three SC wires have p-wave pairing. The diagonal matrix η defined after Eq. ( for both spin-up and -down quasiparticles; hence each of the energies will have a two-fold degeneracy. Then an FIG. argument similar to the one presented at the beginning of Sec. III A will show that one of the ABS energies will always lie at E σ = 0 (corresponding to a 2 σ (E σ ) = -1), while the other two energies must be of the form ±E σ . Then the fact that the sum of the eigenvalues of a matrix is equal to its trace implies that the energies of two of the ABS are given by We next consider a system in which two of the SC wires, say 1 and 2, are p-wave while wire 3 is s-wave. Then the diagonal matrix η will have entries given by (-1, -1, 1), and the ABS energies will be given by Eq. ( We will now present our numerical results. When calculating the currents I i , we have to sum over spin-up and -down quasiparticles and also over the three bands of ABS energies given by functions of φ 1 and φ 2 (we will generally set φ 3 = 0). As usual we will denote the ABS energies by E n,σ , where n = 1, 2, 3 labels the bands and σ = ±1 labels spin-up and spin-down quasiparticles. If I i,n,σ is the contribution to the current in wire i from band n and spin σ, the total current in wire i is given by 6 In general, the SC phases φ i and the ABS energies E n,σ can vary with time. We will assume that Eq. ( In the numerical calculations presented below, we have chosen the SC gap to be ∆ = 10 -6 eV in order to obtain experimentally reasonable values of the currents I i (of the order of nA) and the frequency ω (of the order of GHz) used to study Shapiro plateaus. Another reason for choosing ∆ = 10 -6 eV, along with appropriate values of the elements of the S matrix, is to show large variations and striking peaks in the ABS energies and Berry curvature in Fig. To begin, we will examine the case of three s-wave SC wires. In this case, the energies, wave functions and Berry curvature are identical for spin-up and -down quasiparticles. We will therefore consider only spin-up quasiparticles in the following. Next, we know that one of the ABS energy bands always lies at the edge between the gap and the bulk (E 2 σ /∆ 2 = 1); hence it is not really a bound state. We will therefore not consider this band. The other two bands have energies ±E σ . We will only consider cases where these energies are gapped away from zero. At temperatures much lower than the gap, the band with positive (negative) energy will be unoccupied (occupied) and will therefore have f (E n,σ ) -1/2 equal to -1/2 (1/2) respectively. Since the energies come in ±E pairs, we have n=± E n,σ [f (E n,σ ) -1/2] = E -,σ , where E ±,σ denotes the positive (negative) energy values for spin σ. For the Berry curvature, we have )/2, where B ±,σ,12 denotes the Berry curvatures in the positive (negative) energy bands. (We find numerically that for each value of the φ i 's, B +,σ,12 and B -,σ,12 have almost the same magnitude but opposite signs, as mentioned after Eq. ( We first look at the ac Josephson effect, namely, the case of constant voltages V i ; this is discussed in Eq. ( Since the Berry curvature B -,+1,12 has large values around (φ 1 , φ 2 ) = (2π/3, 4π/3) with a negative sign and around (4π/3, 2π/3) with a positive sign (as shown in Fig. For 2eV 1 = 10 -4 eV, Eq. ( For instance, we see in Fig. Similarly, in Fig. We next look for Shapiro plateaus in an RC circuit involving three wires; we will assume that the all resistances (capacitances) are equal to R (C). As discussed in Eq. ( + 2e(B -,+1,12 -B +,+1,12 ) φ1 , (71) where we have included a factor of 2 for spin. We can solve these equations numerically. Equation (70) does not involve the Berry curvature and can be solved without using the next two equations. Equation (71) involves the Berry curvature and φ1 which can be found using Eq. (70). Equation (72) has a trivial form. After solving Eqs. (70-71) over a long time T , we can calculate the average values We can then plot these average values versus I for a particular set of values of A, ω, φ 2 and φ 3 . To fix the values of the various parameters, it is convenient to re-define time in dimensionless units of ωt; φ1 and φ1 are then dimensionless. Next, we define the dimensionless quantities Equations (70-71) can then be rewritten as + ω(B -,+1,12 -B +,+1,12 ) φ1 . (76) All the terms in Eqs. (75-76) have the dimensions of energy. In addition, we have V 1 = ( ω/2e) φ1 in units of energy; hence In Fig. There are prominent plateaus at V 1 = 0.5, 1, 1.5 2, 2.5, 3 and 3.5 times 10 -6 V (corresponding to integer multiples of ω/(2e)) and narrower plateaus at subharmonic values given by V 1 = 0.25, 0.75, 1.75 and 2.25 times 10 -6 V (namely, odd integer multiples of ω/(4e) = 0.25 V). Figure Let us now replace all the quantities in the above equation by their average values; this gives Next, φ1 is related to V 1 through Eq. (77). On the prominent plateaus in Fig. (7), V 1 is equal to integer where n is an integer. Since we have taken ω = 10 -6 eV, Eq. ( We have studied plots analogous to Figs. As discussed at the end of Sec. II E, the relative widths of the Shapiro plateaus can be understood to some extent by looking at the absolute values of the Fourier coefficients |c l | of ∂E -,+1 /∂φ 1 . This is shown in Fig. We have found that Shapiro plateaus also appear in a system with three p-wave superconducting wires. Con-sidering Eqs. ( C. Two p-wave and one s-wave superconducting wire We now look at a system in which wires 1 and 2 are p-wave SCs and wire 3 is a s-wave SC. In this case, we find that the ABS energies (denoted by E n,σ , where n labels the bands and σ labels the spin) are generally not equal to zero or ±∆. (An exception to this occurs when φ 1 = φ 2 ; in this case, one of the ABS energies is exactly equal to zero). Furthermore, the energies of the spinup and -down quasiparticles are generally not equal to each other. As discussed after Eq. ( An interesting feature of this system is that one of the ABS energies can suddenly change from +∆ to -∆ as we vary the phases φ i . This happens whenever the value of one of the a 2 σ (E σ )'s given by Eq. ( The fact that the ABS energies are not identical for spin-up and and spin-down quasiparticles implies that there can be some spin-dependent effects in this system. One such effect is that the region of the junction and the SC wires can have a net magnetic moment 5 . [The appearance of a non-zero magnetic moment requires breaking of time-reversal symmetry. In our system, this will happen if any of the SC phases φ i is not equal to 0 or π. This is because φ i → -φ i time-reversal, as we can see from the complex conjugation of Eq. (1) or (3). Hence φ i = 0 or π breaks time-reversal symmetry. In the numerical results presented below, we will ensure timereversal breaking by setting one of the phases equal to 2π/3.] We define the magnetic moment as 13: Surface plot of mz (in units of μB/2) vs (φ1, φ2) for a system in which superconducting wires 1 and 2 are pwave and wire 3 is s-wave, the S-matrix has the form given in Eq. ( where μ B is the Bohr magneton, the prefactor of 1/2 has been put in to avoid double counting of spin, and we have used the symmetry E n,σ = -E n,-σ to write the second line of Eq. (81). In Fig. Next, we consider what happens when a constant voltage bias V 1 is applied (i.e., to one of the wires with pwave SC) keeping V 2 = V 3 = 0. Then φ 1 varies linearly with time according to φ1 = (2e/ )V 1 whereas φ 2 and φ 3 remain fixed. As a result, the ABS energies E n,σ vary with time and hence so does m z . This is shown FIG. in Fig. between +∆ and -∆ at certain times. Figure In this paper, we have studied a system of several SC wires which meet at a junction. The junction is parametrized by a scattering matrix S which is of a normal form that does not mix electrons and holes. The SC wires can have s-wave or p-wave pairings, with the pairing phases denoted by φ i . We have discussed how the ABS energies and wave functions can be determined for any combination of s-wave and p-wave wires and any spin of the quasiparticles. Our results provide a scattering matrix based formalism for studying junctions involving superconducting wires with both s-and p-wave pairings; these results generalize the earlier existing results for multi-terminal s-wave wires Next, we have discussed the ac Josephson effect in which a constant voltage bias is applied to one of the SC wires. We find that an time-averaged current flows only in the other two wires; this current is sensitive to the Berry curvature and the corresponding integrated transconductance is quantized in units of 4e Next, we have studied several systems of three SC wires in detail. As two examples of the scattering matrix S, we have considered a highly symmetric and time-reversal invariant form and a randomly generated asymmetric form which is not time-reversal invariant. [Throughout our analysis, we have assumed that the matrix S is spin independent even when time-reversal symmetry is broken. This would be true if, for example, the junction consists of a loop which is threaded by a magnetic flux (thus breaking time-reversal symmetry); such a flux would affect the transport around the loop through an Aharonov-Bohm phase which does not depend on the spin Finally, we have numerically studied a number of threewire systems to test the various ideas presented in the earlier sections. For three s-wave wires, we have shown that the dependence of the ac Josephson current in one wire on the phase φ i in one of the other wires can directly provide information about the Berry curvature. Next, we have shown that when the time-averaged V in one wire is plotted versus I when the current also contains an oscillating piece in the same wire, Shapiro plateaus with discernible widths appear at both integer and half-oddinteger multiples of ω/(2e). Furthermore, the currents in the other two wires show plateau-like features in the ranges of the I where V shows plateaus; these features are mainly due to the Berry curvature terms in the currents. For three p-wave wires, we find Shapiro plateaus in the plot of V versus I; the currents in the other wires show some bumps in the same ranges of I but these are not primarily due to the Berry curvature. For a system with two p-wave wires and one s-wave wire, the fact that the ABS energies are not identical for spin-up and -down ABS leads to spin-dependent effects. For instance, we find that the junction region can have a non-zero magnetic moment which depends on the phases φ i . We note that this allows for a direct control of the time variation of such a magnetic moment by externally applying a voltage across the wires. In the ac Josephson effect, where one of these phases varies linearly with time, we find that the magnetic moment varies periodically in time, showing large jumps when one of the ABS energies either touches zero or changes abruptly between the top and the bottom of the SC gap. There are several experiments which could verify our theoretical results. First, we predict that standard I -V characteristics measurements with three-wire s-wave or p-wave junctions in the presence of an external microwave radiation of frequency ω would detect Shapiro plateaus at rational fractional values of 2e V 1 /( ω). We note that this is in contrast to two-wire junctions where such plateaus can be seen in standard experiments at integral values 2eV 1 /( ω). Such experiments are routine for two-wire junctions In conclusion, we have studied multi-wire junctions of s-and p-wave superconductors and have developed a scattering matrix based approach which can be used to describe such junctions. We have studied the ac Josephson effect in such junctions pointing out the presence of Shapiro plateaus. We have also shown that such systems involving both s-and p-wave superconducting wires lead to presence of magnetic moments in the junction whose time variation can be controlled via an external applied voltage. We have suggested several experiments which can test our theory. J. B. Ketterson and S. N. Song, Superconductivity (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999). 2 A. Kitaev, Physics-Uspekhi 44, 131 (2001).