We report anomalous enhancement of the critical current at low temperatures in gate-tunable Josephson junctions made from topological insulator BiSbTeSe2 nanoribbons with superconducting Nb electrodes. In contrast to conventional junctions, as a function of the decreasing temperature T , the increasing critical current Ic exhibits a sharp upturn at a temperature T * around 20% of the junction critical temperatures for several different samples and various gate voltages. The Ic vs. T demonstrates a short junction behavior for T > T * , but crosses over to a long junction behavior for T < T * with an exponential T -dependence Ic ∝ exp -kBT /δ , where kB is the Boltzmann constant. The extracted characteristic energy-scale δ is found to be an order of magnitude smaller than the induced superconducting gap of the junction. We attribute the long-junction behavior with such a small δ to low-energy Andreev bound states (ABS) arising from winding of the electronic wavefunction around the circumference of the topological insulator nanoribbon (TINR). Our TINRbased Josephson junctions with low-energy ABS are promising for future topologically protected devices that may host exotic phenomena such as Majorana fermions. Three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators (TI) are characterized by insulating bulk and non-trivial conducting surface states, where the spin is helically locked perpendicular to the momentum, and the carriers are massless Dirac fermions with linear energy-momentum dispersion In recent years, S-TI-S JJ's with two-and threedimensional TI's have been extensively studied. Gatetunable supercurrent and Josephson effects, such as Fraunhofer patterns and Shapiro steps, have also been observed In this work, we use the topological insulator BiSbTeSe 2 with a distinct advantage that at low temperatures the bulk is insulating and only the surface states contribute to electrical transport High-quality single crystals of BiSbTeSe 2 were grown by the Bridgman technique Fig. The junction critical temperature (T c ∼ 0.5 -2.2 K), the temperature below which the junction resistance vanishes, is much lower than the critical temperature of Nb (T N b c ∼ 7.5 K) in our S-TINR-S junctions. The DC voltage V dc vs. the DC current I dc , measured in sample 1 when sweeping I dc from -300 nA to 300 nA at T = 20 mK for a few different V g 's is plotted in Fig. Fig. The anomalous temperature dependence of I c observed in our samples is radically different from that of conventional JJ's. While the T -dependence of our I c for T * < T < T c maybe described by the behavior of a TIbased short junction (e.g., solid blue line in Fig. For the TINR with a circumference C = 2W + 2t, the transverse momentum k y , perpendicular to the current, is quantized as k y = 2π C (n + 1/2), where n is an integer [ The modes (corresponding to I 1 ) on the top surface travel a short distance L, the separation between the two Nb contacts, and are supposedly in the short-junction limit. We found our experimental data of I c vs. T for T > T * can be described using the temperaturedependent supercurrent calculated for a ballistic short junction where h is the Plank constant, k B is the Boltzmann constant, e is the electron charge, N 1 is the number of modes in the top surface, φ is the phase difference between the two superconductors, and ∆(T ) is the induced superconducting gap. We assume a BCS temperature dependence for ∆(T ) with ∆(T = 0) = ∆ 0 = 1.76k B T c We have plotted I c1 (T ) calculated from Eq. ( In contrast, the modes (corresponding to I 2 ) flowing through the bottom surface extend over the entire circumference (C ∼ 700 nm for sample 1 shown in Fig. We can extract N 1 ∼ 1-5 for different samples from the fit of I c1 as determined by Eq. ( Cg e (V g -V CN P ) is the Fermi wave vector and C g = 12 nF/cm 2 is the parallel plate capacitance per unit area of a 300-nm SiO 2 . Furthermore, we can estimate the number of modes N 2 corresponding to I 2 as N 2 = N -N 1 ∼ (10 -20)N 1 . This suggests that the majority of the modes in our TINRs are going around the circumference and through the bottom surface to contribute to I 2 , consistent with the expectation that only modes with k y near zero contribute to I 1 . We note that I c at the lowest T is proportional to the number of modes and the energy scale of the ABS in both the long and short junction limits (i.e. the low-T I 1 and I 2 are proportional to N 1 ∆ 0 and N 2 δ, respectively). The extracted large N 2 ∼ (10 -20)N 1 and the small δ ∼ 0.1∆ 0 imply that the contribution of I 1 and I 2 to the total critical current at low T should be comparable, which is consistent with our experimental observations in Fig. In the above phenomenological model, we have used one effective reduced gap δ to describe all the modes flowing around the circumference and through the bottom surface. However, in reality these modes can have different gaps depending on how far they travel between the two superconductors. Currently there is no theory for the temperature dependence of I c specific to TINR (considering the wrapping of the electronic wavefunction around the circumference). Further studies are required to fully understand the nature of the induced superconductivity in this system. We have measured the CPR (supercurrent I vs. phase φ) in our TINR junction at T = 20 mK using an asymmetric SQUID based on our TINR junction in parallel with a reference junction [37, It has been predicted that in a TI flake, regardless of the barrier height Z imposed by a non-magnetic impurity, k y = 0 mode will have a transmission probability D = 1 and will give rise to a highly skewed CPR In this paper, we present transport measurements of the JJ's based on nanoribbons of the bulk-insulating topological insulators BiSbTeSe 2 with superconducting Nb contacts. We experimentally find an anomalous behavior in the T-dependence of I c in a variety of junctions with different T c and V g 's. For all samples, I c increases with decreasing temperature from T c to an upturn temperature (∼ 0.2T c ), followed by an exponential increase with further decrease of the temperature. To understand our results, we introduce a phenomenological model based on the winding of the ABS around the circumference of the TINR. Our model relates the enhancement of I c at low temperatures to the anomalously small energy scale of ABS in the long-junction limit. Furthermore, our measured CPR shows a sinusoidal behavior, consistent with the expectation for such long JJ's under the experimental conditions. Our experimental observations indicate that our TINR junctions can be promising platforms for further exploration of topological superconductivity and Majorana fermions predicted in such systems 