Noncentrosymmetric superconductors with broken inversion symmetry P offer rich physical phenomena such as the upper critical magnetic field Hc2 beyond the Pauli limit and magnetoelectric effect. The relativistic spin-orbit interaction (SOI) plays an essential role in these novel phenomena, which lifts the Kramers degeneracy at each k-point, and leads to the mixing of the spin singlet-even parity and spin triplet odd-parity parings. On the other hand, the time-reversal symmetry T relates the two states at k and -k points with the opposite spins, and the external magnetic field B further breaking T leads to the directional dependence of the nonlinear resistivity called magnetochiral anisotropy (MCA). Here we demonstrate theoretically that the two-component nature of the order parameter, i.e., even and odd pairings, leads to the gigantic enhancement of the MCA in the fluctuation region, in Rashba superconductor as a representative example of noncentrosymmetric system. This reveals the superconducting analogue of "ferroelectric" appearing in the transport phenomena. The lack of spatial inversion P and time-reversal T symmetries is the fundamental issue in condensed matters. The breaking of the former allows the ferroelectric in insulator, while that of the latter leads to the magnetism. Multiferroic insulators with broken both P and T is attracting intensive recent interests from the viewpoint of various magnetoelectric effect and nonreciprocal effects In solids, the electronic states are described by Bloch wavefunctions whose energy eigenvalue is ε σ (k) with σ being the spin component and k the crystal momentum. The spatial inversion transforms (k, σ) to (-k, σ), while the timereversal (k, σ) to (-k, σ) (σ is the opposite spin component to σ). Therefore, when both P and T symmetries are broken, the electron pair with opposite momenta is no longer related, and asymmetry between forward and backward appears. In such situation, nonreciprocal charge current, whose conductivity depends on the direction, can exist. If we assume that the time-reversal symmetry breaking originates from the magnetic field B, the resistivity is traditionally expressed as where I is the current, B is the magnetic field, and γ represents the nonreciprocity. This effect is named "magnetochiral anisotropy" (MCA). There are several experiments on the MCA in normal state systems In this paper, we study the nonreciprocal fluctuation current in Rashba superconductors. In order to treat the parity mixing appropriately, we employ the two-component Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory. We show the drastic enhancement of the MCA, which stems from the energy scale difference between E F and ∆ similar to the case of MoS 2 . However, the twocomponent nature of the superconductivity is essential in the present case, which is analogous to the ferroelectricity where the mixing of s-and p-orbitals produces the electric polarization. We also show that the nonreciprocal current has a unique electric and magnetic fields angle dependence due to the symmetry constraints for the higher rank response tensor. We start with the Rashba Hamiltonian which is given by where 2m -E F is the dispersion without the spin-orbit interaction with E F being the Fermi energy, α is the Rashba parameter, B is the magnetic field, and σ are the Pauli matrices. We have assumed that the g-factor is 2. Its eigenenergies are Now we mention the MCA in the normal state of Rashba system. Due to the helical spin structure in the momentum space, the band is distorted along the direction perpendicular to the magnetic field. Because of such asymmetry, when the electric field is applied perpendicular to the magnetic field, the nonreciprocal current occurs along the electric field direction. According to Ref. with W being the sample width and E R = mα 2 2 being the energy splitting at the shifted momentum due to the Rashba spin-orbit interaction. Now we consider the superconductivity of Rashba system with c † kσ and c kσ being the creation and annihilation operators of the electron with momentum k and spin σ. In general, the odd parity part is with V u ij k, k ′ being an odd function with respect to k and k ′ , and invariant under the crystal symmetry transformations. For simplicity, we assume the simplest case system. Then, the interaction Hamiltonian in the band basis reads to where Ψ † kλ and Ψ kλ are the creation and annihilation operators with the band index λ = ±, and with In this paper, we focus on two regimes. ( , the order parameter is purely singlet, and we consider the deviation from the limit by expanding with respect to the parameter r t = g1-g2 g1 , which is proportional to the triplet mixing. ( the order parameter is purely triplet, and we consider the deviation from the limit by expanding with respect to the parameter r s = g1+g2 g1 , which is proportional to the singlet mixing. In order to calculate the superconducting fluctuation current slightly above the critical temperature, it is convenient to employ the GL theory. The free energy quadratic with respect to the order parameters can be obtained by the equation where Ψ λq is the order parameter and G λ (k, iω n ) = (iω n -ξ λk ) -1 is the non-interacting normal Green's function. We set the Boltzmann constant k B = 1. Firstly, we assume E F > 0, and we will soon show that nonreciprocal current vanishes for E F < 0 in Eq. ( with δ λλ ′ , γ E , and E c being the Kronecker delta, Euler constant, and cutoff energy respectively. The density of states N λ and the other coefficients K λ and R λ are given in Supplementary Information. The critical temperatures are obtained by solving Due to the form of the interaction (g 1 ≈ g 2 for the singlet dominant case and g 1 ≈ -g 2 for the triplet dominant case), the solution with the plus sign has much higher critical temperature. Hence, we can ignore the order parameter with the lower critical temperature when we calculate the fluctuation current. The fluctuation current can be obtained by evaluating the equation where η is the eigenvalue of the matrix in Eq. ( x . We will discuss the case of general fields configurations later. After the integration in Eq. ( in the lowest order of r t,s . Here, we have defined the reduced temperature ε = T -Tc Tc . The linear coefficient σ (1) is the conventional form of the fluctuation conductivity in twodimensional superconductors. The nonlinear coefficient σ (2) grows faster than σ (1) toward the critical temperature as in the case of MoS 2 We mention the case when the Fermi energy is below the crossing point of the bands (E F < 0). In this case, because the density of states from the upper band is zero, the nonreciprocal current vanishes, whereas, the normal current contribution exists For E F > 0, the γ value expressed with the microscopic parameters is with . We have used the relation between σ (1) , σ (2) , and γ as shown in Ref. In the superconducting fluctuation regime, the nonreciprocal fluctuation current exists in the case of E F > 0, which is opposite to the normal state. With the same assumption for the normal state, we obtain From Eqs. ( We finally mention the electric and magnetic fields angle dependence of the nonreciprocal current. If we express the second order current as j i = σ ijkl B j E k E l , the coefficient σ ijkl is the pseudo tensor consistent with the crystal symmetry. Our model Eq. ( According to calculations the same as that for σ xyxx above, we obtain σ xxxy = -1 3 σ xyxx and σ xyyy = 1 3 σ xyxx , which satisfy the above conditions. If we define the angle between the current and magnetic (electric) field as θ B (θ E ), the nonreciprocal current is whose dependence in the (θ B , θ E ) plane is shown in Fig. We have investigated the MCA of the Rashba system in the superconducting fluctuation regime. The main result is the explicit form of the γ value shown in Eq. Such a huge enhancement of the MCA originates from the energy scale difference between the Fermi energy E F and the critical temperature T c as indicated in Eqs. We have also shown the unique fields angle dependence of the nonreciprocal current, which is summarized in Fig. Experimentally, the nonreciprocal current can be observed simply by measuring second order harmonic voltage drop under a fixed a.c. current. With such a simple method, we can observe the nontrivial second order response which reflects the crystal symmetry or the Hall response of the nonlinear current shown in Fig. Microscopic derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau theory Following Ref. We consider the Rashba system with in-plane magnetic field. The Hamiltonian is Eq. ( with ξ λ (k) = ξ (k) + λ |g (k)| and g (k) = α -ky k , kx k , and we assume α > 0 for simplicity. Therefore, where • λ represents the average over the Fermi surface with the band index λ, and is the density of states, and we have defined Therefore, where (35) Here, γ E is the Euler constant and E c is the energy cutoff which correspond to the Debye frequency. Moreover, (Ω λ (k, q)) where k Fλ = -λmα + (mα) 2 + 2mE F . Finally, we obtain If we define we have the compact form of the free energy, which is Eq. with