We report near and mid-infrared pump c-axis terahertz probe measurement on a superconducting single crystal La 1.905 Ba 0.095 CuO 4 with T c =32 K. The measurement reveals that the pump-induced change occurs predominantly at the Josephson plasma edge position below T c . Upon excited by the strong near-infrared pulses, the superconducting state is severely disturbed and incoherent quasiparticle excitations develop in frequency regime above the static plasma edge. However, within very short time delay (∼1.5 ps) we observe the reappearance of a very sharp Josephson plasma edge at frequency lower than the static Josephson plasma edge and the emergence of a new light-induced Josephson mode at higher energy. The results imply that the light can induce new Josephson couplings with different coupling strengths. Similar but weaker effect is observed for the mid-infrared pump. No pump induced effect is detected above T c . Recent development of ultrashort laser pulses has been proven as a powerful tool for light control of different orders in complex electronic materials. Paradigmatic examples include induction of lattice distortions in manganites Here we report near and mid-infrared pump THz probe measurement on a superconducting single crystal La 1.905 Ba 0.095 CuO 4 with T c =32 K. The sample locates at the composition where bulk superconducting transition temperature (T c ), charge stripe order temperature (T co ), spin stripe order temperature T so , and structural phase transition temperature from low-temperature orthorhombic (LTO) P4 2 /ncm to low-temperature less orthorhombic (LTLO) Pccn are all close to each other in the phase diagram Single crystals of La 1.905 Ba 0.095 CuO 4 were grown using the traveling-solvent floating-zone method Figure We now show the time resolved terahertz measurement with NIR pump at 1.28 μm (∼ 1 eV). Figure The complex reflection coefficient of the photo-excited sample, r′ (ω, τ), can be determined from the normalized pump-induced changes to the electric field ∆ Ẽ(ω, τ)/ Ẽ(ω) using the relation ∆ Ẽ(ω, τ)/ Ẽ(ω)=[r ′ (ω, τ)-r(ω)]/r(ω), where Ẽ(ω) and ∆ Ẽ(ω, τ) are obtained from the Fourier transformation of measured E(t) and ∆E(t, τ), the static reflection coef- ficient r(ω) is evaluated from the equilibrium optical reflective index obtained from Kramers-Kronig transformation of optical reflectance measured by FTIR. From r′ (ω, τ), we can calculate all the optical constants. Figure It deserves to emphasize that there exists a significant difference in penetration depths between NIR pump (at 1.28 μm) and the THz probe pulses (below 2.5 THz). To derive the true pump-induced THz spectral change, the penetration depth mismatch should be taken into account. The data shown above are the raw experimental measurement results of static and pump-induced THz spectra together with some calculated quantities at a specific time delay without considering such mismatch. In the following, we present calculated optical constants from a multilayer model by assuming the pumped volume as a stack of thin layers, in which the refractive index, n, evolves as a function along the direction of propagation. The incident angle of 30 0 is also taken into account in the calculations. Detailed procedure is described in the supplementary file Figure Formation of two extremely strong and sharp light-induced longitudinal plasmon modes as presented here was not seen before. Presence of two longitudinal Josephson plasmon modes would lead to the formation of a transverse Josephson plasmon between the two longitudinal modes, which can be regarded as an out-of-phase oscillation of the two individual components We performed similar measurement with MIR excitations at 15 μm. respectively. The shapes are almost the same as that of 1.28 μm excitations though the signal level is smaller due to weak pump fluence. Figure We also performed the pump induced THz measurement at different temperatures for both 1.28 μm and 15 μm excitations. The signal becomes weaker and gradually disappears with increasing temperature (see supplementary file We now discuss the implications of measurement results. An important pump-induced effect is the development of strong and relatively broad feature in σ 1 (ω) at the energy scale above the static plasma edge. It reflects quasiparticle excitations. This feature is prominent with NIR pump at τ=0 ps but its intensity decays with time delays. Because it is not Drude like, we assign it to the incoherent excitations. It implies that the excited quasiparticles are still confined in the ab-plane and the c-axis coherence can not be established due to the insulating block layers. The binding energy has the energy scale of Josephson coupling strength. Nevertheless, at longer time delay, the reduced spectral weight should become superconducting condensate centered at zero frequency. The observation of two longitudinal Josephson plasma modes and a transverse plasmon is the most prominent observation in this work. It suggests the development of two inequivalent Josephson couplings along the c-axis. Its origin is not clear at present. It is known that the application of a moderate external magnetic field within CuO 2 plane can have a remarkable effect on the c-axis Josephson plasma mode in underdoped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ Another possibility is related to the coherent atom oscillations caused by the ultrafast pumping. For example, if the intense pump pulse can drive the out-of-plane apical oxygens to vibrate along the c-axis, it can lengthen and shorten copper-apical oxygen bonds alternately among copper oxide planes. Therefore, two different Josephson coupling strengths can develop. This would naturally explains the formation of two longitudinal Josephson plasmons and a transverse mode. Nevertheless, it is not clear whether or not such coherent apical oxygen oscillations could form in the compound, and no relevant information is reported yet in literature. Under such circumstances, the intense pumping at mid-infrared 15 μm is expected to be more efficient than at 1.28 μm, since its energy is closer to oxygen vibration energy. However, an even weaker effect is indicated by the 15 μm excitations. One may also think that the compound locates close to the charge stripe order phase in the phase diagram, the dy-namical stripe fluctuation may exist in the sample. Since the charge stripes, whose directions change by 90 o in the neighboring copper oxide planes, can lead to spatial modulation of the Josephson coupling strength between the superconducting charge stripes To summarize, we performed near and mid-infrared pump c-axis THz probe measurement on a superconducting single crystal La 1.905 Ba 0.095 CuO 4 with T c =32 K. The measurement reveals that the pump-induced change occurs mainly at the Josephson plasma edge position below T c . The superconducting state is severely disturbed by the strong near-infrared excitations and incoherent quasiparticle excitations develop in frequency regime above the static plasma edge. Most prominently, we observe the reappearance of a very sharp Josephson plasma edge at frequency lower than the static Josephson plasma edge and a new light-induced Josephson mode at higher energy after short time delay. The results imply that light can induce new Josephson couplings with different coupling strengths. Similar but weak effect is observed for the mid-infrared pump. All time-domain terahertz (THz) spectroscopy measurements presented in this paper were performed on a near-to mid-infrared (MIR) pump -THz probe spectroscopy system in reflection geometry. In this spectroscopy system, a two-output optical parametric amplifier sharing with the same white light continuum is used for pump pulse generation. The two outputs both containing signal and idler beams ranging from 1.2 to 1.6 μm and 1.6 to 2.6 μm at 35 fs duration and 1 kHz repetition rate, respectively, can be used directly as the near-infrared (NIR) pump. To obtain the MIR pump, two signal beams which have been tuned to perpendicular polarizations are used for difference frequency generation collinearly on a 1-mm-thick z-cut GaSe crystal. MIR pulses with tunable polarization ranging from 3 to 16 μm can be generated. The THz probe pulses are generated from pulses of 800 nm light whose polarization can be tuned by a λ/2-plate using a 1-mm-thick (110) ZnTe crystal without focalization. The THz beam was focused on the sample by a 30 • off-axis parabolic mirror with a spot size of 0.63 mm and detected via electro-optic sampling using 1mm-thick ZnTe. Detailed experimental setup and measurement technique were presented elsewhere Broadband Infrared spectra in the equilibrium state were measured with Bruker 113/v and 80v Fourier transform infrared spectrometers (FTIR) at different temperatures and the equilibrium optical constants can be calculated by Kramers-Kroenig transformation from the spectra. As we mentioned in the main text, there exists a significant difference in penetration depths between the NIR pump at 1.28 μm (or mid-infrared at 15μm) and the THz probe pulses (below 2.5 THz) due to the fact that the pump pulses have much higher energy than the probe pulses. The penetration depths mismatch must be taken into account in deriving the actual pump-induced optical constants. This can be achieved by a multilayer model or single layer model. The calculated optical constants presented in the main text of this work are obtained by the multilayer model. For a thin homogeneous layer with a thickness of z, the material can be specified by a characteristic matrix M(z) according to the Maxwell's equations and appropriate boundary conditions. When an electromagnetic wave, whose wavelength is λ 0 in vacuum, is incident on a non-magnetic layer, the characteristic matrix M(z) can be written as In the multilayer model, it is assumed that many homogeneous thin layers with evolving ñ stack together along the direction of propagation, which is denoted as z direction. The characteristic matrix of the total probe-interrogating region can be written as a product of the matrices for each layer, Detailed formulas can be found in In the multilayer model, it is assumed that ñ(z) = ñ0 + ∆ñ • e -z/l p , where the latter term is the pump-induced change of refractive index which follows the same decay law as the light intensity. It exponentially decays to ∆ñ/e when z goes to the penetration depth of pump pulses l p . Hence the characteristic matrix of this total probed region can be written as where L is the penetration depth of THz probe pulses whose wavelength is λ 0 in vacuum. We denote the vacuum as medium 1, the pumped region of the material as medium 2, and the unpumped region as medium 3. r13 is the equilibrium complex reflection coefficient which can be acquired by FRIT measurements and the Kramers-Kroenig transformation, and r12 is the pumpinduced transient complex reflection coefficient considering the penetration depth mismatch which is waiting for the following calculation. The reflection coefficient acquired by time-domain THz spectroscopy measurements r can be expressed by the elements of the M(z n ), m i j , as below where p 1 = cosθ 0 and p 3 = 1-r 13 1+r 13 cosθ 0 . Hence, ∆ñ can be solved as an unknown of a quadratic equation shown below There may exist two roots for the quadratic equation according to the quadratic formula. The way to pick a reasonable solution is to maintain the real part of ñ′ = ñ0 + ∆ñ positive, for the calculated results should keep in line with the definition of physical quantities. The pump-induced transient optical properties shown in Fig. We can also derive a single layer model from the above characteristic matrix M(z) by assuming that the total reflection coefficient is a combined contribution from the photoexcited top layer with a constant complex refractive index and the non-excited bottom bulk. The reflection coefficient can The navy dash lines were denoted as the static Josephson plasma edge dip positions at different temperatures characterized by THz time-domain spectroscopy, which had a redshift as the temperature warming up. A pronounced peak slightly below the redshift edge position can be seen in the frequency domain, which was similar with the case at 6K. Similar experiment results were found in a temperature dependence measurements with the 1.28μm excitation cases. No pump-induced THz signals can be seen above T c even when the fluence is over 3mJ/cm 2 . The absence of pump-induced signal may be related to the peculiar overlap of the bulk superconducting transition temperature T c , charge stripe order