We used polarization-resolved Raman scattering to study the magneto-elastic coupling in the parent compounds of several families of Fe-based superconductors (BaFe2As2, EuFe2As2, NaFeAs, LiFeAs, FeSe and LaFeAsO). We observe an emergent Ag-symmetry As phonon mode in the XY scattering geometry whose intensity is significantly enhanced below the magneto-structural transition only for compounds showing magnetic ordering. We conclude that the small lattice anisotropy is insufficient to induce the in-plane electronic polarizability anisotropy necessary for the observed phonon intensity enhancement, and interpret this enhancement below the Néel temperature in terms of the anisotropy of the magnetic moment and magneto-elastic coupling. We evidence a Fano lineshape in the XY scattering geometry resulting from a strong coupling between the Ag(As) phonon mode and the B2g symmetry-like electronic continuum. Strong electron-phonon coupling may be relevant to superconductivity. The lattice, orbital and magnetic degrees of freedom are strongly coupled in the Fe-based superconductors. This is best evidenced by the observation, in most parent compounds, of a magnetic transition from paramagnetic to collinear antiferromagnetic (AFM), occurring at a temperature T N slightly lower than the temperature T S at which a structural transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic phase occurs upon cooling. The interplay between these degrees of freedom is complex and led to a chicken-egg problem for which there is still no consensual view The As height and the related Fe-As-Fe angle are widely believed to play crucial roles in shaping the magnetic and electronic properties of the Fe-based superconductors Raman scattering can directly probe the As phonon behavior upon cooling across the magneto-structural transitions. As a signature of the magneto-elastic coupling, a finite intensity of the As phonon in nearly forbidden scattering geometries below the magneto-structural transition has been reported in CaFe 2 As 2 In this Letter, we use polarized Raman scattering to study the temperature dependence of the magneto-elastic coupling for the fully symmetric phonon associated with the c-axis motion of the As atom for typical "122", "111", "1111" and "11" systems of Fe-based superconductors. For all compounds showing magnetic ordering, we observe strong intensity for the fully-symmetric As mode appearing below T N in the nearly forbidden XY scattering channel as a result of significantly enhanced anisotropy of the in-plane electronic polarizabil-TABLE I. Summary of TS, TN (in Kelvin), lattice orthorhombicity (δ = (a -b)/(a + b)), intensity ratio of Ag phonon in XY and XX geometries, and ordered magnetic moment/Fe M (in μB) for compounds studied in this manuscript. TS/TN δ (%) IXY /IXX M EuFe2As2 Single crystals of materials listed in Table The phononic Raman scattering intensity is propor- where êi and ês are the polarization unit vectors of the incoming and scattering light, respectively, and R is the Raman tensor Before investigating the behavior of the A 1g /A g symmetry As phonon across the magneto-structural transi- tions, we first examine the A 1g and A g Raman tensors: g (orthorhombic phase) has been rotated by 45 • to keep the same XY Z axis notation as in the tetragonal phase. ā and b are the diagonal elements of the A D 2h g Raman tensor in the natural coordinate system of the orthorhombic phase (before the 45 • rotation). Accordingly, the A 1g -symmetry mode is forbidden in the XY scattering geometry in the tetragonal phase. This is the case for LiFeAs, which shows no structural nor magnetic transition. As shown in Fig. If anisotropy develops in the orthorhombic phase, the A g anion mode may acquire a finite intensity |(ā -b )/2| 2 in the XY scattering geometry related to the anisotropy of the in-plane polarizability associated to this A g anion mode because ā and b are the polarizability derivatives along the two Fe-Fe orthogonal directions (X and Y ) in the orthorhombic phase. Since the lattice orthorhombicity δ is small (Table In contrast, BaFe 2 As 2 with magnetic ordering clearly shows the 181 cm -1 A g (As) mode To quantify the intensity of the A g (As) phonon in the XY scattering geometry below T N in different families of Fe-based superconductors, we study the ratio between the A g (As) peak intensity in the XY and XX scattering geometries I XY /I XX . This ratio is proportional to which is a direct measure of the in-plane polarizability anisotropy of the A g (As) mode. Based on Table In Fig. Above we have established that the intensity enhancement of the A g (As) phonon mode in the XY scattering geometry depends on the presence of ordered magnetic moment. We now address the coupling between the A g (As) phonon and the B 2g -like electronic continuum below T N . In Figs. A g irreducible representation. For XY and X X geometry, where the B 2g -like continuum is represent, the bare A g (As) phonon is coupled to the B 2g -like electronic continuum, giving rise to an asymmetric Fano line-shape. In addition, we argue that the density-of-states of the B 2g -like continuum is temperature-dependent. In Fig. To quantify the electron-phonon interaction, we constructed a Fano model (Eq. 3 in Ref. Finally, we discuss the implications of the electronphonon coupling to superconductivity. Early calculations show that when magnetic moments are included In conclusion, we revealed a significant intensity enhancement of the emergent A g (As) phonon mode in the XY scattering geometry below T N only for parent compounds of Fe-based superconductors showing magnetic order. We argue that the in-plane electronic polarizability anisotropy necessary for the A g (As) phonon intensity enhancement originates from the anisotropy of the magnetic interactions in the Fe-As plane that are modulated by the c-axis motion of the As atoms. In particular, we demonstrate a magneto-elastic coupling between the A g (As) phonon and the B 2g -like electronic continuum that is essential to A g (As) phonon intensity enhancement. The asymmetric line-shape of A g (As) phonon is well explained by a Fano model with a magneto-elastic coupling constant proportional to the ordered magnetic moment. Our results identify strong electron-phonon coupling in the magnetic phase of Fe-based superconductors, which could enhance the paring temperature. FIG. 2. Comparison of Raman spectra (shifted for clarity) for the XX and XY scattering geometries for different parent compounds: (a) LiFeAs, (b) FeSe, (c) BaFe2As2, (d) LaFeAsO, (e) and (f) NaFeAs. When finite, the TN and TS values are indicated on the top of the corresponding panel. (g) Ag(As) phonon intensity ratio in the XY and XX geometries (IXY /IXX ) as a function of the squared ordered magnetic moment/Fe [55, 57]. The black line is a linear fit. observation is made for NaFeAs [Figs. 2(e) and 2(f)],