Giant vortices with higher phase-winding than 2π are usually energetically unfavorable, but geometric symmetry constraints on a superconductor in a magnetic field are known to stabilize such objects. Here, we show via microscopic calculations that giant vortices can appear in intrinsically non-superconducting materials, even without any applied magnetic field. The enabling mechanism is the proximity effect to a host superconductor where a current flows, and we also demonstrate that antivortices can appear in this setup. Our results open the possibility to study electrically controllable topological defects in unusual environments, which do not have to be exposed to magnetic fields or intrinsically superconducting, but instead display other types of order. Introduction. It is well-known that applying a magnetic field to a type-II superconductor can lead to the formation of Abrikosov vortices It was recently pointed out in Ref. Geometric effect and winding-number. Since a circulating supercurrent requires a finite phase-gradient ∇φ, and the analyticity of the superconducting wave function implies integral winding numbers n = ∆φ/2π around any point, the system is topologically coerced into nucleating vortices in the normal metal region of Fig. neglected. Note that in contrast to the setup proposed in Ref. When the current in the superconducting wire makes a total winding number N > 1, there are multiple ways to satisfy the boundary conditions. Among other possibilities, we can get (i) N vortices with a winding 1 each, (ii) N + M vortices with a winding +1 and M antivortices with winding -1, or (iii) just one giant vortex with a winding N. The kinetic energy of an n-winding vortex scales with n 2 , so the most energetically favorable is configuration (i). Hence, giant vortices and antivortices are seldom seen. However, since the superconducting order parameter respects the symmetries of the underlying geometry, vortices only nucleate along the symmetry axes of the system. For highly symmetric geometries, these additional constraints may force the appearance of giant vortices or antivortices. The resulting interplay between topological defects, geometric symmetries, and energy minimization was previously studied in Refs. metals without magnetic fields. This generalization is particularly important as it opens the possibility to study novel vortex physics in materials featuring completely different order than superconductors, e.g. ferromagnets or topological insulators. 2D diffusive metal with phase-winding. As shown in Fig. where the normal part g and anomalous part f are complex scalar functions, subject to the normalization constraint ĝ2 = 1. Here, σ 0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix, and σ 2 is the second Pauli matrix. We assume that all length scales in the problem are large compared to the Fermi wavelength and mean free path, i.e. we take the quasiclassical diffusive limit. The propagators ĝ are then governed by the Usadel equation where D is the diffusion constant, the quasiparticle energy, and τ3 = diag(+σ 0 , -σ 0 ). Furthermore, we assume that the normal region is connected to the superconducting wire by a low-transparency interface. We may then use the Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary condition ζ e ⊥ • ∇ ĝn = [ ĝn , ĝs ] /ξ In practice, the differential equations above are Riccatiparametrized for stability Superconducting wire with a uniform current. As shown in the supplemental (Sec. II), the propagator ĝ in a current-biased bulk superconductor can be written where Θ( ) parametrizes the strength of the superconductivity, and φ is the superconducting phase. The phase varies linearly with the distance along the wire. Defining φ(0) ≡ 0, and parametrizing the variation using a winding rate u ≡ ξ |∇φ|, we therefore get φ( ) = u /ξ. The function Θ( ) is determined by: These equations have been written in a form where Θ, ∆, , ω c are all normalized to the zero-current gap ∆ 0 , while the temperature T is normalized to the critical temperature T c . Here, ω c refers to the Debye cutoff, and γ is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. The first of these equations is a fixpoint iteration equation. This is easily solved by guessing Θ( ) = 1 and |∆| = 1, and applying Newton's method to the equation for a discretized set of energies from the Debye cutoff = ω c to zero energy = 0. The second is a selfconsistency equation for the gap ∆, which is evaluated by numerical integration of the results for Θ( ). We then alternate between solving the fixpoint equation and selfconsistency equation until satisfactory convergence. The solutions to the equations above are visualized in Fig. When approaching the setup in Fig. Quantifying vortices. We can study the proximity-induced superconductivity in a normal metal via the pair-correlation where ∂Ω is the boundary of the normal metal. When we have a finite vorticity N, the currents inside the normal metal will form closed loops, leading to the appearance of vortices. More precisely, the total vorticity N will be equal to the sum of the winding numbers n of all the induced vortices. The vortices manifest as nodes in the pair correlation Ψ. Numerical results. In the upper row of Fig. For Φ I = 6π, shown in Fig. As the sum of the individual topological numbers should add up to N = +3, in accordance with Eq. ( The vortices also create a spatial modulation of the DOS: at the vortex cores, superconductivity vanishes, and the minigap disappears. This means that the vortices we predict can be directly inferred via local STM measurements. In Fig. The above can be understood by analyzing the pair correlation. In the supplemental (Sec. I), it is shown that for small distances r from the vortex center, Ψ ∼ (r/2ξ 0 ) n /n!, where ξ 0 is the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length. For r < 2ξ 0 (n!) 1/n ≈ 2[1 + (n -1)/e]ξ 0 , these correlations recover more slowly with increasing winding n, and hence the minigap is increasingly suppressed. The fact that the vortex size increases linearly with n also in the diffusive limit can be motivated from Fig. The vortex patterns of Fig. The above provides a simple prescription for predicting the vortex nucleation pattern. When a total vorticity N is introduced to the system, it splits into vortices with individual windings n i in a way that satisfies N = i n i . Among all patterns permitted by the symmetries of the geometry, the energetically favored is the one that minimizes E = i n 2 i . Note that n i can be either positive or negative, allowing for antivortex nucleation. In the geometry considered so far, off-center vortices can only appear in a square formation without breaking the symmetry of the system, as is seen in Fig. We have used microscopic calculations to show that one can induce giant vortices and antivortices in nonsuperconducting materials in the absence of magnetic fields. We also analyzed the vortex nucleation pattern using arguments of symmetry and energy minimization. Our results open the possibility to study novel topological defects in unusual environments, which do not have to be intrinsically superconducting or exposed to magnetic fields. Morten Amundsen, 1 Jabir Ali Ouassou, 1 and Jacob Linder In this supplemental, we derive two sets of equations that are applied in the main manuscript. In Section I, we find an exact solution to the linearized Ginzburg-Landau equation near a vortex with an arbitrary winding number n, and show that the kinetic energy is proportional to n 2 . This is used to explain the vortex configurations in the main manuscript. In Section II, we find a selfconsistent solution to the Usadel equation in a bulk superconductor with a uniform charge current. This is used as a boundary condition in the main manuscript. Let us consider a superconducting vortex with a winding number n. This means that as we move one counter-clockwise turn around the vortex core, the phase of the superconducting condensate changes by ∆φ = 2πn. We will here calculate the energy of such a vortex, which in the main manuscript is used to understand what nucleation patterns are energetically favored. To keep the calculations simple and intuitive, we approach the problem using the Ginzburg-Landau formalism. Furthermore, we will assume that the energy of a vortex is dominated by the region close to the vortex core, and that this region exhibits a cylindrical symmetry. Since the energy of a vortex (n > 0) and antivortex (n < 0) are exactly the same, we focus on n > 0. The starting point of the Ginzburg-Landau framework is the free energy density in a superconducting material, 1 where Ψ is the superconducting wavefunction, A is the magnetic potential, B = ∇ × A is the magnetic field, and we choose E ≡ 0 in the normal state. Minimizing the free energy of the system, one arrives at the Ginzburg-Landau equation, 1 αΨ We now introduce some approximations. Firstly, as in the main manuscript, we are interested in current-induced vortices in thinfilms, for which there is a negligible magnetic potential A ≈ 0 in the system. Secondly, we are interested in the behaviour near a vortex core, where the superconducting wavefunction is suppressed |Ψ| 1, so that we can linearize the equation. We then obtain an effective Helmholtz equation, where ξ 0 ≡ 2 /2m|α| is the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length. We can parametrize the wavefunction as Ψ ≡ ψe iφ , where the amplitude ψ and phase φ are real. Substituting this parametrization into the Helmholtz equation, we obtain This equation can be significantly simplified using the law of charge conservation. The charge current density in a system governed by the Ginzburg-Landau equation is in general: 1 If we again set A ≈ 0 and substitute in Ψ = ψe iφ , From this equation for the charge current, combined with the fact that charge current is conserved ∇ • J = 0, we conclude: At any point with a finite wavefunction ψ 0, this means that two of the terms on the left-hand side of Eq. ( We now focus on the specific case of a vortex with winding n, meaning that the total phase-difference around the core is ∆φ = 2πn. At a distance r from the core, this phase-difference occurs over a length 2πr, yielding an average phase-gradient |∇φ| = ∆φ/2πr = n/r. Assuming cylindrical symmetry, we expect the amplitude ψ to only depend on the radius r from the vortex core, so that ∇ 2 ψ → r -1 ∂ r (r∂ r ψ). Together, these observations let us reduce Eq. ( This is the defining equation for the modified or hyperbolic Bessel functions I n (r/ξ 0 ) and K n (r/ξ 0 ). However, whereas the first kind I n (r/ξ 0 ) always converges to a finite value as r → 0, the second kind diverges there, and is therefore an unphysical solution. The radial profile of a vortex is therefore: In the previous subsection, we found exact solutions of the linearized Ginzburg-Landau equation in the vicinity of a vortex. These are however not straight-forward to use for analytically comparing vortex energies. Physically, we expect the dominant contributions to the kinetic energy to come from the region close to the vortex. This means that we can do a Taylor expansion around the vortex core r = 0, We can now go back to the free energy, and use these solutions to determine the energy associated with each vortex. Let us consider the kinetic energy density E k . In the absence of magnetism, this is just the gradient term in Eq. ( We then switch to polar coordinates ∇ = ∂ r e r + r -1 ∂ θ e θ : Substituting in the asymptotic solutions Ψ ∼ r n e inθ : Thus, the kinetic energy of a giant vortex is proportional to n 2 . In the main manuscript, we considered a system consisting of a superconducting wire encircling a normal metal. Although the superconductor was assumed to be thick enough to act as a bulk material, the fact that it also carries a supercurrent means that the propagators are no longer given by the standard BCS solution. In order to use as realistic boundary conditions as possible for that setup, we here solve the Usadel equation analytically for a current-carrying superconductor. In a superconductor, the Usadel equation can be written 2-4 iD∇ where τ3 = diag(+1, +1, -1, -1), and the gap matrix is defined as ∆ = antidiag(+∆, -∆, +∆ * , -∆ * ). The superconducting gap can in turn be parametrized as ∆ = |∆|e iφ where φ ∈ . The matrices on the left-hand side of the commutator are then: The propagator ĝ can be written using the θ-parametrization: 4,5 ĝ = + cosh θ σ 0 e +i χ sinh θ iσ 2 e -i χ sinh θ iσ 2 -cosh θ σ 0 . The parameters θ and χ satisfy the particle-hole symmetries θ * (+ ) = -θ(-) and χ * (+ ) = χ(-). 5 For brevity, we also use the abbreviations s ≡ sinh θ and c ≡ cosh θ. Finally, the self-consistency equation for the gap is: 8 Comparing this to the parametrization of the gap ∆ = |∆|e iφ , we immediately note that the phases φ = χ must be equal. In the absence of charge currents, we must have a homogeneous solution ∇ ĝ = 0. Thus, the Usadel equation has to reduce to: Writing the terms in the commutator explicitly, we get: From this, we can extract the scalar equation s -|∆|c = 0, which yields the standard BCS solution θ = atanh(|∆|/ ). Before we attempt to solve the Usadel equation in a currentcarrying superconductor with ∂ z ĝ 0, let us try to constrain the allowed position-dependence of our parameters θ and φ. One such condition can be found from the density of states, For a bulk superconductor carrying a uniform current, we insist that the density of states is uniform as well, i.e. that ∂ z N = 0. Using the chain rule, we can rewrite this condition as follows: Thus, we may either have ∂ z θ = 0 or ∂ θ Re[cosh θ] = 0. Since θ is a direct function of energy, the latter is equivalent to the density of states being energy-independent, which we know is false for a superconductor. Thus, we conclude that ∂ z θ = 0. Now that we know ∂ z θ = 0, differentiating ĝ is quite easy: Multiplying by ĝ from the left, we then obtain: Another constraint can then be found from the spectral current, Substituting in the expression for ĝ∂ z ĝ above, we find that j z / j 0 = is 2 ∂ z φ. But insisting that the divergence ∂ z j z = 0, and keeping in mind that ∂ z s = 0 because we determined that ∂ z θ = 0 above, this gives us the constraint ∂ 2 z φ = 0. One might however argue that perhaps the spectral current does not have to be conserved, since charge conservation only requires that the integral of the spectral current above is position-independent. However, for a uniform current-carrying superconductor, we can safely insist that the spectral current be constant as well. Now that we have the additional constraint ∂ 2 z φ = 0, it is straight-forward to differentiate ĝ∂ z ĝ: This defines the left-hand side of the Usadel equation. Combining the above with the rest of the Usadel equation, we find the following equation from the off-diagonal parts: We will now normalize everything with respect to the zerocurrent gap ∆ 0 , so that |∆| ≡ δ∆ 0 and ≡ E∆ 0 . Furthermore, we define a phase-winding rate u 2 ≡ D(∂ z φ) 2 /∆ 0 . Thus: Note that since the diffusion constant can be written D = ∆ 0 ξ 2 , we could also write u = ξ∂ z φ, which means that this parameter basically measures the phase-winding per coherence length. By substituting the hyperbolic identity c = √ 1 + s 2 into Eq. (30), the resulting 4th-order algebraic equation in s can easily be solved to provide the analytical solution. However, for practical reasons we here pursue a numerical approach. In order to solve Eq. (30), it is convenient to reparametrize the equation using the following mapping, where Θ(E) is an unknown function of energy: 6,7 c Note that this parametrization manifestly satisfies the identity c 2 -s 2 = 1. Substituting the above into Eq. ( In the absence of currents u = 0, we get a trivial solution Θ = δ. For a finite phase-winding rate u, it takes the form of a fixpoint iteration equation, and can be solved using Newton's method. In addition to the above equation for Θ, we need to determine the superconducting phase φ. However, in the previous subsection, we discovered that ∂ 2 z φ = 0. This means that the phase φ has to be a linear function of position. Furthermore, since the reference-point for the superconducting phase is arbitrary, we can define φ(0) ≡ 0. Thus, the phase φ can be expressed as: For small currents, one can safely assume that the gap is nearly the same as for zero current, meaning that δ ≈ 1. However, in general, this fixpoint equation has to be accompanied by a selfconsistency equation for the current-dependent gap factor δ. Let us now revisit the selfconsistency equation for the gap, using the Θ-parametrization from the previous subsection. We normalize the energy E ≡ /∆ 0 , gap δ ≡ |∆|/∆ 0 , Debye cutoff Ω c ≡ ω c /∆ 0 , and temperature τ ≡ T/T c . Furthermore, the cutoff is in general related to the BCS coupling strength by Ω c = cosh(1/N 0 λ), while the gap and critical temperature are related by the BCS ratio ∆ 0 /T c = π/e γ , where γ is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. 8 Combining all of these remarks, Eq. ( In general, the selfconsistent problem is solved in two steps. First, we guess that the solution is Θ(E) = 1 and δ = 1. For each energy in a discretized range from E = Ω c to E = 0, one solves Eq. (32) for Θ(E) using Newton's method. The solutions are substituted into Eq. (34), which is integrated to find a new estimate for δ. This procedure is repeated until convergence. Giant vortices are inherently unstable and will seek to split into single vortices unless hindered from doing so. For the systems under consideration, the giant vortices are maintained due to symmetry constraints. It is therefore interesting to investigate how, for instance, Fig. 