Additive manufacturing represents a revolution due to its unique capabilities for freeform fabrication of near net shapes with strong reduction of waste material and capital cost. These unfair advantages are especially relevant for expensive and energy-demanding manufacturing processes of advanced ceramics such as Yttria-stabilized Zirconia, the state-of-the-art electrolyte in Solid Oxide Fuel Cell applications. In this study, self-supported electrolytes of yttria-stabilized zirconia have been printed by using a stereolithography three-dimensional printer. Printed electrolytes and complete cells fabricated with cathode and anode layers of lanthanum strontium manganite-and nickel oxide-yttria-stabilized zirconia composites, respectively, were electrochemical characterized showing full functionality. In addition, more complex configurations of the electrolyte have been printed yielding an increase of the performance entirely based on geometrical aspects. Complementary, a numerical model has been developed and validated as predictive tool for designing more advanced configurations that will enable highly performing and fully customized devices in the next future. Advanced manufacturing processes for ceramic Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFCs) have been successfully developed for decades being currently a mature technology Accordingly, the use of 3D printing technologies for the fabrication of multi-material functional ceramics like SOFCs is highly desirable and advantageous. However, whilst 3D printing of polymeric and metallic objects is being used, even industrially, for already a decade Despite the excellent results for YSZ layers printed onto different substrates, to the best of the authors' knowledge, there are not references of 3D printed self-supported fully functional YSZ electrolytes for SOFC applications. In this sense, the ability of printing high aspect ratio YSZ parts combined with functional self-supported dense layers is considered crucial for the development of monolithic SOFC devices The fabrication of the ceramic 3YSZ pieces by SLA involved different steps, namely, digital design, printing, cleaning, debinding and sintering. Starting from commercial 3YSZ pastes from 3DCeram, different objects were printed using a CERMAKER SLA printing machine. The paste involved in this process is the commercial 3DMIX-3YSZ composed by a ceramic powder, a UV curable monomer, a photoinitiator and a dispersant, which allows reaching good homogeneity of the powders and a low viscosity of the suspension which is further improved by adding diluents The printing process is based on the doctor blade method. The ceramic paste is spread on the printing platform by using two blades calibrated at 50 μm and 150 μm, being able to scrap thin and uniform layers up to 25 microns. This doctor blade step is followed by photocuring of the UV monomers (acrylate type) using a power modulated UV laser with a wavelength of 355 nm. This photocuring step allows defining a certain pattern with lateral and vertical resolutions of ca. 30 μm and 50 μm, respectively. After this, the printing platform moves down 25 μm to fully cover the printing area with a new layer of uncured paste. The whole sequence is repeated as many times as needed. The average printing speed is 100 layers/h, which results in a thickness of ~2.5mm/h for this high-resolution example. After printing, the uncured paste was removed by using a wax-based cleaning process. Afterwards, clean pieces were thermally treated for more than 70 h in order to eliminate the organics without crack formation on the green parts and, finally, were sintered at 1450oC for 2 hours. Two different geometries based on flat and honeycomb-like self-supported membranes coupled to bulky rings were fabricated. The flat membrane had a thickness of 340 μm and an active area of 1.54 cm2 . The honeycomb cell (HC) consisted of 260 μm-thick hexagonal cells of ca. 1mm2 forming a network connected by 530 μm-thick beams of 220 μm in width. The sintered pieces of 3YSZ were painted with commercial NiO-YSZ and LSM-YSZ pastes as electrode materials. Symmetrical cells with the same electrode material in both sides as well as complete fuel cells with NiO-YSZ as an anode in one side and YSZ-LSM as a cathode material in the other side (NiO-YSZ/YSZ/YSZ-LSM) were fabricated. Different thermal treatments for improving the attachment of the electrode materials were evaluated to minimize polarization losses. Finally, the NiO-YSZ layers were treated in air at 1450oC for 2h while the YSZ-LSM layers at 1100oC for 2 h. Microstructural and morphological characterization of the sintered pieces of 3YSZ has been performed by employing X-ray Diffraction (XRD) in a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer in 2θ mode from 20 to 80o, using copper Kα1 radiation; optical microscopy in a SENSOFAR microscope; and Secondary Electron Microscopy (SEM) coupled to BackScattered Electrons (BSE) and Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) detectors in a Zeiss Auriga microscope. A current collector based on platinum mesh and nickel paste was employed in combination with the NiO-YSZ electrode while a platinum mesh and commercial La0.5Sr0.5CoO3 paste (Kceracell) was employed in combination with the YSZ-LSM electrode. In fuel cell mode, CeramabondTM sealant paste was applied to ensure gas tightness between the anode and cathode chambers. This step was less critical in this work since the ring support monolithically integrated in the membrane avoided any gas leakage close to the active electrodes. The electrochemical and fuel cell tests were carried out in a commercial ProboStat TM (NorECs AS) sample holder placed inside a high temperature tubular furnace. The cells were electrically characterized at temperatures from 350 to 900 oC by employing a multimeter (Keithley Model 2400) and a frequency response analyzer (Novocontrol Alpha-A). Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out in a range of frequencies from 5 MHz to 100 mHz and applying an AC signal of 50 mV of voltage amplitude under OCV conditions. In order to obtain a more complete electrochemical characterization of the cells EIS measurements were performed under a DC bias voltage of 0.7 V by employing a potentiostat/galvanostat (Parstat 2273 from PAR). Synthetic air was used as oxidant while pure humidified hydrogen was used as a fuel. Numerical models have been implemented using Comsol Multiphysics 5.2a to evaluate the ® performance of the fabricated Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. Regarding the numerical domain, a two-dimensional axisymmetric geometry with a concentric feeding channel system has been implemented for the flat SOFC configuration, as suggested by Santarelli et al. The elements of the simulated SOFC are made of different solid and gases, namely, i) an electrolyte of 3YSZ; ii) an anode of Ni-YSZ and a cathode of LSM/YSZ; iii) hydrogen humidified with a 3% of H2O in the anode chamber while a humidified synthetic air in the cathode chamber. The ionic conductivity of the 3YSZ was obtained from experimental measurements included in this work. The electronic and ionic conductivities of the electrodes were extracted from the literature The following mathematical and physical models were considered for simulating the behavior of the cells: i) ohm's law for the electronic and ionic charge balance; ii) Butler-Volmer equations for the charge transfer; iii) Maxwell-Stefan diffusion and convection equations for accounting the mass balance in both gas channels and porous electrodes; iv) Navier-Stokes equations to solve the flow distribution in the gas channels; and v) Brinkman equations to solve the flow in the porous gas diffusion electrodes. In order to simplify the model, the following assumptions were considered according to Santarelli and co. Monolithic 3YSZ pieces consisting of a self-standing membrane on top of a ring support were obtained after printing by stereolithography and subsequent cleaning, debinding and sintering steps (inset Figure In order to electrochemically characterize the 3YSZ membrane, symmetrical and complete fuel cells were fabricated based on nanocomposites of commercial NiO-YSZ and LSM-YSZ deposited on both sides as cathode and anode, respectively. Figure The performance of the printed 3YSZ electrolyte was electrochemically evaluated using optimized LSM/YSZ electrodes in symmetrical cell configuration. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were carried out at different temperatures ranging from 350 to 900oC in synthetic air. Figure After proving that the printed 3YSZ membrane presents the typical behavior of the same type of layers fabricated by traditional methods, the membrane was evaluated as electrolyte in full cells (Ni-YSZ/YSZ/YSZ-LSM) operating under typical conditions, namely, water saturated pure hydrogen and synthetic air in the anode and cathode sides, respectively. The ring support monolithically fabricated around the membrane keeps the sealing area far from the active part of the cell avoiding gas leakages associated to the assembly procedure. The gas tightness of the printed electrolyte is therefore confirmed through the Open Circuit Voltage measurement, which reached a value of OCV=1.14±0.05V at 800oC (Figure After showing the proper performance of a conventional geometry such as a flat membrane, a more complex configuration consisting of a honeycomb-like structure was generated by 3D printing and tested. This honeycomb 3D printed membrane presents an aspect ratio of 40, evaluated as the ratio between the diameter and the thickness weighted average. The inset of the Figure Similarly to the flat membrane, a honeycomb electrochemical cell was prepared by attaching two electrodes, namely, NiO-YSZ for the anode and LSM-YSZ for the cathode. EIS and fuel cell measurements were carried out for the honeycomb cell under equivalent operation conditions. Figure A numerical model based on the Finite Element Method was employed to determine the effect of the increased level of geometrical complexity in the enhancement of the final performance. After validation of the model by comparison of the experimental and simulated V-I curves for both the flat and the HC cells (Figure While the current density distribution of the flat electrolyte is naturally constant (not presented here), Figure Three-dimensional printing of high aspect ratio self-supported and joint-less membranes of 3YSZ has been proved in this work (for the honeycomb shaped membranes an aspect ratio of 40 has been achieved). The functionality of these membranes for working as electrolytes has been evaluated in terms of their ionic conductivity and gas-tightness (full density) as part of symmetrical electrochemical cells and complete fuel cells. Ionic conductivity values of 0.022 S/cm were obtained at 900oC in good agreement with previous works reported in the literature. Under fuel cell operation conditions, open circuit voltages of 1.14±0.05V at 800oC were measured, perfectly matching the theoretical ones, indicating the gastightness of the 3D printed membrane. Power peak densities of 100 mW/cm2 were obtained at 900 °C being compatible with the values expected for SOFCs based on 3YSZ electrolytes of the current thickness. Therefore, a proof of concept for 3D printed electrolyte-based Solid oxide Fuel Cells has been achieved. Additionally, better performing cells were printed taking advantage of the higher level of geometrical complexity allowed by the 3D printing technique. SOFC cells based on thinner honeycomb-like electrolytes were fabricated yielding an enhancement of the power density (PPD of 115mW/cm2 at 900°C) entirely due to geometrical aspects. A numerical model (Finite Element Method) able to take into consideration the geometry of the cells has also been validated. This model can be used as a predictive tool for designing optimum geometry configurations by anticipating their performance before printing them. This aprioristic design of complex systems such as SOFCs will revolutionize the field of energy by opening a new avenue for the customization of systems, the fabrication of joint-less stacks or the increase of the specific power, among other unfair advantages. In order to reach these ambitious goals, further development is required to increase the list of functional printable ceramic materials and the multi-material capabilities of the current 3D printing technologies. 