Designer heterostructures can now be assembled layer-by-layer with unmatched precision thanks to the recently developed deterministic placement methods to transfer twodimensional (2D) materials. This possibility constitutes the birth of a very active research field on the so-called van der Waals heterostructures. Moreover, these deterministic placement methods also open the door to fabricate complex devices, which would be otherwise very difficult to achieve by conventional bottom-up nanofabrication approaches, and to fabricate fully-encapsulated devices with exquisite electronic properties. The integration of 2D materials with existing technologies such as photonic and superconducting waveguides and fiber optics is another exciting possibility. Here, we review the state-of-the-art of the deterministic placement methods, describing and comparing the different alternative methods available in the literature and we illustrate their potential to fabricate van der Waals heterostructures, to integrate 2D materials into complex devices and to fabricate artificial bilayer structures where the layers present a user-defined rotational twisting angle. This is the authors' version, pre-peer reviewed, of the following article: R. Frisenda et al. "Recent progress in the assembly of nanodevices and van der Waals heterostructures by deterministic placement of 2D materials" Chemical Society Reviews (2017) Richard P. Feynman said in his seminal lecture 'There is plenty of room at the bottom': "... What could we do with layered structures with just the right layers? What would the properties of materials be if we could really arrange the atoms the way we want them? They would be very interesting to investigate theoretically. I can't see exactly what would happen, but I can hardly doubt that when we have some control of the arrangement of things on a small scale we will get an enormously greater range of possible properties that substances can have, and of different things that we can do...". One of the first important realizations in the field of van der Waals artificial structures was the fabrication of superlattices with arbitrary periodicity in a simple and effective way, making possible the exploration of the moiré patterns that emerge in twisted artificial bilayers (graphene on graphene or graphene on boron nitride). In fact, the deterministic transfer methods represent the easiest way to produce layered materials where incommensurate layers are stacked at will. A different context where the deterministic transfer methods have proven their efficacy is in the capping of 2D materials to improve their electronic properties. For example, graphene and MoS2 transistors displayed a large increase in their mobility when capped between two hexagonal boron nitride flakes. Moreover, the deterministic transfer of boron nitride flakes can also be used as a protection layer against external agents which might be crucial for applications using unstable 2D materials as it will be discussed later. The aim of this Tutorial Review is to provide a comprehensive description of the recently developed deterministic transfer methods of 2D materials providing a good starting point for researchers that are beginning to work on the field of 2D materials and van der Waals heterostructures. We first introduce the general experimental requirements for a deterministic placement setup, discussing a few real examples from the authors' laboratories. Following on from this, an in-depth description and a critical comparison between the different methods is proposed, allowing one to identify the optimal method for each application. Finally, we discuss some examples that illustrate the potential of the deterministic transfer methods in the fabrication of van der Waals heterostructures and in the fabrication of layer-by-layer assembled electronic and optoelectronic devices. In this section, we will present a systematic classification of the different deterministic transfer methods reported in the literature, allowing for a direct comparison between them. Despite the differences between these methods they all rely on very similar experimental tools: namely a long working distance optical inspection system in combination with one or two micropositioning systems. Figure The PMMA (polymethyl methacrylate) carrying layer transfer method was pioneered by Dean et al. to fabricate high mobility graphene devices on top of mechanically exfoliated hexagonal boron nitride flakes instead of the standard SiO2 substrates. Zomer et al. developed an alternative sacrificial layer based transfer method by employing a polymer with a low glass transition temperature (Elvacite®) instead of PMMA. The stack is then baked for 10 minutes at 120 °C in order to remove the MIBK solvent from the copolymer and then the 2D material of choice is exfoliated on top of the stack (1). The target substrate for the transfer is mounted on a sample holder that can be heated up and the temperature is set in the range between 75oC and 100°C. Using an optical microscope and a micromanipulator one can align the flake with the target substrate (2) and bring the flake in contact with the hot substrate. Once the polymer touches the hot substrate, it melts (3) and it is released from the adhesive tape layer by lifting the glass slide (4). After the transfer procedure, the polymer can be removed using acetone. Hunt et al. Schneider et al. developed a water-based method for transferring 2D materials onto surfaces of various shapes and compositions. The wedging transfer technique is schematically depicted in Figure As the lifting of the flake and its subsequent alignment and transfer is carried out in water, the wedging transfer method has severe limitations to fabricate freely-suspended 2D materials as they may collapse because of the capillary forces. Moreover, the fabricated samples may present trapped water blisters and/or wrinkles produced during the drying process (see Figure Unlike the previously described deterministic transfer methods that rely on the use of sacrificial polymer layers and/or wet chemistry to some extent (spin coating/dip coating of the polymer layer, dissolving/wedging, etc). Castellanos-Gomez et al. developed an This is the authors' version, pre-peer reviewed, of the following article: R. Frisenda et al. "Recent progress in the assembly of nanodevices and van der Waals heterostructures by deterministic placement of 2D materials" Chemical Society Reviews (2017) DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00556C Which has been published in final form at: http://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2017/cs/c7cs00556c 13 all-dry transfer method that relies on viscoelastic stamps. This method does not employ any wet chemistry step which was found very advantageous in terms of transfer speed and to fabricate devices with freely suspended 2D materials as there are no capillary forces involved in the process. We have based the description of the PDMS based deterministic transfer method on Ref. Waals interaction between different 2D materials is exploited to transfer flakes without contacting the 2D materials with any polymer throughout the whole process, reducing impurities trapped between the layers. We have based the description of the van der Waals pick-up transfer method on Ref. Although a quantitative comparison between the different transfer methods is difficult to make, in this section we will provide a qualitative comparison between the different methods described above in terms of some parameters that are relevant in the experiments: how clean are the as-fabricated samples, how easy is to implement the deterministic transfer setup, how long does it take to transfer a flake, etc. Regarding the cleanness, the Elvacite sacrificial layer and the wedging transfer methods yield samples that have been in direct contact with polymers that have to be dissolved through wet chemistry process. Also, the wedging transfer method is more difficult to implement than the other methods as it requires a pump to drain the water during the transfer but it has the advantage that it allows one to transfer flakes on top of curved and uneven surfaces where other transfer methods may fail. In the PMMA carrier layer method the flakes are in contact with the PMMA layer but they can be transferred without needing to dissolve the PMMA layer. In the PDMS dry transfer method the flakes are also in direct contact with the PDMS carrier layer. The van der Waals pick-up method provides the cleaner samples as the flake to be transferred is never in direct contact with any polymer nonetheless this method only allows for the transfer of heterostructures (such as flakes encapsulated between two boron nitride flakes) and it requires several steps making it very time consuming. In terms of easiness of implementation and speed the PDMS dry transfer method advantages the other deterministic transfer methods as it does The layer-by-layer assembly of van der Waals heterostructures is conceptually similar to molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and, therefore, many heterostructures and devices are drawn from analogies with structures previously made by MBE and studied by a large semiconductor community for three decades. There are, however, principle differences. Firstly, instead of III-V and II-VI semiconductors that are the dominant compounds used in MBE, one can fabricate van der Waals hterostructures employing over a hundred different layered crystals that do not require a particular lattice matching or other specific growth conditions. Secondly, 2D materials obtained by the cleavage of bulk layered crystals are a readily available source of materials with high quality electronic transport properties without going through the process of optimizing the growing conditions like in MBE. Thirdly, atomically-sharp interfaces are often very difficult to obtain through the use of MBE and other epitaxial-growth techniques as interdiffusion generally creates a transitional region between two epitaxially grown materials, which typically can extend over several layers. In contrast, the assembly of van der Waals heterostructures allows for an easy route to fabricate atomically sharp interfaces with single-atomic-layer precision due to strong covalent bonding within each layer. Fourthly, as can be seen later in this Tutorial Review, one can fabricate electrical contacts to several individual atomic planes within a complex multi-layered structure; this has been a challenging task for the case of adjoining layers grown by MBE. The incredible fact that structures based on h-BN, WS2, MoS2 and graphene have quality comparable to MBE analogues made in ultrahigh vacuum is mainly due to the good fortune of the "self-cleaning" mechanism. Even for stable crystals, adsorbates such as water, atmospheric gases and hydrocarbons cover every surface, unless it is prepared under special conditions. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) studies reveal that graphene is densely covered with hydrocarbons soon after isolation in air, the same applies to other crystals. Fortunately, it turns out that such contamination trapped in between layers is highly mobile and can segregate into isolated 'pockets' (also referred to as 'bubbles' or 'blisters' in the community) leaving large micron-sized clean areas of the heterostructure behind. This limits the homogeneous device size by tens of micrometres for the h-BN/graphene heterostructure and even less for other combinations. In order to confirm that the segregation process of the adsorbates in the buried interfaces is complete a cross-sectional study was performed by Haigh et al. Inert atmosphere isolation and the transfer of van der Waals materials have provided a unique platform from which to study 2D materials. This has meant a plethora of previously unexplored 2D materials which in the past degraded before their properties could be measured, are now accessible. Thus, devices produced from black phosphorous remain stable down to a single layer demonstrating reliable field effect transistor. Having discussed constituent layers we now will consider architecture of the devices and development of their complexity. The first van der Waals heterostructure devices were developed to improve the electronic properties and to protect a single "key material" by encapsulating a 2D material between h-BN layers (Figure A key advantage of van der Waals heterostructures is the additional functionality that arises due to the "third dimension" when there exists more than one active layer in a single stack. An illustrative example of this concept is the assembly of atomically thin p-n junctions, fabricated out of a stack of two different transition metal dichalcogenide A new (nano-device) control knob that has directly emerged from the deterministic placement methods is the twist angle between the atomic/crystalline lattices of the individual layers in a van der Waals stack. This new degree of freedom removes, at least in principle, the symmetry restrictions imposed by the thermodynamic stacking in natural crystals (vide infra thermal self-alignment). The superlattices that result from the control of the twist angle host exotic moiré physics that has only just began to be explored and the relevance of this discovery has defined a new field coined by some as 'twistronics'. Later, in an attempt to deterministically control the twist angle, Kim et al. developed the 'tear-and-stack' technique. In this section, we will describe how deterministic placement of 2D materials can be crucial for their integration into devices with complex architecture and for the fabrication of devices that require a layer-by-layer assembly. The deterministic placement of 2D materials on arbitrary surfaces with sub-micrometer levels of precision has probably triggered one of the deepest revolutions in the fabrication of nanodevices. These transfer techniques allow both for the integration of selected flakes with other pre-fabricated electronic or optoelectronic nano-devices, and more importantly they also enable the fabrication of complex vertical architectures with atomically-sharp interfaces. The strength of the proximity coupling in these hybrid devices enhances the performance and takes maximum advantage of the quantum properties of 2D materials for technological applications. An exciting example of 2D materials-based hybrid nanodevices arises from the deterministic transfer of graphene on (micro)optical elements such as (nanometer-scale) waveguides for on-chip optical communications. This type of integration gave rise to high-performance broadband photodetecting modulators based on the evanescent coupling between a graphene flake and a silicon waveguide Deterministic transfer methods also allow one to place 2D materials onto nonconventional substrates where employing conventional nanofabrication techniques would be very challenging. Figure Here we will discuss about the challenges that remain to be solved. We will focus on two main issues: the presence of interlayer adsorbates and the environmental instability of certain 2D materials. The ongoing efforts to tackle these problems will be introduced as well. The presence of interlayer contaminants is an important issue in the fabrication of van der Waals heterostructures since it can lower the performances of the 2D materials stack and limit realistic homogeneous device size. As it was mentioned previously, trapped contamination segregates into isolated bubbles typically tens to hundreds of nanometres in size, driven by equilibrium between the cost of elastic energy to form such bubbles and the gain in the surface van der Waals energy from the formation of clean interface regions. Figure While such contamination presents a global problem for the entire field there are strategies that help to maximize clean areas of heterostructures. These involve precise control over the transfer mechanics at the moment when two flakes first engage in contact. This process of initial lamination should be made very slowly so that when the contact line is progressing across the device gradually more contamination can escape the closing interface and avoid being trapped. This can be further improved by heating the sample to enhance the diffusion of contaminants. 29 The control of the environmental conditions during the transfer can be relevant not only to avoid the presence of interlayer contaminants, as discussed above, but to work with materials that tend to degrade upon exposure to air. Exfoliated flakes of black phosphorus, for example, are highly hygroscopic and tend to uptake moisture from air (see Figure Despite the recent progress on 2D materials beyond graphene with high electronic quality reported to date (MoS2, WSe2, BP and InSe), they show their peak performance for devices with This is the authors' version, pre-peer reviewed, of the following article: R. Frisenda et al. "Recent progress in the assembly of nanodevices and van der Waals heterostructures by deterministic placement of 2D materials" Chemical Society Reviews (2017) DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00556C Which has been published in final form at: http://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2017/cs/c7cs00556c 34 thicknesses ranging between 5 and 10 layers. When thinner devices, such as single and bilayer FETs are fabricated their electronic properties such as carrier mobility, residual doping and homogeneity drastically deteriorate by at least two orders of magnitude. One possible reason for this may be residual water and oxygen in the environmental transfer chamber causing surface damage more pronounced in thinner crystals (state of the art glovebox chambers only reach 10 -4 mbar partial oxygen and water pressure). Another reason for poorer performance of thin crystals can be significantly less efficient "selfcleaning" process as compared to few-layer films of the same material. Such incomplete segregation of the adsorbates is likely causing scattering and rough interface morphology with complex local strain. Unfortunately using argon or nitrogen environments, even with the best quality commercially available gas purification systems, does not offer a remedy to the "bubble" problem and only partially reduces the amount of hydrocarbon contamination. While current environmental fabrication setups make many new materials accessible for 2D device fabrication, it is also clear that much further work is needed to develop new fabrication strategies to achieve cleaner van der Waals interfaces. In recent years we have witnessed the development of ingenious deterministic transfer techniques that bring one step closer Feynman's visions of a future where it is possible to control the layered structure of materials, arranging the atoms in the way we want them. These deterministic placement methods have made it possible to fabricate artificial materials, not existing in nature, that showed new physical phenomena and to assemble complex devices that would be otherwise almost impossible to fabricate by conventional bottom-up nanofabrication approaches. We have shown how deterministic placement . Qualitative comparison in terms of cleanness, easiness and speed between the different deterministic placement methods described in the text. Comments about their main drawbacks are also included in the table.