In this paper we explore the effects of 3.5 MeV proton irradiation on Fe(Se,Te) thin films grown on CaF2. In particular, we carry out a systematic experimental investigation with different irradiation fluences up to 7.30•10 16 cm -2 and different proton implantation depths, in order to clarify whether and to what extent the critical current is enhanced or suppressed, what are the effects of irradiation on the critical temperature, the resistivity and the critical magnetic fields, and finally what is the role played by the substrate in this context. We find that the effect of irradiation on superconducting properties is generally small as compared to the case of other iron-based superconductors. Such effect is more evident on the critical current density Jc, while it is minor on the transition temperature Tc, on the normal state resistivity  and on the upper critical field Hc2 up to the highest fluences explored in this work. In addition, our analysis shows that when protons implant in the substrate far from the superconducting film, the critical current can be enhanced up to 50% of the pristine value at 7 T and 12 K, while there is no appreciable effect on critical temperature and critical fields together with a slight decrease in resistivity. On the contrary, when the implantation layer is closer to the film-substrate interface, both critical current and temperature show a decrease accompanied by an enhancement of the resistivity and the lattice strain. This result evidences that possible modifications induced by irradiation in the substrate may affect the superconducting properties of the film via lattice strain. The robustness of the Fe(Se,Te) system to irradiation induced damage makes it a promising compound for the fabrication of magnets in high-energy accelerators. Effects of irradiation on iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) have been investigated since earlier stages after their discovery with several goals, namely gaining information on fundamental properties such as gap symmetry and suppression of the critical temperature Tc by impurity scattering Given the unconventional pairing mechanism and the symmetry of the order parameter in FeSCs, it was initially expected that irradiation damage would suppress the superconducting properties significantly. On the contrary, only mild Tc suppression was observed and visible enhancement of the critical current density Jc were observed in the so-called 122 and 1111 FeSCs families (see ref. [3] for a review). In particular, in the 1111 family, a Jc values up to 2•10 7 A/cm 2 were observed after heavy-ion irradiation In the 11 family, different results have been reported depending on the phase, the type of particle and their energy. For example, thin films grown on LaAlO3 by our group and irradiated with neutrons, duplicated their critical current at 15 K with no change in Tc On the other hand, a more extended investigation carried out on heavy-ion irradiated FeSe0.4Te0.6 single crystals yielded to not systematic and not reproducible results on superconducting properties Clearly, in advance of conjecturing on the mechanisms for Tc and Jc enhancements, understanding irradiation effects in 11 FeSCs requires a larger systematic experimental investigation carried out with different fluences and energies, as well as a comprehensive comparison of samples available in literature, correlating the experimental results with the expected disorder created in the sample by irradiation. In this paper we aim to address several questions concerning the effects of 3.5 MeV proton irradiation of FeSe0.5Te0.5 films, namely whether and to what extent the critical current can be enhanced, what is the effect on the strain, on the critical temperature and on the critical magnetic fields, and finally what is the role played by the substrate. The latter is a crucial and complex issue, unavoidable in the case of thin films: besides defects created in the film, impinging protons produce modifications of the substrate that in turn have influence on the properties of the film. To address this issue, we compare results obtained in different experimental conditions, i.e. same defect density created by protons in the film and different proton-implantation depths into the substrate, obtained by lowering the proton energy with the interposition of a thin Aluminium foil between the proton beam and the sample. The thin films used for this irradiation experiment were deposited on oriented 001 CaF2 single crystals in an ultra-high vacuum PLD system equipped with a Nd:YAG laser at 1024 nm using a FeSe0.5Te0.5 target prepared by direct synthesised with a two-step method Five films 100 nm thick were prepared for irradiation. Three of them, indicated in the following as samples A, B and C, were patterned and designated for transport measurements while samples D and E were analysed with X-ray diffraction. Before irradiation, all the films were analysed with X-ray diffraction using a four-circle diffractometer. This analysis confirms the phase purity of all films and the optimum epitaxial growth of all the films. Φ scans reveal that films grow rotated by 45° with respect to the a axis due to the good matching with the half of the diagonal of CaF2 crystalline cell, as already reported By using the 00l diffraction patterns, the values of the c cell parameter for the different samples were evaluated by means of Rietveld refinement with the program Fullprof. At this scope, the instrumental resolution function and the zero-shift parameters were refined using the CaF2 substrate as reference; diffraction lines were modelled by a Thompson-Cox-Hastings pseudo-Voigt convoluted with axial divergence asymmetry function. The so obtained values were fixed and, imposing a full c-axis texturing, the parameters pertaining to the FeSe0.5Te0.5 thin films were refined, i.e. the lattice parameter c and the Lorentzian strain parameter. Lattice micro-strain along (00l) was evaluated by the refined strain parameters and analysing the broadening of diffraction lines by means of the Williamson-Hall plot method In order to allow the measurement of critical current, the films designated for transport measurements were patterned through standard optical photolithography and the etching performed by water-cooled Argon ion milling (Argon ions energy 500 eV). After the milling process, the photoresist was removed by mild sonication in acetone for few tens of seconds and dried in Nitrogen air blow. Nine Hall bar shaped micro bridges of 20x50 μm 2 size were realized (see Figure In order to investigate the influence of the proton's implantation depth on the structural and electrical properties of the films, some of the samples were directly irradiated with 3.5 MeV protons while others were irradiated with protons decelerated through the interposition of an 80-m thick Aluminium foil. Details of the irradiation experiment (e.g. the choice of the Al-foil thickness, the adopted fluences) were guided by previous accurate simulations of the damage induced both in the film and in the substrate, obtained by the Monte Carlo codes SRIM Table For all samples, there is a pristine reference: for patterned samples there is a pristine Hall bar which is a not irradiated bar while samples used for X-ray diffraction analysis were also measured before irradiation. It is important to have pristine data as a reference of the properties of the films before irradiation. Indeed, for PLD deposited films, the sample-to-sample variability of transport properties may be comparable to the effects of irradiation that we are investigating. In the forthcoming figures, we adopt the following legend: symbol shapes identify the sample, while grayscale is a measure of the irradiation dose, from empty symbols for the unirradiated Hall bars to increasingly dark colour for increasing dose. Samples A, B and E were directly irradiated with 3.5 MeV protons, while samples C and D were irradiated with protons decelerated through the interposition of a 80 m thick aluminium foil. The inter-defect distance was evaluated by considering just stable Frenkel pairs defects and neglecting possible clustering and annealing effects. Samples D and E used for X-ray diffraction analysis also after irradiation do not have Hall bar patterns. The microstructural parameters describing the lattice strain can be calculated by Rietveld refinement, obtaining the Williamson-Hall plots drawn in Figure In Figure In Figure 0.8 From resistivity measurements in applied field we evaluated the irreversibility field Hirr and upper critical field Hc2 using the criterion of 10% and 90% of the resistivity value in the normal state above the transition. In Figure We have analysed five Fe(Se,Te) thin films deposited on CaF2 substrates, which were exposed to proton irradiation at different fluences. For some samples the energy of protons impinging on the film and the implantation depth in the substrate were decreased by the interposition of an Aluminium foil. As for superconducting properties, the critical fields remain unchanged regardless different fluences and the presence of the Aluminium foil. By contrast, the resistivity and the critical temperature stay substantially unaltered for samples irradiated without Aluminium foil, while the slowing down of protons caused a resistivity increase of about 20% and a suppression in Tc of about 0.6 K. For comparison, a Tc suppression of 2 K has been reported in Ba(Fe0.925Co0.075)2As2 single crystals irradiated with 3 MeV protons and a fluence of 1.2•10 16 cm -2 Regarding the critical current density, the samples A and B irradiated directly under the 3.5 MeV proton beam, where the protons implant into the substrate several tens microns away from the film-substrate interface (see Figure Noteworthy, the Jc enhancement upon irradiation is modest as compared to other FeSCs families. In ref. [3] it was pointed out that this can be ascribed to the lower depairing current in 11 FeSCs, which sets the magnitude of achievable currents. The moderate Jc enhancement can be also ascribed to the natural presence of pinning centres in Fe(Se,Te) thin films induced by the growth on the CaF2 substrates MeV protons), is modest: as a comparison, after irradiation, YBCO thin films show a suppression of Jc of about 20% for a d.p.a. as low as 2.04•10 -4 We have conducted a systematic study of the effects of irradiation with 3.5 MeV protons on the superconducting properties (critical temperature, fields and currents) of Fe(Se,Te) thin films grown by PLD on CaF2 substrates. Fluence was varied in a wide range from 0.7 10 16 to 7.3 10 16 cm -2 ; moreover, in order to address the issue of the role of the defected substrate where the protons implant in further modifying the film properties, we irradiated some samples with lower proton energies at comparable d.p.a. values by the interposition of a thin Al foil of a suitable thickness. This allows to control the implantation depth of protons into the substrate, and to check whether the film properties change in a different way when the substrate is mainly damaged close to or far from the substrate-film interface. It turns out that when protons implant far from the superconducting film, Jc enhancements in FeSe0.5Te0.5 can be obtained, even if they are not as large as in the case of other FeSCs [3]. In such conditions, critical temperature, critical and irreversibility fields are virtually unchanged, for the employed fluences. Conversely, when the implantation layer is close to the substrate-film interface, both Tc and Jc show a decrease together with an enhancement of the resistivity, pointing to the crucial role of the substrate itself and its possible modifications in determining the superconducting film properties. This should be carefully considered in every irradiation experiment of thin-film superconductors. Finally, what emerges from our irradiation experiment with high energy protons up to very high values of d.p.a. is that the family Fe(Se,Te) is very robust against proton irradiation with respect to other superconductors, e.g. cuprates, making such superconductor very interesting for applications in harsh environments, where strong radiation emissions are expected, such as in accelerators.