Using a realistic ten-orbital tight-binding model Hamiltonian fitted to the angle-resolved photoemission (ARPES) data on LiFeAs, we analyze the temperature, frequency, and momentum dependencies of quasiparticle interference (QPI) to identify gap sign changes in a qualitative way, following our original proposal [Phys. Rev. B 92, 184513 (2015)]. We show that all features present for the simple two-band model for the sign-changing s+--wave superconducting gap employed previously are still present in the realistic tight-binding approximation and gap values observed experimentally. We discuss various superconducting gap structures proposed for LiFeAs, and identify various features of these superconducting gaps functions in the quasiparticle interference patterns. On the other hand, we show that it will be difficult to identify the more complicated possible sign structures of the hole pocket gaps in LiFeAs, due to the smallness of the pockets and the near proximity of two of the gap energies. In the iron-based superconductors, the origin of the Cooperpairing and the overall phase structure of the superconducting order parameter is still under debate. Nevertheless, taking into account the Fermi surface topology of iron based superconductors, there is a general consensus that the superconducting state in most of these materials belongs to the A 1g symmetry representation as long as both the electron and the hole Fermi surface pockets are present in the system One rapidly developing technique to determine the phase structure of the order parameter makes use of quasiparticle interference as measured by Fourier transform scanning tunneling microscopy (FT-STM). This probe measures the wavelengths of Friedel oscillations caused by disorder present in a metallic or superconducting system, which in turn contains information on the electronic structure of the pure system. The subset of the scattering wave vectors q can be enhanced or not according to the type of disorder and the phase structure of the superconducting gap, as noted by several groups Recently, we proposed a novel method of analyzing the QPI data from non-magnetic impurities, which does not rely on the momentum dependence of individual features, but rather upon integrated indicators, averaged, formally over the entire momentum space. This method utilizes valuable phase information, discarded in usual treatments (see, however, Refs. 24 and 25. It was shown that some integrated indicators, specifically the antisymmetrized combination of the conductance, behave qualitatively differently for scattering events accomponied or not by a change in the order parameter sign. This method does not require manipulating scattering by magnetic field In this connection, a question arises whether a more detailed analysis of the same characteristic, namely the antisym-metrized conductance, can be used to extract more information than just an overall sign change. LiFeAs, for which inetresting possibilities, such as sign-flipping between the hole Fermi surfaces, have been suggested As expected, we find that despite the complications introduced by the multiple Fermi surfaces, the distinction between the s ++ and s +-can de readily made based on the integrated antisymmetrized conductance. We further investigate how various symmetries, discussed in the literature, can be identified via characteristic q-behavior of the antisymmetrized conductance and could be used for a finer elucidation of the gap sign structure in iron based materials up to detailed identification of the gap sign corresponding to different pockets. Specifically, it is tempting to separates electron-hole and holehole scattering features, and investigate the latter for potential signature of the sign change. As we show below, while such a separation is possible, proximity of the two gaps in the two main hole bands precludes a firm conclusion about possible sign change between them. We employ the ten-orbital tight-binding model Hamiltonian fitted to the ARPES measured band structure of LiFeAs samples by Wang et al. (a) The bare non-interacting Green's function is given by . ( where ω n refers to the Matsubara frequency. All quantities may be considered to be matrices in band or orbital space, but the unperturbed Green's function is diagonal in band space. The local density of state (LDOS) is then found as where the Tr runs over the orbital or band index. In the presence of impurities the equation determining the full Green's function reads (2) where the last term describes multiple scattering on impurities. In the following we consider multiple scattering from a single pointlike spherically symmetric nonmagnetic impurity In such a case the solution for the t-matrix may be written, Thus the position dependent correction to the LDOS reads may be written ρ(q, ω) = ρ(ω) + δρ(q, ω) with where in the last equation we employ the analytic continuation to the advanced (retarded) Green's functions. We have not yet specified the form of the impurity potential in band or orbital space. Intuition suggests and density functional theory calculations confirm to a very good approximation that Û is diagonal in orbital space We first examine the QPI peaks that occur due to the complicated Fermi surface in the normal state. The strongest contribution to the LDOS is given by scattering between like orbitals within the large hole pocket (of xy-character), as well as within the small hole pocket (xz, yz-character). The interband scattering between electron and hole pockets, again q 1 q 3 q 2 q 6 q 2 q 1 q 8 ( c) q 2 q 3 q 1 q 4 q 2 q 1 q 5 q 5 q 6 q 7 q 8 ( d) of xz,yz-character (Fig. Once the scattering events in the Born limit are understood, we should mention that by increasing the impurity scattering strength we find within T-matrix that there are also interorbital scattering components introduced for example between larger and smaller hole pockets, which are however still weaker than the intraorbital ones. In the following, however, we proceed directly to the superconducting state. Superconducting gap magnitudes and their angular variations on the electron and hole pockets are known for LiFeAs from ARPES Note that all of these works claim to be roughly consistent with existing ARPES experiments, but find different sign structures of the gaps on the various Fermi surface sheets. In the following, we compute the QPI signatures of each of the s-wave states, which should help to identify the particular symmetry of the order parameter in LiFeAs. In real STM measurements, electrons from a range of k z states are involved in the tunneling process, so no meaningful choice of a single k zcut is possible. In 2D systems like cuprates, the influence of the third momentum dimension is negligible, but in LiFeAs this is not the case (Fig. where τ 0 and τ 1 are Pauli matrices in Nambu (particle-hole) space. We show the total density of states in Fig. where the t-matrix in the Nambu space is given by and τ 3 is the corresponding component of the Pauli matrix. In the following we will consider various representation of the phases of the superconducting gap on the Fermi surface pockets. However, we will also study the role of the impurity potential in changing the characteristic features of the δρ -(q, ω). A. s+--wave gap: impurity potential in orbital and band bases Before we start our analysis by studying the different possible gap structures, we need to point out the importance of the actual model used for the impurity. First, we consider an impurity which is diagonal in orbital space, V where the integration is over the entire momentum space, or, in practical application, over a well defined area Ω around the scattering peaks Comparing the Born limit with U = 1 meV shown in Fig. In particular, in Fig. Choosing U inter = U intra = 1 meV, we find a similar be- havior for the s ++ and s +-case to those shown previously in Fig. In realistic STM experiments, the measurements are done at finite yet very low temperatures. As we have shown previously in Ref. 22, a thermal broadening smears out the clear peak structure with increase of temperature. Nevertheless, as we show in Fig. Other possible A1g-symmetry states with sign-change gap between hole pockets Due to the relative weakness of the spin fluctuations at the wave vector corresponding to the scattering between electron Thermally averaged antisymmetrized full-q integrated LDOS change δρ -(ω) for nonmagnetic scattering in the intermediate limit U = 10 meV (the δρ -(ω) is shown in Fig. The natural question arises whether QPI could be used to determine these additional phase shifts. We first note that the A-state has an additional sign change between two tiny hole pockets, located near the Γ-point. For the QPI it would mean to search for the characteristic features in δρ -(ω) for small scattering wavevectors (q 4 and q 5 ), which is in general difficult for the QPI experiments as it requires a Fourier transform of Friedel oscillations from an isolated impurity recorded in a large field of view in the real space. In addition these small pockets exist only near k z = π and have much smaller densities of states, which represents an additional problem. Therefore, we first address the question of whether some less subtle possible sign changes beyond the usual s +-picture can be still detected. We plot in Fig. Possible sign-changing states within A1g-symmetry representation found previously in Ref. odd symmetry when the change of the sign of the gap occurs. To state confidently whether C and D states can be identified, we now return to a more realistic situation, when the impurity potential is nearly diagonal in the orbital basis. This seems to agree better with ab-initio calculations FIG. is responsible for the scattering between small hole pockets and electron pockets. The results in Fig. The result of this exercise shows that the determination of the superconducting gap structure on the multiple Fermi surface sheets may be a challenging task if gaps change sign more than once (i.e., a frustrated case), or if some gaps are close in magnitude. For this situation, δρ -(ω) can be still helpful to identify whether the gap is generally sign changing at least on some of the pockets, however, the overall phase structure distribution over the mutiple sheets cannot be unambigously determined. Another very interesting proposal put forward for LiFeAs is the so-called orbital-antiphase superconducting gap 7 , originally proposed for the iron-based superconductors within an effective model In particular, in Fig. In a microscopic spin fluctuation theory assuming an LDA+DMFT electronic structure and self-energy, a pairing interaction very close to the phenomenological orbitaldiagonal pairing vertex assumed here was calculated. thors redid the calculation incorporating this symmetry We have investigated an extension of the phase-sensitive method of analyzing QPI data from non-magnetic impurities, proposed by us previously At the same time, the determination of the relative phase of the gap on the tiny Z-centered hole pockets with respect to the other electron and hole bands appears to be a much more subtle issue. It is still possible to distinguish between a conventional constant sign gap and the usual s +-scenario where the gap is one sign on all hole pockets and another on the electron pockets. However, once the sign structure of the gap is more complex and involve further sign changes between large hole and small hole pockets, the behavior of δρ -(q, ω) cannot be clearly assigned, primarily due to the near proximity of two gap energies in this system. We discussed the same point for the so-called orbital-antiphase superconducting gap structure, where the gap is diagonal in orbital space, raised in the context of the LiFeAs system In summary, the method we proposed seems to allow one to answer the question whether the gap has a sign change, but cannot be used, at least in LiFeAs, for a more detailed determination of the phase structure of the order parameter. Note added. In the final stages of writing, two papers appeared that discussed detailed analysis of quasiparticle interference measurements on LiFeAs, including a new qualitative phase-sensitive method based on interference of impurity bound states 