Usually, the superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) consists of two Josephson junctions and the interference therein is modulated by a magnetic flux. In this work, we propose an electrically modulated SQUID consisting of single Josephson junction coupled by a time-reversal breaking Weyl semimetal thin film. For a low Fermi energy, the Josephson current is only mediated by Fermi arc surface states, and has an arbitrary ground-state phase difference φ0 which is directly proportional to the product of the transverse electric field and the cross section area of the junction. For a suitable Fermi energy, the bulk states make comparable contributions to the Josephson current with the current-phase relation of a 0-junction. The interference between the surface channel and the bulk channel results in an electrically modulated SQUID with single Josephson junction, which provides an experimental proposal to identify magnetic Weyl semimetals and may have potential applications in superconducting quantum computation. As the host to Weyl fermions in condensed matter, the Weyl semimetal (WSM) is a topological semimetal where three-dimensional linearly dispersed Weyl cones appear in pairs in momentum space On the other hand, since the recent experimental realization of Josephson φ 0 -junction based on a nanowire quantum dot The interplay between bulk states and surface states is more interesting in the WSM based Josephson junction. In this work, we investigate the quantum interference between the bulk channel and the surface channel in a TR breaking WSM thin film sandwiched between two s-wave superconductors. In the surface channel, electrons and holes appear on the opposite surfaces. This spacial separation gives a chance to endow two paired electrons with different energies by a transverse electric field, which leads to a tunable φ 0 -junction state. The bulk channel is not sensitive to the electric field and is always a normal 0-junction. The interference between surface states and bulk states results in an electrically modulated superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) with single Josephson junction. The normal SQUID is usually modulated by a magnetic flux and consists of two Josephson junctions. This electrically modulated SQUID with single Josephson junction is a simple experimental proposal to identify the magnetic WSM, as well as a promising platform for extensive applications in the fields of superconducting electronics and superconducting quantum computation. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the model of the Josephson junction based on the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation and the tightbinding method, present the formula to calculate the Josephson current and ABS levels. In Sec. III we discuss the anomalous Josephson effect tuned by a transverse electric field when Fermi arc surface states dominate the transport. In Sec. IV, we discuss the SQUID effect stemming from the interference between surface states and bulk states. Finally, a brief summary is given in Sec. V. We consider a Josephson junction that consists of a TR breaking WSM thin film sandwiched between two general s-wave superconductors. As shown in Fig. where M = 4t + 2t cos k 0 determines the locations of two Weyl nodes (0, 0, ±k 0 ), σ x,y,z are the Pauli matrices for spin, λ is the strength of the spin-orbit coupling, and μ W is the chemical potential in the WSM. The lattice constant is set to be a = 1. To consider a thin film geometry in the y direction, we discretize the Hamiltonian in real space along x and y directions. Then the discretized Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is + r,r0,kz where r = (x, y) is the site index, r 0 = x or y represents the unit vector along x or y direction, Φ r,kz = [c r↑,kz , c r↓,kz , c † r↑,-kz , c † r↓,-kz ] T is the field operator with c r↑(↓),±kz the annihilation operator of an electron at site r with spin ↑ (↓) and momentum ±k z . The components included in the Hamiltonian are Moreover, a transverse electric field E y has also been considered and modelled by linearly increasing on-site energies along the y direction. It can be equivalently modelled by the modification of the chemical potential μ W → μ W -eE y y with e the unit charge. For the two superconducting leads, we consider two general s-wave superconductors described by where h s (k z ) = -2t cos k z -μ S with μ S being the chemical potential in superconducting leads, the sum over γ refers to the left and right superconducting leads which are assumed to have the same nearest-neighbor hopping energy t as that in the WSM, ∆ is the superconducting gap, φ γ = ± φ 2 for the left and right superconductor respectively with φ the macroscopic phase difference between two superconducting leads. The coupling between the WSM and two superconducting leads is described by where the sum over r refers to the left sites at the two interfaces and two interfaces are assumed to be transparent for simplicity. Thus, the whole Josephson junction is described by the Hamiltonian H = H W + H S + H C . By using nonequilibrium Green's functions, the Josephson current through column l in the central WSM region for a given k z is calculated by where ť = -tτ 3 ⊗ σ z + 1 2 iλτ 0 ⊗ σ x and ě = -eτ 3 ⊗ σ 0 denote the hopping matrix and the charge matrix respectively. τ 3 (τ 0 ) is the Pauli (unit) matrix in Nambu space. In equilibrium, the lesser-than Green's function is calculated by , where f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. The retarded and advanced Green's functions read where H D is the Hamiltonian of the WSM region. The retarded self-energy Σ r L(R) (E) due to coupling with the superconducting leads L(R) can be calculated numerically by the recursive method. Finally, the total Josephson current is given by J = Lz 2π π/a -π/a I(k z )dk z . In addition, the Andreev bound state (ABS) spectra can also be numerically calculated through the Green's function technique. The ABSs result in peaks of particle density within the superconducting gap. By searching the peaks of particle density in column l (L x l 1) at a given phase difference φ, the energies of ABS levels can be located. Then the ABS spectra can be obtained by scanning φ, which is helpful for understanding the behavior of Josephson current. Next, we present the numerical results for the Josephson current. In our numerical calculations, t = 1 is the unit of energy, λ = 2 and ∆ = 0.01. a = 1 is the unit of length, 1/a is the unit of the wave vector and k 0 = 0.5π. The geometric parameters of the junction are set to be L x = 100, L y = 50, L z = 1000, and W = 100. The unit of transverse electric field E y is set to be t/ea while a constant chemical potential (μ S = -4.4t) is used for the two superconductors. The range of k z of the electronic states in the Fermi surfaces is determined by μ S , i.e., |k z | < 0.43π, is consistent with the k z range in which the Josephson current is nonzero (as shown in Fig. First, we consider the situation where the chemical potential in the WSM is low, for example, μ W = 0.1t. For such a low μ W , there exist only Fermi arc surface states in the range |k z | < 0.43π (see Fig. When μ W increases, the bulk states gradually participate in the transport in the range |k z | < 0.43π. As a result there are two channels available to carry the Josephson current, one is the surface channel and the other is the bulk channel. These two channels form an electrically modulated SQUID. For a suitably chosen μ W , the two channels can have comparable contributions to the supercurrent. To find this suitable value of μ W , we set the surface channel to be a π-junction by setting E y = 2π/S. Since the supercurrent from the bulk channel is not sensitive to E y and remains always a 0-junction, the supercurrents from two channels will cancel each other. At a suitable μ W , the total Josephson current vanishes. Fig. Other parameters are the same as those in Fig. shows the total Josephson current as a function of μ W when the phase difference is fixed to φ = π/2. The Josephson current first decreases gradually with increasing μ W because the supercurrent in the surface channel is greatly enhanced due to the larger penetration depth of the surface states. The penetration depth sensitively determines the coupling of electron and hole, thus the amplitude of Andreev reflection and Josephson current. For a higher μ W , the bulk channel also participate in the transport, the Josephson current goes up sharply, and approaches to 0 nearly at μ W = 0.69t. In addition, the oscillations in the supercurrent come from the multireflection in the normal reflection at interfaces. Fig. where φ 0 = -E y S/λ. The critical current is defined to be J c = 2J 0 cos φ0 2 = 2J 0 cos EyS 2λ . In particular, the Josephson current at φ = π 2 is J( π 2 ) = J 0 [1 + cos φ 0 ], which gives a good fitting of our numerical results shown in Fig. The key parameter to make this condition satisfied is μ S which determines the k z range. The second condition is μ W ≪ 2t(1 -cos k 0 ) which makes the dispersion E(k x ) of surface states linear and the Fermi velocity remains λ. Finally, we comment on the experimental realization of the modulation of the transversal electric field. First, two gate voltages at two surfaces of WSM can induce an exactly transverse electric field. Second, even in the presence of longitudinal component of the electric field, the Josephson current will not change much based on the following considerations. The ABSs formed by Fermi-arc surface states separate electron and hole in space only along the y direction. Therefore only the y component of electric field E y can endow two paired electrons with different energies, thus endow electron and hole with different wave vectors. It is just this wave vector difference between electron and hole that leads to an anomalous phase shift, and finally results in the oscillation of the critical current from the interference with the bulk ABSs. The numerical results also verify that the other components of electric field do not affect the Josephson current much. In conclusion, we propose an electrically modulated SQUID with single Josephson junction coupled by a TR breaking Weyl semimetal thin film. There exist two channels, the surface channel and the bulk channel, to carry the supercurrent. The surface channel serves as a φ 0 -junction where the ground-state phase difference is simply modulated by a transverse electric field as φ 0 = -E y S/λ. The bulk channel remains always a 0junction. The quantum interference between the two channels results in an electrically modulated SQUID. This proposed Josephson junction with arbitrarily tunable critical current and ground-state phase difference may have potential applications in the fields of superconducting electronics and superconducting quantum computation.