Diluted ferromagnetic semiconductors (DMSs) that combine the properties of semiconductors with ferromagnetism have potential application in spin-sensitive electronics (spintronics) devices. The search for DMS materials exploded after the observation of ferromagnetic ordering in III-V (Ga,Mn)As films. Recently, a series of DMS compounds isostructural to iron-based superconductors have been reported. Among them, the highest Curie temperature TC of 230 K has been achieved in (Ba,K)(Zn,Mn)2As2. However, most DMSs, including (Ga,Mn)As, are p-type, i.e., the carriers that mediate ferromagnetism are holes. For practical applications, DMS with n-type carriers are also advantageous. Here we report the successful synthesis of a II-II-V diluted ferromagnetic semiconductor with n-type carriers, Ba(Zn,Co)2As2. Magnetization measurements show that the ferromagnetic transition occurs up to TC ∼ 45 K. Hall effect and Seebeck effect measurements jointly confirm that the dominant carriers are electrons. Through muon spin relaxation (μSR), a volume sensitive magnetic probe, we have also confirmed that the ferromagnetism in Ba(Zn,Co)2As2 is intrinsic and the internal field is static. The combination of spin and charge degrees of freedom in diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMSs) makes them promising materials in spintronics. The observation of ferromagnetism in Mn doped III-V GaAs has therefore attracted extensive attention in last two decades Of these, (Ba,K)(Zn,Mn) 2 As 2 has the highest T C of ∼ 230 K The above-mentioned DMSs are all p-type, i.e., the dominant carriers are holes. N-type DMSs with electron carriers are still exceptionally rare. In practical applications, both p-and n-type DMSs are required to fabricate junctions and devices. Furthermore, n-type DMSs may shed light on the general mechanism for ferromagnetic ordering in DMSs. In the past, Co:ZnO films have been proposed to be a candidate for n-type DMS In this paper, we demonstrate the successful synthesis of a high-quality n-type ferromagnetic semiconductor by doping Co onto the Zn sites of the narrow-band-gap (0.2 eV) semiconductor BaZn 2 As 2 X-ray diffraction. In Fig. In Fig. We used the Arrott plot method for precise determination of the Curie temperature T C for Ba(Zn T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) For a stable state, the derivative of F (M ) with respect to M should be 0. After omitting the high order items, the function is rewritten as: Therefore, around T C , the plot of M 2 versus H/M should be an array of parallel lines. The intercept is positive below T C and neg-ative above T C , respectively. The temperature where the line passes through the origin is T C . In Fig. , where χ 0 is the temperature independent component, C is the Curie constant and θ is the Weiss temperature. , where μ B is the Bohr magneton and g = 2 is the Lande factor for electrons, we estimate the average spin state of Co to be close to S = 1/2. In Fig. Hall effect, Seebeck effect and transport. We jointly utilized measurements of the Hall effect and Seebeck effect (see Supplement) to investigate the properties of the carriers. Since R Hall = B/(ne), where B is the external field perpendicular to the current and e is the elementary charge, we obtained the carrier concentration from R Hall versus B curves. In Fig. In Fig. ZF-and LF-μSR. Generally speaking, a small amount of magnetic impurities such as Co nanoparticles or unknown Co compounds can give rise to magnetic signals that may obscure the intrinsic magnetic properties. To rule out such scenario, we applied μSR, a volumesensitive magnetic probe, to investigate Ba(Zn,Co) 2 As 2 . In Fig. We have successfully synthesized the ferromagnetic semiconductor Ba(Zn,Co) 2 As 2 through the solid state reaction method. Hall resistivity and Seebeck coefficient measurements jointly confirmed that the carriers in Ba(Zn 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 are electrons. Magnetization measurements showed that the highest T C is ∼ 45 K for the 4% doping level and the coercive field is on the order of 10 Oe. ZF-and LF-μSR measurements show that a static field arises throughout the full sample volume below T C , with a magnitude of about 10 Oe at the muon stopping sites. In the temperature-dependent LF-μSR measurements, we observed critical slowing down of spin fluctuations around T C and the freezing of magnetic domains at lower temperature. Combining the ZF-and LF-μSR time spectra, we can conclude that the present n-type DMS system exhibits characteristic signatures of dynamic slowing down followed by static magnetic order, with a magnetically ordered state in the entire volume. The n-type DMS Ba(Zn,Co) 2 As 2 (T C = 45 K) from the current study joins several related compounds including the p-type DMS (Ba,K)(Zn,Mn) 2 As 2 (T C = 230 K) Polycrystalline samples of Ba(Zn,Co) 2 As 2 were synthesized through solid state reaction of high purity elements (≥ 99.9%) Ba, Zn, Co and As. Mixed ingredients were placed in aluminum crucibles and sealed in evacuated silica tubes. All handling of the elements was conducted in a glove box filled with high purity Ar (the content of H 2 O and O 2 is less than 0.1 ppm) except the sealing of the silica tubes. The mixture was heated to 900 • C for 10 h, then held at 1150 • C for 24 h followed by furnace cooling. Next, the products were ground, pressed into pellets, sealed in evacuated silica tubes, then heated to 1150 • C and held for over 24 hours followed by fast cooling to keep the tetragonal phase. Property characterization. Powder X-ray diffrac-tion was performed at room temperature using a PANalytical X-ray diffractometer (Model EMPYREAN) with monochromatic Cu-K α1 radiation. The DC magnetization measurements were conducted on a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3). The Hall effect and magneto-resistivity were measured on a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). The Seebeck coefficient was measured at room temperature using a commercial thermopower measurement apparatus. The zero field resistivity was measured by the typical four-probe method with a Keithley 6221 DC and AC current source and Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeter. μSR measurements were performed with LAMPF spectrometer on the M20 beamline at TRIUMF, Canada, and μSR data were analyzed using the musrfit package through the origin. T C for other doping levels was also determined by this method (see Supplement). We list T C for Ba(Zn 1-x Co x ) 2 As 2 in Table