We present a study of reentrant behaviour in a composite formed by a Hight-Tc superconductor, YBa2Cu3O 7-δ and Ammonium Terbium Oxalate, Tb(H2O)(C2O4)2 •NH4. The composite has a transition temperature about 92 K, and it presents a reentrant behaviour resulting of the coexistence between superconductivity and magnetism. According to this study the values and shape of the critical magnetic fields were dramatically reduced in a similar form as in other known reentrant superconductors. Among the many interesting characteristics of some superconductors, reentrant behaviour in superconductivity is a quite important topic of study. Some superconductors displaying this behaviour are those that have a magnetic ion in its crystal structure. A classical example very well known is ErRh 4 B 4 , it is a reentrant compound found by Ferting many years ago In a possible reentrant superconductor, if the intensity of the magnetic interactions are strong enough will affect and influence the behavior of the superconducting state. Accordingly, the magnetic interactions could give additional information to have a better understanding of a superconductor and in that manner to obtain more insight into the microscopic mechanisms and electronic properties. Then some of the basic phenomena related to the coupling and formation of the Cooper pairs will be related to this elementary excitations. The reentrant behavior in superconductors is well know since early times. As mentioned it may occurr when a superconductor is doped with paramagnetic impurities, the interplay results in pair breaking and total destruction of superconductivity. This phenomenon has been explained by Abrikosov and Gor'kov As was mentioned, in BCS theory the two phenomenons are mutually excludents. In many compound, however recently it has been observed that more types of superconductors involved different forms of pair formation, meaning that the nature of pair coupling will be different to the mediated by phonons. Thus, the superconducting state will be different as in the BCS model. Among those new materials, the Fe-Based compounds are a type of the new materials The effect of the influences of a magnetic field in a superconductor is most notable at temperatures below the superconducting transition. In this situation the influence of the magnetism is quite clear because the transition temperature decreases due to the diminution of the number of Cooper pairs. The most clear consequence of these interactions between superconductivity and magnetic field results in the reentrant superconducting behavior. These interactions create a competition between both, magnetism and superconductivity, growing and reinforcing with decreasing temperature, although those changes will be at different rates. Depending of the strengths and magnitude of those processes, one or the other could be predominant. In some cases the superconducting state could be destroyed or simply reduced. In other situations the two interacting energies, one to create Cooper pairs, the other to energize magnetic interchanges could be in equilibrium In this research we present a study of the reentrant behaviour in a composite formed by a ceramic superconductor and a luminescent material. The experiments were carried out using YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ particles and two luminescent materials; Tb( Two composites to different proportions in weight between its components were prepared. Both were characterized by magnetic susceptibility as function of temperature and magnetic field applied. Only the composite YBCO -Tb(H 2 O)(C 2 O 4 ) 2 • NH 4 presents reentrant superconductivity. The critical fields were evaluated in the composite 10% superconductor -90% Tb oxalate and we found a drastic reduction of them due to the coexistence between superconductivity and magnetism. Initially idea of the research was to study the influence of the luminescent materials into the superconductor under UV illumination at low temperatures. The materials used for this investigation were a ceramic superconductor and two different luminescence materials. The ceramic superconductor, YBCO, presents a high transition temperature, T C = 92 K, and the amount of superconducting material was determined by two modes of measurements, Zero Field Cooling (ZFC) and Field Cooling (FC) under small magnetic field, 100 Oe. The two luminescence compounds were Ammonium Terbium Oxalate, Tb( The preparation of the ceramic superconductor was using a known procedure as already published in the literature, starting from BaCO 3 , Y 2 O 3 , and CuO The composites were prepared by homogeneous precipitation method, starting from a aqueous solution of rareearth nitrates, ammonium oxalate and a certain amount of superconducting particles. This solution was ultrasonically dispersed for 30 minutes in a sealed flask. After, the solution was heated at 75 • C for two hours with magnetic stirring. The resulting mixture was washed three times with 30 ml of pure acetone to remove the ammonium oxalate excess. Finally, the resulting compounds were dried at 60 • C. Only in the case of YBCO@Y 2 O 3 :Eu 3+ composite it was heated at 400 • C for five minutes. With this procedure both, yttrium and europium nitrates, trans- forms to oxides. As above mentioned the main idea of this research was to study the influence of luminescent compounds in the superconducting properties. The characteristics of the ceramic superconductor are shown in Fig. characteristics of the composite formed with the Tb oxalate at different compositions Superconductor -Tb oxalate; 10:90 and 15:85 (in weight). In these three figures the data was obtained in two modes of measurements, ZFC and FC. At low temperature is seen the reentrant behaviour, both middle and bottom figure show in the two modes of measurements the reentrance characteristic. In Fig. Figure It is interesting to mention that these results extracted from Fig. On the other hand, in Fig. In order to have a better information of the Tb oxalate, in Fig. We found a new reentrant superconductor formed by a Hight-T c superconductor and a luminescent material. Two composites were prepared with different luminescent compounds, the composite with ammonium terbium oxalate presented reentrant behavior. According to this study values and shape of the critical magnetic fields, H C1 and H C2 , were dramatically reduced, implying that the Ginzburg -Landau parameter (κ) has a small value of 1.6 in the composite 10:90%. We concluded that the reentrant behavior is because the coexistence between superconductivity and magnetism in the composite. As mentioned before the main idea of this study was to see the influence of a superconductor in the luminescent properties, as already published by other authors in MgB 2 