We investigate the third-harmonic generation (THG) of s-wave superconductors under microwave pulse irradiation. We consider the effect of paramagnetic impurities on the THG intensity of dirty superconductors. The nonlinear response function is calculated using the method of the quasiclassical Green function. It is shown that the amplitude mode is included as the vertex correction and makes a predominant contribution to the THG intensity. When the effect of paramagnetic impurities is weak, the THG intensity shows a peak at the temperature at which the superconducting gap is about the same as the frequency of the incident pulse, similarly to in experiments. As the effect of paramagnetic impurities is strengthened, the peak of the THG intensity disappears. This indicates that time-reversal symmetry breaking due to paramagnetic impurities eliminates the well-defined amplitude mode. The result of our calculation shows that the existence of the amplitude mode can be confirmed through the THG intensity. The result of a semiquantitative calculation is in good agreement with the experimental result, and it also shows that the diamagnetic term is negligible. In recent years, studies on the nonlinear optical response in superconductors have advanced with the development of microwave spectroscopy. Many of these studies were on the dynamics of transient responses using pump-probe spectroscopy, and the main objective was to elucidate the interaction effect in superconductors including strongly correlated electron systems. (For a review, see Ref. 1 Another important aspect of the nonlinear optical response in the research of superconductors is that we can investigate phenomena that do not appear in the linear response. The amplitude fluctuation of the superconducting order parameter Theoretically, the excitation of the amplitude mode overlaps the quasiparticle excitation by two-photon absorption in the spectrum. The following is the structure of this paper. Section 2 gives the formulation by the quasi-classical approximation for calculating the response function. Section 3 gives an expression for the THG intensity under pulse irradiation and shows the results of a numerical calculation such as its temperature dependence. A semiquantitative evaluation is also given. Section 4 gives an expression for the diamagnetic term and shows that this term is negligible in the THG intensity. A nonlinear current is written using the quasiclassical Green function (g K ) as follows: 13) Here, v k and m are the velocity and mass of electrons, respectively, and k F is the Fermi wave number. (We put = c = 1 in this paper with c the velocity of light.) FS means integration on the Fermi surface. The superscripts K and (3) in ĝK(3) indicate the Keldysh Green function ĝK(3) (ǫ + ω, ǫ) is derived from kinetic equations in the dirty limit. Here, α = (mk F /2π)n i u 2 i with n i the concentration of nonmagnetic impurities and u i the magnitude of the potential. The dirty limit means that α ≫ ∆. A ω is the external vector potential. τ3 = ( 1 0 0 -1 ). ĝǫ is the quasiclassical Green function in the equilibrium state and ĝǫ,ǫ ′ is a second-order function on external fields (+ and -in the superscript indicate the retarded and advanced Green function, respectively). The kinetic equations for the latter are written as and τ3 ǫĝ Here, t h ǫ := tanh(ǫ/2T ) (T is temperature), δ(•) is the delta function, and ĝ(a) = Σ(a) = 0 in the equilibrium state). = ατ 3 ĝs ǫ,ǫ ′ τ3 (the effect of nonmagnetic impurity scattering) and Σ(pi)s ǫ,ǫ ′ = α p ĝs ǫ,ǫ ′ (the effect of paramagnetic impurity scattering ph /ω D ) with ω D the Debye frequency and g ph the coupling constant between electrons and phonons. Equations ( and Here, n and a indicate the normal and anomalous self-energy, respectively. τ0 = ( 1 0 0 1 ) and τ1 = ( 0 1 1 0 ). By solving the above equations using Σ = ∆τ 1 (∆ is the superconducting gap with the effect of impurity scattering included), the solution is written Here, s = +, -, or (a), and (the double signs correspond), and Here, Σ indicates the vertex correction, which is calculated in the next subsection, and the diagonal element ( Σn,+ ) is shown to vanish. Here, Quasiclassical Green functions in the equilibrium state are written as g ± ǫ = -iǫ ± p /z ± ǫ and f ± ǫ = -i∆ ± ǫ /z ± ǫ . By using the above results, the nonlinear current is written as Here, I ω,w,w ′ := We obtain Σ [w := (ǫ -ǫ ′ )/2]. Using Eqs. ( the solution is written as with w = ǫ -ǫ ′ = (ω 1 + ω 2 )/2 and w ′ = (ω 1 -ω 2 )/2. Here, with 3. Third-Harmonic Generation The electric field is written as Ẽt = Ēt e -iΩt + Ēt * e iΩt . Using of this field, the vector potential is written as 2π Ẽt e iωt . We assume a Gaussian pulse for Ēt : and we introduce a dimensionless external field, (∆ 0 is the superconducting gap at T = 0 without impurity scatterings.) Using of Āω , the current [Eq. (11)] is rewritten as with Here, are used. ξ 0 = v F /π∆ 0 and l = v F τ are the coherence length and the mean free path, respectively. Equation (12) does not depend on α. This is because ĝs ǫ and ĝs ǫ,ǫ ′ do not include α owing to Anderson's theorem We calculate the THG intensity using the dimensionless j ω from Eq. (19). We take ∆ 0 as the unit of energy (∆ 0 = 1), and in the variables in the subsequent figures, the notation of ∆ 0 is omitted for the sake of simplicity. The dependence of the THG intensity (|j 3Ω | 2 with Ω the frequency of the incident pulse) on temperature is shown in Fig. The dependence of the amplitude mode (D 2ω ) on the frequency ω at T /T C = 0.5 is shown in Fig. We introduce ω am as the frequency at which ReD 2ω takes a local minimum. The dependence of ω am on temperature is shown in Fig. The temperature (normalized by T C ) at which ∆ (or E g ) and Ω (= 0.46∆ 0 , 0.69∆ 0 , 0.92∆ 0 ) intersect is shown in TPA spectrum shows a peak is between E g and ∆. The THG intensities for various values of 1/t 2 0 are shown in Fig. The THG intensity divided by the incident pulse is approximately written as When we take account of the diamagnetic coupling in the interaction between electrons and external fields, 27) there is an additional term in a nonlinear current as follows: (with 1/t 0 proportional to the pulse width in the frequency space). α p = 0.005∆ 0 and Ω = 0.92∆ 0 . In this case, there are also additional terms in the kinetic equations. These are written and for the left-hand sides of Eqs. ( with iτ 2 = ( 0 1 -1 0 ). Since (g ′ , f ′ ) are different matrix elements from (g, f ) in Sects. 2 and 3, they can be obtained separately. The solution is written as with Here, where Using the above quantities, Eq. ( By using the electric field introduced in Sect. 3, the nonlinear current is written as Here, E F = k 2 F /2m is the Fermi energy and We consider the ratio |J d 3Ω | 2 /|J 3Ω | 2 in order to evaluate this term quantitatively. From Eqs. ( Here, 3πξ 0 /2 √ 2l ≃ 20.8 for ξ 0 = 5 nm and l = 0.8 nm, and then this last value is an overestimated value as mentioned below). Thus, the diamagnetic term is negligible as suggested in the annotation of Ref. 10 (Ref. 14 therein). This result is consistent with the experimental result that the diamagnetic term is not observed. In this paper a theoretical study of the third-harmonic generation in dirty BCS superconductors was carried out. We calculated the temperature dependence and frequency dependence of the THG intensity, and showed that the vertex correction term including the amplitude mode is dominant. We introduced the effect of paramagnetic impurities, and showed that time-reversal symmetry breaking destabilizes the amplitude mode and that this effect is reflected in the THG intensity. We showed that the dependences of the THG intensity on temperature and pulse width reproduce experimental results at the limit where the effect of paramagnetic impurities is small. Quantitatively, almost the same result as the experimental result was obtained. In addition, it is known that the diamagnetic term is small in the experiment. It is known that the effect of time-reversal symmetry breaking (due to paramagnetic impurities in this paper) can also be obtained by applying an in-plane magnetic field. Therefore, the results of our calculation show that the presence of the amplitude mode can be confirmed experimentally by applying a magnetic field in the plane.