The concept of a vestigial nematic order emerging from a "mother" spin or charge density-wave state has been applied to describe the phase diagrams of several systems, including unconventional superconductors. In a perfectly clean system, the two orders appear simultaneously via a firstorder quantum phase transition, implying the absence of quantum criticality. Here, we investigate how this behavior is affected by impurity-free droplets that are naturally present in inhomogeneous systems. Due to their quantum dynamics, finite-size droplets sustain long-range nematic order but not long-range density-wave order. Interestingly, rare droplets with moderately large sizes undergo a second-order nematic transition even before the first-order quantum transition of the clean system. This gives rise to an extended regime of inhomogeneous nematic order, which is followed by a densitywave quantum Griffiths phase. As a result, a smeared quantum nematic transition, separated from the density-wave quantum transition, emerges in moderately disordered systems. Introduction -In an electronic nematic phase, the crystalline point group symmetry is lowered by electronic degrees of freedom Such a mechanism for electronic nematicity has been proposed in both iron-based superconductors Several theoretical works have shown that, for a perfectly clean quasi-two-dimensional metallic system, the vestigial Ising-nematic order and the mother densitywave order undergo a simultaneous T = 0 first-order transition, implying the inexistence of a quantum critical point the relevance of nematicity to the properties of these compounds, it is paramount to understand the interplay between disorder and nematic order. Previous works have focused mostly on non-vestigial Ising-nematic phases In this paper, we investigate the impact of rare regions on the vestigial Ising-nematic order arising from a DW quantum phase transition. A rare region is a relatively large droplet that is devoid of impurities in a disordered system (see Fig. As we show here, the rare regions completely change the nature of the simultaneous first-order nematic-DW quantum transition in a two-dimensional itinerant system. This is because of the crucial role of the droplet's dissipative quantum dynamics Low-energy model -We consider a general twodimensional low-energy model that yields vestigial Isingnematic order from a mother DW phase on the square lattice. For concreteness, we consider two N -component DW order parameters, ∆ X and ∆ Y , corresponding to two wave-vectors Q X = (Q, 0) and Q Y = (0, Q) related by tetragonal symmetry. In the case of spin density-wave, N = 3 (commensurate) or N = 6 (incommensurate), whereas for charge density-wave, N = 1 (commensurate) or N = 2 (incommensurate). Hereafter, we consider only the case N > 1, as relevant for copper-based and ironbased superconductors. The low-energy action is given by: where ́q,ω = ́dd q is the inverse DW susceptibility, with the "tuning parameter" r 0 denoting the distance to the mean-field quantum phase transition. For itinerant systems, the dynamical Here, r0 is a control parameter, such as doping or pressure. In the clean system at T = 0, the nematic (φ) and density-wave (∆DW) order parameters appear simultaneously at r * 0,clean (dashed line). In the moderately diluted system, which still has a percolating (infinite) cluster, the first-order quantum transition is expected to be suppressed down to r * 0,dirty (dotted line). For r0 > r * 0,clean , moderately large droplets undergo a second-order nematic transition, giving rise to inhomogeneous nematic order. For r * 0,dirty < r0 < r * 0,clean , exponentially large droplets have an exponentially large DW correlation length, resulting in a DW quantum Griffiths phase. Whether φ jumps or continuously evolves at r * 0,dirty depends on details of the disorder distribution. critical exponent is z = 2 and γ is the Landau damping coefficient. Vestigial Ising-nematic order arises when g > 0. Physically, the emergent Ising-nematic order parameter φ = g ∆ 2 X -∆ 2 Y , which can onset even before the DW, corresponds to unequal fluctuations around the two DW wave-vectors. Mathematically, it is obtained by performing a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation of the second quartic term of Eq. ( To obtain this effective action, we also performed a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation of the first quartic term of Eq. ( Large-N solution for a single droplet -To assess the relevance of rare regions to the nematic and DW quantum phase transitions, we first solve the large-N saddlepoint equations for a single droplet of finite linear size L, and later average over the distribution of droplets. The strategy is similar to that employed in Ref. where r = r 0 + ψ is proportional to the inverse squared DW correlation length, r 0 → r 0 + u ́q,ω 1 q 2 +γ|ω| is the renormalized distance to the bare DW quantum critical point, and Λ is the momentum cutoff, hereafter set to be 1/a (a is the lattice parameter). Note that the quartic coefficients have been rescaled by u → u/ 4N π 2 γ and g → g/ 4N π 2 γ . The droplet finite-size effects are encoded in the function where K 1 (x) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. Because F (y 1) ∼ y 1/4 e -√ y , Eqs. ( To understand how the finite size of the droplet affects the DW and nematic transitions, we recall that the DW transition takes place when r = |φ|. But because F (y 1) ∼ln y, there is no solution to Eqs. ( The situation is completely different for the Isingnematic order parameter φ: since its lower critical dimension d c = 1 < d eff , long-range Ising-nematic order can onset at T = 0 even in a droplet of finite size L Average over droplets -To assess the impact of the nematically ordered droplets on the thermodynamic properties of the system, we need to average over the different possible droplets. The key quantity is thus the probability P (V ) of a impurity-free droplet of volume V ≡ L 2 being realized in the system, which in turn is determined by the particular type of disorder distribution. For concreteness, we consider randomly diluted impurities that kill DW and nematic order at a given site with probability 1-p, such that p = 0 corresponds to the completely dirty system and p = 1, to the completely clean system. Using results of percolation theory Here, τ = 187/91 is a critical exponent, V 0 is the typical volume of an impurity-free droplet for a given p, and p c is the percolation threshold for clean sites. Because V 0 changes from 0 to ∞ from p = 0, 1 to the percolation threshold p = p c , we treat V 0 as our disorder "tuning parameter," instead of p. We consider here the case where dilution is moderate, and the system is above the percolating threshold for clean sites, p > p c . In this case, in addition to the finite-size droplets described above, there is a single infinite percolating droplet devoid of impurities, which behaves similarly to the clean bulk system (see schematic Fig. The results for φ are show in Fig. The proliferation of moderate-size droplets sustaining long-range nematic order upon approaching the clean DW-nematic quantum phase transition at r * 0,clean signals the emergence of an inhomogeneously ordered nematic state separated from the DW transition. The resulting phase transition is thus a smeared quantum phase transition. In contrast to the more usual smeared quantum phase transitions Concluding remarks -We showed that even weak disorder fundamentally alters the properties of the Isingnematic quantum phase transition associated with a mother charge or spin density-wave quantum phase transition. The simultaneous first-order transition of the clean, itinerant system is replaced by an interesting regime that displays inhomogeneous (but long-range) smeared nematic order accompanied by a DW quantum Griffiths phase. The extent and relevance of this regime is controlled by the likelihood of finding isolated droplets of moderate (rather than very large) sizes, which in turn is controlled by the strength of disorder. These results have important implications for the understanding of the phase diagrams of copper-based and iron-based superconductors, where an Ising-nematic phase has been argued to emerge from charge and/or spin density-waves. In the case of the iron pnictides, where the Ising-nematic and DW transition lines follow each other closely, these effects are expected to be more pronounced and less ambiguous. Interestingly, elasto-resistance measurements of the nematic susceptibility upon approach-ing the putative nematic-DW quantum phase transition from high temperatures revealed a weakening of fluctuations and deviation from Curie-Weiss behavior at low temperatures where we used the fact that the momentum cutoff is such that Λ 2 r ± φ. We verified that this condition is met for the parameters u and g used in the main text. Defining r0 = r 0 + u d 2 qdω (2π) 3 1 q 2 +γ|ω| , ũ = u/ 4π 2 γ , and g = g/ 4π 2 γ , we arrive at the equations displayed in the main text: where we defined the function: Note that, for φ = 0, we recover the self-consistent equations of Ref. we can evaluate the sum and express the function as an integral: where θ 3 (a, b) is the elliptic theta function. The asymptotic behavior of F (y) follows from Eqs. (S11) and (S13). For y 1, the sum in Eq. (S11) is dominated by the |n| = 1 contribution, and we obtain: For y 1, it is more convenient to use the integral representation (S13). Following the same steps as Ref. where γ is the Euler number. Equations (S9) and (S10) are solved numerically to yield φ (r 0 , L). In the numerical calculation, we use an interpolation function for F (y) that interpolates between Eq. (S11) with 80 × 80 terms in the sum and the asymptotic behavior in Eq. (S15). The resulting function is shown in Fig. Before proceeding, we rederive the solutions of the self-consistent equations in the clean limit (i.e. L → ∞, which makes F (y) → 0). In this case, the solution of Eqs. (S9) and (S10) shows that r 0 is maximum for φ = r. However, φ = r implies a DW transition, since the renormalized DW susceptibility is (rφ) -1 . Thus, one has to go back to the action (S1) and consider the possibility of a finite DW order parameter ∆. In the large-N limit, this corresponds to adding the term ∆ 2 (rφ) in the action (see for instance Therefore, the first droplet that undergoes a continuous Ising-nematic quantum phase transition satisfies and its area is given by: Using Eqs. (S27) and (S28), we can find the corresponding value of the control parameter r * 0 (L c2 ) at which this happens: It is instructive to compare it with the value r * 0,clean for which the first-order transition of the clean system takes place, see Eq. (S19): For the parameters used in the main text, u = 0.9 and g = 0.25u, we find L 2 c2 ≈ 40 and 