The superconductor-insulator transition (SIT) is an excellent example for a quantum phase transition at zero temperature, dominated by quantum fluctuations. These are expected to be very prominent close to the quantum critical point. So far most of the experimental study of the SIT has concentrated on transport properties and tunneling experiments which provide indirect information on criticality close to the transition. Here we present an experiment uniquely designed to study the evolution of quantum fluctuations through the quantum critical point. We utilize the Nernst effect, which has been shown to be effective in probing superconducting fluctuation. We measure the Nernst coefficient in amorphous indium oxide films tuned through the SIT and find a large signal on both the superconducting and the insulating sides which peaks close to the critical point. The transverse Peltier coefficient, αxy which is the thermodynamic quantity extracted from these measurements, follows quantum critical scaling with critical exponents ν ∼ 0.7 and z ∼ 1 which is consistent with a clean XY model in 2+1 dimensions. Quantum fluctuations are crucial for understanding fundamental physics from atomic scale to the scale of the universe. Most prominently, they are the driving force behind a quantum phase transition (QPT) between two competing phases of matter at zero temperature While much progress has been made in the field over the years both theoretically and experimentally, there are still important open questions concerning phenomena close to the SIT. In particular, to this date it remains controversial which universality class best describes the observed transitions, and to what extent it varies between different specific realizations. From a theoretical point of view, a prototypical model which captures quantum fluctuations in ψ can be cast in terms of repulsively interacting Bosons such as the Bose-Hubbard model, or equivalently an array of Josephson-coupled superconducting islands where a charging energy E C competes with the Josephson energy E J (1) In the clean limit, the insulating phase is interactiondominated (a Mott insulator). The dynamical critical exponent z depends on the commensurability of Boson occupations and is either z = 1, if particle-hole symmetry is obeyed, or z = 2 at generic filling. In the former case, the SIT can be mapped to the classical 3D XYmodel, yielding ν ≈ 2/3 On the experimental front, so far attempts to provide the critical exponents were based on dc transport via scaling analyses of resistivity data A promising candidate for fluctuation studies is the Nernst effect, i.e. the appearance of a transverse electric field in the presence of a longitudinal thermal gradient and a perpendicular magnetic field Recent theoretical studies on quasi 1D Josephson junction arrays predict a pronounced peak of N close to the SIT due to quantum phase fluctuations In this Letter we describe a comprehensive measurement of the Nernst effect on an amorphous indium oxide (InO x ) film driven continuously through a disorderinduced SIT. This enables us to extract a thermodynamic quantity, the off-diagonal Peltier coefficient α xy , in order to quantitatively explore the quantum criticality. Our main findings are as follows: • Sizable Nernst signal is measured on both the superconducting and the insulating sides of the disorder-driven SIT • The Nernst effect amplitude peaks close to the SIT in accordance with recent theoretical predictions. The maximum occurs at g 0.35g c • α xy exhibits data collapse over many orders of magnitude providing a direct determination of the universality class of quantum fluctuations close to the SIT. The scaling analysis is consistent with a clean (2+1)D-XY model yielding critical exponents ν ∼0.7 and z∼1. An InO x film of thickness 30nm was e-beam evaporated on MEMpax TM borosilicate glass substrate of thickness 0.4mm. This substrate was chosen due to its very low thermal conductivity at low temperatures. An Au meander utilized as a heater and two on-chip thermometers (strongly insulating InO x films) were also evaporated in order to allow a Nernst-effect setup as shown in Fig. The transformation from an insulating ground state to a superconducting one was carried out by increasing the electrical conductance of the sample in stages via low temperature thermal annealing For each annealing stage the Nernst signal was measured as a function of magnetic field at different temper- atures in the range of 0.4K to 4K. In every case, including those in the insulating phase, the field dependence of the signal showed features similar to that of a typical superconductor as reported elsewhere Fig. We note that ρ xx is a non-equilibrium property signifying the rate of phase slips, and is therefore rel-atively sensitive to microscopic details. In contrast, α xy is approximately proportional to the diamagnetic moment To derive the implied scaling form of α xy , we recall the definition where the electric current J e has the physical dimension Its dependence on T , B, ∆g and ∇T therefore assumes the general form where F e is a universal scaling function. For small B and ∇T , α xy and hence F e is linearly dependent on the first two arguments: with f e (x) a single-parameter scaling function. Inserting in Eq.( where in the last step we used d = 2. For determining the critical exponents we fit the experimental values of α xy for different T and g to Eq. ( The XY model is in agreement with the so called "bosonic model" for the SIT We are grateful to I. Volotsenko for technical help and to K. Behnia for useful discussions. This research was supported by the Israel science foundation, grants No. 783/17 (A.F.) and 231/14 (E.S.).