Replacement of hydrogen by deuterium in palladium hydride results in higher superconducting temperatures and an anomalous isotope effect that has not been yet fully explained. In this work, we try a new approach to the explanation of the inverse isotope effect in PdH(D). Our approach introduces two new aspects. First, we took into account the experimental evidence that at temperatures below 50 K, the crystal structure of PdH and of PdD is zincblende. Second, we take into account not only the influence of the electron-phonon interaction but also the electron-electron interaction contribution to the isotope coeffiecient due tothe replacement of deuterium in the place of hydrogen. We used the Migdal-Eliashberg theory to perform our ab initio calculations. We found in this picture that the electron-electron interaction is considerably reduced by the isotope substitution and is the most important factor to explain the inverse isotope effect. We found ∆T total c = 2.224 K and α = -0.3134 in excellent agreement with the values found experimentally. Historically the isotope effect has been instrumental in understanding the mechanism responsible for Cooper pair formation in conventional superconductors. It gives the response of the vibration spectrum, the electron-phonon coupling and the Coulomb electron-electron repulsion to an isotopic mass change and therefore gives information on how the dynamics of the ions are involved in the value of T c . If only phonons are taken into account the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory (BCS) Here we consider the hydride system with a very unusual isotope effect, the PdH(D) system. Quite an amount of theoretical and experimental work Another aspect of this problem is associated to the crystal structure considered for PdH(D). Most of the work done so far considers the rocksalt crystalline structure where the hydrogen atoms are located on the octahedral sites of the fcc lattice of Palladium So, following the facts just mentioned, in this paper we will consider the PdH(D) in the zincblende crystal structures that has not been yet considered in this problem. Since the anharmonic hypothesis does not reproduce the experimental value of the isotope effect coefficient for PdH(D), we try in this work to study another possibility. We take into account besides the changes in the electron-phonon interaction, the ones in the electron-electron interaction. We take the vibrational modes to be harmonic. Under these hypothesis, we have found that using the Migdal-Eliashberg theory The paper is organized in the following way. The theory and the basic equations that supports our method are present in Section II. The technical details and results are presented in Section III and concluding remarks are contained in Sec. IV. BCS theory gives for a compound with several atoms the following formula for the partial isotope effect coefficients α i ≡ -d ln T c /d ln M i where M i is the mass of the different atoms in the compound and T c the critical temperature. The total isotope effect coefficient is given by the sum of the partial ones, namely α tot = i α i . According to Migdal-Eliashberg theory, the α i coefficients contain information on both the electronphonon interaction and the electron-electron repulsion where R (ω) is given by The Eliashberg function is defined as where g qν,nm k+ q, k are the matrix elements of the electron-phonon interaction, ǫ k+ q,m and ǫ k,n are the energy of the quasi-particles in bands m and n with vectors k + q and k respectively. The functional derivative of the critical temperature with respect to the Eliashberg function is given by Now we can calculate the change in the critical temperature and in the isotope coefficient as and The phonon spectrum in PdH(D) is neatly separated in two frequency regions (see Fig. Further, the information on the electron-electron contribution can be found from the corresponding Coulomb repulsion parameter μ * . This is a Coulomb effective potential that depends on the phonon frequency. It gives a measure on how retardation effects due to the electron-phonon interaction (due to the ions field) scale the bare Coulomb potential In the Random phase approximation it is given by Where μ = V N (E F ) is the product of the average of the coulomb potential and the density of states at the Fermi level, ω el is an electron energy scale and ω ph is a phonon energy one. It is therefore evident from Eq. ( The isotope coefficient for the electron-electron interaction is given by Here the critical temperature of the isotope is given by [44] where and Now, if we take both contributions into account the total isotope effect coefficient is given by the following equation and the total change in the critical temperature, T c , is calculated from Then, according to Eqs. Where △n is given by Here ρ is the breaking parameter that becomes zero at T c . The frequency ωn is and iω n are the Matsubara frequencies, iω n = iπT (2n + 1) with n = 0, ±1, ±2 . . .. The coupling parameter λ nm is defined as λ nn is the known electron-phonon interaction parameter. In this section we use the analysis showed previously to study the isotope effect of PdH with the zincblende crystal structure. Since several works consider the rocksalt crystal structure to be the proper one and attribute the inverse isotope effect to hanarmonic affects in the vibrational spectra, we also study the isotope effect taken into account this structure. Finally we compare the results from both structures. For the zincblende structure (Fig. For both crystal structures the phonon spectrum and therefore, the Eliashberg function, is divided into two frequency regions. The acoustic region, from the Pd vibrations, is in general similar for both structures and it ranges from 0 to approximately 250 cm -1 . For the two structures the optical frequency region, from the Hydrogen and Deuterium vibrations, is separated by a frequency gap from the acoustic ones. The hydrogen optical region is higher than that for the deuterium one in both structures and there is a shift to higher frequencies from the the rocksalt to the zincblende structure (see Fig. To solve the LMEE, we used a cutt-off frequency, ω cutof f = 10ω ph where ω ph is the maximum phonon frequency, to cut the sum over the Matsubara frequencies. With the ω cutof f chosen the only adjustable parameter left is μ * . We fitted it by solving the LMEE to get the experimental T c . In Tab. 1 we include the fitted values of μ * . In Fig. this critical temperature for the isotope PdD is very close to the experimental value of 11.05 K Even though, as we mention above, this is not the structure that prevails at temperatures T ≪ 55 K, we now proceed to study the system in the rocksalt structure since several works consider it in their study of this problem. In this case R (ω) is not so small as compared to the zincblende system, and remains positive in all the optical frequency region. By integrating α e-ph (ω) over this region we get the isotope effect coefficient contribution to be +0.36448 from the electron-phonon interaction. This means that the superconducting state is highly affected by the isotope mass substitution if only this interaction is taken into account. For the contribution to the corresponding change in the critical temperature in this case, we find ∆T e-ph c = -1.962 K. Now if we calculate the corresponding change due to the electron-electron interaction, we find ∆T el-el c = 0.846 K. This gives a total change in the critical temperature ∆T T otal c = -1.1168. Further, we calculated the isotope effect coefficient contribution to be -0.13254 from the electron-electron interaction. This gives a total isotope coefficient α total = 0.2319. Then, for this system the electron-phonon contribution to the superconducting state is highly modified by isotope mass substitution whereas the electron-electron one is less important as is expected in a conventional superconductor, however the values of ∆T T otal c and α total does not match the experimental ones. Our results for the rocksalt crystal structure contrast with the ones from reference Zincblende Rocksalt Expt. In conclusion, we have found that if we consider the zincblende crystal structure as the proper one for PdH(D) at temperatures below (T ≪ 55 K) in agreement with experiment, the inverse isotope effect can be explained by taking the electron-electron contribution into account. We found that the electron-phonon contribution is much less important. We reproduced the experimental measured values for the isotope coefficient and the change in the critical temperature. Our work provides a simple and direct explanation of the observed inverse isotope effect in PdH. We have also considered the rocksalt crystal structure for PdH(D) and were unable to reproduce the experimental results under this assumption.