We report on the fabrication and electrical transport properties of superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) made from a (Bi 1-x Sb x ) 2 Se 3 topological insulator (TI) nanoribbon (NR) connected with Pb 0.5 In 0.5 superconducting electrodes. Below the transition temperature of the superconducting Pb 0.5 In 0.5 electrodes, periodic oscillations of the critical current are observed in the TI NR SQUID under a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the plane owing to flux quantization. Also the output voltage modulates as a function of the external magnetic field. Moreover, the SQUID the SQUID shows a voltage modulation envelope, which is considered to represent the Fraunhofer-like patterns of each single junction. These properties of the TI NR SQUID would provide a useful method to explore Majorana fermions. Topological insulators (TIs) are bulk insulators having metallic surface states that are topologically protected by time-reversal symmetry When TIs are combined with conventional s-wave superconductors, Majorana fermions (MFs) can be expected at the interface Quantum interference devices have received attention because of the charge neutrality and zero energy of the MF. MFs form zero energy Andreev bound states in the barrier when the phase difference between the superconducting leads is π. Therefore these quasiparticles are described by a current-phase relation (CPR) with 4π periodicity instead of 2π one in TI/superconductor system In this paper, we present an experimental study of SQUIDs made of a TI that has a nanoribbon (NR) shape instead of a flake shape. Because NR shapes have a larger surface-tovolume ratio than flake shapes, a stronger surface effect can be expected. The surface states of TI NR is can be host a single gapless linearly dispersing Dirac fermion. The TI NR which has a quasi-1D geometry exhibits Majorana end modes when it is passed through the magnetic flux of half-integer flux quanta and proximitized from the superconductor Furthermore, Fraunhofer-like patterns superimposed on the SQUID oscillations were observed. Our experimental study gives useful information for flux qubit applications based on TI NRs. As-grown Sb-doped Bi 2 Se 3 TI NRs were mechanically transferred to a highly n-doped silicon substrate covered by a 290-nm-thick oxide layer with prepatterned Ti/Au bonding pads. Source and drain electrodes were patterned by standard electron beam lithography followed by e-beam evaporation of 300-nm-thick Pb 0.5 In 0.5 . A 10-nm-thick Au film was used as a capping layer. The PbIn alloy source was made using a mixture of lead(Pb) and indium(In) pellets with a weight ratio of 1:1. Before metal deposition, the NR surface was cleaned by oxygen plasma treatment to remove e-beam resist residues. Then, the NR was treated using a 6:1 buffered oxide etch for 7 s to remove a native oxide layer that was assumed to be present. Figure where e is the electron charge, ħ is the reduced Planck's constant, L φ is the phase coherence length, ψ(x) is the digamma function, B is the out-of-plane applied magnetic field, and α is a dimensionless transport parameter As a result, the total α (α total = α top + α bottom ) is ~1.2-1.3, which is consistent with our experimental data. In addition, the phase coherence length is estimated to be 465 nm from the HLN fitting result, which confirms the two-dimensionality of the system and is similar to previous results of TI studies When an external magnetic field is applied along the length of the TI NR, periodic magnetoconductance oscillation is observed which is called Aharonov-Bohm oscillation (ABO) and has a period of h/e, where h is Planck's constant. ABO is generally caused by the interference of partial waves formed in the closed electron path surrounding the magnetic flux in the mesoscopic ring structure Because of the density-of-states effect of the 1D subband caused by surface electron conduction and the existence of a π Berry phase due to the TSS, the ABO that alternates between the 0 and π phases depending on the gate voltage can be measured far from the Dirac point The proximity effect of supercurrent though the (Bi 1-x Sb x ) 2 Se 3 TI NR SQUID is observable below the T c value of the PbIn superconducting electrode. where I c1 and I c2 are the critical currents of the weak links A decrease in the critical current as the magnetic flux increased from 0 to 1/2Φ 0 was similarly measured in sample D4 at a much lower temperature, T = 0.3 K, as shown in figure where The output voltage of sample D4, which has an asymmetric critical current, is also related to the oscillation amplitude of I DC and shows a maximum value near I c , as shown in figure Figure Fraunhofer-like interference due to each Josephson junction The magnetic field modulation of the critical current is plotted in figure where I c1 and I c2 are the critical currents for each junction, and Φ is the magnetic flux through the square-ring area of the SQUID. I c1 and I c2 values of 204 and 198 nA, respectively, are obtained, which are similar to the results for the conventional SQUID CPR, and the envelope of the first interference pattern has a period of 92 Oe. This result is consistent with the value that was verified in figure In this case, the period of the SQUID oscillation corresponded to a smaller area than the geometric area. In our experiments, the TI NR SQUID oscillation period is comparable to the effective area considering the penetration depth. In conclusion, we demonstrated the realization of a (Bi 1-x Sb x ) 2 Se 3 TI NR SQUID in contact with PbIn superconducting electrodes. We observed critical current modulation under a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the plane of the SQUID. The output voltage also oscillated with the magnetic field, so the device acted as a flux-to-voltage transducer with high SQUID sensitivity. In addition, a Fraunhofer-like pattern was superimposed on the SQUID interference pattern. Our results are expected to be useful for investigating the superconducting phase interference effects and MFs. 