In order to clarify electronic states and energy dissipations due to a motion of a vortex core in pure FeSe, which is a candidate superconductor possessing a super-clean core, we measured the microwave surface impedance of pure FeSe single crystals under finite magnetic fields. From the magnetic-field dependence of the flux-flow resistivity, we found that a barometer of electronic states inside the vortex core ω 0 τ core is 1 ± 0.5, suggesting that the vortex core of pure FeSe is in the moderately clean regime contrary to the expectation of the super-clean core. We also found that the mean-free path inside the vortex core is suppressed at the distance of the order of the core radius. Based on observed results and previous reports, we discussed possible origins of rather small ω 0 τ core value in terms of the multiple-bands nature of FeSe and additional mechanisms producing extra energy dissipations specific to the vortex core in motion. The discovery of superconductivity in LaFeAsO 1-x F x with a critical temperature of T c = 26 K 1) triggered energetic researches on iron-based superconductors (FeSCs). In order to explore the origin of superconductivity and/or to clarify their potential for superconducting applications, experimental investigations on many physical properties of FeSCs have been carried out so far. The flux-flow resistivity, which reflects energy dissipations induced by quasiparticles bound inside and vicinity of the vortex core (Fig. As schematically shown in Fig. Although the flux-flow phenomena is one of the fundamental topic of superconductivity discovered more than fiftyyears ago, the nature of magnetic vortex in motion has not been fully understood. Indeed, the origin of the force driving magnetic vortices, namely the Lorentz (electromagnetic) force In this article, we focus on FeSe single crystals synthesized by a chemical vapor deposition with a KCl-AlCl 3 flux To elucidate electronic states and energy dissipations regarding the vortex core and to see if the super-clean core is realized in pure FeSe, we investigated the flux-flow resistivity of pure FeSe single crystals on the basis of microwave surface impedance measurements under finite magnetic fields. Pure FeSe single crystals were synthesized by the chemical vapor deposition with the KCl-AlCl 3 flux. The flux-flow resistivity was investigated by using a cavity perturbation technique in a microwave region. where G and C are constants depending on geometries of the sample and the resonator. These factors can be determined by imposing additional conditions of R s (T > T c , B) = X s (T > T c , B) = μ 0 ωρ dc (T > T c , B)/2 with ρ dc (T, B) shown in Fig. where λ(T ) is the penetration depth in the zero-field limit, ρ f (T, B) the flux-flow resistivity, ω cr (T, B)/2π the crossover frequency characterizing the crossover from a reactive response (ω ≪ ω cr ) to a resistive response (ω ≫ ω cr ). Figure As shown in the inset of Fig. Next, we work on the crossover frequency, ω cr /2π, which characterizes the crossover between reactive-and resistive responses of the vortex motion. Regarding the magnitude of the crossover frequency, ω cr /2π of pure FeSe is about 15 GHz under (2 K, 1T) condition, which is lower than that in FeSe 0.4 Te 0.6 (≃ 37 GHz shown in Fig. Figure ω 0 τ core = 1±0.5 is the largest among other FeSCs measured in so far; LiFeAs (0.4±0.1), Since ρ dc (0 K, 0 T) of our samples are 3 -4 times larger than that in Ref. 22, pure FeSe with higher purity may have a 3 -4 times longer scattering time. However, even in this case, ω 0 τ core is expected to be of the order of unity; the vortex core of pure FeSe is still in the moderately clean regime. This is inconsistent with the expectation that the super-clean core is realized in pure FeSe. Here we consider the reason why ω 0 τ core of pure FeSe resulted in about unity below. One possible origin is a carrier compensation reflecting an existence of hole-and electron-type bands in FeSe. is expected to be smaller than (ω 0 τ core ) hole and (ω 0 τ core ) elec alone, where (ω 0 τ core ) hole/elec is ω 0 τ core due to hole/electron bands. Along this speculation, the net ω 0 τ core can be ω 0 τ core 1 even when (ω 0 τ core ) hole and/or (ω 0 τ core ) elec are in the superclean-core regime, (ω 0 τ core ) hole/elec ≫ 1, as expected in pure FeSe. A remarkable reduction of the net carrier density observed by the normal-state Hall resistivity measurements in pure FeSe Now let us focus on τ core to explore another candidate affecting on ω 0 τ core . STS measurements at the center of the vortex core in pure FeSe single crystals By using the Fermi velocity of v F ≃ 3.5 × 10 4 m/s, which we evaluated from a band structure In both cases of nodal-and nodelss SCs, it is clear that motions of quasiparticles are suppressed at the distance of the order of core radius; v F τ core ∼ ξ. This indicates the importance of physics specific to the vortex-core boundary to the enhancement of energy dissipations inside the vortex core. There are some theoretical predictions, which are expected to produce extra energy dissipations inside the vortex core, such as an interplay between a collective motion of the order parameter and CdGM modes In order to clarify electronic states and energy dissipations due to the motion of the vortex core in pure FeSe single crystal, which is expected to possess the super-clean core, we investigated the microwave surface impedance in the zerofield limit and under finite magnetic fields. From the magnetic field dependence of the flux-flow resistivity, we found that the barometer of the electronic state inside the vortex core is ω 0 τ core = 1 ± 0.5. This suggests that the vortex core of pure FeSe is in the moderately clean regime, which is inconsistent with the expectation that the super-clean core is realized in pure FeSe. We also found that the mean-free path inside the vortex core is suppressed at the distance of the order of the core radius similarly to cuprates, LiFeAs, and Y 2 C 3 . We discussed possible origins of rather small ω 0 τ core in terms of the multiple-bands nature and mechanisms producing extra energy dissipations specific to the vortex core. However, it is not clear that observed ω 0 τ core can be explained by these mechanisms in a quantitative manner, and there is the possibility that novel mechanisms specific to the vicinity of the vortex core play a crucial role for extra energy dissipations. 