Based on the first-principles density functional theory electronic structure calculation, we investigate the possible phonon-mediated superconductivity in arsenene, a two-dimensional buckled arsenic atomic sheet, under electron doping. We find that the strong superconducting pairing interaction results mainly from the pz-like electrons of arsenic atoms and the A1 phonon mode around the K point, and the superconducting transition temperature can be as high as 30.8 K in the arsenene with 0.2 doped electrons per unit cell and 12% applied biaxial tensile strain. This transition temperature is about ten times higher than that in the bulk arsenic under high pressure. It is also the highest transition temperature that is predicted for electron-doped two-dimensional elemental superconductors, including graphene, silicene, phosphorene, and borophene. Recently there has been a surge of interest in the investigation of two-dimensional (2D) superconductors, partially due to their potential application in nanosuperconducting devices In recent years, several new 2D materials, like silicene, phosphorene, and borophene, were synthesized experimentally. Similar to graphene, phosphorene is obtained by mechanically exfoliating layered black phosphorus The DFT calculation also showed that the superconducting transition temperature can reach 16.4 K in silicene upon electron doping of n 2D = 3.51×10 14 cm -2 and 5% BTS Unlike silicene and phosphorene, borophene is intrinsically a metal Recently, a buckled single-layer honeycomb arsenic, i.e. arsenene, was proposed In this work, we employ the first-principles DFT and the Wannier interpolation technique to accurately determine the electron-phonon coupling (EPC) properties of electron-doped arsenenes. The phonon-mediated superconducting T c is evaluated based on the McMillian-Allen-Dynes formula. Without applying BTS, 0.1 electrons/cell (hereafter e/cell) doping can already turn arsenene into a superconductor with a superconducting temperature above the liquid-helium temperature. T c increases to 10 K at 0.3 e/cell doping (i.e. n 2D =2.76×10 14 cm -2 ). Moreover, we find that the A 1 phonon mode at the K point contributes mostly to the EPC constant. From the electronic point of view, the p z -like electronic orbitals of arsenic atoms couple strongly with phonons. By applying a BTS, the A 1 phonon mode is softened and the EPC matrix elements are enhanced. This enlarges both the EPC λ and the superconducting transition temperature. Under a 0.2 e/cell doping and 12% BTS, T c of arsenene is predicted to be about 30.8 K. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest T c predicted for 2D elemental superconductors upon electron doping. In the DFT-based electronic structure calculation, the plane wave basis method is adopted The charge density is calculated on an unshifted mesh of 60×60×1 points, with a Methfessel-Paxton smearing 34 of 0.02 Ry. The dynamical matrix and perturbation potential are calculated on a Γ-centered 12×12×1 mesh, within the framework of density-functional perturbation theory The EPC constant λ is determined by the summation of the momentum-dependent coupling constant λ qν over the first Brillouin zone or the integration of the Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω) in the frequency space in which N q represents the total number of q points in the fine q-mesh. The coupling constant λ qν for mode ν at wavevector q is defined by Here ω qν is the phonon frequency and g ij k,qν is the probability amplitude for scattering an electron with a transfer of crystal momentum q. (i, j) and ν denote the indices of energy bands and phonon modes, respectively. ǫ i q and ǫ j k+q are the eigenvalues of the Kohn-Sham orbitals with respect to the Fermi energy. N (0) is the density of states (DOS) of electrons at the Fermi level. N k is the total number of k points in the fine Brillouin-zone mesh. The Eliashberg spectral function is determined by We calculate the superconducting transition temperature using the McMillian-Allen-Dynes formula f 1 and f 2 are the correction factors, which equal 1 when λ < 1.3, and The effective screened Coulomb repulsion constant μ * is set to 0.1, and For a free standing arsenene without doping, we find that the optimized lattice constant is 3.5411 Å, in agreement with the result, 3.5408 Å, obtained by Zhang et al. Figure Figure The Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F (ω) shows two main peaks [Fig. Based on the above results, we calculate the superconducting transition temperature T c using the McMillian-Allen-Dynes formula The EPC constant λ is determined by the DOS, the phonon frequency ω qν , the EPC matrix element |g ij k,qν |, and other parameters. In order to determine which effect has the largest contribution to λ, we calculate the following two quantities ξ(q) is a modified Fermi surface nesting function, in which N (0) is also included. γ(q) is the nesting func- tion weighted by the EPC matrix element |g ij k,qν |. Figure The BTS is measured by ε = (a -a 0 )/a 0 × 100%, where a 0 and a are the lattice constants without and with strain, respectively. Without doping, arsenene remains in the semiconducting phase under BTS up to 12% 27 . In order to study the BTS effect on the superconducting properties, we calculate the EPC of biaxial strained arsenenes under 0.2 e/cell doping. At 4% BTS, as shown in Fig. Figure When the applied BTS is less than 4%, the twopeak structures of α 2 F (ω) are preserved [Fig. FIG. To determine which electron band contributes most to the EPC, we calculate λ ki defined by where i is the band index of electrons. λ ki describes the scattering process of an electron from the i-th band to other bands by a phonon with momentum q and branch ν. It represents the contribution of electrons with momentum k at the i-th band to the EPC. For all the cases we have studied, we find that λ ki behaves similarly. Here we only show the results for the 0.4 e/cell doping without BTS [Fig. The maximal superconducting T c of 23.8 K is predicted for 4.65×10 14 cm -2 electron-doped graphene under 16.5% BTS. Realistically, realizing such requirements in graphene may be very difficult in experiment. The advantage in the case of arsenene is that the high-T c superconductivity above 30 K may be obtained under a relatively smaller doping density (1.28×10 14 cm -2 ) and BTS (12%). Recently, multilayer arsenenes were successfully grown on InAs using the plasma-assisted process Based on the first-principles DFT electronic structure calculation, we predict that the semiconducting arsenene can become a phonon-mediated superconductor upon doping of electrons. The maximal superconducting transition temperature is found to be around 10 K in the doped arsenene. It can be further lifted to 30 K by applying a 12% BTS. The superconducting pairing results mainly from the A 1 phonon mode around the K point and the p z -like electrons of arsenic atoms.