In non-centrosymmetric superconductors, spin-orbit coupling can induce an unconventional superconducting state with a mixture of s-wave spin-singlet and p-wave spin-triplet channels 1-3 , which leads to a variety of exotic phenomena, including anisotropic upper critical field 1,4-7 , magnetoelectric effect 1,8-10 , topological superconductivity 11,12 , et al 1 . It is commonly thought that inversion symmetry breaking is substantial for pairing-mixed superconducting states. In this work, we theoretically propose that a new type of pairing-mixed state, namely the mixture of s-wave spin-singlet and d-wave spin-quintet channels, can be induced by spin-orbit coupling even in the presence of inversion symmetry when electrons effectively carry "spin-3/2" in superconductors. As a physical consequence of the singlet-quintet pairing mixing, topological nodal-line superconductivity is found in such system and gives rise to flat surface Majorana bands. Our work provides a possible explanation of unconventional superconducting behaviors observed in superconducting half-Heusler compounds [13][14][15][16][17] . In the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory, the s-wave spin-singlet pairing relies on the presence of both time reversal and inversion symmetry in superconductors (SCs). In non-centrosymmetric SCs, the absence of inversion symmetry can give rise to anti-symmetric spin-orbit coupling (SOC) with odd parity, and results in a mixture of s-wave spin-singlet (even parity) and p-wave spin-triplet (odd parity) pairings 1-3 . Due to the opposite parities of singlet and triplet pairings, only anti-symmetric SOC is considered in pairing mixing mechanism 1 , while symmetric SOC with even parity is normally overlooked in non-centrosymmetric SCs. However, we will show below this is not true if electrons carry "spin-3/2". Here "spin" refers to total angular momentum j, which is a combination of 1/2-spin and angular momentum of p atomic orbitals (l = 1), of basis electronic states. Such superconductivity with j = 3/2 electrons was recently proposed in superconducting half-Heusler compounds We start from electronic band structures of half-Heusler compounds and illustrate the origin of j = 3/2 electrons. The energy bands near the Fermi energy in half-Heusler compounds are s-type bands (Γ 6 bands) and p-type bands, where the latter is split into j = 3/2 bands (Γ 8 bands) and j = 1/2 bands (Γ 7 bands) by SOC (1) on the basis wavefunctions of |j, j z , where ξ k = 1 2m k 2 -μ with the chemical potential μ. The detailed forms of five d-orbital cubic harmonics g i 's and six 4-by-4 matrices Γ i (i = 0, . . . , 5) are defined in Sec.A of supplementary materials (SMs). The above Hamiltonian only includes symmetric SOC term h SOC , while the antisymmetric SOC that breaks inversion will be discussed in the end. The Luttinger Hamiltonian h(k) is O(3) invariant if c 1 = c 2 , and its symmetry is reduced to O h group if c 1 = c 2 . The eigen-states of h(k) are doubly degnerate with eigenenergies ξ ± (k) = k 2 /(2m ± ) -μ, where the subscript ± labels two spin-split bands, and m ± = m/(1 ± 2mQ c ) with 4 + ĝ2 5 and ĝi = g i /k 2 . We focus on the parameter regime with m < 0 22 , μ < 0 (p-type carriers), and c 1 c 2 > 0 for simplicity. With the choice of these parameters, the effective mass m -of the ξ -band is always negative while there are three different regimes for m + of the ξ + band: (I) m + < 0, (II) m + > 0, and (III) the sign of m + being angular dependent. Energy dispersions and Fermi surface shapes in these three regimes are depicted in Fig. Next we will discuss the interaction Hamiltonian and the possible superconducting pairings in the Luttinger model. Several types of pairing forms have been discussed in literature, including mixed singlet-septet pairing in the s-wave singlet and d-wave quintet channels, where , and V 0 and V 1 stand for the s-wave and d-wave interaction parameters, respectively. Here c † k is the four-component creation operator on the basis |j, j z , γ = -Γ 1 Γ 3 is the time-reversal matrix, V is volume and a is lattice constant. As discussed in Sec.B5 of SMs, the above interaction Hamiltonian H I can be extracted from the electron-optical phonon interaction proposed in Ref. According to the interaction in Eq.2, the gap function should take the form ∆(k) = ∆ 0 (Γ 0 γ/2) +∆ 1 (a 2 g k • Γγ/2), in which ∆ 0 and ∆ 1 represent s-wave singlet and d-wave quintet channels, respectively. The corresponding coupled linearized gap equation can be derived as (Sec.B6 of SMs) where x = ln[2e γ c /(πk B T )], γ is the Euler constant, k B is Boltzman constant, T is the critical temperature, c is the energy cut-off for the attractive interaction(V 0,1 < 0), λ 0 = -V 0 N 0 and λ1 = -(2mμa 2 )V 1 N 0 are the normalized interaction parameters with the density of state N 0 , and ∆0 = ∆ 0 sgn(c 1 ) and ∆1 = ∆ 1 (2mμa 2 ) are the normalized order parameters. The band information is included in the functions y 1,2,3 . In the limit 1 and c /|μ| 1, the functions y 1,2,3 can be perturbatively expanded as 2 )/Q c and m± = m ± /m are the normalized effective masses of the ξ ± bands. As demonstrated in Sec.B6 of SMs, zero c 1,2 can lead to a vanishing off-diagonal term in the gap equation (y 2 = 0) due to m+ = m-, thus revealing the essential role of h SOC in singlet-quintet mixing. By solving Eq. (3), the mixing ratio ∆1 / ∆0 is evaluated numerically as a function of |2mc 1 | in Fig. Similar to the singlet-triplet mixing in noncentrosymmetric SCs 1,11,30-32 , a physical consequence of singlet-quintet mixing is the existence of TNLS in certain parameter regimes. The topological property of superconducting phases can be extracted from the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian with the gap function determined by the gap equation (Eq. 3). TNLS can exist in the regime II when V 0 < 0 and V 1 > 0 and in the regime I and III as long as V 0 < 0 (Sec.C 2, 3, 5 and 7 of SMs). Here we focus on the regime I with normal band structure and V 0,1 < 0. Fig. the phase diagram (Fig. We finally discuss the experimental implications of our theory. Previous theoretical studies on half-Heusler SCs mainly focus on the compounds in regime II (inverted band structure), while our study suggests that regimes I (normal band structure) and III (a special case of inverted band structure) are more interesting due to strong singlet-quintet mixing. Superconductivity has been found in DyPdBi and YPdBi with normal band structure The five d-orbital cubic harmonics are given by 36 The angular momentum matrices of J = 3 2 are written as 36 The five Gamma matrices are defined as 36 Clearly, {Γ a , Γ b } = 2δ ab Γ 0 where Γ 0 is the 4 by 4 identity matrix. Time reversal matrix γ is defined as where θ is the time-reversal operator. The convention of time reversal matrix chosen in this work is where Γ ab = 1 2i [Γ a , Γ b ] and [...] is the anti-commutator. for any three dimensional(3d) unit vector n and any angle θ, where J = (J x , J y , J z ) are the angular momentum matrices on the bases of the spin tensors. Since the spin tensor is a rank-2 tensor, it can be viewed as the addition of two copies of spin basis. In the spin-3 2 case, there are 1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 16 spin tensors with S ranging from 0 to 3 and m S ranging from -S to S. The chosen expressions in this work are shown as the following and M S,-m S = (-1) m S (M Sm S ) † . The spin tensors satisfy the orthogonal condition Tr Furthermore, M Sm S matrices satisfy the relation with s 1,2,3,4 = ± 1 2 , ± 3 2 . B. Linearized gap equation and singlet-quintet mixing in Luttinger model The Luttinger model shown in the main text can be rewritten as where and eigenenergies of h(k) are The Green functions of the Luttinger model are given by and for electrons and holes, respectively. Here we use the fact that h(k) is time-reversal invariant. The Green functions can also be expressed in terms of projection operators P ± (k), defined as in the subspace of the ξ ± (k) bands, where i stands for the double degeneracy of each band. In the chosen bases, the matrix forms of P ± (k) are and where The isotropic case corresponds c 1 = c 2 in the above expressions. Since k • J commutes with h(k) for c 1 = c 2 , energy eigenstates can be labeled with eigenvalues of k • J. In this case, the ξ + bands are 3 2 bands if c 1 > 0, and 1 2 bands if c 1 < 0. This part follows Ref. where s 1,...,4 = ±1/2, ±2/3. After performing the Fourier transformation, we obtain where with the total volume V. Since Cooper pairs of superconductivity occurs for two electrons with opposite momenta, we only keep the terms with k 4 = -k 3 in the above interaction. As a result, we can define k = k 4 = -k 3 and k = kq, which lead to We generally denote V (k -k ) as V (k, k ) and impose the O(3) symmetry on the interaction, V (Rk, Rk ) = V (k, k ) for any R ∈ O(3). In addition, the Hermitian condition of interaction requires Due to the O(3) symmetry, V (k, k ) can be expanded as Here the spherical harmonic functions satisfy the orthogonal condition With the relation (A12) and (B11), (B13) Since both Y lm ( k) and ( where can be easily derived from the orthogonal conditions of M 's and Y 's. With the above expansion, we have which gives rise to (B16) Due to the anti-commutation relation of fermion operators, we have which gives a constraint on the form of N lS jmj ( k). Since [N lS jmj (-k)γ] T = (-1) l+S+1 N lS jmj ( k)γ, it requires l + S to be an even number. As a summary, the form of interaction term is given by where S,l is a part of 3 S=0 ∞ l=0 with l + S being even. We re-define ṼlSj (|k|, |k |) = Ṽl (|k|, |k |)/(2l + 1) for the interaction in the (l, S, j) channel. The gap function ∆ s1s2 (k) is a 4 × 4 matrix and can also be expanded as with the spherical harmonics and spin tensors. Using C-G coefficients, we have where Similarly, due to the anti-commutation relation of fermion operators, only even l + S terms are left, giving rise to In this part, we will derive the linearized gap equation. Consider a Hamiltonian with the form where the chemical potential is set to be the zero energy. , where A = Tr(e -βH A)/Tr(e -βH ) ( The definition of average here is different from the average over angle in the main text). The product of four fermionic operators can be simplified by neglecting the fluctuations around expectations (the mean-field approximation) In the following discussion, mean-field approximation is always assumed. The gap function ∆ αβ (k) is defined as The interaction Hamiltonian H is expanded as in the mean-field approximation, where Here we have used the Hermitian condition of the interaction ), the Hamiltonian can be expressed in the BdG form where k only covers half 1BZ(covering the whole 1BZ if counting its inversion partner), and Plugging Eq.B26 into definition of b γδ (k) and keeping ∆ to first order on the right-hand side, we obtain Combining the above equation with Eq.B24, the self-consistent linearized gap equation is derived as where and ω n = (2n + 1)π/β is the fermionic Matsubara frequency with n being integers. The superconducting transition temperature can be solved from Eq.(B28). In this section, we will show the singlet-quintet mixing is allowed in the above linearized gap equation for Luttinger Hamiltonian in the isotropic case and the symmetric SOC term h SOC defined in the main text plays a central role in this pairing mixing mechanism. If we choose the gap function on the left hand side of the gap equation to be s-wave singlet pairing, the gap equation will take the form With the interaction form in Eq.(B18), we have (B30) The mixing between ∆ 00 00 (k) and ∆ lS jmj (k) in the above equation is determined by To simplify our discussion, we assume the O(3) symmetry of non-interacting Hamiltonian. In this limit, we find for j = 0 or m j = 0 or l is not even. Therefore, only the isotropic d-wave quintet pairing ∆ and only ∆ 00 00 (k) can be mixed into ∆ 22 00 (k) under the O(3) symmetry. Thus, for the chosen O(3) invariant interaction and a generic O(3) invariant non-interacting Hamiltonian, (0, 0, 0) channel is only allowed to mix with (2, 2, 0) channel and vice verse. Next, we will show what terms of the non-interacting Hamiltonian that are essential for the existence of the mixing. The general form of the O(3) invariant non-interacting Hamiltonian reads where N 00 00 ( k) and N 22 00 ( k) are chosen to be Hermitian and f 1,2 (k) are arbitrary real functions of magnitude of k. In terms of Γ matrices, the general form of the O(3) invariant non-interacting Hamiltonian reads and from which one can see that N 22 00 ( k) follows the form of symmetric spin-orbit coupling in the isotropic case. Therefore, we consider the Hamiltonian with the form which leads to the Green functions and With the above form of Green functions, we have Plugging into the linearized gap equation and using the orthonormal condition for N 's, Therefore, non-trivial solutions of the above gap equations require (1) non-zero interaction parameters Ṽ000 , Ṽ220 and (2) non-zero f 1,2 (k). The condition (2) suggests the essential role of symmetric SOC. The above analysis can be carried out in a more compact form similar to the case of singlet-triplet mixing in non-centrosymmetric superconductors, as discussed in Ref. with only s-wave singlet pairing and a generic d-wave quintet pairing. We omit the triplet and septet channels because they are parity-odd and the chosen Luttinger model is centrosymmetric. In this case, the linearized gap equation reads and lead to two coupled equations for φ(k) and d(k) In the equation of φ(k), since the s-wave pairing is isotropic φ(k) = dΩφ(k)/(4π), the mixing term can be re-written as where From the above expression, it is clear that the mixing term will vanish for a zero symmetric SOC term h SOC (c 1 = 0). In addition, we can see that the vector d(k) should contain a component parallel to the vector g k for a non-zero mixing term. The above derived coupled gap equations are quite similar to those for singlet-triplet mixing in non-centrosymmetric SCs The above analysis actually presents us a minimal model that can be chosen for this problem: the O(3) invariant interaction only contains (0, 0, 0) and (2, 2, 0) channels with two parameters V 0 and V 1 discussed in the main text and O(3) invariant non-interacting Hamiltonian with the form in Eq. (B35). In the main text, we present our linearized gap equation based on a simplified interaction form with two parameters V 0 and V 1 in s-wave singlet and d-wave quintet channels. In this section, we will justify this form of interaction from a more realistic interaction. Here we consider a screened Coulomb-like potential, which has been used in Ref. with B > 0 and A < 0 (attractive interaction). Its Fourier transformation has the form which can be used for V (k, k ) in Eq.B10 (V (q = kk )). We are only interested in the form of the interaction in the (0, 0, 0) and (2, 2, 0) channels, and thus expand the interaction as where up to the leading order. In the above limit, we notice that Ṽ2 Ṽ0 . With V 0 = A/B 2 and V 1 = 8A/(3B 6 a 4 ), the interaction term should take the form B55) which is the same as that used in the main text. Since the values of A and B are material dependent, we just regard V 0 and V 1 as two independent parameters in the main text for simplicity. Moreover, we assume that the energy cut-off for attractive V 0,1 to be c . V 0,1 are always assumed to be attractive unless specified otherwise. According to the gap function Eq. (B24) and the interaction form Eq. (B55), we can write the specific gap functions where and With the linearized gap equation (B28), we find the coupled linearized gap equations in the singlet and qunitet channels take the form With the Green functions in Eq.B3 and Eq.B4, the coupled gap equations are re-written as 4 + ĝ2 5 and ĝi = g i /k 2 . It is easy to see that the mixing is zero if c 1 = c 2 = 0, which means the symmetric SOC is essential. The above equations would be easier to deal with if expressed in terms of the projection operators. With Eq.B5 and Eq.B6, we have 1, where c labels the energy range for the momentum summation around the chemical potential μ and is an energy scale much smaller than SOC strength and chemical potential. In the continuous limit, the momentum summation can thus be written as where N ± (0) ≡ (2π) -3 4π|m ± |Re[ √ 2m ± μ] is the density of states for ξ ± bands at Fermi energy without spin degeneracy. Given c /(2Q c k 2 F ) 1, the following four expressions F,-Qc , and thus can be dropped. With the above approximations as well as low transition temperature assumption 1/(β c ) 1, the coupled linearized gap equation can be simplified as up to the leading order of c /(2Q c k 2 F ), | c /μ| and 1/(β c ). Here y 1,2,3 are given by x = ln(2e γ β c /π) with γ being the Euler constant , The coupled Eqs. (B61) can be solved as an eigen problem and the corresponding eigen-values are and Since β c 1 is assumed, x > 0 and thus 1/x increases as T increases. Since 1/x 1 < 1/x 2 , the critical temperature should be determined by x 2 and given by where T 0 = 2e γ c /(πk B ). The corresponding eigen-vector gives rise to the ratio of order parameters ∆0 ∆1 in different channels, which reads We notice that the singlet-quintet mixing can enhance the critical temperature T c . To see that, we can neglect the off-diagonal term in the gap equation (B61) or equivalently choose y 2 = 0. In this case, the critical temperatures in the singlet and quintet channels can be determined by 1/x cs = λ 0 y 1 /2 and 1/x cq = λ1 y 3 /2, respectively, where x cs = ln(T 0 /T cs ) and x cq = ln(T 0 /T cq ). Since with x = ln(T 0 /T c ), we conclude that the T c in Eq. (B67) is always larger than T cs and T cq . This section is devoted to the understanding of three kinks in Fig. Let us first discuss the band structure and the momentum cut-off. In regime III, the ξ -bands always bend down, while the ξ + band bends up along Γ -X and down along Γ -L or vice verse, as depicted in Fig. ) into the integral for the ξ - and ξ + bands, respectively. As a result, the functions y 1,2,3 are re-defined as and The Fermi surface shape of the ξ + band plays an important role in determining the values of y 1,2,3 , and consequently the kink structures. We choose the momentum cut-off as Λ = 3 √ 2mμ for the red line and Λ = ∞ for the blue line in Fig. We will study the energy dispersion of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian with the singlet-quintet mixing and extract the phase diagram for the topological nodal-line superconducting phase. Here we first give a review of the BdG Hamiltonian for superconductivity and its symmetry property. The BdG Hamiltonian is written as ). The BdG Hamiltonian has particle-hole symmetry, time reversal symmetry and consequently chiral symmetry. The particle-hole symmetry is defined as The time-reversal symmetry is defined as with and γ is defined in Sec.A. From the above definition, we find the requirement ∆(k)γ † = γ∆ † (k) for the gap function ∆(k). We know the BdG Hamiltonian has time-reversal symmetry is because ∆ 0 /∆ 1 in Eq.B68 is a real number. According to the convention we choose for time-reversal operator γ = -iΓ 13 , ∆ 0 and ∆ 1 should be set to be real. The chiral symmetry is given by with the chiral operator χ = iT C * naturally following the definition of T and C. We can introduce the unitary transformation matrix U χ to diagonalize the chiral operator 38 Correspondingly, the BdG Hamiltonian can be transformed into an off-diagonal form by the unitary transformation matrix U χ . Now we want to extract the conditions for the existence of nodal points or lines in the above BdG Hamiltonian. Due to chiral symmetry, the energy of nodal points must be zero, thus requiring the condition det[h BdG (k)] = 0. From the Eq.C9, in which h(k) is of even dimension, we obtain and thus According to the Luttinger model expression and gap function expressions (B56), we have Under the conditions m < 0,μ < 0 and c 1 c 2 > 0, the above equations can be simplified as with k = k/ √ 2mμ. One can numerically solve the above equations for k2 and to extract the existence and location of nodal points or lines. Below we will further demonstrate the 4-fold degeneracy at each nodal point for the BdG Hamiltonian of the Luttinger model. This is due to inversion symmetry, which is given by with P = -1 8×8 , in addition to Time reversal, particle-hole symmetry and chiral symmetry. By combining inversion with time-reversal or particle-hole, we can define two new symmetry operators: T = PT and C = PC, which satisfy the symmetry relations and Since the momentum k is invariant under T and C, we conclude that any nodal point at zero energy should be 4-fold degenerate. Although the nodal points or lines can be determined by Eq.C14 numerically, it is desirable to have more analytic understanding of the origin of these nodal points or lines. In this section, we will project the gap function onto the Fermi surface, from which one can identify the physical origin of the nodal points and lines. The BdG Hamiltonian (C2) can be re-written in a compact form as where τ 0 and τ 1,2,3 are identity matrix and Pauli matrices for particle hole index and τ ± = τ 1 ± iτ 2 . The Luttinger Hamiltonian h(k) can be diagonalized by the unitary transformation 36 This leads to We define the unitary transformation which gives rise to With the pairing expression (B56), we can obtain where 2f After the unitary transformation, the block part of the ξ + bands in the BdG Hamiltonian is given by while the block for the ξ -bands is The coupling between different ξ ± blocks is given by the off-diagonal terms of Eq. (C19), which is zero in the isotropic limit(c 1 = c 2 ) and can be neglected for small anisotropy. Even if the anisotropy is not small, it can still be neglected since the physics related with pairing is only relevant near Fermi surfaces. From the expressions of ξ ± blocks, we notice that the d-wave quintet pairing is transformed into s-wave singlet pairing with k 2 dependence after the projection. Such form of pairing is normally known as extended s-wave pairing in literature For the ξ + band, the nodal condition is determined by For the ξ -band, the nodal condition is Here we have used m < 0, μ < 0 and c 1 c 2 > 0 and the relation between ∆0 ( ∆1 ) and ∆ 0 (∆ 1 ) is defined in the main text. The nodal condition for the ξ + (ξ -) band requires ∆0 / ∆1 < 0 ( ∆0 / ∆1 > 0). According to Eq. (B68), which is solved from the linearized gap equation, the sign of ∆0 / ∆1 is determined by y 2 . Therefore, we need to discuss two cases with different signs of y 2 , separately. If y 2 > 0, ∆0 / ∆1 > 0 and thus nodal points cannot exist on the ξ + Fermi surface. In this case, the nodal points for the ξ -band require where If y 2 < 0, ∆0 / ∆1 < 0 and nodal points cannot exist on the ξ -Fermi surface. The nodal points for ξ + bands are fixed by where . The nodal lines extracted from the above equations are found to fit well with those obtained from the direct numerical calculations of Eq. (C14) for ∆ 1 being not too large. In this section, we will extract topological nature of nodal lines in the phase diagram by defining appropriate topological invariants. Due to the existence of chiral symmetry, the BdG Hamiltonian at an arbitrary momentum k belongs to the AIII class. Thus we consider the one dimentional topological invariant N w in the AIII class, defined as 33 where L is chosen to be a closed path that does not pass any gapless point in the momentum space. Here the matrix , in which U and V are two unitary matrices from the singular value decomposition of the upper off-diagonal block of transformed Hamiltonian in Eq.C9, and Σ(k) is a diagonal matrix with entries being real and non-negative. One can easily show that Q is unitary C26) where |Det[Q(k)]| = 1 is used in the last equality and Arg[x] is defined as x = |x|e iArg b. Regime II: Inverted Band Structure In this parameter regime, we find 2mQ c < -1, and thus √ 1 + 2mQ c is purely imaginary, leading to y 2 < 0 according to Eq. (B63). The nodal conditions Eq. (C23) and (C22) for the ξ + and ξ -bands both cannot be satisfied for 2mQ c < -1 and y 2 < 0. Therefore, no nodal lines can exist in this case. It should be mentioned that if interaction in the quintet channel is repulsive, instead of attractive, nodal lines are still possible and we will discuss this situation in the later section. Here we focus on the possibility of nodal rings on the Fermi surface of the ξ + bands. Due to the momentum cut-off Λ, y 2 can be negative if only a sufficiently small area of ξ + Fermi surface is included, and thus nodal lines can also exist on the ξ + Fermi surface within Λ, according to the nodal condition Eq.C23. The corresponding region is on the left of the dashed line Fig. We have neglected the small inversion breaking term (anti-symmetric SOC term ∼ 0.01eV ) in the main text. In this section, we will include this term and show its influence on nodal-line superconductivity. The leading order of the anti-symmetric SOC has the following form where In terms of spin tensors, three V s can be re-written as Therefore, the anti-symmetric SOC term h IB contains p-wave momentum functions and septet spin tensors. The anti-symmetric SOC term h IB is parity-odd where P stands for the inversion operation. Let us denote the Green functions without inversion breaking term as Given the fact that the energy scale of h IB is much smaller than other energy scale, e.g. h SOC ∼ 1eV , we can choose the limit 0 < 2m/μ|C| 1 and thus the Green functions with h IB can be expressed as where the latter uses the fact that h IB is time reversal invariant. We can see, the first-order change of the Green functions given by h IB is parity-odd. Since all zero-order terms in the linearied gap equation for singlet-quintet mixing are parity-even, h IB would not change the linearized gap equation for singlet-quintet mixing to the first order. Therefore, it is reasonable for us to neglect the effect of small h IB to the singlet-quintet pairing mixing. However, as discussed in Ref. where int represents the original singlet-quintet interaction Hamiltonian (B55) and V = (V x , V y , V z ). Thus, the gap function becomes where ∆ (0) (k) is the original singlet-quintet pairing form (B56) and ∆ 2 is the order parameter of the p-wave septet channel. Since this channel is parity-odd and has the similar form as h IB , the mixing between this channel and s-wave singlet channel can exist for the first order of h IB , which should be much smaller than singlet-quintet mixing that is controlled by h SOC . Next we treat the anti-symmetric SOC h IB and the p-wave quintet order parameter ∆ 2 , which preserve the timereversal symmetry 13,23 , as a perturbation, and exam its influence on the nodal-line superconductivity. Due to the topological protection of nodal-line superconductivity, such small time-reversal and particle-hole invariant perturbation cannot directly gap out the nodal lines. We find that this term can split one N w = ±2 nodal line into two N w = ±1 nodal lines since it breaks the inversion symmetry. We exam the energy dispersion of the BdG Hamiltonian with the parameters chosen as ∆0 /|μ| = 1, ∆1 /|μ| = 1.6, ∆2 /|μ| = 0.1 , |2m|c 1 = 0.8, |2m|c 2 = 0.5 and 2m/μC = 0.1 to include the inversion breaking terms. The projection of bulk nodal lines (dark lines) onto (111) plane and the energy dispersion on (111) surface along (11 2) axis are shown in Fig. Another interesting situation occurs for the case that the interaction in the singlet channel is attractive ( Ṽ0 < 0, λ0 > 0), thus inducing the superconductivity, while that in the quintet channel is repulsive ( Ṽ1 > 0, λ1 < 0) within the energy cut-off c . This situation can occur when electron-phonon interaction dominates the singlet channel while repulsive Coulomb interaction dominates the quintet channel. In this case, superconductivity can still exist and the singlet-quintet mixing can be solved by Eq.(B61). The expressions of the pairing ratio Eq.(B68) and transition temperature Eq.B67 remains unchanged. Since the quintet channel is repulsive λ1 < 0, it is necessary to require (λ 0 y 1 -λ1 y 3 ) 2 + 4λ 0 λ1 y 2 2 ≥ 0 for superconductivity to exist. This requirement suggests the singlet channel would be strongly suppressed by the repulsive quintet channel interaction in the strong mixing limit. The discussion below will always assume this condition. According to Eq. (B68), Eq. (C20) and Eq. (C21), the approximate nodal condition is present as follows. (i)If y 2 > 0 which means ∆0 / ∆1 < 0, nodal points cannot exist on ξ -Fermi surface. In this case, the nodal condition for ξ + band (which is also the nodal condition for the whole system) is (ii)If y 2 < 0 which means ∆0 / ∆1 > 0, nodal points cannot exist on ξ + Fermi surface. In this case, the nodal condition for ξ -band (which is also the nodal condition for the whole system) is where a. Regime I: Normal Band Structure When the interaction in the quintet channel is attractive, nodal points in regime I (normal band structure) only exist on the ξ -Fermi surface, as discussed in Sec.C 5 a. For repulsive interaction in the quintet channel, the positive y 2 in regime I requires nodal points to only exist on the Fermi surface of the ξ + bands according to Eq. (C40). To illustrate it, we choose |2mc 2 | = 0.5 and plot the phase diagram in the parameter space of |2mc 1 | and | Ṽ1 /V 0 | with 0 ≤ |2mc 1 | < 1 in Fig. As pointed out in Ref. where 1 n is the n × n identity matrix. h BdG (k ⊥ ) is invariant under the mirror operator M 1 10 h BdG (k ⊥ )M † 1 10 = h BdG (k ⊥ ) with k ⊥ being the momentum perpendicular to (1 10) direction k ⊥ • (1, -1, 0) = 0. Thus, h BdG (k ⊥ ) can be block diagonalized by where h ± (k ⊥ ) stands for the two mirror subspaces of h BdG (k ⊥ ) with mirror eigenvalues ±i. Since the time-reversal operation commutes with the mirror operation and all mirror eigen-values are purely imaginary, the time-reversal matrix can be block off-diagonalized by where γ is a 4 × 4 unitary matrix. Therefore, the time-reversal symmetry gives With h + (-k ⊥ ) = h + (k ⊥ ) due to inversion symmetry, we have Since the chiral operation commutes with the mirror operation, the chiral operator can also be block diagonalized as where χ± are 4 × 4 unitary matrices. Thus, both mirror subspaces have chiral symmetry, given by As a result, h ± can be transformed into an block off-diagonal form as where D ± (k ⊥ ) are 2 × 2 matrices and U χ± are unitary matrices that diagonalize χ± The 1-d AIII topological invariant can be defined for both h ± (k ⊥ ) according to Eq. (C27) and Eq. (C30) as where L is a closed/infinitely-long path on (1 10) plane along which h ± (k ⊥ ) is gapped. The total N w defined in Eq. (C30) can be decomposed into