The spin-orbit coupling can lead to exotic states of matter and unexpected behavior of the system properties. In this paper, we investigate the influence of spin-orbit coupling induced by proximity effects on a monolayer of superconductor (with s-wave or d-wave pairing) placed on an insulating bulk. We show that the critical temperatures Tc of the superconducting states can be tuned by the spin-orbit coupling both in the case of on-site and inter-site pairing. Moreover, we discuss a possibility of changing the location of the maximal Tc from the half-filling into the underdoped or overdoped regimes. The proximity effects may occur in a situation, when two different metals are brought together In modern physics, the proximity effects play an important role in many aspects of spintronics Recently, a combination of the proximity effects and the SO coupling plays an important role in studying different types of junctions or heterostructures. An example of that is the interplay between superconductivity and ferromagnetism (F), which can be experimentally investigated in S/F/S Josephson junctions. That interplay leads to in-and out-of-plane magneto-anisotropies of the Josephson currents Similar behavior can be also helpful in realisation of the Majorana quasi-particles Motivation. -Examples presented above show a crucial role of proximity effects on the properties of the system. Recent experiments revealed an extraordinary increase of the critical temperature of the the FeSe monolayer grown on (001) surface of SrTiO 3 from 8 K The qualitative process of the induction of an effective SO coupling by proximity effect can be explained in the following way. The intrinsic SO coupling existing in the bulk substrate modifies wave functions of electrons located in the bulk. A finite hybridization, arising from the overlapping orbitals of atoms in the substrate and the layer, leads to a modification of the band structure of the electrons belonging to the layer The presented idea of the induced SO coupling by proximity effects is realizable experimentally, e.g. in the form of Bi 2 Te 3 /Fe 1+y Te It should be mentioned that the situations described above are different from that where the SO exists in the whole volume of bulk material. In such groups of systems one can distinguish e.g. topological insulators In this work we analyze the effects of spin-orbit coupling on the critical temperature of a superconducting layer (with both s-wave and d-wave effective pairing) placed on the surface of an insulator. We solve the effective model for the layer and determine critical temperatures as functions of the SO coupling and chemical potential. It is shown that for fixed spin-orbit interaction the maximal critical temperature occurs in the system with optimal electron doping away from half-filling. Next parts of this work are organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the model and method used, whereas in Section III the numerical results are presented. Section IV is devoted to the discussion of derived numerical results. Finally, a summary and final comments are included in Section V. FIG. For theoretical studies of the systems described in previous section we analyze the following model. The considered system is schematically shown in Fig. where ĉiα (ĉ † iα ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of an electron at i-th site with spin α ∈ {↑, ↓}, t ij is the hopping integral between i-th and j-th sites, μ is the chemical potential, and U ij < 0 is the pairing interaction. We consider both, the on-site interaction U ij = U δ ij corresponding to s-wave, and inter-site interaction between nearest neighbors U ij = U (δ i±x,j + δ i±ŷ,j ) corresponding to d-wave symmetry of the energy gap In the momentum space, after employing the brokensymmetry Hartree-Fock mean-field approximation, the Hamiltonian terms (1) are rewritten in the following forms: In the case of a square lattice with hopping between nearest neighbors, t ij = t (δ i±x,j + δ i±ŷ,j ), and next-nearest neighbors, and superconductivity (∆0 = 0) in the first Brillouin zone for a system on the square lattice. When there is no superconductivity in the system, i.e., if ∆ 0 = 0 is assumed, from the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian Ĥ0 + ĤSO , we retrieve two bands, namely, the upper and lower Rashba bands. The eigenproblem ( Ĥ0 + ĤSO )|Ψ k,± = ε k,± |Ψ k,± gives the following eigenvalues: and eigenstates: and We find fourfold-degenerate minimal energy at the nonanalytical points k x = ±k y given by the equation There are also four saddle points near the energy minimum points, which are located at k = (0, ±atan(V SO /t)) and (±atan(V SO /t), 0). The lower and upper Rashba bands correspond to minus "-" and plus "+" signs in above formulas, respectively, for V SO = 2t and t ′ = 0 are shown in Fig. the Nambu spinors Φk = (ĉ k↑ , ĉk↓ , ĉ † -k↑ , ĉ † -k↓ ) T , the total Hamiltonian (2) including all terms can be rewritten in the matrix form, where In the above expression Vk αβ correspond to the matrix elements of the spin-orbit coupling matrix Vk defined previously. The grand canonical potential of the system is determined by where λ kn (n = 1, ..., 4) are the eigenvalues of H k matrix, which is given by The calculations are carried out for a two dimensional square lattice of a size N X × N Y = 200 × 200 with the periodic boundary conditions. In the case of the BCS state this size corresponds to the thermodynamic limit We start analyzing the influence of the spin-orbit coupling V SO on the critical temperature T c as a function of the chemical potential μ in the absence of the NNN hopping (t ′ = 0). The electron concentration n (the filling of the system) is a monotonously increasing function of μ. We define T c as the temperature, at which the amplitude of the superconducting order parameter ∆ 0 , vanishes for a given {μ, V SO }. As we will show T c = T c (μ, V SO ) is not a trivial monotonic function of μ and V SO . All transitions found in the system are second-order (continuous) ones. The phase diagrams for a few values of V SO are presented in Fig. In order to gain a better understanding of the situation, we plot T c , but this time as a function of the SO coupling for several values of the chemical potential, as shown in Fig. Next, we investigate the behavior of the system in the presence of the NNN hopping (t ′ = -0.1t). In such a case the dependence of T c a function of μ losses its symmetry around half-filling, see Fig. Now we will discuss our results in terms of (i) the density of states of the non-interacting system and (ii) the non-trivial superconductivity induced by the SO coupling. In relation to superconducting state, the density of states of the non-interacting system at the Fermi level affects the critical temperatures and critical magnetic fields. This relation between these macroscopic and microscopic quantities has been described in the pioneering papers of To understand the behavior of the system described in the previous section, i.e., the dependence of T c as a function of μ and V SO , we calculate the non-interacting partial density of states (DOS) where the eigenvalues ε k,± of the Ĥ0 + ĤSO are given by Eq. ( In Fig. The band structure along high symmetry points Γ-X-M-Γ (left inset for locations of the points) for t ′ = 0 (solid lines) and t ′ = -0.25t (dashed lines): the electron band structure (for VSO = 0) is represented by the black lines, whereas the lower and the upper Rashba bands for VSO = 1t are indicated by red and green lines, respectively. The lower panels show the total (ρ(E), black line) and partial (ρ∓(E), red and green lines for the lower and the upper Rashba bands) densities of states for (b) t ′ = 0 and (c) t ′ = -0.25t, with spin-orbit coupling VSO = 1t. near E ≈ -4t ′ is the result of an existence of energy local minima (maxima) of the dispersion relation near points X and Y of the Brillouin zone in the lower (upper) Rashba band (cf. also Fig. Assuming that the critical temperature is given by the standard BCS formula, then one gets T c ∼ exp(-1/ρ(E F )) , where E F = μ-4t ′ in a case of the square lattice with the NNN hopping considered here. To illustrate this fact, the two partial DOS are presented in Figs. In the results presented in this paper, for T c as a function of μ and for V SO = 0, we have not found any consequences of the existence of the additional narrow peaks in the DOS ρ(E) at both edges of the Rashba bands. It can be due to the fact that these peaks are located solely at the Fermi level for very small either electron or hole concentrations in the system (i.e., at n ≈ 0 or n ≈ 2, respectively). However, this behavior can have an important role in extremally dilute systems, e.g., in the BCS-BEC crossover region As it was indicated above, in the presence of the SO coupling the electron spin is not longer a good quantum number. Despite the fact that we have labeled the system under our consideration to present either s-wave or d-wave symmetry of the superconducting order parameter, the SO coupling can effectively introduce a p-wave superconductivity. This possibility is well known and described in the literature, e.g., Refs. The spin-orbit coupling can lead to different unexpected behaviors in various systems. In this paper, we discuss the influence of the spin-orbit coupling on superconducting states in the presence of on-site (s-wave) or inter-site (d-wave) pairing in a monolayer with spin-orbit coupling induced by the proximity effects. In particular, we discuss the temperature versus doping phase diagram in detail. In our work, tuning the doping away from the half-filling, we demonstrate that the critical temperature can be a non-monotonic function of the spin-orbit coupling. Moreover, we have shown that for fixed value of the spin-orbit interaction the maximal value of the critical temperature is obtained for the underdoped or overdoped regimes, i.e., away from half-filling. Therefore, our results highlight the effects of the spin-orbit coupling on superconducting properties of the system. These results may be particularly relevant due to the feasibility of experimental realization of superconducting nano-and spintronics devices where a temperature dependence on the spin-orbit coupling using doped systems can enhance critical temperatures T c significantly rather than those at half-filling. It could be of a great importance due to the fact that for applications of superconducting materials systems with larger T c are preferred. The modifications of the T c by the spin-orbit coupling have been also discussed within the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) theory Presented results have been described in the context of solid state physics, e.g., a superconducting monolayer on a surface of an insulator with strong spin-orbit coupling (e.g., topological insulator). In this system, as a consequence of the proximity effects, the SO is induced in the layer and affects the physical properties of the superconductor. However, the investigations of the effects of the SO coupling on superconductivity beyond the described heterostructure can be performed with ultracold atomic gases on the optical lattices. Technically, the Hamiltonian of the system in the presence of superconductivity can be rewritten in a helicity basis of eigenstates (4). Then, the matrix form Using transformation (4), one can express the SOPs in the helicity basis by the SOP in the original basis where ζ k is given by Eq. ( tice that in Hamiltonian