We investigate the vortex lattice and vortex bound states in CsFe2As2 single crystals by scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) under various magnetic fields. A possible structural transition or crossover of vortex lattice is observed with the increase of magnetic field, i.e., the vortex lattice changes from a distorted hexagonal lattice to a distorted tetragonal one at the magnetic field near 0.5 T. It is found that a mixture of stripelike hexagonal and square vortex lattices emerges in the crossover region. The vortex bound state is also observed in the vortex center. The tunneling spectra crossing a vortex show that the bound-state peak position holds near zero bias with STM tip moving away from the vortex core center. The Fermi energy estimated from the vortex bound state energy is very small. Our investigations provide experimental information to both the vortex lattice and the vortex bound states in this iron-based superconductor. The vortex state is a typical character of type-II superconductors. A vortex core carries one flux quantum Φ 0 , and is circulated by supercurrents consisting of Cooper pairs. The repulsive interaction between vortices will make them an ordered triangular lattice which is called an Abrikosov lattice in the sample with weak pinning. The vortex lattice can be easily altered by crystal defects or impurities which usually act as pinning centers The low energy excitation within vortex cores has been predicted theoretically The discovery of iron-based superconductors has motivated the worldwide investigations on their superconducting mechanism, which is very interesting because of the multiple electron and hole Fermi pockets Comparing with some iron pnictides with both hole and electron Fermi pockets tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) is a useful technique for imaging the vortex core and studying the vortex bound states. In this paper, we present investigations on the vortices in CsFe 2 As 2 single crystals by using STS/STM. We observed a structural transition or crossover of the vortex lattice with an increase of magnetic field. The ordered vortex lattice suggests the weak pinning in the material. We also observed the vortex bound states and try to obtain the coherence length from the tunneling spectra crossing a vortex. The single crystals of CsFe 2 As 2 used in the experiments are synthesized by self-flux method Figure Figure Although there are many defects shown by the dark spots on the topography, they seem not to affect the superconducting feature judged from the quite uniform tunneling spectra measured along an arrowed line crossing a defect in Fig. The high density of states within the vortex core or the vortex bound state make it possible to image the vortices by using zero-bias mapping of STM measurements. Figures Furthermore, we do the statistics on the angle values of all the Delaunay triangles in Figs. Actually the first order transition from hexagonal to square vortex lattice was investigated 47 by using nonlocal London theory and Eilenberger theory, and it was argued as a generic phenomenon for a system with tetragonal structure. While since the iron based superconductors have the multiband feature, it is desired to know whether this conclusion is still totally or to some extent valid. In the following we use a simple simulation based on the interaction between vortices to argue that this transition is a generic feature. The repulsive interaction between two vortices can result in an interaction energy, and the energy for the i th vortex can be expressed as 48 Here K 0 (x) is the lowest-order of modified Bessel function, and the penetration depth λ ab = 0.3 μm from a previous report It should be mentioned that an isotropic hexagonal vortex lattice was observed in its sister compound KFe 2 As 2 by neutron scattering, which seems to be dif- ferent from the present situation in CsFe 2 As 2 . One reason for this difference may be from the different electronic structures, for example in KFe 2 As 2 , we observed a strong von Hove singularity near Fermi energy We also notice that the vortex lattice seems to be a mixture of stripe-like hexagonal and square lattices at magnetic field of 0.5 T. The self-correlation map in Fig. In order to get a deeper insight into the vortex core state, we study the tunneling spectra crossing an individual vortex. Figure Usually the coherence length can be estimated by the vortex core size from STM measurements. The way often adopted To summarize, we perform STM/STS investigations on vortices in the iron-based superconductor CsFe 2 As 2 . We observe a structural transition or crossover of vortex lattice from hexagonal to square lattice near 0.5 T. This vortex lattice structural transition or crossover can be understood by considering the inter-vortex interaction and the crystal structure. The intermediate lattice structure is the combination of stripe like hexagonal and square lattices, which may be a new type of vortex lattice structure. In addition, we observe a non-splitting vortex bound state peak located near zero bias. Our observations of vortex physics in CsFe 2 As 2 will help to understand the vortex dynamics and fundamental physics in iron-based superconductors.