Charge transfer and electron-phonon coupling (EPC) are proposed to be two important constituents associated with enhanced superconductivity in the single unit cell FeSe films on oxide surfaces. Using high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy combined with first-principles calculations, we have explored the lattice dynamics of ultrathin FeSe films grown on SrTiO3. We show that, despite the significant effect from the substrate on the electronic structure and superconductivity of the system, the FeSe phonons in the films are unaffected. The energy dispersion and linewidth associated with the Fe-and Se-derived vibrational modes are thicknessand temperature-independent. Theoretical calculations indicate the crucial role of antiferromagnetic correlation in FeSe to reproduce the experimental phonon dispersion. Importantly, the only detectable change due to the growth of FeSe films is the broadening of the Fuchs-Kliewer (F-K) phonons associated with the lattice vibrations of SrTiO3(001) substrate. If EPC plays any role in the enhancement of film superconductivity, it must be the interfacial coupling between the electrons in FeSe film and the F-K phonons from substrate rather than the phonons of FeSe. The superconducting transition temperature (T C ) for monolayer FeSe films, with the thickness of one unit cell (uc), on SrTiO 3 (001) substrate (1uc-FeSe/STO) From the structural point of view, the tensile strain induced by lattice mismatch From the dynamical point of view, phonons have been studied to elucidate the possible contribution to the interfacial T C enhancement. Some studies have proposed that Feand Se-derived phonons (FeSe phonons) could participate in the interfacial T C enhancement, which is supported by electron scattering with FeSe phonons in inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy measurements If phonons are involved in the interfacial enhancement of T C , several essential questions arise: Which phonons provide the major contribution, the FeSe phonons in the thin film or the STO phonons in the substrate? As the dipole field generated by the STO phonons can penetrate into the thin FeSe film Lattice dynamics including phonon spectra In this study, HREELS measurements were performed on various different samples, including single crystalline oxides, oxide films, and ultrathin single crystalline FeSe films grown on single crystalline oxides. The samples and the preparation methods are summarized in Table .I. The Nb-doped (0.5%) SrTiO 3 substrates are annealed at 600 • C for 12 h and then at 950 • C for 1 h in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) condition, which is labeled as "treated STO" in the paper and is used as the substrate of FeSe films. The treated STO samples are covered by thick amorphous selenium layer at room temperature, and annealed at 600 • C to remove the Se capping layer before HREELS measurements. To compare with treated STO, another Nb-doped (0.5%) SrTiO 3 substrate is etched by HF and annealed at 600 • C for 12 h before EELS measurement, which is labeled as "clean STO" in this paper. 40uc SrTiO 3 films without Nb doping are grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) at 600 High-quality single crystalline FeSe films were grown by co-depositing high-purity Fe (99.99%) and Se (99.99+%) with a flux ratio of ∼ 1 : 20 onto the treated STO held at 400 • C. The as-prepared samples were post-annealed at 470 • C for 5 h in UHV to make the first layer FeSe superconducting. The in-situ scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements were performed to confirm the sample quality [Fig. Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements were performed on 1uc-FeSe/STO samples using a He lamp (21.2 eV) and our 2D-HREELS analyzer along the ΓM direction, corresponding to the horizontal direction in the LEED pattern in Fig. LEED has been used routinely to determine the surface Debye temperature where f 0 is the structure factor, S is the diffraction vector (k -k 0 ), u 2 is the mean square displacement of the atoms thermal vibrations from their equilibrium position parallel to S, λ is the wavelength of the scattered radiation, φ is the Bragg angle, k B is the Boltzmann constant, m is the atomic mass, and Θ is the Debye temperature. The first term I Bragg in Eq. 1 shows that the Bragg intensity is reduced by a prefactor e -2M . This prefactor is known as the Debye-Waller factor, containing the effect of the thermal vibrations of the atoms about their equilibrium position. Since the mean square of displacement from equilibrium will increase with increasing temperature [as shown in Eq. 2 and Eq. 3, M is proportional to T ], the thermal vibrations reduces exponentially the intensity of the Bragg peaks As a surface-sensitive technique, HREELS is an ideal candidate to study the interfacial lattice dynamics of FeSe/STO systems. Compared with conventional HREELS, our recently developed 2D-HREELS system In HREELS, a monochromic electron beam with energy E i incident on the sample surface may interact with surface elementary excitations such as phonons, and be scattered with the final energy E f . The energy loss E loss = E i -E f represents the energy of surface excitations. In our HREELS measurements, the incident electron beam energies are E i =50 eV and 80 eV for the scattering direction along the ΓX and ΓM directions, respectively, and the incident angle(θ i ) is 60 • with respect to the surface normal. The surface phonon momentum can be determined from the scattering angles by q = √ 2meEi (sin θ i -sin θ f ) when E loss E i , where m e is the electron mass, θ i and θ f are the angles of the incident and scattered electrons, respectively. The energy and momentum resolutions of HREELS in this study are ∆E ∼ 3 meV and ∆k ∼ 0.01 Å-1 , respectively. For most samples, the HREELS measurements were carried out along both ΓX and ΓM directions with the sample temperature ranging from 35 K to 300 K. For the calculations of FeSe phonon dispersions, we use the frozen-phonon method as implemented in the phonopy code In experiment the monolayer FeSe thin film is deposited on the SrTiO 3 substrate, which exerts strong tensile strain on the monolayer FeSe. To take into account this effect, in the calculations we set the in-plane lattice parameter a = 3.905 Å for the monolayer FeSe thin film, the same as the lattice parameter for a bulk SrTiO 3 crystal. Lattice constants corresponding to the 3 and 10 unit cell FeSe films are extracted from Ref. 26. We place a vacuum layer around 12 Å in height above the monolayer FeSe before it is repeated in the c direction. Before phonon dispersion calculations, the internal atomic coordinates are relaxed until a force smaller than 1 meV/ Å is found on each atom. We have performed phonon dispersion calculations for both nonmagnetic (NM) and checkerboard antiferromagnetic (cAFM) phases and find that the phonon dispersion of the cAFM phase quantitatively agrees with the EELS experiment much better than that of NM phase. For the VASP monolayer FeSe calculations 15 × 15 × 1 k-point grids were used to relax the atoms in the unit cells and 3 × 3 × 1 k-grids were used in 3 × 3 × 1 supercells to compute the phonon dispersions. For the VASP bulk FeSe calculations 15 × 15 × 10 k-point grids were used to relax the atoms in the unit cells and 3 × 3 × 3 k-grids were used in 3 × 3 × 2 supercells to compute the phonon dispersions. For all VASP calculations a 500 eV kinetic energy cutoff was employed. The HREELS results are summarized in Fig. In a HREELS measurement, there are two scattering mechanisms The other mechanism is called dipole scattering, where the incident electrons are scattered by dipole fields generated by ionic vibrations. The ultra-sensitivity to F-K phonons in HREELS measurements is due to this mechanism. In this case, the incident electrons may scatter outside the surface nuclei position, depending on the strength of the dipole field. The STO substrate has two obvious F-K surface phonons, labeled by α and β, which can generate strong electric fields and penetrate through FeSe films. The buried STO signal can be observed because the electrons in FeSe layers can not completely screen the electric field from the F-K phonons To check the substrate effect on the FeSe phonons as a function of film thickness, phonon spectra of 3uc and 10uc-FeSe/STO are also measured, and compared with 1uc-FeSe/STO in Fig. The thickness independence of FeSe phonons is further confirmed by the measurements of the surface Debye temperature. To check the lattice contribution in electron pairing, Debye temperature (Θ) is a vital factor in the McMillan equation We performed LEED I/V measurements to determine the positions of the Bragg peaks (Bragg positions) for three different samples: STO, 1uc-FeSe/STO and 10uc-FeSe/STO as shown in Fig. In stark contrast to the unflappable FeSe phonons, the F-K phonons of STO substrate respond to every change in the system. As shown in Fig. The first feature is the appearance of new energy loss modes, Df and β + A 1g /B 1g , as shown in Figs. To illuminate the origin of the new energy loss modes, all energy loss modes observed on clean STO (w/o Nb) surface are labeled in Fig. The second feature is the dramatic temperature dependence in phonon energy of F-K phonons as shown in Fig. Second, on 1uc-FeSe/STO surface [Fig. The third feature is that the linewidths (Γ ep ) of F-K phonon modes associated with 1uc-FeSe/STO are larger than those of clean STO(001) as illustrated in Table .III. The linewidth broadening can be either from EPC or anharmonic phonon-phonon interaction. The phonon-phonon interactions are strongly temperature dependent and can be neglected at low temperature. So the strength of the mode-specific EPC is approximately proportional to the phonon linewidth at 35 K. After the growth of FeSe film, the linewidth of α mode ( 9.1±1.5 meV) is broadened comparing to that of clean STO ( 6.5±0.7 meV). This linewidth broadening is a signature of EPC enhancement, implying the penetrated F-K phonons do interact with electrons in FeSe films. While the broadening of the β mode is less obvious than the α mode, indicating a relatively weaker coupling between electrons and the β mode. However, this broadening at q = 0 is currently a challenge for theory Additionally thicker FeSe films accompany with larger linewidth, also shown in Table .III. Since the electric field generated by STO F-K phonons can penetrate into FeSe films, F-K phonons from substrate STO interact with all the electrons in FeSe films. The total amount of electrons in FeSe films increase with increasing thickness, thus the linewidth broadening of the F-K phonon is an additive effect layer by layer with the growth of FeSe films. As a result, thicker FeSe films will always show a larger phonon linewidth than that of thinner films. Electrons in the FeSe layer closest to FeSe/STO interface contribute the largest electron-phonon coupling. This contribution becomes smaller in the layers further from the interface, because the electric field decays exponentially inside the FeSe flims If EPC of F-K phonons play a vital role on the superconductivity of FeSe films, these high energy F-K phonons should also be present in a variety of oxide substrates. Surface phonons on other oxides, such as rutile TiO 2 (110), BaTiO 3 (001) and SrTiO 3 (110) Although the F-K phonons from STO substrate play an essential role, the T C enhancement in FeSe-derived systems without the substrate indicate that these modes do not act alone. Magnetic interactions have been always speculated as one of the most possible candidate origins of the pairing in FeSe bulk. However, the existence of magnetic interaction in FeSe/STO is still elusive, due to the limitation of the experimental techniques to measure the magnetic ordering of ultrathin films. In this study our first-principles calculation results show that the AFM correlation in FeSe is indispensable to quantitatively reproduce the experimental phonon dispersions in the ultrathin FeSe films. First-principles calculations are performed to calculate the dispersions of the Fe-and Se-derived phonons in the single layer FeSe film. The technical details of computation have been given in Section II F. In the calculations, when the AFM spin configuration on Fe lattice is taken into account, the total energy per Fe is 103 meV lower compared to the nonmagnetic configuration. Moreover, the AFM results exhibit significant phonon energy renormalization and provide much better consistency with our experimental results than these from nonmagnetic structure, as shown in Figs. In summary, although the electronic structure is tuned by STO substrates, lattice dynamics of FeSe films are unaffected. The phonon energy dispersions associated with the Fe and Se atoms are not only temperature-independent but also thickness-independent. In contrast, the F-K phonons of STO substrate are strongly temperature-dependent in line profile, and change drastically with or without FeSe films. Therefore, if there is EPC which could enhance the interfacial superconductivity, it must be the interaction between the F-K modes of the substrate (with electric field penetrating into the film) and electrons in the FeSe film. Coupling to the FeSe derived phonon modes does not increase the superconducting T C . Moreover, combination of the calculations and experimental phonon dispersions strongly suggest the existence of AFM correlations in 1uc-FeSe/STO, which is also verified to be thickness-independent. Since the superconductivity pairing mechanism of bulk FeSe is still elusive, how the F-K phonon modes in the substrates enhance the existing pairing still needs to be elucidated in future studies. The linewidth of 1uc-FeSe/STO varies with the substrate batches and film growth conditions. The average value is 9.1±1.5 meV for α mode, and 2.4±0.9 meV for β mode.