We report a theoretical analysis of variational wave functions for the BCS pairing problem. Starting with a Jastrow-Feenberg (or, in a more recent language "fixed-node") wave function for the superfluid state, we develop the full optimized Fermi-Hypernetted Chain (FHNC-EL) equations which sum a local approximation of the parquet-diagrams. Close examination of the procedure reveals that it is essential to go beyond the usual Jastrow-Feenberg approximation to guarantee the correct stability range. Jastrow-Feenberg theory has been established as a very effective method for calculating ground state properties of strongly interacting systems. We assume a non-relativistic many-body Hamiltonian or, in second quantized form, The method starts with an ansatz for the wave function, where I o,o = Φ 0 |F † N F N |Φ 0 is the normalization constant. Here Φ 0 (r 1 , . . . , r N ) denotes a model state, which for normal Fermi systems is a Slater-determinant, and F N is an N-body correlation operator written in general form, but to be truncated at the two-body u 2 term in a standard Jastrow calculation. The computationally most effective way to deal with expectation values of correlated wave functions of the type (4) are diagrammatic methods, specifically the optimized Euler-Lagrange Fermi-hypernetted chain (FHNC-EL) method, which is well suited for calculation of physically interesting quantities. These diagrammatic methods have been successfully applied to such highly correlated Fermi systems as 3 He at T = 0 Following up on previous work of the form where the correlated states N-body Here the { m (N) } form complete sets of N-particle Slater determinants of single-particle orbitals. We have commented on alternative choices of the correlated BCS wave function in Ref. 9, the arguments do not need to be repeated here. Physically interesting quantities like the free energy of the superfluid system are then calculated by cluster expansion and resummation techniques; the correlation functions are determined by the variational principle The combination of the (Fermi-)hypernetted-chain summation technique for the energy with the optimization of the ground state correlations is equivalent to a local approximation of the so-called "parquet-diagrams" In Refs. 9 and 4 we have simplified the problem by expanding the free energy In that case, the pair correlation functions u 2 (r) can be optimized for the normal system. With that, we have arrived at the energy expression of the superfluid state Above, H (N) 00 is the energy of the normal N-particle system, μ is the chemical potential. The e k are the single particle energies derived in correlated basis function (CBF) theory where the effective interaction W (1, 2) and the correlation corrections N (1, 2) are then given by the compound-diagrammatic ingredients of the FHNC-EL method for off-diagonal quantities in CBF theory In what follows, we shall denote the value of the gap function ∆ k at the Fermi surface with ∆ ≡ ∆ |k|=k F . The conventional (i.e. "uncorrelated" or "mean-field") BCS gap equation In the calculations of Refs. 4 and 9 we have, however, encountered two problems indicating that the "weak coupling approximation" can be problematic: • We have examined in Ref. 9 a large array of model systems described by a Lennard-Jones potential and an attractive square well (SW) potential Both potentials are parametrized by a characteristic length σ and the depth ε of the attractive well. For a large array of model systems with net attractive interactions (measured by a negative vacuum scattering length a 0 ) we found that the in-medium scattering length a diverges, as a function of interaction strength, well before the vacuum scattering length a 0 diverges, as shown in Fig. The divergence of the in-medium scattering length appears to be an indication for the formation of bound dimers (in other words the BCS-BEC "crossover") which is enhanced by phonon exchange. Such a dimerized state is not described by the Jastrow-Feenberg wave function of a normal system. On the other hand, the simple BCS wave function The divergence of the Euler equation observed in Ref. 9 -recall that we have assumed there a normal ground state and treated BCS correlations perturbatively -is therefore expected to be a signature of a crossover to a strongly dimerized state: The disappearance of solutions of the Euler equation for the normal system tells us that our assumption that the system is normal is incorrect, and the pairing is so strong that a perturbative expansion in terms of the deviation from the normal state as used previously is not legitimate. To clarify the situation, we have developed the cluster expansion and resummation procedures for the fully correlated state The central quantity in the development of the method is the free energy (8) of the superfluid system which we can write as It is helpful in the development of the formal theory to utilize methods developed for the cluster expansions of the normal system and matrix elements of the Hamiltonian Using these definitions, we can write the superfluid free energy as where The actual expansions are tedious matter The second term in Eq. ( The last term, E enum gives rise to the "energy numerator corrections" shown in The purpose of the decomposition (21) is that cluster expansion and resummation techniques of (E diag + E offd ) can be derived directly from the corresponding expression for the normal system. We cite here only the final result: In the normal system, the cluster expansion of the generating function G ≡ ln I o,o is diagrammatically expressed by the sum of all irreducible diagrams constructed by the following rules (i) Small circles depict particle coordinates. Filled circles imply integration over the particle coordinate and a density factor. (ii) Every point is attached to the diagram by at least one correlation line h(r) ≡ exp(u 2 (r)) -1. (iii) Every pair of points is connected by at most one correlon line. (iv) Exchange lines l(rk F ) always appear in non-overlapping closed loops, or polygons. An n-sided exchange polygon contributes a weight factor (-1/ν) n-1 to the corresponding analytic expression, where ν is the degree of degeneracy of single-particle states. (v) No point can be attached to more than two exchange lines. The corresponding expansion for the superfluid system is generated from that by the following rule: (i) Intepret the density factor as where Ω is the normalization volume. (ii) re-interpret all exchange lines l(rk F ) as (iii) In each exchange loop, replace, in turn, each pair of exchange lines l v (r i j )l v (r kl ) by a pair -l u (r i j )l u (r kl ), where The FHNC theory for the terms E diag + E offd in the energy expression The figure shows the leading diagrams contributing to the potential energy. The black and red exchange lines depict the exchange functions l v (r i j ) and l u (r i j ), cf. Eqs. ( The energy numerator terms must be treated separately, we will spell out in the next section the simplest possible form. We shall not implement the full method here but rather spell out what is known as the "uniform limit" approximation because it shows already the most important features of the theory and implications of using locally correlated wave functions in the superfluid system. Technically, the uniform limit approximation amounts to assuming that a product of any two correlation functions is negligible when it appears in coordinate space, but not negligible in momentum space, in other words we assume h 2 (r) ≪ h(r) but not that h2 (k) is small compared to h(k). Note that we define here the dimensionless Fourier transform In the uniform limit approximation, only those exchange diagrams are retained that contain either a loop l 2 v (r i j ) or l 2 u (r i j ), see Fig. Then, the static structure function of the "non-interactig" system is where [. . .] F (k) is used as an alternative notation for the Fourier-transform k is the expectation value of the number operator N with respect to the BCS state where k is the kinetic energy associated with the BCS state We can, in this case, simply copy the equations from previous work, with the understanding that the static structure function of the non-interacting system, S F (k), is replaced by The evaluation of the energy numerator expression E enum must be done in an independent cluster expansion. These terms lead, in the weakly coupled limit considered in previous work, to the second term in the pairing matrix element The analysis of the Euler equation for the spatial correlations turns out to be much more subtle: Carrying out the variation of the energy (Retaining the energy numerator terms simply supplements the bare interaction with a small additive term). At the first glance, the result looks innocuous. In the normal system, we have S F (k) ∝ k as k → 0+ and the condition that the expression under the square root be positive which is -apart from the numerical factor 3/4 which will be discussed momentarily -recognized as the condition F s 0 > -1. In the superflud system, we have instead This says that a locally correlated wave function for a superfluid system has a spurious instability whenever Ṽ (0+) < 0, no matter how small the gap is. This is evidently only a consequence of the approximations implicit to the wave function The source of the problem can be identified as follows: In the normal system, the expression (33) can be derived from an ordinary random phase approximation where χ 0 (k, ω) is the Lindhard function. Consistent with the convention (26) according to which Ṽ (q) has the dimension of an energy, we have defined the density-density response function slightly different than usual This leads to The frequency integration (36) then can be carried out analytically and leads to the equation Experience with electronic systems and the very strongly interaction 3 He has shown that the expression (33) is accurate within 1-2 percent; this is the reason why the Jastrow-Feenberg theory for fermions has been so successful. Of course, this is relevant only for integrated or Fermi-sea averaged quantities; we have pointed out already a long time ago which is the correct stability condition. Returning to the superfluid case, one can expect that the correct Lindhard function removes the spurious instability. There have been several suggestions with ξ k = t(k) -μ and E k = ξ 2 k + ∆ 2 k we have In the limit of a normal system, the coefficients b where n k is the Fermi distribution, as it should come out. This superfluid Lindhard function is consistent with the S F (k) as defined in Eq. We can now return to the frequency integration (36). All we need to show is that this expression exists, for small gaps, for -1 < 3m h2 k 2 F Ṽ (0+). For that, it is sufficient to look at the limit q → 0 of the static response function and the static Lindhard function. For ω = 0 we get for the static Lindhard function lim q→0 χ 0 (q, 0) = - ν 2ρ To estimate this limit for small gap energies, we add and subtract a function that can be integrated exactly such that the remainder vanishes as ∆ → 0. lim q→0 χ 0 (q, 0) = - 4πν 2ρ This is identical to the same limit of the Lindhard function of the normal system, see Fetter-Walecka Eq. (12.46b), considering that the Lindhard function defined here contains a factor 1/ρ. With that we get for the stability condition 1 + 3 Ṽ (0+) 2μ > 0 (48) We have formulated in this contribution the beginnings of a theoretical method to deal with strongly interacting superfluids that promises the same accuracy as what was achieved for the normal helium liquids. We have studied the Euler equation for the local correlations in a simplified example that does not require the formulation of the full FHNC theory. We have derived the interesting, yet disturbing, result that the Euler equation has no physically meaningful solution for net attractive interactions Ṽ (0+) < 0. We hasten to point out that this result is not specific to the "uniform limit approximation", in the fully correlated theory the bare interaction Ṽ (q) is simply replaced by the particle-hole interaction. This is a rather profound observation since it applies to any local correlation operator F; including the "fixednode" approximation used in Quantum Monte Carlo calculations where it would, of course, be hard to discover. We have also outlined a pathway to the solution of this problem: One must go beyond local correlations. The rigorous way to do that has been carried out in Ref. 33: One must add, to the variational energy expectation value, an infinite sum of terms in CBF perturbation theory. That has the effect that the "collective approximation" for S(k), Eq. ( 