Multiorbital correlated materials are often on the verge of multiple electronic phases (metallic, insulating, superconducting, charge and orbitally ordered), which can be explored and controlled by small changes of the external parameters. The use of ultrashort light pulses as a mean to transiently modify the band population is leading to fundamentally new results. In this paper, we will review recent advances in the field and we will discuss the possibility of manipulating the orbital polarization in correlated multi-band solid state systems. This technique can provide new understanding of the ground state properties of many interesting classes of quantum materials and offers a new tool to induce transient emergent properties with no counterpart at equilibrium. We will address: the discovery of high-energy Mottness in superconducting copper oxides and its impact on our understanding of the cuprate phase diagram; the instability of the Mott insulating phase in photoexcited vanadium oxides; the manipulation of orbital-selective correlations in iron-based superconductors; the pumping of local electronic excitons and the consequent transient effective quasiparticle cooling in alkali-doped fullerides. Finally, we will discuss a novel route to manipulate the orbital polarization in a k-resolved fashion. The intrinsic fragility of correlated materials is at the base of the recent ascent of techniques and protocols for achieving the complete optical control of their properties. The idea underlying this intense research activity is the use of light as an external stimulus to manipulate the electronic properties of materials in the vicinity of phase transitions or charge-spin-lattice instabilities. When scaled down to the ultrafast timescale, femtosecond light pulses can be used as a knob to control the band occupation and create transient electronic distributions with no counterpart at equilibrium. In the simplest picture, corresponding to the two-band model, the completely filled valence band originates from the N atomic orbitals which are fully occupied by two electrons/atom. Under moderate photoexcitation, the bandstructure remains rigid while electron-hole excitations are injected into the system, thus modifying the equilibrium charge distribution within the bands. In correlation-driven insulators, commonly named as Mott insulators, the gap opens already in a single-band picture, since it originates from the strong Coulomb repulsion, U , between two electron occupying the same orbital. When the value of U overcomes the bare bandwidth, W , the electron motion is frozen, despite the fact that the N atomic orbitals contain an odd number of electrons. This process leads to the formation of two characteristic bands separated by U (Lower Hubbard Band, filled; Upper Hubbard Band, empty), whose multiplicity is related to the number N of combinations that are available for getting a double occupancy on one of the sites. It is thus clear that any photo-induced electron-hole excitation, at the energy cost U , creates additional conductive states (corresponding to the holes and doublons which can move throughout the lattice at zero energy cost) and also modifies the multiplicity of the LHB and UHB. The basic consequence of the injection of δN photoexcitations across the Mott gap is thus the emergence of δN low-energy metallic-like states and the corresponding decrease of the spectral weight of electronic bands at the energy scale U . In the present manuscript we will review the impact of electronic correlations and Mott physics on the properties of multi-band transition-metal (TM) compounds, with particular focus on systems which develop superconductivity at low temperature. Building on the interplay between the band occupation and the electronic bandstructure introduced above, we will discuss the most promising strategies to control the electronic properties of these materials via selective light excitation. In many cases, the possibility to set up correlated systems with a non-equilibrium band occupation enables to tackle long-standing questions from a new viewpoint. Transition-metal (TM) compounds constitute one of the most interesting families of materials in which electronic correlations are at the heart of a rich variety of phenomena, ranging from high-temperature superconductivity to insulator-to-metal transitions and unconventional magnetism. The partial filling of the TM d shells leads to a strong onsite Coulomb repulsion (U ∼1-10 eV) which determines some universal features, such as: i) the strong frustration of the electronic kinetic energy, that leads to the narrowing of the effective bandwidth (W eff ) as compared to the bare one; ii) the emergence of robust short-range magnetic correlations, which often give rise to long-range antiferromagnetic phases. At the same time, the complex chemical composition of these compounds brings in the multi-band (orbital) physics as a key concept to model the non-equilibrium experiments and develop protocols for the ultrafast orbital manipulation. In order to address the role of correlations in multi-band systems, we start from the simplest case of a two-band insulator in which the correlated half-filled valence band (v) and the conduction band (c) of different orbital origin are separated by a bare gap 2∆ bare (see Fig. where p represents the band (orbital) polarization, defined as the difference between the average occupations of the valence (n v ) and conduction (n c ) bands. The fully polarized case, i.e. p=1, corresponds to a Mott insulator in which the minimum effective gap is the effective distance between the LHB and the conduction band. When U decreases, the simultaneous broadening of the Hubbard bands and the decrease of 2∆ eff drive a highly non-linear evolution of p. If 2∆ bare is of the order (or smaller) of W , the system eventually collapses into a two-band metallic state 6 in which the population of the two bands is the same, i.e. p=0. It is evident from Eq. 1 that the band polarization plays a crucial role in determining the electronic properties of multi-band correlated materials. At the same time, p constitutes a new control parameter that can be manipulated by ultrashort light pulses. The possibility to transiently modify the charge distribution within bands of different orbital nature provides a novel non-thermal way to manipulate the electronic phases in multiband TM compounds. Starting from the insulating state, the strong resonant excitation of specific interband transitions can lead to the collapse of the insulating gap and the formation of transient metallic phases. In the low excitation regime, the same excitation scheme can be used to probe the possible dependence of the bandstructure on the band (orbital) population, thus unveiling the underlying Mottness of the system. In the following sections, we will discuss the role of the electronic correlations and of the presence of multiple bands (orbitals) in determining the main properties of some prototypical transition-metal compounds: superconducting copper oxides, Mott-insulating vanadium oxides and iron-based superconductors. These systems constitute the most promising platform for developing ultrafast orbital manipulation protocols. Finally, we will address some relevant properties of alkali-doped fullerides. Although fullerides do not belong to any TM compound class, they constitute another interesting example of a multi-band material on the verge of the Mott transition. These characteristics can be exploited to transiently manipulate the electronic distribution, up to the point of achieving a transient effective cooling of the quasiparticles 8 upon ultrafast light excitation. Copper oxides (cuprates) represent one of the most celebrated material in which electronic correlations drive the emergence of intriguing phenomena, culminating in high-temperature superconductivity exhibited by some families of cuprates where a suitable amount of charge carriers is introduced by means of chemical doping. The key actors in determining the electronic properties of cuprates are the Cu 3-d orbitals, filled by 9 electrons and subject to the local crystal field associated with the octahedral oxygen cage surrounding the Cu atoms. The 3-d x 2 -y 2 orbital plays a particularly important role since it is raised at the highest energy by the crystal field and hosts a single electron, thus behaving like a strongly-correlated half-filled band. The strong hybridization of the 3-d x 2 -y 2 levels with the ligand O-2p x,y orbitals calls for a multi-band description of the material. The ligand O-2p x,y levels form the O-2p σ band, which has a maximum at momentum (0,0), corresponding to a binding energy of ∼1.2 eV. In contrast, the O-2p π band, which arises from the hybridization of the O-2p x,y orbitals perpendicular to the O-2p ligand orbitals, features almost no overlap with the conduction band and shows a maximum at momentum (π,π) and ∼1.2 eV binding energy. In the insulating parent compound, the half filled 3-d x 2 -y 2 band is completely suppressed by the strong local correlations, giving rise to the lower and upper Hubbard bands up to ∼10 eV far apart. Nonetheless, the minimum gap of the system is on the order of 1.5-2 eV and corresponds to the energy necessary to move an electron from the O-2p x,y to the Cu-3d states, thus creating a double occupation on the 3-d x 2 -y 2 orbital. This process is usually referred to as charge-transfer (CT) excitation. The concept of orbital polarization is a useful tool to model and interpret time-resolved experiments in cuprates. For sake of clarity, we will consider the antiferromagnetic insulating compound, where the CuO 2 unit constitutes the building block for the in-plane bandstructure. If we assume to sit on a copper spin-up site, the LHB will correspond to the energy of the d ↑ electron, while the UHB to the energy necessary to add a d ↓ electron to the same site. The oxygen bands, located between the LHB and UHB, provide the charge reservoir for populating the UHB. The minimum gap thus corresponds to the transition of a spin-down electron from the oxygen to the UHB. At equilibrium, and for very high values of U, the average occupation of the UHB, n UHB , is almost zero while the average occupation of the three p orbitals of each inequivalent oxygen (labeled by i=1,2) is n Oi,σ =3 for each spin orientation (labeled by σ=↑,↓). We can thus introduce the following orbital polarization: which is equal to unity at equilibrium ( i,σ n Oi,σ =12; n UHB =0) and progressively decreases as electrons are moved from the O to the Cu orbitals, down to the value p=0 when the UHB is completely filled ( mean-field model 7 that provides the expression of the effective charge transfer gap as a function of the band polarization: where U pp is the Coulomb repulsion between two charges occupying the same O-2p orbital and U pd is the Coulomb interatomic potential between the excess Cu-3d electrons and the holes residing on the nearest neighboring oxygen sites. When chemically doped, the redistribution of the charges within the Cu-O orbitals and the consequent change of p is at the base of many unconventional phenomena. In the lightly doped region of the phase diagram, the additional holes are preferably localized on the O orbitals. However, although metallic, lightly doped cuprates are characterized by the partial freezing of the electrons moving along the Cu-O bonds, which leads to the suppression of quasiparticles 9 in the antinodal region of the Brillouin zone at momenta (±π,0) and (0,±π). This breakdown of the antinodal Fermi surface has been suggested ii) The origin of the ubiquitous antinodal suppression of states in the underdoped region of the cuprate phase diagram iii) The mechanism underlying the universal instability towards charge-ordered states in lightly doped cuprates In ref. 7, orbital manipulation has been used to investigate the high-energy Mottness in a prototypical cuprate family (Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6+δ , La-Bi2201) across a very broad range of hole dopings. The main idea driving the experiment is the possibility of modifying p through the impulsive CT photoexcitation and measuring the transient redshift of 2∆ CT eff , as predicted by Eq. 3. Considering the fluence of the absorbed 10 fs-pulses at 1.35 eV photon energy (0.3 eV bandwidth), the orbital polarization variation is estimated as δp ∼ 0.3%. Starting from realistic values of U pp ∼5 eV and U pd ∼2 eV, As discussed in Sec. 1, the counterpart of the photoinduced high-energy modification of the Hubbard bands in correlated materials is the emergence of new conductive quasiparticle states close to the Fermi level. In the case of copper oxides the onsite Coulomb repulsion leads to the selective freezing of charges moving along specific k-directions, namely the momenta (±π,0) and (0,±π), corresponding to the antinodal region of the Fermi surface. In order to explore the dynamics of the antinodal quasiparticle states, a time-resolved extreme-ultra-violet (EUV) photoemission experiment has been recently performed. The use of ultrafast excitation to manipulate the orbital polarization shed new light on some important aspects of the physics of superconducting copper oxides: -time-resolved optical spectroscopy demonstrated that the phase diagram of copper oxides is dominated by a temperature-independent transition at p cr 0.16 from a correlated system, whose properties at the CT energy scale are similar to those of a multi-band Mott insulator, to a more conventional metal, -the suppression of quasiparticle states at the antinodes is originated by a correlation-driven breakup of the Fermi surface. The optical manipulation of p drives the evolution of antinodal states from Mott-like gapped excitations to delocalized quasiparticles, -finally, the outcomes of the time-resolved spectroscopies, summarized in the previous two points, suggest that the universal emergence of low-temperature charge instabilities is the low-energy consequence of the Mottness that characterizes the p < p cr region of the phase diagram. Vanadium oxides are among the most extensively studied correlated materials for the richness of their phase diagrams. In these compounds, the interplay between the strong on-site correlations on the V-3d orbitals and the lattice-driven lift of their degeneracy gives rise to spectacular insulator-to-metal phase transitions. The electronic bandstructure of vanadium sesquioxide strongly depends on the local crystal field in which the V-3d orbitals are immersed. Starting from the [Ar]3d 3 4s 2 atomic configuration, the triple oxidation leaves two electrons in the V-3d levels. In the insulating monoclinic phase, the octahedral crystal-field splitting yields to the separation of 3d orbitals into a lower t 2g and an upper e g band. Since the octahedra show further trigonal distortion, reinforced by the on-site Coulomb repulsion, the t 2g are split into a lower doubly degenerate e π g and a single bonding a 1g state which is pushed at an energy of about 2∆ eff ∼1.5 eV above the e π g levels. The multiband character of the electronic structure is perhaps the most distinctive feature of another family of correlated superconductors, the iron-based superconductors. In this section we discuss how the combination of the electronic interactions and the multi-orbital nature of the bands leads to novel opportunities to control the electronic properties of these materials by properly tuning the occupation of different orbitals. One of the most important open questions about iron-based superconductors is the degree of similarity between them and the cuprates, which includes the question about the role of electronic correlations. From a structural point of view, the members of the different families share indeed a common building block, layers of iron atoms and a ligand which can be a pnictogen (As) or a chalcogen (Se, Te) atom. These layers somehow replace the copper-oxygen layers with some important differences in the electronic structure. The generic phase diagram also shares similarities with the cuprates as superconductivity generally appears when doping a spin-density wave metal. As far as the iron-based materials are concerned, it is crucial to note that the Hund's coupling strongly reduces the critical interaction strength U c for a Mott transition at global half-filling (n=5) while it increases U c at n = 6. This is the reason why the parent compounds are not Mott insulators. On the other hand, it has been shown that, in the relevant regime for iron-based materials, the Hund's coupling induces remarkable correlations, as measured by the effective mass. Furthermore, it has been shown that the Hund's coupling "decouples" the different orbitals so that an excitation created in a given orbital remains with the same orbital index with very small orbital fluctuations. This is a direct consequence of the selection of a high-spin state, which implies to spread the electrons as much as possibile among the orbitals. The combination of the Hund's coupling and the multi-orbital nature of the bands leads to two main consequences: • the degree of correlation increases as the number of electrons is reduced by hole doping and decreases with electron doping, • the increase of the correlations is strongly orbital-selective. Namely electrons belonging to different orbitals can have sizably different effective mass. These two observations, which are based on experimental observations alone, can be rationalized in a very simple and nice picture. The degree of correlation is indeed controlled by the distance in doping from the Mott insulator at n = 5 which would be realized if we could dope the sufficient number of holes. The possibility to switch on and off the conduction of selective channels can be used to obtain complex conduction patterns exploiting the different shape of the orbitals and also to control the other electronic properties of the iron-based superconductors, including obviously superconductivity and nematicity (the breaking of the lattice rotational symmetry in a metallic phase), whose connection with the physics of electronic correlations has been discussed in Ref. 66. The actual implementation of protocols able to selectively excite different orbitals can thus shed light on the possible active role of electronic correlations in the superconducting mechanisms and possibly lead to optimized superconducting properties. A first interesting result in this direction has been reported in Ref. 67, where an orbital-selective excitation process has been proposed and realized. Alkali-doped fullerides, A 3 C 60 , represent an interesting class of correlated materials, in which the interplay between the on-site Coulomb interactions and the high icosahedral symmetry of C 60 favors a strong Jahn-Teller coupling between the electronic states and the lattice. The excitation of high-energy super-excitons at energy E SE via mid-infrared pumping can be used to transiently manipulate the population (n t1u ) of the t 1u conduction band with fundamental impact on the transient electronic properties of A 3 C 60 . The most striking consequence of such a band manipulation is that the photoinduced variation of the t 1u population is inherently accompanied by the creation of a non-thermal distribution of localized super-excitons, δN SE =-δn t1u , and the simultaneous annihilation of thermally excited paramagnons. This process leaves the t 1u quasiparticles in a smaller-entropy state, which corresponds to a transient decrease of the initial effective temperature. where ω is the frequency of the incoming light and μ(t) the instantaneous chemical potential. Considering realistic excitation fluences, a transient cooling of the order of several tens of degrees has been predicted. a timescale of few picoseconds the excitons would eventually decay, thus leading to a steady-state increase of temperature. This mechanism has been proposed as the possible explanation of the recently claimed transient superconductivity, photoinduced by pulsed mid-infrared irradiation in K 3 C 6 0 at temperatures as high as ten times the equilibrium T c . 74, 75 As discussed in this manuscript, the possibility of manipulating the band population and transiently modifying the orbital polarization opens new intriguing routes to probe and control the complex properties of multiband materials. Here we have provided many different examples of new concepts emerging from the transient orbital manipulation in correlated materials: the discovery of Mott-like physics regulating the phase diagram of superconducting copper oxides at hole doping as high as 16% and T =300 K; the manipulation of electronic phases via band reversal in vanadium oxides; the control of orbital selective correlations in iron-based superconductors and the photoinduced effective cooling in alkali-doped fullerides. Despite the recent impressive advances in the field and the many problems that still remain unexplored, the "conventional" pump excitation scheme suffers from an intrinsic limitation, that is the lack of selectivity in the momentum-space. In simple terms, the pump excitation can be tuned across an optical resonance thus coupling to specific electronic transitions, independently of the k of the corresponding quasiparticle states. This limitation is particularly severe for multi-orbital materials in which the orbital component, along with the relative degree of correlation, of the valence and conduction bands can be strongly k-dependent. For example, the possibility of using ultrashort light pulses as a sort of optical "tweezer" that selectively modifies the population of specific regions in the Brillouin zone, would allow to manipulate the correlations in multi-band materials in a momentumresolved fashion. As a paradigmatic example, the use of light to unbalance the nodal-antinodal quasiparticle populations in superconducting copper oxides would allow to create new transient states with emergent properties with no counterpart at equilibrium. Similarly, the k-selective change of population in the conduction band of iron based superconductors would pave the way to the real control of the orbital polarization and to the possibility of turning a specific orbital component into a half-filled Mott insulating state and viceversa. Among the different strategies to achieve the k-selective control of electronic excitations, one of the most promising is the exploitation of the quantum interference effect between two different quantum excitation pathways to affect the final state population. In the simplest configuration, this technique, named as coherent control, is based on the use of two phase-locked beams at a fundamental (ω) and second-harmonic (2ω) frequencies that impinges on a crystalline material. where δp=δ(n v -n c ), V is the normalization volume of the crystal and ω cv where superscripts indicate Cartesian components (to be summed over if repeated), E(ω) and E(2ω) are the electric field amplitudes at the indicated frequencies and ζ1 , ζ2 and ζ3 are second-, fourth-, and third-rank tensors. The three different terms of the right-hand side of Eq. 6 represent: 1) the pure one-photon contribution; 2) the pure two-photon contribution; 3) the interference between the two-photon and one-photon transition processes. While ζ1 and ζ2 are even under the symmetry operation +k→-k with respect to a high-symmetry wavevector, the ζ3 is odd under the same operation and is thus responsible for the asymmetric distribution of the injected carriers around the high-symmetry point. This coherent excitation protocol has been recently used for launching ballistic current pulses in arbitrary directions in different kinds of systems, ranging from molecules to solids, such as graphene 