The development of wide-area cryogenic light detectors with baseline energy resolution lower than 20 eV RMS is essential for next generation bolometric experiments searching for rare interactions. Indeed the simultaneous readout of the light and heat signals will enable background suppression through particle identification. Because of their excellent intrinsic energy resolution, as well as their wellestablished reproducibility, Kinetic Inductance Detectors (KIDs) are good candidates for the development of next generation light detectors. The CALDER project is investigating the potential of phonon-mediated KIDs. The first phase of the project allowed to reach a baseline resolution of 80 eV using a single KID made of aluminium on a 2x2 cm 2 silicon substrate acting as photon absorber. In this paper we present a new prototype detector implementing a trilayer aluminium-titanium-aluminium KID. Taking advantage of superconducting proximity effect the baseline resolution improves down to 26 eV. In the last decade, Kinetic Inductance Detectors (KIDs) The CALDER project One of the limits of KIDs is that they can reach a maximum sensitive area of a few mm 2 KIDs base their working principle on the kinetic inductance of Cooper pairs, which can be modified by an energy release able to break them into quasi-particles (QPs). If the superconductor is inserted in a resonant RLC circuit with high quality factor (Q > 10 3 ), the density variation of QPs modifies the transfer function S 21 of the resonator both in phase and in amplitude. The phase readout is usually preferred since the phase response is larger (up to a factor 10) and is given by where η is the energy to QPs conversion efficiency, α is the fraction of kinetic inductance with respect to total inductance, ∆ 0 is the superconducting gap, N 0 is the single spin density of states and V the detector volume. S φ (ω, T) is a dimensionless factor given by the Mattis-Bardeen theory, describing the phase responsivity as a function of frequency and effective temperature The fabrication of the chip was made according to the following steps. The intrinsic 380 μm thick Si <100> wafer is dipped for 1 min in dilute 5% HF solution and then rinsed in deionized water water for 1 min. The wafer is then moved to an electron beam evaporator dedicated to superconducting materials, where the layers are subsequently evaporated at rates of 0.5 nm/s in a residual vacuum of 4 × 10 -8 mb. This is important especially for titanium to avoid trapping impurities in the layer The sensor implements a LEKID design The electrical characterization of the KID is based on the study of the complex transmission (S 21 ) of the resonator around the resonant frequency (Figure The resonant frequency is found to be close to 2.4 GHz. Q c is 1.48 × 10 5 in very good agreement with the value predicted by the SONNET electromagnetic simulation of about 1.5 × 10 5 . Q i is estimated as 6 × 10 5 , lower than our typical samples made of aluminium The critical temperature and the resistance of the trilayer film have been measured in a 4-terminal geometry. The superconducting transition was measured at (805 ± 10) mK with a normal state resistance per square R sq = 0.58 Ω/sq above the transition. We estimate theoretically the T C of the trilayer following To apply straightforwardly this bilayer model to the Al/Ti/Al trilayer, we treat it as a bilayer Al-Ti taking the average thicknesses of the Al layers Using the SONNET electromagnetic simulations software we estimate the amount of kinetic inductance L k needed to shift the resonant frequency from the value simulated for a perfect conductor (L k = 0) to the measured value. The simulation is calibrated against a detector with identical geometry but in aluminium. L k of the calibration device was calculated independently using direct measurements of T C ,R s q, film thickness and an estimation of α from resonant frequency shift with temperature. We obtain a value of 1.4 pH/sq, which is significantly higher than the value of 1.0 pH/sq obtained using the BCS form described in We have also measured the relative variations of the resonant frequency ( ff 0 )/ f 0 as a function of the temperature (Figure Our experimental setup allows to back-illuminate the detector using two different sources: a non-collimated X-ray 55 Fe source and an optical fiber coupled to a fast room-temperature LED. The 55 Fe source illuminates in an almost uniform way the whole substrate with a rate of 1 Hz. The LED emits photons at 400 nm in the typical range of Cherenkov light. Depending on the LED pulse duration and/or amplitude, a variable number of photons can be sent onto the substrate. The whole optical system is intially calibrated with an accuracy of 10 % using a PMT at room temperature and then cross-calibrated with the 55 Fe source. The position and size of the optical system spot on the substrate is shown in Figure The resonator is excited and probed with a monochromatic tone at the resonant frequency f 0 . The output signal is fed into a CITLF3 SiGe cryogenic low noise amplifier, downconverted at room temperature using a superheterodyne electronics and then digitized with an acquisition card at a sampling frequency of 500 kSPS. Time traces of up to 12 ms of the real (I) and imaginary (Q) parts of S 21 are acquired following a software trigger. Finally I and Q variations are converted into changes of phase and amplitude relative to the center of the resonance loop. A detailed description of the experimental setup of our laboratory at INFN Rome, including the room-temperature electronics and the acquisition software, can be found in The optimal working point is chosen at -70 dBm. references For this purpose, we perform a microwave power scan from about -95 dBm to -65 dBm at the input of the sample, while the monitoring signal and noise levels, as well as the pulse shape, in both the phase and amplitude readouts. A reference signal is produced by sending light pulses of 15.5 keV. The signals are processed using a matched filter, a software algorithm that allows to improve the signal-tonoise ratio by suppressing the signal frequencies that are mostly affected by noise In Figure The trailing edge of the pulse is well described by a single exponential law with a decay time that varies between 800 μs and 100 μs with increasing microwave power (Figure To obtain a solid estimation of the detector performance we implement a calibration based on the Poisson statistics of the photons absorbed into the substrate. The detector is biased at the optimal microwave power of -70 dBm and is illuminated with optical pulses of energies in the range 0 -3 keV. For each energy the distribution of the pulse heights in the phase readout is found to be well described by a Gaussian with mean m and standard deviation σ (Figure In this paper we presented the results obtained using an Al/Ti/Al trilayer film to develop a phonon-mediated KID for the detection of UV-VIS light on large surfaces. The sample features T C = 805mK, Q i 600 k and a low-power recombination time τ QP = 800μs. The main features of the detector are compared in Table -104 -102 -100 -98 -96 -94 -