SrAuSi 3 is a noncentrosymmetric superconductor (NCS) with T c = 1.54 K, which to date has been studied only via macroscopic techniques. By combining nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and muon-spin rotation (μSR) measurements we investigate both the normal and the superconducting phase of SrAuSi 3 at a local level. In the normal phase, our data indicate a standard metallic behavior with weak electron correlations and a Korringa constant S exp = 1.31 × 10 -5 sK. The latter, twice the theoretical value, can be justified by the Moriya theory of exchange enhancement. In the superconducting phase, the material exhibits conventional BCS-type superconductivity with a weak-coupling s-wave pairing, a gap value ∆(0) = 0.213(2) meV, and a magnetic penetration depth λ(0) = 398(2) nm. The experimental proof of weak correlations in SrAuSi 3 implies that correlation effects can be decoupled from those of antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC), thus enabling accurate band-structure calculations in the weakly-correlated NCSs. The absence of inversion symmetry in the crystal lattice of certain materials introduces an antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC) in the conduction-electron ensemble. In case of superconductivity, this may result in mixed-parity phases, 1 which have increasingly attracted the attention of the scientific community, especially after the discovery of the first strongly-correlated NCS CePt 3 Si. Since CePt 3 Si, several new compounds belonging to different NCS classes have been discovered. SrAuSi 3 , recently synthesized in the form of polycrystals by means of high-pressure techniques, Below we report the first microscopic study of SrAuSi 3 by employing nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and muonspin rotation (μSR) measurements. We probed both its normal and superconducting phase and show that SrAuSi 3 is a weakly-correlated metal turning into a conventional superconductor. Sec. II offers an overview of the employed experimental techniques, including the relevant settings and conditions. In Sec. III A the electronic correlations in the normal phase are studied via NMR experiments, whereas in Sec. III B the SC phase is investigated by μSR and the respective main SC parameters are evaluated quantitatively. Finally, Sec. IV offers conclusions and a general discussion regarding open questions about the class of weakly-correlated NCSs, with particular reference to SrAuSi 3 . Samples of SrAuSi 3 were prepared using the solid-state reaction method under 6 GPa at 1000-1200 • C. For a preliminary characterization of the electronic and magnetic properties of the normal phase, we measured the sample's magnetization M (T, H) with a commercial MPMS (magnetic property measurement system) XL setup. With a typical χ dia of -1.6 × 10 -4 cm 3 /mol (see Fig. From the published structure-data file, where a i (i = 1, 2) are the normalization factors, f i the peak maxima, and w i their full widths at half maximum (FWHM), with As the temperature is lowered from 300 to 5 K, the shift of the Si-I NMR line varies from 0.1 to 0.105%, whereas that of the Si-II lines varies from 0.14 to 0.142% (see Fig. As shown in Fig. In the normal phase we find a linear variation of 1/T 1 (T ), i.e., a Korringa behavior typical of simple metals (see Fig. From the relative Korringa ratio ≡ S 0 /S exp = 0.508, one can evaluate the enhancement of the static and dynamic spin susceptibilities, driven by the q-independent electronelectron interaction potential 15 ζ = ħ h 2 γ e 2 α/2πχ s0 , where γ e is the gyromagnetic ratio of the electron, χ s0 the spin susceptibility, and α is a parameter that is uniquely defined by the value of via: The quantity G(x) in Eq. ( where k F is the Fermi momentum under the assumption of a spherical Fermi surface. An analytical evaluation of the ζ parameter is not possible, since the value of the spin susceptibility χ s0 , i.e. the Pauli susceptibility, generally cannot be estimated from the measured magnetic susceptibility χ m = M (T, H)/H, which contains also additional contributions due to, e.g., the core electrons and the electronic correlations. Nevertheless, the experimentally determined (α) suggests the presence of ferromagnetic correlations in SrAuSi 3 which, however, are incompatible with the rather weak Knight shift. From the experimental (α) value, one can solve Eq. ( (α) values are found in many alkali metals, as well as in Cu and Ag, all well-known realizations of the nearly-free electron model. TF-μSR measurements were carried out to investigate the superconducting properties of SrAuSi 3 . Figure where the fit parameters A(0) and A bg (0) are the initial asymmetries of the sample and background signals, γ μ /2π = 13.55 kHz/G is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, Figure where H and H c2 (T ) are the applied and upper critical fields, respectively. Figure Here λ -2 (0) is the zero-temperature value of the magnetic penetration depth and f = [1 + exp(E/k B T )] -1 denotes the Fermi function. The BCS temperature depen- where ∆(0) is the gap magnitude at zero temperature. The fit yields T c = 1.49(1) K, λ(0) = 398(2) nm, and ∆(0) = 0.213(2) meV. The ratio ∆(0)/k B T c = 1.65(3), which is lower than the BCS value of 1.76, confirms that SrAuSi 3 is a weak-coupling superconductor. A combined study of the normal and superconducting phase of SrAuSi 3 was performed through NMR and μSR in TF mode measurements, respectively. In the normal phase this compound exhibits a Korringa behavior with enhanced electron-exchange behavior, in line with the Moriya theory mentioned above. The temperature dependence of the London penetration depth λ was evaluated from the TF-μSR time spectra. λ(T ) can be modelled well by assuming a single-gap BCS s-wave scenario with ∆(0) = 0.213(2) meV which suggests that SrAuSi 3 is a nodeless superconductor. The gap-to-T c ratio provides evidence for weak-coupling superconductivity in SrAuSi 3 . The magnetic penetration depth was estimated as λ(0) = 398(2) nm. Single-band fully-gapped BCS superconductivity and weak electronic correlation confirm the small splitting of the bands in the vicinity of the Fermi level E F , visible only in proximity of the Brillouin zone edges. 