Photonic integrated circuits (PICs) are attractive platforms to perform large-scale quantum information processing. While highly-functional PICs (e.g. silicon based photonic-circuits) and high-performance single photon sources (SPSs, e.g. compound-semiconductor quantum dots (QDs)) have been independently demonstrated, their combination for single-photon-based applications has still been limited. This is largely due to the complexities of introducing SPSs into existing PIC platforms, which are generally realized with different materials and using distinct fabrication protocols. Here, we report a novel approach to combine SPSs and PICs prepared independently. We employ transfer printing, by which multiple desired SPSs can be integrated in a simple pick-and-place manner with a theoretical waveguide coupling efficiency >99%, fulfilling the demanding requirements of large-scale quantum applications. Experimentally, we demonstrated QD-based SPSs with high waveguide coupling efficiencies, together with the integration of two SPSs into a waveguide. Our approach will accelerate scalable fusion between modern PICs and cutting-edge quantum technologies. The rapid evolution of photonic integrated circuit (PIC) technologies, as represented by the current flourish of silicon photonics To that end, it is vital to use near-ideal quantum light sources In this context, the hybrid integration of SPSs into PICs is very promising. In previous demonstrations Very recently, the hybrid integration of QD SPSs on silicon waveguides by using a micro manipulator has been reported In this Letter, we propose and demonstrate an alternative approach based on transfer printing Figure The sharp reduction in Q stems predominantly from the coupling of light into the waveguide, characterized with a cavity-waveguide coupling efficiency η of over 99% for 250 nm < d < 450 nm. Further reduction of d leads to a degradation of η, as the waveguide becomes too close to the cavity and starts to scatter cavity photons into free space. In the design presented here, we tuned the cavity/waveguide parameters to minimize the free space scattering for a given d (see The emitter-cavity coupling efficiency, β, reduces when decreasing cavity Q due to the reduction of the Purcell effect, which scales with Q/V. Nevertheless, even when d = 350 nm (Q = 3,800), the maximum possible β is as large as 99.9%, thanks to the very small V. Overall, the theoretical maximum single photon coupling efficiency from the QD into the waveguide, ηβ, is deduced to be a near-unity value of 99.7% for d = 350 nm (see Supplementary Information). We also note that such near-unity ηβ can be obtained even in different material combinations (see Supplementary Information). Figure We observed an enhancement of the QD emission near the cavity resonance Next we performed second order correlation measurements based on a Hanbury Brown-Twiss setup when the QD is slightly detuned from the cavity resonance by 0.43 nm. Figure In summary, we have demonstrated the transfer-printing-based integration of QD SPSs into wire waveguides. We have shown that our strategy allows near-unity total single photon coupling efficiencies into the waveguide, while largely relaxing the difficulties in the hybrid integration of SPSs into PICs. Experimentally, we demonstrated high ηexpβexp efficiencies of up to ~70%, which we expect will be further improved by elaborating the nanofabrication (see Supplementary Information). We believe that our approach will be a key technology for the fusions between the state-of-the-art SPSs and modern PICs, irrespective of material choice. The PL measurements were conducted with a low-temperature micro-PL setup. The sample was fixed in a helium flow cryostat having a built-in heater for temperature control. We used an objective lens with a numerical aperture of 0.65 for sample imaging, pump laser beam focusing and collecting PL signal. The collected PL was analyzed with a grating spectrometer equipped with a Si CCD camera. For measuring the PL image in Fig. Regarding the printing accuracy, we evaluated several different printed nanocavities and deduced that the deviations of the sample positions were less than 100 nm on average. Unwanted sample rotations are found to be less than 1 degree. In the current work, we did not pre-select a suitable nanobeam cavity. Therefore, only one out of three to four samples contain QDs resonating with the cavity mode. The sample discussed in the main text is one of such samples. For the sample with two SPSs on the single waveguide, we prepared 8 pairs of such structure. One of them have QDs in each cavity and has been used for the discussion in the main text. This randomness in the SPS fabrication can be easily avoided by preselecting suitable QD SPSs by optical experiments prior to the transfer processes. We used transfer printing for the fabrication of glass-cladded wire waveguides. For this purpose, first, we prepared airbridge wire waveguides with grating exit ports The waveguide width was chosen to be 220 nm as discussed in the supplementary section 4. We placed the waveguides on a glass substrate by transfer printing. We then formed an upper clad on the waveguide by a spin-on-glass process (FOX15, Dow Corning). The thickness of the glass above the waveguide (= d) was precisely controlled to be 300 nm for the first sample shown in Fig. We optimized the SPS based on the PhC nanobeam cavity on a glass-cladded wire waveguide In an analytical fashion, we can describe η by the following equation: where Q0 and Qwg are the design cavity Q without and with the waveguide, respectively. 1/Qscatter expresses the additional photon loss into free space due to the introduction of the waveguide. From the equation, for realizing a high η, it is vital to design a very high Q0 and a low Qwg, while suppressing 1/Qscatter. The high Q0 (>5 million) of our PhC nanobeam cavity is highly suitable for increasing η. The reduction of 1/Qscatter is possible by taking a large enough d, which in turn exponentially increases Qwg. We overcame this difficulty by optimizing the waveguide parameters so as to minimize Qwg to 1,300 for d = 300 nm (see the supplementary section 4). In this design, 1/ Qscatter becomes negligible and η reaches to be 99.4%. In contrast, for ds much smaller than 300 nm, the above discussion based on the perturbation theory (coupled mode theory) does not hold anymore, since the index modulation by the waveguide becomes too strong to treat as a perturbation for the cavity mode. In this case, the significant cavity-to-free space leakage is turned on, resulting in a high 1/Qscatter value and reduced ηs, as plotted in Fig. For evaluating the emitter-cavity coupling efficiency (β), we assumed that the spontaneous emission from the QD occurs into either the cavity mode or free space. The average spontaneous emission rate of QDs in unprocessed area (γ) was measured to be γ = 1 GHz. The nanocavity enables fast spontaneous emission into the cavity mode with a rate of Fpγ, where Fp is the Purcell factor proportional to the value of Q/V of the cavity mode. Meanwhile, the photonic bandgap effect in the one-dimensional nanobeam PhC suppresses the spontaneous emission rate of embedded QDs For the designed SPS with an overall cavity Q-factor of 1,300 at d = 300 nm, the maximum possible Fp is 250, resulting in a near-unity β of 99.7%. Overall, the total single photon coupling efficiency to the waveguide (ηβ) becomes a near-ideal value of 99.2%. Such high ηβs are also confirmed in direct simulations of them using a dipole source emulating the single QD (see the supplementary section 5). It is noteworthy that our design strategy for near-unity ηβ can be applied to different material systems such as those using Si and Si3N4 (see the supplementary section 6). Moreover, the design is robust against the misalignment between the cavity and the waveguide: a 200-nm cavity position deviation reduces the total efficiency by less than 1% (see the supplementary section 7). From these results, our waveguide-coupled SPS design compatible with the transfer printing process could be regarded as one of the most viable routes to introduce single photons into diverse PIC platforms, regardless of material combinations. We designed the PhC nanobeam cavity so as to possess an ultra-high Q-factor when being placed on flat glass We obtained a high Q-factor of 5.4×10 6 and a small mode volume of 0.434(λ/n) 3 . Fig. As we discussed in the main text, it is essential for realizing high η to achieve the maximum possible coupling between the PhC nanobeam cavity and the waveguide for a given cavitywaveguide distance, d. In the current work, we optimized the waveguide width so as to maximize the coupling We interpreted that the maximum coupling was obtained when achieving the largest overlap integral between the confined cavity mode and the propagating waveguide mode in the sense of the coupled mode theory Fig. For further verifying the high total single photon coupling efficiencies, ηβs, we performed direct numerical simulations of them by using a point dipole as a source of the radiation The two curves match very well each other, confirming the validity of the separated simulations of η and β for estimating ηβ. For d = 300 nm, the simulation using the point dipole source results in ηβ = 99.8%. The remaining deviations between the two curves are considered to be due to the finite simulation accuracy in the FDTD method (which is limited by the spatial grid size and time length of the calculation, etc.). Fig. Our SPS design strategy is versatile and robust for the change in material platform. We examined this by considering waveguides made of Si (n = 3.5) and Si3N4 (n = 2.0), both of which are standard material for the fabrication of PICs. For Si waveguide, we re-designed an InP-based (n = 3.5) nanobeam cavity such that it resonates within the telecom wavelength band at 1.55 μm, where Si is transparent. A design schematic is shown in Fig. These results clearly demonstrate that our design strategy is suitable for the introduction of highly efficient SPSs into diverse PIC material platforms. We emphasize that transfer printing enables the separated optimization of the fabrication processes for the SPSs and the waveguides, opening the way to high quality assembly of SPSs on PICs. The designed SPSs can keep the high ηs even under the presence of misalignment of the cavity to the waveguide. First, we examined the robustness against the simple in-plane deviation, δ, which is defined by the center-to-center distance between the cavity nanobeam and waveguide. Calculated Q-factors are shown in Fig. Then, we checked the design robustness against the rotation, which is quantified by the angle between the cavity and the waveguide, θ. Figure We also confirmed the situations in which both finite delta and θ exist. We simulated light transport for the case that the two cavities are simultaneously integrated onto an individual waveguide. We used two different PhC nanobeam cavities: they differ in a (230 nm and 235 nm), while share the same r/a = 0.26, w = 370 nm and h = 130 nm. The two cavities resonate at 924 nm for a = 230 nm and 937 nm for a = 235 nm in the simulation. For investigating the light propagation, we selectively excite one of the two cavities and computed its evolution until reaching to the steady state in our numerical simulator. Figures The estimation of experimental cavity-waveguide coupling efficiencies (ηexp) was done based on the measured cavity Q-factors. First, we measured several nanobeam cavities that were placed on flat glass and did not coupled to the waveguide. By fitting the measured PL peaks with Lorentzian function, we deduced an average cavity Q-factor on flat glass (Qave) to be 13,000. In addition, the emission spectrum measured for the cavity mode coupled to the waveguide was fitted to deduce the experimental Q-factor (Qexp) of 3,600. The larger Qexp than the designed Q of 1,300 for d = 300 nm can be explained by the deviation of the structural parameters in the fabricated device: in particular, the change in the cavity resonance wavelength disturbs the phase matching between the cavity and waveguide and degrades their coupling strength. Using the measured cavity Q-factors, we deduced an ηexp of 72% based on the following equation: This equation assumes that the observed reduction of the Q-factor when introducing the waveguide is dominated by the leakage of photons into the waveguide. This assumption is fairly reasonable in the current situation where d is large enough to suppress the additional cavity photon leakage into free space, as confirmed in the numerical simulations (see the supplementary section 2). For the case when loading the two cavities to the single waveguide, we measured a Q-factor of 1,000 (950) for the left (right) cavity, resulting in ηexp of 92% (93%). In this case, ηexp improved due to the slight reduction of d to 270 nm, which reduces the cavity Q-factors and increases the coupling between the cavities and the waveguide. Regarding the estimation of the experimental β (βexp), we performed time-resolved PL measurements. First, we measured emission decay rates of several single QDs that were embedded in PhC nanobeams on plane glass and decoupled from any cavity modes. The average decay rate was measured to be 0.5 GHz (= γother), which is roughly half of that for QDs in an unprocessed region of the sample. This reduction of the decay rate stems from partial photonic bandgap effect in the PhC nanobeam For the QD discussed in Fig. In the current demonstration, βexp did not reach to the maximum possible value probably due to the deviation of the QD position from the cavity field maximum, which degrades the Purcell effect enhancement. If the QD position was optimum, the maximum βexp would reach to 99.7%. Moreover, by optimizing the waveguide-cavity distance (d) to 250 nm, it could be possible to increase η up to 96.3%, with slight reduction of the maximum possible β to be 99.4%. Overall, it would be possible to achieve a total single photon coupling efficiency of ηβ = 95.7% even under the present quality of the nanocavity fabrication. Meanwhile, we have already demonstrated a cavity Q-factor over 50,000 for PhC nanocavities Figure 