Two-dimensional materials offer a novel platform for the development of future quantum technologies. However, the electrical characterisation of topological insulating states, non-local resistance and bandgap tuning in atomicallythin materials, can be strongly affected by spurious signals arising from the measuring electronics. Common-mode voltages, dielectric leakage in the coaxial cables and the limited input impedance of alternate-current amplifiers can mask the true nature of such high-impedance states. Here, we present an optical isolator circuit which grants access to such states by electrically decoupling the current-injection from the voltagesensing circuitry. We benchmark our apparatus against two state-of-the-art measurements: the non-local resistance of a graphene Hall bar and the transfer characteristic of a WS 2 field-effect transistor. Our system allows the quick characterisation of novel insulating states in two-dimensional materials with potential applications in future quantum technologies. A widely and long-accepted classification of the materials and states of matter relies on the electrical conductivity of systems which are metallic, insulating or semiconducting. However, their characterization has often proven to be very challenging. Indeed, the difficulty of measuring a superconducting zero-state resistance faced in the early days by Kamerling Onnes There is a wide consensus that alternate-current (AC) lock-in measurements offer higher resolution and greater noise rejection than direct-current (DC) techniques and, for this reason, they are widely used to characterize the response of electronic devices as well as in many practical applications, including medical diagnostics Careful consideration needs to be given to the characterization of insulating states with this technique. For example, a spurious negative value of resistance can appear in the non-local transport of a graphene Hall bar In this letter, we present an experimental apparatus designed specifically to overcome the aforementioned limitations, allowing us to eliminate spurious artefacts and grant direct access to the aforementioned Hi-Z states. The key to achieving this goal lies in the ability to decouple electrically (float) the circuits connected to the current-injection probes from that of the voltage-sensing contacts. To this end, we developed a battery-powered optical isolator (or optocoupler) circuit, together with a custom-designed measuring chamber which is able to float both core and shell of the coaxial cables used to interface the device to the instruments. In this manuscript we present two versions of this circuit: low-power and low-noise. The low-noise circuit is suitable for high-precision measurements as it is characterised by a noise level well below the intrinsic noise of the commercial measuring instrument used in these experiments (< 10 -5 V/ √ Hz at frequencies below 100 Hz). On the other hand, the low-power circuit demonstrates an increase in the period between battery charges from 4 to more than 30 days with a noise floor of ∼ 10 -4 V/ √ Hz, making it ideal for remote, long-term, operation. We benchmark the use of these circuits in two state-of-the-art experiments: measurement of the non-local resistance in a graphene Hall bar in perpendicular magnetic field To allow the measurement of Hi-Z devices in AC and prevent common-mode voltage (CMV), inductive coupling, and dielectric leakage currents from affecting the measuring instruments, it is necessary to effectively float the voltage probes of such instruments from the current-injection leads of the device under test. To achieve this goal, we incorporate into our apparatus an optical isolator or optocoupler. This is a device which converts an electric signal into light using a light-emitting-diode (LED) and converts it back into an electrical signal through one, or more, photodiodes. An ideal optocoupler has a linear response with a gain of 1. Whilst optical coupling is a well-known technique to isolate electric signals, crucially in the specific case of AC lock-in measurements, the optical isolation of the core signal of the wire is not sufficient to eliminate the emergence of spurious electrical signals. Indeed, the dielectric leakage in the coaxial cables (including connectors and terminations) between the core wire and the ground shielding causes the signal in one section of the circuit to be coupled to the ground, known as ground potential difference The core electronic circuit is shown in Figure to an Oxford Instruments Microstat MO superconducting magnet). The circuit shown in figure The noise as a function of frequency has been measured using an Ametek Model 7270 DSP Lock-in amplifier in Noise-measurement mode. Figure Figure In order to demonstrate the use and capabilities of our apparatus we present two stateof-the-art measurements which would be adversely affected by artefacts in a normal experi- transport in bilayer graphene The graphene is contacted using Cr/Au electrodes in a side-contact configuration (or 1D contacts) A typical room temperature non-local lock-in measurement of a graphene Hall bar is shown schematically in figure Such arrangement gives the results shown in figure where R in is the input impedance of the voltage amplifier, typically 1 -10 MΩ, and R 1 (R 2 ) is the total resistance across the local part of the circuit, which include R B , the contact resistance of points 1 and 3 (or 2 and 4) and R in . The ground coupling is due to the dielectric leakage of the BNC cables towards the cable shielding, which effectively allows a signal generated between contacts 1 and 2 to be sensed between contacts 3 and 4 by-passing the device. The value of V cmv increases with the channel resistance and it is maximum at the charge-neutrality point. Notably, depending on the values of R 1 and R 2 , the value V nl can be larger than the actual non-local signal and it can also have opposite sign (see figure The non-local measurement obtained using this arrangement is shown in figure Furthermore, the ground coupling observed in the coaxial wires and connectors, responsible for the observed artefacts, is always present in a standard AC lock-in measurement, and it can be measured also in other Hi-Z devices, such as metallic thin films or in the insulating state of 2D materials. In The measurements obtained from the two different AC configurations are then benchmarked against a DC characterization of the device, see figure In conclusion, we have presented an integrated opto-electrical circuit which allows the use of low-noise and low input impedance AC lock-in for the characterization of high-Z devices. We show that this optocoupler eliminates large spurious electrical signals by effectively decoupling the voltage sensing instruments from the current-driving circuitry. We demonstrate its performance in terms of fidelity, noise level, which is as low as the intrinsic noise level of the measuring instrument, and power consumption, which results in a continuous operation up to 40 days using a small-size battery. The circuit can easily be miniaturized using surfacemount components and quickly up-scaled to fit multi-purposes applications when more than two contacts are needed in a small space, such as in modern experiments on quantum computing, large machines such as particle accelerators or in space applications. The developed optocouplers are highly suitable for the low-noise electrical characterization of narrow-gap states and semiconductors with potential applications in future quantum technologies such as computation, communication and sensing. Although in this work we focussed on the use of our circuitry to the characterization of 2D materials, the technique can be readily applied to the electrical measurement of a multitude of materials in which high-impedance states need to be accessed, such as polymers and composites, metalling thin-films, nanowires, nanotubes and quantum dots. Supplementary material is submitted with the current manuscript. Additional data, including EAGLE files for the schematics and PCB broads, related to this paper may be requested from the authors. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.R. R. Morrison, Grounding and shielding techniques, 4th ed., edited by Wiley (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1998) Chap. 4, pp. 73-74.