Zero-energy Majorana quasiparticles can be induced at the edge of a low dimensional systems. Non-Abelian statistics of this state makes it a good candidate for the realization of quantum computing. From the practical point of view, it is crucial to obtain an intentional creation and manipulation of this type of bound states. Here, we show such a possibility in a setup of quantum nanoring in which we specify a quantum dot region via electrostatic means. States in such quantum dot can lead to the emergence of Andreev and Majorana bound states in investigated system. We study the differences between those bound states and the possibility of their manipulation. Moreover, exact calculation method for spectral function has been proposed, which can be used to discuss the bound states influence on band structure of proposed system. Using this method, it can be shown that the Majorana bound states, induced at the edge of the system, present themselves as a dispersionless zero-energy band. Kitaev's depiction of the possibility of existence of zero energy Majorana bound states (MBS) in low dimensional setup Currently, most promising setups where the emergence of MBS is possible are the semiconductor-superconductor nanostructures For practical application of MBS in quantum computing, it is necessary to first invent the feasible way for creating and afterwards, a manipulation of MBS. One of the possible ways is a creation of MBS from two coalescing Andreev bound states (ABS) in a coupled quantum-dot hybrid-nanowire system For the reasons described above, in this paper, we discuss the possibility of inducing the Majorana quasiparticles in the quantum ring using electrostatic means. The main idea we propose is shown in Fig. where c † iσ (c iσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of the electron with spin σ in i-th site. Here t denotes a hopping integral between the nearest-neighbor sites, μ is a chemical potential and h denotes the magnetic field in the Zeeman form. By thorough choice of the gauge symmetry, we can neglect the diamagnetic (orbital) effects where σ y is the second Pauli matrix and λ is the SOC strength. In the part of the ring, we can form electrostatically the QD. Using the gate voltage V G we can change the occupation of sites i.e.: where V G plays the role of the additional potential in a part of ring (sites belonging to the QD region). As a consequence of formation of the nanoring on the superconducting surface, the superconducting gap ∆ is induced by the proximity effect can be described by the BCS-like term: We assume that superconducting gap depends on the magnetic field , in the form ∆(h , where h c2 is the critical magnetic field of the bulk system, while ∆ 0 is the superconducting gap induced in the quantum ring, in the absence of the magnetic field h. Bogoliubov-de Gennes formalism. The Hamiltonian H can be diagonalized by the transformation where γ n and γ † n are the new quasiparticle fermionic operators, while u inσ and v inσ are the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) eigenvectors. This transformation leads to the BdG equations in the form E n Ψ in = j H ij Ψ jn , where is the Hamiltonian in the matrix form, while Ψ in = (u in↑ , v in↓ , u in↓ , v in↑ ) T . Here the matrix elements are: δ ij is the singleparticle term, D ij = ∆δ ij is the on-site superconducting gap, and We assume the existence of N sites in the nanoring and N D sites (⊂ N ) in the QD region. In calculations we take N = 200, ∆ 0 /t = 0.2 and k B T /t = 10 -5 . Other values will be set at the appropriate times. Additionally, for the numerical purposes in some type of calculations (e.g. local density of states or spectral function) we have replaced the Dirac delta function by a Lorentzian δ(ω) = ζ/[π(ω 2 + ζ 2 )] with a broadening of ζ/t = 0.001. In the case of the N D = 0 or V G /t = 0, described system is equivalent to the homogeneous ring. In this case, the Hamiltonian H can be expressed in the momentum space using the Fourier transform c iσ = where c † kσ (c kσ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of electron with momentum k and spin σ. Here E k = -2t cos(k) is the dispersion relation for non-interacting electron with momentum k, while L k = 2λ sin(k) denotes the spin-orbit coupling. Band structure. Let us shortly describe main properties of the band structure in a homogeneous case (Fig. Schematic representation of the band structure of homogeneous system for the superconducting state in the presence of the external magnetic filed. Blue and red solid line represent lower and upper Rashba bands, respectively. Gray dashed parabolas represent the band structure without the influence of magnetic field. critical magnetic field h c and reopens the new topological gap. Closing trivial (superconducting) gap and reopening the new topological gap as the magnetic field h surpasses the h c threshold, is associated with the topological phase transition. Band inversion is a consequence of transition from trivial to non-trival topological phase Topological phase transition. For the homogeneous system we can calculate the condition for the topological phase transition (from the trivial to non-trivial phase). Topological phase transition occurs, when the gap of the system closes, which is equivalent to the condition which give Second condition is met by k = 0 and k = ±π, which are two time-reversal-invariant momenta for onedimensional system where ∆ = ∆(h). This value of the magnetic field describes the critical value in which the trivial energy gap closes and new topological gap is reopened. To study our system we will use the spin dependent local density of states (LDOS) which by using transformation ( while the total density of states (DOS) is given by ρ(ω) = iσ ρ iσ (ω). Those physical quantities are measurable by the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) A relatively simple way to show the difference between ordinary ABS and non-trivial MBS is the investigation of the LDOS spectrum around the QD region. Numerical results are shown in Fig. For sufficiently large value of V G , the QD energy levels are located above the gap region [Fig. Increasing the gate potential V G to relatively large value with respect to the rest of the ring states (in our case below -4th and above h), leads to occurrence of the new boundary at the QD-ring connection. Absence of the ring energetic levels in the QD regions leads to the emergence the (initially Andreev and finally Majorana) bound states Additional information about realized type of the bound state in the system can be given by the total DOS and polarization at the zero energy level ( In relation to properties described above , it is important to formulate a description of how the MBS are composed of the spin up and down particles. Analysis of the total DOS as a function of the magnetic field h for fixed N D , show typical character [Fig. The LDOS show us how inhomogeneity leads to the localization of the Andreev and/or Majorana bound states in the real space. In similar way, in the momentum space we can define the spectral function which can show how the same defects influence the band structure of our system To investigate the influence of QD on the band structure of our system, we will use the spectral function A kσ (ω) = -1 π ImG kkσ (ω) Additionally, using transformation ( Then, from Eq. 12, the spectral function is given as: From solution of the BdG equations ( Now we discuss the influence of polarization of the spectral function A k↑ -A k↓ in a case of the absence and presence of the QD region (shown in Fig. In our quasi-one-dimensional system, the surface is given by the zero-dimensional "edge" between the QD region and the ring. Additionally, the SOC in the system contributes to the helicity basis As a consequence of this, described model can be exactly mapped on to Kitaev model for some range of parameters Majorana flatband. Now we will discuss the influence of magnetic field h and SOC λ on the Majorana flatband (Fig. First, we will describe how the gaps change as a function of magnetic field h [Fig. notation described in Fig. Additionally, change of the spectral function in Majorana band has its reflection in the LDOS [Fig. As a consequence of the properties described above, the MBS cannot be associated with one specific momentum Localization of the MBS edge state can be probed by the STM Summarizing, we proposed the possibility of the creation and manipulation of the Majorana bound states in the nanoring structure, by the electrostatical formation of the quantum dot region. In contrast to the other proposal of realization of the Majorana quasiparticles in the nanoring Additionally, we discussed the emergence of the Majorana bound state on the "induced" edges in the form of the quantum dot region. We have shown that the Majorana bound states can be induced in the system together with Andreev bound states, however, former states are localized in space at the outside of the quantum dot, while the latter -the ABS, reside inside. Moreover, we proposed and discussed a method which allows for the existence of the Andreev and/or Majorana bound states in the momentum space, and by using it we investigated the properties of the Majorana flatband. Our results have shown that the Majorana bound states are associated with the dispersionless zero-energy flatband. Spectral function analyses shown that those states can not exist within a discrete range of some selected momenta, but should be studied in the context of whole band. It is a consequence of the leakage of the spectral weight within the Majorana flatband from central momentum point to the Fermi momenta. Our results should be helpful in a construction of the realistic minimal model of the Majorana bound states.