A new Cr-based quasi-one-dimensional superconductor Na 2 Cr 3 As 3 was synthesized by an ion-exchange method in sodium naphthalenide solution. The crystals are thread-like and the structure was analyzed by X-ray diffraction with a noncentrosymmetric hexagonal space group P-6m2 (No. 187), in which the (Cr 3 As 3 ) 2-linear chains are separated by Na + ions, and the refined lattice parameters are a = 9.239(2) Å and c = 4.209(6) Å. The measurements for electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and heat capacity reveal a superconducting transition with unconventional characteristic at the T c of 8.6 K, which exceeds that of all previously reported Cr-based superconductors. The discoveries of Cu-based and Fe-based high-T c superconductors have vitalized extensive research interests in the unconventional superconductivity associated with magnetic instability especially among 3d transition metal compounds during the last 30 years. For the exploration of new superconductors, chemical pressure effect has been an effective tool to tune the crystal structure and the electronic properties for obtaining new superconductors or achieving higher T c, which is usually realized by substituting part of the structural motif or ions with equivalent ones but different spacial sizes, and it causes a relative change of crystal lattice analogous to external physical pressure effect. This is typically illustrated in the iron-oxypnictide superconductors, as the superconducting T c dramatically increases from 26 K of LaO 1-x F x FeAs to 55 K of SmO 1-x F x FeAs by the substitution of [La 2 O 2 ] 2+ with smaller [Sm 2 O 2 ] 2+ . The single crystals of Na 2 Cr 3 As 3 were prepared by ion-exchange method with sodium naphthalene solution (Naph.-Na) in tetrahydrofuran (THF) using K 2 Cr 3 As 3 crystals as the precursor. At first the high-quality K 2 Cr 3 As 3 crystals were grown by a high-temperature solution growth method as previously reported (see Supporting Information). The obtained Na 2 Cr 3 As 3 crystals are extremely unstable in air, and any exposure to air should be avoided when performing measurements on them. The crystal structure was characterized at room temperature by both powder x-ray diffraction (PXRD) using a PAN-analytical x-ray diffractometer and single-crystal x-ray diffraction (SXRD) using a Bruker single crystal x-ray diffractometer with Cu-K  radiation. The chemical composition was analyzed with both Phenom scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with an energy-dispersive spectrometer (EDS) and inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP). The resistivity and heat capacity were measured with a Quantum Design physical property measurement system by the standard four-probe method and relaxation method, respectively. The dc magnetic susceptibility measurement was performed with a Quantum Design magnetic property measurement system under zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) modes from 2 K to 10 K under a magnetic field of 10 Oe. The XRD patterns are shown in Figure The temperature dependence of heat capacity is depicted as a relationship of C p /T vs. T 2 , which is shown in Figure In summary, we synthesized a new Cr-based Q1D ternary compound Na 2 Cr 3 As 3 through the ion-exchange method, and superconductivity was discovered in this compound with the transition temperature of 8.6 K, which is the highest T c in all Cr-based superconductors. The characterizations of resistivity and heat capacity revealed unconventional superconductivity with strong electronic correlations in Na 2 Cr 3 As 3 . The dramatic enhancement of T c in this A 2 Cr 3 As 3 series indicates large chemical pressure effect on superconductivity.