The loss and noise mechanisms of superconducting resonators are useful tools for understanding decoherence in superconducting circuits. While the loss mechanisms have been heavily studied, noise in superconducting resonators has only recently been investigated. In particular, there is an absence of literature on noise in the single photon limit. Here, we measure the loss and noise of an aluminium on silicon quarter-wavelength (λ/4) resonator in the single photon regime. Over the past decade it has become clear that the main causes of decoherence in quantum circuits are bad microwave engineering, excess quasiparticles and parasitic two level systems (TLS). As the demands on quantum circuits increase, the tolerance to decoherence mechanisms decreases. Therefore, despite progress in tackling these issues, they remain the primary problem to overcome when attempting to manufacture large scale quantum systems. Superconducting resonators have become a common tool in understanding the decoherence mechanisms of quantum circuits. When fabricated from the same materials, using the same processes, the resonator quality factor can provide a good estimate of the qubit relaxation rate A prominent feature of these studies is related to the origin, nature and removal of TLS Here, we study the loss and noise of a superconducting aluminium λ/4 resonator. We demonstrate a level of loss which is comparable to the literature. We then study the noise of this resonator at single photon energies. This opens up the possibility of directly measuring noise in superconducting qubits as well as further examining the nature of interacting TLS which are the limiting factor for many quantum circuits. Fabrication of the device begins with a solvent clean of a high resistivity silicon wafer. Following this, the wafer is submerged in a 2% hydrofluoric acid bath to remove the native surface oxide and passivate the surface with hydrogen. Within 3 minutes, the wafer is placed under vacuum inside the load lock of a Plassys MEB deposition system. The wafer is then heated to 300 o C while the vacuum chamber pumps. Once the wafer has cooled to room temperature and a base pressure of 1.1x10 -7 mbar is reached, 150 nm of Al is deposited at a rate of 0.5 nm/s. Next, the vacuum chamber is filled to 10 mbar of 99.99% pure molecular oxygen for 10 minutes, after this the chamber vented to atmosphere. A 1.2 μm thick layer of AZ1512HS photoresist is then patterned by direct-write laser lithography to realise the microwave circuitry. The photoresist is developed in AZ developer diluted with H 2 O 1:1, which minimises the parasitic etching of aluminium. This pattern is transferred into the Al film by a wet etch in a mixture of phosphoric, nitric, and acetic acids. Then, a reactive ion etch using an inductively coupled NF 3 plasma was used to isotropically etch the Si substrate, forming a 1 μm deep trench with a 400 nm undercut below the Al features. After dicing, the resulting chip is cleaned using hot solvents, then wirebonded within a light-tight connectorised copper sample enclosure (shown in Fig. The S 21 transmission response of the superconducting resonator is measured at 9.5 mK while the microwave power is varied. A traceable fit routine where Z 0 is the characteristic impedance (Z 0 = 50Ω), Z r is the resonator impedance (Z r is chosen to be close to 50Ω), E int is the average energy stored within the resonator and Q l is the loaded quality factor (1/Q l = 1/Q c + 1/Q i ). Figure where F is the filling factor describing the ratio of Efield in the TLS host volume to the total volume. δ 0 TLS = 1/Q TLS is the TLS loss tangent, n c is the critical number of photons within the resonator to generate the E-field required to saturate one TLS. δ other is the contribution from non-TLS loss mechanisms, which are generally associated with loss at high microwave drives. A fit to Eq. ( The loss induced by the TLS corresponds to the resonant absorption of microwave photons. Recent experiments have examined the role of these resonant TLS in contributing noise to the resonator A Pound setup is used to form a frequency locked loop which can continuously monitor ω 0 (t). The Pound setup we use is identical to one previously used in the study of low frequency noise in superconducting resonators where h 0 is a white frequency noise level, h -1 is a flicker frequency noise level and α is an exponent describing the strength of low frequency noise components. When α = 1, the first term represents a true flicker noise process. From this fit we find that the white noise level is described by h 0 = 2.5×10 -16 , while the flicker noise level is described by α = 1.05 and h -1 = 3.5×10 -15 . This level of noise is larger than that previously observed In summary, we measured frequency noise of a high-Q superconducting resonator at single photon energies. This is an important step towards studies of the interacting nature of TLS, which are currently limiting the performance of many superconducting circuits. In showing that noise can be measured at single photon energies, the technique could be extended to the circuit-QED architecture. Here, a superconducting qubit in the dispersive regime shifts the resonator frequency with χ = -g 2 /∆, where g is the qubit-resonator coupling and ∆ is the frequency detuning between the qubit and the resonator. The frequency shift implies that any noise of the qubit frequency will get mapped to a frequency noise of the resonator. For normal values of g and ∆ the effective noise of the resonator will be between 0.01 and 0.001 times than that of the qubit. This gives a straightforward method to measure flux noise of qubits by measuring the frequency noise of the resonator, without needing to use advanced pulse sequences 