Recent progress in superconductor electronics fabri- cation has enabled single-flux-quantum (SFQ) digital circuits with close to one million Josephson junctions (JJs) on 1-cm 2 chips. Increasing the integration scale further is challenging because of the large area of SFQ logic cells, mainly determined by the area of resistively shunted Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb JJs and geometrical inductors utilizing multiple layers of Nb. To overcome these challenges, we are developing a fabrication process with self-shunted high-Jc JJs and compact thin-film MoNx kinetic inductors instead of geometrical inductors. We present fabrication details and properties of MoNx films with a wide range of Tc, including residual stress, electrical resistivity, critical current, and magnetic field penetration depth λ0. As kinetic inductors, we implemented Mo2N films with Tc about 8 K, λ0 about 0.51 μm, and inductance adjustable in the range from 2 to 8 pH/sq. We also present data on fabrication and electrical characterization of Nb-based self-shunted JJs with AlOx tunnel barriers and Jc = 0.6 mA/μm 2 , and with 10-nm thick Si1-xNbx barriers, with x from 0.03 to 0.15, fabricated on 200-mm wafers by cosputtering. We demonstrate that the electron transport mechanism in Si1-xNbx barriers at x < 0.08 is inelastic resonant tunneling via chains of multiple localized states. At larger x, their Josephson characteristics are strongly dependent on x and residual stress in Nb electrodes, and in general are inferior to AlOx tunnel barriers. HERE has been a continuing progress in superconductor electronics fabrication towards increasing the number of superconducting layers and reducing the minimum size of circuit features All authors are with Lincoln Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lexington, MA 02421 (e-mail: sergey.tolpygo@ll.mit.edu). Submitted to IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. on Sept. There are a few fabrication technology development paths for growing the SFQ integration scale. For instance, staying with resistively shunted JJs and geometrical inductors, we can continue to decrease the minimum feature size and to increase the number of superconducting layers and layers of Josephson junctions. Transitioning to a 250-nm process for resistors, inductors, and interlayer vias would give a theoretical maximum circuit density of about 10 7 JJs per cm 2 with a single layer of junctions and proportionally higher with two layers of active devices A more promising way is to replace externally shunted junctions with self-shunted junctions and replace geometrical inductors with kinetic inductors, and then continue to decrease the minimum feature size and increase the number of junction layers. In kinetic inductors, most of the energy is stored in kinetic energy of the supercurrent, not in the magnetic field around the inductor. Therefore, the mutual inductance between kinetic inductors remains much lower than their selfinductance even at deep submicron spacings and linewidths. The goal of this work is to develop a superconductor electronics fabrication process utilizing kinetic inductors and high-Jc self-shunted Josephson junctions. We mainly concentrate here on high-Jc Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb junctions because so far they have shown better characteristics for SFQ digital circuits than other potential types of self-shunted JJs, e.g., Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb There are two options for replacing geometrical inductors by more compact inductors with low cross talk: use the kinetic inductance of the supercurrent in a thin, d << λ, superconducting film Lk = μ0λ 2 /d; or use the kinetic inductance of the Josephson current through a junction LJ = Φ0/(2πIc cos φ), a socalled Josephson inductance. Here, λ is London magnetic-field penetration depth, d the film thickness, Ic the junction critical current, φ the Josephson phase difference, and Φ0 the flux quantum. Being the same in nature, these two types of inductors utilize different structures. The former is a planar thinfilm device whereas the latter is formed by a vertical stack of multiple layers. The difference practically disappears in microbridge-type thin-film JJs. So the choice of kinetic inductors should be based on technological considerations. For a process with the minimum feature size F, the smallest area of a planar inductor that can be made is F 2 . Forming an SFQ cell inductor Lcell from a film with inductance per square Lk requires Lcell/Lk squares of the film. The area occupied by a this kinetic inductor is Ak = (Lcell/Lk)F 2 if Lk < Lcell, and Ak = (Lk/Lcell)F 2 if Lk > Lcell. The density of inductors is maximized when Lk ≈ Lcell. Typically, Lcell ~ Φ0/Ic is about 20 pH, where Ic ~ 100 μA is the typical critical current of the cell junctions. The latter value is set from the cell bit error rate considerations. Therefore, the practical upper value of Lk above which there is little benefit for circuit density is about 20 pH/sq and, respectively, λ 2 /d about 17 μm. If we select a material with λ of about 0.5 μm, we can get (w/λ) 2 ~ 0.5 using w = F in the current F = 350 nm technology node, where w is the film width. Then, the typical inductor area Ak ≈ (Φ0d/μ0Ic)(w/λ) 2 in μm 2 can be less than 10d, where d is in micrometers, and getting Ak < 1 μm 2 and inductor density over 10 8 cm -2 would require only modestly thin films with d less than about 100 nm. There are many suitable amorphous and crystalline materials, e.g., NbN, NbTiN, MoNx, and such thin-film inductors can be fabricated with very high uniformity, yield, and repeatability. The critical current of the inductor film, Icf, has to be much larger than the cell junction Ic ~ 100 μA. This constrains the film's width, inductance per square Lk, and the ultimate circuit density. Indeed, the fundamental critical current of superconductors is the pair breaking, Ginzburg-Landau (GL) depairing critical current In real films with w/ξ >> 1, the critical current is smaller than the IGL and determined by the entry and motion of Abrikosov vortices from the film edges, which depend on the edge defects and current distribution. Setting Icf =αIGL with α < 1, the Icf > Ic requirement results in a restriction on the film width w > (3√3ξ/α)Lk/20, where Lk is in pH/sq. That is, the larger Lk the wider film we need to use. Assuming α ~ 0.1 and ξ ~ 10 nm, this condition becomes w/Lk > 25 nm/pH. If we use w = F to maximize the circuit density, the film kinetic inductance should be Lk < 14 pH/sq at F = 350 nm and < 10 pH/sq if we transition to F = 250 nm process node. If, to be on the safe side, we use a material with Lk = 4 pH/sq, the inductor area at F = 350 nm can be made as low as Ak ~ 0.6 μm 2 . For thin-film inductors, LkIcf is adjustable by w. Therefore, the condition LkIc > 1 required for making quantizing kinetic inductors can be easily satisfied. However, this is not the case for junction-based inductors. Making a quantizing loop comprised of only usual Josephson junctions requires more than four serially connected JJs, N > 4, in order to satisfy the flux quantization condition ∑φi = 2π before reaching the critical current of the JJs, i.e., φi < π/2, where φi is the phase difference across the i-th junction. It would be more practical to use N = 6 nearly identical JJs, e.g., in a vertical stack, so that φi ≈ π/3 and the loop current Icir = Icsin(π/3) ≈ 0.87Ic is sufficiently lower than the critical current. However, even for a 6-JJ loop, the LJIc product (parameter βL) is only about 2Φ0, a much lower value than can be obtained by using thin-film kinetic inductors. Replacing the passive JJs with the so-called π-junctions, providing a π phase shift across their ferromagnetic barrier, can dramatically reduce the number of required JJs The Josephson critical current of the inductor JJs must be larger than the Ic of the active (switching) JJs. An example of a possible fabrication process was described in NbN and NbTiN films, typically used for kinetic inductance detectors, have magnetic field penetration depth values about 200 nm in thick films, increasing to ~ 500 nm as the thickness decreases to 3 nm; see MoNx films were deposited on 200-mm wafers in a Connexion cluster tool using reactive sputtering of a Mo target in Ar/N2 mixture. For process optimization, we used a fixed sputtering power, fixed Ar flow, and varied the N2 flow to study a range of N2/Ar ratios from 0.01 to 0.15 in order to obtain films with different nitrogen content, critical temperature Tc, and resistivity. A few nanometers of titanium were used as an adhesion layer. The range of sputtering powers from 0.5 kW to 3 kW was studied. We also varied the substrate temperature from 35 o C to 400 o C. For simplicity, we targeted approximately the same film thickness, about 40 nm, for all depositions. The actual thickness was measured, and the sheet resistance data were corrected for the actual thickness. The obtained films were studied by x-ray diffraction and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) to determine nitrogen content. Films deposited at 35 o C were found to be amorphous with a very small amount of a cubic phase with crystallite size about 2.6 nm, likely inclusions of highly disordered molybdenum and/or cubic γ-Mo2N phase. The sharpness, position, and intensity of the observed x-ray diffraction lines move closer to elemental Mo, and the crystallite size increased to about 3.7 nm and about 5.1 nm with increasing deposition temperature to 200 o C and 400 o C, respectively. The results of the SIMS measurements of nitrogen content in the deposited films are given in Table Electrical resistivity ρ of the deposited films increases sharply with increasing N2 content in the sputtering gas mix- ture above ~ 2%. It changes from values ~ 30 μΩ•cm, typical for a polycrystalline molybdenum with impurities, to values ~ 120 μΩ•cm typical for amorphous metals with very short mean free path, indicating a sharp onset of amorphization; see Fig. The critical temperature of MoNx films also increases sharply in the same range of N2 concentrations as does the sheet resistance Rs; see Fig. The critical temperature of MoNx films correlates very well with their electrical resistivity, or sheet resistance, as shown in Fig. At a fixed N2 content, the film resistivity decreased with increasing the sputtering power, as shown in Fig. Wafers were rotated during the deposition to improve the film thickness and sheet resistance uniformity to about 2% (one standard deviation), measured at 49 points across 200mm wafers. Fine adjustments of film thickness were made based on measurements of kinetic inductance in unpatterned and patterned films and their critical currents. Thermal stability of the MoNx films and their suitability for integration into a multilayer process stack with PECVD SiO2 interlayer dielectric was verified by depositing 200 nm of SiO2 at 150 o C on top of the MoNx films with a 5-nm Ti adhesion layer. This sandwich was then annealed at 200 o C for 30 and 60 minutes in N2 at 2.5 Torr, and electrical characteristics were remeasured; see Fig. Magnetic field penetration depth and its temperature dependence λ(T) of unpatterned MoNx films were measured using a dielectric-resonator technique shown schematically in Fig. where g is a geometric factor of the resonator and λeff(T) is the effective penetration depth. In general, λeff = λcoth(d/λ), which gives λeff = λ 2 /d for a very thin d << λ and λeff = λ in the opposite case. In the simplest two-fluid model, the T-dependence of the penetration depth is Then, the fr(T) change with respect to the fr at the liquid He temperature, fr(T0), is given by in the thick film λ(T) << d limit, and in the thin-film λ(T) >> d limit. The geometrical factor of the resonator was calculated, and an additional calibration was done using deposited 200-nm Nb films. The zero-T penetration depth λ0 ≡ λ(0) and Tc were determined by fitting the experimental data to (3) or (4). Thus obtained Tc values agreed within ±0.1 K with the values obtained from the dc resistive transitions measured on the same films. Fig. We measured films deposited at different conditions and annealed films. We have found that MoNx films with the maximum Tc, corresponding to films with composition Mo2N and electrical resistivity around 110 μΩ•cm in Fig. We noted larger variation of λ0 in films with reduced Tc than in the optimal, "stoichiometric" Mo2N films, apparently indicating larger sensitivity of the Cooper pair density ns to the nitrogen content and other film fabrication details. Similarly, 60min anneals of nonoptimal films at 200 o C sometimes resulted in increased value of the measured λ0, suggesting some changes in the morphology of the films because changes in Tc and resistivity were minor. The resonator quality factor Q at T = 4.24 K decreased strongly with decreasing Tc of the films, as shown in Fig. In order to compare the penetration depth data in different MoNx films, we recall that λ0 in the microscopic theory of superconductivity is given by λ0 2 ≈ λL 2 (0)(ξ0/l) in the dirty limit l << ξ0, which is certainly applicable to our amorphous superconducting films. Here, l is the mean free path and ξ0 ≡ ħvF/πΔ0 is the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) coherence length, and Δ0 the energy gap; see, e.g., where λ0 is in micrometers, ρ in μΩ•cm, and Tc in Kelvin. The measured values of λ0 are shown in Fig. Josephson junction networks are usually formed in thin films because of the columnar growth, e.g., in transition-metal films and their nitrides such as Nb and NbN, and/or grain boundary oxidation, e.g., in Nb and Al films, and high-Tc superconductors; see Mo2N films with the target thickness of 40 nm were incorporated into SFQ5ee process stack with eight Nb metal layers For inductance measurements, a dc-SQUID based technique described in The average Lk values obtained on wafers fabricated during the two-year period since the launch of the SFQ5ee process are shown in Fig. The critical current of patterned MoNx films, Icf was measured on the same chips as used for SQUID measurements of Lk. The films were patterned as meanders with length to width ratios Nsq from about 100 to 500 squares. The typical Icf versus width dependences are shown in Fig. From a circuit design standpoint, the important characteristic of a kinetic inductor is the LIcf product, which for the inductor with length l is LIcf = lLkJcf. From II.A, we expect the LkJcf product to be the film material property independent of the film thickness and width where α < 1 characterizes reduction of the critical current with respect to the Ginzburg-Landau depairing current. We have found the product LkJcf = 4.4Φ0/μm for our films and indeed independent of Lk. This value gives ξ/α = 44 nm. Hence, a 1-μm square of Mo2N film provides a factor of two larger product of inductance and critical current than a stack of six JJs. The critical current of the films correlates with Tc, as shown in Fig. It is well known that the most commonly used Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb Josephson junctions become self-shunted at sufficiently high values of Jc ~ 1 mA/μm 2 Another group of self-shunted JJs are junctions of an SNS or SSmS type using a normal-metal or semiconductor barrier. In order to get IcRN product values high enough to be suitable for high-speed SFQ circuits, highly disordered metals or doped semiconductors are used as a barrier, usually with composi-tions close to the metal-insulator transition The requirements for superconducting digital circuits are quite different: submicron-size junctions with Ic ~ 0.1 mA and lower, IcRN products over 1 mV, low JJ parameters spread, JJ counts over a million, and good uniformity over large-size wafers. Therefore, we investigated fabrication of JJs with doped-Si barrier on 200-mm wafers in order to evaluate their uniformity and suitability of their parameters to VLSI SFQ circuits. Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb trilayers were deposited on 200-mm oxidized Si wafers in-situ in a Canon-Anelva deposition system. Nb-doped Si barriers were deposited using co-sputtering of Si and Nb targets with 100-mm diameters. Wafers were rotating during the deposition; the obtained thickness uniformity was better than 1%. The obtained uniformity of Nb and Si1-xNbx sheet resistance ρ/d was in the range from 0.4% to 0.9% depending on Nb film stress, and 1.7% and 1.4% for Si1-xNbx films with x = 0.09 and 0.1, respectively. Full optimization of JJs' deposition requires optimization of the barrier thickness and Nb content because the critical current of SSmS and SNS junctions exponentially depends on the barrier thickness d and coherence length of the barrier material ξN, which in turn depends on the doping level and temperature. Instead, we set the barrier thickness at 10 nm, because it was estimated as the lowest thickness that could provide better than 2% run-to-run reproducibility of the barrier thickness on 200-mm wafers. The amount of Nb doping x in Si was varied from 3 to 15 atomic percent, based on the results of the prior work After deep-UV photolithography, junctions were etched using Cl2-based chemistry and planarized using CMP of a PECVD SiO2 interlayer dielectric as described in Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions with Nb concentration in the barrier of 8 at. % and below do not show any signs of Josephson current at 10 nm barrier thickness and 4.24 K. Instead, currentvoltage I(V) characteristics of the junctions are highly nonlinear, as shown in Fig. The observed I(V) characteristics are indicative of electron transport by resonant tunneling via chains of localized states, so-called Lifshitz' resonance-percolation trajectories Junctions with x = 0.03 display a much stronger nonlinearity than where the third term, which becomes dominant at V > 25 mV, represents a contribution of inelastic resonant tunneling via chains with three localized states Si1-xNbx barriers with Nb concentration of 9 at. % resulted in Jc ~ 0.6 mA/μm 2 . Higher doping levels, x > 0.1, resulted in Jcs too high and not suitable for SFQ circuits. Using the sheet resistance of deposited Si1-xNbx films, we determined in-plane resistivity ρ = Rsd to be 4.27 mΩ cm and 3.14 mΩ cm at x = 0.09 and 0.1, respectively. Hence, the specific barrier resistance (in the direction perpendicular to the junction plane) Rsq = Rsd 2 was expected to be about 0.43 and 0.31 Ω μm 2 , respectively, i.e., a factor of 10 lower than for AlOx-based tunnel barriers at Jc = 0.6 mA/μm 2 . The fabricated junctions showed a factor of 2x higher specific resistances of 0.78 and 0.7 Ω μm 2 for x = 0.09 and 0.1, respectively. The on-chip and on-wafer resistance uniformities were found to be nearly the same and equal to 1.2% and 1.5% for 0.7-μm and 1-μm JJs, respectively. Despite relatively small changes in junction resistance with doping at these levels of x, the Josephson critical current density Jc was found to strongly depend on the composition x and the residual stress in Nb electrodes. The Jc changes from 0.62±0.05 mA/μm 2 to 1.42±0.07 mA/μm 2 with x increasing from 0.09 to 0.10. We have found that residual stress in Nb films has a profound effect on Jc of Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions. For instance, a change in residual stress of Nb films from about -100 MPa to -700 MPa resulted in the Jc reduction from 1.12 to 0.62 mA/μm 2 at x = 0.09 and from 2.07 to 1.42 mA/μm 2 at x = 0.10, a 60% reduction on average. A similar change in the stress results in only about 10% change in the Jc of Nb-based junctions with AlOx tunnel barriers. These results indicate that accurate Jc targeting and reproducibility needed for a stable VLSI process with Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions require a very precise process control over both Nb doping within a 0.1% or better level and over Nb film deposition parameters. The typical I-V characteristics of a 0.7-μm-diameter JJ with 9% doping is shown in Fig. By inspecting the published I-V characteristics of junctions with doped Si barriers, we noted that IcRN products reported for nonhysteretic JJs with various barrier thicknesses, doping types and levels in Indeed, getting close to the latter value requires barriers with d < ξN. At x = 0.09, ξN ≈ 5.6 nm according to our estimate. Making barriers thinner than that would increase Jc to unpractically high values requiring nanoscale junctions. Their properties would be similar to nano-constrictions considered in Note also the presence of a large excess current, Iex, in I-V characteristics, as indicated by dashed lines in Fig. The Ic variation of 0.7-μm and 1-μm junctions with deposited Si1-xNbx barriers on-chip and on-wafer have been found so far to be a factor of about 3x larger than for Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb JJs with the same sizes and the same average Jc of 0.6 mA/μm 2 . Similarly, the run-to-run repeatability of Ic was inferior to AlOx-based junctions. A more detailed description of the results on Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junction fabrication and characterization will be published elsewhere, whereas we also plan to do more experiments with submicron JJs with doped Si barriers. For the process integration with kinetic inductors, we concentrated on using Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb due to their superior characteristics. To conclude, we note that there are other types of junctions which exhibit self-shunting, have sufficiently high Jc, and rela-tively high IcRN values, e.g., SINIS In the SFQ5ee process, kinetic inductors are used for circuit biasing and, as a result, are placed as the first layer in the process stack and interconnected by the first layer of Nb The first superconducting layer in the process is a Nb ground plane. It is followed by a Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb trilayer. For placing and interconnecting kinetic inductors, we are investigating two options: a) right below the trilayer base electrode (BE) and using BE interconnections, shown as layer K0; b) above JJs with interconnections by the next Nb layer, shown as layer K1. In the SFQ5ee process, the latter place is occupied by the shunt resistors, but it is available in this newer process node due to the use of self-shunted JJs. Depending on the circuit design requirements, we could implement two layers of kinetic inductors K0 and K1. Alternatively, we can use a layer of resistors instead of K0 to facilitate additional JJ shunting if required. For circuit biasing, we implement the regular layer of resistors, R4 in Fig. Since many components of SFQ circuits may use relatively low inductances, e.g., about 2 pH in Josephson transmission lines (JTLs), implementing 8-pH-per-square kinetic inductors would not make much sense. Therefore, we increased the target thickness of our Mo2N films to 120 nm in order to decrease Lk below 3 pH/sq and, accordingly, increase Jcf by a factor of 3x to about 3 mA/μm. This should allow us to use 0.35-μm-wide inductors and have enough margin in their critical current. We presented a detailed investigation of the superconducting properties of thin MoNx films, such as critical temperature, critical current, magnetic-field penetration depth and its Tdependence, as well as a detailed optimization of the fabrication parameters in order to implement amorphous Mo2N kinetic inductors in superconducting integrated circuits. We have found that the product of kinetic inductance and critical current of a 1-μm 2 Mo2N film is about 4.4Φ0, which is a factor of 28 larger than the LIc product for Josephson junctions, Φ0/2π. This makes thin Mo2N films more attractive for integration into VLSI circuits as kinetic inductors than stacked Josephson junctions requiring a much more complex fabrication process. We investigated Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions with 10-nm thick barriers deposited by co-sputtering and x in the range from 0.03 to 0.15. We showed that electron transport through Si1-xNbx barriers at low doping levels x and low temperatures is due to inelastic resonant tunneling via chains of localized states with two and three localized states. At x above about 0.08, Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions become nonhysteretic Josephson junctions with relatively low IcRN products, a few times lower than in Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb Josephson junctions at the same critical current density Jc. Strong dependence of Jc on Nb doping level x and residual stress in Nb electrodes was also observed. We compared Nb/Si1-xNbx/Nb junctions to self-shunted Nb/AlOx-Al/Nb Josephson junctions at the Jc value used in our current SFQ5vhs process node We developed an integration scheme and a process stack to implement Mo2N kinetic inductors in SFQ logic/memory cells along with up to eight planarized Nb layers.