We consider Bogoliubov de Gennes equation on metric graphs. The vertex boundary conditions providing self-adjoint realization of the Bogoliubov de Gennes operator on a metric star graph are derived. Secular equation providing quantization of the energy and the vertex transmission matrix are also obtained. Application of the model for Majorana wire networks is discussed. Quantum graphs, which are the one-or quasi-one dimensional branched quantum wires, have attracted much attention in different contexts of contemporary physics (see, e.g., Refs. Quantum graphs were first introduced by Exner and Seba to describe free quantum motion on branched structures Despite the growing interest to quantum graphs which are described by linear wave equation on metric graphs, within such approach one is restricted by modeling linear wave dynamics only. For modeling of nonlinear waves and soliton dynamics in branched structures one should consider nonlinear wave equations on metric graphs. During the past decade the studies of particle and wave dynamics in branched structures have been extended to nonlinear evolution equations by considering nonlinear Schrödinger and sine-Gordon equations on metric graphs In this paper we consider quantum graphs described by Bogoliubov de Gennes (BdG) equation. The latter can be used for modeling of quasiparticle dynamics in superconductors The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we give formulation of the problem and derive vertex boundary conditions providing self-adjointness of the problem. Section III presents derivation of the transmission matrix describing wave transmission through the graph branching point. In section IV we discuss zeromode solutions of BdG equation on metric graph and possible application to Majorana wire networks. Finally, section V presents some concluding remarks. First order BdG equation which is often used in condensed matter physics can be written as where T and General solution of Eq.( where κ = E 2 -∆ 2 0 and C 11 , C 12 , C 21 , C 22 are constants which can be found, e.g. from the normalization and boundary conditions. Current for such system is determined as 1: Sketch of a metric star graph. Lj is the length of the jth bond with j = 1, 2, . . . , N . Here we address the problem of BdG equation on metric graphs by considering a metric star graph with N bonds, having the finite lengths, L j , j = 1, 2, . . . , B (see, Fig. where j = 1, 2, . . . , N is the bond number, Ψ (j) and H BdG are the wave function and BdG operator (respectively), which are given by Ψ 3 , Ψ T and Eq.( Also, for a given differential operator, D on a graph we define so-called skew-Hermitian form which is given as Using the notations 3 (0); ...; ψ 1 (L 1 ); ...; ψ 3 (L 1 ); ...; ψ 4 (0); ...; -ψ 2 (L 1 ); ...; -ψ 4 (L 1 ); ...; ψ for Ω we have Then the vertex boundary conditions can be written in a linear subspace of C 8N as Then we have from Ω(φ, ψ) = 0 Solution of Eq.( For the negative energy (H BdG Ψ (j) = -EΨ (j) ) we have For these solutions the vertex boundary conditions given by Eq.( where and (for E < 0) where Eqs. ( for the positive energy and det (AΘ 3 + BΘ 4 ) = 0 (20) for the negative energy. Here e iκL = diag{e iκL1 , . . . , e iκLN }, α , . . . , μ β , . . . , μ(N) β }, I N is the identity matrix with the N th order. Eqs. ( Here we treat the problem of wave transmission through the graph branching point. Defining the vectors for outgoing and incoming waves at the vertex from the vertex boundary conditions we have where and det (AA ′ + BB ′ ) = 0. Then the vertex transition matrix can be written as Following the Refs. where (mn) is the bond connected vertices m and n. The above treatment concerns non-zero energy (E = 0) solutions of BdG equation on metric graph. An important case having application in topological states of condensed matter is described by zero-energy solutions of BdG. Such solutions describe bound states of the Majorana fermions on a quantum wire (so-called Majorana wires) where the spinor Ψ (j) has (for Majorana fermions) the Nambu structure which is given as ↓ , Ψ Eq.( where q = 1 + i. Furthermore, we choose the following vertex boundary which provide self-adjointness of the BdG operator on metric star graph. Eqs.( Using the same prescription as in the previous section, one can derive vertex transmission matrix for zero-energy solution which can be written as where and det (AA ′ + BB ′ ) = 0. Then the vertex transition matrix can be written as The above approach can be an effective model for branched Majoana wires with different topologies and vertex structures. Considering the appropriate vertex boundary conditions for Eq.( We have studied the first order Bolgoliubov de Gennes equation on a metric star graph. The vertex boundary conditions providing the self-adjointness realization of the BdG operator on a metric star graph are derived for non-zero and zero energy cases. The solutions of some special types of the vertex boundary conditions providing continuity and current conservation are obtained. The secular equation for finding of eigenvalues is derived. The above results can be used for modeling of one dimensional branched superconductors and Majorana wire networks by choosing appropriate boundary conditions at the branching points.