We examine the effects of strain and cation substitution on the superconducting phase of polar semiconductors near a ferroelectric quantum phase transition with a model that combines a strong coupling theory of superconductors with a standard microscopic framework for displacive polar modes coupled to strain degrees of freedom. Our calculations reveal that the superconducting transition temperature Tc is enhanced by proximity to the ferroelectric instability from the disordered side, while it is generally suppressed in the ordered phase due to its increase in dielectric stiffness and a reduction of critical fluctuations from dipolar induced anisotropies. The condensation of the pairing phonon excitations generates a kink in Tc at a charge density that is generally lower than that of the quantum critical point (QCP) and where both superconducting and ferroelectric orders set in. We apply our model to SrTiO3 and find that the antiadiabatic limit places the kink nearly at its QCP. As the QCP is pushed to higher charge densities with either tuning parameter, we find that the dome narrows and sharpens. Our model is in qualitative and fair quantitative agreement with the recent observation of overlapping ferroelectric-like and superconducting instabilities in ndoped Sr1-xCaxTiO3 and strain tuning of Tc in n-doped SrTiO3. We compare our results to previous models invoking order-disorder lattice dynamics to describe the pairing excitations. Strontium titanate (STO) is the first superconducting (SC) oxide to be discovered more than half a century ago 1 . Upon doping, it exhibits dome-shaped superconductivity 2-5 similar to the well-known cuprates at unusually low charge carrier concentrations (< 10 18 cm -3 ) Somewhat recently, Rowley et al. In conventional FEs, the relevant low energy lattice excitations are zone-center transverse optic (TO) phonons which break spatial inversion symmetry and trigger a phase with a spontaneous, reversible polarization upon condensation. In pure STO, such a transition is aborted by quantum fluctuations of the polarization order parameter To model the pairing excitations between carriers, onedimensional transverse Ising models with short-range interactions have been invoked and solved within a mean field approximation We use a self-consistent phonon approximation (SCPA) to study the quantum statistical mechanics of our model Hamiltonian which includes local thermal and quantum fluctuations of the order parameter. This allows us to self-consistently calculate the doping and strain dependence of T c , as well the FE transition temperature T f e , phonon energies and polarization order parameter. We neglect the effects of band narrowing due to polaron formation, which could have strong effects on the correlations We find that proximity to the QCP favors superconductivity from the PE side, but T c decreases on the ordered side due to a reduction of the critical fluctuations from dipolar induced anisotropies and the dielectric stiffening by the spontaneous polarization. This generates a kink in the SC dome at a characteristic charge density that is generally lower than that of the QCP and where the SC and FE orders set in. As the QCP is pushed to higher charge densities with cation substitution or tensile strain so the FE phase increasingly overlaps with the SC phase, the dome narrows and sharpens. Though we do not make any a-priori assumptions that the pairing fluctuations are quantum critical, we find that the antiadiabatic limit places the kink nearly at the QCP and within the QC region. While our results are in qualitative agreement with the essentials of the OD models, there are significant qualitative differences. Though our model produces a dome which is narrower than the observed one, its phase diagram is in overall agreement with recent experiments in n-doped Sr 1-x Ca x TiO 3 (STO:Ca-x) where α e-ph (ω) is the electron-phonon coupling, F (ω) = q,μ δ (ω -Ω qμ ), is the spectral density at frequency ω, and Ω qμ (μ = 1, 2, 3) is the phonon energy at wave vector q. Generally, it is not expected that charge carriers couple to long-wavelength TO phonons. where the sum over q runs over the entire Brillouin zone. We note that despite this assumption λ does not diverge: The largest contributions occur at the FE transition where the TO phonons become gapless and have a dispersion Ω q ∝ q [see Eq.(5b) below]. By taking the continuum limit of Eq. ( where N ( ) √ + F is the electron density of states near the Fermi level F , and We now need a model for the phonon excitations. We consider a standard model Hamiltonian for displacive FEs with normal mode coordinates that describe local displacements Q i = (Q ix , Q iy , Q iz ) in the unit cell i that are associated with the soft TO mode, the condensation of which is driven by the dipolar force and leads to the FE transition The Hamiltonian is as follows where, Here, Π i is the conjugate momentum of Q i , and v νν ij (ν, ν = x, y, z) is the dipolar interaction tensor with Fourier transform v νν q = 1 3 C 2 -B 2 q 2 δ νν -C 2 qν q ν q 2 , where q = |q| and B and C are constants that depend on the lattice structure For simplicity, we will assume that the PE phase is cubic. Above T f e , there is therefore a doubly degenerate TO phonon Ω ⊥ q and a singlet longitudinal optic (LO) mode Ω q with isotropic dispersions where Ω ⊥ 0 is the TO mode at the zone center. As expected Within SCPA, Ω ⊥ 0 is given as follows where ω 0 ≡ √ κ -v 0 , is the frequency of a purely harmonic model and v 0 ≡ C 2 /3 is the largest Fourier component of the dipole interaction; ψ 0 = (2ω) -1 coth (βω/2) are local fluctuations of polarization (e a /C a ) (3ψ 0 ) -P/C a is the volume strain. ... denotes thermal average. According to Eqs. (1) and ( Note that the largest contributions to λ come from the critical mode Ω ⊥ q , as Ω q is gapped out by the large depolarizing field. We now parametrize the model parameters in order to describe the effects of doping and cation substitution on the phonon excitations. In the OD models where b 1 , b 2 , g are model parameters that will be fitted to experiments. x r = 0.018 is the Ca concentration above which STO:Ca-x enters a glassy phase which we do not aim to describe here Clearly, this highlights the need for a theory to model these effects The observed FE order in STO:Ca has orthorhombic symmetry where q ⊥ = q 2 x + q 2 y . Ω ⊥ 01 , and Ω ⊥ 03 are zone-center TO phonons for q ⊥ (001) given as follows , and η t = η 3 -η 1 = (3e t /2C t ) A 2 + ψ 3 -ψ 1 are volume and deviatoric strains, respectively. Equation (9) shows that the phase volume of critical fluctuations in the FE phase is reduced by the dipolar force. According to Eq. ( Similarly to the PE phase, the critical isotropic TO phonons make the largest contributions to λ. We assume the same F and x dependence of the model parameters as that of the nonpolar phase. Thus, Eqs. (2) and ( Figure We now apply our model to n-doped STO:Ca. The model parameters are obtained by fitting to the observed phonon frequencies We find similar results when the QCP is induced by cation substitution. Figure We now compare our results to those of previous OD models. We now compare our results to recent experiments. Our phase diagram is in overall qualitative and fair quantitative agreement with recent experiments in STO:Ca-x In summary, by combining a standard model for displacive FEs with a strong-coupling theory of superconductivity, we have studied the effects of a FE quantum phase transition on the SC phase of polar semiconductors and applied it to STO. We have shown that superconductivity is favored by the FE instability from the disordered side, while the increase in dielectric stiffness and dipolar induced anisotropies in the pairing excitations decrease T c . A kink signature in the dome is generated by the condensation of the phonons when both SC and FE orders set in and when the coupling constant peaks. This generally occurs at charge densities below that of the QCP. When we apply our model to doped STO, we find that the antiadiabatic limit places the kink nearly at its QCP. Our model is in qualitative and fairly quantitative agreement with the recent observation of overlapping FE-like and superconducting instabilities in n-doped STO:Ca-x and the strain tuning of T c in n-doped STO. At the qualitative and static level considered here, we find that while these results agree with the essentials of previous work invoking OD models to describe the pairing excitations in STO, there are significant differences. The theoretical framework presented here and its extensions could provide insight into the intriguing role of spatial inversion symmetry breaking in twodimensional superconductivity at the interface of STO-based heterostructures, 51 gated KTaO 3 Finally, to further explore the possible role of quantum structural transitions on electronic degrees of freedom, we speculate that it may be worthwhile to chemically or electrostatically dope other material candidates near structural QCPs such as the ionic insulators ScF 3 J. F. Schooley, W. R. Hosler, and M. L. Cohen, "Superconductivity in semiconducting SrTiO3," Phys. Rev. Lett.12, 474 (1964). J. F. Schooley, W. R. Hosler, E. Ambler, J. H. Becker, M. L. Cohen,