Searching for natural materials exhibiting larger electron-electron interactions constitutes a traditional approach to high temperature superconductivity research. recently we pointed out that the newly developed field of electromagnetic metamaterials deals with the somewhat related task of dielectric response engineering on a sub-100 nm scale. Considerable enhancement of the electronelectron interaction may be expected in such metamaterial scenarios as in epsilon near zero (ENZ) and hyperbolic metamaterials. In both cases dielectric function may become small and negative in substantial portions of the relevant fourmomentum space, leading to enhancement of the electron pairing interaction. This approach has been verified in experiments with aluminium-based metamaterials. Metamaterial superconductor with Tc = 3.9 K have been fabricated, that is three times that of pure aluminium (Tc = 1.2 K), which opens up new possibilities to considerably improve Tc of other simple superconductors. Taking advantage of the demonstrated success of this approach, the critical temperature of hypothetic niobium, MgB2 and H 2 S-based metamaterial superconductors is evaluated. The MgB 2 -based metamaterial superconductors are projected to reach the liquid nitrogen temperature range. In the case of an H 2 S-based metamaterial projected Tc appears to reach ~250 K. 2) Macroscopic electrodynamic description of superconductivity 6 3) Epsilon near zero superconductors: theory and experiment 9 4) Hyperbolic metamaterial superconductors: theory and experiment 21 One of the most important goals of condensed matter physics is reliably designing new materials with enhanced superconducting properties. Recently, an electromagnetic metamaterial strategy, consisting of deliberately engineering the dielectric properties of a nanostructured "metamaterial superconductor" that results in an enhanced electron pairing interaction that increases the value of the superconducting energy gap and the critical temperature, T c , was suggested to achieve this goal The metamaterial superconductor approach takes advantage of the recent progress in plasmonics We should also mention that very recently other approaches to artificial metamaterial superconductor engineering have been proposed by several groups, such as suggestions to create better superconductors by phonon spectrum modification via periodic nanostructuring of thin film Electromagnetic properties are known to play a very important role in the pairing mechanism of superconductors This mechanism may be described as an attractive interaction of electrons that results from the polarization of the ionic lattice which these electrons create as they move through the lattice. Based on this interpretation, Kirzhnits et al. formulated their description of superconductivity in terms of the dielectric response function of the superconductor where V C is the Fourier-transformed Coulomb potential in vacuum, and  eff (q,) is the linear dielectric response function of the superconductor treated as an effective medium. While the thermodynamic stability condition implies that  eff (0,)>0, the dielectric response function at higher frequencies and momenta may become large and negative, which accounts for the weak net attraction and pairing of electrons in the superconducting condensate. Based on this approach, Kirzhnits et al. derived explicit expressions for the superconducting gap  and critical temperature, T c , of the superconducting transition as a function of the dielectric response function, and demonstrated that their expressions agree with the BCS result. The key observation made in Refs.  BCS cutoff around the Debye energy), while keeping the real part of  eff (q,) negative. These solutions involve either the epsilonnear-zero (ENZ) (1) assumes the form where  xx =  yy = 1 and  zz = 2 have opposite signs. As a result, the effective Coulomb interaction of two electrons may become attractive and very strong along spatial directions where which indicates that the superconducting order parameter must be strongly anisotropic. This situation resembles the hyperbolic character of such high T c superconductors as BSCCO gives rise to the same BCS-like relationship between the superconducting gap  and the coherence length : where V F is the Fermi velocity. Therefore, the metamaterial structural parameter (such as the inter-layer or inter-particle distance, etc.) which must remain smaller than the coherence length, defines the limit of critical temperature enhancement. Demonstration of the superconductivity enhancement in electromagnetic metamaterials opens up numerous new possibilities for metamaterial enhancement of T c in such practically important simple superconductors as niobium and MgB 2 . Let us demonstrate that tuning electron-electron interaction is indeed possible using the epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) metamaterial approach, which is based on intermixing metal and dielectric components in the right proportions. Following where  p is the plasma frequency, k is the inverse Thomas-Fermi radius,  n (q) are dispersion laws of various phonon modes, and  n are the corresponding damping rates. Zeroes of the dielectric response function of the bulk metal (which correspond to various bosonic modes) maximize electron-electron pairing interaction given by Eq. ( In the discussion below we will limit our consideration to the behaviour of  m (q,) near = 1 (q) in the vicinity of the Fermi surface, so that a more complicated representation of  m (q,) by the Lindhard function, which accurately represents  m (q,) in the q 0 and  0 limit As summarized in where  is the characteristic temperature for a bosonic mode mediating electron pairing (such as the Debye temperature  D in the standard BCS theory, or  ex = ħ ex /k or  pl = ħ pl /k in the theoretical proposals which suggest excitonic or plasmonic mediation of the electron pairing interaction), and  eff is the dimensionless coupling constant defined by V(q,) = V C (q)  (q,) and the density of states see for example where V C is the unscreened Coulomb repulsion, and the angle brackets denote average over the Fermi surface. Compared to the bulk metal, zeroes of the effective dielectric response function  eff (q,) of the metal-dielectric metamaterial are observed at shifted positions compared to the zeroes of  m (q,) where n is the volume fraction of metal ( 1 0   n ). The explicit expression for  eff may be written as and it is easy to verify that For a given value of the metal volume fraction n, the ENZ conditions ( 0 Since the absolute value of  m is limited by some value  m  max (see Eq. ( Based on Eqs. where  m '= Re m and  m "= Im m . Assuming that ~ n (which is justified by the fact that there are no free charges in the dielectric phase of the metamaterial) and using Eq. ( where  m is also determined by Eq.( Based on this prediction, we may expect enhancement of superconducting properties of the metal-dielectric metamaterial in the n cr < n < 0.6 range. For comparison, Fig. Let us apply the obtained simple estimates to the case of Al-Al 2 O 3 core-shell metamaterial studied in The proof of principle experiments conducted with both random Both nanoparticle sizes fall substantially below the superconducting coherence length in pure tin  Sn ~230 nm The Sn/BaTiO 3 superconducting metamaterials were fabricated by combining the given amounts of Sn and BaTiO 3 nanoparticle powders by volume into a single test tube filled with de-ionized water. The resulting suspensions were sonicated and magnetically stirred for 30 minutes, followed by water evaporation. The remaining mixtures of Sn and BaTiO 3 nanoparticles were compressed into test pellets using a hydraulic press. A typical Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) image of the resulting Sn/BaTiO 3 composite metamaterial is shown in Fig. The superconducting critical temperature T c of various Sn/BaTiO 3 metamaterials was measured via the onset of diamagnetism for samples with different volume fractions of BaTiO 3 using a MPMS SQUID magnetometer. The zero field cooled (ZFC) magnetization per unit mass for several samples with varying concentrations of BaTiO 3 is plotted in Fig. In order to verify the reproducibility of these results, our measurements were repeated for several sets of nanocomposite samples fabricated using strontium titanate nanoparticles (instead of barium titanate) using the same fabrication technique described above. The superconducting critical temperature T c of the Sn/SrTiO 3 metamaterial samples was measured for samples with different volume fractions of SrTiO 3 nanoparticles as shown in Fig. To overcome this issue, it was suggested that an ENZ plasmonic core-shell metamaterial geometry, which has been developed to achieve partial cloaking of macroscopic objects The design of an individual core-shell nanoparticle is based on the fact that scattering of an electromagnetic field by a sub-wavelength object is dominated by its electric dipolar contribution, which is defined by the integral sum of its volume polarization where r c and r s are the radii, and  c and  s are the dielectric permittivities of the core and shell, respectively. Eq.( The successful realization of such an ENZ core-shell metamaterial superconductor using compressed Al 2 O 3 -coated aluminium nanoparticles has been reported in The 18 nm diameter Al nanoparticles for these experiments were acquired from the US Research Nanomaterials, Inc. Upon exposure to the ambient conditions a ~ 2 nm thick Al 2 O 3 shell is known to form on the aluminium nanoparticle surface The of Al in Fig. The observed increase in T c also showed good correlation with the results of the Kramers-Kronig analysis shown in Fig. These results strongly suggest that increased aluminium T c 's that were previously observed in very thin (<50 nm thickness) granular aluminium films While the Tc increase observed in ENZ metamaterial superconductors is impressive, the core-shell metamaterial superconductor geometry exhibits poor transport properties compared to its parent (aluminum) superconductor. A natural way to overcome this issue is the implementation of the hyperbolic metamaterial geometry (Fig. The first successful realization of an artificial hyperbolic metamaterial superconductor has been reported in Upon exposure to ambient conditions a ~ 2 nm thick Al 2 O 3 layer is known to form on the aluminum film surface where n is the volume fraction of metal, and  m and  d are the dielectric permittivities of the metal and dielectric, respectively Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry with photon energies between 0.6 eV and 6.5 eV on the Al/Al 2 O 3 metamaterial have been performed using a Woollam Variable Angle Spectroscopic Ellipsometer (W-VASE). For a uniaxial material with optic axis perpendicular to the sample surface and in plane of incidence, ellipsometry provides the pseudo-dielectric function which, in general, depends both on ε 1 and ε 2 . However, as demonstrated by Jellison and Baba The sign of the real part of  2 (and therefore, the hyperbolic character of our samples) was determined by polarization reflectometry, since ellipsometry data are less sensitive to  2 where Reflectivity for p-polarization is given as where We measured p-and s-polarized absolute reflectance on the metamaterial sample using the reflectance mode of the ellipsometer. The reflectance was measured at two photon energies, 2.07 eV (600 nm) and 2.88 eV (430 nm), as shown in Fig. The measurements of H c in parallel and perpendicular fields are shown in Fig. Measurements of the perpendicular critical field H c perp for the same metamaterial sample, which are shown in Fig. Assuming H c2 perp = 100 G (based on the inset in Fig. We have also studied changes in T c as a function of Al layer thickness in a set of several 8-layer Al/Al 2 O 3 metamaterial samples, as shown in Fig. Let us assume once again (see ref. Let us consider the region of four-momentum (q,) space, where >  1 (q). While  m = 0 at =  1 (q),  m (q,) is large in a good metal and negative just above  1 (q). Based on Eq. ( where x = cosandvaries from 0 to . The latter expression has two poles at As the volume fraction, n, of metal is varied, one of these poles remains close to  m = 0, while the other is observed at larger negative values of  m : This situation is similar to calculations of T c for ENZ metamaterials. Since the absolute value of  m is limited (see Eq. ( Due to the complicated angular dependences in Eq. ( Near n=0 and n=1 these expression may be approximated as respectively. Note that at the  1 (q) zero of the dielectric response function of the bulk metal the effective Coulomb potential inside the metal may be approximated as so that the coupling constant  eff of the hyperbolic metamaterial obtained by angular integration of the sum of Eqs. ( where  is a constant of the order of 1 and x 0 is defined by the maximum negative value of  m , which determines if the second pole (Eq. ( If the second pole does not exist then x 0 = 0 may be assumed. Based on Eq. ( assuming the known values T cbulk = 1.2 K and  m = 0.17 for bulk aluminum The observed combination of transport and critical properties of the Al/Al 2 O 3 hyperbolic metamaterials is very far removed from the parameter space typical of the granular aluminum films While theoretical plots in Fig. let us assume that near = 1 (q) Eq. ( where E m is a positive constant. Based on Eq. ( which is slightly higher than  1 , and therefore a slightly larger value of may be expected at the metamaterial pole at this higher frequency. As a result, by taking into account simultaneous contributions from both poles (by adding the contributions to  eff from the "metal" and the "metamaterial" poles given by Eqs.( where =  m "/ mm "< 1 is determined by the dispersion of  m ". Substitution of Eq. which now has a single fitting parameter . We will consider it as a free parameter of the model, since we are not aware of any experimental measurements of dispersion of Im m for aluminum. Note that Eq. ( The apparent success of such a simple theoretical description in the case of Al-Al 2 O 3 core-shell and hyperbolic metamaterial superconductors prompted us to apply the same theory to the tin-based ENZ metamaterials studied in We should also note that the appearance of an additional "metamaterial" pole in the Maxwell-Garnett expression (Eq. ( First, let us consider the case of niobium, which has Tc bulk = 9.2 K and  D =275K in the bulk form The calculated behavior of T c of a niobium-based ENZ metamaterial as a function of n is presented in Fig. The spatial scale of mixing is not important within the scope of this model. Therefore, our model may be applicable to some alloys. We should note that the additional "metamaterial" pole described by Eq. ( This pole will result in the enhanced T c of the metamaterial (or alloy), which may be calculated using the same Eq. ( Next, let us consider the case of MgB 2 , which has Tc bulk = 39 K and  D = 920 K in the bulk form Unfortunately, in the strong coupling limit the expected T c enhancement may not be as drastic as in the weak coupling limit described by Eq. ( Therefore, enhancement of  by the largest possible factor of 1.5 calculated based on the Maxwell-Garnett theory for the effective dielectric response function of the metamaterial (see Fig. Considerable increase of Tc of the metamaterial superconductors may also be achieved by optimizing the metamaterial geometry. Historically, the suggestion to use highly polarizable dielectric side chains or layers in order to increase T c of a 1D or 2D electronic system can be traced back to the pioneering papers by W. Little Ginzburg Recent development of high  metamaterials gives these proposals another chance An example of the high-index metamaterial, which may be used in the modern day versions of either 1D or 2D superconducting geometries proposed by Little and Ginzburg is shown in Fig.21 In another recent development, fractal metamaterial superconductor geometry has been suggested and analyzed based on the theoretical description of critical temperature increase in epsilon near zero (ENZ) metamaterial superconductors Considerable enhancement of critical temperature has been predicted in such fractal metamaterials due to appearance of large number of additional poles in the inverse dielectric response function of the fractal. Indeed, relatively large value of the superconducting coherence length = 1600 nm of bulk aluminum Let us consider the central image (the 2nd fractal order) from Fig. It is easy to verify that in addition to the pole at 0  m  and the first order pole described by Eq. ( The latter equation, which expresses  m (k+1) as a function of  m (k) may be used to determine all the poles of the fractal metamaterial structure using an iterative procedure. The first few poles determined in such a way are plotted in Fig. The vertical dashed line in Fig. As indicated in Fig. Let us evaluate what kind of critical temperature increase may be expected in a fractal metamaterial superconductor because of the appearance of all these additional poles in   eff (q,). We already have demonstrated that the additional poles of the inverse dielectric response function may be found using an iterative procedure. A similar iterative expression may be derived for Im  eff (q,) near these poles. Based on Eq. ( where , and ~ 1 near n ~ 1. Since the magnitude of  m is finite (see Fig. 1. An expression similar to Eq. ( As far as the density of states  in Eq. ( assuming that the metamaterial structure contains K fractal orders. The resulting  eff is plotted in Fig. ) in a fractal metamaterial occurs starting at n ~ 0.8, which is close enough to n ~ 1 to validate our assumptions. The corresponding values of T c calculated using Eq.( Our results agree with the recent observations Unlike the traditional searches of higher Tc superconductors, which rely on choosing natural materials exhibiting larger electron-electron interactions, the metamaterial superconductor paradigm offers considerably extended range of search scenarios. The newly developed electromagnetic metamaterials offer the field of superconductivity research many novel tools, which enable intelligent engineering of electron pairing interaction. Considerable enhancement of the electron-electron interaction may be expected in such metamaterial scenarios as in epsilon near zero (ENZ) and hyperbolic metamaterials, as well as in novel fractal metamaterial geometries. In all these cases the dielectric function may become small and negative in substantial portions of the relevant four-momentum space, leading to enhancement of the electron pairing interaction. This approach has been verified in experiments with aluminium-based metamaterials. Metamaterial superconductor with Tc = 3.9 K have been fabricated, that is three times that of pure aluminium (Tc = 1.2 K), which opens up new possibilities to considerably improve Tc of other simple superconductors. Taking advantage of the demonstrated success of this approach, the critical temperature of hypothetic niobium, MgB2 and H2S-based metamaterial superconductors has been evaluated. The MgB2based metamaterial superconductors are projected to reach the liquid nitrogen temperature range. In the case of an H2S-based metamaterial projected Tc appears to be as high as ~250 K, which almost reaches the room temperature range. We hope that our brief review clearly demonstrates that the future of metamaterial superconductors is bright, and we anticipate many novel exciting scientific and technical applications of these materials. Little L=98 nm, g=14 nm, w=28 nm. The metamaterial exhibits broadband high  behaviour, while metamaterial losses remain modest below 50 THz.  (1) 