Phase estimation algorithms are key protocols in quantum information processing. Besides applications in quantum computing, they can also be employed in metrology as they allow for fast extraction of information stored in the quantum state of a system. Here, we implement two suitably modified phase estimation procedures, the Kitaev-and the semiclassical Fourier-transform algorithms, using an artificial atom realized with a superconducting transmon circuit. We demonstrate that both algorithms yield a flux sensitivity exceeding the classical shot-noise limit of the device, allowing one to approach the Heisenberg limit. Our experiment paves the way for the use of superconducting qubits as metrological devices which are potentially able to outperform the best existing flux sensors with a sensitivity enhanced by few orders of magnitude. Phase estimation algorithms are building elements for many important quantum algorithms, 1 such as Shor's factorization algorithm 2, 3 or Lloyd's algorithm However, the uncontrollable interaction of the probe with the environment limits the time scale t where the Heisenberg scaling can be attained by the probe's coherence time t ∼ T 2 . A further improvement then has to make use of an alternative measurement strategy with a precision following the standard quantum limit but with a better prefactor. The unknown parameter λ can be estimated from the phase φ = ∆E(λ) τ / accumulated by the system in the course of its evolution during the time τ ∼ T 2 . The 2π-periodicity of the phase limits the probe's measurement range ∆λ where λ can be unambiguously resolved within the narrow interval [δλ] H = 2π /(μT 2 ), with μ ≡ ∂∆E/∂λ denoting the sensitivity of the probe's spectrum. Therefore, the improvement in the precision at larger T 2 is concomitant with a proportional reduction of the measurement range ∆λ. The use of phase estimation algorithms then allows to resolve the 2π phase uncertainty and hence break this unfavorable trade-off between the measurement precision δλ and the measurement range ∆λ. Moreover, a metrological procedure based on a phase estimation algorithm is Heisenberg-limited: it attains the resolution δλ ∼ [δλ] H within a large measurement range ∆λ [δλ] H with a Heisenberg scaling in the phase accumulation time τ , i.e., δλ ∝ /(μτ ) for τ ≤ T 2 . At larger times τ > T 2 , the measurement proceeds with independent measure-ments involving the optimal time delay τ = T 2 . Running N = t/T 2 experiments and averaging over N 1 outcomes, one can further improve the precision within the standard quantum limit, There are two major classes of phase estimation algorithms, one suggested early on by Kitaev Here, we implement a modified version of these algorithms using an artificial atom or qubit in the form of a superconducting transmon circuit. Making use of phase estimation algorithms, we demonstrate an enhanced dc-flux sensitivity of the transmon sensor in an enlarged flux range as compared to standard (classical) measurement schemes. Recently, a standard measurement procedure using a flux qubit has been used for the measurement of an ac-magnetic field signal. This follows an opposite strategy as compared to the situation where the phase estimation algorithms are employed for quantum computing and simulations; in the latter cases, the qubit sensitivity to flux noise is maximally suppressed by tuning the device to the 'sweet spot' characterized by a vanishing first derivative of the energy with respect to flux. Operating away from the 'sweet spot' leads to a reduction of the T 2 time. The is the sum of the relaxation (2T 1 ) -1 and dephasing T -1 φ rates. In the experiment, we apply a Ramsey sequence of two consecutive π/2 pulses separated by a time delay τ , which corresponds to an effective spin-1/2 precession around the z-axis of the Bloch sphere. The precession angle φ = ∆ω(Φ)τ is defined by the frequency mismatch ∆ω(Φ) = ω d -ω 01 (Φ) between the transition frequency ω 01 (Φ) of the transmon qubit and the fixed drive frequency ω d of the π/2 pulses. The Ramsey sequence drives the transmon from its ground state into a coherent superposition of ground-and excited states with relative amplitudes determined by the phase φ. The theoretical probability to find the transmon in the first excited state is given by and depends both on the delay time τ and on the magnetic flux Φ through the frequency mismatch ∆ω(Φ). The decay function γ(τ ) accounts for qubit dephasing, typically due to charge or flux noise. By design, the transmon artificial atom is rather insensitive to background charge fluctuations. On the other hand, intrinsic 1/f magnetic-flux noise couples to the SQUID loop and is known to be a relevant source for dephasing in flux qubits The function γ(τ ) determines the optimal delay time τ where the sensitivity of the probability P (τ, ∆ω) to the changes in ∆ω and hence to a flux is the highest. In the standard (classical) measurement approach, a minimal delay τ = τ 0 T 2 sets the frequency range ∆ω(Φ) ∈ [0, π/τ 0 ] where the phase φ and hence P (τ, ∆ω) can be unambiguously resolved. This defines the range ∆Φ = π(τ 0 dω 01 /dΦ) -1 where the magnetic flux can be resolved with a precision scaling given by the standard quantum limit (see Methods), where t is the total measurement or sensing time of the experiment and T rep is the time duration of a single Ramsey measurement. A better flux sensitivity can be attained at larger delays τ , where the probability ] is more sensitive to changes in ∆ω. We obtain the best sensitivity at τ = τ * defined by the con- The amplitudes A class and A quant in Eqs. Measuring at large time delays τ ∼ T 2 leaves an uncertainty in ∆ω(Φ) due to the multiple 2π-winding of the accumulated phase, thereby squeezing the flux range ∆Φ ∼ 2.5 × 10 -3 Φ 0 by the small factor τ 0 /T 2 . The Kitaev-and Fourier phase estimation algorithms, avoid this phase uncertainty by measuring the probability As a result, such a metrological procedure is able to resolve the magnetic flux with the quantum limited resolution b k 2 k in the so-called quantum abacus. Modified Kitaev-and Fourier metrological algorithms. In the present work, we use modified versions of the phase estimation protocols, which take into account the nonidealities present in actual experiments. For brevity, we will still refer to these protocols as the Kitaev-and Fourier phase estimation algorithms. We demonstrate the superiority of these algorithms over the standard technique and show that we can beat the standard quantum limit. Instead of relying on the ideal theoretical probability function P [τ, ∆ω(Φ)] of Eq. (1) these modified Kitaev and Fourier protocols exploit the empirical probability P p (τ, Φ), the so-called passport, which we measure by a set of Ramsey sequences at various magnetic fluxes Φ, representing the result on a discrete equidistant grid in the form P p (τ j , Φ i ), see Fig. Using the qubit passport P p (τ j , Φ i ), one can pose the following metrological question: given an unknown flux Φ within some pre-chosen range, how can one estimate its value using a minimal number of Ramsey measurements? We design two metrological algorithms where the time delay τ of the Ramsey sequence serves as an adaptive parameter whose value is dynamically adjusted. In the course of operation, both our algorithms return a discrete probability distribution P(Φ i ), i ∈ I 0 , which reflects our current knowledge about the flux Φ to be measured. This probability distribution is improved in subsequent steps and shrinks to a narrow interval around the actual flux-value when running the algorithm. Bayesian learning. The elementary building block for both our metrological algorithms is a Bayesian learning subroutine which updates the discrete flux distribution P(Φ i ) after each Ramsey measurement of the qubit state. This subroutine takes the time delay τ j between π/2 pulses as an input parameter and performs a sequence of N = 32 Ramsey measurements. Our readout scheme returns a measured variable h N which, at N 1, is equal to the empirical passport probability P p (τ j , Φ i ). At small values N , the readout variable h N is a normally distributed random variable with a mean value given by P p (τ j , Φ i ), where the variance σ 2 N = σ 2 1 /N can be directly measured, σ 2 1 ≈ 3.5 (see SI 1 for further explanations on the readout variable h N ). Next, the algorithm makes use of the measurement outcomes h N and updates the flux probability distribution with the help of Bayes' rule, Kitaev algorithm. The Kitaev-type metrological algorithm has been introduced earlier in Ref. The flux values Φ i , i / ∈ I 1 are discarded. After completing the first step, the algorithm searches for the optimal delay τ j for the next step. The next optimal Ramsey measurement requires a larger delay τ where ∆P (τ j ) = max i∈I1 P p (τ j , Φ i ) -min i∈I1 P p (τ j , Φ i ). The algorithm thus sweeps over the passport data P p (τ j , Φ i ) to find the optimal delay τ ) and P 1 (Φ i / ∈I1 ) = 0 is initialized and the algorithm proceeds to the next step by running the Bayesian learning with the new optimal delay τ 1 . After K steps, the algorithm localizes Φ within a 2 K times narrower interval I K , N (I K ) = N (I 0 )/2 K , with an error probability = 1 - Quantum Fourier algorithm. This algorithm starts from the Ramsey measurement with an optimal time delay τ (s) ∼ T 2 . The starting delay τ (s) is a free input parameter of the algorithm. Similarly to the Kitaev algorithm, the quantum Fourier algorithm runs the Bayesian learning subroutine until the flux probability distribution P 0 (Φ i ), i ∈ I 0 , squeezes to a twice narrower subset S 1 ⊂ I 0 such that i∈S1 P 0 (Φ i ) ≥ 1 -0 . However, in contrast to the Kitaev algorithm, the passport function P p (τ (s) , Φ i ) is an ambiguous function of Φ i at the large delay τ (s) . As a result, S 1 is not a single interval but rather a set of n ∼ τ (s) /τ 0 disjoint narrow intervals S 1 = I 1 ∪ • • • ∪ I n of almost equal lengths, see Fig. which are ordered by the passport function, P p (τ j , Φ ∈ A) > P p (τ j , Φ ∈ B). Then it finds the probability distance ∆P (τ j ) = min i∈A P p (τ j , Φ i ) -max i∈B P p (τ j , Φ i ) > 0 separating the two sets A and B. Repeating this procedure at all available delays τ j , the algorithm finds the optimal delay τ Results. The superiority of our quantum metrological algorithms is clearly demonstrated by the scaling be- haviour of the magnetic flux resolution with the total sensing time of the flux measurement, see Fig. In case of the Fourier algorithm, such a definition is meaningful only at the final step of the algorithm where P(Φ) becomes a single-peaked function. The sensing time t is defined through the total number of calls of the Bayesian learning subroutine m, t = N T rep m. The scaling behaviour of the measured flux resolution δΦ(t) with sensing time t is shown in Fig. Both quantum algorithms clearly outperform the standard procedure, with the Kitaev algorithm appearing slightly more efficient than the Fourier one. We explain this by the fact that the Fourier algorithm strongly relies on the periodicity of the Ramsey interference pattern given by Eq. ( for the Fourier procedure. These sensitivites are an order of magnitude worse than the theoretical bound 4.0 × 10 -7 Φ 0 Hz -1/2 set by Eq. ( Finally, for our transmon, the SQUID area S 20 × 30 μm 2 results in a magnetic filed sensitivity in the range 19.3 -29.3 pT Hz -1/2 . Decoherence processes define the most important factor limiting the sensitivity of our device. E.g., the intrinsic 1/f flux noise Interestingly, the non-ideality of the qubit's passport strongly affects the performance of the standard procedure as well. Its scaling behaviour δΦ std ∝ t -α exhibits a crossover in the scaling exponent α, assuming a value α ≈ 0.39 at short sensing times, while at large times α decreases to a much smaller value ≈ 0.046. The scaling exponent 0.39 deviates from the shot noise exponent 1/2 due to the cases when the actual flux value is located near the boundaries of the flux interval Φ ∈ [Φ 1 , Φ 161 ], where the passport function P p (0, Φ) has an extremum and the scaling exponent for the standard procedure is reduced to 1/4, δΦ(t) ∝ t -1/4 . As a result, the aggregated scaling exponent of Eq. ( Finally, we discuss how our metrological algorithms use the quantum resource of qubit coherence in order to acquire information about the measured flux. We quantify the quantum coherence resource spent in a given measurement by the total phase accumulation time The scaling exponent is still below the Heisenberg limit, which is a consequence of the finite dephasing time T 2 : at large time delays τ ∼ T 2 the visibility of the Ramsey interference pattern decreases, requiring more Ramsey measurements in order to learn the next bit of information. We have used a single transmon qubit as a magnetic-flux sensor and have implemented two quantum metrological algorithms in order to push the measurement sensitivity beyond the standard shot-noise limit. In our experiments, we utilize the coherent dynamics of the qubit as a quantum resource. We demonstrate experimentally, on the same sensor sample, that suitably modified Kitaev-and Fourier algorithms both outperform the classical shot-noise-limited measurement procedure and approach the Heisenberg limit. Both algorithms exhibit a similar asymptotic flux-sensitivity A Φ ∼ 6 × 10 -6 Φ 0 Hz -1/2 or magnetic-field sensitivity A B ∼ 20.7 pT Hz -1/2 within a dynamical range ∆Φ/A Φ ∼ 417 √ Hz at a coherence time T 2 ∼ 260 ns of the qubit. Finally, we can compare the characteristics of our qubit sensor with other magnetometers. dc-SQUID sensors typically feature a 1 μΦ 0 Hz -1/2 sensitivity and a much larger dynamical range ∼ 10 6 √ Hz, see ref. Atomic magnetometers 30 can approach a magnetic field sensitivity ∼ 0.1 -1.0 fT Hz -1/2 . However, these magnetometers measure the field in a finite macroscopic volume ∼ 1 cm 3 and their sensitivity translated to the (100 μm) 3 volume range of a transmon sensor reduces to 0.1 -1.0 pT Hz -1/2 , with a dynamical range ∼ 10 4 -10 5 √ Hz compatible with dc-SQUID sensors. NV centers in diamond are able to resolve magnetic fields with atomic spatial resolution and approach sensitivities ∼ 6.1 nT Hz -1/2 . Phase estimation algorithms allow one to enlarge the dynamical range of NV-sensors The superconducting artificial atom (1) at different dephasing times T 2 ranging from 10 μs (red line) to 340 ns (blue line). One can clearly see that at large dephasing times the Kitaev procedure approaches the Heisenberg limit, while at smaller T 2 the scaling exponent decreases to the standard quantum limit 0.5. The observed experimental scaling behaviour shows that both Fourier and Kitaev algorithm are indeed quantum with a scaling exponent above the standard quantum limit 1/2, see the dash-dotted cyan line connecting the Kitaev (at 0.2% tolerance) data. The transmon 18 is a capacitively-shunted split Cooper-pair box, with a Hamiltonian where E C is the charging energy E C = e 2 /2C Σ with C Σ the total capacitance (dominated by the shunting capacitor). The SQUID loop in the transmon design provides a flux-dependent effective Josephson energy E J (Φ) = E JΣ | cos(πΦ/Φ 0 )| (assuming identical junctions). The state of the device is described by a wavefunction which treats the superconducting relative phase across junctions φ as a quantum variable similar to a standard coordinate. In contrast to standard SQUID measurements, the flux dependence is reflected in the quantized energy levels; for the first transition this reads The readout of the qubit state is realized by a dispersive coupling of the transmon to a coplanar waveguide (CPW) resonator whose resonance frequency depends on the transmon state. This allows us to perform a non-demolition measurement of the qubit state by sending a probe pulse to the CPW right after the second π/2-pulse and collecting the resulting resonator response signal whose shape in time depends on the qubit state, see SI 1. The dephasing of the qubit can be modeled via an interaction of the qubit with an external classical noise source ν(t). The qubit state acquires a stochastic relative phase δφ = τ dt ν(t) ∂ω 01 /∂ν. Then the decay function γ(τ ) ≡ e iδφ can be expressed via a noise spectral density function S ν (ω) = dtdt ν(t)ν(t ) e iω(t-t ) as γ(τ ) = exp -1 2 (∂ω 01 /∂ν) 2 dω 2π S ν (ω) sin 2 (ωτ /2)/(ω/2) 2 , see ref. , where τ ∼ 2T 1 and ω c ∼ 1s -1 is a low frequency cut-off. One can estimate the corresponding decay rates Γ wn = (520ns) -1 and Γ 1/f = (420ns) -1 , from the freeinduction decay of the qubit state at the working point of the qubit spectrum, see SI 2. If we assume that the main dephasing mechanism is due to the intrinsic magnetic flux noise of the SQUID loop ν(t) = δΦ(t), one can translate these rates into the corresponding noise spectral densities, S wn ≈ (5.9 × 10 -8 Φ 0 ) 2 /Hz and S 1/f (f ) ≈ (1.9 × 10 -5 Φ 0 ) 2 /f [Hz], where we have used a value dω 01 /dΦ ≈ -2π × 5.3 GHz/Φ 0 obtained from the characterization measurement of the qubit spectrum. After N Ramsey experiments at a fixed delay τ , the probability of the excited state P (τ, ∆ω) can be estimated as N 1 /N , where N 1 is the number of outcomes where an excited state was detected. The accuracy δP 2 = P (τ, ∆ω) -N 1 /N ) 2 of this estimate is given by a binomial statistics, δP As suggested in ref. The magnetic flux threading the transmon SQUID loop is generated by a dc-current flowing through the fluxbias line located nearby the SQUID loop with the current controlled by a dc-voltage V ∈ [0.977, 1.009] V generated with an Agilent 33500B waveform generator (see SI 2). As a result, our device can also be operated as a sensitive voltmeter. The conversion from voltage values to the non-integer part of the normalized flux (Φ/Φ 0 -n), where n is an integer number, is obtained from spectroscopic measurements (Fig. Here, V 0 is the periodicity (in volts) of the CPW resonator and qubit spectra, which corresponds to the magnetic flux change by one flux quantum, and Φ tr is the residual flux trapped in the SQUID loop. Measuring the CPW resonator spectrum periodicity (see Fig. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.