We analyze the heat current traversing a quantum dot sandwiched between a ferromagnetic and a superconducting electrode. The heat flow generated in response to a voltage bias presents rectification as a function of the gate potential applied to the quantum dot. Remarkably, in the thermally driven case the heat shows a strong diode effect with large asymmetry ratios that can be externally tuned with magnetic fields or spin-polarized tunneling. Our results thus demonstrate the importance of hybrid systems as promising candidates for thermal applications. Control of heat flow is a key goal in modern quantum electronics Here, we investigate a ferromagnetic-quantum dot-superconducting (F-D-S) junction and show that this system can work as an efficient heat diode both for charge and spin transport. These hybrid systems have recently received a good deal of attention due to their excellent thermoelectric properties The total Hamiltonian describing the F-D-S system (left panel of Fig. where H F = kσ ε F kσ c † F kσ c F kσ accounts for charge carriers in the ferromagnet with momentum k and spin σ =↑, ↓, and H S = kσ ε Skσ c † Skσ c Skσ + k [∆c † S,-k↑ c † Sk↓ + H.c.] depicts a superconductor reservoir with the energy gap ∆ as an order parameter. Importantly, in the dot Hamiltonian H D = σ (ε dσ -eU σ )d † σ d σ , not only the energy level can be Zeeman split with magnetic fields, viz. ε dσ = ε d + σ∆ Z , but it can also be renormalized by the spin-dependent interaction potential U σ . We determine U σ within a self-consistent (Hartree) approach The spin-resolved heat current can be evaluated from the rate of energy flow per each spin (H F σ = k ε F kσ c † F kσ c F kσ ) at the F side and the Joule heating in the presence of the voltage bias where the spin-resolved electric current is given by for carriers with spin σ. Due to coupling to the superconductor, the spin-resolved heat transport (J σ = J σ A + J σ Q ) has two separate contributions (with where J σ A refers to the spin-resolved Andreev heat current dominant for the subgap transport |ε| < ∆, while J σ Q is that of quasiparticle contributions beyond the gap |ε| > ∆. Here, is the Fermi-Dirac distribution with the applied voltage to the ferromagnet V = V F and temperature T α = T + θ α (T : average temperature, θ F = θ: thermal bias, V S = θ S = 0). The respective transmission functions T σ A (ε) and T σ Q (ε) are evaluated using the Green's function approach (see, e.g., Refs. In a previous work . . ) (purely thermoelectric terms vanish due to the particle-hole symmetry Note that the leading order nonvanishing Andreev thermal conductance can only be given by the cross coupling term M σ A similarly to the subgap nonlinear electric current Having the aforementioned points in mind, we below discuss the total heat flux J = J ↑ + J ↓ and the spin-polarized heat current p=0.1 p=0.5 p=0.9 Figure eV /∆ p=0.1 p=0.5 p=0.9 rectification is possible in this optimal Zeeman splitting as shown in Table An applied voltage bias V is detrimental to the diode effects described above as the subgap heat transport becomes appreciable beyond the linear response [Eq. It should be again noted that there is no linear subgap Peltier effect in our system due to Onsager symmetry since there is no corresponding linear Andreev thermocurrent because of the particle-hole symmetry In Fig. It should be emphasized that the above discussions are meaningful only with the finite voltage V = 0, otherwise J A = J s A = 0 [Eq. ( To summarize, we have examined the heat transport properties of a quantum dot attached to ferromagnetic and superconducting contacts. We have unveiled strong thermal diode effects that can be manipulated with external magnetic fields or magnetization of the ferromagnetic reservoir. these systems, it is crucial to distinguish between Andreev and quasiparticle currents, which determine the specific transport mechanism. Our work thus represents an important step toward a full characterization of heat transport in hybrid systems.