In the YBa2Cu3O7-δ (YBCO) high temperature superconducting thin film fabrication via the chemical solution deposition method, BaF2 is an important intermediate phase during heat treatment. In this paper, BaF2 thermodynamics stability was analyzed through calculating the standard Gibbs free energy change (ΔGT) of the reactions related to other intermediate phases within the temperature range of 700-1000 K. Two thermodynamics methods, the Gibbs free energy function method and standard formation molar Gibbs free energy method, were utilized to obtain the ΔGT values. The formation priority of BaF2 relative to other intermediate phases were verified at higher temperatures, while the possibility of BaCO3 formation was found at 700 K. REBa2Cu3O7-δ (REBCO, RE represents Rare Earth elements including Y, Gd, Sm, etc.) high temperature superconducting (HTS) materials are of important application potentials in many fields In the study of Clem 1 Analysis Methods In order to investigate the thermodynamics stability of BaF2, the Ba-related and F-related phases would be considered as possible intermediate phases, including BaO, BaCO3, Ba(OH)2, YF3 and CuF2. It could be noted that there are also some other related intermediate phases such as Y2Cu2O5, Ba1-xYxF2+x, Ba-O-F A high positive ΔGT value of a certain reaction would indicate that the reaction could not occur in the standard condition. Thus the ΔGT calculation of the listed reactions could be used to interpret the possibility of BaF2 conversion, and investigate the formation priority of BaF2 during the intermediate phase evolution. In this study, two methods of ΔGT calculation would be used, which were the Gibbs free energy function method and standard formation molar Gibbs free energy method, respectively. We would combine and compare the results calculated using the two methods below. In the Gibbs free energy function method through a series of transformation introduced by Ye Table ΔHf,298 φ700 φ800 φ900 φ1000 The ΔGT calculation method using standard formation molar Gibbs free energy (ΔGf,T) are introduces in many thermodynamics textbooks, with the calculation procedure shown in equation ( Table ΔGf,700 ΔGf,800 ΔGf,900 ΔGf,1000 2 Results and Discussion The Gibbs free energy change (ΔGT) of the reactions in Table However, the results of reactions (e) and (f) using two methods were similar, as shown in Fig. Besides, ΔGT values were positive except reaction (c), indicating that most reactions could hardly occur under the standard condition. For reaction (c), ΔGT increased along with T raising. ΔGT was negative at 700 K, and positive at higher T of 900 K and 1000 K, according to both calculation methods. Table The negative ΔGT at 700 K (approximately 427°C) could account for the existence of BaCO3 phase in the samples quenched at low temperatures, which were prepared using precursors with very low fluorine amount. In our previous study Moreover, in the above two studies In this paper, two methods, Gibbs free energy function method and standard formation molar Gibbs free energy method, were used to calculate the Gibbs free energy change (ΔGT) at temperatures ranging from 400 K to 1000 K, to analyze the possible conversion reactions of BaF2. ΔGT values calculated using the two methods were generally similar. ΔGT of the reaction BaF2 converting to BaCO3 was found to be negative at 700 K and positive at high temperatures, consistent with the studies of very low fluorine amount precursors. This study could verify the BaF2 phase stability at higher temperatures and could help to investigate the evolution of intermediate phase in heat treatment of MOD-YBCO process.