Tellurium is a high-performance thermoelectric material due to its superior electronic transport and low lattice thermal conductivity (κ L ). 1 Here, we report the ultralow κ L in the monolayer tellurium, i.e., tellurene, which has been successfully synthesized in recent experiments. We find tellurene has a compellingly low room temperature κ L of 2.16 and 4.08 W m -1 K -1 along the armchair and zigzag directions, respectively, which is lower than any reported values for other 2D materials. We attribute this unusually low κ L to the soft acoustic modes, extremely low-energy optical modes and the strong scattering among optical-acoustic phonons, which place tellurene as a potential novel thermoelectric material. Finally, we disclose that κ L is proportional to the largest acoustic phonon frequency (ω a D ) and the lowest optical phonon frequency at Γ point (ω o Γ ) in 2D materials, which reflect both harmonic and anharmonic thermal properties respectively. Graphene, maybe the most studied 2D system in the history of science, displays record thermal conductivity, Specifically, the figure of merit of a thermoelectric material is expressed as zT = S 2 σT /(κ e + κ L ), where S, σ, T, κ e and κ L are the Seebeck coefficient, electric conductivity, absolute temperature, electronic thermal conductivity and lattice thermal conductivity, respectively. Hunting for optimum zT materials needs not only a maximum power factor (S 2 σ), but also a simultaneously minimum thermal conductivity (κ e + κ L ). Since electric properties S, σ and κ e couple strongly with each other and interdepend in complicated ways, optimization of zT becomes an arduous issue to realize the waste heat recovery. As an accepted rule of thumb, On one hand, bulk Te has been recently shown as a superior thermoelectric material with zT = 1.0 1 in addition to as a topological insulator, On the other hand, Dresselhaus et al. have pointed out the low dimensional materials (such as 2D materials) can further enhance the electronic performance comparing to the 3D counterparts due to quantum confinement. In this Letter, we find that tellurene has unusually low room temperature κ L that of merely 2.16 and 4.08 W m -1 K -1 along the armchair and zigzag directions, respectively. Those values, although obtained from the 2D crystalline tellurene, are comparable to the bulk Te, which is quite counterintuitive given the well-known trend that 2D materials have usually larger κ L than their 3D counterpart due to the significant ZA mode contribution to the κ L . In semiconductor and insulator, heat is mainly carried by phonons. The anisotropic in-plane lattice thermal conductivity under the relaxation time approximation can be calculated as sum of contribution of all phonon mode λ with wave vector q: where V is the crystal volume, C λ is the specific heat per mode, υ λα and τ λ are the velocity component along α direction and the phonon relaxation time. κ L can be obtained by solving the phonon Boltzmann transport equation that is related to the harmonic and anharmonic interatomic force constants. κ L is an intensive property. Hence, a value of thickness needs to be chosen in 2D materials when comparing with the 3D counterpart. In order to make it more clear and consistent, we also use the thermal sheet conductance ("2D thermal conductivity") with unit W K -1 as that is the most unequivocal variable in 2D materials. The thickness of tellurene (6.16 Å) is taken as the summation of the buckling distance and the van der Waals (vdW) Green rhombic dots and purple triangles/circles are the experimental 1 and theoretical Figure The minimum lattice thermal conductivity κ min of bulk Te according to the Cahill model The thermal sheet conductance of tellurene along x and y directions are 1.33 and 2.51 nW K -1 which are also the lowest values in 2D crystalline family to date (Supporting Information). Furthermore, we find κ L of tellurene follows well with T -1 behavior, indicating a dominant Umklapp process of phonon scattering that causes thermal resistivity. This nice T -1 curve is common in other heavy elements Tellurene has three atoms in each unit cell as shown in the inset of Fig. Phonon dispersion and phonon density of states (PDOS) of tellurene are shown in Fig. From the tellurene's phonon spectrum, the ZA mode along both directions is much flat (smaller D), The mechanical properties of tellurene calculated based on elastic solid theory Strong anharmonicity in materials can lead to low κ L (criterion iv). The Grüneisen parameter, γ, measures the effect of volume changing of a crystal upon the thermal expanded phonon vibrations so that large γ indicates a large bonding anharmonicity in materials. This giant anharmonicity of TO y phonon mode is strongly related to the chemical bonding and distortion potential To further explore the γ distribution, we calculated γ for whole frequency spectrum in Fig. In the frequency range of 0.5∼2.0 THz, γ of ZA, TA, LA and TO y phonon modes suddenly jump, indicating a giant anharmonic scattering change of interactions (matrix) elements between the acoustic and optical phonons. This phenomenon can also be mapped in the phonon dispersion shown in Fig. A finite κ L is an outcome of the phonon-phonon scattering. Moreover, Fig. These two trends are different from the model κ L ∝ (ω a D ) 3 described by Slack et al. where a 3 , ρ and γ are the average volume occupied by one atom of the crystal, density and the acoustic phonon Grüneisen parameter. While in 2D materials, our finding shows κ L ∝ (ω a D ) 1.69 that violates the above Slack formula. Hence it should be careful when applying Slack model to κ L of 2D materials. In conclusion, we have theoretically explored the unusually low thermal properties of tellurene by the first-principle calculations and phonon Boltzmann transport. To trace the ultralow κ L , we unveil the reasons from both the harmonic and anharmonic aspects. Tellurene consists of heavy atomic mass (criterion ii). From the harmonic view of phonon dispersion and elasticity, low Debye temperature, group velocities of acoustic phonons, Young's modulus, and shear modulus reveal the weak phonon vibrations and interatomic bonding that lead to the unusually low κ L in tellurene (criteria iii). For anharmonicity, large γ, strong acoustic-optical phonon scattering and large phonon-phonon anharmonic scattering rates are shown to illustrate the strong anharmonicity in tellurene (criterion iv). These convincing evidence has verified the unusually low κ L in atomically thin 2D tellurium. Finally, we find κ L is proportional to the largest acoustic phonon frequency (ω a D ) and the lowest optical phonon frequency at Γ point (ω o Γ ) for reported 2D materials. These two frequencies reflect the thermal properties from both harmonic and anharmonic aspects, Coupled with the superior electronic trans-port, Our quantitative predictions are obtained by performing the density functional theory (DFT) and by solving the phonon Boltzmann transport equation. We performed density functional theory calculations as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio simulation package (VASP) 