At present, hydrogen-based compounds constitute one of the most promising classes of materials for applications as a phonon-mediated high-temperature superconductors. Herein, the behavior of the superconducting phase in tellurium hydride (HTe) at high pressure (p = 300 GPa) is analyzed in details, by using the isotropic Migdal-Eliashberg equations. The chosen pressure conditions are considered here as a case study which corresponds to the highest critical temperature value (Tc) in the analyzed material, as determined within recent density functional theory simulations. It is found that the Migdal-Eliashberg formalism, which constitutes a strong-coupling generalization of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, predicts that the critical temperature value (Tc = 52.73 K) is higher than previous estimates of the McMillan formula. Further investigations show that the characteristic dimensionless ratios for the the thermodynamic critical field, the specific heat for the superconducting state, and the superconducting band gap exceeds the limits of the BCS theory. In this context, also the effective electron mass is not equal to the bare electron mass as provided by the BCS theory. On the basis of these findings it is predicted that the strong-coupling and retardation effects play pivotal role in the superconducting phase of HTe at 300 GPa, in agreement with similar theoretical estimates for the sibling hydrogen and hydrogen-based compounds. Hence, it is suggested that the superconducting state in HTe cannot be properly described within the mean-field picture of the BCS theory. Recent theoretical and experimental investigations prove that chalcogen atoms (particularly elements of group VIa) paired with hydrogen constitute promising compounds for applications as a phonon-mediated hightemperature superconductors Another promising candidate for the applications described above is tellurium, which is isostructural with sulfur For the further development in the discussed field, it is natural that novel candidate materials, such as HTe, has to be understood in details. In this context, herein the complementary and comprehensive investigations of the superconducting phase are provided for the HTe at 300 GPa; the pressure conditions which are considered to be a perfect case study and match the state where superconducting phase in HTe reaches its maximum value of T c . Due to the relatively high value of the electron-phonon coupling constant (λ = 1.07) in HTe at 300 GPa, the discussed superconductor is investigated within the strongcoupling generalization of the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, namely the formalism of the Eliashberg equations As already mentioned, in the present study the thermodynamics of the superconducting state in the tellurium hydride (HTe) at very high pressure (p = 300 GPa) are determined in the framework of the Eliashberg equations and In this context, above set of equations allow to find the values of the order parameter (∆ n ≡ ∆ (iω n )) and the wave function renormalization factor (Z n ≡ Z (iω n )), respectively. Note that, for the Eliashberg equations on the imaginary axis, the frequency takes on the discrete values (ω n ≡ π β (2n -1)) which are temperature dependent (β ≡ 1/k B T , where k B is the Boltzmann constant). Herein, the numerical stability is ensured by taking into account 2201 Matsubara frequencies. In this manner, the high-accuracy predictions are obtained for T ≥ T 0 , where T 0 = 3 K, assuming that the cutoff frequency ω c = 10Ω max , where Ω max is the maximum phonon frequency equal to 188.59 meV. Moreover, in Eqs. ( Next, the quantity α 2 F (Ω) is the so-called Eliashberg function, which models the electron-phonon interactions in the considered material. For the tellurium hydride at the p = 300 GPa, the form of the α 2 F (Ω) function is The maximum value of the order parameter (∆m=1) and (B) the wave-function renormalization factor (Zm=1) as a function of the temperature (T ), for HTe at 300 GPa. Insets given in (A) and (B) show the thermal behavior of the order parameter (∆m) and the wave-function renormalization factor (Zm) on m for the selected values of the temperature, for the analyzed superconductor. adopted after In the present analysis, the depairing electronic correlations are modeled by the phenomenological parameter known as the Coulomb pseudopotential (μ ), which assumes value of 0.1. The magnitude of μ is adopted to match predictions of Ashcroft for the hydrogen-based materials In Fig. To further investigate the character of the superconducting phase in the HTe at 300 GPa, the behavior of the wave function renormalization factor is investigated. As already mentioned, Fig. [m e /m e ] T =Tc 1 + λ 2.07 To further verify the strong-coupling character of the superconducting state in the analyzed hydrogen-based material, it is instructive to calculate the characteristic dimensionless ratios for the thermodynamic critical field (H c ), the specific heat for the superconducting state (C S ), and the superconducting band gap (∆ g ), towards their comparison with the predictions of the BCS theory. Specifically, the thermodynamic critical field normalized with respect to the density of states at the Fermi level (ρ (0)), can be written as where ∆F/ρ (0) denotes the normalized free energy difference between the superconducting and normal state, given as In Eq. ( Note that the H C / ρ (T ) function takes on only positive values and decreases together with the increase of the temperature, where above ∼ 30 K mentioned decrease is almost linear. The maximum value of H C / ρ (T ) is equal to 44.09 meV at T = T 0 . In overall, such characteristics is in agreement with the behavior presented by the phonon-mediated superconductors The knowledge of the free energy allows also to calculate the normalized specific heat difference between the superconducting and normal state (∆C/k B ρ (0)) as In the context of Eq. ( The full functional dependence of the C S and C N functions, normalized with respect to the ρ (0), is plotted in Fig. FIG. where the specific heat for the superconducting state at T c presents characteristic jump. Next, the analysis conducted above makes it possible to determine two of the already mentioned characteristic dimensionless ratios i.e: R H ≡ T c C N (T c ) /H 2 C (0) and R C ≡ ∆C (T c ) /C N (T c ). The computed values of these ratios for the HTe at 300 GPa are: R H = 0.147 and R C = 1.73. Note that in the framework of the BCS theory both parameters adopt the following universal values: [R H ] BCS = 0.168 and [R C ] BCS = 1.43 The third and the last characteristic ratio of interest is calculated for the value of the superconducting energy band gap at the Fermi level which is defined as: ∆ g ≡ 2∆ (0). Herein, the exact ∆ (0) value is estimated by analytical continuation of the imaginary axis solutions on the real axis. In particular, the order parameter function, within the employed here Padé method In Eq. ( where DOS S (ω) and DOS N (ω) is the density of states for the superconducting and normal state, respectively, whereas Γ denotes the pair breaking parameter equal to 0.15 meV. As depicted in Fig. In the present paper, the superconducting state in the HTe at 300 GPa was analyzed within the Eliashberg formalism towards its complementary characterization and to prove the strong coupling between electrons and phonons in this phase. In particular, the value of the critical temperature was estimated to be equal to T c = 52.73 K, adopting universal value of the Coulomb pseudopotential for the hydrogen-based materials equal to μ * = 0.1 