Local electronic effects in the vicinity of an impurity provide pivotal insight into the origin of unconventional superconductivity, especially when the materials are located on the edge of magnetic instability. In high-temperature cuprate superconductors, a strong suppression of superconductivity and appearance of low-energy bound states are clearly observed near nonmagnetic impurities. However, whether these features are common to other strongly correlated superconductors has not been established experimentally. Here, we report the in situ scanning tunneling microscopy observation of electronic structure around a nonmagnetic Zn impurity in heavy-fermion CeCo(In1-xZnx)5 films, which are epitaxially grown by the state-of-the-art molecular beam epitaxy technique in ultrahigh vacuum. The films have very wide atomically flat terraces and Zn atoms residing on two different In sites are clearly resolved. Remarkably, no discernible change is observed for the superconducting gap at and around the Zn atoms. Moreover, the local density of states around Zn atoms shows little change inside the hybridization gap between f -and conduction electrons, which is consistent with calculations for a periodic Anderson model without local magnetic order. These results indicate that no nonsuperconducting region is induced around a Zn impurity and do not support the scenario of antiferromagnetic droplet formation suggested by indirect measurements in Cd-doped CeCoIn5. These results also highlight a significant difference of the impurity effect between cuprates and CeCoIn5, in both of which d-wave superconductivity arises from the non-Fermi liquid normal state near antiferromagnetic instabilities. Unconventional superconductivity often emerges from the competition between magnetically ordered and paramagnetic phases in a wide variety of strongly correlated materials, including cuprate, iron-pnictide, and heavyfermion compounds. In these materials, superconductivity is frequently observed close to an antiferromagnetic (AFM) quantum critical point (QCP) where the ordered and disordered states are nearly degenerate 1-3 . It is widely believed that the proliferation of quantum fluctuations in the vicinity of the AFM QCP gives rise to the non-Fermi liquid behavior, which is visible in many physical quantities in the normal state, and induces the magnetically mediated pairing interaction. To gain deep insight into the pairing mechanism and competing electronic correlations in these unconventional superconductors, more and more efforts have been focused on understanding the changes of the electronic structure produced by an impurity Among the heavy fermion systems, CeCoIn 5 , whose crystal structure is illustrated in Fig. STM provides detailed information about the local electronic structure. However, until now, STM measurements have been performed on only a few heavy fermion compounds and very little is known about the local impurity effect, mainly because of the difficulty in obtaining a fresh atomically flat surface by cleaving the single crystal The STM experiments have been performed with a combined system of MBE and low-temperature ultrahigh vacuum (LT-UHV) STM. The STM head can be cooled down to 300 mK using Helium-3 refrigerator. Magnetic fields perpendicular to the sample surface can be applied up to 11 T. All data are obtained with a PtIr tip. All conductance spectra are measured by using a lock-in technique with a modulation voltage V MOD and a modulation frequency f MOD . The c axis oriented epitaxial nondoped and Zn-doped CeCoIn 5 films are grown by MBE. The (001) surface of MgF 2 with rutile structure (a = 0.462 nm, c = 0.305 nm) is used as a substrate. The substrate temperature is kept at 370 • C. Each metal element is evaporated from an individually controlled Knudsen cell. The typical deposition rate is 0.01-0.02 nm/s. The area and thickness of the films are 5.0 × 5.0 mm 2 and 120 nm, respectively. The quality of films are checked by X-ray diffraction and atomic force microscopy. The films are transfered to the STM head, while being kept in ultrahigh vacuum (∼ 10 -8 Pa). For the theoretical calculations, we use a periodic Anderson model on a square lattice with two-atomic basis. The first atom corresponds to the Ce-atom including conduction-and f -electrons. The second atom corresponds to In, including only conduction electrons. In addition to a large electron hopping between the conduction electrons of Ce and In, we include a small hybridization between the f -electrons of Ce and the conduction electrons of In. Due to symmetry, we neglect a local hybridization on the Ce atoms. Furthermore, we take into account a small direct transfer between the conduction electrons of different In-atoms. To describe the Kondo effect as necessary for heavy fermion materials, the model contains a local density-density interaction between the f -electrons of Ce. We tune the parameters so that a hybridization gap opens at the Fermi energy with a gapwidth of ∆ = 50 K which corresponds to that of CeCoIn 5 . The effect of a Zn(1) impurity is included by changing the local energy and thus reducing the filling of a single atom at an In(1) position by one electron. This model can be regarded as a toy model describing a Zn-impurity in a single layer of CeCoIn 5 . This model is solved via the realspace dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) which is an extension of DMFT 44 for inhomogeneous systems. Each atom of a finite lattice is mapped onto a separate quantum impurity model and solved self-consistently. Thus, real-space DMFT can treat inhomogeneous systems including impurities. The quantum impurity models are solved via the numerical renormalization group (NRG) The c axis oriented non-doped CeCoIn 5 thin films were grown by MBE in ultrahigh vacuum (∼ 10 -8 Pa) on MgF 2 substrate. The films are transfered to the STM head, while being kept in ultrahigh vacuum. The superconducting transition temperature T c of this thin film is 2.0 K, which is slightly reduced from the single crys- tal (T c = 2.3 K). The residual resistivity of this film is ρ 0 ≈ 5 μΩcm, which is comparable to that of high-quality single crystal (ρ 0 ∼ 3 μΩcm). The resistivity shows Tlinear dependence above T c , which is a hallmark of non-Fermi liquid Figure Step structures are clearly observed and the step height is found to be 0.761 nm, which coincides with the c axis lattice constant. We note that the atomically flat terraces are much wider than those of cleaved planes of single crystals. Figure Figure We note that the local electronic structure is measured mainly through the p z orbital of In(1) atoms which is well extended perpendicular to the surface. Therefore, as shown in Fig. Figure The observation of superconducting and hybridization gaps at and around Zn impurities provide direct information of the local electronic structure. Figure The absence of any discernible change of the superconducting gap spectra around Zn(1) site immediately indicates that non-superconducting regions are not formed by the Zn impurity, as this would lead to strong suppression of the superconducting gap. In addition, in d-wave superconductors with sign changing order parameter, a non-superconducting regime creates the Andreev bound states, which are not observed in the present measurements. Let us here consider two scenarios about the effect of an AFM droplet on the conduction electrons. First, the AFM droplets are fluctuating, which may occur in the dilute case. In this situation, the formation of a magnetic moment reduces the c-f Kondo mixing, which changes the hybridization gap and LDOS. Therefore, it can be observed in our STM measurements. Moreover, the modification of the LDOS affects the superfluid density, which leads to a change of the superconducting gap. Second, if the AFM droplets form a static order, the LDOS around the impurity is largely influenced because the c-f Kondo mixing is suppressed similar to the fluctuating case. The influence on the superconductivity is even more dramatic. In the majority of models, static magnetic order competes with d-wave superconductivity. Therefore, the superconductivity is strongly suppressed, if static AFM order is induced. Since our measurements demonstrate that the hybridization and superconducting gaps are almost unchanged, it is unlikely that AFM droplets are induced at and around a Zn impurity. The absence of changes of the hybridization gap around the nonmagnetic Zn impurity is supported by the calculations based on dynamical mean field theory The NMR measurements in Cd-doped CeCoIn 5 reported that the induced AFM moment is strongly enhanced at Cd(2) site Although Zn substitution leads to no discernible change of the LDOS within the hybridization gap at the first glance as shown in Fig. Our STM measurements do not provide evidence that AFM droplets are induced around nonmagnetic Zn impurities. There are two scenarios explaining our measurements. First, AFM droplets are not formed around nonmagnetic impurities and the appearance of long range AFM order at higher Zn concentrations is due to the shift of the chemical potential by hole doping. Second, the induced AFM moments are so tiny that they have no influence on the superconducting and hybridization gaps. We note that although the phase diagrams of CeCo(In 1-x R x ) 5 for R = Zn, Cd, and Hg, in which one hole is doped, bear strong resemblance, we cannot rule out the possibility that the electronic structure around an impurity depends on the dopant; While AFM droplets are induced around Cd atoms, they are not around Zn atoms. In this case, the mechanism of the induction of the static AFM ordering for Zn doping is different from Cd case. Our results furthermore demonstrate a significant difference of the impact of nonmagnetic impurities between cuprates and layered heavy fermion systems, despite many remarkable common features in both systems. This difference may originate from the different ground states of cuprates and heavy fermions, which are theoretically described by a Hubbard and a periodic Anderson models, respectively. This might also be related to the fact that the mother material, from which superconductivity emerges when the AFM order is suppressed, is insulating for cuprates, while it is metallic for heavy fermions. In summary, to investigate the local electronic structure around a nonmagnetic Zn impurity in a heavy fermion superconductor in the vicinity of an AFM QCP, we performed in situ STM measurements on CeCo(In 1-x Zn x ) 5 thin film grown by MBE. The hybridization and superconducting gaps are clearly resolved around the Fermi level. What is remarkable is that the superconducting gap at the Zn(1) site in the Ce plane exhibit no discernible change from that at In sites. Moreover, the LDOS within the hybridization gap also exhibits only little change both at Zn(1) and Zn(2) sites. Thus, our results do not provide any evidence for induced AFM moments around a single Zn impurity. In addition, Zn(2) atoms outside the Ce plane do not play an important role for the emergence of AFM order and suppression of T c . The different response to nonmagnetic impurities between cuprates and CeCoIn 5 may also provide important information on the coexistence and competition of unconventional superconductivity and antiferromagnetism. Moreover, combined MBE-STM system should pave a new way for further experimental studies of exotic electronic properties of heavy fermion compounds.