We have fabricated planar amorphous Indium Oxide superconducting resonators (Tc ∼ 2.8 K) that are sensitive to frequency-selective radiation in the range of 7 to 10 GHz. Those values lay far below twice the superconducting gap that worths about 200 GHz. The photons detection consists in a shift of the fundamental resonance frequency. We show that the detected frequency can be adjusted by modulating the total length of the superconducting resonator. We attribute those observations to the excitation of higher-order resonance modes. The coupling between the fundamental lumped and the higher order distributed resonance is due to the kinetic inductance non-linearity with current. These devices, that we have called Sub-gap Kinetic Inductance Detectors (SKIDs), are to be distinguished from the standard Kinetic Inductance Detectors (KIDs) in which quasi-particles are generated when incident light breaks down Cooper pairs. Superconducting microwaves resonators are the building blocks of various ongoing and future technological developments ranging from sensitive photon detectors for astrophysics The resonator superconducting material directly affects its employability. Indeed, the critical superconducting temperature T c imposes a working temperature T << T c and the superconducting gap ∆ sets in the photon detector cutoff frequency to hν > 2∆. Within the BCS-superconducting theory T c and ∆ are not independent parameters as ∆ = 1.76 × K B T c . Thus, for classic KID lowering the cutoff frequency requires to lower accordingly the operating temperature. For example to detect 100 GHz one needs an operating temperature T ∼ 100 mK, and to detect 10 GHz T ∼ 10 mK is required. In this letter, we present a disruptive technology for millimetric down to centimetric detection that we have called Sub-gap Kinetic Inductance Detectors (SKIDs). These detectors are sensitive to photons with an energy hν laying well below twice the superconducting gap 2∆ thus removing the operating temperature constraint when lowering the photon detection cutoff frequency. We attribute their detection mechanism to the excitation of higher-order resonance modes combined with the kinetic inductance non-linearity with current. In case of disordered superconductors, the kinetic inductance non-linearity with current is more pronounced because of a reduced critical current due to a low superfluid density In that context, we have investigated amorphous Indium Oxide films, a : InO, that can be tuned through the superconductor-to-insulator transition by varying the disorder level Figure In figure The resonators frequencies were monitored employing a Vectorial Network Analyzer (VNA) connected to the transmission line. Using the VNA we measured the S 21 transmission coefficient for two types of scans : f V N A -scans and ν-scans. In f V N A -scans we spanned the VNA-frequency for a fixed ν-antenna frequency. In ν-scans we varied the ν-antenna frequency while measuring the resonator S 21 transmission coefficient at a fixed f V N A frequency. Panels (b) and (c) detail the results obtained on the resonator with the lowest resonance frequency f low ∼ 1.832 GHz. Panel (b) shows three f V N A -scans performed at different ν-antenna frequencies. The unperturbed resonance frequency, f low , is unaffected by all the ν-antenna frequencies but ν detected = 7.511±0.003 GHz. For ν detected the resonance is shifted to lower frequencies. The peak in panel (c) corresponds to the resonance frequency shift observed on panel (b) and indicates the ν-antenna detected by the resonator. In summary, within the whole range 7-10 GHz, the f low -resonator detects only a radiation peaked at 7.511 GHz with a frequency selectivity of ±0.003 GHz. The resulting resolving power is R = ν/dν = 2500. Figure Figure with the noise measured for a 1 Hz bandwidth. The signal to noise ratio is of the order of ∼200 √ Hz. Thus, assuming for simplicity a linear response of the detector (implicit in the above equation), the rough evaluation of the NEP is in the 10 -14 -10 -15 W/ √ Hz range. For future development it is important to notice that the detector response is actually nonlinear : see figure Radio-frequency electromagnetic simulations have been realized using the Sonnet software For the f high -geometry, besides the base resonance at 2.57 GHz, higher frequency resonance modes are found at 6.81 GHz and 9.16 GHz. The highest simulated frequencies match within less than 1% the ν-frequencies detected. Within the present set-up our resonators did not detect the ∼ 6 GHz-frequency but they did with an antenna enclosed in the cryostat and placed at 1 cm from the resonators. This probably indicates that the current induced from the incident radiation in the resonator or the cross-kerr coupling between the fundamental and the harmonic mode is weaker for the second resonance order compared to the third. The induced current is determined by the optical absorption efficiency, the internal and the coupling quality factors of the resonator, the crosskerr coupling quantifies the frequency shift of the fundamental mode when an harmonic mode is excited. We have also detected ν-frequencies above the 7-10 GHz range. The observations were similar: the ν-detected frequency was different for each resonator with a very high frequency-selectivity. Again, the ν-frequencies detected correspond to simulated frequencies. The agreement between the simulated and/or the measured higher-order resonance mode and the detected frequencies lead us to conclude that the higher-order resonance modes are at the origin of the detection mechanism of our SKIDs. In the following paragraph we discuss why the fundamental resonance mode is shifted when a harmonic mode is excited. There is a ∼ 25% difference from the ∼900pH/sq estimated with the BCS-analytic formula and the 700pH/sq extracted from the comparison between simulated and measured resonance frequencies. The difference is likely due to the non BCS-behavior of a:InO Below twice the superconducting gap, in order to be absorbed, the frequency of an incident light radiation has to match a resonance mode (or any collective mode) otherwise the superconductor is a perfect mirror. When absorbed, the radiation increases the resonator current density, modifying the inductance L owing to the following expression where J * is a constant that sets the scale of the kinetic inductance nonlinearity. The change of inductance leads to a shift of the fundamental resonance frequency. Within the Ginsburg-Landau theory Low superfluid density are of importance as it contributes to lower J * and thus increases the detector sensitivity The non-linear behavior of the kinetic inductance is already adopted in the recently proposed kinetic inductance parametric amplifiers Adding lower (e.g. 20-60 GHz) frequency channels would allow to strongly improve this procedure. The goal is to clearly identify the sources exhibiting non-thermal spectra, e.g. synchrotron radio emission. Using SKID instead of alternative technologies like bolometers or HEMT would allow using the existing readout electronics and naturally integrate the further pixels into the existing focal plane held at 100 mK. Further potential applications of the SKID include precise, real-time atmospheric monitoring for millimeter-wave interferometry In conclusion, we designed, fabricated and measured Kinetic Inductance Detectors that are sensitive to photons with an energy hν laying well below twice the superconducting gap 2∆ : the Sub-gap Kinetic Inductance Detectors (SKIDs). These detectors are innovative with respect to the current KID technology for two reasons: first they remove the temperature constraint when lowering the photon detection cutoff frequency, second they are very selective in energy (resolution R∼1000-10000). The frequency detected can be adjusted according to the total length of the resonator. The sub-gap detection mechanism is due to the excitation of higher-order resonance modes combined with the kinetic inductance non-linearity with current. As the kinetic inductance non-linearity with low current is a key ingredient to get sensitive detectors we suggest that low superfluid density materials, like indium oxide, granular aluminum or niobium nitride are of interest for future SKIDs development. The surface superfluid density n s of our a : InO film is estimated from the sheet kinetic inductance L s using where e is the elementary charge, d = 50 nm is the film thickness and m is the electron mass. The L s = 700 pH/sq inductance has been adjusted to obtain the same f low -resonance frequency by simulation and measurement (1.83 GHz). We get n s = 1 × 10 24 m -3 . Figure 