Electrically controllable magnetism, which requires the field-effect manipulation of both charge and spin degrees of freedom, has attracted growing interest since the emergence of spintronics. We report the reversible electrical switching of ferromagnetic (FM) states in platinum (Pt) thin films by introducing paramagnetic ionic liquid (PIL) as the gating media. The paramagnetic ionic gating controls the movement of ions with magnetic moments, which induces itinerant ferromagnetism on the surface of Pt films, with large coercivity and perpendicular anisotropy mimicking the ideal two-dimensional Ising-type FM state. The electrical transport of the induced FM state shows Kondo effect at low temperature, suggesting spatially separated coexistence of Kondo scattering beneath the FM interface. The tunable FM state indicates that paramagnetic ionic gating could serve as a versatile method to induce rich transport phenomena combining field effect and magnetism at PIL-gated interfaces. The ongoing quest to control magnetism by an electric field has attracted growing interest in both fundamental sciences and technological applications Physically, the Stoner model of band ferromagnets explains spontaneous spin splitting in FM metals such as Fe, Co, and Ni, requiring the product of the density of states (DOS) at Fermi energy r F and the exchange integral I larger than unity. Platinum (Pt) is normally regarded as an exchange-enhanced paramagnetic (PM) metal on the verge of FM instability. Hence, applying an electric field could induce the FM state in Pt if the enhanced product Ir F satisfies the Stoner criterion, which might subsequently evoke marked changes in both magnetism and electrical transport. Meanwhile, decreasing the coordination number of the nearest neighboring atoms at the surface results in reduced electronic bandwidth Despite the fact that ionic gating is capable of tuning a large number of carriers, it is highly demanding to realize the field-effect control of the spin degree of freedom. Here, paramagnetic ionic liquids (PILs), composed of anions containing transition metal with unpaired d orbitals, are introduced as gating media to induce magnetic interactions at the gated channel surface (Fig. Pt thin films with various thicknesses were prepared by magnetron sputtering. The films were patterned into Hall bar geometries and gated by BMIM[FeCl 4 ], as shown schematically in Fig. As reported in many other material systems Despite the quantitative difference, large Dn Hall implies substantial change of E F , which is composed of the 6s electron-like and 5d holelike pockets in open and nearly closed Fermi surfaces, respectively (Fig. The thickness dependence of AHE and magnetic phase diagram For PIL-gated Pt films with two thicknesses t = 8.0 nm (device A) and 2.7 nm (device B), the temperature dependence of the Hall effect shows the occurrence of ferromagnetism manifested as AHE with clear hysteresis loops (Fig. , where B is the magnetic field, M is the magnetization, and R 0 and R A are the ordinary and anomalous Hall coefficients, respectively. Compared with device A, the anomalous Hall term r A xy in device B is one order of magnitude larger, suggesting stronger M in thinner films. It is worth noting that the strength of the induced FM states is closely linked to the V G . As shown in Fig. It is well known that the induced FM state, demonstrated by the emerging hysteresis loop in AHE, should also leave traces in the longitudinal resistance. Surprisingly, the magnetoresistance (MR) shows a very weak signature of hysteresis loop, which is distinguishable only in the thinnest sample (t = 2.7 nm), when the influence of bulk Pt is minimal (fig. As shown in Fig. The FM state is induced in Pt by the formation of an electric double layer, where the thickness is temperature-independent and expected to be a few angstrom thick due to the strong screening effect in a typical metal. We determine the R A xy by extracting the linear part of R xy under high B field. The temperature dependence of the M s (that is proportional to theR A xy ) can be described by the Bloch equation M s (T) = M s (0)(1 -CT b ), where M s (0) is the saturation magnetization at zero temperature and C is a temperature-independent constant. The fittings for the hightemperature region (T > 40 K) yield b = 1.3 and 1.8 for the thinnest (t = 2.7 nm) and thicker films (t = 8.0, 12.0, and 16.0 nm), respectively (Fig. -anions, whose PM magnetization significantly increases at low temperature, obeying Curie's law. It is worth noting that applying the same gating protocol to the identical Pt films using a conventional IL (fig. The coexistence of Kondo effect and surface FM states Depositing magnetic molecules on a metal film provides the ingredients essential to induce the Kondo effect, which has been observed in systems where a monolayer of a metal complex with unpaired spins is deposited on a gold (Au) film To quantitatively extract key parameters such as the Kondo resistance (R K ) and the Kondo temperature (T K ), we performed a numerical renormalization group (NRG) analysis , where R K (0 K) is the Kondo resistance at zero temperature,T ′ K 1⁄4 T K =ð2 1=s À 1Þ 1=2 , and the parameter s is fixed to 0.225. (D) Thickness dependence of Kondo parameters R K and T K and effective thickness ratio k. The dashed lines represent the exponential decay as a function of the film thickness t, where the decay constant c 0 = 0.8 is the same for all fittings. a typical R s upturn for t = 2.7 nm can be fitted well by the Kondo scenario (inset of Fig. Looking at the phenomenon of surface magnetization, the transport phenomena can be described by a simple model composed of two parallel conducting channels, where the ratio between the gate-tuned top layer and the total film thickness is denoted as k = t tp /t (table , where k B and ħ are the Boltzmann and reduced Planck's constant, respectively. Here, the diffusion constant D is given by D 1⁄4 1 3 u F l e , where u F is the Fermi velocity and l e is the elastic mean free path The origin of the AHE can be analyzed by scaling the anomalous Hall conductivity s xy Þ in a power law form as s AH os g xx Itinerant ferromagnetism is generally considered to be detrimental to the Kondo effect, whereas coexistence of FM and Kondo states has been observed in atomic contacts of pure itinerant ferromagnets To substantiate our observation that the induced FM state and Kondo effect in Pt films are caused by PIL gating, we performed a series of control experiments. By successively gating using different ionic media (IL-PIL-IL-PIL) on the same device (fig. A series of PILs (fig. The crystal structures of PIL were determined by x-ray diffraction using a Bruker D8 Venture diffractometer equipped with a monochromator (Triumph) and an area detector (Photon 100). We used Mo K a radiation and carried out the measurement at 100 K to minimize the thermal vibrations. The PIL crystals were picked up using nylon loop with cryooil and cooled using a nitrogen flow (Cryostream Plus, Oxford Cryosystems). The diffraction data were processed using the Bruker Apex II software. The crystal structures were solved and refined using the SHELXTL software. Transistor devices used for PIL gating were all fabricated by standard microfabrication. Using electron beam lithography, we defined the Hall bar at 3 × 7 mm 2 . All metal channels (Pt, Pd, and Au) were prepared by dc magnetron sputtering (Kurt J. Lesker) after pumping the chamber below 1.0 × 10 -8 mbar. Sputtering powers (50 to 200 W) and duration (2 to 12 s) were optimized to prepare films with different thicknesses. Separately, contact electrodes comprising bilayer Ti/Au (5/70 nm) were deposited onto the patterned Hall bars using e-beam evaporation (FC-2000, Temescal) below 1.0 × 10 -6 mbar. Afterward, an Al 2 O 3 isolation layer (30 nm) was deposited to cover contact electrodes, limiting the gating effect to only the exposed channel surface. Low-temperature electrical transports were measured in a helium cryostat (Physical Property Measurement System, Quantum Design) under out-of-plane magnetic fields up to 6 T. All transport properties were measured by two lock-in amplifiers (SR830, Stanford Research) using a constant ac current excitation of 50 mA at 13.367 Hz. The voltage bias on BMIM[FeCl 4 ] (the PIL used in all gating experiments) was applied by a source measure unit (model 2450, Keithley). The magnetization curves of BMIM[FeCl 4 ] were measured in a SQUID magnetometer (MPMS XL-7, Quantum Design) up to 7 T. The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured using zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) methods. In the ZFC method, the sample was first cooled down to 2 K in zero field and measured during warming up in a field of 100 Oe. In the FC method, the measurement procedure was identical except that PIL was first cooled down in a field of 2 T. Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/ content/full/4/4/eaar2030/DC1 section S1. Magnetization and magnetic susceptibility measurement Liang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaar2030 6 April 2018 1 of 8 on April 9, 2018 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from Liang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaar2030 6 April 2018 2 of 8 on April 9, 2018 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from Liang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaar2030 6 April 2018 3 of 8 on April 9, 2018 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from Liang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaar2030 6 April 2018 4 of 8 on April 9, 2018 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from Liang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaar2030 6 April 2018 5 of 8 on April 9, 2018 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from Liang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaar2030 6 April 2018 6 of 8 on April 9, 2018 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from Liang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaar2030 6 April 2018 7 of 8 on April 9, 2018 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from Liang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaar2030 6 April 2018 8 of 8 on April 9, 2018 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from