We investigate the magnetic field dependence of an ideal superconducting vortex lattice in the parity-mixed pair-density wave phase of multilayer superconductors within a circular cell Ginzburg-Landau approach. In multilayer systems, due to local inversion symmetry breaking, a Rashba spinorbit coupling is induced at the outer layers. This combined with a perpendicular paramagnetic (Pauli) limiting magnetic field stabilizes a staggered layer dependent pair-density wave phase in the superconducting singlet channel. The high-field pair-density wave phase is separated from the low-field BCS phase by a first-order phase transition. The motivating guiding question in this paper is: what is the minimal necessary Maki parameter αM for the appearance of the pair-density wave phase of a superconducting trilayer system? To address this problem we generalize the circular cell method for the regular flux-line lattice of a type-II superconductor to include paramagnetic depairing effects. Then, we apply the model to the trilayer system, where each of the layers are characterized by Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ0, and a Maki parameter αM . We find that when the spin-orbit Rashba interaction compares to the superconducting condensation energy, the orbitally limited pair-density wave phase stabilizes for Maki parameters αM > 10. Magnetic fields applied to superconductors with Cooper pairing in the spin-singlet channel are in two ways detrimental for the superconducting phase. The first is through the coupling to the charge which confines electrons into cyclotron orbits leading to "orbital depairing". The second originates from the Zeeman coupling to the spin by breaking up the spin singlet configuration of the Cooper pair, called "paramagnetic limiting". The corresponding orbital and paramagnetic upper critical fields are denoted by H c2 and H p , respectively. In most superconductors the latter is irrelevant because superconductivity disappears at H c2 , much smaller than H p . However, in the opposite limit remarkable features may appear such as the famous Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state in high magnetic fields if H c2 sufficiently exceeds H p , quantified by the Maki parameter α M = √ 2H c2 (0)/H p (0) Recently, Shishido et al produced artificial superlattices consisting of regular stacks of several layers of CeCoIn 5 alternating with several layers of YbCoIn 5 , in this way separating the layers of the heavy Fermion material by a normal metal Among these exotic phases, we will focus here on the field-induced pair density wave (PDW) phase, character-ized below, which is supposed to appear at low temperature for sufficiently high magnetic fields perpendicular to the layers. This proposal is substantiated by a microscopic model calculation on the level of a Bogolyubovde Gennes formulation for a trilayer system (see Fig. In this paper we start with the formulation of the GL functional for a monolayer spin-singlet superconductor in order to examine the effect of paramagnetic limiting on the mixed phase, where we treat the vortex lattice with the circular cell method. This system is centrosymmetric such that parity-mixing does not occur. After this test case we turn to the trilayer stack, which requires a more involved multi-component order parameter in both spin-channels for every layer which is necessary to capture both the ordinary BCS and the PDW phase. An important quantity in this context is the Maki parameter α M that is needed to exceed a certain threshold to allow for the PDW phase. The derivation of our free energy functional and related discussions will be supported by the three sections in the appendix. In this section we develop a Ginzburg-Landau-type model for an ideal vortex lattice of a high-κ type-II super-conductor, where paramagnetic depairing is included. In order to treat the vortex lattice, we employ the Wigner-Seitz approximation which uses a circular vortex unit cell, neglecting effects due to a specific vortex lattice geometry The PDW phase we would like to address is expected to be realized at high magnetic fields and low temperatures. Therefore, we focus our discussion to the T = 0 limit, where a simple relation between the normal state susceptibility χ n and the Maki parameter α M applies (see appendix A). The zero-temperature free energy density in terms of dimensionless quantities (see appendix A for more details) can be written as or F = F c + F m + F p for the three terms, where F c , F m and F p refer to the vortex core energy, the orbital magnetic coupling and the paramagnetic limiting term, respectively. Here f (ρ) is the renormalized superconducting order parameter that due to circular symmetry only depends on the radial coordinate ρ of the vortex cell, where A cell = 2π/(κ 0 B) is the cell area with B as the mean magnetic induction. The magnetic induction can be written in terms of a vector potential B = ∇ × A, and κ 0 is the standard Ginzburg-Landau parameter ignoring correction due to the paramagnetic depairing. The normal state susceptibility χ n determines the strength of the paramagnetic effect via χ n = (α M /κ 0 ) 2 /2 involving the Maki parameter α M (see equation (B6)). In dimensionless units the flux quantum threading a unit cell reads φ 0 = 2π/κ 0 , and the vortex unit cell radius is The dimensionless magnetic field H and magnetic induction B are related by by Clem to model the vortex core, where f ∞ and ξ c are variational parameters for the bulk magnitude of the order parameter and vortex core size, respectively. This Ansatz eliminates one of the two Ginzburg-Landau equations and provides one remaining differential equation that can be solved analytically. Substituting the Ansatz (3) into the free energy (1) the variational derivative with respect to A leads to where After the gauge transformation A → A + ∇φ/κ 0 , we take the curl of equation ( This is a modified Bessel differential equation whose solution determines the spatial distribution of the magnetic induction B. A general solution of equation ( where I n (x) and K n (x) are n th -order modified Bessel functions of the first and second kind, respectively. The coefficients c 1 and c 2 are determined by the conditions that the flux threading a unit cell (for the α M = χ n = 0 case) is a flux quantum and that the current density is zero at the cell boundary. Defining P 2 = 2/(κ 0 B) + ξ 2 p , these coefficients can be expressed analytically as Inserting f (ρ) and B(ρ) in Eq.( Note that Bκ 0 ξ 2 c /2 = (ξ c /ρ B ) 2 . To calculate F m we use the result by Hao-Clem (11) If the order parameter is very small, f ∞ 1, one can approximate eq. ( To evaluate the last term F p we use the mean value of the magnetic induction B where Q(T ) is defined in Appendix A and The resulting free energy summing up all three terms, F[f ∞ , ξ c ], is an analytic free energy density for a vortex lattice subject to paramagnetic limiting. The minima with respect to the variational parameters (f ∞ , ξ c ) for some values of B can be obtained by simultaneous numerical minimization of the free energy density. Here we use a Nelder-Mead procedure to find (f ∞ , ξ c ) min . We include the expressions for the magnetic field H and the lower critical field H c1 in Appendix C. We consider now the behavior of the mixed phase for different values of the Maki parameter, α M = {0, 1, 2, 3}, providing the results for the magnetization, the order parameter and the vortex core size as a function of the applied magnetic field in Fig. Fig. We now turn to the trilayer system as introduced at the beginning. The properties of this system under various conditions have been investigated using a Bogolyubov-de Gennes (BdG) formulation restricting to paramagnetic depairing In a system with time reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry, we categorize superconducting phases by the Cooper pair symmetry into even-parity spin-singlet and odd-parity spin-triplet pairing states A superconducting system composed of a stack of three identical layers can be regarded as a locally noncentrosymmetric system (see Fig. Parity-mixing is induced by spin-orbit coupling that is of Rashba-type for these outer layers with opposite sign for the upper and lower one (see Fig. We now extend the GL theory developed in the preceding section II for a single superconducting layer to the case of three layers in order to describe the occurrence of a PDW state in a magnetic field and to estimate the necessary Maki parameter α M . In order to integrate the parity-mixing effect we need six order parameters, three spin-singlet components, Ψ i (r, α i ) = ψ i (r) exp iα i , and three triplet components, Ξ i (r, β i ) = η i (r) exp iβ i . Again, we write the free energy in terms of dimensionless quantities that will be indicated by the argument ψ i (r) → ψ i (ρ) within the single-vortex cell, whereby we renormalize in the same way as above and explained in Appendix A. We write the dimensionless zero temperature free energy density as the sum of five terms, which refer respectively to the core, order parameter mixing, Josephson inter-layer coupling, magnetic orbital part, and paramagnetic term. Each one of the terms will be introduced and discussed now. The core free energy density including all order parameter components is given by where A cell = πρ 2 B is the vortex cross section unit cell area. We assume that the threading vortex line is vertically aligned throughout the three superconducting layers. Both ψ i (ρ) and η i (ρ) are the dimensionless superconducting order parameters, renormalized with respect to the maximum layer values. In order to be able to perform to a large extent analytical calculations, we impose several simplifications here. The fourth-order mixed terms are neglected. The spin-triplet square term η 2 i (ρ) has been omitted for simplicity fixing the bare critical temperature of this pairing channel to zero in all layers. A finite T c for η i would not alter our conclusions qualitatively. We also fixed the GL parameter κ 0 to be the same for both the spin-singlet and -triplet components which implies that the orbital depairing is equally detrimental to both. The parity mixing induced by the Rashba spin-orbit coupling in layers 1 and 3 is implemented by a secondorder mixing term with i = (1, 0, -1) reflecting that the spin-orbit coupling has opposite sign on the two sides in accordance with the mirror symmetry with respect to the middle layer. The parameter γ is the coupling strength. In previous studies of the trilayer system, neglecting the orbital depairing effect, phase differences α i -β i were constant and either 0 or π where J is the coupling strength and i, j indicates the summation over neighboring layers, i.e. (1, 2) and (2, 3). In the following we assume the coupling constants J and γ to be comparable to the condensation energy density, F cond = -|ψ| 2 + |ψ| 4 /2 which is -1/2 for the minimizing order parameter |ψ| = 1. Next we consider the magnetic orbital part. A dramatic simplification occurs, if we allow the magnetic induction B i (ρ) to be identical in all layers, B(ρ). Together with the constant phase differences this allows also to perform the analog gauge transformation for the vector potential as done for the monolayer case above (Sec.II) because α i -β i implies ∇α i = ∇β i . Then, the orbital magnetic term can be written as where χ n is the susceptibility parameter, identical for all layers. At last, we write the paramagnetic coupling to the superconducting order parameter as, which only affects the spin-singlet component. Here we introduce the layer-dependent renormalization factor d i which is 1. The two outer layers have a strongly reduced renormalization factor d i because Rashba spin-orbit coupling turns the Pauli spin polarization into a van Vleck type spin polarization which does not lead to pair breaking Following the previous variational treatment, we take the Ansatz for the order parameters and minimize with respect to A obtaining an analogous equation to (4) where is the representative variational order parameter and vortex core size of the trilayer system. Defining the quantity for the sake of compactness, the integrated free energy density for the vortex cell is then written as with and P 2 = 2/(κ 0 B) + ξ 2 ∆ . The trilayer free energy density functional F[ψ i∞ , η i∞ , ξ c ] has seven variational parameters with respect to which it has to be simultaneously minimized. We may, however, impose the structure of the states allowed by symmetry, that is, the low-field BCS state as and the high-field PDW state as which simplifies the problem considerably. Thus, the free energy functionals can be written for the two states using the corresponding free variational parameters: F BCS [ψ out , ψ in , η out , ξ c ] and F PDW [ψ out , η out , η in , ξ c ]. Now again we resort to numerical minimization and compare the free energy densities to decide which of the two states is more stable under given conditions, i.e. the mean magnetic induction B. Our setup is chosen so that all variational parameters remain real in this procedure. Note that by imposing the PDW order parameter structure (30) into the free energy (23), one immediately sees that the PDW phase is predominantly limited by orbital depairing, whereas the BCS is dominated by paramagnetic limiting, as we will see in the following. For the sake of clarity we extract the role of the different depairing effects by analyzing different limiting cases in sequence. First, we discuss the emergence of the PDW phase in the trilayer system purely based on paramagnetic limiting (neglecting orbital depairing), which corresponds to the α M → ∞ limit. As mentioned above this case was already investigated by previous works within a BdG approach to a microscopic model We first consider the simplest case with paramagnetic limiting only. Since orbital depairing is neglected we can do without the gradient terms in the free energy density and the spatially modulated order parameter, In order to understand the basic mechanisms at work we consider first the case with d 1,3 = 0 such that only the middle layer is subject to paramagnetic limiting. For a BCS solution with ψ i = {ψ out , ψ in , ψ out }, η i = {η out , 0, -η out }, only ψ in couples to the B-field. Nevertheless, through the interlayer coupling all order parameters decrease when the field is increased, although weaker for the outer layer than the middle layer. On the other hand, the PDW solution with ψ i = {ψ out , 0, -ψ out }, η i = {η out , η in , η out } does not have any order parameter coupling to the B-field, because ψ 2 = 0. For this reason the PDW solution is the favored state for high magnetic fields if χ n is sufficiently large. Now we turn to a more general situation, where also the outer layers suffer paramagnetic limiting, by setting d 1 = d 3 = 0.01. Moreover, to be concrete, we choose χ n = 0.001 and γ = J = 1. In Fig. Comparison of a monolayer κ0 = 100 and a trilayer system subjected to pure orbital limiting (αM = 0). The dotted gray curves show the monolayer case (in all panels). In the trilayer system, the order parameter mixing causes a slight increase in the upper critical field. Here we have assumed that both singlet and triplet components are equally orbitally limited, which then yields an additional magnetization due to the triplet components in the trilayer system, which is seen in (b). (c) The suppression of the vortex core size for increasing Maki parameter. This contrasts with the monolayer case, where the core sizes increase. (d) The trilayer system is less susceptible than a monolayer due to the presence of triplet Cooper pairs. We now address the opposite limit of a trilayer system with orbital depairing only (α M = 0), and compare it to the monolayer case of section II. Because there is no paramagnetic limiting in the middle layer, a PDW phase is out of competition. Still, the outer layers in the trilayer system will have an induced spin-triplet order parameter, whereas in the monolayer system there is only one singlet component f ∞ . In Fig. Discussing now the complete free energy density, we show in Fig. To illustrate the effect of varying Maki parameters we show the behavior of ψ out as a function of magnetic field in Fig. The threshold for the occurrence of a PDW phase for γ = 1, the case displayed in Fig. In Fig. Interesting properties arise when artificial superlattices including multilayer superconductors are exposed to external magnetic fields. An important aspect often ignored is the presence of a local non-centrosymmetricity in these structures that can cause specific forms of spinorbit coupling giving rise to Cooper pairing with parity mixing. In such a system it was shown that inplane magnetic fields lead to a complex stripe phase of the order parameter resembling a state between the Fulde-Ferrell (FF) and the Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) phase In the present study we have addressed this latter situation, extending previous studies using the Bogolyubov-FIG. Typical magnetic induction -temperature phase diagram for the trilayer system with αM = 14, J = 1 and γ = 3/4. The color-scale shows the amplitude of the superconducting order parameters in the middle layer, i.e. ∆2 = ψ 2 in + η 2 in . The solid black line indicates a secondorder phase transition, whereas the dashed black line shows the first-order BCS-PDW transition. de Gennes formalism without orbital depairing to take into account the penetration of flux lines. This mixed phase is treated within a Ginzburg-Landau model of system of three superconducting layers. For symmetry reasons these three layers behave differently. The spinorbit coupling makes the outer layers more robust against paramagnetic limiting effects in contrast to the center layer. If paramagnetic limiting is important in this material, i.e. the Maki parameter α M is sufficiently large, this provides a mechanism to change the configuration of layer-dependent order parameters, from a phase (BCS) where the spin-singlet component of the order parameter is even under reflection at the middle layer to a phase (PDW) where it is odd. This transition upon increasing the magnetic field is of first order. Increasing the paritymixing in the outer layers in zero magnetic field lowers the threshold of α M for this transition to happen. The heavy fermion CeCoIn 5 compound has an estimated perpendicular magnetic field Maki parameter ranging from α ⊥ M = 3 -5 4 . Other heavy fermion superconductors have comparable Maki parameters. Another promising family of superconductors are the ironbased materials. In particular KFe 2 As 2 has an estimated value of α M = 15 . Therefore, we estimate the Maki parameter in the Ginzburg-Landau context as For the χ n 1 case, we arrive at a neat formula relating the normal state susceptibility to the Maki parameter and zero temperature Ginzburg-Landau parameter: Whereas for an orbital limited type-II superconductor there is only one free input parameter κ 0 , an "or-bital+paramagnetic" limited superconductor has two input parameters (κ 0 , α M ). Appendix C: Expressions for the magnetic field For the sake of clarity of the main text, we include the expressions for the magnetic field H derived from the free energy density for reference here. From equations (2), ( K 0 (f p ξ p )I 1 (f p P) + I 0 (f p ξ p )K 1 (f p P) K 1 (f p ξ p )I 1 (f p P) -I 1 (f p ξ p )K 1 (f p P) + (K 1 (f p ξ p )I 1 (f p P) -K 1 (f p P)I 1 (f p ξ p ))) -2 Taking the limits f ∞ → 1 and B → 0 in equation (C1), allows us to obtain an expression for the lower critical field, which reads where ξ c0 is the variational vortex core parameter that minimizes the free energy for a single vortex, that is ∂H c1 /∂ξ c0 = 0, from which For κ 0 1 we see that κ 0 ξ c0 ≈ √ 2. Equation (C2) can also be found in the first paper by Hao-Clem where it is also convenient to calculate where here we did not consider the spatial dependence of the order parameter for the paramagnetic term for simplicity. Once the free energy density has been minimized for the order parameters at a given B, the magnetic field is calculated using the expressions above, from which the magnetization M and susceptibility χ are extracted. We do not include the analytical expressions for M and χ here.