Cavity optomechanical magnetic field sensors, constructed by coupling a magnetostrictive material to a micro-toroidal optical cavity, act as ultra-sensitive room temperature magnetometers with tens of micrometre size and broad bandwidth, combined with a simple operating scheme. Here, we develop a general recipe for predicting the field sensitivity of these devices. Several geometries are analysed, with a highest predicted sensitivity of 180 pT/ √ Hz at 28 μm resolution limited by thermal noise in good agreement with previous experimental observations. Furthermore, by adjusting the composition of the magnetostrictive material and its annealing process, a sensitivity as good as 20 pT/ √ Hz may be possible at the same resolution. This method paves a way for future design of magnetostrictive material based optomechanical magnetometers, possibly allowing both scalar and vectorial magnetometers. Magnetometers with high spatial resolution are required for many applications such as magnetoencephalography Among various types of magnetometers, optomechanical magnetometers In this work, we present a model of magnetostrictive magnetometers that accounts for arbitrary mechanical mode shape and device geometry. We modify the elastic wave equation, which describes the small-amplitude motion of elastic materials, by including magnetostrictive stress. This modified elastic wave equation is then numerically solved by finite element analysis (using COMSOL Multiphysics). Magnetomechanical overlap, describing the overlap between the magnetostrictive deformation induced by the signal magnetic field and the excited mechanical eigenmode, is intrinsically included in the matrix form of the modified elastic wave equation, with each matrix element containing directional information. Mechanical properties are extracted from the solution to the modified elastic wave equation from COMSOL to be further combined with optomechanical analysis We apply this analysis to study the effect of the position of the magnetostrictive material on the sensitivity of devices similar to those reported in Ref. Optomechanical magnetometry can be schematically explained via the example of a Fabry-Pérot optical resonator coupled to a spring-mass mechanical oscillator as depicted in Figure The magnetic field sensitivity is limited by noise consisting primarily of thermal force and shot noise on the optical field. Thermal noise is explained by the equipartition theorem, which states that each mechanical degree of freedom of an object has a mean energy of k B T /2 (k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature). This energy excites incoherent mechanical vibration near mechanical eigenfrequencies. The bandwidth of the magnetometer depends on the visibility of the thermal noise over the optical shot noise. For the case of a single mechanical resonance, the sensitivity is flat over the frequency range where thermal noise dominates shot noise, and degrades outside of this region. Consequently, in this case, the bandwidth is given simply by the thermal-noise-dominant frequency band, which is typically on the order of a few megahertz In this paper, as a test geometry for our model, we choose optomechanical magnetometers of the form reported in Refs. The primary objective of this work is to develop a versatile technique to numerically obtain a meaningful estimation of the magnetic field sensitivity for a wide range of sensor geometries. We consider the case of phase quadrature detection in a homodyne scheme and on-resonance optical probing of the cavity resonance, which maximises the signal-to-noise. We note, however, that simpler direct detection with off-resonance probing and an optimal detuning of κ 2 √ 3 , where κ is the optical cavity linewidth, only degrades the sensitivity by a factor of 8 3 3/2 ∼ 1.5. The sensitivity as a function of magnetic field frequency Ω can be determined from the finite-time sensor power spectrum S(Ω), which can be separated into a stochastic noise term S noise (Ω) and coherent signal term S signal (Ω) as S(Ω) = τ -1 i * (Ω)i(Ω) = S signal (Ω) + S noise (Ω), where the first term is the optical shot noise and the second term constitutes the combination of mechanical thermal noise and quantum back-action noise. The detection efficiency η, consisting of the loss in the fibre-device coupling and detection process, is ideally taken to be 1 in the model. However, in the non-back-action dominated regime relevant here, reductions in efficiency can be exactly modelled by a proportionate decrease in the optomechanical cooperativity. Γ j is the mechanical decay rate of mode j and C eff,j is its effective cooperativity, which depends on the input laser power used, the decay rate of the optical field and mechanical excitation, and the radiation pressure coupling rate between them. The mechanical susceptibility of mode j is defined as χ j (Ω) ≡ Ω M,j /(-Ω 2 -iΩΓ j + Ω 2 M,j ), with Ω M,j its mechanical resonance frequency. k B T/ Ω M,j is the number of phonons thermally excited at room temperature, with being the reduced Planck constant. The mechanical motion induced by an alternating-current (AC) magnetic field is quantified by the finite-time power spectrum S signal (Ω). This is calculated by replacing the thermal environment forcing F th in the input momentum fluctuation P in = x zpf F th / √ Γ where B signal,rms is the root-mean-square amplitude of B sig (t), m eff,j is the effective mass of mode j, and c act,j is the actuation constant associated with that mode. This finite-time power spectrum takes into account mechanical interference, as experimentally observed, for example in optoelectromechanical systems coherently driven by an electric field The frequency dependent signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the magnetic field measurement is given simply by The minimum detectable field in the measurement time τ is defined as the field that produces a signal-to-noise ratio SNR of one, i.e., B min,τ = B sig (SNR = 1). It should be noted that the stochastic noise power spectral density S(Ω) noise of Equation ( To determine the minimum detectable field via finite element simulations, we use COMSOL Multiphysics. Simulations detailed in the appendices allow us to extract each of the parameters in Equations ( The spatio-temporal mechanical modeshape is described by a separable function u(r, t) = Ψ(r)x(t). The effective mass m eff,j for one mechanical resonance at an eigenfrequency Ω M,j is calculated from the maximum physical dis- ρ n is the density of the material and the subscript n denotes different parts of the device (for instance, silica for the optical resonator and Terfenol-D for the transducing medium). Note that, while this definition of effective mass is the convention for microelectromechanical systems, an alternative definition-where the effective mass is defined with respect to the optical path lengthis commonly used in the optomechanical community The magnetic field response S signal (Ω) of the sensor is determined by the eigenmode-dependent actuation parameter c act . For a single mechanical eigenmode, the equation of motion is At the resonance frequency of each mechanical eigenmode, c act can be extracted as a fitting parameter in the mechanical signal frequency response spectrum obtained from COMSOL. Taking the Fourier transform of Equation ( This allows c act to be determined for each mechanical mode. Due to the magnetostrictive energy stored within compressed magnetostrictive materials, the extraction of m eff and displacement from COMSOL for such materials requires modification of the elastic wave equation. To treat the magnetostrictive material in COMSOL, we built upon a previously used method The modulated driving stress is linked to the magnetic field via the piezomagnetic constant To obtain the value of effective cooperativity, we quantify the effectiveness of transduction of mechanical motion to measurable optical path length change as the geometrical factor, as where δL is the change of the optical path length due to the mechanical displacement. The extraction of the value of ξ from COMSOL is detailed in Appendix E. Within one mechanical mode, ξ is directly linked to the effective cooperativity (Appendix F) by where κ is the optical decay rate, ω 0 is the optical resonance frequency, N in (photons•s -1 ) is the input optical photon number flux, L is the optical path length, and η esc is the escape efficiency counting fibre-device coupling. The front part of the right hand side of Equation ( To verify the numerical model, we apply it to the first experimentally realized optomechanical magnetometer From available optical microscopic images, it is not clear whether the Terfenol-D is centred on the toroid or not. Therefore, we sweep the position of the Terfenol-D from the centre. Without loss of generality, we analyse the magnetic response for a second order crown mode because this mode has been commonly observed in experiments The numerical results show that asymmetry and the bimetallic-like bending effect helps to enhance the sensitivity. With an optimal offset of Terfenol-D, low nT/ √ Hz sensitivity is predicted, which is five times better than the experimental result The single mechanical mode analysis is then applied to a proposed Single mode analysis is limited, in that it only correctly predicts the performance of devices over frequency ranges where only one mechanical mode contributes significantly to the dynamics. In reality, this is rarely the case, and often there is a dense spectrum of mechanical modes (see e.g., Ref. We examine the limitations of single mode analysis by considering the magnetometer design reported in Ref. A single mechanical mode at Ω M /2π=23 MHz has the largest actuation parameter (see Appendix D for c act spectrum) due to a relatively large spatial mode overlap between the mechanical eigenmode (Figure To achieve better sensitivity, the direction of the driving magnetic field needs to be optimised. The mechanical mode under magnetic field driving should have both relative large optomechanical coupling and relative good magnetomechanical overlap compared to other modes. As might be expected, and is shown in Figure With in-plane magnetic field driving, the sensitivity observed in the experiment 200 pT/ √ Hz We have developed a new versatile approach to model the sensitivity of optomechanical magnetometers, introducing magnetostriction into the elastic wave equation used to solve for mechanical eigenmodes. By numerically solving a modified elastic wave equation for a range of geometries, we model the sensitivity for magnetometers both experimentally demonstrated and not-yet fabricated. The modelling predicts that at least one order of magnitude improvement from previous experimental results The numerical method developed here is applicable to optomechanical magnetometers with a wide range of geometries and any magnetostrictive materials. A full characterization of the response of the magnetomechanical overlap to the variation of the signal magnetic fields direction may allow vectorial optomechanical magnetometry, complementary to vectorial optomechanical force sensors Appendix A: Derivation of the Sensitivity for a Single Mechanical Mode For a single mechanical mode, the minimum detectable magnetic field can be obtained from the actuation parameter c act and the noise force spectral density S F F . Calibrated in the medium of air, the sensitivity at individual mechanical eigenfrequencies can be written as where a factor of 1/ √ 2π ensures B min having the unit of T/ √ Hz. Noise sources considered are thermal noise and noise from optical measurement including imprecision and back-action. Measurement imprecision comes from the laser shot noise in the optical phase quadrature. Backaction noise is due to the laser shot noise in the optical amplitude quadrature driving the mechanical oscillator. The power spectral density in the unit of force (specifically rad•s•N 2 ) for individual mechanical modes driven by noise can be found in Ref. in which a factor of 4 in front of the classical thermal force spectrum in Equation (A2) is due to the definition of Γ being the full-width-half-maximum of the mechanical oscillator. Inspection of Equations (A3) and (A4) shows that, despite optomechanical coupling, the effective cooperativity C eff also quantifies the trade-off between better measurement precision and large back-action noise due to the Heisenberg uncertainty relation. |C eff (Ω)| is given by where N is the intra-cavity photon number, N in (photons •s -1 ) is the input photon number flux, and g 0 (rad•s -1 ) is the vacuum optomechanical coupling rate quantifying the optical resonance frequency shift by the mechanical displacement at zero energy excitation. Fibre-device coupling here is idealized to be lossless where the intra-cavity and end mirror loss due to the scattering and/or absorption of the light is neglected, leaving the optical decay only counted at the front mirror to be κ as shown in Figure To provide an idea of the relative magnitude of S therm F F , S imp F F and S ba F F , we choose the geometry and parameters (in Section V in the main text) of the magnetometer reported in Ref. Appendix B: COMSOL Implementation of the Magnetic Field The magnetic field B sig is generated by a pair of Helmholtz coils whose axis can be freely rotated in a 4π solid angle as shown in Figure Up to the first term in the bracket on the right-hand side (RHS) of Equation ( where the modulated Maxwell stress tensor ∆σ ij Maxw The last term in the bracket on the RHS of Equation ( followed by a Fourier transformation to the frequency domain can have the damping coefficient Γ in front of the term linear with Ω in the mechanical susceptibility. Only the part of (σ ij ela + σ ij driv + σ ij Γ ) perpendicular to dS contributes to the integral. Roughly speaking (simplified to one dimension), m eff Ω 2 M is related to elasticity matrix and spatial profile of the mechanical eigenmode Ψ(r) and surface area S. The damping factor Γ includes the input damping η damp (Pa•s), m eff , Ψ(r) and surface area S. The actuation parameter is determined by c act = e S ⊥ /μ 0 μ r (S ⊥ being the area perpendicular to the magnetic field induced stress). Note that Ψ(r) comes from an ansatz of Equation ( Due to the transverse (axial) symmetry of the Terfenol-D, the independent elements of the elasticity matrix are reduced to only six 0 0 e 13 0 0 e 13 0 0 e 33 0 e 15 0 e 15 0 0 0 0 0 where small modulation ∆ kl and ∆H k in Equation (C2) is replaced with kl and H k in the frequency domain. The input elasticity matrix elements λ H ijkl and piezomagnetic constant elements e ijk are taken from an experimental measurement biased at 60 kA/m and prestressed at 20 MPa All the fitting parameters are on the RHS of Equation (D1): c act , Γ and Ω M , while all the three parameters on the LHS of Equation (D1), maximum displacement, effective mass and signal magnetic field, can be drawn from COMSOL. The COM-SOL syntax for extracting the maximum displacement is sqrt(abs(u^2)+abs(v^2)+abs(w^2)) under volume maximum analysis and the m eff is the quotient of solid.rho*(abs(w^2)+abs(v^2)+abs(u^2)) under volume integration analysis and maximum displacement where u,v,w are displacements in x, y, z directions. Since damping is input manually, it is important to check whether the damping affects c act or not. By changing the input damping for a wide parameter range of 12500 times variation, it has been verified that the effect of the damping variation on c act is negligible. Figure Figure A line integral with integrand 1 along the outermost circumference of the devices is followed after the phase synchronization, which results in the circumference at a particular phase. Linear optomechanical coupling is evaluated through δL by taking the difference of circumference synchronized at phase 0 and phase π where Equation (E1) is multiplied by a phase factor exp(i*pi). Figure where the front part on the RHS is mode dependent, ξ(Ω M ) and m eff (Ω M ) can be accurately extracted from the numerical simulation. The optical resonance frequency ω 0 and length of the cavity L are input parameters, and the only empirical parameters left are the optical decay κ and the mechanical damping factor Γ with the assumption of an idealized lossless cavity escape efficiency η esc = 1.