Indium-doped SnTe has been of interest because the system can exhibit both topological surface states and bulk superconductivity. While the enhancement of the superconducting transition temperature is established, the character of the electronic states induced by indium doping remains poorly understood. We report a study of magneto-transport in a series of Sn1-xInxTe single crystals with 0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.45. From measurements of the Hall effect, we find that the dominant carrier type changes from hole-like to electron-like at x ∼ 0.25; one would expect electron-like carriers if the In ions have a valence of +3. For single crystals with x = 0.45, corresponding to the highest superconducting transition temperature, pronounced Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations are observed in the normal state. In measurements of magnetoresistance, we find evidence for weak anti-localization (WAL). We attribute both the quantum oscillations and the WAL to bulk Dirac-like hole pockets, previously observed in photoemission studies, which coexist with the dominant electron-like carriers. The discovery of topological insulators (TIs) has attracted great attention and stimulated considerable work on topological surface states arising from band inversion and time-reversal symmetry An unresolved issue concerns the nature of the carriers introduced by In doping. Studies of IV-VI semiconductors have long indicated that In dopants act as if they contribute a resonance state or impurity band near the Fermi level In this paper, we use transport measurements to explore the normal-state properties of Sn 1-x In x Te single crystals for 0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.45, spanning most of the range of superconductivity. From measurements of the Hall coefficient at T = 5 K, we infer the presence of both hole-and electron-like charge carriers, with a crossover in the dominant type at x ∼ 0.25. The significant change with increasing x is the increase in electron mobility. In field-dependent measurements of the Hall coefficient, we observe Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations, whose frequency and temperature-dependent amplitude are comparable to those expected for the bulk L-point hole pockets as detected by ARPES Single crystals of Sn 1-x In x Te (SIT) with nominal In concentrations of x = 0.10-0.45 were grown by a modified floating-zone method. Pure SnTe used in the experiment was a polycrystalline sample, prepared via the horizontal unidirectional solidification method. The details were reported previously To provide context for interpreting the measurements, we did some simple band-structure calculations. We consider the case in which each indium dopant replaces a Sn atom and behaves as an acceptor, having one less electron than Sn. We used the WIEN2k code The transport data for our SIT crystals spanning a range of In concentrations are presented in Fig. While there could be a small difference in concentration of Sn vacancies, that is unlikely to be the explanation, as the measured values of lattice parameter and superconducting transition temperature as a function of x The apparent sharp jump in carrier concentration and sign with doping is surprising. If we look at the measured Hall coefficient at a temperature of 5 K, shown by the circles in Fig. We imagine a scenario as illustrated in Fig. To approximately describe this behavior, we consider a two-band model that contains contributions from both holes and electrons where N h (N e ) is the density of holes (electrons) and b = μ e /μ h , the ratio of mobilities of the electrons and holes. We take N h to be small but finite at x = 0 and allow it to grow linearly with x. In contrast, we take N e to be equal to the density of In ions, but make the mobility μ e very small in the regime where the electrons are localized. The key to the crossover in dominant carrier type is the variation in the mobility ratio, b, which starts out small, but then grows rapidly towards one at larger x; the product N e b 2 is indicated by the dashed line in Fig. Measurements of the field dependence of R H for the x = 0.45 sample with the field along (001) revealed prominent SdH oscillations. Figure F , with k F being the Fermi wave vector. The resulting k F is 0.04 Å-1 . The Landau level index has been assigned as done in previous reports Given the substantial carrier density in our sample, we expect that the quantum oscillations must come from bulk states. Of course, we have both hole-and electronlike carriers, so which of these contributes the oscillations? ARPES studies of SIT have observed the hole- pockets near the L points, and have distinguished bulk and surface states by their dispersion with momentum perpendicular to the sample surface We can compare our results with those obtained by ARPES for the bulk L-point pockets of a (111) SIT film with x ≈ 0.4 Observations of WAL For WAL from bulk states where ψ is the digamma function and B φ = φ 0 /(8πl 2 φ ), with φ 0 = h/e and l φ being the phase coherence length. The parameter α is a constant that equals 1 for the case of Dirac-like dispersion in a single pocket at the Brillouin zone center In Fig. We have used transport measurements to study the normal state of Sn 1-x In x Te crystals across much of the composition range for which superconductivity occurs. We have confirmed that the dominant carrier type changes from hole-like to electron-like near x ∼ 0.25. The observations of quantum oscillations and a bulk WAL response in the magnetoresistance at x = 0.45 provide evidence for the hole-like states that have been detected by ARPES about the L points of the bulk Brillouin zone. Hence, hole-like and electron-like carriers coexist and all contribute to the transport. In modeling the doping dependence of the Hall effect, we considered a picture in which the In 5s states sit somewhat below the chemical potential of SnTe. At low concentration, these states behave as if they are localized, so that the chemical potential moves lower in the valence band. With increasing concentration, the In 5s levels begin to hybridize with one another, and these electronlike states gain some mobility. In the future, it would be interesting to see this picture tested with spectroscopic measurements, with a particular focus on characterizing the electron-like states. This mixture of carriers is of interest with respect to the nature of the superconductivity. The superconducting transition temperature rises continuously with In concentration across the crossover in dominant carrier type 