The ELIMED (MEDical and multidisciplinary application at ELI-Beamlines) beam line is being developed at INFN-LNS with the aim of transporting and selecting in energy proton and ion beams accelerated by laser-matter interaction at ELI-Beamlines in Prague. It will be a section of the ELIMAIA (ELI Multidisciplinary Applications of laser-Ion Acceleration) beam line, dedicated to applications, including the medical one, of laser-accelerated ion beams [1, 2]A Monte Carlo model has been developed to support the design of the beam line in terms of particle transport efficiency, to optimize the transport parameters at the irradiation point in air and, furthermore, to predict beam parameters in order to deliver dose distributions of clinical relevance. The application has been developed using the Geant4 [3] Monte Carlo toolkit and has been designed in a modular way in order to easily switch on/off geometrical components according to different experimental setups and users requirements, as reported in [4], describing the early-stage code and simulations. The application has been delivered to ELI-Beamlines and will be available for future ELIMAIA's users as ready-to-use tool useful during experiment preparation and analysis. The final version of the developed application will be described in detail in this contribution, together with the final results, in terms of energy spectra and transmission efficiency along the in-vacuum beam line, obtained by performing end-to-end simulations. The ELIMAIA beam line will be located in one of the future experimental halls at ELI Beamlines facility in Prague, i.e. the one dedicated to laser-driven ion acceleration as well as x-ray production and their possible multidisciplinary applications. It will be composed of two sections: the first one is addressed to the Peta-Watt (PW) laser interaction with solid target, including two available interaction chambers, plasma mirrors and diagnostics, and the second one, called ELIMED, is a complete transport and dosimetry beam line dedicated to laser-driven ion beams handling, selecting and monitoring in view of possible multidisciplinary applications, such as the medical one. The latter has been in charge of INFN-LNS, which has signed a three-years contract with ELI Beamlines in 2014 to design, develop and realize the ELIMED beam line,including all the transport as well as dosimetry elements The simulation software Geant4 (GEometry ANd Tracking) • Realistically reproducing each single beam line element, in terms of geometry and magnetic features, maintaining a good flexibility of the code for user experimental setups • Implementing a realistic laser-driven ion source with specific energy and angular distribution. It is possible to use typical Particle In Cell simulation outputs as input of the simulation to obtain realistic results. • Giving the possibility to retrieve outputs at different positions along the beam line, including the final irradiation point • Providing a easy-to-use and friendly interface of the code for future users In order to fulfill all these requirements, the ELIMED application has been conceived as complex and modular code, in which the different geometrical components, as well as their functionalities can be switched off/on according to the specific purpose of the simulation. The scheme of the whole ELIMED beam line simulated with Geant4, indicating the main beam line components, is reported in figure 1. The first transport element, is composed of five focusing high-gradient permanent quadrupoles (PMQs), whose configuration, i.e. relative distances, is determined according to the particle species and energy to be transported Once the reliability of the ELIMED application has been properly demonstrated as shown in section 3, simulations from the source down to the in-air irradiation point have been performed in order to study the expected energy spectra and fluence per shot. Since experimental data are not yet available at the ELIMAIA beam line, Particle In Cell simulations have be used as input of the Geant4 simulations As shown in figure The described Geant4-based application, reproducing in details geometrical as well as magnetic field features of the ELIMED transport and dosimetry elements, has been successfully validated comparing the field implementation and the tracks with the reference codes. Top-to-bottom simulations allowed to study the transported beam characteristics along the in-vacuum beam line, i.e. after the PMQs and at the ESS exit, confirming the influence of the slit width on the final energy spread and particle transmission efficiency. Further studies related to the final in-air section of the ELIMED beam line have been performed, including spatial dose distributions relevant for clinical applications and results will be presented in future works. Preprint submitted to Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research ASeptember 20, 2018