We discuss the role of strong Coulomb interactions in iron-based superconductors (FeSCs). The presumed s ± character of these superconductors means that the condensate is not symmetry protected against Coulomb repulsion. Remarkably, the transition temperatures and the excitation gap are quite robust across the large family of iron based superconductors, despite drastic changes in Fermi surface geometry. The Coulomb problem is to understand how these superconductors avoid the strong onsite Coulomb interaction at the iron atoms, while maintaining a robust transition temperature. Within the dominant space of t2g orbitals, on-site repulsion in the FeSCs enforces two linearly independent components of the condensate to vanish. This raises the possibility that iron-based superconductors might adapt their condensate to the Coulomb constraints by rotating the pairing state within the large manifold of entangled, extended s-wave gap functions with different orbital and momentum space structure. We examine this "orbital and k-space flexibility" (OKF) mechanism using both Landau theory and microscopic calculations within a multi-orbital t-J model. Based on our results, we conclude that OKF necessitates a large condensate degeneracy. One interesting possibility raised by our results, is that a resolution to the Coulomb problem in FeSC might require a reconsideration of triplet pairing. Ten years after their discovery Discoveries over the past decade have revealed a broad family of iron-based superconductors. Generally, they are categorized by their chemical compositions, and the most prominent classes are the 1111, 122, 111, and 11 families. All iron-based superconductors share a common local electronic structure, with the iron atoms contained within a tetrahedron of pnictide or chalgonide atoms. These tetrahedra are closely packed in a staggered formation with two iron atoms per unit cell, forming a two dimensional layered structure. There are two slight exceptions: the quasi-1D compound BaFe 2 S 3 The Fermi surfaces of the FeSC are primarily composed from the t 2g orbitals of the iron d-shell. The electron correlations increase from the 1111 to 122 and 111 compounds, and are maximal in the 11 materials. First principle calculations Based on Knight shift experiments, the superconducting gap structure Despite the enormous progress of the past years, two unsolved questions about the pairing mechanism in the ironbased superconductors stand out: • Why does superconductivity appear so generically, independently of very different Fermi surface topologies? • What is the common mechanism by which FeSC overcomes the strong Coulomb repulsion at the iron sites? In almost all other strongly correlated pair condensates including the cuprate superconductors, Sr 2 RuO 4 , heavy fermion and organic superconductors, and superfluid 3 He, the condensate avoids the local repulsion by forming finite angular momentum Cooper pairs. This is because the nodes in the finite an-gular momentum Cooper pairs guarantee a vanishing on-site component of the pair expectation value, thereby protecting the condensate against large Coulomb repulsion. In an orbital basis, the onsite Coulomb interaction is written ψ † m,α (x j ) creates an electron in orbital m, spin component α ∈ {↑, ↓} at position x j and is the integral of the Coulomb interaction V c (x -y) with the atomic orbitals, φ m (x). In an isotropic environment, a simplified version of the interaction can be written[21] where n j = m,α ψ † mα (x j )ψ mα (x j ) is the number of d-electrons at site j, while S j and L j are the corresponding total spin and orbital angular momentum at site j, respectively. The leading Coulomb repulsive U is of order 2-4eV, while the subleading Hund's interactions, J H,1 and J H,2 are typically a few tenths of eV The important point is that in the iron-based superconductors, the characteristic gap energies on the scale of tens of millivolts, are dwarfed by the onsite Coulomb interactions on the scale of volts. Once a superconducting condensate forms, the additional onsite charge fluctuations associated with the coherent state modify the Coulomb energy. The key quantity determining this condensate correction to the Coulomb energy is the anamolous equal-time Gor'kov function Here we have restricted ourselves to spin-singlet pairing, in which the Gor'kov function is proportional to the antisymmetric tensor αβ =βα . If we evaluate the change in the condensation energy in the Hartree Fock approximation, by contracting the anomalous terms in the energy, then for the isotropic interaction the change in condensate energy per site is where N s is the number of sites, and |Ψ SC (|Ψ F L ) is the superconducting (Fermi liquid) many body ground state. Here, the Coulomb cost is Ũ = U + (3J H,1 -4J H,2 )/2, to be specific we have considered the case of a t 2g triplet (m ∈ {zx, zy, xy}). The huge discrepancy of scale between the Coulomb and gap energies, means that for the stabilization of the condensate, the onsite pairing terms have to vanish, i.e These are the Coulomb constraints on the condensate. If we rewrite the Coulomb constraint in the momentum and frequency domain it becomes where f (ω) = (exp[βω] + 1) -1 is the Fermi function. Typically, the integrand in Eq. ( In fact crystal symmetries do protect the off-diagonal Coulomb constraints. Within the subspace of dominant t 2g orbitals, there are à priori six independent constraints. However, the off-diagonal components of F change sign under some of the non-symmorphic crystal symmetry operations and since an s-wave condensate is invariant under the crystal symmetries, the off-diagonal components of F must vanish, F mm = 0 (m = m ). For example, under a combined π/2 rotation about the zaxis and mirror-reflection in the xy plane, (x, y, z) → (y, -x, -z) and so F zx,zy → -F zy,zx , which must then vanish for an s-wave condensate. Tetragonal crystalline symmetry also guarantees that F zx,zx = F zy,zy , are equal, so the Coulomb repulsion thus imposes two independent local constraints: In conventional phonon-paired superconductors the bare Coulomb repulsion is screened by virtual high energy pair fluctuations As such, the Coulomb problem is conceptually equal for FeSC with tetragonal or orthorhombic symmetry. We here concentrate on the case of fourfold rotational symmetry and mention that the orthorhombic symmetries also ensure vanishing off-diagonal components F mm | m =m leading to three independent Coulomb conditions F mm = 0. A widely proposed mechanism for superconductivity from repulsive interactions relies on a generalization of the Kohn-Luttinger idea to multiband systems, often explored using renormalization group (RG) approaches To illustrate these arguments and their connection to the Coulomb problem, we focus on two-band models. In this situation, the ladder resummation of logarithmic corrections to interband (intraband) Cooper coupling constants G 12 (G 11 , G 22 ) is expressed in terms of two RG equations (see also App. B 3) where we introduced the cutoff D, temperature T and Here ρ 1,2 denote density of states of the respective bands. While g + > 0 generically for repulsive interactions, g -becomes negative for sufficiently strong interband interaction and its runaway flow signals the onset of s ± pairing. Importantly, g -< 0 can be induced dynamically by fluctations in the particle-hole channel (Kohn-Luttinger mechanism). Since the presence of a Cooper instability in Eq. ( However, a closer inspection reveals a difficulty with this line of reasoning. Each momentum space RG theory is tailormade for a specific subset of FeSC compounds with the same Fermi surface topology, as such it does not provide a generic explanation for the robustness of the transition temperature against the appearance and disappearance of electron and hole pockets. Even within a family with a fixed Fermi surface topology the critical temperature suffers from unrealistically large variations as the relative carrier concentration in different pockets changes from compound to compound. We can illustrate this with the the two-band model. Suppose we concentrate on the limit of infinite repulsions where While the robust existence of a Cooper instability in RG demonstrates an asymptotic orthogonalization against Coulomb repulsion, the microscopic on-site constraint, Eq. ( Δ (5) Δ (5) ⇒T c (A)=T c (B) 1. Schematic illustrating orbital and k-space flexibility. Here, the large space of superconducting order parameters is represented as a three dimensional space. Each direction has an associated "bare" Tc( ∆) which is determined in the fictitious case without on-site repulsion and which is represented as the distance from the origin. It varies continuously and thus forms a surface, e.g. a sphere or an ellipsoid. The orientation with maximal Tc determines the pairing state. On-site Coulomb repulsion constraints the order parameter space to a submanifold, see Eq. ( on the relative density of states δ = (ρ 1 -ρ 2 )/(ρ 1 +ρ 2 ), which leads to exponential suppression of T c = D exp[-1/g -(0)] when δ is of order unity. This strong suppression should be contrasted to the case of phononic BCS theory where, due to retardation, effects A central element of the iron based superconductors, is the orbital degrees of freedom. In general, the gap function ∆ m,m (k) ≡ mk| ∆|m k is a momentum-dependent operator in the space of orbital quantum numbers. The simplest possibility is that pairing is orbitally trivial ∆ m,m (k) = δ m,m ∆(k). Another possibility, is orbitally selective pairing In this case, the condensate wave function can not be written as a product state in the space of orbitals, and is thus orbitally entangled. Sizeable interorbital, spin singlet pairing was predicted in material specific calculations on LiFeAs Motivated by these promising arguments, which are implicitly assumed in many theories of FeSC, we present a comprehensive study of orbital and k-space flexibility as a way to solve the Coulomb problem. Our principle conclusion, based on both phenomenological arguments and microscopic calculations, is that OKF requires an internal degeneracy amongst the pairing states. The apparent absence of such a degeneracy leads to a failure of orbital flexibility, forcing us to reconsider the singlet pairing assumption, as we discuss in the conclusions. The paper is structured as follows: Section II is primarily phenomenological, and conceptually explains the Coulomb constraints and the idea of orbital and k-space flexibility. Sec. III provides a systematic classification of the superconducting matrix gap functions within the space of t 2g states and supporting, microscopic calculations. We summarize the derivation of the Landau theory and analyze a t-J model for a family of electronic structures. We conclude with a criticism and an outlook, Sec. IV, in which we discuss resolutions of the Coulomb conundrum beyond the spin-singlet s-wave channel. In this section we cast the Coulomb problem in the iron based superconductors as a phenomenological Landau theory. Leaving microscopic details, a derivation and a thorough symmetry analysis to the subsequent Sec. III, we anticipate that a real order parameter, viz. a superconducting gap ∆ Γ , can be associated to each of the many pairing channels within the subspace of spin-singlet, extended s-wave states, see also Table ] mm (Gell-Mann matrices are denoted λi). We employed the notation cx = cos(kx), sx = sin(kx) etc. for the harmonics in the unfolded tetragonal Brillouin zone. model in the tetragonal phase, symmetries impose that exactly two such order parameters are penalized by the Coulomb energy. They represent intraorbital on-site pairing, see also Eq. ( Here we use the notation Γ→ C ∈ {1, 2} to denote the two channels with repulsive Coulomb interaction U C . On the other hand, we use Γ → P = 3, 4, . . . D to denote the attractive pairing channels with interaction g P , for example s ± pairing and orbital entangled pairing. In Eq. ( The term including [χ CC ] -1 , which denotes the partial inverse in the subspace of repulsive channels, reduces the susceptibility χ P P of pairing channels and thereby suppresses T c . To illustrate these ideas, we analyze a two band model and compare to the discussion of Sec. I B. We restrict our attention to the Coulomb channel C = 1 and s ± pairing channel P = 3. In this case, the diagonal components of the pair susceptibility are where as the off-diagonal component is given approximately by corresponding to a Fermi surface sum over the electron and hole pockets. Here, δ is a parameter that measures the average of c x c y ≡ cos(k x ) cos(k y ) over the two compensating Fermi surface pockets, weighted by the density of states. This quantity vanishes when the density of states of the electron and hole pockets are fully compensated, but it grows to a number of order unity when either the electron or hole pockets are shrunk to zero. (Note that in a 2D band with strict quadratic dispersion, the density of states is independent of Fermi surface size, and in this extreme case δ only becomes sizeable at the Lifshitz transition where one Fermi surface vanishes.) The condition for T c is then given by which gives Thus once the cancellation between the electron and hole pockets is removed, the effect of the Coulomb interaction is to suppress the effective coupling constant gρ → gρ(1 -δ 2 ), producing an exponential depression in the transition temperature. Yet experimentally, the elimination of the hole pockets in iron selenides produces no significant reduction in T c . Note that this same result We conclude this section with a comment on the incipient band scenario: It has been demonstrated, that bands which do not cross the Fermi level but reside within a distance D in energy space facilitate superconductivity The Landau energy has the following salient features: First, the quadratic part of the attractive channels is determined by a matrix which is positive definite for T > T c and has lowest eigenvalue proportional to (T -T c )/T 2 c , its associated eigenvector ê determining the direction of the instability in channel space. Second, in order to avoid the energetically cost of Coulomb repulsion, the on-site pair density, i.e. Gor'kov function, must vanish. Expanding F m,m (k) in s-wave channels, Eq. ( implies a reduction of the χ P P susceptibility, see also Eq. ( We shall make two assumptions about the vectors χ 1P ,χ 2P and the matrix (T ). First, both vectors and (T ) are highly susceptible to changes in the electronic structure, in particular the Fermi surface geometry. Second, χ 1P = 0 = χ 2P if the order parameter in pairing channel P transforms according to a different representation than s-wave even-frequency (e.g. if P was a d-wave channel). In this case Eq. ( The appeal of the OKF concept, lies in the observation that while there may be several attractive pairing channels, there are only two Coulomb constraints Eq. In order to further develop this idea we first consider the case in which the lowest eigenvalue of the matrix (T ) is almost degenerate, i.e. just below T c there are a number of nearby superconducting instabilities corresponding to a sequence of small eigenvalues proportional to (T -T T c . If the degeneracy is sufficiently large, changes to T c will remain small even though the vector space of allowed states perpendicular to χ 1P , χ 2P would undergo a large-scale rotation when the electronic structure changes from compound to compound. The above discussion demonstrates the potential of the OKF mechanism to overcome the Coulomb repulsion by exploitating the large manifold of degenerate pairing states (see Fig. In the previous section, the concept of OKF was qualitatively elaborated on the level of a phenomenological Landau theory. In this section, we provide quantitative aspects regarding the large multitude of pairing states, i.e. the fundamental ingredient for OKF, in iron-based superconductors. We will focus on the three t 2g -orbitals in a purely 2D model, though our discussion can be simply extended to a more general setup. We first provide a symmetry classification of states and then present a microscopic calculation. The matrix gap function ∆(k) can naturally be expanded in irreducible representations of the point group Here, λ i are the Gell-Mann matrices (see Appendix A 4). A comprehensive classification Point group operations, such as a π rotation in the iron plane k → R π k = (-k x , -k y , k z ), are represented by unitary matrices in orbital space, e.g. U Rπ = diag(-1, -1, 1). We adopt a convention in which the orbitals are placed in the order m = (1, 2, 3) ≡ (d xz , d yz , d xy ). Assuming the order parameter has overall s-wave symmetry, it must remain invariant under the crystal transformations, Still, non-trivial (e.g. B 1g ) form factors φ Γ (k) are possible, as long as the transformation behavior of associated Gell-Mann matrices λ i(Γ) compensates the transformation behavior of φ Γ (k). In Table A BCS description of the interactions in these various channels then takes the form where we use C ≡ Γ C to denote the repulsive Coulomb channels and P ≡ Γ C to denote the attractive pairing channels. The pair creation operators take the form where the sum is over an energy shell | k | ≤ D around the Fermi surface. We typically carry out a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation of the repulsive and attractive interactions, so that the interactions can be written in a mean-field form (24) This kind of transformation is carried out with the understanding that inside the path integral, the Coulomb gap variables are integrated along the imaginary axis ∆ C ∈ [-i∞, i∞], but that in a mean-field theory, we can distort the contour and seek a saddle point solution where the ∆ C lie on the real axis. The combined set of order parameters ∆ Γ = (∆ C , ∆ P ) then form a D dimensional real vector. We are particularly interested in the limit where the U C → ∞ are large enough to neglect the second term. In this case, the saddle point values of the ∆ C (C=1,2) play the role of Lagrange multipliers that impose the Coulomb constraints Ψ C = 0 (C=1,2), equivalent to conditions The derivation of the Landau free energy follows from the integration of fermionic degrees of freedom. The generic form for the pair susceptibility matrix entering Eq. ( where n is the band-index and the are the form-factors of the pairing matrices in the band-basis. The interband (n = n ) parts of these matrices are weakly temperature dependent. However, the intra-band parts (n = n ) contain a Cooper-instability divergence where where ρ n is the density of states for the n-th Fermi surface and . . . F S represents the corresponding Fermi surface average. In this section we investigate our findings by means of a microscopic t-J model (without a constraint on the occupancy) treated to the mean field level. In addition to the on-site interaction (3) we consider nearest neighbor antiferromagnetic coupling J 1 and next nearest neighbor antiferromagnetic coupling J 2 , We note that inter-orbital magnetic interactions are not uncommon, e.g. perfectly Hund's aligned antiferromagnetic interaction can be expected to be of the form JS total,1 •S total,2 = J( m S m,1 ) • ( m S m ,2 ) projected onto the strong Hund's subspace. In Appendix B 1, we project the interactions on the space of spin singlet pairing. The magnetic interactions generate Cooper channel attraction in extended s-wave and, for concreteness, we assume that Cooper instabilities occur only in channels Γ = 3 -5, so that the effective Landau free energy, and repulsions due to crystal symmetries. In Fig. and Fermi surfaces with the orbital content and geometry analogous to those x = -1 to (∆ 3 , ∆ 4 , ∆ 5 ) ∝ (-0.97, -0.03, 0.24) at x = 0.7, the position of optimal electron doping, see Fig. A key result of our investigation of the effects of onsite Coulomb interactions in the iron-based superconductors, is that observation that Coulomb repulsion enforces two constraints on the condensate, forcing two on-site, equal-time pairing amplitudes to vanish, see Eq. We attempted to provide a way out of this conundrum, examining a hypothesis that pairing within a large class of or-bitally entangled singlet states allows the condensate the orbital and k-space flexibility (OKF) to "rotate" into new configurations that satisfy the Coulomb constraint in new Fermi surface morphologies. We encountered a number of unresolved issues with the OKF approach: 1. OKF requires that the lowest eigenvalues of the matrix (T ) must be almost degenerate, see Sec. II. [54] 2. From a microscopic weak-coupling viewpoint, different Fermi surface geometries lead to different pair susceptibility matrices. Therefore, even if the lowest eigenvalue of (T ) was largely degenerate for a given compound, it is unlikely to be so in another. This would lead to dramatic variations in T c from compound to compound, see Fig. 3. Concerning k-space flexibility, one would like to concentrate on states involving only the first few harmonics, since higher harmonics require long-distance interactions. This substantially reduces the dimension D of the order parameter space. Finally, it is worth mentioning that a linear increase in the lowest eigenvalue of implies an exponential decrease of T c within microscopic weak-coupling theories, due to the logarithmic Cooper instability. These arguments suggest that orbital and k-space flexibility is unable to explain the robustness of T c against Coulomb repulsion in the zoo of FeSC. Our microscopic calculations leading to Fig. In the present analysis, only Cooper channel instabilities were considered in a simple mean field treatment. More generally particle-hole channels should also be taken into account. As we mentioned in the introduction and in Sec. I B, while the mutual renormalizations of particle-hole and particle-particle channels can provide a mechanism to reverse the sign of Coulomb interaction near the scale of the superconducting instability, the results are still highly sensitive to the Fermi surface morphology and the pattern of bare repulsive interaction values What alternative mechanisms for robustly avoiding the Coulomb problem might be at work across the full range of iron-based superconductors? One possibility we are forced to reconsider, is that pairing in the FeSC is not primarily driven by extended s-wave, spin singlet pairing, but that it involves a symmetry-protected orthogonalization against Coulomb interaction. One way forward is to explore higher angular momentum states in the spin singlet channel. Many proposals in the literature have examined d-wave The common observation of full excitation gaps remains an open issue for higher angular momentum states (see Ref. Since the chalcogen/pnictogen atoms are ordered above and below the iron plane in an alternating manner, the system has a two-atom unit cell which in iron-only models shows up as staggered hopping elements. We choose the origin on an iron site for the lattice model represented by and a C 4 rotation symmetry (A6) Here we have introduced a set of three inversion operators ( Px , Py , Pz ) which respectively reverse the x, y and z components of momentum, and a rotation Rπ/2 : (k x , k y , k z ) → (k y , -k x , k z ). Often, superconducting order parameters are assumed to be an even function of frequency (in most cases a constant). We denote such states by a "+" in the subscript of the order parameter F ωn,k,+ and gap ∆ ωn,k,+ . According to Eqs. (A3),(A4) these matrix functions transform in the same manner as the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian under crystal and time reversal symmetries. It is convenient to expand the order parameter matrix by means of Gell-Mann matrices (see Appendix A 4) k , see Eq. (A7), which are even under ωn → -ωn but odd under k → -k and transposition in orbital space. The notation is the same as in Table Odd frequency components A frequency independent gap function ∆(k)τ x thus generates an odd frequency anomalous Green's function proportional to τ y . Analogously to the even frequency case we classify the components of the pair amplitude The transformation behavior of all components is presented in tables VI and VII, where the former (latter) table is devoted to states which are even (odd) under spatial inversion and odd (even) under transposition in the matrix space of orbitals. We note that, in a purely 2D model, the coefficients of all Gell-Mann matrices but λ 2,4,6 vanish by symmetry. ωn,k,-, see Eq. (A9), which are odd under ωn → -ωn and under transposition in orbtial space, but even under spatial inversion. The notation is the same as in Table -0 0 + + 0 0 - ωn,k,-, see Eq. (A9), which are odd under ωn → -ωn and k → -k but even in orbital space. The notation is the same as in Table The Gell-Mann Matrices are and These matrices are a complete basis set of the Lie algebra u(3) which are orthonormal under the trace form trλ i λ j = 2δ ij . This appendix includes details on microscopic interactions. 1. Effective interaction in the Cooper channel. We will consider only the spin singlet channel in which we define These Cooper pair operators have the property . By means of these operators, Eqs. ( where the superscripts (S) ((A)) denote symmetry (antisymmetry) under k → -k where Ū = U + 3 2 J H,1 . Assuming s-wave pairing and exploiting the crystal symmetries in Eq. (B2a) we obtain . In view of the low power of trigonometric functions, we readily see that only short range pairing is induced. We obtain where and V We note that we only need the s-wave part for i = 0, 8, dwave part for i = 1, 3 and p-wave part for i = 5, 7. Thus Coulomb repulsion only affects channels i = 0, 8. This directly leads to the interactions g C entering the Landau free energy in Eq. Without repeating details, we replot the Fermi surfaces as suggested by the three orbital tight binding model is the set of Pauli matrices in the space of yz and xy orbitals and I β,0 is unity in this space. An analogous term may be obtained at the γ pocket by a π/2 rotation, we do not report it here. We consider a simpler model than (B9) For simplicity we assume ρ h1 = ρ h2 ≡ ρ h in Fig. In this appendix, we briefly recapitulate the RG treatment of a two-band model Here we used that u * -k,n = u k,n . For the two band case the situation simplifies as (u † k,n λ i u k,n ) → 1. In band space, Cooper interactions take the form As mentioned, for pure Coulomb interaction, G nn ∝ U (independently of n, n ). Clearly, the ladder RG describing only particle-particle logarithms (assuming non-degenerate bands) leads to 