Chemical vapor deposition synthesis of single-walled carbon nanotubes experiments, using Fe catalyst, and alternating methane and carbon monoxide as carbon feedstocks, lead to the reversible formation of junctions between tubes of different diameters. Combined with an atomistic modeling of the tube / catalyst interface, this shows that the ratio of diameters of the tube and its seeding particle, denoting the growth mode, depends on the carbon fraction inside the catalyst. With carbon monoxide, nanoparticles are strongly carbon enriched, and tend to dewet the tube, in a perpendicular growth mode. Cross-checking our results with available reports from the literature of the last decade strongly suggests that these latter conditions should favor the near armchair chiral selectivity observed empirically. Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs), among which singlewalled ones (SWNTs) are most promising, have now reached a high level of maturity. A number of applications based on SWNTs outstanding electronic properties, such as transparent conductive films A pair of indices (n, m) defines the tube structure, -its "chirality", or more properly, its "helicity" -, and electronic properties. Starting with the pioneering work introducing the CoMoCAT catalyst In this paper, we show experimentally that a rational control of the tube growth mode, introduced by Fiawoo et al. The Fe catalyst was prepared by hydrolysis of anhydrous ferric chloride in boiling water IN FE-BASED CVD SYNTHESIS. Tubes were grown at 1073 K using two different CVD reactors. The first one is a horizontal furnace, described in This preference for near armchair selectivity is even more pronounced in experiments using a floating catalyst CVD setup A second important step is to show that growth modes can be reversibly switched by alternating CO and CH 4 feedstocks, thus ruling out any change of the catalyst as a cause for the SWNT diameter change. To this end, surface bound CVD experiments with Fe at 1073 K were performed, alternating CO and CH 4 feedstocks (approximately 1 min each, up to 15 switches). Using previous data as control experiments, we could check that diameters obtained with each feedstock were in the same range, using either a single feedstock, or alternating both. Figure It is important to notice that the diameter alternation along SWNT junctions is reversible (Figure Similar results were also reported by Hosmani et al. Our previous studies of carbon solubility in nickel nanoparticles SWNT synthesis experiments were performed, using Fe catalyst, and either CH 4 or CO as carbon feedstocks, coupled with systematic HR-TEM analysis of the link between the tubes and the NP from which they grew. Electron diffraction analysis of a few hundred tubes allowed for an unambiguous assignment of the tubes (n, m) index. With CO feedstock, tubes were grown in perpendicular mode, and a close to armchair preference was observed, for both supported and floating catalyst CVD, while those with CH 4 were closer to tangential mode, and displayed no selectivity. These different behaviors regarding selectivity was already noticed by He et al. Indeed, on the basis of our present investigations, and revisiting a number of published results, we suggest that a key to achieve a higher degree of chiral selectivity is to promote a perpendicular growth mode, with an interface between the tube and its seeding particle limited to a line. In the case of catalysts displaying a significant carbon solubility and a moderate melting temperature, such as Fe, Co or Ni, this is achieved by tuning the degree of carburization of the nanoparticle, via the choice of the appropriate feedstock and growth (P, T) conditions. Under such conditions, a near armchair selectivity can be obtained. Although not explicitly stated as such, it appears that perpendicular growth mode is also observed or assumed for Co 7 W 6 Growing tubes in perpendicular growth modes somewhat alleviates these constraints, while putting more emphasis on the perpendicular contact between the tube and the catalyst. Under such conditions, the choice and the preparation of the catalyst appears as a key step for mastering the tube's structure during the growth. In this context, we should note that new promising nanoparticles synthesis techniques for bimetallic catalysts based on the use of Prussian blue analogs have been devel-oped to produce a wide range of homogenous bimetallic catalyst nanoparticles with controlled stoichiometry and sizes 