High pressure serves as a path finding tool towards novel structures, including those with very high Tc. The superconductivity in sulfur hydrides with record value of Tc =203 K (!) is caused by the phonon mechanism. However, the picture differs from the conventional one in important ways. The phonon spectrum in sulfur hydride is both broad and has a complex structure. High value of T c is mainly due to strong coupling to the high-frequency optical modes, although the acoustic phonons also make a noticeable contribution. New approach is described; it generalizes the standard treatment of the phonon mechanism and makes it possible to obtain an analytical expression for Tc . It turns out that, unlike in the conventional case, the value of the isotope coefficient varies with the pressure and reflects the impact of the optical modes. The phase diagram, that is the pressure dependence of Tc, is rather peculiar. A crucial feature is that increasing pressure results in a series of structural transitions, including the one, which yields the superconducting phase with the record Tc . In a narrow region near P≈150 GPa the critical temperature rises sharply from Tc ≈120K to Tc ≈200K. The sharp structural transition, which produces the high Tc phase, is a first-order phase transition caused by interaction between the order parameter and lattice deformations. A remarkable feature of the electronic spectrum in the high Tc phase is the appearance of small pockets at the Fermi level. Their presence leads to a two-gap spectrum, which can, in principle, be observed, with the future use of tunneling spectroscopy. This feature leads to non-monotonic and strongly asymmetric pressure dependence of Tc. Other hydrides can be expected to display even higher values of Tc, up to room temperature. The fundamental challenge lays in creation a structure capable of displaying high Tc at ambient pressure. I. Introduction II. Hydrides A. Metallic hydrogen B. Superconductivity in hydrides: main properties III. Electron-phonon interaction. Critical temperature A. Main equations. The coupling constant and T c . B. Function α 2 (Ω)F(Ω). Tunneling spectroscopy IV. Sulfur hydrides A. Phonon spectra and electron-phonon interaction B. Generalized equation and two coupling constants. C. Critical temperatures for different phases V. Isotope effect VI. Energy spectrum in the high T c phase: two-gap structure and non-monotonic behavior of T c A. Structural transitions. High T c phase. B. The "Migdal" criterion and small pockets C. Broad bands and small pockets D. Two-gap spectrum. Slow decrease in T c at P>P cr. VII. Other hydrides A. Calcium hydride; MgH 6 B. Palladium hydride C. Organic hydrides D. Transition of ice under high pressure and by doping VIII. Main challenges. under high pressure We focus below on theoretical aspects, which can provide a clue to understanding the specifics of the new superconducting state. It should be emphasized that in many respects the system is quite unusual. As will be discussed below, the observed phenomenon can be explained by the phonon mechanism. Nevertheless, a number of T C key features reveal that the picture differs from the conventional one. In this Colloquium we devote particular attention to these features. One of them is the peculiar pressure dependence of the critical temperature. Not only does external pressure result in metallization and the appearance of superconductivity, but also the value of T c grows dramatically with a further rise in pressure. Moreover, this variation turns out to be non-monotonic. It also should be noted that while Cooper pairs formation is mediated by phonons, the complex structure of the phonon spectrum and its broad range (all the way up to Ω≈2000 K, where Ω is the phonon frequency) makes it necessary to modify the conventional treatment. While the strong isotope effect affirms the action of the phonon mechanism, the value of the isotope coefficient turns out to vary with pressure. Below we discuss all these interesting aspects of the new development in superconductivity. Despite its rich and interesting prehistory, the discovery came as a surprise, especially for those who accept the notion that electronphonon interaction cannot give rise to such a high T c . The background of this notion will be discussed below (Sec. IIIA). One also should not lose track of the fact that this impressive discovery came about thanks to the remarkable progress in high-pressure technique and to experimental innovations by the M.Eremets group (Max Planck Institute, Mainz, Germany ). One should stress also that the study of the hydrides has attracted an attention of many theoretical groups (see below,Ch.3). One should give a special credit to the group of Y.Ma and also to D.Duan, T.Cui and their collaborators (Julin University, Changchun, China) (see below,Chs.III,VII). Their remarkable studies brought a special attention to the sulfur hydrides and motivated the key experimental studies. A few remarks on the historical perspective are in order. The phenomenon of superconductivity was discovered more than one hundred years ago by H. Kamerlingh Onnes The microscopic theory of superconductivity was created by The well-known expression for the critical temperature is Here ! Ω is the characteristic phonon frequency (typically on the order of the Debye temperature), λ is the electron-phonon coupling constant, and μ* is the so-called Coulomb pseudopotential which characterizes the direct electron-electron repulsion (usually μ*≈0.1-0.15). Eq.(1.1) is valid in the weak coupling approximation (λ<<1) . Note that the specific value of the pre-exponential factor is determined by the renormalization effect (see below,Sec.IIIA). The search for superconducting materials with higher critical temperatures has been ongoing. Subsequent research on cuprates raised their T c all the way up to 130 K in the HgBaCaCuO compound As noted in the Introduction, recent work on sulfur hydrides under high pressure led to the observation of a superconducting state with the record value of T c =203K . This achievement was preceded by developments, which started almost fifty years ago According to the BCS theory, T c is proportional to the characteristic phonon frequency ! Ω ∝1 / M [see Eq.(1.1)]. One may expect, therefore, that metallic hydrogen should have a high value of T c : for such a light metal the characteristic phonon frequency in the prefactor of Eq.(1.1) is high and (ignoring for the moment the magnitude of the exponential factor) T c may also turn out to be rather high. However, this prediction can be verified only under very high pressure. Indeed, hydrogen first must become metallic, but the transition from the molecular phase into the metallic state is known to require high pressure A conductive (probably, semimetalic ) state of hydrogen was observed by The phase diagram for hydrogen is rather complicated (Fig. The diagram in Fig. These properties are characteristic of the metallic state. As concerns the superconducting state of metallic hydrogen, theoretical calculations The reasoning for an elevated value of T c outlined above applies not only to pure hydrogen but also to hydrides, that is, to materials containing hydrogen as one of their components A number of density-functional theory studies supported the high promise of hydride compounds. For example, calculations Initial experiments on SiH 4 In 2014 Li et al. made the remarkable prediction that metallic sulfur hydride would become superconducting with T c ≈80 K under the relatively low pressure P≈100 GPa . Following the first experimental observation of such a superconducting state, Eremets and his collaborators continued increasing the pressure and discovered that T c goes up significantly all the way to T c ≈203 K The transformation H 2 S! H 3 S also has been confirmed by detailed calculations by Sulfur hydride at the pressure P≈90GPa has T c ≈90 K. As mentioned above, the subsequent increase in pressure leads to a large increase in the value of the critical temperature up to T c ≈200 K. This pressure dependence implies that the presence of hydrogen is necessary but not sufficient by itself for reaching the highest T c values. Indeed, the sample at 90 GPa contains hydrogen and consequently high frequency modes. The T c of 90 K is very high and would be sensational 30 years ago, but it is much below the 203 K that is achieved under higher pressure. Therefore the pressure increase brings in some additional factors. As mentioned above, As will be described below, the pressure increase changes the crystal structure of sulfur hydride, thereby signifying a structural phase transition. The structural transformation plays the phase Im-3m. From Below we focus on the two phases with the highest values of T c (Fig. The usual X-rays spectroscopy does not allow to determine the structure of the hydrides with a high accuracy, because the light H ions do not provide strong scattering. In addition, the multiphase nature of the studied samples Experimentally, the onset of the high T c superconducting state in sulfur hydrides The critical temperature shifts downward in the presence of an external magnetic field. Magnetic susceptibility measurements reveal an abrupt transition into the diamagnetic state (the Meissner effect). This key result was also confirmed by a direct observation Below we concentrate on the two phases with the highest T c . One of them (R3m; Fig. phase." The question of the mechanism of superconductivity with such a record T c is of fundamental interest. The strong isotope effect indicates that pairing is provided by phonon exchange. The main contribution comes from the high-frequency optical modes. Nevertheless, as stressed in the Introduction, the picture is far from conventional. The phase diagram, that is, the pressure dependence of T c is very peculiar. Indeed, Fig. Note also that because of the complex structure and the width of the phonon spectrum evaluation of T c and of the isotope coefficient (whose value turns out to be pressure-dependent) must be carried out with considerable care. The next chapter contains a general description of the phonon mechanism with emphasis on the strong coupling case. Subsequent chapters focus on the challenges described above. A. Main equations. Coupling constant and T c. Our main goal is to evaluate the value of the critical temperature for the hydrides. The usual BCS model is not applicable here ,because it has been developed in a weak coupling approximation ( λ<<1 and correspondingly, 2πT c << ! Ω ). The equations describing strong-coupled superconductors The equation for the pairing order parameter Δ(ω n ) has the form: Here is the phonon propagator, Ω is the phonon frequency, ω n =(2n+1)πT c (the method of thermodynamic Green's functions is employed; see, e.g., The renormalization function describes the "dressing" of electrons moving through the ionic lattice. Eqs.(3.1),(3.3) contain the important quantity, the function Here F(Ω) is the phonon density of states, α 2 (Ω) describes the electron-phonon interaction and contains the corresponding matrix element (See e.g., In addition, one can introduce an important parameter, so-called coupling constant λ, defined by the relation: Note that Eqs. (3.1), (3.3) do not explicitly contain the coupling constant λ. Indeed, generally speaking, this constant cannot be factored out, because the phonon frequency enters not only in the factor α 2 Ω ( ) F Ω ( ) but also in the phonon propagator D(ω n -ω m ) , which, in addition, depends on ω n -ω m (see Eq. in the denominator of the integrand. Such an equation describes the order parameter at any temperature ( then ω n =(2n+1)πT).The calculation can be performed numerically ,without invoking the coupling constant concept. We will discuss the corresponding method below (Sec. IVA) while focusing on the sulfur hydrides. At the same time the possibility to introduce the coupling constant, λ ,is very beneficial for the analysis. The concept of coupling constant is commonly used to study usual superconductors. It allows one to deduce the analytical expressions for T c and interpret its dependences on other parameters in the problem. Such an approach is justified, because usually the function α 2 Ω ( ) F Ω ( ) is characterized by the peak structure in phonon density of states F(Ω) (see, e.g. , ( ) F Ω ( ) ; λ is defined by Eq.(3.4). As a result, Eqs.( 3.1 ),(3.3) can be written in the form D is defined by Eq.(3.2) and As is known, the solution of the equation (3.5) can be written in analytical form and the explicit expression depends on the strength of the electron-phonon interaction (see the review by This expression is valid for λ ! < 1.5. Note that for small λ Eq. (3.8) can be written in the form similar to Eq. (1.1) with a ≈ 0.3 ! Ω , which is close to the value mentioned above. For larger values of λ one should use the different expression, which was obtained by numerical modification of Eq. (3.8) (see In addition, one can introduce the following important relation (I describes the electron-phonon scattering, ν is the electronic density of states) The important question is whether there exists an upper limit of the value of T c . A "myth", which persists even today, claims that the phonon mechanism is unable to provide the values of the critical temperature higher that ∼30K. For some scientists the argumentation Another erroneous restriction was imposed not on the dependence of T c on λ (see above), but on the limiting value of the coupling constant itself. In the framework of the so-called Froelich Hamiltonian : Ĥ = Ĥel + Ĥ ph + Ĥint ,where Ĥ ph contains the phonon frequency Ω 0 q ( ) and Ĥint describes the electron-phonon interaction, one obtains for the frequency ! Ω ,renormalized by the electron-phonon interaction, the expression: 1/2 .One would conclude that the lattice becomes unstable at value of the coupling constant =0.5, and therefore the value T c ≤ 0.1 ! Ω (see Eq.(1.1), ! Ω ≈ Ω D ) provides the upper limit of the critical temperature. At the same time, as we know, there exist many superconductors with λ > 0.5 (e.g., Sn, Pb, Hg ). To clarify this point, an analysis, based on rigorous adiabatic theory was carried out ( Brovman and Starting from the adiabatic theory with the Hamiltonian The tunneling contact contains two electrodes, separated by a barrier. For the most interesting case of the S-I-N system (S stands for a superconductor, N for a normal metal, and I for an insulator),one can obtain the following relation Here σ s is the tunneling conductivity; σ s =∂j/∂V, j is the tunneling current, and V is the applied voltage;Δ(ω) corresponds to the analytical continuation of Δ(ω n ) to re al axis ; σ N is the conductivity for the N-I-N junction .The value of the energy gap ε 0 is determined by the relation ω = Δ iω ( ) . The quantity σ s / σ n can be measured experimentally (see The special inversion procedure, allowing to reconstruct the functionα 2 Ω ( ) F Ω ( ) and the value of μ* was developed by McMillan and Rowell (see, e.g., Let us now turn our attention to the material of interest, sulfur hydride. As was noted above, the Cooper pairing in the superconducting state is provided by the electron-phonon interaction and the main role is played by high frequency optical modes; this mechanism is manifested in the large value of the isotope coefficient for substitution of deuterium for hydrogen (see below, Ch. ) In principle, the value of the critical temperature can be evaluated with help of Eqs. (3.1),(3.3),which contain the function α 2 Ω ( ) F Ω ( ) . As mentioned above, the tunneling measurements allowing to reconstruct this function have not been performed yet. Instead ,we use results of the calculations carried out by several groups. For example, Fig. For comparison, one can see the pictures for Pb, the conventional superconductor (Fig. One can see from Fig. As mentioned above (Sec. IIIA), the value of the critical temperature can be found without invoking the coupling constant concept in the denominator of the integrand. This equation is valid at any temperature. The value of T c was calculated from such a non-linear equation by successive approximations. With each iteration the value of order parameter decreases, and T c was identified as the point (after up to 512 iterations) where the order parameter approaches zero. According As was noticed in the previous section, the concept of the coupling constant was very fruitful for studying conventional superconductors. Similar approach was used by Eq.(4.1) is similar to Eq.(3.8), but the pre-exponential factor is multiplied by the product f 1 f 2 ; the functions f 1 and f 2 are numerically fit for the solution valid at larger and have a form: The large value of the constant for the coupling to characteristic phonon frequency leads to a high T c close to that observed experimentally. The phonon spectrum of the sulfur hydrides is broad and rather complex: it contains a number of optical and acoustic branches. On the other hand, these branches are well separated, and this separation allows us to develop different approach, which will be described in the next section. In the more general approach (Gor'kov and Kresin,2016) the value of T c was evaluated analytically. As will be shown, it allows us to compare the relative contributions of the optical and acoustic modes for different parts of the phase diagram. Here The critical temperature must be calculated with the use of Eq. (4.2). This equation is the generalization of Eq.(3.5) for the presence of two phonon groups , the acoustic and optical modes. Let us assume that in the high-T c phase (Im-3m) λ opt. ≫ λ ac . We also suppose that λ opt ! < 1.5 . As will be shown below, these conditions are indeed satisfied. Then from Eqs. (4.2) and (4.2') one can obtain expression for T c in an analytical form and, hence, . evaluate the value of the critical temperature for the sulfur hydrides. Let us write T c as and assume that ΔT c ac << T c 0 . Based on Eq.( For , one can use the McMillan-Dynes expression (Eq.(3.8)), which is valid for λ opt ! < 1.5: One can use the close expression, obtained analytically by As is known that the coefficients in the Eq.( Indeed, by neglecting μ * for simplicity, one can write Eqs.(4.5),(4.6) in the form: T c ≈Aexp(-1/λ opt ), with close values of the pre-exponential factor. For ordinary superconductors the values of the coupling constants and μ* (usually μ*≈ 0.1 ÷ 0.15) can be determined from tunneling spectroscopy measurements (see, e.g., The fact that the coupling constant λ opt in the cubic phase is so large is the key factor underlying the observed high T c ≈ 203 K. Qualitatively, this comes about due to the ability of sulfur to retain several hydrogen atoms in its proximity, that is, to the presence of many light ligands near the S atoms. There are six (!) ligands in the high phase (see Fig. To demonstrate the importance of this point, let us evaluate the value of T c for the "low T c " phase (R3m structure). One can see from Fig. 6a With ! Ω opt ≈ 105meV , ! Ω ac ≈ 26meV The transition into the high T c phase is accompanied by redistribution of interaction of electrons with optical phonons and their interaction with acoustic branches. This re-distribution is manifested in an increase in a number of hydrogen ligands, caused by the structural transition. This is a key factor determining record high value of T c . Dividing the phonon spectrum and, correspondingly, the electron-phonon interaction in two parts, turns out to be rather fruitful. First of all, the value of λ opt is within the range of applicability of Eq. (4.4). Moreover, one can evaluate the relative contribution of the optical and acoustic branches of the phonon spectrum to T c . For the high T c phase the contribution from the optical phonons comprises ~80% and only ~20% is due to the acoustic part. The impact of acoustic phonons is noticeably smaller than that of optical branches (45K vs. 170K), but still is essential. The method proposed above can be of relevance for other materials as well. A promising example is calcium hydride, CaH 6 (see below, Sec. VIIA ). It is known that for a number of superconductors the value of the electron-phonon coupling constant is large. Among them Pb (λ≈1.55), Hg (λ≈1.6), AmPb 0.45 Bi 0.55 (λ≈2.6), see, e.g., According to Observation of this isotope effect is of fundamental importance, since it proves (a) that the high T c state is caused by the electron-phonon interaction, and (b) that namely the high frequencies hydrogen modes determine the value of T c . Indeed, the optical modes are mainly due to motion of hydrogen, whereas for the acoustic modes the participation of sulfur ions prevails. Therefore the magnitude of the isotope shift for the deuterium for hydrogen substitution reflects indirectly the relative contributions of the each group (the optical vs. acoustic ones) into the observed T c . Defining the isotope coefficient via the relation T c ∝ M -α one can obtain the following expression for α (see,e.g.,Gor'kov and Kresion,2016): Since the deuterium substitution affects the optical modes, one can write the expression (5.1 ) in the form ( in the harmonic approximation; then ! Ω ∝ M -1/2 ): The value of the isotope coefficient in the high T c phase can be calculated with use of Eqs. (4.4) and (5.2). As a result, we obtain: Ω opt ≈450K ,we obtain α≈0.35 , in a good agreement with the experimental data in Fig. One should use the different expression, Eq.( 4.7), for T c in the "low T c " phase. Then, with use of Eq.( As was mentioned above (Sec. IIB) , at low pressures a formation of the H 3 S phase occurs (see Eq. (2.1)). According to In other words, we are dealing with the coexistence of phases and the percolation scenario, so the percolation threshold corresponds to formation of the so-called infinite cluster, that is, to the metallic state. As a result and the R3m phase contains some inclusions. Then one can expect the pressure dependence of the isotope coefficient inside of the R3m phase. Note that the usual analytical derivation of the value of the isotope coefficient is carried out under the assumption that the ionic mass is The value of the isotope coefficient in the high T c phase is relatively large and it reflects the fact that the pairing in this phase is dominated by the optical H-modes, whereas in the "low T c " phase the contributions of the optical and acoustic modes are comparable. The impact of the isotopic substitution in the region of smaller T c is weaker than in the high T c phase. A smaller α is in agreement with the larger role played by the optical phonons in the cubic high T c phase Notice that the value of can be affected by the anharmonicity A. Structural transition. High T c phase. As was mentioned above, the pressure dependence of is highly asymmetric relative to its maximum value T c;max =203K. The value of T c ≈120K at P≈125GPa sharply increases to T c ≈200K at P≈150GPa ≈203K . The appearance of the two-gap spectrum is an important ingredient of the picture (see below, Sec VIC) According to the band structure calculations Meanwhile, the calculations also revealed the presence in the high-phase of small Fermi-pockets. The importance of their existence was emphasized by Note, however, that the analysis of the electron-phonon mediated pairing on pockets should be carried out with a considerable care. Let us discuss this point in more details. The complex structure of the Fermi surface with small pockets emerging in addition to several large Fermi sheets is not uncommon for many novel superconductors such, for instance, as the high-T c oxides , low-dimensional organic conductors, the so-called heavy fermions (see, e.g., The main equation, Eq. (3.1) is valid if the so-called adiabatic Migdal,1958, see also review by Migdal Therefore, the inequality ! Ω << E F allows us neglect the higher order corrections . If Ω ! > E F one should include the contribution of all higher terms . But the rigorous calculations of even the second term The case of the weak electron-phonon coupling (λ<<1) is the exception (see The condition ! Ω / E F ( ) << 1 is satisfied for most conventional superconductors, since in usual metals the Fermi energy is large compared with the Debay energy E F >> ! Ω ≈ Ω D . However, this is not the case for pockets in the sulfur hydrides, since for these materials the characteristic frequency of optical modes ! Ω opt ≈ 1.5 -2 ( ) 100meV , whereas the Fermi energy of a pocket is of order ≈ (40-50) meV. The electron-phonon interaction on the pockets can be rigorously treated only in the case of weak coupling, that is, if the corresponding coupling constant λ P <<1. The calculated spectrum of electrons display small pockets only inside of the high-T c phase and it may be tempting to relate the high value of T c to the appearance of the pockets At this point it is worth noting that the calculations of T c performed assuming the prevailing role of the large bands and sufficiently strong coupling are in a good agreement with the experimental data (see Ch. IV), so that there is no special need for modifying the picture. Besides of that, if one is trying to assign the leading role to pockets, then it is clear that the on-pocket interactions should be rather strong in order to provide high T c . However, in this case the rigorous treatment is not known, because of the violation of the Migdal theorem (see above). On the other hand, if the main contributions into the interaction were coming from the large bands, then the contribution of the pockets could be assumed weak, and the case can be analyzed self-consistently. Note also-and this is a strong argument-that if the leading role of pockets were due to a peak in their density of states ,this would produce a pre-factor in the expression for T c of an electronic origin. However, such a pre-factor cannot depend on the ionic mass, in the strong contradiction with the observed isotope effect Each band has its own set of the Cooper pairs. Since a single pair is formed by two electrons with equal and opposite momenta, one can neglect pairing between electrons belonging to different bands. Indeed, in general, the electrons on the Fermi level, which belong to different bands, have different values of the momenta. However, in the two-band model, the absence of the interband pairing does not mean that the pairing within each band is insensitive to the presence of the other band. Indeed, the presence of the second band gives rise to an additional pairing channel. Namely, the electron originally located on the first band can radiate phonon and make the virtual transition into the second band. The second electron can absorb the phonon and also make transition into second band forming the pair the first electron. Therefore, owing to the interband electron-phonon scattering the on-the-pocket electrons can form the Cooper pairs on the large Fermi surface and vice versa. Let us stress one important point. As noted above, the two gap model was introduced shortly after the creation of the BCS theory. Nevertheless, the two gap phenomenon has not been essential for the conventional superconductors. This is due to the large coherence length; more specifically, the inequality l<< ξ ( l is the mean free path) ,which hold for usual superconductors , leads to the averaging caused by the interband impurity scattering. As a result ,the two gap picture is washed out and the usual one gap picture is applicable. The two-gap spectrum was observed for the first time in the Nb-doped SrTiO 3 system At the formulation of the two-gap model for the high-T c phase of sulfur hydrides one can introduce three coupling constants: , responsible for strong electron-phonon interactions on the large band , <<1 ( weak coupling on the pockets), and λ LP <<1, describing the transitions from large band electrons to the pairing The two-gap spectrum and its evolution with pressure, including the decrease in the amplitude of the second gap at P>P cr must be confirmed by future tunneling experiments. The presence of the second energy gap will be manifested as the second peak in the density of states. S-H system appears to be the first hydride, which displays record high value of T c. We described above (Ch.II) the development of the field. Let us discuss here several other studied hydrides, which display interesting and promising properties. As was emphasized in the Introduction and Ch.IV, the theoretical studies containing predictions of specific hydrides along with values of T c and the pressures, deserve a special credit. In this Chapter we will be talking about promising compounds. As was mentioned above, the group of Y.Ma made a very important prediction related to sulfur hydrides Even higher values of T c were obtained by Calcium hydride, CaH 6 , has been analyzed by The value of T c for CaH 6 can be evaluated with use of Eq.(4.2 ).Indeed, in accordance with an approach described in Sec. IVB , the electron-phonon interaction can be separated in two parts. From Fig. 7 one can determine that λ opt ≈2.1, λ ac ≈0.6, ! Ω opt =820 sm -1 , ! Ω ac The search for novel hydrides with still higher values of T c (including CaH 6 , YH 6 ) is a very important direction of future research. More detailed X-ray diffraction of sulfur hydrides will establish the position of the sulfur atoms with high accuracy and clarify the nature of the phase transition between the "low T c " and "high T c " phases. Development of tunneling spectroscopy of the high T c hydrides is another important forthcoming task. Because of the large values of T c and the energy gap, the tunneling I(V) characteristic needs to be measured for a wider energy interval as compared to that for conventional superconductors. But similar measurements have been phonon frequencies. As long as the Migdal adiabaticity criterion is not violated, observations of superconductivity at even higher temperatures now can be anticipated. There are, however, novel features, which necessitate significant deviations from the conventional Migdal-Eliashberg approach. First of all, the hydride phonon spectra are quite broad (up to 200 meV) and contain both optical and acoustic modes. We propose that the electron-phonon interaction can be treated with the use of the general equation (4.1) by employing two coupling constants λ opt and λ ac together with two corresponding average frequencies. This leads to an analytical expression for T c applicable to a number of cases, and permits analysis of other relevant factors for different phases. The experimentally observed isotope effect (deuterium-hydrogen substitution) turns out to be not universal in the sense that the isotope coefficient depends on the pressure and has distinct values for different phases. We show that this reflects the relative contributions of optical and acoustic modes. We point out that the sharp increase in T c (from ≈120K up to≈200K over a narrow pressure interval near ≈150GPa) is a signature of a first-order structural transition into the high T c phase. This picture also explains the curiously slow decrease in T c at P>P cr . It has been predicted in a number of theoretical papers that the transition into the high T c phase is accompanied by the appearance of additional small Fermi pockets. As a consequence, a two-gap