Relativistic massless Dirac fermions can be probed with high-energy physics experiments, but appear also as low-energy quasi-particle excitations in electronic band structures. In condensed matter systems, their massless nature can be protected by crystal symmetries. Classification of such symmetry protected relativistic band degeneracies has been fruitful, although many of the predicted quasi-particles still await their experimental discovery. Here we reveal, using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, the existence of two-dimensional type-II Dirac fermions in the high-temperature superconductor La 1.77 Sr 0.23 CuO 4 . The Dirac point, constituting the crossing of d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 bands, is found approximately one electronvolt below the Fermi level (E F ) and is protected by mirror symmetry. If spin-orbit coupling is considered, the Dirac point degeneracy is lifted and the bands acquire a topologically nontrivial character. In certain nickelate systems, band structure calculations suggest that the same type-II Dirac fermions can be realised near E F . Dirac fermions are classified into type-I and type-II according to the degree of Lorentz-invariance breaking Single-layer transition metal oxides often crystallise in the body-centred tetragonal structure. These systems can be doped by chemical substitution on the rare-earth site. Strontium substitution, for example, drives the Mott insulator La 2 CuO 4 into a superconducting ground state Enormous efforts have been made to explore the electronic structure of cuprate superconductors The lowenergy quasi-particle structure of LSCO with x = 0.23 is well documented As previously reported in Ref. 21 and shown in Fig. Dirac fermions are classified by their dimensionality and the degree to which they break Lorentz invariance (see Table Three-dimensional Dirac points are characterised by linearly dispersing bands (around the Dirac point) along all reciprocal directions (k x ,k y ,k z ). For type-I, such Dirac points have been identified in Na 3 Bi 5 and Cd 3 As 2 6,7 . Two-dimensional Dirac fermions, by contrast, have linear dispersion in two reciprocal directions. Graphene, being a monolayer of graphite has a perfect two-dimensional band structure. The Dirac cones found in graphene are therefore purely two-dimensional. A three-dimensional version of type-II cones has recently been uncovered in PtTe 2 Given the quasi-two-dimensionality, it is imperative to compare our results with graphene. Although SOC is generically small in graphene and the cuprates, it is of conceptual importance to understand the fate of the Dirac electrons if SOC is considered. The seminal work of Kane and Mele 37 demonstrated that graphene, in the presence of SOC, is turned into a topological insulator with spin-Hall conductivity σ s xy = e/2π. We stress that this conclusion is independent of the microscopic details. If graphene's crystal symmetries and time-reversal symmetry are to be preserved by SOC, the only perturbative way to open a gap leads to a topological band structure. The reason for this is a pre-formed band inversion at the M points in the band structure of graphene, away from the nodal Dirac points. Turning to the Dirac cones discussed in this work, a very similar analysis can be made. Already without SOC, the d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 bands change their order from the Γ to the M point. (This is a precise statement since mirror symmetry M xy , mapping (x, y) → (y, x), implies a well-defined orbital character of the bands along the lines k x = k y .) This is a band inversion of C 4 rotation eigenvalues of the lower band between Γ and M, being -1 at Γ and +1 at M (for the spinless case). It has previously been shown that the Chern number C of a band can be determined from the rotation eigenvalues of a C 4 -symmetric system (mod 4) by the formula i C = ξ(Γ)ξ(M)ζ(X) Our DFT calculations (Fig. Experimental specifications: High-quality single crystals of LSCO (x = 0.23) were grown by the floating-zone method. The samples with superconducting transition temperature T c = 24 K have previously been used for transport DFT calculations: Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed for LSCO (x = 0) and ESNO (x = 0) in the tetragonal space group I4/mmm using the WIEN2k package. Crystal lattice parameters and atomic positions of LSCO (x = 0.225) Tight-binding model: We utilise a two-orbital tightbinding model Hamiltonian with symmetry-allowed hopping terms constructed in Ref. 21. The momentum-space tight-binding Hamiltonian, H σ (k), at a particular momentum k = (k x , k y , k z ) and for electrons with spin σ =↑ / ↓ is given by in the basis c σ,k,x 2 -y 2 , c σ,k,z 2 ⊤ , where the operator c σ,k,α annihilates an electron with momentum k and spin σ in an e g -orbital d α , with α ∈ {x 2 -y 2 , z 2 }. The righthand side of (1) being independent of σ indicates that we have neglected spin-orbit coupling initially. For compactness of the Hamiltonian matrix entries, the following vectors are defined, where κ, κ 1 , and κ 2 take values ±1 as defined by sums in the Hamiltonian and T denotes vector transposition. In terms of these, we can write and 2t βz cos (R κ1,κ2 • k) which describe the intra-orbital hopping for d x 2 -y 2 and d z 2 orbitals, respectively. The inter-orbital nearestneighbour hopping term is given by Ψ (k) = 2t αβ cos k x a -cos k y b . In the above, μ represents the chemical potential. The hopping parameters t α and t ′ α characterise nearest neighbour (NN) and next-nearest neighbour (NNN) intraorbital in-plane hopping between d x 2 -y 2 orbitals. t β and t ′ β characterise NN and NNN intra-orbital in-plane hopping between d z 2 orbitals, while t βz and t ′ βz characterise NN and NNN intra-orbital out-of-plane hopping between d z 2 orbitals, respectively. Finally, the hopping parameter t αβ characterises NN inter-orbital in-plane hopping. In closing, we discuss the inclusion of spin-orbit coupling in the tight-binding model. The lowest-order spinorbit coupling term (in terms of in-plane hopping processes) that preserves inversion symmetry, M xy mirror symmetry, C z 4 rotation symmetry, and time-reversal symmetry is given by g σ sin(k x ) sin(k y ) c † σ,k,x 2 -y 2 c σ,k,z 2 +h.c. (9) with g ↑ = +1, g ↓ = -1 and the parameter λ representing the strength of spin-orbit coupling. Such spin-orbit coupling gaps out the Dirac points and equips the two pairs of spin-degenerate bands with a nonvanishing spin Chern number as discussed in the main text. The parameters of the tight-binding model, except for the spin-orbit coupling, were determined from fitting to the experimental band structure and are given by μ = -0.97, t ′ α = -0.31, t αβ = -0.175, t β = 0.057, t ′ β = 0.010, t βz = 0.014, t ′ βz = -0.005, all expressed in units of t α = -1.13 eV.