We test the effect of an external RF field on the switching processes of magnetic Josephson junctions (MJJs) suitable for the realization of fast, scalable cryogenic memories compatible with Single Flux Quantum logic. We show that the combined application of microwaves and magnetic field pulses can improve the performances of the device, increasing the separation between the critical current levels corresponding to logical '0' and '1'. The enhancement of the current level separation can be as high as 80% using an optimal set of parameters. We demonstrate that external RF fields can be used as an additional tool to manipulate the memory states, and we expect that this approach may lead to the development of new methods of selecting MJJs and manipulating their states in memory arrays for various applications. Further progress in computing systems demands a significant improvement in energy-efficiency of digital data processing. Cryogenic superconducting single flux quantum (SFQ) technology by virtue of its high speed and low power dissipation attracts a significant attention for the realization of the next generation classical computing system with high energy efficiency In this paper, we study the effects of microwave fields on MJJ critical current levels in attempt to find an alternative addressing approach which would minimize the memory cell dimensions. The RF-assisted magnetization switching is a rather well known phenomenon for a wide range of systems such as magnetic clusters, single-domain magnetic particles and magnetic tunnel junctions When an RF field is applied together with a magnetic field pulse, the percentage difference in high and low critical current levels can be almost twice as large than the difference observed in absence of external RF fields. We have found that for the particular sample investigated in this work the separation between the two current levels can be improved from 380 μA to 680 μA, for optimal working temperature and for magnetic field pulse amplitudes below 20% of the saturation field. This effect provides an additional knob to manipulate the memory state of MJJs which can increase power efficiency of the memory device and assist in solving MJJ addressing problems. The MJJs used for this experiment have been fabricated within a collaboration between HYPRES Inc. and the Russian Institute of Solid State Physics (ISSP-RAS) The measurements have been performed in a Heliox VL evaporation cryostat, with the sample thermally anchored to the 3 He pot of the cryostat. Magnetic field is applied in the plane of the junction, which is the easy magnetization plane due to the presence of the two superconducting electrodes acting as screens, using a superconducting Nb/Ti coil thermally anchored to the 1 K pot of the cryostat to ensure thermal insulation of the sample. We use a pulse generator to control width, amplitude and other parameters such as delay, rising and falling time of the pulse. The filtering system of our cryostat is designed to minimize thermal and electronic noise, using a combination of RC filters and copper powder filters anchored to different thermal stages, with cutoff frequencies of about 1 MHz and 1 GHz respectively The working frequency is 3.88 GHz, chosen so that the coupling with the junction is maximum, which means that we observe the maximum critical current reduction when microwaves are continuously applied to the sample. This frequency is slightly higher than the ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) frequencies detected for 100 nm thick Pd 0.99 Fe 0.01 layers The use of an antenna limits our control of the microwave train, and cannot be considered as a viable approach for memory cell fabrication. However, the demonstration of RF influence on memory switching processes paves the way for the development of new addressing schemes based on coplanar RF waveguides, as shown for magnetic tunnel junctions PdFe layer is a soft ferromagnet with cluster magnetic structure and a Curie temperature of about 10 K at 10-20 nm thickness In this work, we choose Pd 0.99 Fe 0.01 because its properties have been extensively studied Since the magnetization is in the plane of the junction, the magnetic flux Φ M due to the layer magnetization M adds up to the flux generated by the external field where L is the junction width, d F is the thickness of the ferromagnetic layer and d m is the magnetic thickness of the SIsFS junction From I C (H) it is also possible to estimate experimentally d m , the magnetic thickness of the SIsFS junction. For fields above the saturation field, the magnetic flux Φ M due to magnetization is constant, and thus the difference between two subsequent minima depends solely on the applied field From M (H) curves it is possible to estimate the saturation magnetization M S , the coercive field H C and the saturation field H S (inset in Fig. We compare the current levels obtained applying only magnetic field pulses 500 ms long (Fig. An example of the above mentioned procedure is shown in Fig. Firstly we tested the devices as memory elements using large magnetic field pulses (i.e. with amplitude larger than the saturation field) as reported in literature For these field values, the difference between critical current levels ∆I is (60 ± 2)% in both cases, so G is zero. Decreasing the field pulse amplitude down to ≈ H S /2 ≈ 5.7 Oe, ∆I becomes higher when the RF field is applied, and G increases. By further decreasing the field pulse amplitude, G increases and reaches the maximum difference at about 3.9 Oe, and then decreases progressively, until at low fields, of about 2.4 Oe, G goes back to zero. As shown in Fig. Our experiments show that the difference between the critical current levels also depends on the amount of energy transferred to the device. In particular, we tested the effect for different RF power levels and pulse durations, alongside with testing at different nominal energy values of the microwaves. We have found that increasing RF power level and keeping the train duration constant, the current level separation enhancement increases, and the same happens when increasing the time duration of the external microwave field keeping the power level constant In Fig. The use of long pulses for magnetic fields and RF trains is due to intrinsic limits of the setup used to demonstrate the effect. The characteristic time of the superconducting coil used to generate magnetic field is of the order of several ms, while the use of an antenna to apply microwaves implies a reduction of the actual power reaching the sample. In order to measure the intrinsic switching times of the MJJ, a further step is needed to implement a specific setup and engineer a sample equipped with dedicated on-chip waveguides. The dependence of critical current levels on the energy carried by the RF signal demonstrates an instability in cluster magnetic structure of PdFe induced by the RF signal itself. The microwave radiation excites fluctuations of local magnetic moments of PdFe clusters that decrease the coercive field and facilitate the remagnetization process. The alternating field of the microwave signal moves the local magnetic moments out of equilibrium, causing their precession, which can be treated as thermal fluctuations. This analogy is suggested by temperature measurements shown in Fig. The percentage enhancement G at a given temperature corresponds to the percentage difference in coercive fields at different temperatures. At low temperatures, M(H) is almost constant, so if the effective temperature of local magnetic moments varies from the 3.5 K working temperature to 4.2 K due to the effect of microwaves the coercive field H C and the saturation magnetization M S are almost unchanged, as sketched in Fig. The change in M(H) curves around 4.7 K has been recently explained Another potential application of the MJJ with PdFenanoclustered ferromagnetic layer is in neuromorphic computing circuits. Recently, it was proposed to use MJJs with Mn ferromagnetic nanoclusters for the implementation of artificial synapses compatible with SFQbased artificial neurons as underlying technology platform for large scale neuromorphic systems The proposed microwave-assisted tuning of MJJ critical currents may be used also in the recently proposed superconducting magnetic field-programmable gate array (FPGA), in which MJJs are used to implement the FPGA programming layer The MJJ device with the clustered ferromagnetic layer may not be scalable to submicron dimensions, perhaps limiting their size to 1 μm 2 . However, the size of the MJJ is often not defining the cryogenic memory cell dimensions, nor the memory array density. In fact, the addressing schemes to enable a reliable selection of memory cell in a random access memory (RAM) array define the memory cell area and RAM array density. In particular, the few square micron MJJ used in JMRAM Most of the literature devoted to new cryogenic memory devices does not address this issue and focuses solely on the memorizing storage element such as MJJs of various kinds overlooking the critical issue of implementing the addressable memory cell design within a 2D RAM array configuration. Therefore, we believe that the development of new ways to address and manipulate memory cell within the array will have the highest impact on the eventual success of various memory implementations achieving higher density. This work on microwave assisted MJJ switching is a step in this direction. In conclusion, we observed a clear evidence of RFassisted switching of magnetic Josephson junctions in a wide range of magnetic field pulses. For field pulses above and below this range, the RF radiation does not provide any effect. The larger field pulses magnetize MJJ into a saturation and any change in M(H) induced by microwaves cannot be distinguished. For the lower field pulses, M(H) becomes non-hysteretic and almost linear. The RF-assisted switching mechanism can be explained in terms of effective heating of local magnetic moments, and its temperature dependence can be interpreted in terms of a two-component magnetization in PdFe. The application of RF radiation makes possible to induce MJJ switching using lower field pulses than without RF. This also allows one to reduce reading bias current, poten-tially leading to the improvement of the overall energy efficiency. The damping of the coercive field caused by the microwave signal can be used to choose the amplitude of the writing magnetic pulse in such a way that only MJJs subjected to the microwave radiation change their digital state. In this way, the addressing task is reduced to the control of the microwave train, which is easier to perform. Further studies are required to determine the role of other mechanisms that might be involved in switching processes. We plan to extend the RF-assisted switching approach to entirely RF addressing of memory cells in an array, using coplanar waveguides as described elsewhere 