The comprehensive research of the electronic structure, thermodynamic and electrical transport properties reveals the existence of inhomogeneous superconductivity due to structural disorder in Ca3Rh4Sn13 doped with La (Ca3-xLaxRh4Sn13) or Ce (Ca3-xCexRh4Sn13) with superconducting critical temperatures T c higher than those (Tc) observed in the parent compounds. The T -x diagrams and the entropy S(x)T isotherms well document the relation between degree of an atomic disorder and separation of the high-temperature T c and Tc-bulk phases. In these dirty superconductors with the mean free path much smaller than the coherence length, the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenber theoretical model does not well fits the Hc2(T ) data. We suggest that this can result from two-band superconductivity or from the presence of strong inhomogeneity in these systems. The multiband model very well describes the H -T dependencies, but the present results as well as our previous studies give arguments for the scenario based on the presence of nanoscopic inhomogeneity of the superconducting state. We also revisited the nature of structural phase transition at T ∼ 130 -170 K and documented that there might be another precursor transition at higher temperatures. The impact of the magnetic Ce-Ce correlations on the increase of Tc in respect to the critical temperatures of Ca3-xLaxRh4Sn13 is also discussed. The family of R 3 M 4 Sn 13 compounds, where R is an alkali metal or rare earth and M is a transition metal (Ir, Rh, Ru, or Co), was first synthesized by Remeika et al. We documented, that Ca, when is partially replaced by La (Ca 3-x La x Rh 4 Sn 13 ) or Ce (Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 ) which simulates a negative chemical pressure, revealed the existence of this structural transformation at the presence of T c and T c superconducting phases. Recently, it was also shown that this phase transition remains second-order at T = 0, which leads to a novel structural QCP The Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 , La 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 and Ce 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 polycrystalline samples were prepared by arc melting the constituent elements on a water cooled copper hearth in a high-purity argon atmosphere with an Al getter. The Ca 3-x La x Rh 4 Sn 13 and Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 alloys were then prepared by diluting the parent compounds with nominal compositions of La or Ce and Ca which were then annealed at 870 o C for 2 weeks. All samples were examined by x-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis and in the first approximation found to have a cubic structure (space group Pm 3n) Measurements were performed using twenty integrations with a 6 s acquisition time with x50 long working distance objective and 600 lines per mm grating (giving a spectral resolution of 0.5 cm -1 ) over a Raman shift range between 80 cm -1 and 1200 cm -1 . The compositions of the Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 and Ca 3-x La x Rh 4 Sn 13 samples, checked by electron microprobe technique and by XPS analysis were very close to the assumed stoichiometry. However, local fluctuations in stoichiometry over the length of the sample were observed at the nanoscale for all x components of the both systems, the greatest one exist for Ce or La, which explain the strong disorder induced by doping (c.f. the detailed investigations of the homogeneity of the series of Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 compounds are presented and discussed in Ref. 12, similar fluctuations in the composition are observed in the system of Ca 3-x La x Rh 4 Sn 13 alloys, which signals site disorder). Figure Specific heat C was measured in the temperature range 0.4-300 K and in external magnetic fields up to 9 T using a Quantum Design PPMS platform. The dc magnetization M and (dc and ac) magnetic susceptibility χ were obtained using a commercial superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer from 1.8 K to 300 K in magnetic fields up to 7 T. The XPS spectra were obtained with monochromatized Al K α radiation at room temperature using a PHI 5700 ESCA spectrometer. The sample was broken under high vacuum better than 6 × 10 -10 Torr immediately before taking a spectrum. The refined lattice parameters shown in the Fig. A. Superconductivity in the presence of disorders in Ca3Rh4Sn13 doped with La and Ce: a comparative study 1. Electrical resistivity; the effect of magnetic field and pressure on superconductivity We expect that an increase of crystallographic disorder by doping of Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 will enhance the separation of the T c and T c superconducting phases. We present a comprehensive magnetic and electrical resistivity study which indeed give evidence of these two superconducting phases. Figure as a solution to the finite-temperature Eliashberg equations, where λ is the electron-phonon coupling parameter, and the Coulomb repulsion μ is assumed to be ∼ 0. where I 2 is the square of the electronic matrix element of electron-phonon interactions averaged over the Fermi surface, ω 2 is an average of the square of the phonon frequency (ω ∼ θ D ), N ( F ) is a density of states at the Fermi energy, and M is the atomic mass, is larger for the inhomogeneous superconducting T c state with respect to the bulk effect observed below T c , the primary reason for dP > dTc dP is the pressure dependence of θ D , which leads to larger lattice stiffening in the T c phase with respect to the bulk effect below T c and contributes to the T c > T c effect. The P dependence of θ D is given by the Grüneisen parameter γ G = -dlnθ D dlnV , which determines the lattice stiffening. It was documented experimentally Figure values of H c2 (0) and H c2 (0), where H c2 (0) > H c2 (0), as shown in the Figure gives the superconducting coherence length ξ(0) or ξ (0) (Φ 0 = h/2e = 2.068 × 10 -15 Tm 2 is the flux quantum). Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 exhibits similar values of ξ(0) and ξ (0) ∼ = 10.3 nm (c.f. 12 ); for La 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 , ξ(0) ≈ ξ (0) ∼ = 14 nm 13 , while for the series of Ca 3-x La x Rh 4 Sn 13 and Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 alloys, ξ (0) ∼ = 8.6 nm and ∼ 9.3 nm, respectively. From the theoretical point of view, the upper critical field in a dirty superconductor, where the free mean path l ξ, can be described by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) It can be seen in Fig. where Arguments for this scenario can also be seen in Fig. 2. Magnetic properties, evidence of short range magnetic order in Ce-doped alloys and the superconducting state The superconducting state of Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 is strongly dependent on the atomic disorder, which, upon quenching, leads to a significant decrease in T c Frequency ν dependencies in χ and χ , depicted in Fig. Figure where ∆0 and D are treated as fitting parameters, well fits the ∆C(T )/T data for strongly disordered Ca energy gap of T c phase at zero temperature). The C(T ) data of cerium doped (Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 ) samples were recently reported in Ref. 12. It was documented 12 that the broad maximum observed at T < T c in the specific heat data of the samples 0 < x < 1.2 represents an inhomogeneous superconducting phase in presence of spin-glass-like state, with evident contribution of the short-range magnetic correlations to entropy. Figure In summary, we present in Fig. The T -x diagram also shows the minimum for T c versus x dependence at x min ∼ 1.2 for Ca 3-x La x Rh 4 Sn 13 , and at x ∼ 0.4 for Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 , however, in the both cases x min is about 40% of the whole superconducting x-region. Figure For the skutterudite-related Ce 3 M 4 Sn 13 and La 3 M 4 Sn 13 compounds, where M is a d-electron metal, the charge density analysis revealed a strong charge accumulation between Sn1 atom and Sn2 atoms of the Sn2 12 cage, and between metal M or rare earth element and Sn2 atoms, which implies a strong covalent bonding interaction and leads to a subtle structural transition There has been only one type of structure related transition reported in the 3:4:13 system, related to the appearance of the modulation with a single arm In the Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 system we have studied two compositions with x = 1 and x = 2. Figure In the Ca-La series a possible high temperature transition was observed around 250 K for Ca 2.8 La 0.2 Rh 4 Sn 13 (Fig. In order to justify the result, we present preliminary analysis of synchrotron PXRD carried out on Ca 0.2 La 2.8 Rh 4 Sn 13 (Fig. At the end, a quick look at representative ADPs (Fig. One can ask if the transition T D is somehow reflected in the structural properties. Due to limited angular resolution of Supernova scans, no subtle transitions could be detected in slopes of thermal expansion of lattice parameters (see the Supplementary Information) and detailed studies are under way. For the purpose of this paper we have repeated temperature scans with higher angular resolution over the angular range of (622) reflection. Interplanar d-spacing calculated in this way was plotted on a log -log scale in a way similar to the resistance data (see Supplementary Information). The plot revealed two possible inflection points with temperatures equivalent to T D and T * . At present we can only associate the lower transition with the T D since it perfectly correlates with temperatures observed in resistance and susceptibility data in both La and Ce dopes series (Fig. The comprehensive research on La and Ce substituted Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 leads to several important observations, which are helpful for a better understanding of the nature of its superconductivity. The basic problem of our studies is an atomic disorder, which plays a crucial role in the strongly correlated materials. It was documented The red points are the temperatures TD, determined for each sample x from the d vs T plot in log -log scale. In such log -log presentation of the d(T ) data, TD represents a clear kink between two linear dependencies in d(T ) at temperatures T > TD and T < TD, respectively. The similar kink at TD shows dc magnetic susceptibility χ dc (T ) (pink diamonds), and inverse electrical resistivity 1/ρ(T ) (blue square points), when the both quantities are presented in log -log scale. theoretically for this class of compounds that in the critical regimes near the quantum critical point a system is at the threshold of an instability, and disorder as perturbation, can cause significant macroscopic effects. Due to structural disorder of the doped Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 , one has to distinguish two behaviors. First, the atomic disorder leads to significant decrease in T c of Ca 3 Rh 4 Sn 13 upon quenching. This T c decrease can easily be explained from the BCS equation 72 T c = θ D e -1/N ( F )U as consequence of local stress due to disorder, which significantly changes N ( F ) value, and thus changes the expression N ( F )U ∼ λ-μ 1+λ In such dirty Ca 3-x La x Rh 4 Sn 13 and Ca 3-x Ce x Rh 4 Sn 13 superconductors, where the mean free path is much smaller than the coherence length, the upper critical field H c2 (T ) is usually interpreted within the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg or Maki-de Gennes theoretical model. This model, however, does not well fit the H c2 vs. T c data, and does not interpret the observed positive curvature of H c2 close to T c . One of the possible scenarios of the observed H c2 (T ) dependencies could be a two-band nature of superconductivity in these systems. Previously, intriguing evidence for multiband effects was also documented in structurally similar filled skutterudite LaRu 4 As 12 its c2 (T ) can result from microscopic segregation in the superconducting material, where an array of Josephson junctions is formed spectra measured for both series are very similar and dominated by Rh 4d electron states, which are located in the XPS bands between the Fermi energy F and ∼ 4 eV, and by