Overdoped high temperature cuprate superconductors have often been understood within the standard BCS framework of superconductivity. However, measurements in a variety of overdoped cuprates, indicate that the superfluid density is much smaller than expected from BCS theory and decreases smoothly to zero as the doping is increased. Here, we combine time-domain THz spectroscopy with kHz range mutual inductance measurements on the same overdoped La2-xSrxCuO4 films to determine the total, superfluid and uncondensed spectral weight as a function of doping. A significant fraction of the carriers remains uncondensed in a wide Drude-like peak as T → 0 while the superfluid density remains linear-in-temperature. These observations are seemingly inconsistent with existing, realistic theories of impurity scattering suppressing the superfluid density in a BCS-like d -wave superconductor. Our large measurement frequency range gives us a unique look at the low frequency spectral weight distribution, which may suggest the presence of quantum phase fluctuations as the critical doping is approached. Unlike their underdoped counterparts The unexpectedly low superfluid density naturally leads to two important questions: To study these questions, we utilize time-domain THz spectroscopy (TDTS) in conjunction with kHz range mutual inductance measurements to systematically track both the condensate and the free carrier spectral weight as a function of doping for overdoped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 films. We find that a significant fraction of the total spectral weight remains uncondensed as T → 0 and manifests as a Drude-like peak at frequencies comparable to the theoretical weak coupling BCS gap. Taken with the linearity of the superfluid density with temperature, our observations are difficult to reconcile with extant theories of a BCS-type d -wave superconductor in the presence of impurity scattering. Analysis of the frequency dependence of the spectral weight distribution points to the presence of significant quantum phase fluctuations. This limits any mean-field description of the superconducting transition for overdoped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 . Dynamical measurements such as TDTS independently determine both the real and imaginary parts of the frequency dependent conductivity σ(ν) at the relevant energy scales for superconductivity To study this further, we directly compare the measured σ 1 (ν) in the normal state and in the limit T → 0 for a range of overdoped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 films. Figures This observation naturally answers the first question raised above i.e., where are the "missing" carriers? Our results here indicate that they remain uncondensed in a THz wide Drude-like peak down to T = 0. To corroborate this, we have performed two-coil mutual inductance (MI) measurements on the same films to extract the spectral weight in the superconducting delta function (S δ ). Figure Having located the "missing" spectral weight, we consider a few reasons these charge carriers don't condense. One obvious possibility is pair-breaking scattering due to impurities which smears out the d -wave node leading to nodal Bogoliubov quasi-particles and a suppression of the superfluid density n s . Such pair-breaking in both the unitary and Born scattering limits within BCS theory have been studied extensively First, aside from the delta function at ν = 0, σ 1 (ν) for a dirty d -wave superconductor may be composed of both a narrow low frequency Drude-like peak and -if the normal state scattering rate is larger than the superconducting gap 2∆/h -a part that is an increasing function of ν (e.g., Second, it is expected that impurity scattering drives a change from the expected linear-T behavior of n s for a clean d -wave superconductor to a quadratic dependence at a crossover temperature T * * for both unitary and Born scatterers Observations reminiscent to ours have been made in heat capacity measurements of overdoped La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 single crystals A quantity that has been quite useful in understanding TDTS on cuprates is the phase stiffness T φ , which is the energy scale to introduce twists in the phase φ of the superconducting order parameter ∆e iφ . As detailed in previous works FIG. Figure Note that one naturally expects large quantum phase fluctuations to accompany the small T → 0 superfluid stiffness We note that T c ∝ √ S δ is expected to emerge from quantum phase fluctuations within the (3+1)D-XY universality class with z = 1. Indeed, this is the scaling found in 