Surface acoustic wave (SAW) resonators are critical components in wireless communications and many sensing applications. They have also recently emerged as subject of study in quantum acoustics at the single phonon level. Acoustic loss reduction and mode confinement are key performance factors in SAW resonators. Here we report the design and experimental realization of a high quality factor Fabry-Perot SAW resonators formed in between tapered phononic crystal mirrors patterned on a GaN-on-sapphire material platform . The fabricated SAW resonators are characterized by both electrical network analyzer and optical heterodyne vibrometer. We observed standing Rayleigh wave inside the cavity, with an intrinsic quality factor exceeding 1.3 × 10 4 at ambient conditions. In last decades, surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices have found wide use in analog signal processing By analogy to optics, an acoustic resonator can be constructed in the form of Fabry-Perot (FP) cavity in which the SAW is bounced between two mirrors and confined in between. Unlike optics where highly reflective mirrors can be patterned from a high-refractive-index waveguiding layer, unsuspended, directly etched acoustic reflectors are often insufficient in producing high enough reflectivity to prevent coupling to bulk acoustic modes Recently it was shown that it is feasible to confine SAW with phononic band gap structures The acoustic FP resonators are patterned from Gallium Nitride (GaN) (0001) epitaxially grown on c-plane sapphire substrate The unit cell of the PnC structure, a square pillar with a centered elliptical hole in GaN layer, is shown in the inset of Fig. The device fabrication starts from the growth of 5 μm GaN on c-plane sapphire wafers by metal-organic chemical vapour depositon (MOCVD) A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the fabricated device is shown in Fig. The reflection spectrum around the working frequency of the resonator is recorded with a vector network analyzer. As shown in Fig. The resonance at f 0 = 194.07 MHz, on the other hand, have the largest extinction ratio among all observed modes and is selected to analyze the coupling efficiency between IDTs and SAW. According to input-output fomula where ∆ = ω -ω 0 is the frequency detuning from the resonance frequency, and κ int , κ ext are the internal and external coupling coefficient. In our case, κ int = 2πf 0 /Q int represents the intrinsic loss in cavity (including all the losses except the loss to microwave channel), κ ext describes the coupling strength between microwave and SAW through the IDTs. The value of internal and external coupling coefficient could be extracted from the Lorentzian fitting: κ int /2π = 26.3 kHz , κ ext /2π = 458 Hz. If we consider the IDTs at resonance frequency as a lumped element in transmission line, the amplitude reflection is R = (Z eff -Z 0 )/(Z eff +Z 0 ), where Z 0 = 50 Ω is the characteristic source impedance and Z eff is the effective impedance of IDT and resonator. If κ int and Z 0 are fixed, we have κ ext ∝ 1/Z eff . Here Z eff is found to be 2.87 kΩ. Since the IDTs should be effectively considered as parallel connected component in circuit, the external coupling coefficient κ ext is propotional to the area of IDTs. By further increasing the area of IDTs, a critical coupling between microwave and acoutic cavity could be reached. In this work 5 pairs of IDT fingers are sufficient to excite SAW. A custom-built optical heterodyne vibrometer In conclusion, we have designed and fabricated high-Q SAW Fabry-Perot resonators at the frequency around 200 MHz, with highest Q-factor about 1.3×10 4 . Through vibrometer measurement, confined Rayleigh mode is directly visualized inside the cavity and evanescent wave observed at the phononic crystal mirror. Our approach can also be extended to other frequencies and may achieve even higher Q, particularly at cryogenic temperatures or with other materials. The demonstrated high-Q resonator is compatible with the sensing applications (such as mass sensor 