The sheet resistance Rs of Ar + irradiated SrTiO3 in patterns with a length scale of several microns increases significantly below ~40 K in connection with driving currents exceeding a certain threshold. The initial lower Rs is recovered upon warming with accelerated recovery around 70 and 160 K. Scanning SQUID microscopy shows local irreversible changes in the spatial distribution of the current with a length scale of several microns. We attribute the observed non-uniform enhancement of Rs to the attraction of the charged single-and di-oxygen vacancies by the crystallographic domain boundaries in SrTiO3. The boundaries which are nearly ferroelectric below 40 K are polarized by the local electrical field associated with the driven current and the clustered vacancies which suppress conductivity in their vicinity yield a noticeable enhancement in the device resistance when the current path width is on the order of the boundary extension. The temperatures of accelerated conductivity recovery are associated with the energy barriers for the diffusion of the two types of vacancies. Perovskites attract tremendous interest for their wide range of intriguing properties including magnetism, high Tc superconductivity and multiferroicity Here we report current-induced sheet resistance (Rs) increase in patterned STO samples with a length scale of several microns. This phenomenon occurs below ~40 K in connection with driving an electrical current through the sample exceeding a certain threshold. The initial as-cooled Rs recovers upon warming, particularly around 70 and 160 K, similar to the behavior exhibited by LAO/STO system Our samples are commercially available two sided polished STO crystals. The substrates are selectively irradiated to define conducting areas in patterns that allow resistivity measurements with current path width that vary between 2 to 20 μm (see a typical pattern geometry in Figure The thickness of the e-beam resist was chosen such that it survives the irradiation due to Ar + beam. For irradiation we use an Ar + beam with a fluence of 10 15 ions /s cm 2 accelerated by 4 KeV for 100 seconds. The estimated penetration depth "L" in Angstrom was calculated using the empirical formula , where E is the energy in eV, W is the atomic weight of the target in amu, ρ is the target density, and Zi and Zt are the atomic numbers of the ions and the targets respectively. The calculated penetration depth was found to be ~ 120Å. The reported effect was studied using transport measurements carried out in Quantum Design PPMS-9. In addition, we have used a scanning SQUID probe to explore the microscopic manifestation of the effect. Figure Whereas a spontaneous small increase in Rs is occasionally observed at low driving currents and also when probing current is used. A larger increase is observed consistently above a certain current threshold of ~ 0.3 μA without a clear dependence on the channel width, as might be expected. On the other hand, the magnitude of the effect (the current induced increase of Rs) strongly decreases with the increase of the channel width. In order to quantify the relative increase in Rs due to driven current we have calculated (R s after trapping -R s before trapping )/R s before trapping in percentage. Figure The initial lower Rs is recovered upon warming. In this study we show current-induced increase of Rs in irradiated STO. The effect becomes most notable in patterns with a length scale below ~ 10 microns and it occurs below a threshold temperature of ~ 40 K for large enough applied currents. The initial Rs is recovered upon warming with notable accelerated recovery around 70 and 160 K. Scanning SQUID imaging reveals that the Rs enhancement is nonuniform and correlated with local changes on the order of several microns in the current distribution (see Figure Single-and di-oxygen vacancies commonly occur in STO At low temperature, (single-, di-) vacancies cannot overcome the migration energy barrier and they form static clusters within the filament bundles. The values of these barriers at the surface, namely 0.14 -0.2 eV and 0.4 eV for single-and di-vacancy motion respectively A recent report by Ma et al., We suggest that driving a current exceeding a certain threshold below 40 K polarizes the domain walls which increases the density of the charged oxygen vacancies in their vicinity. The electric field generated by the positive charge of the vacancy leads to a spatial variation of the ferroelectric polarization in the wall. This variation entails a larger value of the polar energy than that produced by a uniform polarization. In order to lower the energy, electrons from the 2DEG bind to the vacancies so as to screen their positive charge and cancel their electric field. This causes an increase in Rs. When oxygen vacancies and di-vacancies become mobile upon warming, i.e. above 70K and 160K, the initial higher conductivity is recovered. A schematic description of this scenario is presented in Figure In conclusion, we identify a low temperature Rs increase in connection with driving an electrical current higher than a certain threshold through the pattern. This effect is predominant below ~40 K and an accelerated recovery near 70 K and 160 K is observed while warming the sample. Microscopic SQUID imaging of the sample at lower temperature before and after the charge trapping reveals the change in the magnetic flux structure. The modulation of the current density prior to and after charge trapping reveals that the microscopic changes are taking place in the region of ~4-5 μm. We understand the observed phenomena by considering the tendency for domain wall polarization below 40 K, the interaction between charged oxygen vacancies and the domain walls, the internal gating effects, and the energy barriers associated with the mobility of the two types of vacancies. Understanding the interplay between domain walls and oxygen vacancies in this system is crucial for understanding electrical transport properties of this system and for designing future STO-based devices. 