Since many years, sub-60mV/decade switching has been reported in ferroelectric FETs. However, thus far these reports have lacked full physical explanation since they typically use a negative capacitance in the ferroelectric layer to be able to explain the experimental observations. Because negative capacitance as such is not a physical concept, we propose an alternative model that relies on the non-linear and non-equilibrium behavior of the ferroelectric layer. It is shown that a steep subthreshold slope can be obtained by a 2-step switching process, referred to as nucleation and propagation. Making use of the concept of domain wall motion as known also from fracture dynamics, we are able to explain the steep slope effect. A simple mathematical model is added to further describe this phenomenon, and to further investigate its eventual benefit for obtaining steep slope transistors in the sub-10nm era. Ferroelectrics have regained a lot of interest since the discovery of a ferroelectric phase in HfO2 In contrast to paraelectric polarization, when switching a ferroelectric layer the polarization of the layer is highly nonlinear as a function of the applied field. This is clear from the initial P(V) curve as measured on any ferroelectric capacitor when starting from unpolarized (zero) state (Fig. Since the material properties are changing during ferroelectric switching, the concept of dielectric constant becomes highly unpractical. But it is clear when using average values for the dielectric response (in space), the charge balance equation is still valid. This lemma can be derived directly from the basic Maxwell equations (not shown here). Splitting the FeFET structure into 2 capacitors, one being the ferroelectric part and the other one describing the series of the interfacial oxide capacitor and the substrate depletion capacitor (in subthreshold), we get the simple capacitive divider shown in Fig. where Na is the doping concentration of the substrate and Si is the permittivity of silicon. The other parameters are clear from Fig. The solution of Eq.( If we raise the voltage at the gate, the voltage over both capacitors will increase, which implies that the bottom capacitor decreases and the ferroelectric one increases. Thus, the internal voltage Vint will start to increase faster than at t=0. If the response of the material reaches the propagation phase (i.e. domain growth takes over), the polarization keeps on increasing to the point where the voltage over the ferroelectric capacitor starts to decrease with time. At that point, the internal voltage Vint increases faster than the gate voltage and an amplification is seen at the level of the surface potential (ds/dVg>1). In summary, it is possible to observe a boost or amplification of the surface potential response ds/dVg. It suffices that the internal node goes up faster than the gate bias, which is the case when the dielectric response stops following the voltage over the capacitor and becomes a function of time only. At that point, the ferroelectric capacitor increases further with decreasing voltage (Fig. According to the model, the steep slope effect will only appear under certain conditions. As can be seen from Fig. It has been shown that the domain wall motion effect in ferroelectrics can be described as a walk-out (or 'domino' effect) of the dielectric response in the ferroelectric capacitor which leads to decreasing voltage over the capacitor. As a consequence, the surface potential can increase faster than the external gate voltage leading to steep slope behavior in a limited range of gate biases. The presented model will be helpful in order to better understand the behavior of ferroelectric FETs in the subthreshold regime as well as its potential applications. 