Chip-scale optical phased arrays 1-15 could enable compact beam steering and LIDAR for autonomous vehicles, precision robotics, and free-space optical communications. Because these applications demand wide angle beam steering as well as high optical power in the output beam, a natural design choice would be to space the array emitters at a half-wavelength pitch, as is common in radiofrequency phased arrays. Optical phased arrays, however, unlike RF phased arrays, have been limited by the tradeoff between field of view (i.e. angle steering) and beamforming efficiency (i.e. optical power in the output beam). This tradeoff exists because optical phased arrays rely on waveguides as emitters, which suffer from strong crosstalk when placed in close proximity relative to their mode size. Here we overcome these limitations and demonstrate a platform for optical phased arrays with 180° field of view, where more than 72 percent of the power is carried in a single diffraction-limited beam even when steered up to 60° off-axis. Our platform leverages high index-contrast, dispersion-engineered waveguides spaced one half-wavelength apart without incurring crosstalk. Optical phased arrays to date, despite ever-increasing array size and element count range of the array. While strong confinement in metals makes half-wavelength spacing possible in RF arrays, the nearby plasmon resonance makes such approaches We simultaneously achieve wide steering angle and high beam efficiency by designing an endfire optical phased array at true half-wavelength pitch, engineered to avoid coupling between closely-spaced output waveguides even over millimeter-scale propagation lengths. In order to minimize coupling of modes of adjacent waveguides, we minimize their overlap in phase space instead of real space We demonstrate wide-angle beam steering with a 64-channel thermooptically-steered silicon phased array. Figure Waveguides run parallel for up to 680 μm and then terminate in a low-roughness plasma-etched facet We experimentally achieve grating-lobe-free operation over an entire 180° field of view. Figure Total phase shifter power consumption regardless of beam position is approximately 600 mW. Our array emits a high quality beam with 11.4 dB peak to sidelobe power ratio, close to the theoretical maximum of 13 dB (fundamentally limited by the sinc 2 diffraction pattern of a uniformly-illuminated rectangular aperture). This peak to sidelobe ratio is achieved over the entire 180° field of view, and it is to our knowledge the highest demonstrated to date. Figure The array shows at least twice the optical efficiency expected in randomized coarse-pitch arrays, concentrating 72% of the total emitted power in the main 0° beam. Theoretically, with perfect phase alignment, our tightly-packed waveguide approach would direct a full 90% of the total output power into the main beam (corresponding to the integral of a sinc 2 function between the first nulls), compared to a theoretically expected 30-40 % in randomized coarse-pitch arrays. We have demonstrated an all-dielectric optical phased array with true half-wavelength emitter pitch that generates nearly diffraction-limited output beams over a full 180° field of view. Our anticrosstalk design maintains beam quality even at very small emitter spacing, allowing high fill factors, and scales to a large number of channels. Such systems will enable the next generation of extremely compact and lightweight long-range LIDAR. Effective index versus waveguide width. We choose widths between 300 and 400 nm (green shading) to take advantage of the steep index slope. Keeping waveguide widths roughly equal but well-separated in index is key to creating a uniformly-illuminated aperture. c. Eigenmode expansion simulation of an array of eight waveguides with equal width of 400 nm on 775 nm pitch. Light is launched into a single waveguide from the left and couples strongly when adjacent waveguides are introduced. d. Simulation of the waveguide array with sequentially varying widths of 300, 350, and 400 nm. Light is launched into the 300 nm wide waveguide, and less than 3% coupling is observed, only to the waveguides with equal width. 