The detailed behavior of the in-plane infrared-active vibrational modes has been determined in AFe2As2 (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba) above and below the structural and magnetic transition at TN = 172, 195 and 138 K, respectively. Above TN , two infrared-active Eu modes are observed. In all three compounds, below TN the low-frequency Eu mode is observed to split into upper and lower branches; with the exception of the Ba material, the oscillator strength across the transition is conserved. In the Ca and Sr materials, the high-frequency Eu mode splits into an upper and a lower branch; however, the oscillator strengths are quite different. Surprisingly, in both the Sr and Ba materials, below TN the upper branch appears be either very weak or totally absent, while the lower branch displays an anomalous increase in strength. The frequencies and atomic characters of the lattice modes at the center of the Brillouin zone have been calculated for the high-temperature phase for each of these materials. The high-frequency Eu mode does not change in position or character across this series of compounds. Below TN , the Eu modes are predicted to split into features of roughly equal strength. We discuss the possibility that the anomalous increase in the strength of the lower branch of the high-frequency mode below TN in the Sr and Ba compounds, and the weak (silent) upper branch, may be related to the orbital ordering and a change in the bonding between the Fe and As atoms in the magnetically-ordered state. The discovery of superconductivity in the iron-based materials As with the cuprates, the proximity of superconductivity to an AFM region suggests that the superconductivity may be mediated by spin fluctuations In this work we extend our recent investigation of the electronic properties of the AFe 2 As 2 (A = Ca, Sr, or Ba) parent compounds Single crystals of AFe 2 As 2 (A = Ca, Sr, or Ba) were grown using conventional high-temperature solution growth techniques either out of self flux (A = Ba) or out of Sn flux (A = Ca, Sr) The vibrational properties of these materials are determined from the symmetry properties of the space group. Above T N , the three materials studied all crystalize in the tetragonal I4/mmm space group. The irreducible vibrational representation is where the E u and A 2u vibrations are infrared active in the a-b planes and along the c axis, respectively. Accordingly, the two infrared active modes observed in these materials at room temperature are assigned as E u modes. Below T N , there is a weak structural transition to an orthorhombic F mmm space group, with the irreducible vibrational representation, where the B 1u modes are active along the c axis, and the orthorhombic distortion lifts the degeneracy of the E u mode and splits it into B 2u + B 3u (active along the b and a axes, respectively) for a total of four infrared-active modes at low temperature. However, ab initio studies indicate that the splitting of the E u mode in the related LaFeAsO compound should be relatively small In the absence of coupling to a continuum of excitations, infrared-active modes usually display a symmetric Lorentzian profile. However, it is possible that coupling to either a spin or charge background may be present, so the infrared-active vibrations have been fit using a phenomenological complex dielectric function, ̃ = 1 + i 2 , for a Fano-shaped Lorentz oscillator where ω 0 , γ 0 and Ω 0 are the position, width, and strength of the vibration, respectively, and the asymmetry is described by the dimensionless parameter 1/q = ω q /ω 0 . The complex conductivity is σ(ω) = σ 1 + iσ 2 = -2πiω[ ̃ (ω) -∞ ]/Z 0 (in units of Ω -1 cm -1 ); Z 0 377 Ω is the impedance of free space. The complex conductivity satisfies σ * (ω) = σ(-ω). The real and imaginary parts of the optical conductivity are then: and Note that for finite ω 0 , in the ω q → 0 (or 1/q 2 → 0) limit, the dielectric function for a simple Lorentz oscillator is recovered; however, as 1/q 2 increases the line shape becomes increasingly asymmetric. The infrared-active modes are superimposed on an electronic background, which in our previous study of these materials where ∞ is the real part at high frequency. In the first sum, ω 2 p,D;j = 4πn j e 2 /m * j and 1/τ D,j are the square of the plasma frequency and scattering rate for the delocalized (Drude) carriers in the jth band, respectively, and n j and m * j are the carrier concentration and effective mass. In the second summation, ω k , γ k and Ω k are the position, width, and strength of the kth vibration or bound excitation. The detailed optical properties of CaFe 2 As 2 have been previously determined by us over a wide frequency range above and below T N The real part of the optical conductivity is shown with the electronic background removed in Fig. The detailed optical properties of SrFe 2 As 2 have been previously determined by us over a wide frequency range above and below T N The real part of the optical conductivity is shown with the electronic background removed in Fig. The calculated position of the high-frequency E u mode for SrFe 2 As 2 in the tetragonal phase at 294 cm -1 is once again somewhat above the experimentally-observed position at 257 cm -1 (taken just above T N ); however, the nature of this mode is unchanged from CaFe 2 As 2 with the atomic intensities nearly identical (Table The detailed optical properties of BaFe 2 As 2 have been previously determined by us over a wide frequency range above and below T N Photon energy (meV) Wave number (cm -1 ) Photon energy (meV) this mode shows little frequency dependence, in agreement with a previous study The real part of the optical conductivity is shown with the electronic background removed in Fig. The calculated position of the low-frequency E u mode at 87 cm -1 is in good agreement with the experimentally observed position at 94 cm -1 ; however, in a continuation of the trend observed in SrFe 2 As 2 , the character of this mode has changed significantly with the Ba atom now playing a reduced role with increased contributions from the Fe and As atoms (Table In AFe 2 As 2 , the series of A= Ca, Sr and Ba represents the steadily increasing size of the alkali earth atom, which is reflected by the increase in the size of the unit cell (Table The most striking phonon anomalies occur in BaFe 2 As 2 . While the splitting of the low-frequency E u mode is observed below T N The bonding in the highly-distorted FeAs planes occurs from the hybridization of the Fe d xz and d yz and As 4p orbitals The detailed temperature dependence of the in-plane infrared active modes has been studied in AFe 2 As 2 (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba) above and below the structural and mag-Table sulting in a total of 12 atomic displacements. In this case, displacement amplitudes of 0.03 Å were used. The calculations have converged when the successive changes for the forces on each atom are less than 0.1 mRy/au. The residual forces are collected for each set of symmetric displacements and a list of the Hellmann-Feynman forces are generated. Using the program PHONON a This work; positions determined just above T N . b c Ref.