The paper describes a novel parametric excitation scheme that acts as a tunable amplifier by controlling two pumping signals and two nonlinear feedback terms. By modulating the stiffness of a mechanical oscillator with a digital signal processor, low frequency inputs are projected onto a higher resonance frequency, thus exploiting the natural selective filtering of such structures. Described is an optimized dual-term nonlinear stiffness resonator that enhances the input signal level and the sensitivity to changes in both amplitude and phase, while limiting the obtained response to desired levels. This amplifier is geared to cases when the frequency of the input is known or measurable, like in rotating structures, while the amplitude and phase are too weak to be detected without amplification. It is shown that by tuning the cubic and quadratic feedback terms, the amplifier benefits from a nearly linear response behavior, while exploiting the benefits of nonlinear and pumping signal enhancements. Parametric excitation (pumping) can be effective in signal amplification while squeezing noise 2 amplitudes, principal parametric resonance is commonly employed, and the pumped systems are operated close to the linear instability Single degree of freedom (SDOF) systems consisting nonlinear stiffness terms can exhibit a wide range of dynamical phenomena, as has already been reported by several researchers Additionally, the combined effect of external and parametric excitations was considered in prior studies Amplifiers are widely used in different fields of engineering, and their role is to increase physical signals well above the noise floor, to achieve good signal to noise ratio. Because they are used to amplify various signals, (e.g., voltage, current, displacement, force) different amplification principles are utilized, and it has been shown that low loss mechanical amplifiers can outperform their electronic counterparts Although parametric amplifiers produce large amplitudes they are usually narrow banded, more than their equivalent linear resonators, therefore suitable for predetermined frequencies. To extend the parametric amplifier bandwidth a modified scheme was suggested by Dolev and Bucher To increase the sensitivities and allow more flexibility in the parameters tuning process, it was suggested to add a quadratic nonlinearity to the feedback term, which allows to shape the backbone curve It was shown by Nayfeh In summary, the lumped parameters model of the considered parametric amplifier is depicted in Fig. The amplifier is characterized by a point mass m , linear viscous damping c , linear stiffness 1 k , quadratic stiffness 2 k , cubic stiffness 3 k , being pumped at frequencies The proposed scheme is designed to enhance the amplification, while keeping the sensitivity to the external force amplitude and phase, high. Most important is the ability to shift some of the external force energy at frequency r  to the designated natural frequency, n  , when natural amplification takes place. The paper begins with the analytical solution of the governing equation of motion. Afterwards, the linear system's stability is analyzed by seeking the transition hyperplane in the controlled parameter domain. The following section deals with the response sensitivity to the various parameters. The insights are then implemented to suggest a parameters tuning scheme for the desired optimal amplifier response. Next, the analytical solution is compared to numerically simulated results with good agreement, and lastly a summary and conclusions are provided. In order to understand the role of the nonlinear terms and to analyze their effect, an asymptotic solution based on the multiple scales approximation is derived. To begin the analysis, first the governing equation of motion, Eq. ( Whereas, If the amplifier is lightly damped, a small dimensionless damping parameter can be defined as 1 O . Additionally, small amplitudes are assumed, therefore the following transformation is defined: Eliminating y from Eq.( A second order uniform solution is sought using the method of multiple scales Here, 0   is the fast times scale associated with changes occurring at frequency close to the natural frequency, now scaled to unity. The slow time scales, 1 whereas, the notation ,  is adopted. x and its temporal derivative from Eq.(4) via Eqns.( The solution of Eq.( , e e cc, . 21 Whereas, cc stands for the complex conjugate of the preceding terms. To update the solution up to the next order (i.e., 1 x ), Eq.( Once Eqns. whereas, A is the complex conjugate of A , and the particular solution of Eq.( To approximate the solution up to the second order, 2 x , Eqns.( x yields: It can be shown that Eqns.( Substituting the polar form: into Eq.( : To transform Eqns.( Differentiating Eq.( Seeking the steady-state solution, thus 0  , and from Eq.( therefore, the following is defined: Substituting Eqns.( Whereas, the subscript 0 denotes the steady-state solution. The steady-state amplitude, 0 a , as a function of the steady-state phase, 0  , can be obtained from Eq.( Eliminating 0 a from Eq.( Once 0 a and 0  are obtained, according to Eq.( whereas, AOT stands for All Other Terms. The steady-state approximate response of the nonlinear, parametrically excited amplifier was obtained analytically up to the second order, when two harmonic terms, /2 a  and r  , are of interest. To this approximation, the quadratic and cubic nonlinear terms have a combined effect as can be seen in Eq.( When 0 e   , the nonlinearity is of the hardening type, and when 0 e   it is of the softening type in Eq.( By solving the Eq.( Because the system acts as an amplifier, it is important to understand when large amplitudes can be produced. Therefore, one can define the criterion and a threshold value, for which the denominator of Eq.( In a previous work, it was observed that even when a th   large amplitudes were produced. A possible reason is that the second pumping frequency   b  , having a different pumping amplitude, shifts the linear stability boundary as it feeds power into the system. It is important to find this boundary, since efficient operation is obtained while working in its vicinity. In the following section, the exact linear stability boundary is found for the case of two pumping frequencies and external forcing. The stable and unstable regions of the linear system are separated by hypersurfaces that depend on the externally governed parameters. In order to compute these separating surfaces when the frequencies are tuned according to Eq.( : To obtain the solution of Eq.( and separate Eq.( Equations ( whose solution can be expressed as: Here, the b  terms are constants and 1  and 2  are the eigenvalues, such that . Therefore, to compute the transition surfaces it is sufficient to check when does the determinant becomes null. The determinant can be written as a second order polynomial in  : The functions F  and the stability transition hyper-surface are provided in Appendix A, Eqns. ( The functions G  are also provided in Appendix A, Eq.( The underlying assumption is that the external force frequency r  is known, but its amplitude and phase are not. It is assumed that the external force is weak and possibly buried in wideband noise, therefore accurate identification of its amplitude and phase requires selective amplification. To achieve the desired amplified response, proper tuning of the amplifier parameters needs to be carried out. Therefore, to better understand the influence of each parameter on the amplitude 0 a , and sensitivities 0 / aP  and 0 / r a   are required. A closed form expression for the approximate amplitude 0 a was derived in Section 2, and closed form expressions for the amplifier sensitivities are provided in Appendix B. For the analysis, the following non-dimensional parameters were chosen: According to Eq.( The nonlinear terms in Eq.(40) were arbitrarily chosen within an acceptable range. To tune the nonlinear terms effectively, their influence on the response is studied. The amplitudes near the natural frequency, at the external force frequency and the sensitivities were computed as a function of 2  and 3  for 0.2307 and are shown in Fig. The pumping magnitudes have a strong influence on the amplifier performance, especially when they are tuned in a way that leads to instability of the linear system, as discussed in Section 3. To understand their influence on the response, the amplitudes and sensitivities vs. / Observing Fig. By comparing Fig. The suggested system is designed to oscillate at a frequency close to its natural frequency while the input signal is at a much lower frequency. Additionally, it was shown that variations in the external force amplitude or phase, leads to variations in the amplitude 0 a . To identify the input's amplitude and phase, a single measurement of 0 a is not enough. Interestingly, the pumping phase b  always appears with r  as a sum in the governing equations (e.g., Eq.( The effect of various parameter was examined in Section 4 based on the analytical solution of the nonlinear and linear governing equation. As the studied system is designed to operate as an amplifier; one would like to tune it to produce the largest possible amplification and sensitivities. It was found that if the effective stiffness is set to zero, no compromise between the amplitude and sensitivity should be made when tuning the other parameters. To tune the effective stiffness to zero, according to Eq.( Prior to considering the amplifier response to the excitations, the equilibrium points of the system are calculated from Eq.( In what follows, the system parameters were chosen according to an existing experimental rig In this work, a parameter tuning methodology for a nonlinear SDOF dual frequency parametrically excited amplifier was derived. The topology of the proposed amplifier is unique and it allows to tune low frequency inputs by shifting the energy to a chosen natural frequency. The relevant parameters can be controlled by a digital signal processor that implements a feedback that determines the desired parameter levels, as was done in The derivation of the suggested scheme was made possible by analytically solving the linear and nonlinear governing equation, Eq.( Lastly, comparisons between the analytically and numerically obtained solutions were performed, with good agreement for various cases. The system parameters were set to match the properties of an existing experimental rig found in the lab. Future work will apply this approach to an experiment which is being constructed. For brevity, the following functions appearing in Eq.( The amplifier sensitivities to variations in the input signal are key features. The amplifier is operated such that the response is dominated by the harmonic term at the frequency / 2 1 a  with amplitude 0 a , see Eq. (28). Therefore, the sensitivity to variations in the amplitude and phase of the input signal are studied via the sensitivity of the latter harmonic term. First, a closed form expression for the amplitude sensitivity is derived, and then in an analogous manner a closed form expression for the phase sensitivity is derived. The sensitivity to the external force amplitude is computed as follows: whereas, the term 0 / aP  is computed by taking the derivative of Eq.( , , , , , , To compute 0 / aP  one must first compute 0 / P   , which can be computed from the nonlinear transcendental phase equation. Taking its derivative with respect to P , when only the numerator is considered, yields: , , , , , , Hence, the amplifier sensitivity to variations in the external force amplitude can be evaluated via: The latter transformation is chosen according to results which were previously achieved and measured in experiments