The understanding of strongly-correlated materials, and in particular unconventional superconductors, has puzzled physicists for decades. Such difficulties have stimulated new research paradigms, such as ultra-cold atom lattices for simulating quantum materials. Here we report on the realization of intrinsic unconventional superconductivity in a 2D superlattice created by stacking two graphene sheets with a small twist angle. For angles near 1.1°, the first 'magic' angle, twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) exhibits ultra-flat bands near charge neutrality, which lead to correlated insulating states at half-filling. Upon electrostatic doping away from these correlated insulating states, we observe tunable zero-resistance states with a critical temperature Tc up to 1.7 K. The temperature-density phase diagram shows similarities with that of the cuprates, including superconducting domes. Moreover, quantum oscillations indicate small Fermi surfaces near the correlated insulating phase, in analogy with under-doped cuprates. The relative high Tc, given such small Fermi surface (corresponding to a record-low 2D carrier density of ∼10 11 cm -2 ), renders TBG among the strongest coupling superconductors, in a regime close to the BCS-BEC crossover. These novel results establish TBG as the first purely carbon-based 2D superconductor and as a highly tunable platform to investigate strongly-correlated phenomena, which could lead to insights into the physics of high-Tc superconductors and quantum spin liquids. Strong interactions among particles lead to fascinating states of matter, including quark-gluon plasma, the various forms of nuclear matter within neutron stars, strange metals, and fractional quantum Hall states. Monolayer graphene has a linear energy dispersion at its charge neutrality point. When two aligned graphene sheets are stacked, the hybridization of their bands due to interlayer hopping results in fundamental modifications to the low-energy band structure depending on the stack- V xx (V) V xx ∝I 3 ing order (AA or AB stacking). If an additional twist angle is present, a hexagonal moiré pattern consisting of alternating AA-and AB-stacked regions emerges and acts as a superlattice modulation. 2θ 2 is the moiré unit cell area, a = 0.246 nm is the lattice constant of the underlying graphene lattice, and θ is the twist angle. In the supplementary video, we present an animation of how the band structure in the MBZ of TBG evolves from θ = 3°to θ = 0.8°, calculated using the continuum model for one valley. Figure In contrast to other known 2D and layered superconductors, the superconductivity in MA-TBG only requires the application of a small gate voltage, corresponding to a density of merely 1.2 × 10 12 cm -2 from charge neutrality, an order of magnitude lower compared to 1.5 × 10 13 cm -2 in LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 interfaces and 7 × 10 13 cm -2 in electrochemically doped MoS 2 , among others. Figure The application of a perpendicular magnetic field B ⊥ to a 2D superconductor creates vortices that introduce dissipation and gradually suppresses superconductivity. Tc , where Φ 0 = h/2e is the superconducting flux quantum, and gives the GL superconducting coherence length ξ GL ≈ 52 nm (at T = 0). The in-plane critical field dependence, on the other hand, is not explained by the GL theory for thin-film superconductors, due to the atomic thickness of TBG, d ≈ 0.6 nm, which would imply an in-plane critical field B c ≥ 36 T as the temperature approaches zero. 1/2 near T c . MA-TBG provides a rich phase diagram with interplaying correlated insulator phases and superconducting phases, with continuous tunability by temperature, magnetic field, and charge density. Apart from the superconducting domes discussed above, the correlated Mott-like insulator phase at half-filling also assumes a dome shape with a transition to a metallic phase at about 4∼6 K, and centered around half-filling density. We have previously shown that the MOtt-like insulator phase crosses over to a metallic phase by applying a strong magnetic field around 6 T in any direction (perpendicular or parallel to the devices). We have studied quantum oscillations in the entire accessible density range, including in the vicinity of the correlated insulating state where superconductivity occurs. Figures To further study the non-trivial origin of the Landau fan near half-filling, we measured the effective mass from the temperature-dependent quantum oscillation amplitude according to the Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) formula (see Methods for definition). Figures The appearance of both superconductor and correlated insulator phases in the flat bands of MA-TBG at such a small charge density is beyond weak-coupling BCS theory. The carrier density that is responsible for T c = 1.7 K is extremely small according to the quantum oscillation measurements, merely n = 1.5 × 10 11 cm -2 at optimal doping. To place this in the context of other superconductors, we plot T c against T F in a log-log plot ductors lie on the far right in the plot, with much smaller ratios. MA-TBG is located above the trend line on which most cuprates, heavy fermion and organic superconductors lie, approaching the recently observed exotic FeSe monolayer on SrTiO 3 (see Fig. The devices are fabricated using a modified dry-transfer technique detailed in previous work Transport measurements are performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of ∼70 mK except for the temperature-dependent quantum oscillations which are measured in a He-3 fridge. We use standard low frequency lock-in techniques with excitation frequency of 5 Hz∼10 Hz and excitation current of 0.4 nA∼5 nA. The current flowing through the sample is amplified by a current pre-amplifier and measured by the lock-in amplifier. Four-probe voltage is amplified by a voltage pre-amplifier at ×1000 and measured by another lock-in amplifier. The twist angle of the devices is determined from the transport measurements at low temperatures, which are detailed in the Methods section of our previous work The effective mass in device M2 is extracted using the standard Lifshitz-Kosevich formula, which relates the temperature-dependence of resistance change ∆R xx (T ) to the cyclotron mass m * (at a given magnetic field B ⊥ ). For each gate voltage (charge density), we measure the R xx -B ⊥ curves at different temperatures, normalize them by their low-field values, and subtract a common polynomial background in B ⊥ . Examples of the curves are shown in Fig. The errorbars in Fig. Mathematically, in a twisted moiré system, the lattice is strictly periodic only when the twist angle satisfies a specific relation such that lattice registration order is perfectly recovered in a finite distance. These special cases are termed 'commensurate' structures. One important parameter in the commensurate TBG structures is r, which can be intuitively understood as the number of 'apparent' moiré pattern wavelengths it takes to fully recover the lattice periodicity. We deduce the size of the moiré unit cell and twist angle based on the density of the superlattice gaps ±n s (±4e -/moiré), and then cross-check the twist angle with the Landau levels observed at high magnetic fields. ±n s are the only multiple of n s that correspond to Fermi energies located within single-particle band gaps and therefore exhibit strong insulating behavior. For twist angles above about 0.9°to 1°, the band structure at energies higher than these gaps is very complex (with strongly overlapping bands) and no single particle gap at ±2n s , ±3n s , . . . appears. In Fig. Extended Data Fig. The fact that the critical current is maximum at zero B ⊥ and oscillates at periodic intervals of the magnetic field suggests the existence of Josephson junction arrays, in the simplest case a SQUID(Superconducting QUantum Interference Device)-like superconducting loop, around a normal or insulating island is plotted as a function of total charge density induced by the gate, n, measured at temperatures from 0.4 K to 31.8 K. Colored vertical bars correspond to densities -ns, -ns/2, ns/2, and ns for the two samples respectively. much higher and therefore has a much lower mobility, so that the quantum oscillations cannot be observed and their contribution to the Hall effect becomes negligible. Further theoretical work can possibly shed more light onto the true nature of the many-body energy gap and the related quasiparticles. In the main text, we have determined the Fermi surface area in the MA-TBG devices using the Shubnikov-de Hass (SdH) oscillation frequency in a magnetic field (Fig. Extended Data Figure 