For the first time, thousands of RF MOSFETs were batch-fabricated on liquid-exfoliated MoS2 below 300 °C with nearly 100% yield. The large-scale fabrication with high yield allowed the average performance instead of the best performance to be reported. The DC performance of these devices were typical, but the RF performance, enabled by buried gates and on the order of 100 MHz, was reported for the first time for liquid-exfoliated MoS2. To resolve the dilemma of thin vs. thick films, gate recess was used on 20-nm thick films to improve the gate control while keeping the contact resistance lower than that on 10-nm films. These innovations may enable thin-film transistors to operate in the microwave range. Two-dimensional atomic-layered materials such as 2H-MoS2 have high charge carrier mobility without epitaxy requirement. They are therefore promising materials for thin-film transistors to operate in the microwave range, well beyond that of currentgeneration InGaZnO devices. To date, most MoS2 transistors have been individually crafted by direct-write electron-beam lithography on micrometer-size flakes mechanically exfoliated from bulk crystals. Recently, scores of MOSFETs and smallscale integrated circuits were fabricated on large-area MoS2 synthesized by chemical vapor deposition By contrast, liquid-exfoliated and dispensed MoS2 can be applied near room temperature, in large area, and at low cost, making it attractive for thin-film processes. Over the past decade, there have been many attempts to demonstrate MOSFETs on liquid-exfoliated MoS2 as listed in Table Thousands of MoS2 MOSFETs were batch-processed through three major steps: (A) formation of buried gates, (B) spin-coating of MoS2, and (C) definition of active and contact regions. To facilitate the gate-recess experiment, although step A was carried out on a 200-mm Si wafer, the wafer was subsequently diced into 25 mm × 15 mm chips before steps B and C. A one-mask photolithography process was used to form Al gates buried in SiO2, before deposition of gate oxide and MoS2 (Fig. The isopropanol suspension of MoS2 contained flakes with a thickness of 3-6 nm and a lateral size of 1-2 μm. The suspension was spun onto the chips of step A at 2000 rpm for 20 s, followed by annealing at 300 °C for 1 h in argon. The spincoating process was repeated two and four times to obtain MoS2 films with approximately 10-and 20-nm thicknesses, respectively, as confirmed by atomic force microscopy. The atomic force microscopy confirmed also that the films were continuous despite a roughness of approximately 5 nm, which resulted in grainy contrast under the optical microscope as shown in Fig. A two-mask photolithography process was used to define the active and contact regions of all 1500 MOSFETs on each chip. To define the active region, MoS2 was dry-etched by CHF3/O2 whereas Al2O3 was wet-etched by buffered HF. Source and drain contacts were formed by electron-gun evaporated Ti and Al with thicknesses of 10 nm and 490 nm, respectively. Gate recessing was performed by dry etching with CHF3/O2 for 50 s using the source and drain contacts as self-aligned masks. Random sampling confirmed that, before gate recessing, nearly all 1500 MOSFETs fabricated on each chip had sourcedrain conduction, whether the chip was coated with 10-nm or 20-nm MoS2. However, whereas devices on 10-nm MoS2 exhibited effective gate control, devices on 20-nm MoS2 exhibited no gate modulation up to a gate-source voltage of 10 V, presumably because the channel was too thick. Correspondingly, the total source-drain resistance was reduced from 28 ± 8 MΩ•μm for devices on 10-nm MoS2 to 20 ± 10 MΩ•μm for devices on 20-nm MoS2. (The reduction is less than 50% because the source-drain resistance is presently dominated by the contact resistance.) Devices on 20-nm MoS2 exhibited effective gate control only with gate recess. However, the gate was overrecessed and only 90 of the 1500 devices survived, with the yield dropping from 100% to approximately 6%. Visual inspection confirmed that only 167 devices had channel material left after gate recessing. Thus, although the present experiment demonstrated the benefit of gate recessing in improving gate control and reducing contact resistance, much process development and control are needed. For example, gate recessing could be done with wet etching instead of dry etching to avoid damaging the channel material. Historically, gate recessing has been the most critical process step for compound semiconductor devices For the chip coated with 10-nm MoS2, Fig. For the chip coated with 20-nm MoS2, Fig. For the first time, thousands of RF MOSFETs were batchfabricated on liquid-exfoliated MoS2 with nearly 100% yield. The large-scale fabrication allowed the average performance instead of the best performance to be reported. The DC performance of these devices were typical of that of MOSFETs fabricated on liquid-exfoliated MoS2, with drain current ~ 0.1 μA/μm, electron mobility ~ 0.01 cm 2 /Vs, and on/off ratio ~ 10. However, the RF performance, on the order of 100 MHz, was reported for the first time. The RF performance was enabled by buried gates with low parasitic inductance and capacitance. Additionally, to resolve the dilemma of thin vs. thick films, gate recess was introduced to MoS2 MOSFETs for the first time, which improved gate control and contact resistance. However, the present process is far from optimum for achieving the full potential of the material, which had been shown to result in orders-of-magnitude higher mobility and on/off ratio with a substrate gate. Therefore, with further process development and optimization, especially in reducing the parasitic resistances of the source contact and the source-gate access region, these innovations and results suggest that MoS2 MOSFETs may enable thin-film transistors to operate in the microwave range. 