Transport measurements in thin film junctions of NbN-Bi 2 Se 3 exhibit tunneling as well as bound state resonances. The junctions are prepared by pulsed laser deposition of a NbN layer through a 25 μm wide gold wire shadow mask bisecting the wafer into two halves, on a Bi 2 Se 3 blanket film without further patterning. This results in two independent near-edge junctions connected in series via the 25 μm long and 10 mm wide area of the uncapped Bi 2 Se 3 layer. Conductance spectra measured across the wire masked trench at different locations on the wafer show that some junctions have tunneling behavior with pronounced coherence peaks at ±2∆ where ∆ 1 meV, while others have zero bias conductance peaks and series of bound states at higher bias. The later can be attributed to zero energy Majorana bound states or to the more conventional Andreev bound states. Based on the present results, we can not distinguish between these two scenarios. Topological superconductivity (TOS) is predicted to support zero mode Majorana bound states (MBS) which will possibly be used in future quantum computers The NbN and Bi 2 Se 3 thin films were prepared by laser ablation deposition from a metallic Nb target and from a non stoichiometric pressed pellet with Bi:Se ratio of 1:17 target. While the NbN film was deposited under 30 mTorr of N 2 gas flow the Bi 2 Se 3 film was deposited under vacuum. Both films were deposited at 300 0 C heater block temperature, which yields about 250 0 C on the surface of the wafer. Due to this low deposition temperature for the cap NbN layer which is required in order to avoid Se loss from the base Bi 2 Se 3 film, the resulting superconducting transition temperature T c is only 9.5 K, instead of the normally obtained 12-14 K when deposition is done at 600 0 C heater block temperature. High laser fluence on the target was used for the deposition of NbN (∼ 10 J/cm 2 ), while a much lower fluence was needed for the deposition of the Bi 2 Se 3 film (∼ 1 J/cm 2 ) which also helped to reduce the Se loss. Both films were deposited on (100) SrTiO 3 (STO) wafers of 10 × 10 mm 2 area. X-ray diffraction measurements of single layers of NbN and Bi 2 Se 3 on (100) STO showed that both grew with preferential crystallographic orientation. The NbN layer, mostly in the cubic phase with a-axis orientation and a=0.433 nm, while the Bi 2 Se 3 film had the typical hexagonal structure with c-axis orientation normal to the wafer and c=2.88 nm. The junctions were prepared by first depositing a 60 nm thick blanket film of Bi 2 Se 3 on (100) STO wafer. Then a straight gold wire of 25 μm diameter was attached in contact as a shadow mask to the wafer by two silver paste dots on its two edges, in such a way that it divided the wafer into two 10×5 mm 2 halves. This was followed by the deposition of a 60 nm thick NbN layer, yielding an NbN/Bi 2 Se 3 bilayer with a 25 μm × 10 mm trench in the NbN layer along the bisector of the sample. Transport measurements were carried out by the use of an array of 40 gold coated spring loaded spherical tips for the 4-probe dc measurements on ten different locations on the wafer, with silver paste contact pads. Each of the four sets of ten contacts was equidistantly separated from one another by 1 mm and the bias current was flown across the trench. Magnetic fields of up to 4 T were applied normal to the wafer along the c-axis direction of the Bi 2 Se 3 layer. Fig. The measured conductance spectra at low temperatures and zero field of all junctions of Fig. The thermal broadening Γ of the spectra was taken as kT at 2.1 K. In addition due to the slightly asymmetric spectrum, two different linear backgrounds were added to the fits. The resulting fit parameters are given in this figure, and one can see an excellent fit to the measured data. Fig. The normalized conductance spectra of J7 at 6.7±0.1 K are shown in Fig. Two types of near-edge NbN-Bi 2 Se 3 thin film junctions connected in series via a short Bi 2 Se 3 segment were fabricated by a wire shadow mask with no further patterning. Measurements at different locations on the wafer show that at low temperatures some junctions were an order of magnitude more resistive than others. The former exhibit classical tunneling conductance spectra with low interface transparency, while the later show ZBCP and a linear series of bound states. The ZBCP could originate in MBS as well as ABS, but the present data does not allow for separation between the two. V. APPENDIX Using a potential model shown schematically in the inset of Fig. 