We have performed de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) measurements of the heavy-fermion superconductor CeCoIn5 down to 2 mK above the upper critical field. We find that the dHvA amplitudes show an anomalous suppression, concomitantly with a shift of the dHvA frequency, below the transition temperature Tn = 20 mK. We suggest that the change is owing to magnetic breakdown caused by a field-induced antiferromagnetic (AFM) state emerging below Tn, revealing the origin of the field-induced quantum critical point (QCP) in CeCoIn5. The field dependence of Tn is found to be very weak for 7-10 T, implying that an enhancement of AFM order by suppressing the critical spin fluctuations near the AFM QCP competes with the field suppression effect on the AFM phase. We suggest that the appearance of a field-induced AFM phase is a generic feature of unconventional superconductors, which emerge near an AFM QCP, including CeCoIn5, CeRhIn5, and high-Tc cuprates. The competition between distinct quantum states at a quantum critical point (QCP), where the second-order transition temperature is suppressed to absolute zero, prevents the ground state from attaining either state and enhances quantum fluctuation in the vicinity of the QCP HF systems have emerged as prototypical systems for studying QCPs, because the strong mass renormalization that occurs through hybridization of f -electrons with conduction electrons lowers the relevant energy scale on which the effects take place. Thus, the ground state can be easily tuned at experimentally accessible pressures or magnetic fields. In particular, unconventional superconductivity in HFs has been most extensively studied in CeCoIn 5 because a d-wave superconducting state emerges at ambient pressure without chemical substitution Despite the accumulating evidence for field-induced QCP, no AFM state corresponding to the QCP has been observed outside the superconducting phase. This ap-parent absence has been attributed to the AFM state being hidden at an inaccessible negative pressure In this Letter, we report de Haas-van Alphen (dHvA) measurements for H//c down to 2 mK using our homemade nuclear-demagnetization cryostat. We find that the dHvA amplitudes deviate from the conventional Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) formula High-quality single crystals of CeCoIn 5 were grown by the In-flux method The dHvA oscillation for H//c and the corresponding fast Fourier transformation (FFT) spectrum are shown in Figs. To analyze the field dependence in detail, the dHvA signal of α 3 branch, which showed the largest signal, was isolated by a steep bandpass filter. The temperature dependence of the dHvA amplitude at different field strengths is shown in Fig. Further, we analyzed the temperature dependence of the dHvA frequency by using a phase shift analysis A similar suppression of the dHvA amplitude of α 3 has been reported below 100 mK and at 13-15 T The revised H-T phase diagram of CeCoIn 5 with the field-induced phase is shown in Fig. Here, we suggest that a field-induced AFM order provides the most plausible explanation for the anomaly observed in our dHvA measurements. An AFM transition in the simple tetragonal structure of CeCoIn 5 (P 4/mmm) modifies the dHvA frequencies by a folding of the Brillouin zone. However, the paramagnetic Fermi surface can still be observed in the AFM phase with a larger attenuation by magnetic breakdown (Color online) (a) Temperature dependence of the dHvA amplitudes of α3 at different fields. The data are shifted for clarity. The open (filled) data were taken by using nuclear demagnetization (dilution refrigeration). A clear suppression of the dHvA amplitude from the standard Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) formula (solid lines, m * c /m0 used for the fits are shown right) The temperature dependence of the normalized shift of the dHvA frequency ∆F (T, H)/F (150 mK, H) of α3. The data are shifted for clarity. The dashed lines are guides to the eye. served in NdIn 3 The appearance of the AFM order is also supported by the slight change of the dHvA frequency below T n (Fig. The absence of the anomalous suppression in ε branch [20] is also consistent with the AFM transition because ε branch corresponds to a small pocket located at the zone center The revised H-T phase diagram of CeCoIn 5 (Fig. Remarkably, the transition temperature of the fieldinduced AFM phase depended on field only weakly for 7-10 T even though the Zeeman energy at 10 T is about three orders of magnitude larger than k B T n . This weak field dependence implies that an enhancement effect on AFM order by the magnetic field competes with the suppression effect. If the critical spin fluctuation near the QCP We suggest that the field-induced AFM phase is pos-sibly related to the high-field superconducting (HFSC) phase for H//c, which has been discussed as a spatially inhomogeneous superconducting state In summary, we have observed anomalous changes in the dHvA oscillations in the normal state of CeCoIn 5 below T n = 20 mK. We attribute these anomalies to the emergence of an AFM state which is the origin of the AFM QCP in CeCoIn 5 . We suggest that CeCoIn 5 shares a phase diagram with other materials near an AFM QCP. We also suggest that AFM order is enhanced by suppressing the critical spin fluctuations in the vicinity of the AFM QCP in high field, which gives rise to the weak field dependence of T n as supported by the FLEX cal-