This paper presents a novel one-step method for the periodical nanopatterning and reduction of graphene oxide (GO). Self-organized periodic structures of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) appear on GO surfaces upon processing with a femtosecond laser at fluences slightly higher than the fluence needed for reduction of the GO. This indicates that the periodic pattern is formed either simultaneously with or due to the reduction of the GO. Graphene has received much attention in recent years due to its extraordinary physical properties So far, patterned structures on graphene and GO have been achieved through several physical and chemical techniques One way to both pattern and reduce GO with a single technique is to apply laser processing. In particular, periodical patterning of graphene and rGO surfaces have a great potential in functionalizing the surface, e.g. for energy storage applications In this study, commercially acquired graphene oxide (GO) in an aqueous solution with a concentration of 4 mg/mL (Graphenea S.A., Spain) is used and spin coated onto SiO 2 substrates (Alineason Materials Technology GmbH, Germany). The spin coating process is repeated four times with a spin coating velocity of 5000 RPM and a subsequent heating at 95 °C for 10 min. The SiO 2 substrates had a polished surface with R a <1 nm. The thickness of the GO layer is 23.5 ± 4.3 nm, measured with a laser scanning microscope VK-X200 (Keyence Corp., Japan). For laser irradiation of GO a fiber-rod amplified femtosecond laser (Tangerine, Amplitude Systemes, France, average power P = 20 W, wavelength λ = 1030 nm, repetition rate f = 2 MHz, pulse duration τ p ≈ 280 fs) is employed. The laser beam is directed and focused onto the sample by a galvanometer scanner and a 63 mm f-theta objective. The calculated beam radius at beam waist is ω 0 = 10 μm taking M 2 = 1.05 and a near Gaussian beam profile into account. Energy density is adjusted by a combination of a λ\2 plate and a polarizing beam splitter. During laser processing the sample was placed into a flow chamber with an argon flow of 10 L/min for inert atmosphere while processing in order to exclude any chemical reaction with the environment, which can also influence the LIPSS formation After laser processing the samples are analyzed by means of optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In order to ascertain GO reduction Raman and X-ray photoelecton spectroscopy (XPS) are employed. Raman spectroscopy (inVia, renishaw GmbH, Germany) is performed with λ=532 nm and focused onto the sample with a 50×objective. For avoiding sample damage a maximum power of 3.6 mW is employed while measuring. Data analysis is performed after baseline subtraction and smoothing of spectra. XPS is carried out with a Versaprobe spectrometer (Physical Electronics, USA) with monocromatized AlK α radiation of 1486.6 eV. The UNIFIT2013 software is used for analyzing the survey and the high resolution measurements of the C1s and O1s peaks. Atomic force microscopy (AFM, Nanoscope 5, Bruker Corp. USA) is employed at ScanAsyst mode, which is based on PeakForce Tapping technology, in order to analyze the topography of the sample. Sheet resistance is measured following the method of van der Pauw The analysis of the surface chemistry of GO after laser exposure by means of XPS, shown in Figure A substantial reduction of sheet resistance ρ sh was measured of the rGO layers compared to the unexposed GO. In literature a variety of values for the sheet resistance of unexposed GO has been documented ranging from 10 6 to 10 10 Ω/sq Raman spectroscopy allows the analysis of the structure of the carbon network of the graphene basal plane present in the GO flake These changes in the Raman spectra indicate a fs-laser induced sp 3 to sp 2 structural reorganization in the carbon network. Previous studies Comparing the Raman spectrum of the area irradiated at a low fluence (11 mJ/cm 2 ) with its corresponding XPS spectrum in Figure The ratio between the intensity of 2D and G peaks in the Raman spectrum can be taken for qualitative description of the GO reduction For fluences slightly above F r an unexpected phenomenon appears: As can be seen in Figure The amplitude of the LSFL was measured to be d = 28 ± 8.4 nm indicating, that a redistribution of the rGO layer takes place since it is in the range of the measured film thickness. In addition, Figures In the results of the image analysis (see Figure Three possible scenarios can be suggested to describe the appearance of the periodic surface structures on the surface upon femtosecond laser irradiation in our experiments: 1. The periodic structures are formed on the GO surface by the first laser pulses before the reduction, and then the GO layer with periodically modulated thickness is reduced by the following laser pulses. 2. First the GO is reduced and the LIPSS are formed in the conductive rGO. 3. Both reduction and LIPSS formation happen simultaneously. The first scenario (LIPSS formation before reduction) seems to be less probable, because the threshold for the reduction is below the threshold of the LIPSS formation, compare Figures The second scenario (first reduction, then LIPSS formation) would agree with the theory of the LIPSS formation, which describes the periodic structure as an interference pattern between the incident light and surface-scattered (e.g., plasmonic) wave The third scenario (simultaneous reduction and LIPSS formation) also cannot be excluded, because the hydrodynamic instabilities influence the LIPSS formation While the laser induced graphene oxide reduction allows to laser scribe micropatterns or circuits into the GO layer, the LIPSS can be used to generate self-organized periodic nanopatterns on the surface. This enables simultaneous reduction and nanopatterning of GO for rapid and flexible production of rGO structures. In particular, in this paper we demonstrated formation of LIPSS upon reduction of GO and studied the laser parameters needed for the pattern formation and for the GO reduction. We notice that these LIPSS are different from usually observed laser-induced periodic patterns in metals, semiconductors or dielectrics, because in our experiments the periodic pattern is not only reflected in the topography but also the chemical composition of the surface is modified. The physical mechanisms of the LIPSS formation on graphene oxide are not entirely clear. The ripples appear either after or simultaneously with the GO reduction. In the first case, the ripples are formed on a conductive rGO surface, on which surface electromagnetic waves can be excited. In the second case the ripples are formed on a non-conductive surface, hence the LIPPS couldn't be explained only through excitation of plasmons and their interference with the incident light. Thus, the self-organization model should contribute to their formation. Materials (ZGH) at the Ruhr-Universität Bochum for AFM measurements and Shizhou Xiao from EgdeWave GmbH for laser scanning measurements.