We performed resonant microwave measurements on superconducting titanium (Ti) down to temperatures of 40 mK, well below its critical temperature Tc ≈ 0.5 K. Our wide frequency range 3.3-40 GHz contains the zero-temperature energy gap 2∆0 and allows us to probe the full electrodynamics of the superconducting state, including excitations across the gap and the low-frequency responses of superfluid condensate and thermal quasiparticles. The observed behavior follows the predictions of the BCS-based Mattis-Bardeen formalism, which implies that superconducting Ti is in the dirty limit, in agreement with our determination of the scattering rate. We directly determine the temperature dependence of the energy gap, which is in accordance with BCS predictions, and 2∆0/kBTc ≈ 3.5 with ∆0 ≈ 75 μeV. We also evaluate the penetration depth, and we characterize the behavior of superconducting Ti in external magnetic field. Optical spectroscopy is a versatile tool to investigate the fundamental electronic characteristics of superconductors Recent experimental advances now allow microwave spectroscopy experiments in 3 He/ 4 He dilution refrigerators We employ a microwave multimode resonator to obtain the optical conductivity of superconducting Ti for frequencies and temperatures ranging from 3 -40 GHz and 40 -600 mK, respectively, smoothly crossing from ω k B T to ω k B T . This allows us to measure across the superconducting energy gap and observe the temperature dependence of the gap as a unique feature in our optical conductivity spectra. Furthermore, we evaluate the full electrodynamic response of Ti within the BCS framework, and we investigate the superconducting state of Ti in an external magnetic field. To combine microwave spectroscopy with mK temperatures, we employ superconducting stripline resonators [ Here ∆f 0 is the change in the resonance frequency that is caused by the sample compared to an unperturbed resonator. G is the resonator constant, which depends on the resonator geometry and the interaction of the electromagnetic fields with the sample. To determine ∆f 0 (T ) from the experimentally measured frequencies f 0 (T ), we have to know the absolute value of ∆f 0 for one reference temperature, and to this end we assume that R s and X s match at temperatures above T c , in the metallic state, and we introduce the appropriate additive constant to the X s data. This procedure is valid for frequencies below the scattering rate of the sample, i.e. in the Hagen-Rubens regime The dimensions of the stripline (see schematic cross section in Fig. To be as sensitive as possible to the sample of interest, the internal losses of the resonator have to be minimized. Therefore we use sapphire as a dielectric due to its low microwave losses The Ti sample (dimensions: 9.5 × 9.5 × 1 mm 3 ) was cut from a Ti plate with purity of 99.999% We performed mK microwave measurements on the same sample twice, and we could easily determine T c from a sharp drop in the resonant bandwidth f B (T ) at the lowest frequency. In the first measurement, we observed T c ≈ 0.47 K. Then the sample was polished, and in the second measurement we found T c ≈ 0.50 K. Superconducting Pb resonators bear loss mechanisms that originate from the polycrystalline structure of the evaporated Pb, defects and oxides on the conducting surfaces, and coupling losses , where T 0 denotes the lowest measured temperature. At low temperatures, the losses of a superconductor become very small and This procedure is certainly valid for fully gapped superconductors with a T c which is a few times higher than the lowest measurable temperature and frequencies below the energy gap 2∆ 0 = 2∆(T = 0). The surface impedance is then determined from f sample B via Eq. 1. In Fig. f res B is fulfilled, since the frequency is near the expected energy gap 2∆ 0 /h = 3.53k B T c /h = 34 GHz of Ti, and absorption by breaking Cooper pairs is possi-ble even at the lowest temperature. Therefore we use the frequency dependence R s ∝ ω 1/2 , expected in the Hagen-Rubens-regime above T c , to correct the bandwidth at this frequency The inset of Fig. The interpretation of optical spectra measured on superconductors is usually done with respect to the complex optical conductivity σ = σ 1 + iσ 2 , where σ 1 is connected to the absorption rate and σ 2 to the phase shift of the electromagnetic wave. For dirty superconductors, with scattering rate Γ much larger than the superconducting energy gap 2∆/ , the optical conductivity is treated within the Mattis-Bardeen theory Panel (e) in Fig. The qualitative behavior of σ(T ) fits quite well with the behavior predicted by Mattis-Bardeen theory, which is shown in the panels (e) and (f) of In principle one can quantify the superconducting energy gap 2∆ from measured data by fitting the σ(ω) spectra to the theoretical expectation For the intermediate frequencies (f = 6.52 GHz -21.79 GHz) we can easily observe this abrupt change in temperature dependence, as marked by the red arrows in the inset of Fig. 5. Temperature dependence of the superfluid density ρs calculated from the σ2 data obtained at f0 = 6.52 GHz. The black dashed line is a fit for BCS-weak-coupling superfluid density in the presence of disorder, with Tc and the scattering rate Γ/2π as fit parameters. (Inset) Temperature dependence of the DC resistivity, measured in four-point geometry. The flattening of ρDC at about 30 K and the low RRR ratio of 23.9 indicate strong scattering present in the sample. So far we have only considered the response of the thermal quasiparticles and the breaking of Cooper pairs, which contribute to σ 1 . The response of the superfluid is encoded in the out-of-phase response σ 2 . At low frequencies the superfluid density ρ s is connected to σ 2 via In the clean case where Γ/2π → 0, the spectral weight in σ 1 (ω) available to condense into the superfluid is the full spectral weight of the normal-state Drude peak, which is given in terms of the plasma frequency by ρ s00 = μ 0 0 ω 2 p . With increasing scattering, spectral weight is shifted to higher frequencies, out of the range where it condenses into the superfluid. Therefore an increase of scattering causes a decrease of the superfluid density. In the presence of scattering, the temperature dependence of the superfluid density can be calculated by ) where ω n = 2πk B T (n + 1/2) are the Matsubara frequencies Next we would like to comment on the change in T c after polishing, and the absence of multigap features in our data. (All theory descriptions above consider only a single superconducting gap, and all our data, most notably the temperature-dependent penetration depth in Fig. Titanium is a type I superconductor, i.e. any magnetic field is expelled from the interior of the sample until the external applied field reaches the value B c . Fig. been reported ( The fits properly describe our experimental data and thus confirm the conventional parabolic temperature dependence that one expects for the critical magnetic field. Unfortunately, we cannot explicitly assign either of the two field scales to a the conventional definition of B c : microwave spectroscopy on type I superconductors previously found a similar effect for Pb that was ascribed to surface superconductivity, but that observation was in a rather narrow field range compared to the present observation (and even narrower or absent for Sn) We performed resonant microwave measurements on superconducting titanium using stripline resonators and determined the optical conductivity σ(ω, T ) in frequency and temperature ranges 3-40 GHz and 40-600 mK. Qualitatively the frequency and temperature dependence of σ(ω, T ) is in excellent agreement with the predictions of the Mattis-Bardeen theory. We can observe unique signatures of the energy gap 2∆ in the frequency and temperature dependence of σ 1 , and from the latter we can determine the temperature dependence of 2∆, which nicely follows the BCS temperature dependence in the weak coupling limit with a ratio of 2∆/k B T c ≈ 3.53. Therefore we conclude that Ti is a BCS-like superconductor. The temperature dependence of the superfluid density, obtained from the imaginary part of the optical conductivity, allows us to determine the absolute value of the scattering rate Γ sf /2π = 430 GHz, which compares well with the value determined from resistivity Γ ρ /2π = 490 GHz. These scattering rates clearly indi-cate Ti being a superconductor in the dirty limit. From the absolute values of the superfluid density we determine the zero-temperature penetration depth λ 0 = 241 nm.