We have designed and characterized a micro-SQUID with dispersive readout for use in low temperature scanning probe microscopy systems. The design features a capacitively shunted RF SQUID with a tunable resonance frequency from 5 to 12 GHz, micrometer spatial resolution and integrated superconducting coils for local application of magnetic fields. The SQUID is operated as a nonlinear oscillator with a flux-and power-dependent resonance frequency. Measurements for device characterization and noise benchmarking were carried out at 4 K. The measured flux noise above 10 kHz at 4 K is 80 nΦ 0 Hz -1/2 at a bandwidth of 200 MHz. Estimations suggest that one can benefit from parametric gain based on inherent nonlinearity of the Josephson junction and reduce the flux noise to 30 nΦ 0 Hz -1/2 at 100 mK, which corresponds to 7.5 μ B Hz -1/2 for a magnetic moment located at the center of the pickup loop. Measuring the magnetic response of mesoscopic samples or mapping it vs. position for extended systems are effective methods for revealing fundamental quantum properties of condensed matter systems. Over the past few decades, many advanced magnetic imaging schemes have been developed, including magnetic force microscopy Our devices were fabricated at Hypres Inc. using planarized Nb/AlO x /Nb trilayer Josephson junction technology, including two planarized Nb layers with approximately 0.8 μm minimum feature size. The SQUID consists of a superconducting ring shunted by one Josephson junction with designed critical current of 20 μA [Fig. As readout, we adopted a dispersive approach. An external magnetic flux applied to one pickup loop will induce a circulating current in the SQUID resonator and through the junction which changes the Josephson inductance. Part of the circulating current is shunted through the other pickup loop inductance and reduces the effect of the external flux by a factor of two. Thus, the resonance frequency of the tank circuit and hence the mixer output voltage (V ) is a periodic function of the applied external magnetic flux (Φ a ) with a periodicity of 2Φ 0 [see Fig. The analysis discussed above assumes that the excitation signal is small enough (< -95 dBm) for the SQUID to behave as a linear inductor. When increasing the power, nonlinear effects arising from the sinusoidal phase-current characteristic of the Josephson junction become important. With moderate excitation, one can harness inherent nonlinearities in the SQUID to enhance the sensitivity [inset of Fig. While nonlinearities result in an enhancement of the transduction factor, the spectral noise density of the SQUID S V /(dV /dΦ) is also affected by parametric amplification of noise on the excitation line. To estimate the total noise level, two contributions have to be taken into account. First, the semiconductor cryogenic amplifier adds its own noise to the reflected signal. Second, noise on the drive line is amplified by the SQUID with parametric voltage gain G = Γ -1 (dv ref /dv in ) = 1 + v in Γ -1 (∂Γ/∂v in ), where v ref = Γv in is the complex voltage amplitude of the reflected signal at the SQUID. The above expression assumes conservation of energy so that changes in v in can only affect the phase of v ref . An estimate of |G| based on the dependence of the measured reflected signal on the excitation power is shown in Fig. where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T amp is the equivalent input noise of the cryogenic amplifier and T eff is the effective Johnson noise temperature considering the effect of quantum noise at the excitation frequency and the base temperature (k B T eff = hω coth(hω/k B T base )). At 4 K, the thermal Johnson noise is close to the noise associated with the first stage semiconductor microwave amplifier (5 K), requiring only very small parametric gain in the SQUID for the amplified noise to exceed the noise from the semiconductor amplifier. However, we expect that at lower temperature a stronger excitation can be applied to the SQUID to provide higher parametric gain in order to reduce the effect of amplifier noise before noise amplification becomes dominant. Fig. To verify the noise model, we directly measured the noise at different points on both linear and non-linear branches [Fig. At 4 K the best operating points lie on the linear branch where parametric gain is negligible. We obtained an effective flux noise of 80 nΦ 0 Hz -1/2 . This = hL = 79 nΦ 0 Hz -1/2 at dilution refrigerator temperatures. We attribute improved noise performance of our devices to the advantages of dispersive readout. Note that the bandwidth decreases as the parametric gain increases. The bandwidth was determined by sweeping the ac signal frequency at the field coil. For the linear branch it is about 200 MHz and independent of the applied power. This value lies close to an estimate of the bandwidth of a simple LC resonator with a line impedance of 50 Ω and a capacitance of 30 pF (1/2πZ 0 C ≈ 100 MHz). The bandwidth at the nonlinear branch is a function of the parametric gain and thus a function of power [inset of Fig. In conclusion, we have characterized a Nb scanning SQUID at 4 K. Using homodyne to readout our dispersive RF SQUIDs, we reached a flux noise of S 1/2 Φ = 80 nΦ 0 Hz -1/2 with 200 MHz bandwidth at 4 K. Furthermore, estimations predict that at lower temperature and higher excitation power the flux noise decreases to 30 nΦ 0 Hz -1/2 at a bandwidth of 20 MHz. Thus, our micro-SQUID shows flux sensitivity on par with the best reported micro-and nano-SQUIDs, sub-micron pickup loops and integrated on-chip field coils and a scanning microscopy compatible geometry. A reduced back action and dissipation compared to conventional DC SQUIDs can be expected because of the lower operating frequency and easier variation of the excitation power. Furthermore, heating effects commonly found in on-chip resistors can be avoided. 