Tunnel-injection lasers promise various advantages in comparison to conventional laser designs. In this paper, the physics of the tunnel injection process is studied within a microscopic theory in order to clarify design requirements for laser structures based on quantum dots as active material and an injector quantum well providing excited charge carriers. We analyze how the electronic states of the injector quantum well and quantum dot levels should be aligned and in which way their coupling through the tunnel-injection barrier should be adjusted for optimal carrier injection rates into the quantum-dot ground state used for the laser transition. Our description of the tunnel-injection process combines two main ingredients: the tunnel coupling of the wave functions as well as the phonon-and Coulomb-assisted transition rates. For this purpose, material-realistic electronic state calculations for the coupled system of injector quantum well, tunnel barrier, and quantum dots are combined with a many-body theory for the carrier scattering processes. We find that the often assumed longitudinal-optical-phonon resonance condition for the level alignment has practically no influence on the injection rate of carriers into the quantum dot states. The structural design should provide optimal hybridization of the injector quantum well states with excited quantum dot states. In conventional semiconductor lasers, the modulation response is limited by the nonlinearity of the differential gain. This nonlinearity originates from several effects, the most important ones being spectral hole burning and carrier heating. The latter can be mitigated in semiconductor lasers with quantum wells (QWs) as active material by injection of cold carriers through a tunnelinjection (TI) barrier. In a QD laser, the pump process typically generates excited carriers in the delocalized states, while the QD ground state is used for the carrier recombination into the laser mode. The capture of carriers from extended into localized states is assisted by carrier-phonon In this paper, we analyze the carrier dynamics of TI-QD laser structures in terms of the interplay between structural properties and carrier interaction effects to gauge the engineering possibilities of the TI design and its advantages over conventional laser designs. Electronic states are determined from three-dimensional k • p calculations for the coupled system of injector QW, TI barrier, and QDs in order to quantify electronic hybridization effects. The influence of QD and QW geometry and material composition on level alignment and hybridization strength and the resulting relaxation and capture dynamics of excited carriers due to carrier-carrier Coulomb scattering and carrier scattering with LO-phonons are determined. The carrier dynamics is an important component for efficient laser operation, as it controls, e.g., the non-linear gain, the modulation properties, and the temperature stability of the laser. We analyze the conditions for the level alignment to achieve optimized carrier injection rates. It is shown that a phonon resonance condition does not appear, for two distinct reasons. The electronic states of the joint system of injector QW, TI barrier, and QDs are hybrid states containing a natural spread of energies due to the quasi-continuous nature of the QW states. The phenomenon is related to virtual bound states discussed in Ref. 37. Furthermore, perturbation theory describes carrier-phonon interaction in terms of free-carrier states while a treatment beyond perturbation theory reveals new joint eigenstates of the coupled carrier-phonon system. These are known as polaronic states and can be viewed as hybrid states of the carrier-phonon interaction. For LO phonons providing the dominant coupling to lattice vibrations, the inclusion of polaronic effects has been shown effectively lift the resonance criterion and thus avoiding a relaxation bottleneck. For TI laser structures, the injector QW is placed in the growth direction below a QD and separated by a tunnel barrier, as sketched in Fig. The foregoing discussion leads to the following picture of the tunnel injection process. Carriers are captured from bulk states into the injector QW and thermalize via Coulomb and carrier-phonon interaction. This populates the hybridized states, which are partially localized within the QD. As a final step, from these states, carrier scattering into the QD ground state occurs. A. Perturbative and non-perturbative treatment of carrier-phonon scattering Using perturbation theory and scattering rates based on Fermi's golden rule, kinetic equations for the dynamics of the carrier occupation probabilities f α of the electronic states α can be derived, which contains Boltzmann scattering rates, 39 Here, M βα are the matrix elements of the carrier-phonon interaction, n LO is the phonon occupation, α is the energy of the state α, and ω LO is the phonon frequency. The δ-function in Eq. ( in which two principal modifications are present. The δfunction, which represents strict energy conservation, is replaced by functions that contain the spectral properties of electrons and holes under the influence of the interaction. This includes renormalization effects in the form of quasiparticle energies and their broadening. Quasiparticles as eigenstates of the interacting system are characterized by new energies in comparison to the free-particle energies. The broadening reflects the finite lifetime of the quasi-particle, caused by emission and reabsorption of phonons. In the nonperturbative regime, the new energies reflect the dressing of the electronic states with a series of phonon replica due to emission and absorption processes. It is the overlap of these dressed states and their quasiparticle broadening, which is lifting the phonon resonance condition. Furthermore, non-Markovian effects are included via the t' integral and the explicit dependence of the population functions on the system evolution in the past. Non-Markovian effects reflect the finite built-up time of quasiparticles and the influence of this built-up process on scattering rates. In systems with a quasicontinuous electronic density of states, such as bulk semiconductors or QWs, the perturbative treatment of carrier-phonon interaction is often a good approximation, while the nonperturbative treatment provides quantitative corrections to the scattering rates -in particular to the ultrafast carrier dynamics. In the following, we discuss the physics behind the absence of a resonance condition for the LO-phononassisted carrier scattering from the injector QW and upper QD states into the QD ground state. One origin lies in the electronic states of the coupled system. Instead of calculating just the overlap of unperturbed quantumwell and quantum-dot states through the tunnel barrier, we determine new eigenstates of the coupled system. For the considered level alignment, the excited quantum-dot state hybridizes with the quasi-continuum of quantumwell states. As a result, the discrete upper quantum-dot state is replaced by a band of electronic energies with a width of several meV. This itself lifts the resonance condition for scattering from the hybrid injector quantum well and excited quantum-dot state into the discrete quantum-dot ground state due to LO phonons. As a second origin, Fermi's golden rule (which has led to the prediction of a phonon bottleneck) should not be applied to the coupling of discrete quantum-dot states by LO phonons (see, e.g., Seebeck et al. 16). A nonperturbative treatment of the carrier-phonon interaction provides quasiparticle (polaron) effects that broaden the individual levels, thereby weakening the resonance condition. The combination of electronic-state hybridization and nonperturbative carrier-phonon interaction essentially negates the resonance criterion to a very large degree, as can be seen from the results in the following section; see especially Figs. 4(a) and 4(f). Also at high excited carrier densities relevant for laser action, Coulomb scattering complements the carrier-phonon scattering. As Coulomb scattering has no preferred energy resonance, this is just another contribution known to lift the LOphonon bottleneck. In analogy to the carrier-phonon interaction, a kinetic equation for Coulomb scattering can be formulated as For the Coulomb scattering, we apply a quasiparticle approximation for the retarded Green's functions (GFs) using polaronic energies and the corresponding quasiparticle broadening. Within the Markov approximation, Eqs. ( where Γ in α and Γ out α describe the in and out scattering of the state α. For a small deviation from quasiequilibrium, the scattering time τ can be calculated according to In the following, we describe our numerical results for the carrier scattering. To identify their relative importance, the carrier-phonon and the Coulomb interaction are investigated separately in the next two sections. Scattering processes are described in terms of hybridized QD-QW states, as discussed in Sec. II. We utilize the nonperturbative treatment of the carrier-phonon interaction via Eq. ( The temporal evolution of the electron population for the QD ground state and the hole population for the three lowest QD states are shown in Figs. In this section, we investigate the Coulomb scattering contribution to the carrier injection processes. As for the phonons, this interaction mechanism is described as scattering between hybridized QD-QW states, using a generalized Boltzmann equation including quasiparticle properties as discussed in Sec. III C. For the Coulomb interaction no significant influence of the detuning is ex- pected due to the absence of characteristic energies like the one for LO phonons. We choose a barrier width of 2 nm, an excess barrier height of 175 meV, and an indium concentration of 0.695 as an example to discuss the influence of the Coulomb mediated tunneling in TI structures. To have comparable conditions to Sec. IV A, we assume quasiequilibrium distributions with varying carrier density at a temperature of 300 K in the injector QW and an initially empty QD ground state. The results for the Coulomb-mediated injection are shown in Fig. To facilitate the use of the presented results in device models based on rate equations, we extract scattering times for the TI structure by considering the relaxation of a small perturbation of a quasi-equilibrium distribution. These scattering times are calculated via Eq. ( In this paper, the carrier injection from a QW to the QD ground state for TI structures has been investigated. The QW-like hybridized states support a fast relaxation into the QD ground state. In contrast to previous works, it is found that the tunability of the interaction strength in the TI structure is not governed by the energetic alignment with the phonon energy, but by the alignment of the excited QD state with the QW conduction band minimum that determines the strength of the hybridization. Unlike conventional QD laser structures, only continuumassisted capture processes are possible for the electrons in the TI system. This decreases the importance of the Coulomb interaction relative to the electron-phonon interaction. For structures with strong hybridization the electron-phonon interaction can be the dominant process even at high carrier densities. The insensitivity of the carrier-phonon interaction to variations of the QW or barrier material composition supports the experimental findings of high modulations rates due to a reduction of the gain nonlinearity and spectral hole burning. with the prefactor (B3) that includes the polar coupling strength α and the reduced mass m. The functions containing the spectral properties of electrons and holes under the influence of the interaction [see Eq. ( For the corresponding retarded selfenergy in random-phase approximation (RPA), where the phonon propagators d ≷ are given by d ≷ (t, t ) = (1 + n LO )e ∓iω LO (t-t ) + n LO e ±iω LO (t-t ) , (B6) and contain the phonon frequency and the phonon population. The carrier-phonon scattering is described in terms of a quantum-kinetic equation [see Eq.( 