The pseudogap (PG) state and its related intra-unit-cell symmetry breaking remain the focus in the research of cuprate superconductors. Although the nematicity has been studied in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ , especially underdoped samples, its behavior in other cuprates and different doping regions is still unclear. Here we apply a scanning tunneling microscope to explore an overdoped (Bi, Pb) 2 Sr 2 CuO 6+δ with a large Fermi surface (FS). The establishment of a nematic order and its real-space distribution is visualized as the energy scale approaches the PG. The electronic nematic order has attracted a lot of interests in both the cuprate and iron-based high-transition-temperature (high-T c ) superconductors STM is a powerful tool for detecting electronic structures with an atomic resolution in the real space. For Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi-2212), the STM studies have revealed a 90o rotational symmetry breaking for the O sites within each CuO 2 unit cell, around the energy level of the pseudogap (PG) states With similar phase diagrams, various cuprate superconductors can differ in the detailed electronic structures Topographical and electronic properties of overdoped Bi-2201. The samples studied in this paper are overdoped (Bi, Pb) 2 Sr 2 CuO 6+δ single crystals with T c = 13 K and all the data are taken in an ultra-high-vacuum STM at T = 4.5 K. Figure The local electronic property can be probed by the differential conductance (dI/dV) spectroscopy, which is proportional to the local density of states (LDOS). A spectral survey is taken simultaneously with the topographic image in Fig. The Bogoliubov quasi-particle excitations, which is related with the SC phase, are often detected around the Fermi energy. The electronic excitations behave differently as the energy increases to the PG energy scale Collective nematic order. Although the current Bi-2201 sample is overdoped with a large FS, the PG state is known to exist Figure where Z ̅ (ε) is the spatial average of Z(r ⃗, ε). In Fig. The information extracted from the Bragg peaks in the momentum space represents an asymmetric intra-unit-cell electronic modulation along the x and y directions in the real space. Based on the spatial structure shown in the inset of Fig. where r ⃗ n is the location of the Cu site centered in the nth unit cell, and N is the total number of unit cells. The results of Z x (r ⃗ n , ε) and Z y (r ⃗ n , ε) are averaged from the O sites of the nth unit cell along the x and y directions (labeled by O x and O y ), respectively. As the reduced energy ε increases, O(ε) follows the same trend as O ̃(ε), and a smooth transition from C 4v to C 2v is observed (as shown in Fig. The nematicity defined in (2) is explored in the Z(r ⃗, ε) maps which are derived from the dI/dV spectra. To confirm that the nematicity is not artificially induced by our data analysis, we directly average the dI/dV spectrum over all the O x /O y sites in the FOV. As shown in Fig. Real-space distribution of the nematic order. The two order parameters, O ̃(ε) and O(ε), reflect the same phenomenon of the nematic order, despite the fact that they are defined separately in the momentum and real spaces. The real-space Z(r ⃗, ε) map will be further applied to explore the spatial distribution of nematicity. However, the electronic modulations other than the intra-unit-cell periodicity lead to strong interference signal in the real space, and the atomic-scale nematic order is buried in background noise and other electronic orders. A solution to this difficulty is to retain Z ̃(q ⃗, ε) within a limited region around four Bragg peaks in the momentum space, which can be realized by The Gaussian filtering function, f Λ (q ⃗) = exp(-q 2 /2Λ 2 ), is defined with a filtering size Λ -1 . Figure where Z f,x (r ⃗ n , ε) and Z f,y (r ⃗ n , ε) are averaged over the O sites along the x and y directions. A coarse-grained average within the area of Λ -2 is implied in our cell order parameter, which is consistent with a previous approach of estimating the correlation length by a local Fourier transform Three typical cell order parameter maps with ε = 0.150, 0.375, and 0.975 are displayed in Fig. , is used to quantitatively describe the structural difference between the images of local order parameters at two different reduced energies. A similarity over 75% is found between Fig. To gain a more quantitative description of the site-specified nematicity, we draw a histogram of O f (n, ε) for each reduced energy ε by counting O f (n, ε) over a selected bin size δO f = 0.001. In As shown in Fig. The STM experiment reported in this paper confirms the nematic order in overdoped Bi-2201, extending previous studies in Bi-2212 In Bi-2212, the nematic order is determined in underdoped and optimal samples, but disappears for overdoped samples without the PG state. Our observation in the overdoped Bi-2201 presents the nematicity in cuprates with a large FS, implying the nematicity more correlated with the PG state than the FS structure. On the other hand, the nematic order also coexists with other electronic orders, e.g., the charge order (smectic order) which is interpreted by a Landau-Ginzberg theory Sample growth. The high-quality Pb-doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CuO 6+δ single crystals are grown by the traveling solvent floating zone method 