The magnetic field dependence of the superconductivity in nanocrystalline boron doped diamond thin films is reported. Evidence of a glass state in the phase diagram is presented, as demonstrated by electrical resistance and magnetic relaxation measurements. The position of the phase boundary in the H-T plane is determined from resistance data by detailed fitting to zero-dimensional fluctuation conductivity theory. This allows determination of the boundary between resistive and non-resistive behavior to be made with greater precision than the standard ad hoc onset/midpoint/offset criterion. Historically, the experimental observation of a proposed superconducting glass state was first made by Müller, Takashige and Bednorz in powder samples of La 2 CuO 4-y :Ba 1 . The authors noted the existence of frustration in granular systems that gives rise to a "superconductive glass" that is equivalent to an XY spinglass 2 , demonstrating the existence of degenerate states. In line with the essential features of the analogous spinglass system, the authors reported a logarithmic decay of the remanent magnetization, and an irreversibility line -the boundary in the H-T plane between reversibility and irreversibility in magnetization -which obeyed H ∝ (1 -T /T c ) 3/2 . This observed power law of the irreversibility line was thus likened to the de Almeida-Thouless line which separates the metastable and stable regions of the phase diagram in related models of spinglasses Similar behavior regarding the irreversibility line and magnetic relaxation was subsequently observed in single crystal Y-Ba-Cu-O, and an alternative interpretation was proposed by Yeshurun and Malozemoff in the form of a thermally activated flux-creep model 4 . Tinkham then extended this work to propose a phenomenological model that includes the effects of pinning and reproduces the observed power law 5 . Other theories purporting to explain the form of the irreversibility line in this kind of superconductor include vortex-lattice melting 6 and the existence of a disordered vortex glass Whilst the majority of reports of irreversible magnetic behavior have focused on high-T c compounds, Oppermann In this paper, we describe the measurement of the magnetic field-dependence of superconductivity in BNCD films, where the granularity may be controlled by the film thickness. We have found evidence in support of a superconducting glass in the phase diagram which we have confirmed with electrical resistivity and magnetic relaxation measurements. We observe a quasi de Almedia-Thouless-type line in H c2 (T ), and confirm the proposed glassy superconductivity by observing a logarithmic decay in the magnetization over time. Such glassy dynamics can be attributed to frustration in a system of weakly coupled superconducting clusters, each of which acts as an individual U (1) ∼ = O(2) spin 2 . The BNCD films, described in detail elsewhere All temperature dependent measurements relating to the magnetic field dependence of the superconductivity were made using a Quantum Design physical property measurement system with a base temperature of 1.9 K. Resistance measurements were performed using silver paste contacts made to the sample surface in a four-wire Van der Pauw configuration. Vibrating sample magnetometry was used to measure the magnetization. All measurements were made with the magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the samples. Fig. The resulting field induced transition temperature is shown in Fig. To confirm the observation of glassy superconductivity in this system, we have also measured the relaxation of the magnetization, and observed the logarithmic decay that is expected from the analogous frustrated model. The procedure for measuring the magnetic relaxation described by Yeshurun, Malozemoff and Shaulov 26 was followed. The sample was cooled to the measurement temperature in zero applied field. A magnetic field smaller than the irreversibility field, but larger than the minimum sample magnetization, was then applied, followed by a step decrease that ensured a reversal of the flux profile. The values of these fields were determined by measurement of a magnetic hysteresis loop at the appropriate temperature. The magnetic moment was then monitored as a function of time by vibrating sample magnetometry, where the amplitude of sample translation was minimised to avoid possible field inhomogeneity. The normalised magnetic relaxation at 2.2 K is shown in Fig. Generally, reports of the field dependence of the resistive transition in BNCD to date have shown that the transition width broadens with applied magnetic field; the onset of the superconductivity has been shown to be less sensitive to the field than the tail in the resistance that grows with increasing field The samples studied here are not unique in terms of the existence of a quasi de Almeida-Thouless line in the H(T ) diagram; there is some evidence in the literature that other BNCD samples show similar behavior under the influence of a magnetic field As an important side-note, it is common practice throughout the literature to calculate the coherence length in films such as these by comparing the H(T ) curve to the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) theory Finally, the signature of glassy superconductivity observed here has potential consequences for the use of BNCD in low temperature device engineering. The high Young's modulus of diamond -even in the form of nanocrystalline films 36 -makes it a good candidate for the fabrication of high frequency nanoelectromechanical resonators with which to study the fundamentals of quan-tum mechanics in a macroscopic object We have examined the magnetic field dependence of the superconductivity in BNCD. We extract values of the transition temperature in increasing magnetic fields, and clearly observe the behavior H ∝ (1 -T /T c ) 3/ C. Ebner and D. Stroud, Physical Review B 31, 165 (1985). 3 K. H. Fischer and J. A. Hertz, Spin glasses, Vol. 1 (Cambridge University Press, 1993). 4 Y. Yeshurun and A. P. Malozemoff, Physical Review Letters 60, 2202 (1988). 5 M. Tinkham, Physical Review Letters 61, 1658 (1988). 6 G. Blatter, V. Geshkenbein, A. Larkin, and H. Nordborg, Physical Review B 54, 72 (1996).