Motivated by the recent low-temperature experiments on bulk FeSe, we study the electron correlation effects in a multiorbital model for this compound in the nematic phase using the U (1) slave-spin theory. We find that a finite nematic order helps to stabilize an orbital selective Mott phase. Moreover, we propose that when the d-and s-wave bond nematic orders are combined with the ferro-orbital order, there exists a surprisingly large orbital selectivity between the xz and yz orbitals even though the associated band splitting is relatively small. Our results explain the seemingly unusual observation of strong orbital selectivity in the nematic phase of FeSe, uncover new clues on the nature of the nematic order, and set the stage to elucidate the interplay between superconductivity and nematicity in iron-based superconductors. The iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) present a topic of extensive current research in condensed matter physics Besides the overall effect of electron correlations Another important aspect of the multiorbital effect in FeSCs is associated with the nematic order. In most of the undoped iron pnictides, there is a structural transition from a tetragonal phase to an orthorhombic one with lowering the temperature. Right at or slightly below the structural transition temperature, the system develops a long-range (π, 0) antiferromagnetic (AFM) order. The superconductivity usually appears near this antiferromagnetic phase. In between the structural and the magnetic transitions the C 4 lattice rotational symmetry is broken, and the system is in a nematic phase. The origin of this nematic phase is still under debate. In the spin-driven-nematicity scenario, the nematicity is associated with an Ising order characterizing the anisotropic antiferromagnetic fluctuations Among the FeSCs, FeSe is one of the most fascinating compounds. The single-layer FeSe on the SrTiO 3 substrate holds the record of the highest superconducting transition temperature of the FeSCs In this Letter, we examine the electron correlation effects in a multiorbital Hubbard model for the nematic phase of FeSe using previously developed U (1) slave-spin theory Model and method. We study a five-orbital Hubbard model for FeSe. The Hamiltonian reads as H TB is a five-orbital tight-binding Hamiltonian with tetragonal lattice symmetry, where d † iασ creates an electron in orbital α (α = 1, ..., 5 denoting xz, yz, x 2 -y 2 , xy, and 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals, respectively) with spin σ at site i, α refers to the energy level associated with the crystal field splitting (which is diagonal in the orbital basis), and μ is the chemical potential. The tight-binding parameters t αβ ij and α , which are presented in the Supplemental Material (SM) where Here, U , U , and J H , respectively denote the intraorbital repulsion, the interorbital repulsion, and the Hund's rule coupling, and we take U = U -2J H . Here,besides the ferro-orbital order (δ f ) we have also taken into account a d-and an s-wave bond nematic order (δ d and δ s ), which corresponds to nearest-neighboring hopping anisotropy. Phase diagram in the tetragonal phase. We first examine the correlation effects in the tetragonal phase. The ground-state phase diagram in the J H -U plane is shown in Fig. Enhanced orbital selectivity in the nematic phase. We turn next to how the nematicity influences electron cor- relations. Fig. We also analyze the effects of the two bond nematic orders on the Mott localization, and find that the enhancement of orbital selectivity is a general feature (Fig. x(ŷ) (and t 22 x(ŷ) ) are highly anisotropic. In particular, t 11 x = t 22 ŷ ≈ 0. Hence either a d-or an s-wave bond nematic order will enhance the kinetic energy associated with the xz and yz orbitals. This increases the orbital selectivity, promoting an OSMP. But the overall bandwidth is also increased, and therefore destabilzes a MI. Orbital selectivity and band splitting. The nematic order not only helps stabilizing an OSMP by Mott localizing the xy orbital, but also enhances the orbital selectivity between the xz and yz orbitals. As shown in Fig. In the case of a single bare ferro-orbital order, δ f must be larger than 0.4 eV to arrive at such a large ratio within a reasonable range of U (See Fig. To make progress, we consider a combination of the three nematic orders. An observation of Eq. ( Discussions. With a single nematic order alone, to keep the band splittings ∆E Γ and ∆E M to be compatible to the observed values (< 50 meV), we find that the bare nematic order must be small, leading to a weak orbital selectivity in the xz and yz sector with Z yz /Z xz close to 1. This is consistent with a previous study The necessity that all the three types of nematic orders coexist implies that the nematic order observed in FeSCs has an unconventional origin and cannot be entirely driven by orbital order. In the spin driven nematicity, the nematic order is just an Ising order associated with short-range antiferromagnetic or antifer-roquadrupolar orders within an effective frustrated spin model including short-range Heisenberg and biquadratice interactions. Within this scenario, it is expected that the nearest-neighbor bond nematic orders, together with the linearly coupled ferro-orbital order, contribute significantly in the nematic phase Conclusions. We have studied the effects of electron correlation with a nematic order in a multiorbital Hubbard model for FeSe by using the slave-spin method. We show that the orbital selectivity is generally enhanced by the nematic order. A large combined nematic order can give rise to a large orbital selectivity in the xz/yz orbital subspace with a small band splitting. Our results resolve an outstanding puzzle in the recent experimental observations on the orbital selectivity and nematicity in FeSe, elucidate the nature and origin of the nematic order in FeSCs, and pave the way for understanding the interplay between nematicity and high temperature superconductivity. We This representation contains a U (1) gauge redundancy corresponding to f † iασ → f † iασ e -iθiασ and S + iασ → S + iασ e iθiασ . As a result, the slave spins can be used to carry the U (1)-symmetric physical charge degree of freedom, similarly as in the slave-rotor approach To ensure that the saddle point captures the correct quasiparticle spectral weight in the non-interacting limit (being equal to 1), we define a dressed operator in the Schwinger boson representation of the slave spins (in a way similar to the standard slave-boson theory where , and δ is an infinitesimal positive number to regulate P ± iασ . Here a iασ and b iασ are Schwinger bosons representing the slave-spin operators: They satisfy an additional constraint, In other words, they are hard-core bosons. In this representation, the constraint in Eq. (S2) becomes In addition, Eq. (S1) becomes The Hamiltonian given in Eq. ( Here, λ iασ is a Lagrange multiplier used to enforce the constraint in Eq. (S5). In addition, H S int is the interaction Hamiltonian in Eq. ( (S8) A metallic phase corresponds to Z iασ > 0, and a Mott insulator corresponds to Z iασ = 0 in all orbitals with a gapless spinon spectrum. After decomposing the boson and spinon operators and treating the constraint on average, we obtain two saddlepoint Hamiltonians for the spinons and the Schwinger bosons, respectively: where δ αβ is Kronecker's delta function, ξ αβ k = 1 N ijσ t αβ ij e ik(ri-rj ) , and In addition, μα is an effective onsite potential defined as μα = 2 ξα η α (S13) where and with Eqs. (S9) and (S10) represent the main formulation of the U (1) slave-spin approach at the saddle-point level. Note that in this approach, the spinon dispersion (along with the dispersion of the physical electrons) is naturally renormalized by the quasiparticle spectral weights Z α Z β and the effective onsite potential μα . We study the metalto-insulator transitions in the paramagnetic phase preserving the translational symmetry. The latter allows us to drop the spin and/or site indices of the Schwinger bosons (slave spins) and the Lagrange multiplier λ α in the above saddle-point equations. We refer to Refs. The focus of the present work is the effect of the nematicity on the orbital selectivity. We have therefore treated only the diagonal part of the Hund's coupling J H . The Mott and orbital-selective Mott transitions are related to the charge U (1) symmetry of the system. Therefore, retaining only the U (1) instead of the SU (2) spin symmetry does not qualitatively affect the nature of the transitions. But quantitative difference, such as the critical U values for the transitions, may exist, as discussed in DMFT studies. Here we give the explicit expressions of the non-interacting band splittings at Γ and M points. From Eq. ( and the band splitting at M point is It is easy to see that for δ f /4 = δ d = δ s , the bare band splittings ∆E Γ = ∆E M = 0: The effects of the different nematic order components cancel with each other, in contrast to when either the ferro-orbital order δ f , or the bond nematic order δ d or δ s acts alone. Taking into account the electron correlations, both ∆E Γ and ∆E M will be renormalized from their bare values. But as shown in Fig. 