We demonstrate how potential impurities are a very powerful tool for determining the pairing symmetry in graphene proximity-coupled to a spin-singlet superconductor. All d-wave states are characterized by subgap resonances, with spatial patterns clearly distinguishing between nodal and chiral d-wave symmetry, while s-wave states have no subgap resonances. We also find strong supergap impurity resonances associated with the normal state Dirac point. Sub-and supergap resonances only interact at very low doping levels, then causing suppression of the supergap resonances. Superconductivity in graphene The superconducting pairing symmetry is crucial as it is the key for many properties in the superconducting state. However, the induced pairing symmetry can be unknown even in proximitized systems, due to interface roughness or special properties of the material Recent scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) experiments Modifications of the local density of states (LDOS) by a single potential impurity offers a tantalizing opportunity to more accurately determine the superconducting pairing symmetry. While potential impurities cannot induce subgap states in conventional s-wave SCs, as stated in Anderson's theorem In this work we show that a potential impurity in graphene in proximity to any spin-singlet SC gives rise to several impurity resonances that uniquely determine the pairing symmetry. In particular, any d-wave state is characterized by subgap resonances, with spatial and QPI patterns clearly differentiating between nodal and chiral states. In contrast, s-wave states have no subgap resonances. Constant and extended s-wave symmetry is however still easily distinguishable since the latter is nearly gapless at low doping levels. We also find that superconducting graphene always hosts supergap impurity resonances, associated with the normal state Dirac point. Subgap and supergap impurity resonances do not interact as long as the normal state Dirac point is well separated in energy from the superconducting gap edge due to doping. However, at very low doping levels the supergap resonance is strongly suppressed. Our results are directly relevant to experiments on proximity-induced superconductivity in graphene Model.-When graphene is placed on a SC, see Fig. Here a † iσ (b † iσ ) creates an electron with spin σ at site i in sublattice A (B) and a λ with λ = 1, 2, 3 being the nearest neighbor bond (NN) directions, see Fig. , and ∆ dxy = 1 √ 2 (0, 1, -1). Moreover, the two d-wave solutions belong to the same irreducible representation of the point group and are thus allowed to mix. In particular, the chiral combination 3 , e ±i 4π 3 ) is a fully gapped time-reversal symmetry breaking state that has been shown to have the lowest intrinsic energy To investigate the influence of impurities, we add a single potential impurity of strength U to site m using We set μ > 0, U > 0 which adds positively to the total on-site energy of site m (for a discussion different signs, see SM Supergap resonances.-For finite impurity strength U , the LDOS is suppressed at the impurity site, see SM In Fig. Subgap resonances.-Turning our attention to the subgap resonance spectrum, we see in Fig. The d-wave subgap resonance peaks Ω sc changes with U , but the behavior is very different from that of the supergap resonance, see Figs. Graphene on cuprate substrate.-Above we established the existence of both supergap and subgap impurity resonances. We have however so far kept both μ and ∆ 0 relatively large, to clearly elucidate the different phenomena. To model a more realistic experimental regime, such as graphene on a cuprate substrate It is therefore possible to clearly differentiate between the s-and s ex states by a bulk LDOS measurement in this experimentally relevant regime. On the other hand, all d-waves states, see Fig. Impurity resonances in SCs give a distinct spatial pattern, not unlike Friedel oscillations in metals. For the supergap resonance we find the same spatial pattern in the superconducting states and the non-superconducting state, see SM We can even further differentiate between the different d-wave states by studying the QPI pattern, given by the Fourier transformed LDOS (FTLDOS). The QPI pattern of the chiral d-wave state, see Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated that potential im-purities are an extremely powerful tool for identifying pairing symmetries in graphene proximity-coupled to any spin-singlet SC. Subgap states only exist for d-wave symmetries, but distinct spatial patterns clearly differentiate chiral and nodal d-wave phases. We also find that superconducting graphene hosts strong co-existing supergap impurity resonances due to the normal state Dirac point. In combination this opens for very accurate determination of the pairing symmetry using STS measurements. In this supplementary material we provide additional figures and accompanied discussion to further support the work and conclusions of the main text. As discussed in the main text, when β = |μ|/∆ 0 1 the superconducting gap edge and D g are well separated and there is little or no interaction between superconductivity and the normal state Dirac point D g . This is clearly shown in Fig. At large doping levels compared to the superconducting gap edge, such that β 1, the normal state Dirac point D g and the superconducting gap are well separated in energy. In the main text we stated that the resonance peak close to D g is due to the normal state. In Fig. Impurity resonance states at doping close to the gap edge As discussed in the main text, the behavior of the supergap resonance associated with the normal Dirac point D g changes when β is reduced. This is illustrated in Fig. In the main text we analyzed the situation with μ > 0 and U > 0, i.e. graphene is effectively hole-doped and the impurity scattering adds further to the on-site energy of the impurity site, such that it has on-site energy μ + U . The impurity can thus be seen as a scatterer that will never counteract the overall doping of the system, just enhance it. If we were to reverse the signs of both U and μ simultaneously, all results are unchanged up to a reflection in energy. This situation can be understood as an electron doped system, where the impurity adds further electron doping. Thus, the electron doped system has the same impurity resonances but with a reflection in energy: electron-like components are now at negative energies while the hole-like components have positive energies. However, if only one of U and μ changes sign, there is no subgap resonance states, rather the subgap features spread out in energy except in the unitarity limit. The supergap resonance still appears, but now at E = 2μ -sgn(U )Ω g . This different behavior is the result of the total on-site energy at the impurity site being a partial cancelation between the overall chemical potential and the impurity scatterer. A detailed understanding of the lack of subgap peaks can relatively easily be obtained from the analytical solution of the poles of the T -matrix, but that is not the current objective. In the main text we investigated the spatial properties of the impurity-induced LDOS for subgap resonances. Here we show the same data for the supergap resonance. In Fig. In the main text we studied only the LDOS spatial pattern of the negative energy subgap impurity resonance. In Fig. ) FIG. 2. LDOS at impurity NN sites for different U in the sex (a), d x 2 -y 2 (b) and d x 2 -y 2 + idxy (c) states for μ = 0.8t, β = 10. Insets show a zoom-in at low energies. (d) Supergap peak energy Ωg shifted by μ as a function of 1/U for non-superconducting (•), sex (dotted), son (dashed), d x 2 -y 2 (solid), and d x 2 -y 2 + idxy (dashed-dotted) states. (e, f) Subgap peak energies ±Ωsc for dxy (+), d x 2 -y 2 (•), and d x 2 -y 2 + idxy ( * ) states as a function of 1/U and μ. Here ∆0 = 0.08t.