We study non-centrosymmetric topological superconductivity in correlated doped quantum spin-Hall insulators (QSHI) on honeycomb lattice without inversion symmetry where the intrinsic (Kane-Mele) and Rashba spin-orbit couplings can in general exist. We explore the generic topologically non-trivial superconducting phase diagram of the model system. Over a certain parameter space, the parity-mixing superconducting state with co-existing spin-singlet d+id and spin-triplet p+ipwave pairing is found. On a zigzag nanoribbon, the parity-mixing superconducting state shows co-existing helical and chiral Majorana fermions at edges. Relevance of our results for experiments is discussed. Non-centrosymmetric supercondutors (NCSs) have drawn intensive attraction since their discoveries in last decade due to the lack of space inversion symmetry, such as CeP t 3 Si, U Ir and Li 2 P d 3 B 1 . Based on Pauli principle, the total electronic wave function is antisymmetric under particle exchange. However, there is no definitely symmetry of spatial wave function in NCS, giving rise to the exotic mixture of spin singlet (with even parity) and triplet states (with odd parity) Cooper pairs. Graphene and graphene-based two-dimensional materials, such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), silicene, germanene, the binary compounds of the group-IV elements, and the group III.V compounds all have broken inversion symmetry For moving electrons in a closed orbit, an electric field will produce an effective magnetic field via relativistic effect, which generates a Zeeman energy term, recognized as Rashba SO coupling. The electric field based Rashba interaction can be internal in quantum wells with structural inversion symmetry breaking or external as is in graphene An interesting aspect of Rashba coupling in NCSs is that it induces spin-triplet pairing (apart from the conventional spin singlet pairing) due to the in-balance in populations of different spin species via Rashba coupling. A non-trivial Chern number has been predicted in spin triplet p+ip superconductors induced by Rashba interaction on square lattices under strong magnetic fields, which suggests that NCSs are topological superconductors On the other hand, for doped graphene in the absence of SO couplings, spin-singlet chiral superconducting state with d+id pairing is energetically favourable as the ground state Including the intrinsic (Kane-Mele) SO coupling in graphene, exotic and distinct helical topological edge states with two counter-propagating chiral modes protected by the TR symmetry were predicted within the Kane-Mele (KM) model, signature of 2D quantum spin Hall (topological) insulator The purpose of this paper is to explore all possible topologically non-trivial non-centrosymmetric superconducting states in graphene-based materials by combining all the phenomena mentioned above, including the effects of intrinsic (KM) and Rashba SO couplings, the mixture of d+id spin singlet and triplet p+ip-wave pairings in the presence of both KM and Rashba SO couplings. A recent related study on the simplified model without KM interaction in cuprates has shown non-trivial topological properties The Rashba and KM SO couplings have been argued to exist in graphene For electric field perpendicular to the graphene plane, the Hamiltonian of Rashba model is represented as 40 Here, a(b) stand for sublattices A(B), a † iσ (b jσ ) is a creation (an annihilation) operator for an electron at site i(j) with spin σ (σ ). The Pauli matrix is defined as σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ). λ R is the Rashba coupling. The nearest-neighbor (NN) vectors of the honeycomb lattice are given by: (1/2, √ 3/2), (1/2, -√ 3/2), and (-1, 0). ij denotes NN sites, connected by unit vectors e ij . λ R is proportional to the electric field. The explicit Rashba SO terms, (σ × e ij ) z , along three NN vectors, e i , can be described by those are illustrated schematically as green lines in figure The bulk band structure of graphene under Rashba interaction does not open a gap in the spectrum. It exhibits the crossings of conduction and valence bands, giving rise to the splitting of the original dispersion line on the Dirac points. The probability of finding an electron in the spinup and spin-down state is equal. As a result, the Rashba SO interaction does not break TR symmetry. For the band structure of ZGNR, it has be shown that there is crossing of conduction and valence edge bands, whereas intrinsic SO coupling tend to open gaps. Furthermore, the Rashba SO interaction produces a non-homogeneous spin polarization on the edge states of the ZGNR. This is in contrast to the effect produced by the intrinsic KM SO coupling where spin-polarized states have same spatial spin distribution The Kane-Mele SO coupling is represented by the spin dependent next-nearest-neighbor (NNN) hopping, reads 28 Here, c = a or b. λ SO is the Kane-Mele (intrinsic) spinorbital coupling. ij denotes NNN sites. For the same sublattice hopping, amplitude v ij = 1 or -1 (red counterclockwise or blue clockwise arrows in figure The Haldane model of honeycomb lattice shows that a non-trivial topology can exist when TR symmetry is broken. The KM model can be considered as spinful Haldane model, composed of two decoupled Hamiltonians, there up and down spin electrons exhibit helical quantum Hall effects in graphene, and backscattering are forbidden due to TR invariance For graphene without SO coupling, it has been shown that the superconducting state is of d+id spin singlet pairing at low energy. By examining the superconducting order on K and K points, s-wave and exotic p+ipwave pairing orders emerge, indicating that d+id-wave pairing is a mixed state from these two orders We now discuss mechanism of possible triplet p+ipwave superconductivity on honeycomb lattice. The superconducting pairing on honeycomb lattice has been proposed to exist between electrons on NN sites. The three amplitudes of the superconducting pairing gaps along the three unit lattice vectors are defined as: (1, e i2π/3 , e i4π/3 ) for d+id-wave pairing, (-2, 1, 1) and (0, 1, -1) for p+ip-wave pairing (see shaded yellow triangle in figure The general bulk Hamiltonian with d + p mixed pairing symmetry we consider includes a nearest hopping term (H t ), KM interaction (H KM ), Rashba interaction (H R ), the mixing singlet d+id-wave and triplet p+ipwave pairing (H ∆ ), chemical potential term (H μ ), and Zeeman coupling term (H B ). In momentum space, the model Hamiltonian of the system is written as Here k = (k x , k y ), and t, μ are the NN hopping parameter and chemical potential, respectively. The magnetic field B z is in the z direction, which results in the Zeeman coupling (μ B B z ). In what follows we set t = 1. The k-dependent NN hopping amplitude, KM and Rashba couplings are given by (-e l,y , e l,x ) e i(k•e l +π/2) , where e l = (e l,x , e l,y ). e l are NNN vectors, given by e 1,2 = ±a 1 , e 3,4 = ∓a 2 , and e 5,6 = ± (a 2 -a 1 ). The gap function can be represented as ∆ (k) = i∆ d σ y + i∆ t Rk • σσ y for the general co-existing singlet (d+idwave) and triplet (p+ip-wave) pairing state, while ∆ d and ∆ t are the corresponding parameters, respectively. In the Nambu basis, the Hamiltonian Eq. ( with Then, the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian can be written as (12) Here L k and R k are k-components of the Fourier transformed d+id-wave and p+ip-wave pairing gaps, respectively. μ ± is the modified chemical potential of spin up and down electrons. In two dimensional system, inversion and TR symmetries give rise to gapless Dirac modes since these symmetries enforce the σ z terms vanish in the Hamiltonian To simplify complex bulk Hamiltonian with Rashba interaction, the author in Ref. To search for edge modes, the Chern number (Hall conductance) of the system with periodic boundary conditions (bulk) is considered. The Chern number is obtained by integrating Berry curvature over all occupied bands in first Brillouin zone (BZ), can be expressed in the form In principle, the edge states connect bulk bands inside the band gap, and the number of edge modes is equal to the sum of the Chern numbers of each band below Fermi level. To analyze edge modes of the honeycomb lattice, a ZNR is considered. The Hamiltonian matrix is diagonalized directly to obtain band structure. For simplicity, the Hamiltonian matrix for a 3-ZNR within this formalism is given below. This can be straightforwardly extended to ZNR with different widths. The quantum many body state can be written in the following basis: each substate passes through either A or B sites of all zigzag chains (see figure Hk↓,k↑ H-k↑,k↑ H-k↓,k↑ Hk↑,k↓ Hk↓,k↓ H-k↑,k↓ H-k↓,k↓ Hk↑,-k↑ Hk↓,-k↑ H-k↑,-k↑ H-k↓,-k↑ Hk↑,-k↓ Hk↓,-k↓ H-k↑,-k↓ H-k↓,-k↓ where submatrices take the following form: Hk↑,k↑ = Ht + HKM -Hμ + HB , Hk↓,k↓ = Ht + HKM (λ SO → -λ SO ) -Hμ -HB , H-k↑,-k↑ = -Ht -HKM (λ SO → -λ SO ) + Hμ + HB , H-k↓,-k↓ = -Ht -HKM + Hμ -HB , Hk↓,k↑ = HR , Hk↑,k↓ = Hk↓,k↑ (γ 1 → -γ 1 ) , H-k↓,-k↑ = Hk↑,k↓ , H-k↑,-k↓ = Hk↓,k↑ , Hk↓,-k↓ = H∆t , Hk↑,-k↑ = -Hk↓,-k↓ (γ 1 → -γ 1 ) , Blank entries in above matrices are zeros and Ĩ represents unit matrix. The matrix elements are then given by the following expressions: Here k = k y , and ∆ i=0,1,2 are the matrix elements of d+id-wave pairing in ZGNR system where Ψ ±kσ= ↑, ↓ = Ψ ±kσ= ↑, ↓ (x; A , B ). Here, x, σ and A (B ) are position across the ribbon (see figure The NCS supports MF zero energy modes at the edge of vortex cores in the presence of a magnetic field The topological phase diagrams as a function of the chemical potential (μ) and Zeeman coupling (μ B B z ) are presented in figure The phase diagram for system at a finite Zeeman coupling is shown in figure Figure To confirm the emergence of edge mode in sample boundary with non-trivial bulk Chern number, band structures of a finite sized ZNR with periodic boundary conditions in the y-direction are considered (see figure The topological band structure of a 16-ZNR is shown in figure It has been shown theoretically that MFs may appear in graphene. The d+id pairing superconducting graphene hosts two chiral edge states in ZGNR, MFs will be created at single edge mode in the presence of Rashba interaction and a moderate Zeeman coupling In the present work, we start by considering honeycomb lattice bulk topological phase system with KM interaction and singlet pairing (d+id-wave) under Zeeman couplings. We further study the phase diagram for system with Rashba interaction induced triplet pairing (p+ip-wave). It is found the outcomes in the case are similar to that from previous studies We then study the edge state behavior of ZNRs in this most interesting case. Our parity mixing model can host three states per edge crossing the bulk gap in a ZNR. We find that helical and chiral Majorana edge modes can exist near Fermi level simultaneously. For large value of ∆ t (∆ t = 2λ R ), we also observe chiral edge modes at finite energy, whereas helical edge states still in the vicinity of zero energy. Mathematically, there is a duality between a s-wave system and a chiral p+ip-wave superconductor when Rashba SO interaction is taken into consideration Although many fascinating properties of graphenebased system are well described by the low energy Dirac femions, the electron-electron interactions are still of great interest. The many-body effect in graphene can be induced by doping or electron-electron interaction. The critical M points in band structure of graphene are associated with the well-known Van Hove singularity, playing a crucial role in the pairing symmetry of correlated graphene. For example, in graphene a spin-triplet f -wave instability occurs when it is doped to the Van Hove singularity at 1/4 doping 66 . It hosts helical MFs at large SO coupling In this work, we study topological phase diagram and edge states in non-centrosymmetric superconductors on honeycomb lattice with broken inversion symmetry. Due to the lack of inversion symmetry, co-existence between spin-singlet and spin-triplet pairings are in general expected in non-centrosymmetric superconductors. Promising candidates of this kind include: graphene and graphene-based two-dimensional materials. Due to the presence of both Kane-Mele intrinsic and Rashba spinorbit couplings, the superconducting state shows paritymixing phases between singlet d+id-wave and triplet p+ip-wave pairing states. We compute the topological Chern number in the bulk system and map out the topological phase diagram. We further study the possible edge states on a finite-size ribbon. For strong Kane-Mele intrinsic spin-orbit coupling, the helical Majorana modes are favoured despite the underlying time-reversal symmetry breaking d + id-wave singlet pairing. In the other limit with strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling, however, the spin-triplet p + ip-wave pairing is favoured, leading to chiral Majorana fermions at edges. When the strength of the Kane-Mele and the Rashba couplings are compara-ble, we find in certain parameter regime the co-existence between chiral and helical Majorana fermions at edges, a signature of parity-mixing. Our results provide useful guidance in searching for non-centrosymmetric superconductors on graphene-based materials.