Gallium (Ga) displays several metastable phases. Superconductivity is strongly enhanced in the metastable β-Ga with a critical temperature Tc = 6.04(5) K, while stable α-Ga has a much lower Tc < 1.2 K. Here we use a membrane-based nanocalorimeter to initiate the transition from α-Ga to β-Ga on demand, as well as study the specific heat of the two phases on one and the same sample. The in-situ transformation is initiated by bringing the temperature to about 10 K above the melting temperature of α-Ga. After such treatment, the liquid supercools down to 232 K, where β-Ga solidifies. We find that β-Ga is a strong-coupling type-I superconductor with ∆(0)/kBTc = 2.00(5) and a Sommerfeld coefficient γn = 1.53(4) mJ/molK 2 , 2.55 times higher than that in the α phase. The results allow a detailed comparison of fundamental thermodynamic properties between the two phases. Gallium is a metal with peculiar properties and very rich phase diagrams, caused by an interplay between covalent and metallic bonding. Like water, Ga expands as it freezes. The stable solid phase in ambient conditions (α-Ga) has a melting point at 302.9 K The crystal structures of α and β-Ga are given in Fig. The metastable phases are typically obtained by dispersing small Ga droplets in a solvent Due to the technical difficulties in handling metastable phases, relatively little is known about β-Ga in comparison with α-Ga. Low-temperature specific heat data is so far not available. While it is clear that Ga is a type-I superconduc-tor in both phases, experimental evidence is contradictory on whether β-Ga is a weak-or strong-coupling superconductor Ga samples with sizes between 10 μm and 150 μm were prepared and individually attached to a membrane-based acnanocalorimeter The specific heat signatures measured during two heating and cooling cycles around the melting temperature T m,α are shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of the specific heat, shown as C/T , as well as the entropy S(T ) = T 0 (C/T )dT for α- and β-Ga in the studied temperature range are shown in Fig. The contribution from the grease and the device specific heat has been independently measured and then subtracted. Melting can be seen as two sharp peaks in C/T at 257 K and 302.9 K for βand α-Ga, respectively, due to the presence of latent heat. The entropy of the metastable β phase lies above the stable α phase over the full temperature range. The sharp steps at the melting temperatures in the entropy curves are due to latent heat absorption. Latent heat for α-Ga at the melting point is taken as In order for the entropy to be conserved in the common liquid state, the latent heat for β-Ga at the melting point has to be This value is about 10% higher than that reported in Ref. The temperature dependence of the low temperature specific heat for β-Ga is shown in Fig. In the inset of Fig. We could not obtain the corresponding superconducting properties or accurately estimate γ n of α-Ga with our current experimental setup because of the low T c of α-Ga. Values from the literature are, however, well known in this case. From Fig. By integrating ∆C and ∆C/T down from T c , the free energy difference between the superconducting and the normal state ∆F (T ) is obtained. Using the α-fit to extrapolate down to T = 0, we obtain -∆F (0) = 14.4(4) mJ/mol. The superconducting energy gap ∆(0) can be estimated from the free energy ∆F (0) using the BCS relation: From ), the density of states at the Fermi energy N (E F ) can be estimated as 0.65(2) states/eVatom. A strong increase of N (E F ) in comparison with α-Ga is in agreement with both theoretical predictions The sharp, additional peak in the vicinity of the transition seen in Fig. The parameters obtained from our measurement for β-Ga are summarized in Table In a renormalized BCS frame, T c is given by three parameters Here, θ D is the Debye temperature and μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential coming from electron-electron interactions and opposing superconductivity. The Debye temperature θ D for αand β-Ga can be evaluated by fitting C/T as a function of T 2 at low temperatures. We obtain θ D,α = 350(20) K and θ D,β = 120(20) K. We note that the apparent θ D for both αand β-Ga are temperature dependent, but with opposite trends. For α-Ga the trend agrees with the observations in Ref. We show that it is possible to obtain metastable β-Ga through a simple thermal cycle of α-Ga around its melting temperature by using a membrane-based nanocalorimeter. This in-situ transformation enables the measurement of specific heat on the same Ga sample in the two different phases. We find that superconductivity is enhanced in the metastable phase, with T c shifting up to 6.04(5) K, mainly because of a strong increase in density of states at the Fermi energy N (E F ) and reduction in Coulomb pseudopotential μ * . From the specific heat jump at T c and the temperature dependence of ∆C(T ), we estimate a zero temperature energy gap ∆(0) = 1.04(3) meV and conclude that β-Ga is a strongcoupling superconductor. a f From Ref.