A modeling approach is proposed based on transmission line theory for the characterization of the periodic rectangular waveguide grating (RWG) structure. Using an equivalent circuit (EC) model the dispersion equation of the structure is derived with largely reduced workloads as compared to the conventional field-theory method. An EC based analysis of the RWG structure is performed. Numerical results show a good consistency between the two methods as varying structural parameters of significance. The proposed approach is also used for the taper design with the objective of minimizing wave reflection of the structure. A resulting multistage taper can deliver a low cumulative reflection coefficient on the order of 10 -3 . Furthermore, the coherence performance of an RWG based planar Cerenkov maser (PCM) is studied on the driving electron beam interacting with the traveling harmonic wave. This includes the impacts of the grating height uniformity, due to practical machining uncertainty, on the net wave reflection as well as on the growth rate of the wave in the maser. The obtained results show, that a non-uniformity on the order of 50 μm in the grating height can increase the reflection level by at least one order of magnitude. The PCM coherence can be considerably degraded, in terms of a significant reduction in the wave growth rate of more than 30% with respect to its theoretical value. P LANAR Cerenkov maser (PCM), as a promising electro- magnetic radiation source, has drawn growing interests in the millimeter (mm) and / or sub-mm wavelength range over the last decades Adoption of a rectangular waveguide grating (RWG) structure in the PCM takes advantages of the facts, in comparison to dielectric-lined slow-wave structures, that the metallic grating shows better tolerance to electron interception and stronger capability in heat dissipation. This is of particular importance for high power applications. However, the PCM performance Y. Chen was with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences and now is with Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY. E-mail address: ye.lining.chen@desy.de. Y.-G. Ding is with the Chinese Academy of Sciences. is sensitive to geometrical uniformity of periodic gratings. This refers, especially, to a slight variation of the grating height along the maser with respect to its designed value, due to practical machining error within certain accuracy. A very important role plays this effect on the coherence performance of the PCM for practical applications. Design of an RWG based PCM usually starts with characterization of the RWG structure. This process refers to deriving the dispersion equation of the structure as well as finding solutions to the equation. This can be done by modeling a field matching problem with continuity conditions applied on the interface between the grating groove inside and the region above the grating In this paper, the modeling of the RWG structure is done using transmission line theory instead of the conventional field theory. A simple equivalent circuit (EC) model is proposed in Section II to derive the dispersion equation. In Section III, numerical simulations of the dispersion relation are carried out to validate the proposed method by varying crucial geometrical parameters of the structure. A physical interpretation of the approach is given on the basis of the consistency with the fieldtheory method. Moreover, the proposed approach is extended in Section IV for the taper design of the PCM. In Section V, the coherence performance of the PCM is investigated taking into account geometrical non-uniformities of the gratings. A summary and an outlook are given in Section VI. Figure In Fig. Using the proposed EC model, the wave propagation in the RWG structure can be described using a transfer matrix A t . Given the normalized characteristic impedance of the serial reactance X = X/Z c , the electrical length l as k 0 d/2 with k 0 denoting the wave number in free space, the overall transfer matrix of each EC unit is expressed as where A i represents the transfer matrix of the three cascaded EC elements, respectively. This directly gives . (2) Applying conditions of periodicity leads to and where γ represents wave propagation constant and V (/I) i denotes the representative voltage (/current) wave at the i th port of the periodic structure. Combining Eqs. ( with ) Only if the determinant value of Eq. ( with the characteristic reactance of the shorted branch jX = j s b tank 0 h, which exhibits inductive and capacitive to the main transmission line for the working frequencies satisfying 0 < k 0 h < π/2 and π/2 < k 0 h < π, respectively. As k 0 h = π/2, the shorted branch resonates and approximately defines the first critical frequency. An increase of the grating height from the this point on would lead to a further reduction of the phase velocity in the first passband. Detailed characteristics are shown in the following section. The dispersion relations obtained from Eq. ( In order to provide a physical interpretation of the proposed approach, further discussions are rendered on the basis of the field formalism that is commonly used for the modeling of the periodic grating by the field theory. Within the grating grooves (Region II in Fig. and where ω represents the angular frequency, the wave numbers are defined as k 0 = ω/c and k x = lπ/w with c denoting speed of light, w denoting the width of the waveguide and l = 0, 1, 2...n representing a sequence of positive mode integers. The symbols b and h(y) stand for the distance of the grating (top) surface to the upper boundary of the waveguide and the vertical coordinate within the grating groove, as respectively shown in Fig. An effective wave impedance in the grating groove along the grating height (y) direction can thus be defined as Substituting Eqs. ( with an effective reactance of the wave impedance As the aspect ratio of the waveguide is sufficiently large (e.g., w/H ≥ 2 justified in Fig. This simplified effective wave impedance has the same form as the one used in Eq. ( In Fig. Within a taper the local reflection coefficient at each grating unit can be defined by the mismatch of the characteristic impedances at the reference plane. Through simple derivations using Eqs. ( with where A ij is given in Eq. ( The goal function of the taper design is then to achieve a lowest possible cumulative reflection coefficient, ρ t . As an example, the length of the taper is fixed at 20 cm. The working frequency is chosen at 9 GHz. The wave number k z in Eq. ( Figure In the following, the coherence performance of an RWG based PCM is investigated using the proposed approach. This refers to the analysis for the influences of geometrical grating uniformity on the wave net reflection of the structure in coldstate, as well as on the wave growth rate in the hot-state of the maser. The geometrical uniformity here concerns the height of the grating along the interaction region of the maser (see Fig. In a practical PCM, a non-uniformity of the grating height can be introduced by the existing machining uncertainty within certain accuracy. Here we choose a realistic machining uncertainty (∆h) of 50 μm to demonstrate the significance of the effect. The grating height h(z) along the maser is then randomly generated within certain parametric range, [h 0 (z)-∆h, h 0 (z)+∆h]. The term h 0 (z) refers to the designed value of the grating height. For numerical calculations, an RWG based PCM with a length of 40 cm is considered, including a linear taper and an interaction region of 20 cm length for each. The waveguide width and grating period take a value of 0.08 and 0.002 mm, respectively. Other parameters stay the same as in Table The wave reflection of the PCM is first considered. In Fig. where ω p , γ and ν 0 represents the plasma frequency, the relativistic factor and the beam velocity, respectively. The symbol D denotes the hot-state dispersion relation. The terms β 0 and χ +1 stand for synchronized propagation constant and effective beam susceptibility for the first harmonic wave, respectively. Interested readers are referred to Ref. Figure Furthermore, a relative error function of the wave growth rate is defined as abs(GR-GR0) GR0 100%. The term GR denotes a realistic mean wave growth rate along the interaction region, while GR 0 corresponds to its designed value. In Fig. In this paper, we report a modeling approach based on transmission line theory for the characterization of the rectangular waveguide grating (RWG) structure for planar Cerenkov masers (PCM). An equivalent circuit model is proposed in conjunction with the use of the transfer matrix method for deriving and analyzing the dispersion relations of the RWG structure. The heavy workloads on theoretical derivations can be significantly reduced. The obtained results are in good consistency with the conventional field-theory method. A physical interpretation of the proposed approach is also given on the consistency with the field theory. The proposed approach is also used for the taper design in the RWG based PCM. An efficient design of a multistage taper shows a cumulative reflection coefficient on the order of 10 -3 using the optimum scheme of varying the tapering rate. Another important effect is, furthermore, addressed for the impacts of geometrical uniformity of the gratings along the structure on the coherence performance of the PCM. The obtained results have shown, that a slight non-uniformity in the grating height (on the order of 50 μm) can increase the reflection level by at least one order of magnitude. The effect can, meanwhile, degrade the wave growth rate by a large amount with respect to its theoretical expectation. Further applications of the proposed approach are foreseen to consider RWG-like slow-wave structures with more geometrical and / or dielectric features. Possible extension of the modeling approach makes its way for the improvements on higher frequency applications with appropriate matching networks of the equivalent circuit. in Table