Supercooling of aqueous solutions below their melting point without any crystallization is a fundamentally and practically important physical phenomenon with numerous applications in biopreservation and beyond. Under normal conditions, heterogeneous nucleation mechanisms critically prohibit the simultaneous long-term (> 1 week), large volume (> 1 ml) and low temperatures (< -10 o C) supercooling of aqueous solutions. Here, in order to overcome this bottleneck and enable novel and practical supercooling applications, we report on the use of surface sealing of water by an oil phase to drastically diminish the primary heterogeneous nucleation at the water/air interface. Using this approach, we have achieved deep supercooling (as low as -20 o C) of large-volumes of water (up to 100 ml) for long periods (as long as 100 days) simultaneously. Since oils are mixtures of various hydrocarbons we also report on the use of pure alkanes and primary alcohols of various lengths to achieve the same. All alcohols and some of the longer alkane chains we studied show high capacity to inhibit freezing. The relationship of this capacity with the chain length, however, shows opposite trends for alcohols and alkanes due to their drastically different interfacial structures with the water molecules. We find that the deeply supercooled water (at -20 o C) can withstand vibrational and thermal disturbances with all sealing liquids used, and even an extreme disturbance, ultrasonication, when alcohols are used as the sealing phase. The deep supercooling approach we developed here, for large samples and long periods, is expected to enable novel applications of supercooling in a variety of areas including biopreservation and food storage among others. Water is a seemingly simple yet a practically complex liquid with extraordinary phase behavior, which enables many of life's intricacies. While water is possibly the most studied liquid, there remain many areas where its behavior is still largely mysterious Recent advances have shown that supercooling can be a promising alternative approach for the preservation of cells, tissues, and especially organs Under normal atmospheric conditions, ice transitions into water at 0 °C, i.e. the melting point or the equilibrium temperature (T e ). Nevertheless, the observed freezing temperature (T f ) for pure water is usually below the equilibrium temperature (T e ). Water, in the liquid phase, below the equilibrium temperature is said to be "supercooled" where ∆T = T e -T f measures the degree of supercooling. Supercooled water is intrinsically metastable and can spontaneously transform to lower-energy-level ice crystals through the formation of ice nuclei, which can be readily achieved by ice seeding There are two general ice nucleation mechanisms, homogenous and heterogeneous crystallization. Homogeneous crystallization occurs due to random aggregation of interior water molecules to create a critically large nucleus of ice crystal, which could only be achieved and observed below -20 °C First, we cooled a large ensemble of polystyrene tubes containing 1ml of ultra-pure water to -13 °C (Fig. We also examined the influence of water volume on the efficacy of oil sealing for freezing inhibition. We studied the two most promising oils, MO and PO, at -13 and -16 o C for ultra-pure water ranging from 10 0 ̴ 10 5 μl (Fig. In order to further support our hypothesis that the water/air interface plays a dominant role in ice nucleation and subsequent freezing, we measured water freezing frequencies under differential degrees of surface sealing by MO, ranging from a) unsealed (0 oil), b) ring sealed along the contact line between water and tube wall (0.01 ml), c) partially sealed with partial exposure to air (0.1 ml), d) critically sealed with water surface just completely covered (0.15 ml), e) normally sealed (0.5 ml), and f) over sealed with excessive oil mounted on water surface (3.5 ml) (Fig. We also observed that additional oil beyond the critical sealing has a statistically negligible effect on freezing suppression. This indicates that additional pressure and dampening effects, associated with a long-column of viscous oil phase, have a negligible effect on freezing inhibition. In order to further test this, we examined the effects of viscosity of the sealing agents where we used hydroxy (-OH) terminated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) of different chain lengths (Fig. Most oils are complex mixtures of alkanes, saturated cyclic alkanes, alkylated aromatic groups, and fatty acids among other hydrocarbon compounds. In an effort to more systematically study the observed freezing inhibition effect of supercooled water sealed with an immiscible hydrocarbon phase, we studied two prototypical families of hydrocarbons: linear alkanes and their corresponding primary alcohols of different lengths (Fig. We found that f f of DSC water, at -20 °C, sealed with alkanes decreases monotonically with increasing carbon number m and chain length l (Fig. On the other hand, f f of DSC water, at -20 °C, sealed with alcohols increases with m and l. This opposite trend is likely due to the starkly different structures of the alcohol/water interface compared to that of alkane/water interface (Fig. Experimental and computational investigations of ice nucleation in droplets under monolayers of long primary alcohol chains with 16 ≤ m ≤ 31, revealed a very low tilt angle β (~ 7.5 -10 °) and a very good lattice match between hexagonal ice and the alcohol structure for 29 ≤ m ≤ 31 Having established the efficacy of the deep supercooling approach using either oils or pure alkane and alcohol phases, we then studied its stability under vibrational, thermal, and ultrasonic disturbances. Vibrational disturbances were introduced by placing DSC water onto a shaking plate with various shaking speeds and frequencies (SI). When the DSC water (-20 °) is sealed by MO, its f f is 0% and 5.6%, respectively, under 0.84 g and 2.1 g centrifugal acceleration (Fig. Upon the instability of DSC water sealed by MO under ultrasonication, we further tested its stability sealed by pure alkanes and pimary alcohols. DSC water sealed by alkanes freeze immediately upon being ultrasonicated (Fig. In the preceding, we demonstrated a seemingly counterintuitive and novel approach to achieve long-term deep supercooling of large-volume water by using a hydrocarbon-based immiscible phase to seal the water surface. Our initial observations with laboratory grade oils demonstrated that replacing the water/air interface, which is the primary ice nucleation site, with a water/oil interface dramatically inhibits stochastic freezing processes. The seemingly time independent nature of the freezing frequency of oil-sealed water suggests that its freezing might be casespecific rather than stochastic. Our studies with linear alkanes and primary alcohols suggest that freezing inhibition can be achieved by surface sealing with starkly different interfacial structures and microscopic mechanisms, which results in opposite trends of inhibition capacity correlated to the chain length. While all sealed DSC water show great stability under vibrational and thermal disturbances simulating normal storage and transportation conditions, only the primary alcohol sealed supercooled water can withstand ultrasonication. We note that while we have hypothesized about possible macroscopic (thermodynamic) and microscopic mechanisms that might explain our observations, further studies are warranted to test, confirm, and improve upon them. Especially, since most existing literature focuses on longer alkane and alcohol chains at the water interfaces and the resulting molecular structures, computational and experimental studies with short chains might prove useful. Similarly, careful measurements of interfacial properties and structures at low temperatures with mixed and pure hydrocarbons can shed further light on why some oils are more effective than others. Given that monolayers of long alcohol chains have been historically used to initiate ice nucleation, our results with the short chains to prevent nucleation expand the use of alcohols to provide a robust control mechanism over the temperature at which nucleation can be achieved in an aqueous solution. Further studies with different families of hydrocarbons and their mixtures will be aimed at expanding this robust control of supercooling degree to allow novel applications. Beyond its fundamental implications, deep supercooling of large volumes of aqueous solutions can enable previously prohibitive applications, and provide new biopreservation methodologies for cell, tissue, and organ engineering and transplantation, as well as other areas, such as food preservation. Given our prior experience and interest in both organ and cell preservation using supercooling and the limitations we have previously encountered in terms of temperatures, volumes and durations for preservation, we believe that the deep supercooling via the surface sealing with immiscible phases will be vital in advancing these applications forward. The immediate goal is to translate this approach to preservation of large number of cells that are amenable to preservation at the supercooled temperatures we can achieve here, and then translate such results to the clinic. We will then explore tissue and organ preservation with deep supercooling approaches. For all experiments in this study, DNase/RNase-free distilled water (Life Technologies/Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) was used to minimize potential pollutants or ice-nucleating agents, except DSC trials of 100 ml water where deionized (DI) water (resistivity R = 18.2 MΩ) produced by a deionizing water system (METTLER TOLEDO Thornton, USA) was used. All water containers (dishes, 96-well plates, round-bottomed tubes, and bottles, Corning, USA) were made of polystyrene, and clean and sterile before experiments. The purity of all oil phases used for water surface sealing is at least 99% as specified by the vendor (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The loading of water into containers was performed in a chemical hood to avoid contamination of the samples by pollutants or dust particles in the air. Water of small volume (< 1 ml) was loaded into containers (dishes or 96-well plates) using clean and sterile tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and calibrated pipets (PIPETMAN, Gilson, USA), while that of large volume (≥ 1 ml) was loaded into containers (round-bottomed tubes or bottles) using serological pipets (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) by pipette filler (Drummond Scientific, USA). We note that as water droplets smaller than 10 0 μl are subject to significant evaporation during long-term deep supercooling (DSC) experiments, and those bigger than 10 5 μl (100 ml) beyond the volume capacity of the freezing chamber, they were not investigated in this study. After loading water samples into the containers, oil phase was gently added onto the water surface using serological pipets, trickling down along the wall of containers to avoid splashing or trapping air bubbles at the interface. The water-laden containers (with or without sealing oil) were transferred into portable temperature controlled freezers (Engel MHD-13, Engel, USA) that were placed in 4 °C cold room to minimize temperature fluctuations, or stored in -20 °C freezer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The temperatures within these freezers were verified by Toluene-filled low-temperature thermometer (Sigma, USA). To examine the effects of dissolved air in water on ice nucleation and water freezing, the water was vacuumed at a pressure below 10 -4 atmosphere for 24 hours to extract dissolved air molecules. The degassed water was, then, gently pipetted into tubes and sealed with mineral oil (MO) for supercooling tests at -16 °C. The air content of the degassed water is significantly lower than that of normal water without degassing, as no air bubbles emerge from the degassed water (second row of Fig. To test the stability of DSC water sealed by oil phase, three types of disturbances, vibrational, thermal, and ultrasonic disturbances, were studied. For vibrational disturbance test, DSC tubes were placed on shaking plate (Labline 4625 titer shaker, Marshall Scientific, USA) with shaking speed 500 and 800 rpm for 30 seconds, which give rise to the centrifugal acceleration of 0.84 and 2.1 g (g is gravitational acceleration), respectively. To prevent heat transfer, the tubes were wrapped with thick tissue paper in tube racks, all of which had been previously cooled to -20 °C in freezer. The temperature of the DSC water would not change noticeably during experiments given the brief shaking period and thick insulation layer. For thermal disturbance test, the DSC tubes were put into 37 °C incubator (warmed by air) or plunged into 37 °C water bath (warmed by water). Therefore, DSC water would experience different warming rates and temperature gradient. For ultrasonic disturbance test, DSC tubes would be plunged into 4 °C ultrasonic water bath. The sonicator (Branson B-200, TMC Inductries, USA) generates 40 kHz ultrasonic wave with power 30 W. The freezing of the DSC water can be evidenced by the change of sample transparency (from transparent to opaque). All data were organized and reported as the mean ± standard deviation from at least three independent runs of experiments (n > 3); further information on sample numbers are disclosed in figure captions. The statistical significance of mean values between two groups was determined by Microsoft Excel based on Student's two-tailed t-test, assuming equal variance. Although a pvalue less than 0.05 is generally regarded as statistically significant, different ranges of p-value (NS: 0.05 < p, *: 0.005 < p < 0.05, **: 0.005 < p < 10 -6 , ***: p < 10 -6 ) were provided to show different degrees of significance. The formation of a critical ice embryo, i.e. a successful nucleation, in metastable supercooled water is generally regarded as a stochastic process that does not depend on the number of previous nucleation trials or correlate to other nucleation events during the same period (1, 2). In addition, heterogenous nucleation is the major type of crystallization in this study since homogeneous nucleation in water occurs at much lower temperatures (around -40 °C). As a result, the heterogeneous ice nucleation on water surfaces/interfaces would follow Poisson statistics where f f (t) is the freezing frequency after supercooling of a period t, J(T) is the nucleation rate at temperature T, and S is the area of heterogeneous nucleation sites. Therefore, for water samples of the same volume and shape under a constant temperature, the non-frozen (supercooled) fraction is expected to decline exponentially with time. However, in our experiments we found that f f (t) of DSC water with oil sealing does not change significantly after Day 3 as shown in Fig. Using similar heuristics, our experimental results also suggest that the freezing we observed is not due to homogeneous ice nucleation either, where the formation of critical ice embryo is caused by spontaneous aggregation of water molecules via random translational, rotational, and vibrational movements that would conform stochastic process When a water sample is sealed by an oil phase (i.e mixed oils, and pure alkanes and alcohols) for DSC, the "immiscible" oil might slightly dissolve in supercooled water to decrease the equilibrium melting temperature T e below 0 °C, the equilibrium melting point of pure water under atmospheric conditions. We, therefore, quantified the potential depression of freezing point due to this effect and assessed whether it's comparable to the high degree of supercooling we observed in our experiments. According to the Bladgen's Law, the extent of freezing point depression ∆T F can be calculated by where i is the Van't Hoff factor (i = 1 for nonelectrolytes or oil phase in this study), b is the molality of oil phase in water, and K F is the cryoscopic constant (K F = 1.85 K•kg/mol for water). Therefore, ∆T F can be determined by the solubility of sealing oils in water at DSC temperatures. Solubility of oils in metastable water at DSC temperatures are not readily available; as such we have assessed ∆T F using the available solubility data of oils in water under room temperature. This approach, likely, leads to an overestimation since solubility of oils in water typically increases with temperature (4). For oil mixtures (MO, OO, PO, NO, and PDMS) and linear alkanes (C5 ~ C11) utilized in this study, the maximum solubility is 0.04 g/L (or 0.55 mM) (C5 in water), and the corresponding estimate for ∆T F is less than 1.03 × 10 -3 °C, which is negligible compared to the degree of supercooling ∆T (10 to 20 °C) achieved using these oil phases as sealing agents. For alcohols used in this study, the maximum solubility is 73 g/L (or 0.98 M) (C4OH in water at room temperature) and the corresponding estimate for ∆T F is less than 1.82 °C. This likely overestimated freezing point depression accounts for about 9.1% of ∆T (20 °C) enabled by alcohol sealing. Moreover, the DSC water and sealing alcohols are likely not mixed altogether. The stable contact interface with strong hydrogen bonding on the head and a long hydrophobic tail of alcohols, low molecular mobility, and viscous water at -20 °C would significantly impede the diffusion of alcohol molecules into water. We, therefore, conclude that the depression of freezing temperature due to oil-water mixing does not play a significant role in achieving the observed high degree of supercooling in our experiments.