Layered 1T -TiSe2 has attracted much interest for the competition of charge density wave (CDW) and superconductivity in its bulk and even monolayer forms. Here we perform first-principles calculations of the electronic structure, phonon dispersion, and electron-phonon coupling of the Pb-intercalated 1T -TiSe2 in bulk and layered structures. Results show that upon the Pb atom intercalation, the CDW instability in 1T -TiSe2 can be effectively suppressed, accompanied by the removal of the imaginary phonon modes at qM. The Pb 6p orbitals occupy directly at the Fermi level, which hence intercalates the superconductivity. Both bulk and layered PbTiSe2 are phonon-mediated superconductors, with estimated superconducting temperature Tc to be ∼1.6-3.8 K. The main contribution to the electron-phonon coupling is from the vibrations of Pb and Se atoms. The superconducting related physical quantities are found tunable by varying Pb content. Since the successful fabrication of the monolayer of the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) using a micromechanical cleavage method Both bulk and monolayer 1T -TiSe 2 undergo CDW instability at around 205-230 K characterized by 2×2×2 or 2×2×1 superlattices In the present work, we perform first-principles calculations of the electronic structures, lattice dynamics, and electronphonon coupling (EPC) of the bulk and 2D forms for Pbintercalated 1T -TiSe 2 , so as to investigate the effects of heavy-metal doping on the CDW and superconductivity. The doping content of Pb in our work is greatly larger than that of Cu in Cu x TiSe 2 , where the Cu composition x only varies in range of 0-0.1 The calculations are performed at the DFT level, employing the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) and projector augmentedwave (PAW) pseudopotentials We present in Figs. Upon cooling, the monolayer and bulk 1T -TiSe 2 respectively undergo a second-order CDW transition at around 230 and 205 K to the commensurate 2×2×1 and 2×2×2 superlattices Suppressing the CDW state in 1T -TiSe 2 by Cu intercalation We present in Fig. A new hole pocket dominated by Pb 6p orbitals appears at the K point. The SOC effect on the Pb-dominated bands is visible. For example, the Dirac-like band gap at the K point at around -0.8 eV for TSPTS is greatly enlarged by the SOC from 0.208 to 0.716 eV. As indicated by the elliptical yellow shades in Fig. We now focus on the vibration properties and the EPC in 2D and 3D forms of PbTiSe 2 . Figures The phonon dispersions weighted by the magnitude of the EPC λ qν , the phonon density of state (PhDOS), the Eliashberg electron-phonon spectral function α 2 F(ω), and the cumulative frequency-dependent of EPC λ (ω) are displayed in Figs. 5(b)-5(d) and 5(f)-5(h) for TSPTS and PTSP, respectively. Here, the λ qν is calculated, according to the Migdal-Eliashberg the- ory where Ω BZ is the volume of BZ, ǫ kn and ǫ k+qm denote the Kohn-Sham energy, and g ν kn,k+qm represents the EPC matrix element. The g ν kn,k+qm , which can be determined selfconsistently by the linear response theory, describes the probability amplitude for the scattering of an electron with a transfer of crystal momentum q and respectively. We find that in TSPTS the low-frequency phonons, mainly associated with the Pb vibrations, account for 0.13 (27%) of the total EPC (λ =0.48). The phonons in the intermediate-frequency region, dominated by Se modes, contributes an EPC strength of 0.27 (56%). The large EPC strength here is mainly originated from the large values of the λ qν along the Γ-M direction in frequency range of 150-180 cm -1 , which has resulted in the largest peak of the PhDOS and α 2 F(ω). Similar to the Na-intercalated bilayer NbSe 2 In the case of the 3D form, as indicated by the phonon dis- persion, PhDOS, α 2 F(ω), and λ (ω) of bulk PbTiSe 2 in Fig. Using a typical value of the effective screened Coulomb repulsion constant μ * =0.1 as well as our calculated Eliashberg spectral function α 2 F(ω) and λ , we can calculate the logarithmic average frequency ω log and the superconducting transition temperature T c by and In Table As indicated by the results of the ARPES In summary, we have investigated the structure, electronic structure, phonon spectrum, EPC, and superconducting properties of the Pb-intercalated 1T-TiSe 2 using first-principles calculations. We show that Pb intercalation can suppress the CDW instability of the bulk and monolayer 1T-TiSe 2 . We further predict the superconductivity in its 3D and 2D forms which is mainly contributed by the low-frequency phonons associated with the Pb and Se vibrations. The Pb 6p orbitals are found crucial for the superconductivity. Upon increasing of the Pb content, the λ and the T c of the 2D form increases while the ω log decreases. Our present findings provide a new choice and also a new mechanism in realizing superconductor in 1T-TiSe 2 and will inspire further efforts in modificatory metallic TMD materials.