We have performed an experimental study on the temperature and field dependence of magnetization of a series of superconducting Mo100-xRex alloys. Our studies reveal the presence of high field paramagnetic effect (HFPME) in these low temperature superconductors. The results of our studies indicate that the HFPME in the Mo100-xRex alloys is related to the inhomogeneous distribution of strong and weak flux-line pinning centers, and the flux compression resulting due to the same while cooling down the samples in the presence of high magnetic fields. The results are complemented by the studies on the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity and heat capacity of these alloys in different constant magnetic fields. We compare our findings with the studies reported in literature on both low TC and high TC superconductors. While a diamagnetic response to applied magnetic field (H) is the well-known signature of superconductivity, a net paramagnetic response has been observed in many superconductors when they are cooled below the normal state to superconducting state transition temperature (TC) in the presence of a magnetic field The LFPME in the high-TC superconductors has been explained in terms of the generation of spontaneous supercurrents due to the combined effects of randomly distributed Josephson π-junctions between the superconducting grains, and the d-wave pairing symmetry The HFPME was first observed in the high-TC superconductors by Rykov et al In the present work, we study the temperature and field dependence of magnetization of a series of superconducting Mo100-xRex alloys, and also complement these studies with the measurement of the temperature dependence of electrical resistivity (ρ) and heat capacity (C) of these alloys in different constant magnetic fields. We identify the characteristic signatures of HFPME in these alloys, and explain our results in terms of the inhomogeneous distribution of strong and weak flux-line pinning centres, and the flux-compression resulting due to the same while cooling down the samples in the presence of high magnetic fields. The Mo75Re25, Mo60Re40, Mo52Re48 alloys were synthesized by melting high purity (99.95+%) Mo and Re (ACI Alloys, USA) taken in atomic proportions. The melting was performed under high purity Ar atmosphere in an arc-melting furnace. The samples were flipped and re-melted six times to ensure the homogeneity. The loss of mass during the melting procedure was less than 0.1%. The prepared samples were cut in required shapes and sizes with the help of a diamond wheel cutter and a spark wire cutter for different experimental measurements. While most of the measurements were performed on the as-cast samples, the Mo60Re40 alloy was measured both in the as-cast and annealed condition. The annealing was done (in sealed quartz ampoule, with the sample wrapped in Ta foil) at 1250 °C for 20 h in Ar atmosphere, which was followed by slow-cooling down to room temperature The magnetization (M) measurements as functions of temperature (T) and magnetic field (H) were performed using a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM; Quantum Design, USA). The M versus T measurements were performed following the zero field cooled (ZFC) warming, field cooled cooling (FCC) and field cooled warming (FCW) protocols. In the ZFC protocol, the sample was cooled in zero field from 20 K down to the lowest temperature of measurement (2 K). The field was applied at 2 K and the M versus T measurements were performed in this field while warming up the sample up to 20 K. After the ZFC warming measurements up to 20 K, the sample was cooled down to 2 K in the same magnetic field, and the M versus T measurements were continued during this cool-down process to obtain the FCC curve. After the FCC experiments, the M versus T measurements were further continued in the same magnetic field while warming up the sample back to 20 K. This last protocol of measurements is called the FCW. The isothermal M versus H measurements were performed while varying μ0H sequentially from 0 to 7 T, from 7 T to -7 T, and then from -7 T to 7 T, starting from an initial ZFC state. The T dependence of C in different H values for the Mo100-xRex alloys were measured in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS; Quantum Design, USA) using a two-τ relaxation technique. The T dependence of ρ for different H values were measured using standard four-probe configuration in different standard cryostats (the PPMS, a cryostat from the Oxford Instruments, UK, and another cryostat from the American Magnetics, USA). The T dependence of both ρ and C were measured while cooling down the samples below 20 K (in different fields). The XRD patterns for the as-cast samples of Mo75Re25 and Mo60Re40 alloys indicate that these alloys are single-phase, and have formed in the body centred cubic (bcc) β-phase structure. These alloys have been used in our previous study where the XRD patterns have been presented Comparatively, the spatial distribution of the dislocations for these alloys seems to be more uniform. Figure Figure The present magnetization measurements were performed on samples of small dimensions (in the range of 0.5-1.5 mm), in the presence of He exchange gas, in a standard experimental set-up, using standard protocols, and slow cooling rate (0.1 K min-1 for the M(T) measurements). Any appreciable inhomogeneity in cooling these (metallic) samples is not really expected in the present measurements. We therefore need to look into more intrinsic physical phenomena that could lead to the HFPME in the present alloys. We have recently analyzed the field dependencies of the critical current density (JC) and pinning force density of a wide range of Mo100-xRex alloy compositions We have studied the temperature and field dependence of magnetization of a series of superconducting Mo100-xRex alloys, namely the as-cast samples of Mo75Re25, Mo60Re40, Mo52Re48 alloys and the annealed Mo60Re40 alloy, and have also performed complementary studies on the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity and heat capacity of these alloys in different constant magnetic fields. In the temperature dependence of magnetization measured in different magnetic fields we have observed the following characteristic signatures of HFPME in these alloys: (i) the field cooled magnetization while warming up lies above the field cooled magnetization measured while cooling down, and (ii) field cooled magnetization increases continuously (exhibits relaxation effects) even at constant field and temperature. The linearity of the isothermal field dependence of magnetization of our alloys, measured just above the TC, rules out the presence of magnetic impurities in the alloys. We have also shown experimentally that the HFPME in the Mo100-xRex alloys is not because of surface superconductivity, and this is in agreement with the existing literature which suggests that HFPME in general may not be related to the surface related effects 