The past 15 years have seen an astonishing increase in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) sensitivity and accessible pressure range in high-pressure NMR experiments, owing to a series of new developments of NMR spectroscopy applied to the diamond anvil cell (DAC). Recently, with the application of electro-magnetic lenses, so-called Lenz lenses, in toroidal diamond indenter cells, pressures of up to 72 GPa with NMR spin sensitivities of about 10 12 spin/Hz 1/2 has been achieved. Here, we describe the implementation of a refined NMR resonator structure using a pair of double stage Lenz lenses driven by a Helmholtz coil within a standard DAC, allowing to measure sample volumes as small as 100 pl prior to compression. With this set-up, pressures close to the mega-bar regime (1 Mbar = 100 GPa) could be realised repeatedly, with enhanced spin sensitivities of about 5x10 11 spin/Hz 1/2 . The manufacturing and handling of these new NMR-DACs is relatively easy and straightforward, which will allow for further applications in physics, chemistry, or biochemistry. Varying thermodynamic conditions opens the possibility of accessing low-energy configurations, metastable or new states of matter, allowing the investigation of electronic or structural instabilities in solids. Thus, variation of pressure -that is directly reducing atomic or molecular distances -turned out to yield one of the most intriguing branches in condensed matter sciences small pressure range, depending on the choice of gasket material and pressure medium Figure A ~80 μm sample hole was cut in the centre of the pre-indentation using an automated laser-drilling system at BGI. PVD coating of the diamonds has been performed using a Dreva Arc 400 (manufacturer: VTD). An ultrapure copper target from Chempur (99.999 %) has been used. Argon (0.01 mbar) served as processing gas for plasma sputtering. The power of the Pinnacle magnetron power supply was set at 300 W. In order to achieve the required thickness of the copper layer (~ 2 μm) the duration of the coating process was set to 20 minutes. Using a focused ion beam (Scios Dual beam from FEI), the shape of the DSLL resonator was cut out from the almost homogeneous copper layer, using a 30 kV beam accelerator voltage and 65 nA gallium ion beam current. Figure The excitation coils were prepared from 100 μm PTFE insulated copper wire and consisted of 8 turns with a diameter of 4 mm. Both coils were placed on the backing plates of the diamonds, fully enclosing the anvils. Subsequently, the prepared anvils were aligned again in the DACs, and the cells were loaded with distilled water and slightly closed to prevent water leakage. After the cells were closed, both coils were connected in order to form a Helmholtz arrangement. The loaded and pressurised cells were then mounted on a home built NMR probe for standard wide-bore magnets. Analysing the return-loss spectrum of the resonator at 400 MHz, a quality factor of the resonance circuit of about 40 was found. All measurements were conducted at a magnetic field of 9 T. The actual pressure in the sample cavity was monitored using the first derivative of the pressure dependent first order Raman vibron mode taken at the centre of the diamonds' culets As a first step, numerical simulations of the RF B1 field of the DSLL resonator have been conducted using the FEMM software package Using RF nutation experiments at 90 GPa, an optimal 90° pulse length of tπ/2=2.5 μs at 10 W average pulse power was found, leading to an actual B1 field strength of B1 = π/(γntπ/2)= 2.3 mT, which is in excellent agreement with the found values from the numerical simulation. Estimating the sensitivity of this new resonator, the common definition of the time-domain limit of detection (LODt) as the minimal necessary number of spins, resonating in a 1 Hz bandwidth and providing a single-shot SNR of unity in the time domain, is used. Figure Another important point for the characterisation of a high pressure resonator is its ability to withstand high mechanical stresses and deformation under load. Figure The presented DSLL-resonator for high-pressure NMR applications exhibits several significant advances compared to previous set-ups. First, these novel resonators allow for a stable and safe use in a standard DAC equipped with two diamonds of identical culet diameters. As electro-magnetic coupling between excitation coils, 1 st stage, and 2 nd stage LLs works sufficiently well, it may be applicable for even smaller culet faces, opening the possibility for NMR at even high pressures. This conjecture might be confirmed, following some geometric reasoning: Preparation of the gasket typically follows some empirical rules found to maximise the DAC's stability under load, namely that the diameter of the sample chamber should be around 1/3 x d, whereas the preindentation is usually as flat as 1/6 x d, where d is the culet diameter of the diamond anvils. This sets some upper limits for the sample volume V0 prior to compression, i.e. V0 ≈ 1.5 • 10 -2 • d 3 . Empirical maximal pressures in a standard DAC for non-NMR applications was found to be proportional to ~d-2 up to about 1.5 Mbar, with a flattening-out of this behaviour to roughly a ~d-1/2 dependence above this pressure. The inset in figure Obviously, the use of smaller diamond anvil culets will inevitably reduce both diameter and height of the sample cavity. In contrast, the diameter of the counter winding as well as the separation between both 2 nd stage LLs will also be reduced, leading to a further increase in B1. Therefore, the inevitable loss in SNR due to reduced amount of sample for smaller V0 and maximal pressures, will be compensated by an increase in LODt due to this proximity boost. The deduced spin sensitivities of about 10 11 spin/Hz 1/2 mark a major advancement in this application field, which is illustrated in the main frame of figure Here, we summarized extracted data on LODt from the majority of all known high-pressure NMR set-ups, and compared it to their pressure stability. One of the most widely used applications for high pressure NMR is bio-chemistry, in particular proteinfolding dynamics External resonators encompass all set-ups introduced from the end of the 1980s to 1998, that is resonators which are either placed solely on the pavilion of the anvils 