We present temperature dependent frequency shift and line broadening of phonon modes by insertion of atomic layers of Pb and PbTe in the prototype 3D topological insulator Bi 2 Te 3 , using Raman spectroscopy. Good quality single crystals of Pb 2 Bi 2 Te 3 , PbBi 2 Te 4 and PbBi 4 Te 7 are grown using the modified Bridgman technique. The Raman modes show progressive blue shift with the decrease in temperature from 298 K to 93 K in Pb 2 Bi 2 Te 3 , PbBi 2 Te 4 and PbBi 4 Te 7 is due to anharmonic vibrations of the lattice as well as increasing strength of Bi-Te covalent interactions. Experimental results are complemented by extensive density functional theory calculations where a reasonable matching between experimental and computational data is found. Chemical pressure, induces by the insertion of Pb and PbTe layers in Bi 2 Te 3 , modifies the interactions at the boundaries of the quintuple-layers which is evident from the evolution of 2 1u A mode. The enhancement of out-of-plane Bi-Te vibrations with respect to in-plane Bi-Te vibrations are observed at low temperatures. Topological insulators (TIs) are materials that behave as insulators in its interior, but always have conducting boundaries. This compelling characteristic of topological insulator is possible due to strong spin orbit coupling (SOC) of heavy elements, which constitute the topological insulators. [1, 2, 3] Furthermore, the topological order is protected by time reversal symmetry analogous to the quantum spin Hall effect. . [15] The odd and even parity phonons are related to Raman and IR active modes of lattice vibrations respectively, of the bulk Bi 2 Te 3 like materials with inversion symmetry in the crystal structure. [16] Out of fifteen phonon modes, three (E u ) are acoustic modes and another twelve are optical in which, 2(E g + A 1g ) are Raman active in the range 20-200 cm -1 . [15] The Raman active E g modes are related to in-plane A(VI)-B(V) and that of A 1u corresponds to out-of-plane IR lattice vibrations. [17] As grown silver color platelet crystals are easily cleaved off from the ingots. For At room temperature we have identified Raman modes at 94, 104 and 124 cm -1 respectively along with a notch at 142 cm -1 . The mode at 124 cm -1 is relatively broad; multi-peaks fit by considering Lorentzian line shape shows the existence of two distinct modes at ̴ 124 cm -1 i.e., 1 A 1u and ̴ 132 cm -1 i.e., 2 A 1u respectively. With lowering the temperature these two modes become completely distinct at ̴ 183 K. This observation can be explained by considering thermal noise effect which get suppress with decreasing temperature from RT and finally at low temperature, the phonon scattering effect becomes insignificant, makes the modes prominent and distinct. The notch like 142 cm -1 i.e., 2 A 1g mode evolves to a shape of peak at ̴ 263 K and after that its intensity changes gradually till the end of the temperature variation (i.e., lowest temperature achieved) and are illustrated in the main panel of the Fig. The shapes of the humps gradually evolve at the cost of lowering the temperature and beome distinct at ~183 K. In total, we have identified five modes at low temperature. The intensity of 2 E g mode at 105 cm -1 decrease gradually relative to the 1 A 1u mode at 124 cm -1 as we decreases the temperature and 1 A 1u becomes the highest one at 93 K. The evolution of humps and increasing intensity of 1 A 1u relative to 2 E g establish the enhancement of out-of-plane Bi-Te vibrations compare to in-plane Bi-Te vibrations at low temperatures. The existance of the 131 cm -1 i.e., Two distinct modes 2 E g at 104 cm -1 and 1 A 1u at 124 cm -1 are identified at RT. With decreasing temperature the 1 A 1u mode evolves gradually and its intensity becomes almost equal to 2 E g at ̴ 163 K. A new mode is observed at ̴ 147 cm -1 at ̴ 113 K and becomes distinct at the lowest measure temperature here, which can be explained in terms of the enhancement of the out-of-plane vibrations over inplane Bi-Te vibrations at lower temperatures. The maturity of 2 A 1g mode at 142 cm -1 is accompanied by the enhancement of the 1 A 1u mode which becomes the most intense Raman mode at ̴ 113 K. Due to poor signal to noise ratio the spectra observed in case of PbBi 4 Te 7 , the mode at ~95 cm -1 is not well resolved and the appearance of new mode at 147 cm -1 due to insertion of PbTe layers is not clearly visible, therefore only three modes at 111, ̴ 130 and 147 cm -1 are discussed here. The observed ~95 cm -1 mode for Bi 2 Te 3 , Pb 2 Bi 2 Te 3 and PbBi 2 Te 4 more or less behaves in the same way. That means, with lowering the temperature; they remain un-shifted but their shapes evolve gradually and are broadened as clearly observed in the Fig. The peak position and full width half maxima (FWHM) as obtain from Lorentzian line shape fitting of individual modes as a function of temperature for each specimen are illustrated in Fig. [28] It provides a reasonably precise depiction of the phonon temperature dependence in some semiconductors and diamond. where / χ and // χ are first order and second order temperature coefficients respectively. For PbBi 2 Te 4 and PbBi 4 Te 7 with decreasing the temperature from RT, the modes shift towards the higher wave number side. It infers that, the strength of covalent interactions between Bi-Te increases and hence force constant of the interacting forces increase which in turn produces blue shift in Raman modes. As a result of insertion of Pb and PbTe layers in Bi 2 Te 3 the out-of-plane Bi-Te vibrations become less restrained compare to the in-plane vibrations as temperature decreases from RT to 93 K. Increase of slope of the 2 A 1g mode is tabulated in Table We have also performed First principles simulations and computed the Raman modes and frequencies for all the samples. All the calculations have been performed within the framework of density functional theory using the Quantum Pb 2 Bi 2 Te 3 is analogous to Bi 4 Te 3 , which is reported to be semi metallic. [21] So it is expected that Pb 2 Bi 2 Te 3 may behave as semi-metallic. We can infer that due to the insertion of Pb slab within the Bi 2 Te 3 slabs the narrow gap ( ̴ 170 meV) of Bi 2 Te 3 vanishes and system becomes metallic, this finding is consistent with literature report. [22] The experimentally observed Raman modes and the frequencies for the bulk structures of PbBi 2 Te 4 , PbBi 4 Te 7 are the same as that obtained from bulk Bi 2 Te 3 . The main reason is the higher atomic weight of the Pb atom which reduces the mode frequency under harmonic approximations (since, k ω = M ), which is clearly seen from the PPDOS and are illustrated in Fig. [18] The band structure of Bi 2 Te 3 film is resolved correctly when including spin-orbit effect and the Dirac cone is observed at the Γ point in the Brilliuon zone and is illustrated in Fig. x Te y .