The quantum CP N -1 model is in the confining (or unbroken) phase with a full mass gap in an infinite space, while it is in the Higgs (broken or deconfinement) phase accompanied with Nambu-Goldstone modes in a finite space such as a ring or finite interval smaller than a certain critical size. We find a new self-consistent exact solution describing a soliton in the Higgs phase of the CP N -1 model in the large-N limit on a ring. We call it a confining soliton. We show that all eigenmodes have real and positive energy and thus it is stable. The two-dimensional CP N -1 model The CP N -1 model is in the confining (or unbroken) phase with a mass gap when it is defined in an infinite space, in agreement with the Coleman-Mermin-Wagner (CMW) theorem prohibiting a spontaneous symmetry breaking or a long-range order in 1+1D systems The GN model is in the broken phase in the large-N or mean field approximation, in which the order parameter is constant and the Z 2 symmetry is dynamically broken. The chiral GN (or NJL) model, having a complex order parameter, is in the broken phase (or Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) phase in the context of superconductivity) in the ground state in the infinite system in the large-N limit. Though one might think this phase to be incompatible with the CMW theorem because of U(1) symmetry breaking, it was shown to be compatible with the CMW theorem in Ref. The above arguments only consider homogeneous configurations. Although it is usually the case that a constant condensation is the lowest energy state in a homogeneous system without any external field, inhomogeneous condensations may appear as the lowest energy states in certain situations. For instance, a twisted boundary condition unavoidably make a configuration inhomogeneous, e.g., the 1D Ising model with the anti-parallel spin orientation on the opposite boundary. Many examples of inhomogeneous configurations have been known for long time in the (chiral) GN model, corresponding to conducting polymers or superconductors in physical systems. For instance, a phase twist on a superconductor results in the Fulde-Ferrell (FF) state On the other hand, inhomogeneous or soliton solutions for the quantum CP N -1 model had not been discussed until recently, while various classical solitons in the CP N -1 model have been known for long time, such as kinks (domain walls) The hidden connection between the CP N -1 and GN models has been recently BCS Normal Kink Kink crystal Gross-Neveu CP N-1 Higgs Confining Higgs soliton Higgs soliton lattice Table A natural question arising immediately is whether any soliton can exist in the Higgs phase of the CP N -1 model. In this paper, we construct self-consistent analytical soliton solutions of a kink-shape or kink-anti kink crystal shape in the Higgs phase of the CP N -1 model. The solution is LO-like in the sense that the amplitude of the Higgs field modulates. We call them confining solitons since the confining phase is localized inside the solitons. Confining solitons are stable at least in the linear order; all eigenmodes are real and non-negative. While classical solutions such as kinks (domain walls), lumps (instantons) and their composites were known in the Higgs phase in the CP N -1 model, our new solitons in this paper are the first examples of quantum solitons in the Higgs phase of the CP N -1 model. Since the 1+1D CP N -1 model appears on a non-Abelian vortex string in 3+1D (supersymmetric) U(N) gauge theory The O(3) sigma model which is equivalent to the CP 1 model also appears in the condensed matter physics. It is the continuous model of the Heisenberg antiferromagnetic spin chain The action of the CP N -1 model is given by where the first term describes the kinetic term of N complex scalar fields n i (i = 1, • • • , N) with the covariant derivative D μ = ∂ μ -iA μ , and the second term gives the constraint n * i n i = r by the Lagrange multiplier λ(x). When this model is considered as the effective theory of a non-Abelian vortex in U(N) gauge theory, the "radius" r can be written as r = 4π/g 2 YM , where g YM is a coupling constant in the Yang-Mills theory. Here we note that the gauge field in this model is auxiliary (no kinetic term) and thus we set A μ = 0 in the following. One can obtain the effective action for n 1 ≡ σ by integrating out the rests (2. 2) The total energy functional can be written as The stationary conditions for λ and σ, respectively, yield where f n (x) and ω n are given as orthonormal eigenstates and eigenvalues of the following equation Thus we end up with three Eqs. (2.4)-(2.6). We here note that Eqs. (2.5) is nothing but the zero mode equation of Eq. (2.6). In the previous paper and find the solution for Eq. (2.5), with is the integral constant A which must be determined from Eq. (2.4). The energy functional Eq. ( (2.9) The important point is that the real solution ∆ (order parameter) for the GN model automatically satisfies the self-consistent equations in the CP N -1 model. Thanks to this map we have found the various new solutions which are inhomogeneous in the space. In the present paper, we find a new solution with kink crystal Higgs profiles and also discuss a possible setup in which the new solution can exist. As we already mentioned, the homogeneous confining and Higgs phases were known in the CP N -1 model. Those solutions are mapped from ∆ = const (BCS phase) and ∆ = 0 (normal phase), respectively in the GN model. In addition, we have found the following inhomogeneous solutions (the corresponding solution in the GN model are denoted in the brackets in the following, see also Table (3.1) In this case, the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues are, respectively, given as where n is an integer. By substituting Eqs. (3.1) and (3.2) into the gap equation (2.4), we obtain This equation allows the normalized zero mode A = 1/L with renormalized coupling constant r. After the continuous approximation, the situation becomes more clearer. By using the replacement 2π/L n = dk, one obtains This shows that the size L introduces a low-energy cutoff and the solution is forbidden in the infinite size limit L → ∞ since r must diverges as ln(2π/L) in the limit. Now we move to inhomogeneous solutions. A candidate of a new solution would be the following In Fig. Though the mass gap function in Eq. (3.5) takes negative values everywhere and seems to be problematic, unstable modes are absent. In fact, the above mass gap function is called the Pöschl-Teller potential and all the energy spectra for this potential are known to be positive where the eigenvalues are given as For the map between the CP N -1 and GN models, we use Eq. (2.4) differentiated with respect to x instead of Eq. (2.4) itself. Thus the left hand side of Eq. (2.4) can be shown to be constant, but the map of the solution in the GN model does not necessary yield a solution of the CP N -1 model. 1 For the present case, the first term in the left hand side of the gap Eq. (2.4) becomes const × where Λ UV and Λ IR are the ultraviolet and infrared cutoff, respectively. In the case of the infinite system, Λ IR → 0 and the gap equation cannot be satisfied, which is consistent with the CMW theorem. However if we consider a finite system with the length L the infrared cutoff ≃ 1/L because the quantization of the energy levels are introduced, and thus a solution can exist. For instance, a ring of the length L with anti-periodic boundary condition in which the Higgs field changes the sign (π rotation) σ(0) = -σ(L) allows a solution, as discussed in the next section. For this configuration all eigenmodes have real and non-negative energy, and thus the solution is energetically stable in the linear order. The minimum energy state is homogeneous solution as follows. The energy difference between the homogeneous Higgs solution with the confining soliton and the homogeneous Higgs phase can be calculated as Here we have used the fact that the energy spectra for both solutions are the same and thus the energy difference only comes from the second term in Eq. (2.9). Here we note a similarity and difference from the Higgs soliton solution in the confining phase, which we obtained before. In the Higgs soliton solution the localized Higgs field appears in the confining background. The corresponding mass gap function has a dip at the peak of the Higgs field in the background constant mass gap. The energy spectra and the mass gap parameter m coincide with those of the homogeneous confining phase. On the other hand, in the present solution, the localized confining part (σ = 0) or localized confining soliton appears in the Higgs phase. Thus we call this solution as a confining soliton. The mass gap function has a dip around the confining soliton and it becomes zero far away from the soliton. The energy spectra of the confining soliton solution coincide with those of the homogeneous Higgs phase. The confining soliton solution contains the mass parameter m, although the homogeneous Higgs phase does not have it. It may be interesting to note that this solution is similar to the kink solution in the GN model In the last section, we have considered the single confining soliton. This configuration is a special case of the following solution where sn, cn, dn are Jacobi's elliptic functions, ν is the elliptic parameter, and A CSL is a normalization constant. Here the A CSL is determined by the gap equation (2.4) as where s(x) = σ(x)/A CSL and f CSL n is the eigenfunctions obtained from Eq. (2.5) for the current solution. The mapping between the GN and CP N -1 models ensures that the left hand side of Eq. (4.2) becomes a constant. Though it can be fixed by a numerical summation, it is difficult to give an explicit form of the normalization factor for the present solution. In Fig. The single soliton configuration presented in the last section is corresponding to the case of ν = 1. For this solution, we need to be careful since the energy spectra are not always positive in the infinite system. For instance, if we consider the ν = 0 limit, the mass gap function becomes λ = -m 2 (Fig. Let us make a comment on the similarity between solutions in the CP N -1 and GN models. The solution has an amplitude modulation of the Higgs field and thus it can be considered as a counterpart of the LO solution in the GN model, although the solution for the soliton lattice solution is not identical to the LO solution ∆ = Msn(Mx, ν) Using the configuration in Eq. (4.1), we can construct a self-consistent analytic solutions on a ring. Here we consider (a) periodic or (b) anti-periodic boundary conditions. (a) For the case of the periodic boundary condition, one can satisfy the condition by choosing ν such that the nl (n ∈ Z) to be the size of the ring. In this case, the homogeneous Higgs solution also satisfies the same boundary condition. (b) For the case of the anti-periodic boundary condition, one needs to choose ν to satisfy L = (n + 1/2)l with n ∈ Z. In this case the homogeneous Higgs solution with the flavor rotation In this paper, we have constructed the self-consistent localized confining soliton solution in the Higgs phase of the CP N -1 model. While this solution is inhibited in the infinite system as the homogeneous Higgs phase is inhibited in the same limit, it is allowed in finite systems due to the existence of the infrared cutoff ∼ 1/L. Our solutions are stable since the all eigenmodes have real and positive energy. We have generalized the kink solution to the case of the soliton lattice. Our present calculation relies on the large-N limit, however the resulting selfconsistent equations are the same with the equations obtained by the mean field approximation. Thus we expect that our solution is qualitatively reliable even for the case of N ∼ 1. Throughout the present paper, we have discussed the CP N -1 model, but the same analysis is applicable to the O(N) model. Thus the present solutions are expected to appear in the spin system. Although our solutions are stable at linear order, the minimum energy state should be the homogeneous Higgs phase. It remains an interesting future problem to look for conditions that the confining soliton lattice becomes the minimum energy state. For instance, if we consider the anti-periodic boundary condition, solutions satisfying the same boundary condition known so far are the confining soliton in this paper and the flavor rotating solutions obtained in the previous paper. Suppose we have an anisotropy which makes Higgs field tend to align in a specific direction, we expect that the confining kink solution is favored since the flavor rotating solution costs more energy to have the components not aligned to the selected direction. Another possibility could be the presence of a defect. For example, if the Higgs fields are obliged to vanish at the defect, the kink solution might be chosen energetically. We leave this for the future problem. Our solution may be relevant for a gauge field localization in the brane world scenario, see, e.g., Refs. The inhomogeneous solutions obtained so far are given by the CP N -1 /GN correspondence, in which we can use only real condensates of the real GN model. Thus, a possible generalization should be the case of the chiral GN model which has the complex order parameters. We also leave this for the future problem. In fact the homogeneous Higgs solution is known to be inappropriate as the solution in the infinite system, though the corresponding solution so-called normal phase exists in the GN model.