By measuring the spatial distribution of differential conductance near impurities on Fe sites, we have obtained the quasi-particle interference (QPI) patterns in the (Li1-xFex)OHFe1-yZnySe superconductor with only electron Fermi surfaces. By taking the Fourier transform on these patterns, we investigate the scattering features between the two circles of electron pockets formed by folding or hybridization. We treat the data by using the recent theoretical approach [arXiv:1710.09089] which is specially designed for the impurity induced bound states. It is found that the superconducting gap sign is reversed on the two electron pockets, which can be directly visualized by the phase-referenced QPI technique, indicating that the Cooper pairing is induced by the repulsive interaction. Our results further show that this method is also applicable for data measured for multiple impurities, which provides an easy and feasible way for detecting the gap function of unconventional superconductors. The discovery of iron based superconductors 1 provides us a second example of unconventional high temperature superconductors. It is categorized as "unconventional" because a lot of unique features have been found. For example, the parent phase of RFeAsO (R = rare earth elements) and AEFe 2 As 2 (AE represents the alkaline earth metals Ba, Sr, Ca, etc.) have the long range antiferromagnetic (AFM) orders It seems that the model of s ± -pairing is so far so good for the systems with both electron and hole pockets. However, new challenges come out for some later discovered FeSe-based systems, such as the FeSe monolayer thin film Very recently, another method is proposed to judge the gap sign problem in LiFeAs with both electron and hole pockets. Namely the phase information can be validly extracted from the impurity induced bound states The single crystals of (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFeSe and (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Zn y Se are synthesized by hydrothermal ion-exchange method STM/STS measurements are carried out by a scanning tunneling microscope (USM-1300, Unisoku Co., Ltd.) with the ultra-high vacuum, low-temperature and highmagnetic field. All the samples were cleaved at room temperature in an ultra-high vacuum of 1×10 -10 Torr, and then transferred into the low-temperature microscope head immediately. The electrochemically etched tungsten tips were used during all the measurements. To raise the signal-to-noise ratio in dI/dV spectra, a typical lock-in technique was used with an ac modulation of 0.4 mV at 987.5 Hz. All data in the paper were taken at 1.5 K. The Bogoliubov quasi-particles with the momentum and energy (k,E) can be elastically scattered by defects to another state (k ′ ,E), forming a standing wave with the wave vector q = k ′k. Such standing waves can be easily observed by STM in the real space from QPI measurement. The measured differential conductance mapping g(r, E) is proportional to the local density of state LDOS, neglecting the spatial variations of the tunneling matrix. Then the detailed information in q-space can be obtained by applying the Fourier transformation to QPI data, which reflects the scatterings in k-space. The obtained FT-QPI g(q, E) is a complex value, and can be expressed as g(q, E) = |g(q, E)|e iθq,E with θ q,E the phase. Recently a phase-referenced QPI method was proposed to determine the gap symmetry, and the model is based on the phase-referenced QPI near one single impurity as (1) As one can see, θ q,E in the above equations is used as a referenced phase when compared to θ q,-E . Then the phase difference term can be expressed as cos(θ q,-E -θ q,+E ) = cos θ q,-E cos θ q,+E + sin θ q,-E sin θ where Re represents the real part of the complex function g(q, E), and Im represents imaginary part. According to the newly suggested treatment method where R j is the location of the j th impurity, and then g s (r -R j , E) is the differential conductance mapping by moving the center of the j th impurity to the origin. Here the subscript s means for single impurity. After a brief mathematical operation ( From the equation above, with no need of complicated calculation concerned, the denominator j e -iq•Rj is only a complex parameter determined by the location of each impurity and can be calculated from experimental data. As a result, it could be a practical way to obtain g s (q, E) directly from g(q, E), then g r (q, ±E) can be calculated from Eqs. ( The inset of Fig. As revealed by previous angle resolved photo-emission (ARPES) intensity is assumed as a constant everywhere around the Fermi surfaces and then we simulate the FT-QPI pattern by using self-correlation for Fig. The QPI patterns were measured at different energies between -24 meV and +24 meV in the region whose topography is shown in the inset of Fig. at some positive energy is positive everywhere, because it is the absolute value according to Eq. ( Inferred from the theoretical models and previous experimental results In order to reinforce the reliability of the analyzing method and also conclusions above, we have carried out a control experiment on another kind of impurity. Figure Subsequently, a set of differential conductance mappings were measured in the region shown in Fig. In the next, we present the data of a new round of experiments on a Zn-free sample with multiple impurities. As shown in Fig. Therefore, if we want to recover g s (q, E) from the QPI measurements for the large area with multiple impurities, it is necessary to mask out one kind of impurities with another kind left. Thus we need to deduct the contribution of that kind of impurities. For that purpose, the values in the circle surrounding one kind of impurity (1 or 2) with a radius 1.6 nm are substituted by the average value of the whole differential conductance mapping, as a result there exist only one kind of identical impurities of interests in the masked mapping. Then we can get a series of phase-referenced QPI patterns referring to Eq. ( results have some diffuse weight arising from the longrange disorders in real space, so that the pattern with very small q which is concentrated within the inner circle could be complex and difficult to analyse. As mentioned above, the selected region between two circles will cover the main scattering intensity of the intra-or inter-pockets scattering. One can clearly see that most of the values in the selected area are negative when the energies are close to impurity-induced in-gap state energies of impurity 1 [Fig. Compared to the case of one single impurity, QPI measurements for a large area with multiple impurities can give us a high resolution in q-space and we can obtain more details of the QPI scatterings from the Fermi surfaces. Between the two circles in Fig. where |u k | 2 and |v k | 2 are the probabilities that Cooper pairs unoccupy and occupy the ±k state, and ε k is the kinetic energy. Within the Fermi's golden rule, the scattering probability from k to k ′ is roughly proportional to for the scalar potential From the experimental data of phase-referenced QPI, we can find that the integral of g r (q, E) has a sign changing of the signal peak between the positive and negative energies near the impurity bound states. We can also notice that the signals at the high energies become positive disregard in the positive or negative energy sides, as shown in Figs. In our recent work q Re[g(q, +E) -g(q, -E)], and is coherently enhanced within the energy region between two gaps We performed QPI measurements around a single impurity in (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFe 1-y Zn y Se at a series of energies. Adopting the newly proposed method of boundstate based phase-referenced QPI, we demonstrate that there exists a sign reversal gap between the two electron pockets, namely the inner and outer circles after folding or hybridization. Furthermore, for the situation in (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFeSe with multiple impurities, the similar results are also obtained, which proves the validity of the method and conclude again the sign reversal gaps in the system. Considering a practical case, sometimes it may not be easy to find out one well-isolated impurity, so that the phase-referenced QPI measurements applied for multiple impurities seem to be more realistic and thus provide a practical way to detect the gap function of unconventional superconductors. Our results suggest that the FeSe-based superconductors without the hole pockets have a sign reversal of gaps between the two electron pockets, being consistent with the picture of unconventional Cooper pairing mediated by exchanging antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations.