We study the modulations of the superconducting order parameter in the vicinity of edges, magnetic and non-magnetic impurities by self-consistently solving the gap equations of a system with competing interactions in the Cooper channel. It is shown that the presence or absence of Friedellike oscillations of the superconducting order parameter crucially depends on its symmetry and can, hence, be used to obtain information about the symmetry properties of the condensate. Furthermore, the appearance of competing order parameters at inhomogeneities is discussed. We show that this can lead to the presence of a topologically trivial region close to the boundary of a system that is topologically nontrivial in its bulk. The resulting shift in position of the Majorana bound states is demonstrated to significantly affect its signatures in Josephson-junction experiments. We discuss Josephson scanning tunneling microscopy as a probe to resolve the Friedel-like oscillations as well as the spatial texture of competing s-wave superconductivity and Majorana bound states in the vicinity of the edge of the system. While the assumption of perfect lattice-translation symmetry facilitates the theoretical treatment of solid state systems, it is inevitably broken in reality due to the presence of impurities or defects in the crystal and the fact that samples are of finite size. In the context of superconductivity, the study of impurities has a long history The physics of inhomogeneities due to sample edges has received enormous attention in recent years due to the emergence of topological insulators and superconductors In this paper, we show that the Friedel-like oscillations of the superconducting order parameter at the edge of one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) systems and in the vicinity of both magnetic and non-magnetic inhomogeneities in 1D are only present in the even-parity channel but not for an odd-parity order parameter. Consequently, the observation (the absence) of oscillations of the order parameter on the length scale 1/k F indicates that the order parameter is even parity (odd parity). This also allows to gain information about the topology of superconductivity as a gapped system with odd-parity pairing realizes a time-reversal invariant topological superconductor given its Fermi surfaces enclose an odd number of time-reversal invariant momenta and a trivial phase in the case of even-parity pairing candidate systems for time-reversal invariant topological superconductivity include the doped topological insulator Cu x Be 2 Se 3 30 , (quasi-)1D wires In addition, we provide an example of a modification of the conventional bulk-boundary correspondence due to competing interactions that can significantly influence Josephson tunneling experiments aimed at identifying MBSs. To this end, we focus on "intrinsic" topological superconductors, i.e., systems where the nontrivial topology arises spontaneously from the internal interactions (applies to Refs. 5, 26, 30, 32, and 36). For concreteness, we assume the interaction to be dominated by the p-wave channel, but closely followed by the competing s-wave instability. By construction, this yields purely pwave, time-reversal invariant topological superconductivity in the bulk; however, the broken inversion symmetry at the edge allows the competing s-wave order parameter to emerge locally and leads to a topologically trivial region with width of the order of the coherence length ξ between the topological superconductor and the vacuum. Consequently, the MBSs are not localized at the edge of the system, as expected from the bulk-boundary correspondence, but are "pushed away" from it by a length of the order of ξ. While this seems like a minor modification at first sight, it can change the signal in the MBS-induced Josephson effect 29 between the system and an s-wave superconductor, see Fig. We finally discuss Josephson scanning tunneling microscopy In this section, we introduce the model we use in this paper to analyze the behavior of superconductivity in the vicinity of inhomogeneities and describe our procedure for solving the corresponding gap equations. In this work, we focus on a single-band lattice Hamiltonian of the form Ĥ = Ĥ0 + Ĥimp + Ĥpairing . ( The kinetic contributions are represented by where c iσ annihilates (creates) an electron of spin σ = {↑, ↓} at site i. Here, we only consider hopping between nearest-neighbours ij with hopping amplitude t. The boundary conditions of the system will be chosen as open (OBC) or periodic (PBC), depending on the specific questions at hand. The chemical potential is given by μ. The second term of the Hamiltonian (2.1), allows for magnetic and non-magnetic defects. We take the defects to be localized at a single site i = i 0 , U σσ i = u 0 (σ m ) σσ δ i,i0 using u 0 to denote the strength of the defect. The appropriate spin-structure of the impurities is chosen as σm = σz and σm = σ0 for magnetic and non-magnetic impurities, respectively. The pairing Hamiltonian allows for superconducting pairing in the appropriate spin channels corresponding to singlet s-wave (η = s) and triplet p-wave (η = t) with coupling constants V η . The spin-and spatial-structure leading to on-site s-wave (δ = 0) and nearest-neighbour p-wave (δ = ±1) pairing are encoded in the spin matrices χ η σσ (δ). The s-wave pairing interaction shall be taken to be momentum independent, i.e. of the form χ s σσ = ∆ s (iσ y ) σσ and, unless otherwise stated, the p-wave pairing interaction in momentum space is chosen as χ t ∝ d(k) • σiσ y , with triplet vector d(k) ∝ (-sin k y , sin k x , 0) T . We treat the interacting problem in the mean-field approximation focusing on the Cooper channel and introduce as the gap function. We bring the resulting mean-field Hamiltonian into the standard BdG form 44 Ψjσ , (2.6) with BdG Hamiltonian ĤBdG and Nambu spinor Ψiσ = c iσ , c † iσ T . All single-particle contributions, Ĥ0 and Ĥimp , are incorporated into the single-particle Hamiltonian ĥ, while ∆ results from Ĥpairing . The problem is now reduced to solving the BdG equations with eigenmodes φ E . The particle-(φ (e) ) and holeamplitudes (φ (h) ) are the Nambu-components of the eigenvectors φ E = (φ The intrinsic redundancy of the BdG Hamiltonian, having effectively doubled the degrees of freedom, leads to the chargeconjugation symmetry where Ξ = τ x C is the charge conjugation operator with the first Pauli matrix τ x in particle-hole space and the operator C for complex conjugation. Due to the chargeconjugation symmetry of the BdG equations, a solution φ E with energy E is related to a solution φ -E with energy -E by By performing a mode expansion of the spinor where α = {i, σ} is a shorthand for site-and spin-indices, we diagonalize the BdG Hamiltonian. The equivalence of creating a hole and annihilating a particle, i.e. a E = a † -E , has been used in Eq. (2.10) to reduce the expansion to a sum over positive eigenenergies. Using the mode expansion to evaluate the average c α c α in Eq. (2.5) and introducing an energy cut-off c leads to the inhomogeneous gap equation (2.11) At T = 0, which we shall be considering for the remainder of this paper, the Fermi-distribution function f (E) = [e βE + 1] -1 vanishes, due to the lack of thermal excitations at zero temperature. The results shown below are obtained by solving Eq. (2.11) via iteration, i.e., iteratively inserting an approximation of ∆ η i into the righthand side of the equation and recalculating its value from Eq. (2.11) until convergence is achieved. The convergence criterion we use is demanding that the relative change in ∆ η i from one iteration to the next one be smaller than 10 -4 . We start our discussion of the numerical solution of the superconducting self-consistency equations (2.11) by focusing on 1D systems since the oscillatory features in the order parameter are most pronounced and the results can be more conveniently illustrated in one spatial dimension. In the presence of inversion symmetry in the normal state, the superconducting order parameter that assumes finite values below the superconducting transition temperature must be either pure singlet or pure triplet Inversion symmetry can be broken globally by the crystal structure itself or by the environment of a lowdimensional system (e.g., the substrate of a 2D thin film). Alternatively, it can be broken locally at edges and inhomogeneities of the sample. In this work, we will entirely focus on the local breaking of inversion symmetry. As a first example, let us consider a system with dominant triplet pairing in the bulk and allow for a non-vanishing singlet component (V t > V s = 0). The spatial texture of the superconducting order parameter at one of the edges of the system, as found from solving the superconducting gap equations numerically, is shown in Fig. The most prominent feature of the local structure of the s-wave order parameter are the pronounced Friedel oscillations For the simple band structure assumed, with only two Fermi points, see Eq. (2.2), the system is a topological class-DIII superconductor for triplet pair- ing and in a topologically trivial phase for singlet superconductivity We note that the phase competition between singlet (trivial) and triplet (topological) superconductivity and the associated shift of the MBSs cannot occur in spinless models, such as the Kitaev chain, as the lack of spin degrees of freedom only allows for p-wave pairing. The sole modification as compared to just taking spatially constant p-wave pairing is a slight deformation of the MBS wave function as can be seen in Fig. In addition to the suppression of triplet pairing and the emergence of a local singlet phase in a spinful superconductor, we have also identified significant Friedel oscillations in the singlet channel in the vicinity of the edge (see Fig. To analyze impurities, we impose PBC on our system and separately consider s-wave and p-wave pairing in presence of either a single non-magnetic ( Û ∝ σ0 ) and magnetic ( Û ∝ σz ) defect. Note that Friedel oscillations in the s-wave singlet order parameter in the presence of a single non-magnetic defect have already been studied by Zhitomirsky and Walker 18 . We will extend their analysis by including p-wave triplet pairing and by studying magnetic impurities. For a non-magnetic impurity the local structure of the s-wave order parameter (see Fig. As in the case near the sample edge, the p-wave order parameter does not possess pronounced Friedel oscillations near defects, but exhibits a suppression of the superconducting gap close to the defect site (see Fig. Very similar behavior is found for s-wave pairing in the presence of a magnetic impurity. As can be seen in Fig. From the local structure of the p-wave order parameter in Fig. In this section, we will derive an analytical expression for the impact of an isolated impurity on the superconducting order parameter in leading order in the impurity strength. From the structure and symmetry properties of this expression, the numerical observation of Friedel oscillations in the spatial structure of the singlet s-wave order parameter and the lack thereof in the p-wave triplet component are readily seen. We start by transforming the Hamiltonian (2.1) with a single impurity localized at the origin, U σ,σ i = δ i,0 U σ,σ in Eq. (2.3), to momentum space, with c kσ (c † kσ ) denoting the fermionic annihilation (creation) operators in momentum space and single-particle dispersion k . The pairing symmetries for singlet and triplet superconductivity are encoded in the momentumand spin-dependent matrix χ(k), with relative and center-of-mass momenta denoted by k and q, respectively. A mean-field decomposition in the Cooper-channel yields where we have defined h kσ,k σ = δ k,k δ σ,σ k + U σσ and the gap function Denoting the Nambu Green's function by with ω n representing fermionic Matsubara frequencies, Eq. ( Assuming the impurity to be weak, we only keep terms linear in Û and neglect the spatial variations with F (q) ≡ ∆(q) -δ q,0 ∆ 0 describing the impurityinduced alteration of the superconducting gap and tr denoting the trace in spin-space. As we will see below, the crucial qualitative differences in the behavior of the superconducting phases in the presence isolated impurities are captured by Eq. (4.6). We thus conclude that the Born approximation applied above suffices to describe the relevant physics. First, we study the general expression in Eq. (4.6) for a non-magnetic impurity of the form Û = u 0 σ0 and consider the cases of pure s-wave and pure p-wave pairing separately. We take the singlet pairing interaction to be χ s (k) = iσ y , i.e. momentum independent. With these approximations, the expression in Eq. (4.6) reduces to with system length L, d = 1, and The graph in Fig. and the pole-structure of F(q, ω n ) at q = ±2k F ±i2ω n /v F reproduces the oscillation period equaling 2k F in the numerical results in Sec. III. For the case of p-wave pairing, the interaction is chosen to be χ t (k) = iσ y σy k/k F = iσ 0 k/k F . Substituting this into Eq. (4.6) yields ) . (4.11) In contrast to s-wave pairing, F(q, ω n ) does not exhibit a peak around q = 2k F , as can be seen in Fig. So far, we have been focusing on the 1D case. As the analytical result in Eq. (4.6) can be readily applied to higher dimensions as well, let us next discuss its predictions for Friedel-like oscillations around defects in two spatial dimensions. In Sec. V below, the numerical solutions of the 2D inhomogeneous gap equations in the presence of impurities will be presented. For a 2D system with s-wave pairing interaction (choosing χ s (k) = iσ y as before), we obtain in Eq. (4.7) with d = 2. Due to the rotational symmetry of the dispersion k = k 2 2m -μ, the expression only depends on |q|, F(q, ω n ) = F(|q|e x , ω n ). Based on the presence of a peak around |q| 2k F , see Fig. For a general triplet vector, χ t (k) = d(k) • σiσ y , we find in Eq. (4.10) with d = 2. For concreteness, let us further assume a d-vector of the form Again, F(q, ω n ) is rotationally symmetric, such that F(q, ω n ) = F(|q|e x , ω n ). The numerical evaluation of Eq. (4.14), as shown in Fig. Consequently, we expect the difference in the behavior of s-and p-wave order parameters around non-magnetic impurities to be smaller in higher dimensions than in 1D; in accordance with our numerical results presented in Sec. V below, Friedel-like oscillations are expected in both s-and p-wave components in higher dimensions, whereas, in 1D, only the s-wave channel shows oscillatory behavior. Let us next analyze the predictions of our analytical expression in Eq. (4.6) for the case of a magnetic impurity, i.e., for Û = S • σ with some real vector S. Inserting a general singlet-pairing function, χ(k) = iσ y f (k) with f (k) = f (-k), the spin-trace in Eq. (4.6) vanishes, leading to F = 0. Consequently, there is no impact on the local superconducting order parameter within the leading-order perturbative treatment presented in this section. The suppression of the superconducting order parameter, including the minor oscillatory features, present in the local structure of the singlet s-wave (see Fig. Taking a general triplet term, χ(k) = (d(k) • σ)iσ y with triplet vector satisfying d(k) = -d(-k), Eq. (4.6) assumes the form Interestingly, the resulting leading order correction is purely imaginary for real-valued triplet vectors. This means that the phase of the order parameter changes in the vicinity of the impurity and, thus, induces a timereversal-symmetry-breaking component in the superconducting order parameter. In the 1D case we have studied numerically in Sec. III C, we did not obtain this phase as the triplet vector d(k) was colinear leading to d(k) × d * (k -q 2 ) = 0 in Eq. (4.15). When investigating the 2D case numerically in the next section, we will indeed recover the emergence of a local imaginary part. We finally note that there are crucial differences to the local phase shift by π in s-wave superconductors in the vicinity of magnetic impurities studied, e.g., in Refs. 49-51. First, the local phase shift in the p-wave superconductor is continuous and incommensurate with π, thus breaking time-reversal-symmetry in the superconducting order parameter itself. Secondly, it occurs already at linear order in the impurity strength and as such does not require the impurity potential to exceed a certain strength. In addition to the numerical treatment of 1D systems and the analytic approach in both dimensions, we follow up with a numerical examination of 2D square lattices with L × L sites and the influence of inversion symmetry breaking at impurities and boundaries on the different superconducting order parameters. The result of the self-consistent calculation for a 2D square lattice with OBC and pure s-wave pairing is depicted in Fig. We have also studied the behavior of 2D p-wave pairing in the vicinity of edges taking a bulk triplet vector of the form d = (sin(k y ), -sin(k x ), 0) T . In contrast to the swave case, the two components ∆ t x and ∆ t y of the triplet order parameter transforming as k y and k x , respectively, do not exhibit a spatial oscillation, but a smooth decrease towards one boundary and a smooth increase towards the other, see Fig. The influence of non-magnetic and magnetic defects on the spatial structure of the 2D s-wave order parameter closely resembles that of the 1D case (see Fig. A comparison of these results with the effect of non- magnetic and magnetic defects on the p-wave order parameter only yields minor differences (see Fig. The only sharp qualitative difference in the behavior of sand p-wave pairing in the vicinity of defects is that only the latter exhibits a local change of phase in the case of a magnetic impurity. As a promising experimental tool to detect the spatial textures of competing superconducting order parameters and of MBS wave functions, we discuss JSTM with the subsystem Hamiltonians Ĥsc and Ĥtip for the inhomogeneous superconductor of interest and the superconducting tip, respectively. Tunneling between the two subsystems is mediated by the tunneling Hamiltonian ĤT . The Hamiltonian of the inhomogeneous superconductor is obtained from our self-consistent calculations, while the tip Hamiltonian Ĥtip = Ĥn tip + Ĥsc tip , consisting of normal state and superconducting terms, is assumed to model an atomically sharp homogeneous superconducting tip. The superconducting part reads as with operators d σ that annihilate (create) an electron of spin σ in the tip, and Ĥn tip is taken to describe a noninteracting, spin-diagonal, spectrum in the tip with density of state ρ 0 at the Fermi level. The Hamiltonian describing tunneling (with amplitude T 0 ) between the site i 0 of the superconductor and the tip, is taken to preserve spin. Throughout this work, we take a tunneling amplitude of T 0 = 0.01t which corresponds to the weak-tunneling limit, T 0 /t 1. This allows to neglect any back action of the presence of the superconducting tip on the order parameter in the inhomogeneous superconductor and vice versa. The Josephson current crucially depends on the difference ∆φ = φ s -φ t of the superconducting phases of the tip (φ t ) and of the inhomogeneous superconductor (φ s ). These phases can be gauged away from the superconducting terms by an operator transformation c iσ → c iσ •e iφs/2 and d σ → d σ • e iφt/2 such that they only appear via ∆φ in the tunneling Hamiltonian This gauge transformation allows us to take the order parameters ∆ s and ∆ t as real parameters below. Closely following the derivation given in Ref. 52 we find the Josephson tunneling current between the inhomogeneous superconductor and the superconducting tip to take the general form where I J,1 (V ) and I J,2 (V ) represent the integrals Here, f ( ) is the Fermi-distribution function, eV the voltage drop across the interface, and F s and F t denote the anomalous retarded Green's functions of the inhomogeneous superconductor and the superconducting tip, respectively. Summation over spin-indices is implied. The superconducting tip is assumed to be in an isotropic swave state, such that The sine-term in Eq. (6.5a) produces a dc current of electron pairs at zero voltage, while at finite voltages it leads to the oscillating currents known as Josephson effect. The cosine contribution 53 in Eq. (6.5a) is often neglected and vanishes for eV = 0, due to the term [f ( -eV )-f ( )] in the integral in Eq. (6.5c). We shall later see, that this contribution leads to pronounced beat signatures in the Josephson current. A. Vanishing voltage drop eV = 0 For a vanishing voltage drop across the interface, eV = 0, the expression for the Josephson current in Eq. (6.5) reduces to as the integral associated with the cosine contribution vanishes. The critical Josephson current is given by ) . The numerical results for the spatial variation of the critical Josephson current are presented in Fig. Furthermore, the minor oscillatory features present within the suppression of the order parameter close to the magnetic defect are mapped by the Josephson current. Our numerical results affirm the work presented in Ref. 43. Next, we will extend this technique to a nonvanishing potential drop eV = 0 across the junction interface. The result of the numerical evaluation of the general time-and voltage-dependent expression for the Josephson current given in Eq. (6.5) for magnetic and nonmagnetic defects is illustrated in Fig. As the Green's function formalism used above is not able to capture the JSTM signature of the MBSs, due to the induced ground state degeneracy, we calculate the current-phase relation directly from 54 i.e., by partial derivation of the negative quasi-particle energy spectrum E n of the JSTM setup with respect to the relative phase ∆φ (we set e = 1 for the electron charge). As before, we assume a homogeneous s-wave superconductor for the tip and take a weak tunneling element of T 0 = 0.01t. The current-phase relation I J (i 0 , ∆φ) (with eV = 0) close to the boundary for a spinfull homogeneous p-wave chain, i.e. spatially constant order parameter, is depicted in Fig. We find that the phase relation is sensitive to the degree to which the MBSs at the two ends of the system are separated, i.e., it depends on the ratio of coherence length ξ t and system size L. In Fig. In Fig. As was discussed in Sec. III B, for a spinfull system with inhomogeneous p-wave, i.e. spatially varying order parameter, the MBSs are slightly distorted at the system boundaries compared to the homogeneous case. Compar-ing the critical Josephson current I c (i 0 ) = I J (i 0 , ∆φ = 0) for these two cases, we find this distortion to be clearly reflected in the Josephson current (see Fig. In Fig. Finally, the current-phase relation for a superconductor with competing order parameters with dominant pwave in the bulk and an s-wave state emerging at the boundary is shown in Fig. A closer examination of the site-and phase-dependent Josephson current in Fig. Note that the contribution of the MBSs to the Josephson current very close to the boundary, i 0 ξ t , is much smaller for systems with larger coherence lengths ξ t . As can be seen in Fig. In this paper, we have studied the modulations of the superconducting order parameter in the vicinity of edges, magnetic and non-magnetic impurities by selfconsistently solving the gap equations for multiple pairing interactions. We have shown that the presence or absence of Friedel oscillations of the superconducting order parameter crucially depends on the pairing symmetry and the nature of the inhomogeneity. Hence, they can be used to discern, on the one hand, between different defect types and, on the other hand, between even parity singlet and odd parity triplet pairing. This distinction is especially prominent in low-dimensional systems. The s-wave order parameter exhibits pronounced Friedel oscillations in the vicinity of non-magnetic inhomogeneities, while the p-wave order parameter lacks such distinct features. We note that a different alternative route to access the character of the order parameter in noncentrosymmetric superconductors, which is based on Shiba states, has been recently proposed in Ref. 55. Furthermore, we have discussed the competition of order parameters with different pairing symmetries in the presence of inhomogeneities. We have shown that this competition can lead to the emergence of a topologically trivial region close to the boundary of a system that is topologically nontrivial in its bulk. Due to this competition, the MBSs are shifted towards the transition point separating these two regions, as opposed to the clear localization at the system edge for a topologically nontriv-ial system with homogeneous order parameter. As a means to probe and resolve the Friedel oscillations induced by inhomogeneities, as well as the spatial structure of competing s-wave superconductivity and the MBSs, we have discussed JSTM. The spatially resolved Josephson current provides a precise tool for the mapping of the spatial structure of the s-wave order parameter as well as of the MBS signatures in systems with competing order parameters. MBSs contribute significantly to the current-phase relation of the Josephson current, modifying it beyond the well established sinusoidal dependence of pure s-wave superconductivity, thus revealing the presence of MBSs and their spatial profile. Taken together, the spatially resolved Josephson current can be utilized to distinguish between different order parameter symmetries by means of their response to inhomogeneities, discern between magnetic and nonmagnetic defects, identify the competition of order parameters, and carry clear signatures of MBSs.