The ab initio calculations suggest (Y. Ma et al.), that the high-pressure (p = 200 GPa) superconducting state in BiH5 and BiH6 compounds characterizes with a high value of the critical temperature (TC ∼ 100 K). Due to the large value of the electron-phonon coupling constant (λ ∼ 1.2), the thermodynamic parameters of the superconducting phase in BiH5 and BiH6 have been determined beyond the mean-field approximation -in the framework of the Eliashberg equations formalism. We have calculated the dependence of the order parameter (∆) and the wave function renormalization factor on the temperature. Then we have estimated the free energy difference between the superconducting state and the normal state, the thermodynamic critical field (HC) and the specific heat of the superconducting state (C S ) and the normal state (C N ). The values of the dimensionless ratios R∆ = 2∆ (0) /kBTC, RC = ∆C (TC ) /C N (TC ) and RH = TC C N (TC) /H 2 C (0) are equal R∆ BiH 5 = 4.17 and R∆ BiH 6 = 4.20, RC BiH 5 = 2.54 and RC BiH 6 = 2.58, RH BiH 5 = 0.146 and RH BiH 6 = 0.146 respectively. In 1935 Wigner and Huntington noted that hydrogen affected by the high pressure (∼ 25 GPa) should transit into a metallic state In 1968 Ashcroft noted that the metallic hydrogen should be a high-temperature superconductor Due to the very high value of the hydrogen's metallization pressure, in 2004 Ashcroft suggested to try to look for a high temperature superconducting state not in pure hydrogen but in hydrogenated compounds In the presented work, we have determined the thermodynamic properties of the superconducting state in hydrogenated compounds BiH 5 and BiH 6 . Due to the high predicted value of the electron-phonon coupling constant (λ BiH5 = 1.236 and λ BiH6 = 1.259 In Fig. where function of the order parameter on the real axis (∆ (ω)) was obtained using the method of the analytical extension, which has been described in detail in the paper Let us consider the order parameter ∆(T 0 ) = ∆ (0) estimated on the basis of the equation denotes the logarithmic phonon frequency. For BiH 5 and BiH 6 compounds it was obtained r = 0.11. In the BCS limit we have r = 0 Basing on the function of the order parameter on the real axis, one can determine the renormalized electronic density of states in the superconducting phase: where we have assumed that the pair breaking parameter equals Γ = 0.15 meV. We have plotted the obtained results in the drawings Fig. The maximum value of the wave function renormalization factor on the imaginary axis relatively precisely determines the ratio of the effective mass of the electron (m ⋆ e ) to the electron band mass (m e ). However, the exact value of m ⋆ e /m e should be determined on the basis of the following formula: Graphs of the ratio of the electron effective mass to electron band mass in the temperature range from 0 to T C , were collected in the drawing Fig. Basing on the solutions of the Eliashberg equations on the imaginary axis (∆ n and Z n ) we have calculated the free energy difference between the superconducting state and the normal state: where ρ (0) denotes the value of the electron density of states at the Fermi level, ω n is the fermion Matsubara frequency, and symbols S and N refer respectively to the superconducting and normal (metallic) state. On this basis, the thermodynamic critical field can be estimated: and the difference in specific heat between the superconducting state and the normal state (∆C = C S -C N ): wherein the specific heat of the normal state can be determined on the basis of the formula: C N (T )/k B ρ(0) = γk B T , where γ = 2 3 π 2 (1 + λ) denotes the Sommerfeld constant. Obtained results were collected in the drawing Fig. 0). For BiH 5 compound we have received R C = 2.54 i R H = 0.146, while for BiH 6 compound we have R C = 2.58 and R H = 0.146. Recall that the BCS theory gives accordingly 1.43 and 0.168 In summary, in the presented work we have determined the values of the thermodynamic parameters of the superconducting state in BiH 5 and BiH 6 compounds. The systems were located under the pressure at 200 GPa. We have shown that for the Coulomb pseudopotential's value of 0.1 the superconducting state with a very high critical temperature of the order of 100 K is induced in both studied compounds. Additionally, within the framework of Eliashberg formalism, we have determined the values of: the energy gap, the electron effective mass, the thermodynamic critical field and the specific heat of the superconducting state. Performed calculations prove that the thermodynamic parameters of the superconducting state in BiH 5 and BiH 6 compounds cannot be calculated correctly in the framework of the mean-field BCS theory.