Optical excitation of stripe-ordered La2-xBaxCuO4 has been shown to transiently enhance superconducting tunneling between the CuO2 planes. This effect was revealed by a blueshift, or by the appearance of a Josephson Plasma Resonance in the terahertz-frequency optical properties. Here, we show that this photo-induced state can be strengthened by the application of high external magnetic fields oriented along the c-axis. For a 7-Tesla field, we observe up to a ten-fold enhancement in the transient interlayer phase correlation length, accompanied by a two-fold increase in the relaxation time of the photo-induced state. These observations are highly surprising, since static magnetic fields suppress interlayer Josephson tunneling and stabilize stripe order at equilibrium. La2-xBaxCuO4 does not originate from a simple optical melting of stripes, as previously hypothesized. Rather, we speculate that the photo-induced state may emerge from activated tunneling between optically-excited stripes in adjacent planes. In these photo-induced superconductivity experiments, the enhancement was achieved at or near 1/8 doping levels, and it was generally interpreted as a consequence of the removal of frustration by ultrafast melting of stripes Here, we study this effect by tuning the relative strength of equilibrium interlayer tunneling and stripes before photo-excitation. This is investigated for different doping levels, as a function of temperature, and in presence of external magnetic fields up to 7 T. The experiments yield highly surprising results and identify a correlation between the strength of the equilibrium stripe phase (before it is optically melted) and the photo-induced superconducting state. Charge and spin ordered phases are found throughout wide regions of the phase diagrams of high-TC cuprates Recent experimental evidence Pressure and magnetic fields have been used to tune the striped state in LBCO and in related compounds. In particular, hydrostatic pressures of few GPa were shown to increase TC More recently, optical excitation with femtosecond laser pulses has emerged as a means to drive the interplay between stripes and superconductivity The La2-xBaxCuO4 single crystals used in our experiments were grown at two nominal Ba concentrations x = 9.5% and 11.5% All measurements were carried out in a superconducting magnet with optical access, with magnetic fields up to 7 T applied along the c direction, and for temperatures down to ~5 K (see Fig. The equilibrium optical properties In the time resolved experiments, the LBCO crystals were photo-excited with ~100 fs, 800 nm wavelength laser pulses, also polarized along the c axis (see Fig. having accounted for the pump-probe penetration depth mismatch The optical response of the 11.5%-doped compound (T < TC), measured in absence of magnetic field, is displayed in Fig. The τ = 1.4 ps data show a response compatible with a strong optically-induced increase in interlayer tunneling strength, evidenced by a blue-shift of the reflectivity edge from ~0.2 THz to ~0.6 THz (see Fig. # ω # ⁄ 0. Fits to the transient spectra are displayed as blue lines At longer time delay (τ = 2 ps), the response evolved into that of a conductor with finite momentum relaxation rate, as evidenced by the broadening of the reflectivity edge (Fig. ) and by a downturn of σ # (ω) at low frequency (Fig. Here, ω 2 and Γ are the carrier plasma frequency and momentum relaxation rate, respectively The same experiment was repeated in a 7 T magnetic field, oriented along the c axis. At equilibrium, the application of the magnetic field induces vortices within the CuO2 layers, stabilizes charge and spin order T). The magnetic-field-induced suppression of interlayer superfluid stiffness is evidenced by the red-shifted equilibrium JPR, which for zero field is found at ~0.2 THz (gray line in Fig. Similar to the data of Fig. The coherent character of this newly discovered optically-enhanced superconducting state in presence of high magnetic fields is even more evident in Fig. At longer time delays, for which the response is well described by the Drude model, ξ < becomes finite and exhibits a collapse, within a few picoseconds, down to values close to 1-2 unit cells. This collapse became slower and not faster when the temperature was raised to 30 K (Fig. A relevant piece of information is added here by the measurements performed at TC < T < TSO (Fig. This observation suggests that, for H = 0, the transient superconductor induced from the normal state is "more coherent" than that induced by exciting the superconducting state at T < TC. Importantly, all data reported in Fig. The full dynamical response, determined for a wide variety of initial conditions (different doping values, temperatures, external magnetic fields) is shown in Fig. Here, we plot the frequency-and time-delay-dependent energy loss function, Jm[-1 ε⁄ (ω, τ)], as extracted from fits to the transient optical response functions. This quantity exhibits a sharp peak at the JPR frequency, which acquires a finite width Γ as soon as momentum relaxation processes set in. Figure When a 7 T magnetic field is applied to the 9.5% compound (Fig. The middle and lower panels of Fig. 3 The dynamical evolution of the loss function in this compound displays, for all temperatures and applied magnetic field values, a more "coherent" character than that found in La1.905Ba0.095CuO4 (Fig. All results above clearly indicate that optically-enhanced (induced) superconductivity in La2-xBaxCuO4 correlates with the strength of the equilibrium stripe order. Indeed, the stronger the stripes, the longer the photo-induced coherence, as shown by systematically changing the doping level, sample temperature and external magnetic field. An exception to this trend is found in the temperature dependent response of LBCO 11.5% (Fig. The observations above can be interpreted by considering the role of the equilibrium, pre-existing c-axis superfluid stiffness in determining the properties of the transient state in the LBCO compounds investigated in our study. Our data suggest that a more robust superconductor at equilibrium adversely affects the strength and lifetime of the photo-induced interlayer coupling (see Fig. We speculate that the equilibrium and optically-induced interlayer tunneling might indeed originate from two separate entities. The former is a spatially homogeneous inplane condensate, which contributes to the interlayer superfluid stiffness at equilibrium, and whose density is higher for dopings away from 1/8 (as in LBCO 9.5%). The latter, within a PDW picture In the aggregate, the results reported above set new constraints on the overall origin of light-induced superconductivity in single-layer cuprates, which appears to result from the photo-excited striped phase and perhaps is not easily explained as simple optical melting of stripes. in main text). This allowed us to perform Kramers-Kronig transformations, thus retrieving full sets of equilibrium optical response functions (i.e., complex optical conductivity σ < = (ω), complex dielectric function ε̃=(ω), complex refractive index n < = (ω)) for all temperatures and magnetic field values investigated in our pump-probe experiment. An example of broadband equilibrium optical conductivity is reported in the inset of Fig. . Equilibrium c-axis reflectivity of LBCO measured with THz time-domain spectroscopy, as described in the text. Blue and green circles are experimental data taken at T = 5 K (no magnetic field) on the x = 9.5% and x = 11.5% sample, respectively. Fits with a model describing the optical response of a Josephson plasma are displayed as solid lines. The same THz time-domain spectroscopy geometry used for the equilibrium characterization (see Section S1) was also employed to measure the transient response of the sample after photo-excitation. Optical pulses of ~100 fs duration and 800 nm wavelength from the same Ti:Sa amplifier were shone at normal incidence onto the sample surface, with polarization along the c axis and a fluence of ~2 mJ/cm 2 . Delayed THz probe pulses were used to measure the pump-induced reflectivity changes for frequencies between ~0.3 and 2.5 THz. The pump-induced change in the THz electric field ∆E % (t, τ) = E % CDECFG (t, τ) -E % (t) was acquired at each time delay τ by filtering the electro-optic sampling signal with a lock-in amplifier, triggered by modulation of the optical pump with a mechanical chopper. This measurement yielded "pump on" minus "pump off" reflected electric field. The stationary field, E % (t), was determined for each measurement by chopping the probe beam while keeping the pump on at negative time delay, i.e. as E % (t, τ ≪ 0). Here, the pump was set to hit the sample with the same power as that used for ∆E % (t, τ), thus accounting for possible average heating effects. The differential electric field ∆E % (t, τ) and the stationary reflected electric field E % (t) were then independently Fourier transformed to obtain the complex-valued, frequency dependent ∆E ) % (ω, τ) and E ) % (ω). Importantly, the same measurement was repeated by (i) directly recording E ) % CDECFG (ω, τ) and E ) % (ω) without chopping the pump and then calculating ∆E ) % (ω, τ) = E ) % CDECFG (ω, τ) -E ) % (ω), or by (ii) acquiring ∆E ) % (ω, τ) and E ) % (ω) simultaneously at each time delay τ by filtering the electro-optic sampling signals with two lock-in amplifiers. Method (i) does not require calibration of the absolute phase of the lock-in amplifier and eliminates phase errors in estimating the optical properties, while method (ii) avoids the introduction of possible artifacts due to long term drifts and is particularly useful when the measured electric field contains fast-varying frequencies. All these methods yielded identical results. The complex reflection coefficient of the photo-excited material, r <(ω, τ), was determined using the relation To calculate these ratios, the stationary reflection coefficient r < = (ω) was extracted at all temperatures from the equilibrium optical properties, determined independently at the same temperature and magnetic field value (see Section S1). These "raw" light-induced reflectivity changes were only ~0.5-1% and needed to be reprocessed to take into account the mismatch between the penetration depth, This mismatch can be taken into account by modeling the response of the system as that of a homogeneously photo-excited layer of thickness d ≃ 0.4 μm with the unperturbed bulk beneath it. The complex reflection coefficient of such multilayer system is expressed as The above equation can be solved numerically, thus retrieving n <(ω, τ) from the experimentally determined r <(ω, τ), and from this the complex conductivity for a volume that is homogeneously transformed, (here ε m = 4.5, a standard value for high-TC cuprates The consistency of this multilayer model was also checked against an alternative method which treats the excited surface as a stack of thin layers with a homogeneous refractive index and describes the excitation profile by an exponential decay Note that, in order to minimize the effects of pump-probe time resolution due to a finite duration of the probe pulse, we operated the delay stages in the setup as explained in Ref. In this Section we report extended data sets taken at selected pump-probe time delays, for various sample temperatures and applied magnetic fields (Fig. Note that all these data and fit results have been used to produce Fig. An exception is given by the spectra of Fig. The absence of any appreciable magnetic field dependence in the transient response at T = 30 K may relate to the fact that the equilibrium stripe order is strengthened by a magnetic field only in presence of a superconducting phase (i.e. for T < TC and not for T = 30 K). Therefore, the data of Fig. The full dielectric function is expressed in this case as ε̃{(ω) = ε m |1 -ω { O ω O ⁄ } + ε̃~(ω) + ε̃p q (ω) Here, the free fit parameters are the Josephson Plasma frequency, ω { , and ε̃(ω), a weak "normal fluid" component Importantly, both models discussed here consistently return optical properties compatible with a superconducting response for frequencies above ω ≳ Γ, with Γ playing here the role of an inverse lifetime, 1/τ € , of the transient superconducting state. This means that, within the frequency range over which the optical response of the transient state can be defined (ω ≳ Γ = 1/τ € ), a transient superconductor with lifetime τ € and a normal conductor with momentum relaxation rate Γ = 1/τ € are undistinguishable. Despite this intrinsic ambiguity, we stress here that the evidence of a transient superconducting state in our measurement is very solid. Firstly, it should be emphasized that, starting from a weak superconductor at equilibrium (as indicated by a pre-existing Josephson Plasma Resonance, see e.g. Fig. Even at later time delays (τ ≳ 2 -3 ps), the momentum relaxation rates returned by Drude fits, 1/Γ ≈ 1 ps, are still anomalously high for conventional incoherent charge transport, and are rather suggestive of a strongly fluctuating superconducting state Finally, the fact that such high mobility transport occurs at a density which is very close to the c-axis density of Cooper pairs in the same compound at equilibrium (as determined by the frequency of the plasma resonance) gives additional evidence in support of the picture of optically enhanced superconducting transport in photostimulated La2-xBaxCuO4.