In this study effects of surface integrity (i.e. surface texture and surface mechanical properties) on the mechanics of functionally graded (FG) nanobeams are investigated. This study reports the changes in the geometry and dynamics of FG nanobeams because of changes in their surface textures and/or surface mechanical properties. A new model for FG nanobeams with engineering surfaces is developed. This engineering surface is considered as a different material phase with a surface texture (i.e. waviness and roughness). The initial curvatures of cantilever, simple supported, and clamped-clamped FG nanobeams due to surface residual stresses are determined. Moreover, their natural frequencies and mode shapes are derived depending on the surface integrity. The initial curvatures of FG beams are obtained increasing with an increase in the slope of the surface texture and/or a decrease in the heights of the asperities of the surface roughness. Moreover, it is observed that the natural frequencies of FG beams may decrease or increase due surface integrity depending on the boundary conditions. Thus, as a first prospect, the surface roughness allows the vibration energy to propagation over the beam length and hence its natural frequency decreases resulting in a zero-frequency mode. As for the other prospect, surface roughness inhibits the propagation of the vibration energy through the beam length leading to a mode localization. It is revealed that a mode localization is accompanied with an increase in the natural frequency of the nanobeam. The proposed surface integrity model for FG nanobeams is compared with Gurtin-Murdoch surface elasticity model. The results demonstrate that the surface integrity model is preferred over the former model where it accounts for, both, surface texture and surface mechanical properties effects. However, Gurtin-Murdoch model assumes smooth surfaces of nanobeams which leads to under/overestimations of their mechanics. A functionally graded (FG) material is an inhomogeneous composite material in which the volume fractions of the material constituents vary smoothly and continuously through the microstructure. In 1984, the concept of functionally graded materials was introduced Nowadays, micro/nano-sized structures made of FG materials are being proposed to design smart structures for various engineering and medical applications. Therefore, studies were carried out to investigate the mechanics of FG micro/nanostructures such as bars, beams, plates, and shells. Moreover, because their mechanics is affected with the excess energy of their surfaces, a countless list of studies used Gurtin-Murdoch model of the surface elasticity [e.g. Due to uncontrollable manufacturing errors, engineering structures may possess material and/or geometrical irregularities. The presence of these irregularities in a structure may result in significant changes in its dynamical behaviors. For instance, due to a small irregularity in periodic structures, a mode localization or an eigenvalue loci veering may occur Small-scale structures are more sensitive to irregularities than large-scale structures. Mode localization and eigenvalue loci veering phenomena in micro/nanobeam-structures with material and/or geometrical irregularities were discussed in a very short list of studies: As previously mentioned, Gurtin-Murdoch surface elasticity model was intensively used to model the mechanics of nanostructures. Gurtin-Murdoch model introduces measures to account for the influence of the excess energy of the material surface on its mechanics. However, this former model assumes a nominal surface of the material. An engineering surface, on the other hand, contains various forms of irregularities, e.g. waviness and roughness. Surface integrity is the characterization of an engineering surface which concerns with describing the surface texture, metallurgy, and mechanical properties Recently, In this section, a detailed formulation for the influence of the surface integrity on the mechanics of FG nanobeams is developed. This formulation is inspired by the surface integrity model Moreover, the engineering surface is modeled with different mechanical properties and with a residual surface stress. In this study, a FG beam is modeled as a linear elastic-Euler-Bernoulli beam; therefore, the displacement field, , of a point, = ( , , ), that belongs to the beam can be defined as follows: where ( , ) denotes the transverse deflection of the beam. Also, the non-zero component of the infinitesimal strain, = , + , i.e. , ≡ , , , can be obtained as follows: To model the surface texture of a FG beam, ( ) is introduced as the profile of the outermost surface layer of the beam: where R( ) and ( ) denote the profiles of the surface roughness and waviness, respectively. It should be mentioned that R( ) represents the deviations of the asperities of the surface roughness measured from the waviness, as shown in Figure where denote the components of the stress tensor of the material bulk. * is the equivalent elastic modulus of the beam interior (material bulk). is the beam's 1st Lame constant. It should be mentioned that the material properties of the beam depend on the material variation through the beam thickness as well as the geometrical variations due to the surface texture. Because it may be exposed to a high temperature during processing and because of the environmental interactions, the surface of the beam possesses different mechanical properties. Thus, the surface of the beam experiences a different strain energy level than the material bulk. Furthermore, because atoms at the free surface of the beam are under-coordinated, a residual stress is generated to achieve the equilibrium at the surface. Given these observations, the total stress at the beam surface can be defined as follows: ( , , ) = ( , ) + * ( , ) ( , , ) , where denote the components of the stress at the outermost surface of the beam. * is the equivalent elastic modulus of the beam surface. denotes the residual surface stress. To derive the equations of motion, Hamilton's principle is employed which states: where , , and are the first variations of the strain energy, the kinetic energy, and the work done, respectively. According to the considered formulation, these quantities can be defined as follows: where is the beam mass density. ( , ) denotes the body force in the z-direction. is the surface traction along z-direction. By substituting equations ( where ( ) is the non-uniform cross sectional area of the beam due to its surface texture. ( ) denotes the mass per unit length. The corresponding boundary conditions are obtained as follows: where and denote the applied shear force and bending moment at the beam end, Γ. and , are prescribed deflection and slope at the beam end. The moment stress resultant introduced in equations ( where By substituting equation ( where Similarly, by substituting equation ( For a FG beam with an engineering surface whose material varies according to the simple power law through the beam thickness, its material properties can be defined as follows: where h is the beam thickness. The superscript '+' refers to the material properties at the upper surface of the beam ( = -h 2 ⁄ -( )). The subscript '-' refers to the material properties at the lower surface of the beam ( = h 2 ⁄ + ( )). By substituting equation ( where ( ) and ( ) are two hypergeometric functions only depend on the grading parameter, . These functions are defined as follows: According to equation ( In the derived model, ( ) is incorporated to account for the influence of surface integrity on the mechanics of FG beams. As demonstrated by the author in Moreover, the surface integrity as reported by the experiment is explained with the average of the surface parameters where is the average roughness, and is the average waviness. denotes the average slope of the surface roughness, and is the average slope of the surface waviness. These average parameters can be defined for a FG beam as follows: where is the beam length. Utilizing the average parameters defined in equation ( where where is a residual force due to surface stresses. It should be mentioned that the higher-order gradients of the surface profile, ( ), are neglected as recommended by the author in Equations ( This model is reformulated considering the average of the surface profile as presented in equations ( The derived model recovers the model of FG beams based on Gurtin-Murdoch surface elasticity model by setting → 0, → 0, → 0, and → 0 in the derived equations ( where It is clear that the surface integrity model outweighs Gurtin-Murdoch model by modeling the real engineering surface of the material. Thus, the former model assumes a smooth surface of the material. The surface integrity model, on the other hand, accounts for, both, the surface texture and the surface excess energy effects on the mechanics of nano-sized materials. The nondimensional form of the derived equations ( The substitution of equation ( where א and M are the nondimensional applied shear force and bending moment. and , are the nondimensional prescribed deflection and slope. In this section, the initial curved configurations of FG beams due to surface residual stresses are analytically derived. To this end, equations ( Where denotes the initial curvature of a FG beam. A general solution of equation ( where = 4 -. In this study, the initial curvatures of cantilever, simple supported, and clamped-clamped FG nanobeams are determined. Therefore, the following boundary conditions are employed: Cantilever: Simple supported: Clamped-clamped: (0) = 0, ( ) = 0, (1) = 0, ( ) = 0 (45) Thus, the constants, , , , and , are determined for the different FG beams by applying the boundary conditions defined in equations ( In this section, the free vibrations about the initial curved configurations of cantilever, simple supported, and clamped-clamped FG nanobeams are determined. Therefore, the beam deflection is decomposed as follows: where is the nondimensional natural frequency, and ( ) is the corresponding mode shape. By substituting equation ( A general solution of equation ( where are the roots of the following characteristics equation. The constants along with the natural frequencies are determined for different boundary conditions. For cantilever FG beams, the following boundary conditions are used: Thus, the nondimensional natural frequencies can be obtained by solving the following equation: and the constants, , are determined as follows: As for simple supported FG beams, the following boundary conditions are used: The nondimensional natural frequencies are, then, determined by solving the following equation: and the constants, , are obtained as follows: For clamped-clamped FG beams, the following boundary conditions are employed: Therefore, the nondimensional natural frequencies can be obtained by solving the following equation: also, the constants, , are determined as follows: In this section, effects of the surface integrity on the initial curvatures, natural frequencies, and mode shapes of FG nanobeams with different boundary conditions are discussed. To this end, a set of FG nanobeams with the geometrical and material characteristics presented in Table 1 are studied. Figures 2-4 show the initial deflections produced in unloaded cantilever, simple supported, and clampedclamped FG beams due to surface residual stresses. As presented in equations ( Moreover, the magnitudes of these residual forces and moments depend on the material grading parameter, . As observed in Figures Figures 2-4 reflect the significant influence of the surface texture on the initial curvature of FG nanobeams. Thus, a FG beam exhibits an increase in its initial curvature for an increase in the slope of its To show the influence of the surface integrity on the natural frequencies of FG nanobeams, the first four nondimensional natural frequencies ( = Ω where Ω is the dimensional natural frequency) are presented as functions of the average slope of the surface roughness (Figures Figure Figure The inhibition of the vibration energy increases with an increase in the average slope of the surface roughness. As a result, the magnitude of vibration decreases, and the vibration energy is confined within a small portion of the beam causing a mode localization. These observations explain the increase in the natural frequency of the 3rd and 4th modes previously seen in Figures Figure As for clamped-clamped FG beams, all modes are localized due to an increase in the average slope of the surface roughness. Thus, the vibration energy is confined over a small portion of the beam length, as shown in Figure Figure As for the higher-order modes of the simple supported beam, their natural frequencies increase with a decrease in the beam size. All the natural frequencies of a clamped-clamped FG beam with an average slope of surface roughness = 6 / are obtained increasing with a decrease in the beam thickness, as shown in Figure This paper presented the first study on the influence of the surface integrity on the mechanics of FG nanobeams. A detailed formulation for the equation of the motion and the boundary conditions of FG nanobeams with engineering surfaces were derived incorporating measures for the surface texture and surface mechanical properties. Two versions of the proposed surface integrity model were developed. First the model was derived depending on a surface profile function ( ) ; then, it was reformulated incorporating the average parameters of the surface texture. Analytical solutions for the initial curvatures of cantilever, simple-supported, and clamped-clamped FG beams due surface residual stresses are proposed. Moreover, the natural frequencies and mode shapes of FG beams with the different boundary conditions were analytically derived. A parametric study was presented on the influence of the surface integrity on the initial curvatures, frequencies, and mode shapes of FG nanobeams. The initial curvatures of FG beams were observed increasing with an increase in the slope of the surface texture and/or a decrease in the heights of the asperities of the surface roughness. Moreover, it was demonstrated that the natural frequencies of FG beams may decrease or increase due surface integrity depending on the boundary conditions. Thus, the presented results came demonstrating two prospects. It was revealed that surface roughness may lead to a zerofrequency mode or a mode localization. As for the first prospect, surface roughness permits the vibration energy to propagate through the beam length, and hence the mode shapes are nonlocalized. As for this prospect, the surface roughness reduces the beam natural frequency. It was demonstrated that the first two natural frequencies of cantilever FG nanobeams and the fundamental frequency of simple supported FG nanobeams decrease due to surface roughness. Thus, at high values of the average slope of the surface roughness, these frequencies attain zeros. As for the second prospect, surface roughness inhibits the propagation of the vibration energy through the beam length causing a mode localization. Thus, the vibration energy is confined within a small portion of the beam, and natural frequency increases. The 