The single impurity effect on the graphene-based superconductor is studied theoretically. Four different pairing symmetries are discussed. Sharp resonance peaks are found near the impurity site for the d + id-wave pairing symmetry and the p + ip-wave pairing symmetry when the chemical potential is large. As the chemical potential decreases, the in-gap states are robust for the d + id pairing symmetry while they disappear for the p+ip pairing symmetry. Such in-gap peaks are absent for the fully gapped extended s-wave pairing symmetry and the nodal f -wave pairing symmetry. The existence of the in-gap resonance peaks can be explained well based on the sign-reversal of the superconducting gap along different Fermi pockets and by analyzing the denominator of the T -matrix. All of the features can be accessed by the experiments, which provide a useful probe for the pairing symmetry of graphene-based superconductors. The graphene-based superconductors have attracted great interest in the past few years. Experimentally, superconductivity was proposed to be induced to the monolayer graphene growing on the superconducting Rhenium film On the theoretical side, the graphene was predicted to go into the superconducting state through doping or the proximity effect The impurity effect has been one powerful tool to explore the pairing symmetry of unconventional superconductors. One prominent feature is the impurity induced in-gap resonance state in the superconducting state of cuprate superconductors Recently, it was reported experimentally that the graphene materials can be highly doped to beyond the Van Hove filling In the present work, we study theoretically the impurity effect of a superconductor in the graphene lattice utilizing the T -matrix method. Four different pairing symmetries, i.e., the p + ip-wave pairing, the d + id-wave pairing, the extended s-wave pairing, and the f -wave pairing, are considered. Note that, this work is different from Ref. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the model and derive the formalism. In Sec. III, we report numerical calculations and discuss the obtained results. Finally, we present a brief summary in Sec. IV. For the honeycomb lattice which describes the monolayer graphene, each unit cell contains two inequivalent lattice sites. The whole system includes two sublattices A and B. We start from a BCS-type Hamiltonian, including the nearest-neighbor hopping term, the chemical potential term, and the superconducting pairing term. Then the Hamiltonian is written as, where A † k↑ and B † k↑ are creation operators of the spin-up electron with momentum k on the sublattices A and B, A -k↓ and B -k↓ are annihilation operators of the spin down electron with momentum -k on the sublattices A and B, respectively. M k is the 4 × 4 matrix in the momentum space: Here ξ = 1 and -1 are for the spin triplet pairing and the spin singlet pairing, respectively. γ k describes the nearest-neighbor electron hopping, with with ), and e 3 = 1 2 (-1, -√ 3). ∆ k represents the superconducting pairing. For the electron pairing of the nearest-neighbor sites, it is expressed as, Following Ref. π , e i 4 3 π ). We consider a single impurity being placed on the sublattice A in the unit cell (0, 0). The impurity Hamiltonian is written as, where V s is the induced imputity strength. Then we can define the T -matrix as, Here Î is the 4 × 4 identity matrix. Ĝ0 (k, ω) is the bare Green's function in the momentum space, with Ĝ0 (k, ω ω-En(k)+iδ . u ij (k) and E n (k) are obtained by diagonalizing the 4 × 4 Hamiltonian matrix of Eq.3. The non-zero elements of the matrix Û0 include U 11 0 = V s and U 33 0 = -V s , respectively. The local density of states (LDOS) is then expressed as, The LDOS spectra at the nearestneighbour site of the impurity for the p + ip-wave pairing symmetry. with Ĝ(r, ω) = Ĝ0 (0, ω) + Ĝ0 (r, ω) T (ω) Ĝ0 (-r, ω). The bare Green's functions Ĝ0 (r, ω) in the real space can be obtained by performing a Fourier transformation to the bare Green's function in the momentum space Ĝ0 (k, ω). In the results presented below, we use 1eV as the energy unit. The nearest hopping constant t is chosen as 2.7. The gap magnitude is usually very small in real materials. In the present work, as usually done, we consider a much larger inputting gap to make the detailed in-gap features clear. Our main results do not change qualitatively with different gap magnitudes. The normal state energy bands (obtained by setting ∆ ±k = 0 in Eq.3) along the high symmetric lines in the Brillouin zone are plotted in Fig. Let us discuss the impurity states for the d + id-wave pairing symmetry. The corresponding LDOS spectra are presented in Fig. For the case of highly doping level (μ = 2.8), the intensities of the in-gap peaks are significantly enhanced, qualitatively consistent with previous numerical calculations We turn to study the impurity effect for the extended s-wave pairing symmetry and the f -wave pairing symmetry, respectively. For both the extended s-wave pairing and the f -wave pairing, the effective gap magnitude becomes rather small, especially for tiny Fermi pockets when the chemical potential is small. Thus we would like to consider a larger input gap magnitude ∆ 0 obtain large enough effective energy gap. In the following presented results, ∆ t = 0.7 is used the cases of μ = 0.4 and 0.8, and ∆ t = 0.4 for the cases of μ = 1.8 and μ = 2.8. The numerical results for the impurity effect in the extended s-wave pairing are displayed in Fig. The LDOS spectra at the nearestneighbour site of the impurity for the f -wave pairing symmetry. larger, the superconducting coherence peaks are suppressed due to the impurity scattering. Note that, here for all of the parameters we considered, no in-gap resonance peaks exist, which is significantly different from the cases of the d + id-wave pairing symmetry. The numerical results for the cases of the f -wave pairing symmetry are presented in Fig. The phase analysis and the sign reversal picture can explain qualitatively the emergence of the in-gap bound states. While the sign reversal of the order parameters is usually not the sufficient condition for the bound states. An alternative method to explain the the impurity induced resonance peaks can be achieved through discussing the denominator of the T -matrix [A(ω)] from Eq.7 with A(ω) =| Î -Û0 small due to the existence of the superconducting gap. Then a resonance occurs when its real part ReA(ω) approaches to zero at a certain low energy. The denominator of the T -matrix with the p + ip and d + id pairing symmetries are presented in Fig. As the chemical potential increases (μ = 2.8), [Fig. In summary, we have studied theoretically the single impurity effect of graphene-based superconductors. Four different pairing symmetries, i.e., the p+ ip-wave pairing, the d + id-wave pairing, the extended s-wave pairing and the f -wave pairing, are considered. Robust in-gap reso-nance states are revealed for the d + id pairing symmetry. For the cases of the p + ip-wave pairing, the in-gap resonsance states are sensitive to the doping level and they exist at the highly doped sample. For the f -wave and extended s-wave pairing symmetries, no in-gap resonance states are obtained for all of the parameters we considered. All of the features can be explained through analyzing order parameter along the Fermi pockets and the denominator of the T -matrix. We conclude that the impurity effect may provide useful information to resolve different pairing symmetries in graphene-based superconductors.