Two dimensional (2D) superconducting systems are of great importance to exploring exotic quantum physics. Recent development of fabrication techniques stimulates the studies of high quality single crystalline 2D superconductors, where intrinsic properties give rise to unprecedented physical phenomena. Here we report the observation of Zeeman-type spin-orbit interaction protected superconductivity (Zeeman-protected superconductivity) in 4 monolayer (ML) to 6 ML crystalline Pb films grown on striped incommensurate (SIC) Pb layers on Si(111) substrates by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Anomalous large in-plane critical field far beyond the Pauli limit is detected, which can be attributed to the Zeeman-protected superconductivity due to the in-plane inversion symmetry breaking at the interface. Our work demonstrates that in superconducting heterostructures the interface can induce Zeeman-type spin-orbit interaction (SOI) and modulate the superconductivity. 2D superconducting system has raised considerable interests in condensed matter physics. The development of state-of-art film growth technique makes it possible to investigate the intrinsic properties of high quality crystalline superconducting films down to a few atomic layers, such as Pb and In films on Si Besides, intrinsic SOI can also give rise to the enhancement of . Rashba-type SOI, which generates from the out-of-plane inversion asymmetry, can polarize the spin of the electron to the in-plane direction, but the in-plane critical field cannot exceed [18]. In highly crystalline 2D superconductors with in-plane inversion symmetry breaking, such as single layer NbSe 2 and MoS 2 , extremely large in-plane critical field far beyond the Pauli limit is observed and attributed to Ising superconductivity To for comparison (Fig. Therefore, the spin splitting in 4 ML Pb/SIC system can be mainly attributed to the lattice distortion and is very likely to be Zeeman-type. Due to the time reversal symmetry, the spin polarization of electrons with momenta at k and -k has opposite direction. Formation of Cooper pairs between electrons with opposite momentum and spin polarizations is thus favored in this situation. Zeeman-type SOI locks the spins of Cooper pairs in the out-of-plane orientation and prevents the alignment of the spin to the external in-plane magnetic field when < , and the superconductivity is protected under large parallel magnetic field far beyond the Pauli limit, i.e. Zeeman-protected superconductivity (Fig. To further confirm and investigate Zeeman-protected superconductivity in ultrathin crystalline lead film, we measured the R sq (B) curves of a 6 ML sample in We then discuss other possible origins that may contribute to a high parallel critical field in 2D superconductors, such as spin-triplet pairing, spin-orbit impurity scattering and Rashba-type SOI. In ultrathin crystalline Pb films, the out-of-plane critical field ( ) can be well fitted by WHH theory, indicating conventional s-wave pairing [Fig. The KLB formula, however, cannot describe the observed relationship between B c /B p and T/T c (the inset of Fig. where ( ) is the digamma function, and , , is the solution of the following equations: ). The result of equation ( As shown in Fig. The Brillouin zone sampling was performed on a 9 × 9 × 1 k-grid with Gaussian type broadening of 0.05 eV. The crystal structure is relaxed with a conjugate gradient method until Hellmann-Feynman forces on each atom are less than 0.01 eV/Å. Spin-orbit interaction is taken into account in the band structure calculation. To perform the first-principles calculations, we put The solid lines are fitting curves using Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg theory giving larger B c2 (0) for thinner films. 