BaFe2S3 is a special iron superconductor with two-leg ladder structure which can help to unravel the role played by the electronic correlations in high-Tc superconductivity. At zero pressure it is insulating with stripe antiferromagnetic (AF) order and superconductivity emerges under pressure. We use a slave-spin technique to analyze the strength of the local correlations in BaFe2S3. We find that at the pressure at which the superconductivity appears the electronic correlations in BaFe2S3 are similar to the ones measured in other iron superconductors. At zero pressure the strength of the correlations is strongly enhanced being particularly severe for the two orbitals with the largest weight at the Fermi level what invalidates nesting as the mechanism for AF. At zero temperature the system is not a Mott insulator, but these two orbitals with mass enhancements m * ∼ 12 -15 will become incoherent at higher temperatures. Different from what happens in other iron superconductors, at both pressures, the Fermi surface is reconstructed by the electronic correlations. Ten years after the discovery of high-Tc superconductivity in iron materials its origin is not understood Well studied iron superconductors have a planar square lattice. Recently superconductivity has been found in the two-leg ladder 123-compounds BaFe 2 S 3 and BaFe 2 Se 3 up to 24 K and 11 K respectively BaFe 2 S 3 shows stripe order, AF along the ladder and ferromagnetic along the rung, with Neel temperature and magnetic moment T N ∼ 120 K and μ ∼ 1 -1.2μ B , close to the ones of other iron superconductors In this paper we use a slave spin technique to study the strength of electronic correlations in BaFe 2 S 3 and shed light on the nature of the superconducting and AF instabilities. We find that at pressures for which superconductivity appears the electronic correlations are similar to those found in other iron superconductors. However at zero pressure the correlations are much stronger, especially for the orbitals with the largest weight at the Fermi level. Such strong correlations invalidate nesting as the origin of AF in this material with local and itinerant electrons. We also show that electronic correlations reconstruct the Fermi surface at both pressures. Model and methods We consider a multi-orbital model for Fe atoms. Interactions, restricted to orbitals in the same atom, include intraorbital U , interorbital U , Hund's coupling J H , and pair hopping J terms, see the supplementary information (SI) and The interaction terms are defined in the w γ basis. We take atomic filling n = 6, U = U -2J H , J = J H , assume J H = 0.25U and study the electronic correlations as a function of U Electronic correlations Fig. BaFe 2 S 3 with U P =0 = 2.90 eV is a strongly correlated Hund metal. At this interaction, the electronic correlations reduce the bandwidth to less than 2 eV, see SI. The narrowing of the bands is especially prominent close to the Fermi level. This happens because the bands close to In the absence of correlations the ab-initio Fermi surface has electron pockets α and β respectively centered at Γ and along (±π, k y , 0) and (k x , ±π, 0) and hole pockets γ around (0, 0, 3/4π) directed along the (k x , -k x , ±3/4π), see Fig. When the effect of correlations is included the γ hole pockets change their shape and cut k z = ±π, the β pockets grow and new smaller hole pockets appear close to (π, π, 0). At P = 0 the α pocket disappears at Γ but smaller triangular-like electron pockets still remain around (π/2, π/2, 0). At P = 12.4 GPa the α pocket is still present at Γ but with an "H" form, see SI . The large mass enhacements make all the Fermi pockets extremely shallow at P = 0. The top and bottom of the hole and electron bands which give rise to the Fermi pockets are shifted only a few meV of the Fermi level, see Fig. We find that at zero pressure BaFe close the Fermi level will behave as incoherent particles: the quasiparticle peak is expected to be absent in photoemission experiments and the resistivity could show insulating behavior as observed experimentally. Short range AF correlations above the Neel temperature will enhance the insulating tendencies localizing these very weakly coherent electrons. In agreement with photoemission and X-ray experiments the system can be described in terms of itinerant and localized electrons The reconstructed Fermi surface shows enhanced scattering at Q ∼ (0, 0, 2π) between the hole pockets. In a Brillouin zone unfolded along k z , Q would become Q * ∼ (0, 0, π) coincident with the intra-ladder AF momentum. These pockets are very shallow and therefore very sensitive to other effects not included in this work. But overall the small quasiparticle weight prevents any explanation of the antiferromagnetic state in terms of nesting. This can have important consequences for the understanding of the superconducting phase which it is believed to be mediated by the AF correlations. Whether the AF order in this material is better explained by a double exchange mechanism or with local moments is an interesting issue beyond the scope of this work. Interestingly, at P = 12.4 GPa, at which the superconductivity is found, the strength of the correlations is reduced to values similar to the ones measured in other iron superconductors. Intermediate correlations could be beneficial for high-Tc temperature superconductivity in iron superconductors As in the P = 0 case, at P = 12.4 GPa the reconstructed Fermi surface shows enhanced scattering at Q ∼ (0, 0, 2π), Q * ∼ (0, 0, π) in the unfolded Brillouin zone. At this pressures the Fermi pockets are not so shallow and the larger quasiparticle weight could, in principle, justify an explanation of the superconductivity in terms of the processes at the Fermi surface, or at least some contribution to it. Such mechanism would predict an order parameter with sign change between the two hole-pockets. An interesting issue which requires further work is whether this weak coupling mechanism for superconductivity is invalidated by the non-nesting character of the AF phase suppressed by pressure or not. In conclusion our work shows that the quasi-one dimensional 123 family can be very useful to decipher the nature of high-Tc superconductivity in iron based materials. Further experimental and theoretical work is desired. We start from a multi-orbital model with local interactions including: intraorbital U , interorbital U , Hund's coupling J H , and pair hopping J terms, j label the Fe atoms. Each unit cell contains 4 atoms. X and Y axis connect ladders in adjacent planes and Z runs along the ladders. k is the momentum in the 4 Fe Brillouin zone, σ the spin and γ, and β the orbitals. We include five orbitals per Fe atom. There are 20 orbitals in the unit-cell. Curly brackets {} in the sum subscript indicate that the sum is restricted to orbitals in the same atom, i.e., both orbitals are between 1 and 5 or between 6 and 10, and so on. The model is defined in w α orbital basis. In this basis there are no hybridization terms between different orbitals within the same atom, only a diagonal on-site contribution γ . We assume U = U -2J H To obtain k,γ,β and γ we start from the 20-orbital tight-binding models calculated in In this basis there are inter-orbital onsite terms. We perform a change to a basis w α in which the onsite terms of these tight-binding models are diagonal. The subscript α corresponds to the orbital of the original basis which gives a larger contribution to w α The matrix elements of the change of basis have the same absolute value in the four atoms, but their sign can differ. Their value depend on pressure. An example is given below. For P = 0: where the superscript label the atom in the unit cell. For P = 12.4 GPa We then write the onsite and hopping terms of the tightbinding models are the basis w α .To address the role of the electronic correlations we use U (1) slave spin theory With this technique we calculate the quasiparticle weight and the onsite energy shifts which are generated by the electronic correlations. Below we provide some figures, complementary to Fig. 