High pressure nuclear magnetic resonance is among the most challenging fields of research for every NMR spectroscopist due to inherently low signal intensities, inaccessible and ultra-small samples, and overall extremely harsh conditions in the sample cavity of modern high pressure vessels. This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the topic of high pressure research and its fairly young and brief relationship with NMR. 1. An unexpected journey for an NMR spectroscopist, a motivation "Pressure. To most people the word brings to mind the stress of our lives in a time of economic crisis. Yet to many scientists, pressure means something very different; it is an idea filled with wonder and power -a phenomenon unlike anything else we know. Pressure shapes the stars and planets, forges the continents and oceans, and influences our lives every moment of every day." These are the opening lines of Robert Hazen's intriguing monograph "The New Alchemists", in which the author describes the early days of modern high pressure science, and its evolution towards one of the most challenging and fascinating research branches today concerned, the most typical ways to alter a given system are by altering its chemical composition, e.g. through doping, increasing or decreasing temperature, or using high or low magnetic fields. Pressure modifying vessels, on the other hand, are only rarely employed in NMR research, owing to substantial technical difficulties associated with the design of such apparatuses; their demand for radio-frequency (RF) resonators, which require most NMR spectroscopists to look over the rim of their tea cup; as well as their inherent inability to use modern high sensitivity and line narrowing methods like MAS or DNP. Nevertheless, in condensed matter systems, where the interatomic bond strength easily exceeds several eV, utilisation of immense pressures is needed to induce significant structural or electronic changes. Other ways of increasing energy density would require tremendous resources, or else are simply extremely impractical. For example, the application of an external magnetic field of 50 T would only correspond to the application of about 1 GPa (10.000 atmospheres) 1 ; a pressure which is easily reached in modern diamond anvil cells. If we would start to compare these pressures with the geothermal gradient of our planet Earth, we would have started our hypothetical journey at the bottom of the Mariana's trench, corresponding to about 1 kbar or 100 MPa of pressure exerted by the 11 km high water pillar above us. Reaching deeper into Earth's interior, say to a depth of about 200 km in the middle of the upper mantle, the experienced pressure would be similar to the contact pressure of the Eiffel tower turned up side down and balanced on its tip, which would only be 10 GPa (about 100.000 bar). At one mega-bar, or 100 GPa, we would already have "dived" down half way through the lower mantle, and at a crushing 350 GPa our journey would come to a violent end upon reaching Earths' gravitational centre, a solid ball primarily comprised of iron and nickel. Clearly, Professor Lidenbrock and his companions would have come to a literally crushing end as well, had they succeeded in their quest. In modern high pressure laboratories, of course, Jules Vernes' fictional journey takes a somewhat different path. Here, pressures are generated by the application of pressure sustaining vessels, which are often composed of a movable piston and an enclosed pressure chamber Recently, record pressures of up to 1 TPa were achieved in double-stage diamond anvil cells 2 I am omitting the specification of "nuclear" here on purpose, because the gain a general impression of the "nuts and bolts" approach associated with these experimental set-ups. Secondly, I will review NMR experiments obtained using micro-coil and magnetic flux tailoring techniques, which are capable of reaching pressures from between 1 GPa and close to 1 Mbar. Closely related to this is a critical overview of some methodological difficulties arising within certain experiments, which can complicate data analysis, or might even lead to false interpretations. From Psi over Torr to kbar. The Low pressure regime as the playground for bio-chemistry and life-sciences. Let us begin our journey with a pressure regime ranging over almost four orders of magnitude from ambient conditions to about 1 GPa. This is the realm of high pressure Bio-NMR, were one of the more commonly used and better known high pressure NMR set-ups is used. This approach uses so-called clamp cells, which are basically comprised of a movable piston exerting the pressure on a sample volume often as big as 100 μl . As this pressure range is still below solidification transitions of most liquid buffer media, it has been proven to be an ideal tool investigating pressure driven protein folding and unfolding dynamics in liquids As this field of high pressure NMR research is extremely extensive and already very well studied, I would like to draw the attention of the reader to the comprehensive review articles from Jonas Up to this point in the pressure-temperature landscape, experimental conditions mimicking the pressure at the bottom at the Marianas trench, and some kilometers deeper in the Earth's crust, could easily be achieved without the application of diamond anvil cells. However, conditions beyond 1 GPa demand a much more powerful device. In this sense, the DAC turned out to be one of the most versatile pressure generating vessels, as it enables the experimenter to not only reach very high static pressures, but also provides him with an astonishing variability of set-ups which can be adopted to a plethora of different experimental environments. Nevertheless, performing NMR experiments in a DAC can at best be considered problematic due to the following reasons. 1) The available sample volume in a DAC is often several orders of magnitude smaller than in a standard NMR experiment. The reason behind this is obvious: We can either generate high pressures by applying a huge force on a sample of some dozens of mm 2) The cavity is tightly enclosed by diamond from two sides, and by a very hard and often metallic gasket which seals the cavity, and provides additional "massive support" of the diamond anvils 3) If we are talking about pressures exceeding 1 GPa, we have to start thinking about hydrostaticity, that is in NMR we need a more or less uniform pressure distribution in the sample cavity, as we are detecting NMR signals from the bulk of the sample. Thus, non-hydrostatic conditions which arise if pressure media turn solid, either at cryogenic temperatures or at high pressures, can lead to ambiguous and distorted NMR spectra. The first NMR experiments in DACs emerged in the late 1980s. The main idea of these pioneering groups was to place a small RF coil operating at predominantly hydrogen frequencies as close as possible to the sample cavity without distorting the diamonds or the metallic gasket. These set-ups include resonators which comprised, for example, a pair of coils placed on the diamonds pavilion As the hairpin resonator is far off the actual samples, the filling factors in this approach are in the order of a fraction of a percent, leading to a spin sensitivity of about 10 19 spin/ √ Hz, which is roughly a factor of 100 lower compared to the standard NMR sensitivity of a static non-DNP experiment. While this improvement sounds very promising, we have to keep in mind that the sample dimensions are already decreased by a factor of about 10 6 in a DAC such as was used in these experiments. Thus, very long data acquisition times hampered a further application of this technique beyond its use for hydrogen NMR in liquid samples, where NMR signals are typically sharp enough to be detected after a couple of thousand scans Up to this point, we were merely able to literally scratch the surface of our planet. The analogy of an apple seems fitting: We would have penetrated the apple to just below its peel. So, most of the interesting things are still deeper below, awaiting their discovery. This demand for higher pressures can easily be understood then we think about chemical bonding and crystal structures. To investigate transitions in the electronic or atomic environment of a solid, we need to be able to increase its energy density, i.e. the pressure, up to a point where atomic distances in a system are below a certain threshold, triggering phase transitions. Here, we are typically not only talking about structural phase transitions but also about higher order phase transitions like electronic or magnetic transitions Hz which is almost four orders of magnitude lower, and thus much more sensitive compared to the set-ups shown in chapter 3 Working in an environment dominated by physicists, we fo- Right inset: recorded proton nutation data. Figure from If we think about a solid, be it a metal, semiconductor, or insulator, we realise immediately that reducing the inter-atomic distances will inevitably have a large effect on the solids band structure. The most pronounced of these effects is the transition from an insulator to a metal, i.e. a pressure triggered electron delocalisation. Decreasing the distances between atoms often leads to a broadening of valence and conduction bands, culminating in an overlap of both bands triggering electronic conductivity. Of course, such a drastic effect will also significantly influence observable NMR parameters, like spin relaxation, or resonance frequencies. Typically, we can define two distinctively different regimes in NMR. On the one hand, there are insulators, e.g. most organic material is insulating, where the shift of resonance frequency is mainly governed by the diamagnetic shielding of the nuclei by low energy paired-up electrons. Thus, the shift is often small, in the range of some ppm. Spin lattice relaxation is predominantly given by dipole-dipole coupling for I = 1 2 nuclei or quadrupolar interactions for I > 1 2 nuclei, and is often in the range from 1 ms up to hours On the other hand, as was realised already in the early days in NMR, resonance frequencies in a metal are profoundly higher compared to a non-conducting salt containing the same nucleus Within the five odd years of my working with micro-coils, Taken from To give one example, using a pair of two 500 μm culeted anvils, reaching about 40 GPa on average, requires a sample volume of 160 μm in diameter and 40 to -50 μm in height for best stability; but this would require micro-coils to be made having only two turns, which is almost impossible to manufacture. Another serious problem originated in the use of the gasket ma- Figure Therewith, the quest for a method for gasket stabilisation was on. A possible solution was found by using so-called composite gaskets, which are made by replacing the pre-indented part of the gasket with a rigid matrix of a nano-crystalline ultra hard material, like diamond or c-BN. A photograph of such a gasket design is shown in figure It could be shown that these gaskets allow for significantly stabilised cavities as illustrated by the much bigger recovered gasket heights in figure Our journey is almost at an end. Despite what the title of this chapter suggests, NMR experiments above 1 Mbar, or 100 GPa, have not been realised so far. But it is a close call. In the course of the last year, high pressure NMR gained momentum, and routinely reaching pressures above 30 to 40 GPa could be feasible even for a broader NMR community. But let us start at the beginning. At the end of the last chapter I have summarised attempts to conduct magnetic resonance at pressures well above 10 GPa. This research also coincided with me obtaining my PhD, and moving on to a purely high pressure oriented institute. Here, it instantly became clear that pressures well above the state-ofthe-art must be realised. Having gathered all the experience from implementing micro-coils in DACs, we began looking for a completely different approach. Experimenting with planar micro-coils or even micro-striplines, it quickly became apparent that something much more robust must be used, as both micro coils and striplines did not sustain the exceedingly high deviatoric stresses in a DAC made for Mbar measurements. The revelation came in form of magnetic flux tailoring Lenz lenses (LL), pioneered by the group of Prof. Korvink in the KIT In accordance with similar calculations from van Bentum et al. Within this admittedly rather short overview about the technical evolution of high pressure NMR devices, we came across an extraordinary degree of ingenuity. Every little step towards the final installments has certainly been difficult, riddled with mishap and frustration. Nonetheless, the pressure possible nowadays surpasses what was thought possible some years ago almost a hundred fold. It is often said that progress in diamond anvil cell research is by no means revolutionary but evolutionary, every advancement in the field comes together with a new problem longing for a solution. This thought seems to be particularly accurate for high pressure NMR. At this point, DAC-NMR advanced both in terms of NMR sensitivity and in achievable pressures to an amount which was widely believed impossible. In fact, over the course of my relatively short academic career, I was met with both disbelieve and ridicule about my vision to perform NMR above 100 GPa. But, as years went by and the field went forward, the voices of the skeptics became increasingly quieter. And as we face the world of real high pressure, both NMR and high pressure communities slowly begin to show interest in each other. I am particularly thankful to Leonid Dubrovinsky, who offered me a safe haven to pursue my research. Without his encouragement enthusiasm, we would not stand were we are today. The same holds true for Jan Korvink, who showed me that it is always worthwhile to look beyond the own comfort zone and find solutions where you would not expect them. Also, I want to thank my wife who, despite endless proof readings, always encouraged me, even in times of upmost discord. Finally, I want to thank the editorial board of PNMR for the chance to write about my story and my contribution to, what I think, is one of the most intriguing new research brands for the magnetic resonance community. We often refer to the culet as the flattened area on the tip of the diamond anvil. In fact, these resonators are often referred to as "key hole resonators". which do not necessarily coincide with first order phase transitions. If the experiments were conducted carefully, and special care has been taken to ensure hydrostatic pressure conditions. which has the same working principle as a DAC, but uses metallic anvils often made from non-magnetic WC. Which will, without a doubt, yield an amazing amount of new phenomena even in the lower pressure range in the near future. In fact, we often prepared DACs like this to use as much sample as possible due to limited sensitivity.