Epoxy nanocomposites able to meet pressing industrial requirements in the field of structural material have been developed and characterized. Tunneling Atomic Force Microscopy (TUNA), which is able to detect ultra-low currents ranging from 80 fA to 120 pA, was used to correlate the local topography with electrical properties of tetraglycidyl methylene dianiline (TGMDA) epoxy nanocomposites at low concentration of carbon nanofibers (CNFs) ranging from 0.05% up to 2% by wt. The results show the unique capability of TUNA technique in identifying conductive pathways in CNF/resins even without modifying the morphology with usual treatments employed to create electrical contacts to the ground. Epoxy matrix-based composite materials filled with MWCNTs or various carbon additives, such as natural, artificial and exfoliated graphites (EGs), activated carbons, and thick graphene exhibit many properties of great interest both from a scientific and industrial point of view such as low electrical percolation threshold (below 1.5 wt.%) as well as high electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding capacity, good adhesive properties etc... The epoxy matrix T20B was prepared by mixing an epoxy precursor, tetraglycidyl methylene dianiline (TGMDA) (epoxy equivalent weight 117-133 g/eq), with an epoxy reactive diluent 1-4 Butanediol diglycidyl ether (BDE) at a concentration of 80%:20% (by wt), respectively. The unfilled epoxy resin T20BD was obtained after adding to the T20B epoxy mixture, the 4,4'diaminodiphenyl sulfone (DDS) curing agent at a stoichiometric concentration with respect to all the epoxy rings (TGMDA and BDE). Fig. The furnace was purged with nitrogen gas for 1 h prior to heating. The heating rate was 100°C h -1 and the furnace was held at a temperature of 2500°C for 1 h prior to cooling. Epoxy blend and DDS were mixed at 120°C and the CNF2500 were added and incorporated into the matrix by using an ultrasonication for 20 min. An ultrasonic device, Hielscher model UP200S (200 W, 24 kHz) was used. CNF2500 were dispersed within the epoxy resin at loading rates of 0.05, 0.32, 0.64, 0.8, 1.00, 1.3 and 2% by weight. Epoxy nanocomposites with loads of CNF2500 beyond 1.3% by weight have difficulty in establishing a homogeneous mixture Dynamic mechanical properties of the unfilled epoxy matrix T20BD and CNF-reinforced epoxy nanocomposites were performed with a dynamic mechanical thermo-analyzer (Tritec 2000 DMA -Triton Technology). Solid samples with dimensions 2 x 10 x 35 mm 3 were tested by applying a variable flexural deformation in three points bending mode. The displacement amplitude was set to 0.03 mm, whereas the measurements were performed at the frequency of 1 Hz. The range of temperature was from -90°C to 310°C at the scanning rate of 3°C/min. The infrared spectra were obtained in absorbance by using a Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR-spectrophotometer with a resolution of 2 cm -1 (32 scans collected) in the range of 4000-400 cm -1 , and the samples were spread on the KBr slice. Thermal analysis was performed with a Mettler DSC 822 differential scanning calorimeter in a flowing nitrogen atmosphere. The samples were analyzed in the temperature range of 0°C-300°C with a scan rate of 10°C min -1 . Calorimetric data have been used for the estimation of the Cure Degree (DC) of the samples. Micrographs of the carbon nanofibers CNF2500 and T20BD+1.3%CNF2500 nanocomposite were obtained using Scanning Electron Microscope-SEM (mod. LEO 1525, Carl Zeiss SMT AG, Oberkochen, Germany). All samples were placed on a carbon tab previously stuck to an aluminum stub (Agar Scientific, Stansted, UK) and were covered with a 250 Å-thick gold film using a sputter coater (Agar mod. 108 A). Nanofilled sample sections were cut from solid samples by a sledge microtome. These slices were etched before the observation by SEM. The etching reagent was prepared by stirring 1.0 g potassium permanganate in a solution mixture of 95 mL sulfuric acid (95-97%) and 48 mL orthophosphoric acid (85%). The filled resins were immersed into the fresh etching reagent at room temperature and held under agitation for 36 h. Subsequent washings were done using a cold mixture of two parts by volume of concentrated sulfuric acid and seven parts of water. Afterward the samples were washed again with 30% aqueous hydrogen peroxide to remove any manganese dioxide. The samples were finally washed with distilled water and kept under vacuum for 5 days before being subjected to morphological analysis. Atomic force microscope (AFM) images were acquired in an ambient atmosphere (30%-40% humidity) with a Dimension 3100 coupled with a Bruker NanoScope V multimode AFM (Digital Instruments, Santa Barbara, CA) controller operating in tunneling current mode (TUNA-AFM), using microfabricated silicon tips/cantilevers. The sample slices of the T20BD+1.3%CNF2500 were etched before the morphological observation. The TUNA-AFM measurements were performed using platinum-coated probes with nominal spring constants of 35 N m -1 and electrically conductive tip of 20 nm. TUNA -AFM operates in contact mode. TUNA works similarly to C-AFM but with higher current sensitivity. The sensor signal is the electric current between the afm tip and the conductive sample for an applied DC bias. In feedback mode, the output signal is the DC bias, adjusted to maintain the electric current setpoint. The following values of the TUNA control parameters are used: DC sample bias ranged from 1 V to 2 V taking into account that bias limit is 12 V, current sensitivity was 1 nA/V, current range was 200 nA, samples/lines: determines the number of data points or pixels in X and Y (256), scan rate: controls the rate at which the cantilever scans across the sample area (0.9-1.5 Hz s-1). In order to obtain repeatable results, different regions of the specimens were scanned. By adopting TUNA-AFM is possible to perform electrical characterization at nanoscale level without grounding the samples. The images were analyzed using the Bruker software Nanoscope Analysis 1.80 (Build R1.126200). Tunneling atomic force microscopy which has been given the official designation 'TUNA' by the equipment manufacturers (Bruker) is a highly sensitive technique by which ultra-low currents (<1pA) ranging from 80 fA to 120 pA can be measured The TUNA setup employs a conductive AFM probe, an external voltage source needed to apply a potential difference between the tip and the sample holder, and a current amplifier used to convert the (analogical) current signal into (digital) voltages that can be read by the computer The measurements of electrical properties have been carried out both under dc and ac voltage. The DC volume conductivity of the composites have been performed by using disk-shaped specimens of about 2 mm of thickness and 50 mm of diameter. Before performing the electrical measurements, the samples are thermally pre-treated at 90°C for 24 h in order to remove any trace of moisture or solvents. Then, both sides of the samples have been metallized (circular form of about 22 mm of diameter) with silver paint (Alpha Silver Coated Copper Compound Screening, with a resistivity of 0.7 Ω-square) in order to reduce the effects of surface roughness and to ensure Ohmic contacts. The measurement system is composed by a multimeter Keithley 6517A with function of voltage generator (max ± 1000 V) and voltmeter (max ± 200 V) and an ammeter HP34401A (having resolution of 10nA). The AC properties have been evaluated in the frequency range 100 Hz-1MHz by using a Quadtec7600 dielectric analyzer and by applying a sinusoidal stimulus of amplitude 0.1V or 1V for specimens above or below the electrical percolation threshold (EPT), respectively, in order to avoid measurements around the current saturation limit (100 mA) of the instrument for samples with low resistivity. Two tests were performed for each composition. All electrical measurements were carried out at room temperature. The epoxide functional group is the characteristic group in the epoxy resin, and epoxide rings will open under the attack of amine molecule during the curing reaction of epoxy resins by amine curing agent, which will decrease the content of epoxide groups drastically. FTIR spectroscopy is an effective method to investigate the curing behavior of epoxy resin by determining the band intensity change of functional groups, before and after curing reactions of epoxy resin and also during the reaction time at a given temperature. We followed the absorbance of the IR peak at 906 cm -1 due to the epoxy group responsible of the polymerization reaction. The absorption intensity of this band (906 cm -1 ) is considered maximum for uncured epoxy resins, decreasing with the conversion of the epoxide groups during the curing cycle, when the conversion of the epoxide groups takes place. FTIR spectra allowed us to confirm the complete curing for all the epoxy formulations cured up to 200°C for 3 h, both unfilled resin T20BD and epoxy nanocomposites loaded with different percentages by weight of CNF2500 nanoparticles. FTIR spectra of the unfilled epoxy resin T20BD and CNF epoxy nanocomposites cured at room temperature, up to 125°C for 1h and up to 200°C for 3 h are shown in Figs. The absence of the absorption of epoxy ring and presence of OH group confirm the conversion of epoxy group into the corresponding polymer and thus that all the amine and epoxy groups reacted during the curing process proving undoubtedly the proper formation of the crosslinked network. It is worth noting that the changes in the intensity of the peaks mentioned above are clearly visible compared to the peaks at 1143 cm -1 and 1105 cm -1 corresponding to the strong asymmetric and symmetric SO 2 stretching of the DDS hardener In this work, DSC has been used for the estimation of the curing degree (DC) of the samples under the assumption that the exothermic heat evolved during cure is proportional to the extent of reaction. The DC can be determined from the total heat of reaction (∆H T ) of the curing reaction and the residual heat of reaction (∆H resid ) of the partially cured epoxy resin To obtain fraction reacted at various temperatures, we have performed a series of isothermal experiments. To secure accurate total ∆H T values from isothermal studies, dynamic runs were made after the isothermal curing cycle to obtain the residual heat of reaction. The total heat of reaction was considered as follow: where ∆H iso and ∆H resid are the areas under the isothermal and dynamic thermograms, respectively. In this paper, the curing degree (DC) has been obtained in dynamic and isothermal regime. This last experimental procedure has also been considered because many processes in the industry are actually done isothermally, the curing degree obtained in dynamic regime has been compared with the curing degree of the samples after a curing cycle composed of two steps: a first step of 125°C for 1 hour followed by a second step at the higher temperature of 200°C for 3 hours, where both the steps have been carried out in isothermal condition in oven. In particular, in the dynamic regime, the uncured nanofilled samples were analyzed by a three step dynamic heating program in the temperature range between -50°C and 300°C considering a first run from -50°C up to 300°C with a scan rate of 10°C min -1 , a second run from 300°C to -50°C with a scan rate of 50°C/min and a third run from -50°C up to 300°C with a scan rate of 10°C/min (see Figs. Dynamical mechanical data provide useful information on the relaxation processes that become operative in the polymer in a temperature range depending on the examined system. Figs. A detailed study of the DC electrical properties of the composites has been reported in a previous paper The electrical percolation threshold (i.e. EPT) falls in the narrow range [0.05÷0.32] wt%. The composite below the EPT (i.e. 0.05 wt%) presents an electrical conductivity of the order of pS/m comparable with that of neat resin. Above the electrical percolation threshold, due to the formation of an electrical network of neighboring conductive particles and the possibility for electrons to flow through tunneling effect, the composites present a transition of the electrical behaviour from an insulating to a conductive one Therefore, the electrical conductivity of the composites increases significantly above the EPT following a power-law of the form: where σ 0 is the intrinsic conductivity of the filler, φ c is the EPT and t is a critical exponent depending on the dimensionality of the percolating structure Electrical properties of insulating polymers can be improved by adding high-permittivity nanofillers such as carbon-based particles In particular, Fig. It is well known in fact that, starting from a certain critical frequency f c , the AC conductivity increases according to the so-called Almond-West-type power law where σ DC is the DC conductivity, Aˑω s is the AC conductivity. More in details, A denotes a temperature-dependent constant, ω is the angular frequency (i.e. ω=2πf) and s is a characteristic exponent whose value is strictly close to 1. Moreover, with reference to Figure Hz except for the insulating composites due to frequency dependent behavior of the electrical conductivity observed in Fig. where j 2 = ─1, ε' is the relative permittivity or dielectric constant which takes into account the stored energy in a material subject to an external variable field, whereas ε'' is a term which, for a dielectric material, provides an information on the efficiency to dissipate the power of the applied electromagnetic field. The larger its value, the greater the capacity of absorbing the incident electromagnetic field that is dissipated as heat. The variations of the real part of the dielectric permittivity against the frequency is presented in Fig. Dielectric materials with high dielectric permittivity are particularly required in several industrial fields such as modern electronics, electrical power systems, hybrid electric vehicles, and so on. Neat polymers are the best choice of dielectric materials for charge storage applications, thanks to their high breakdown strength. However, their potential applications are restricted by the typical low value of dielectric permittivity. Therefore, polymer nanocomposites have shown great potential in overcoming such limitation since the introduction of small amount of nanofillers can increase ε of resulting materials without sacrificing the dielectric strength and other interesting mechanical, thermal and chemical properties where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity (8.856 pF/m). I may be noted that, for composites above the EPT having an almost constant conductivity in the frequency range under examination, the value of ε'' decreases linearly with the angular frequency ω. Vice versa for the pure resin (but it is also valid for the formulation T20BD+0.05%CNF2500) the imaginary part of the complex permittivity shows a constant trend. Furthermore, as evident from Fig. where b is a critical exponent that is different for various properties In a previous paper, TEM investigation on the nanofibers was performed to analyze the morphology of the nanofibers before their incorporation into the epoxy mixture. It was found that heat-treated carbon nanofibers CNF2500 are characterized by straighter walls where the nested configuration characteristic of the as made CNF is not clearly visible The TUNA-AFM images were collected on etched samples to partially remove the resin surrounding the carbon nanofibers and to better observe the distribution of the nanofiller inside the epoxy matrix. For each sample, 3 TUNA-AFM image types, which are the most common in contact mode, namely height (or topography) image, deflection error image, and tuna current image, are displayed below. The height image is the type of image most commonly reported and published. Usually, the height image is a map of differently coloured pixels, with a colour bar relating the colour to the height. This type of acquisition is really very useful as it allows to estimate both lateral (xy) and height (z) measurements. However, one reason other types of image are here shown is that such "height maps" do not always really "look like" the object in question, in other words, the appearance of a certain shape can be very different to that it would have in optical (or electron microscopy). What this means, is that, to the casual observer, such images do not display easily the shape of the features. Ways around this include shading the image, and more commonly, creating a pseudo-3D image from the height data. Because the deflection error image is equivalent to a map of the slope of the sample, it often displays the shape of the sample more easily. But it is worth noting that the z-scale in deflection is completely meaningless in terms of the sample structure. All it shows is how the tip deflected as it encountered sample topography. It is important to remember too that the best images are obtained when the deflection signals are minimised. In general, TUNA-AFM by simultaneously mapping the topography and current distribution at nanoscale level allows to obtain the direct correlation of a sample location with its electrical properties. In fact, the 3 TUNA-AFM images reported below clearly show the morphological characteristics of the nanofilled sample and provide complementary information that helps the reader to a more complete understanding of the observed electrical properties. In the TUNA-AFM images of the nanofilled sample, the conductive network of carbon nanofibers strongly anchored to the epoxy matrix can be clearly observed, especially in 2D and 3D tuna current images. In fact, the carbon nanofibers appear homogeneously distributed across the sample surface and they are clearly observable in almost any image, but they are most resolved in the tuna current images that have been recorded at the same time as the height and deflection error images. The tuna current images show an increased contrast in the morphological features of carbon nanofibers. A clear correlation between the topography and the regions of high current was found whenever a measurable current can be recorded. In the case of the TUNA current image obtained at a bias voltage within a range of 1 to 2 V, conducting CNF2500 nanoparticles appear very bright in the light blue colour, thus demonstrating their high conductivity and domains with lower conductivity values appear darker. As can be seen in the current profile, domains with different brightnesses present differences in the current value. A careful observation of the current profile of the T20BD+1.3%CNF2500 sample (see TUNA current image in Fig. Fig. The TUNA-AFM technique has proven to be really a powerful tool for measuring electric transport through the carbon nanofiber based epoxy network, thus allowing to provide a map of nanofiller distribution at atomic scale level inside the polymeric matrix. In the analyzed nanocomposites, the carbon nanofibers are integrated into the matrix and become part of the cross-linked structure. The lower percolation threshold and higher conductivity exhibited by the carbon nanofiber reinforced nanocomposites can be justified on the basis of their stiffness and smoothness of surface graphitized CNF2500 which determines a lower thickness of the insulating epoxy layer around the fibers. When the percolation threshold is reached, the formation of a percolated filler network structure takes place, where a critical minimum distance between carbon nanofibers has been reached and electron conduction is facilitated through a 'tunnelling' mechanism. The TUNA technology is an innovative tool able to correlate the electrical properties of the nanofilled structural material with its topographic features, giving new insights for a better understanding of current conduction mechanism. The use of this technique allowed to identify the nanoscopic distribution of the conductive phase and characteristics of the charge conduction throught the current pathways in carbon nanofiber nanocomposites, without undergoing any prior treatment with silver paint that is usually used to create electrical contacts to the ground, proving that the investigated samples are intrinsically conductive. The CNF/epoxy nanocomposites are characterized by good electrical performance and they are potentially suitable for aircraft lightning strike protection. In particular, for concentration of CNFs higher than 0.25 wt.%, the nanofiller determines an increase in the efficiency of curing process performed in isothermal regime, which is usually the real condition of curing in industrial processes; and the nanocomposites are characterized by an electrical conductivity beyond the EPT and can be used for all applications where the employment of an insulating material is not suitable. In addition, the strong dependence of the properties on the frequency around the percolation threshold allows to suitably use the CNF based nanocomposites as a highly sensitive device for monitoring strain in aeronautic structural parts or even as part of wing de-icing system. The curing behavior, investigated by FTIR and DSC, proving the proper formation of the crosslinked network together with the high mechanical properties demonstrate the real potential of the formulated conductive nanocomposites for advanced structural applications.