To calculate the radioactivity of product nuclides generated in pulse irradiation, it is generally assumed that the irradiation is approximately continues in the entire irradiation period (t i ) and the flux of incoming irradiation particle can be obtained by averaging their intensity in each pulse period (T). However, this approximation fails to acknowledge the fact that the product nuclides are not created in each pulse period (T) evenly: they are only produced in a very short pulse width (t p ) and then decay in a relative long rest time (t r = T -t p ). Given by the enormous number of pulses, the sum of these decays may not be negligible. To make the activity calculation in accordance with the real situation in pulse irradiation, we scrutinize the details of irradiation and decay processes in each pulse, applies the geometric series to obtain the activity superimposition of millions of pulses, and derives a novel activity equation particularly suitable for pulse irradiation. The experimental results, numerical simulations, and activity measurements from photon activation driven by a pulsed electron LINAC have confirmed the validity of this new equation. The comparison between the new and traditional equations indicates that their discrepancy could be significant under certain conditions. The limitations of the new activity equation for pulse irradiation are discussed as well. Radioactivity calculation is a primarily concern in nuclear activation analysis, medical isotope production, health physics, and other fields in nuclear and radiological sciences. Historically, the activity may be generated from sources which are capable of continuous radiation, such as nuclear reactors and radioisotope resources. The number of product nuclides N(t i ) at end of irradiation time t i follows the equation where R is the reaction rate of selected nuclear reaction, N 0 is the original number of target nuclides, λ is the decay constant of product nuclides, φ is the particle flux of the irradiation particle (e.g. high energy photon or thermal neutron), and σ is the cross section of corresponding nuclear reaction. The product φσ, or reaction rate density, is usually an integral over the energy of the incoming particle from threshold energy which the reaction occurs to the maximum energy (φσ = ∫ φ(E)σ(E)dE ). The burn-up of target nuclides is usually very small and could be ignored in most situations. The total number of radionuclides N follows the curve in Figure Nowadays, due to the development of accelerator technology, more and more radioisotopes are produced by pulse irradiation What is the activity equation looks like if we adapt the pulsed irradiation model instead? Does the pulse activation model impact significantly on the results of the final activity of radioisotopes? Which physical parameter(s) in pulse irradiation will be significantly affect the final activity of product nuclides? To answer these questions and make the activity calculation more accurate, one needs to establish a new pulse irradiation model in accordance with the real experimental situation in pulse irradiation. In real situation of irradiation, the pulse profile is very complicated (see Figure Initially, it looks like a tedious work to calculate the total number of product nuclides after an irradiation period t i due to millions of pulses. However, this can be solved by the superimposition of millions of pulses (bumps) using convergent geometry series. The final number of product nuclides is the superimposition of a series of bumps which are illustrated in Figure For the 1 st pulse, it created N p product nuclides in pulse width time t p . At the moment of t i , product nuclides generated from the first pulse have decayed with a time period of t i -t p . Thus, according to the decay law, one gets the number of residual product nuclides produced by the 1 st pulse at moment of t i is For the 2 nd pulse, it created N p product nuclides in pulse width time t p as well (the burnup of target nuclide is ignored). At the moment of t i , the decay time for the second pulse is t i -t p -T. The number of residual product nuclides produced in the 2 nd pulse is: For the 3 rd pulse, at the moment of t i , the decay time is t i -t p -2T, and Accordingly, for the last pulse m before the end of irradiation, the number of residual product nuclides is N m (t i ) = N p e -λ(t i -t p -(m-1)T) = N p e λt p e -λt i e (m-1)λT (6) The total of residual product nuclides at end of irradiation is = N p e λt p e -λt i + N p e λt p e -λt i e λT + N p e λt p e -λt i e 2λT + ⋯ + N p e λt p e -λt i e (m-1)λT = N p e λt p e -λt i (1 + e λT + e 2λT + ⋯ + e (m-1)λT ) = N p e λt p e -λt i ∑ e (j-1)λT m j=1 = 1 + e λT + e 2λT + ⋯ + e (m-1)λT (8) To get the limit of the convergent geometric series above, we multiply e λT on both sides By rearranging The relation of m and t i is By inserting ( Combing ( In the pulse width t p , the irradiation is continuous and φ = φ p . Combining ( Derivation 1 is based on the superimposition of residual radioactive nuclides produced by each pulse at the end of moment t i . To some extent, it is slightly counterintuitive. The logical way is to follow the time sequences: the growth of activity should be calculated one pulse after another pulse from the start to the end of irradiation. In this section, we will follow this logic and prove that two derivations reach the same result. For the convenience of discussion, we assume that the burn-up of target nuclides is negligible and the number of product nuclides suddenly increased N p at the end of each t p (see the sketch in Figure At point A, the number of product nuclides is For the 2 nd pulse, it starts at point B At point C, compared with the point X where B decays after a period of t p , the number of nuclides increases N p , thus Accordingly, for the 3 rd pulse (DE) For the last pulse m before the end of irradiation, we have Similar to derivation 1, we can get the limit of the convergent geometric series as By combining ( which is exactly the same as the result of ( Since T = t p + t r , ( • e -λt r (24) And the final activity at the end of pulse is If one considers the activity right at the end of last pulse width t p , the decay factor e -λt r vanishes. This term can be seen as a factor generated by the rest time in the last pulse. Thus, at the end of last pulse width, the total number of product nuclides N total and the corresponding activity A total are Equation ( From Equation ( To validate the new activity equation in pulse irradiation, photon activation experiments were conducted by the 44 MeV short pulsed LINAC at the Idaho Accelerator Center. Figure Electrons were initially created by hot cathode and then accelerated by a series of alternating RF electric fields in the acceleration cells. Optimized energy around 30 MeV was applied and the total output power was around 2kW. The pulse width is 2.3 μs, the repetition rate is 120 Hz, and the peak current is about 240 mA. The electron beam is focused by magnetic fields to a radius of about 3 millimeters. After the tungsten converter of 3mm thickness, the electron beam completely converted into a bremsstrahlung photon beam. The converter was cooled with forced air continuously to avoid the risk of melting down. The photon flux produced directly after the converter at 30 MeV and 2 kW is approximately 1.1 × 10 12 photons/sec/cm 2 /kW. An aluminum hardener of 7.62 cm was positioned after tungsten block to absorb the residual electrons and ensured that the photon beam behind the hardener was predominantly made of high energy photons. A well-known certified reference material, standard reference material 1648a (urban particulate matter) from NIST was served as irradiation target After photon activation, the target was cooled down in the accelerator hall for 24 hours to meet the requirement of radiation safety for transferring to the spectroscopy room. Spectra collection was finished by a P-type coaxial detector with 48% efficiency and a resolution less than 1.5keV. After one week, spectra of long-lived isotopes were collected by the same HPGe detector again. Samples were measured in two positions: J and A. Position J is 10cm away from the detector head with an intrinsic peak efficiency of 0.00258@393.529keV for short-lived isotope measurements. Position A is right against the detector with an intrinsic peak efficiency of 0.0625@393.529keV for long lived isotope measurements. Figure To get the photon flux φ in the sample, Monte Carlo simulations were performed with GEANT4 toolkit 4.10.3 installed on an HP ProDesk 600 G1SFF workstation running a 64 bits Ubuntu 16.04.1 LTS operating system In the physics list file of the photon shower program, all the electromagnetic processes were added, including G4ComptonScattering.hh, G4GammaConversion.hh, G4PhotoElectricEffect.hh, G4eMultipleScattering.hh, G4eIonisation.hh, G4eBremsstrahlung.hh, G4eplusAnnihilation.hh, and G4ionIonisation.hh. To create an electron beam with measured energy distribution, the default PrimaryGeneratorAction.hh file in the include directory of the program was modified with the class of general particle source (GPS) Figure In Table A live script in MATLAB was written to numerically imitate pulse superimposition in the irradiation As we expected, the outputs of numerical simulations from two different algorithms are almost the same Table If the new equation was confirmed by the experiments, does it mean the traditional practice with continuous assumption are invalid and the foundation for photon activation analysis were built on sand? Fortunately, the answer to this question is no. The discrepancy of current and traditional equations is negligible in most photon activation cases. As mentioned before, the traditional method to calculate the activity is based on continuous assumption, which means φ p t p = φ ̅T and (2) In some extreme cases, the discrepancy of these two equations might be quite significant. For example, Figure One can see that ζ changes its values significantly once half-life τ is less than the pulse period T: the shorter the half-life of radionuclide, the larger the ratio ζ, with a maximum value of ζ close to the ratio of T/t p . When the half-life and pulse period are in the same scale, the ratio is close to 1. Using traditional continuous assumption for those isotopes will not be accurate enough. However, this observation does not impact too much on nuclear activation analysis since what really counts in traditional radioanalytical practice is the ratio of activities, not the absolute activities of the same radioisotope in sample and reference The relationship between pulse period T and half-life τ of product nuclides not only plays a dominant role in the ratio ζ, but also significantly impacts the final activity of the product nuclides. From the denominator e λT -1 of Equation ( •T -1, which is larger than 1, the whole fraction is smaller than λN 0 φσe λt p (1 -e -λt p )(1 -e -λt i ) . On the contrary, if T < τ , the denominator is less than 1, and the result is larger than N 0 φσ(1 -e -λt p )e λt p (1 -e -λt i ). Thus, the turning point of activity is decided by the relationship of pulse period T and the half-life τ of the product nuclides. If the pulse period T is significantly shorter than the half-life τ of product nuclides, one can expect a substantial increase of final activity in pulse irradiation. Although the current equation is a general equation for pulse irradiation, it can be easily broadened its usage to ion beams, reactors operating in pulse mode, and radiation dose calculation, it has its limitations as well: First of all, it is based on rectangular wave assumption of pulses. In some practical cases, sinusoidal wave assumption might be more accurate. Secondly, it is based on the assumption that the burn-up of target isotope can be negligible in irradiation. If the burn-up cannot be ignored, the current equation of pulse irradiation needs to make some adjustments according to the Bateman's Equations A novel activity equation for pulse irradiation was derived mathematically with the assistance of geometry series, and then it was confirmed numerically by MATLAB codes, and finally validated experimentally by photon activation conducted via a short-pulsed LINAC. The comparison between the new equation (based on pulse irradiation) and the traditional equation (based on an approximation of continuous irradiation) indicates that their discrepancy is negligible in most cases of photon activation, but it could be significant under certain conditions. The limitations of the new activity equation are discussed as well. The slightly difference is originated from the inaccuracy of floating-point arithmetic. The linear fit parameters are: A(intercept) ≈ 14.42±15.28; B(slope) ≈1.271±0.076; Pearson's R ≈ 0.99289, R-Square(COD) ≈ 0.98583. In analysis of variance (ANOVA), F Value ≈ 278.29, (Prob>F) ≈7.565E-5. Philosophically speaking, the argument of continuous assumption or pulse irradiation is a new example of ancient Zeno's paradoxes.