Charge carrier recombination in the perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has a deep influence on the electrical performance, such as open circuit voltage, short circuit current, fill factor and ultimately power conversion efficiency. The impacts of injection barrier, recombination channels, doping properties of carrier transport layers and light intensity on the performance of PSCs are theoretically investigated by drift-diffusion model in this work. The results indicate that due to the injection barrier at the interfaces of perovskite and carrier transport layer, the accumulated carriers modify the electric field distribution throughout the PSCs. Thus, a zero electric field is generated at a specific applied voltage, with greatly increases the interfacial recombination, resulting in a local kink of current density-voltage (J-V) curve. This work provides an effective strategy to improve the efficiency of PSCs by pertinently reducing both the injection barrier and interfacial recombination. Despite high power conversion efficiency (PCE), over 20%, of organic-inorganic lead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has been reported in recent years, arising from a high absorption coefficient, high carrier mobilities, and long charge carrier diffusion lengths 1-3 , the current a density-voltage (J-V) responses represent an anomalous hysteresis It is well known that the recombination of charge carriers in the PSCs will reduce not only the fill factor (FF) but also the open-circuit voltage (VOC). Most of the structures of PSCs are composed of electron transport layer (ETL), perovskite absorber layer and hole transport layer (HTL). Apart from grain boundaries which act as bulk recombination in perovskite absorber layer, various film interfaces recombination The solar cell device to be investigated has an n-i-p device structure, where n is the doped TiO2 acting as ETL, i is the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) absorber layer, and p is the doped spiro-OMeTAD acting as HTL The device model is based on the non-linear Poisson, drift-diffusion and continuity equations for electrons and holes throughout the device in one dimension = --+ - Where is the electrostatic potential, is the positive electron charge, is the dielectric permittivity, and are the densities of the electrons and holes, and are the ionized ptype and n-type doping. The doping levels are constant in the ETL and HTL, and zero in the perovskite layer. is the built-in electric field, and are the mobility of electrons and holes, respectively. = ( / ) and = ( / ) are the diffusion coefficients of electrons and holes, respectively, where and are the Boltzmann constant and Kelvin temperature. and are the generation rate of electrons and holes, respectively. The charge carrier generation profile under illumination throughout the device, calculated by using the Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) method The boundary condition of the electrostatic potential at the electrodes is where is the externally applied voltage and is the work function of the electrode. The charge carrier densities (boundary conditions) at the Schottky contracts are given by Cathode where and are the effective density of states for charge carrier transport materials. ∅ and ∅ are injection barriers for the cathode and anode, respectively. The computational method To investigate the impacts of trap-assisted interfacial recombination on the performance of PSCs, the traps are located in a 5 nm thick interface recombination region Sun et al. We first explore the effect of the different recombination channels on the performance of it is noted that there is a minimum of FF of PSCs in the case of bottom interfacial recombination when the light intensity is 0.1 Sun. To investigate the anomalous phenomenon, Figure The trap-assisted recombination is the dominant recombination mechanism during device operation . So, the quality of perovskite film should be enhanced together with passivation of traps at top interface for achieving higher performance of PSCs. The FF of PSCs with bottom interfacial recombination drops rapidly when is above 6 × 10 . To analyze the impact of bottom interfacial recombination and find out the physical origin, J-V characteristics of PSCs for bottom interfacial recombination with trap density from 1 × 10 to 3 × 10 are illustrated in Fig. And the bigger the trap density, the stronger the J-V curves bend. As can be seen from the figure, the voltage corresponding to the maximum degree of bending is the same, i.e., 0.83 V. A voltage applied at the electrodes of the PSCs establishes an electric field within the The doping of charge carrier transport layer could be an effective method to increase the FF of PSCs The electric field in the charge carrier transport layer increases with the corresponding increasing the doping concentration. In other words, as shown in Fig. ). As shown in Fig. Until now, we know that the degree of J-V curve bending, which impacts on the FF of PSCs, depends on different recombination channels, trap density at the interface and doping concentration in charge carrier transport layer. By investigating the profiles of charge carriers in the perovskite active layer of PSCs, we find that the injection barrier of the interface is the most fundamental reason resulting in the above anomalous J-V characteristics. Figure As a result, the more carriers' accumulation, the more recombination between carriers and traps at the interfaces occurs. And it results in the distortion in J-V curve. The sufficient electron/hole injection barrier and interfacial recombination could give rise to the local kink of J-V curve. The applied voltage corresponding to the zero electric field dependence of the hole injection barrier.