The biomaterials exploitation in a sophisticated manner can provide extensive opportunities for experimentation in the field of interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary scientific research. Owing to the unique features of this trendy area, research scientists have been directed/redirected their interests in biobased biomaterials for targeted applications in different sectors of the modern world. The present manuscript highlights the novel perspectives of biomaterials as a trendy source to engineer functional entities in numerous geometries for pharmaceuticals, cosmeceuticals, nutraceuticals, and other biotechnological or biomedical applications. Biomaterials have gained special research interests as novel candidates and potential alternatives to the traditional counterparts The biomaterials exploitation for biotechnological applications at large and biomedical in particular has several intrinsic advantages that include but not limited to the biocompatibility, biodegradability, renewability, sustainability, and non-toxicity Apart from plants, cellulose is biosynthesized by certain bacteria, e.g., Rhizobium spp., Agrobacterium spp., Acetobacter spp., and Alcaligenes spp. The high level of purity, change in color, change in flavor, and enormous potential to develop various shapes and textures, makes BC/MC a potential candidate for the food industry. The most popular use of BC in food is the production of Nata, originating from the Philippines; Nata is a traditional sweet dessert in Southeast Asia. Nata is a fermentation product of the bacteria, Acetobacter xylinum. Referred to as Nata de coco and Nata de pina, their flavors are controlled by the coconut water-based and pineapple water-based culture mediums, respectively Bio-based biomaterials are moving into the mainstream applications changing the dynamics of 21 stcentury materials and their utilization in drug delivery strategies. Owing to the increasing consciousness and demands to reduce bacterial contaminations in healthcare facilities and possibly to cut pathogenic infections, the engineering aspects of novel active anti-microbial materials are considered to be a potential solution to such a problematic issue As mentioned above, there has been increasing research interest in the development of biomaterials-based bio-composites with multi characteristics i.e. (1) stronger, (2) stiffer, (3) lighter along with other multifunctional properties for a variety of industrial and biotechnological applications In conclusion, through sophisticated design and novel characteristics, the material can be modified to achieve an optimal infective capability. Such materials include but not limited to the biodegradable and biocompatible films and highly porous 3-D constructs. Bio-based biomaterials are versatile to synthesize novel constructs with multifunctional characteristics for potential applications in the biomedical sector. Moreover, a novel type of potent materials could be designed for the management and skin regeneration/repair from injury, particularly burns and ulcers, where the risk of bacterial infection is high. Material structure and performance integrity need to be accessed using a range of analytical and imaging techniques. Considering this scenario, research, production, and commercialization of such novel materials have drawn global efforts from numerous transnational companies as well as highly skilled research groups from around the world and diverse research areas.