We study the influence of the inverse proximity effect on the superconductivity nucleation in hybrid structures consisting of the semiconducting nanowires placed in contact with a thin superconducting film and discuss the resulting restrictions on the operation of Majorana-based devices. A strong paramagnetic effect for electrons entering the semiconductor together with spin-orbit coupling and van Hove singularities in the electronic density of states in the wire are responsible for the suppression of superconducting correlations in the low field domain and for the reentrant superconductivity at high magnetic fields in the topologically nontrivial regime. The growth of the critical temperature in the latter case continues up to the upper critical field destroying the pairing inside the superconducting film due to either orbital or paramagnetic mechanism. The suppression of the homogeneous superconducting state near the boundary between the topological and non-topological regimes provides the conditions favorable for the Fulde-Ferrel-Larkin-Ovchinnikov instability. The transport phenomena in semiconducting wires with induced superconducting ordering and strong spin-orbit interaction are in the focus of current experimental and theoretical research in field of nanophysics and quantum computing In most cases theoretical study of these Majorana wires is based on a simplified model of the superconducting correlations described by a phenomenological gap potential inside the wire i.e., Gor'kov equations. The microscopic approach allows to get the effective gap operator analogous to the one used in the phenomenological model. On top of that it gives the gap dependence on the transparency of the interface between the wire and the s-wave superconductor and chemical potential via density of states (DOS). Another important point is that the exchange of electrons between the wire and superconductor can cause a so called inverse proximity effect, i.e., suppression of the gap function at the superconductor surface. For a rather thin superconducting shell covering the wire this gap suppression can result in the change of the superconducting critical temperature of the whole system. The analysis of this inverse proximity phenomena is important to find out the optimal range of parameters which allows to realize the switching between the topologically trivial and nontrivial states of the semiconducting wire used in various braiding protocols. The goal of the present work is the self-consistent analysis of the critical temperature behavior in the wires with the induced superconducting ordering taking account of the inverse proximity effect. For this purpose we start from the full set of microscopic equations for the Green functions taking account of both scattering rates describing the quasiparticle The magnetic field H is applied along the wire axis Oy while the Rashba spin-orbit vector is perpendicular to the substrate (not shown). transfer between the superconducting film and the wire These rates are determined both by the probability of electron tunneling through the barrier at the superconductor/semiconductor (S/SM) interface and the corresponding densities of states. In particular, it is important that the rate γ w is proportional to the DOS in the SM nanowire resulting in its non-trivial energy dependence. Indeed, considering, e.g., a single channel nanowire we get the DOS diverging as a square root function of energy relative to the bottom of the conduction band. This van Hove singularity in the DOS should cause a strong energy dependence of the scattering rate γ w and, as a consequence, the superconducting critical temperature should depend on the position of the Fermi level with respect to the bottom of the one-dimensional conduction band in the SM wire. The influence of the van Hove singularity on superconductivity should be also accompanied by the strengthening of the paramagnetic effect. Indeed, one can naturally expect that the scattering rate γ w could result in the additional effective Zeeman field induced in the superconductor due to the electron exchange with the SM wire. Due to the divergence in the DOS together with the large g -factor in the wire this induced Zeeman field can even exceed the usual Zeeman field value. Under such conditions the field dependence of the critical temperature would have a minimum near the fields H ∼ |μ w |/gβ, where μ w is the Fermi energy of the wire relative to the bottom of its conduction band at H = 0 and β is the Bohr magneton. Strictly speaking, the spin-orbit interaction may cause the emergence of the third van Hove singularity below -gβH/2, but it appears only at rather large spinorbit interaction strengths. Note that for a vanishing induced superconducting gap ∆ ind this field separates the regimes with trivial and nontrivial topological properties of the system The suppression of the superconducting order parameter near the line of transition between the topologically trivial and nontrivial phases can result in one more interesting phenomenon: similarly to the standard paramagnetic effect this suppression can cause the transition into the analog of the so-called Fulde-Ferrel-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) state with the spatially modulated superconducting order parameter. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the Section "Basic equations" we give the main equation of our model. The Section "Results and Discussion" is devoted to the description of the solution and the analysis of the phase diagrams. In the Conclusion Section we summarize our results and the suggestions for the experiment. Hereafter we consider a long 1D semiconducting wire partially covered by a thin superconducting shell with the thickness d s ξ s , where ξ s is the superconducting coherence length. In the wire cross section the superconducting film covers the angular sector φ 0 . The model system is schematically shown in Fig. where k B is the Boltzmann constant, and is the Planck constant. The Hamiltonian of the system reads: with the first term describing the s-wave superconducting shell, corresponds to the Hamiltonian of the nanowire, and the tunnel Hamiltonian takes the form Here σ = ↑, ↓ denotes spin degrees of freedom (summation over repeated spin indices is always assumed throughout the paper), while σm (m = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices in the spin space, R w is the radius and S w = πR 2 w is the cross section area of the wire, r = (R w , φ, y), φ is the polar angle in the plane perpendicular to the wire axis which changes in the interval 0 < φ < φ 0 , y denotes the coordinate along the wire, ε s (r) = -∇ 2 r /2m s -μ s and ε w (y) = -∂ 2 y /2m w -μ w stand for the quasiparticle kinetic energies in the shell and in the wire with respect to the corresponding chemical potentials μ s and μ w , m s and m w are the effective masses of the electrons in the subsystems, ∆ s (r) is the superconducting order parameter, α is the spin-orbit coupling constant, h = gβH/2 is the Zeeman energy, and H is the applied magnetic field. We consider the incoherent tunneling model, which does not conserve the momentum, e.g., due to the presence of the disorder at the interface. Thus, the ensemble average of the tunneling amplitudes has the form: where c is the correlation length of the order of the atomic scale. The tunneling is also assumed to be energy and spin independent and occurs locally in time and in space, i.e., from a point r on the superconducting shell into the point y in the wire and back with the amplitude T (r). It is important to note that here we do not consider the orbital effects in the superconducting shell. This approximation of course imposes some restrictions on the value of magnetic fields under consideration which are nevertheless quite realistic for the experiments aimed to the manipulation with Majorana states in such systems. It is the large g factor in the SM wire which allows to have the magnetic field values affecting the electronic states in the wire and barely affecting the ones in the superconducting cover. Note that omitting the orbital effects we cannot describe possible Little-Parks effect arising in the wires fully covered by the S shell Neglecting the order parameter inhomogeneity in the shell for d s ξ s , we derive the following system of Gor'kov equations written in the frequency-momentum representation (see the Appendix for the details of derivation) where ω n = 2πT (n + 1/2) is the Matsubara frequency, T is the temperature, ε s is the single particle kinetic energy relative to the chemical potential, p y is the momentum along the wire, τm (m = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices acting in the Nambu space, ∆ = ( ∆τ + + ∆ † τ-), ∆ = ∆ s (iσ y ), ∆ s is the superconducting order parameter, which we assume to be constant in space and real-valued, τ± = (τ x ± iτ y )/2, and ε w = p 2 y /2m w -μ w . The tunneling self-energy parts are given by the following expression: where Γ s = t 2 c R w m s φ 0 /2 and Γ w = t 2 c /2υ 0 . The functions ǧs(w) are the quasiclassical Green's functions: The precise definitions of the Green's functions Ǧw,s of the wire and of the shell, respectively, together with the derivation of Eqs. (6 -7) are given in the Appendix. Note that we neglect here possible dependence of these quasiclassical Green's functions on the coordinate along the wire assuming, thus, the limit of an infinitely long wire without edge effects. The velocity υ 0 is introduced just for the purpose of unification of dimensionality of the tunneling rates Γ w and Γ s and does not appear in the product Γ w ǧw which enters the measurable quantities. One can choose this velocity, e.g., as υ 0 = 2μ w /m w so that the rate Γ w includes the divergent DOS in the 1D wire. Tunneling rates for the quasiparticles in the shell Γ w and in the wire Γ s can be expressed in terms of the normal-state tunnel resistance R in the following manner where S = 2πR w w is the contact area, w is the wire length, G 0 = e 2 /π is the conductance quantum, ν s = m s /2π and ν w = (2m w /μ w ) 1/2 are the normal DOS in the shell and in the wire, respectively, R 0 = (N G 0 ) -1 , N = k F w w , and k F s(w) is the Fermi momentum in the shell (wire). The expressions for the tunneling rates can be conveniently written through the numbers of transverse modes in the superconducting shell (N s ∼ k 2 Fs d s R w φ 0 ) and in the wire (N w ): where υ Fs = k Fs /m s . Here we use the simplest generalization Due to the growth of N s with the shell thinkness d s in the multi-mode regime of the superconductor this ratio may become rather small weakening the inverse proximity effect (the details of experimental relevance are considered in the next section) The Eqs. (6 -7) must be solved together with the self-consistency equation for the superconducting gap function: where λ is the dimensionless pairing constant and the trace is taken over spin indices. The next section is devoted to the perturbative solution of the Gor'kov equations (6 -7) and the self-consistency equation Considering the perturbation theory in the superconducting gap function ∆ s it is natural to start with the equations for the normal Green's functions which give us the zero order solution of the Gor'kov equations Ĝs = iωn-εs-Γwg w0 +Γwgw σ Here U w = [(αp y + Γ s g sx ) , (h + Γ s g sy ) , Γ s g sz ] and the quasiclassical Green's functions are written in the spin form with k = s(w) for the shell (wire). The solutions for spin matrix functions Ĝk are given by the expressions According to the definitions for the quasiclassical Green's functions (9 -10) and due to a specific spin structure of the Zeeman term and spin-orbit coupling term in the Eqs. where and ωn = ω n + Γ s sign(ω n ). The equations for the anomalous Green's functions read: and give the solution for the anomalous Green's functions F † k within the first-order perturbation theory in the superconducting gap Introducing a general presentation for the components of the quasiclassical anomalous Green's functions The solutions of the Eqs. ( Here and further we use the following notations Here and further ν, η = ±1. The expressions for the integrals involving the products of the normal Green's functions in the shell can be written as follows: In the definitions (34 -35) and (39 -41) we have introduced the following functions: Here ] * , and ε I = Im(ε 0 ). Finally, we explicitly show the expressions for the normal Green's functions in the wire: Note that in the absence of the spin-orbit coupling, zero magnetic field and for energy independent DOS in the wire the self-consistency equation formally coincides with the one obtained in the seminal work by McMillan Turning now to the case of nonzero Zeeman energy and spin-orbit coupling we use numerical approach to analyze the solution of the self-consistency equation ( Taking the critical temperature of Al The color plots in Fig. temperature decays as we increase the magnetic field due to a standard paramagnetic effect. On the contrary, in topologically nontrivial regime T c increases (with or without initial decay at small fields). This increase in the critical temperature originates from the reduction of the proximity effect due to almost pure spin polarization of quasiparticles in the wire. Of course the above mentioned increase in the critical temperature is limited from above by either orbital or intrinsic paramagnetic effect in the S shell and continues up to the upper critical field in the superconductor. One can see that the scattering rates Γ w and Γ s have a strong quantitative effect on the above physical picture because of the smearing and shifting of the peculiarities of DOS and resulting smoothing of T c variations. The nonmonotonic behavior of T c is illustrated by the plots in Fig. for typical Majorana nanowires It is worth noting that the T c (h) plot in the panel (a) of the Fig. FFLO type we also find only the temperatures corresponding to the second-order phase transition. The physical picture can become more complicated if one takes into account possible first-order transitions corresponding to the interplay between different local minima of the thermodynamic potential in the nonlinear regime. However, the solution of nonlinear gap equations is beyond the scope of the current work and needs further investigations. Note also that the possible FFLO phase appears on either side of topological transition (h 2 = μ 2 w + ∆ 2 ind ) depending on the sign of the chemical potential μ w . Indeed, in general the temperature as a formal solution of the self-consistency equation ( Additionally, an accurate analysis of FFLO state should include careful consideration of the modulation of the superconducting order parameter both along the wire and in the azimuthal direction Before we conclude we discuss briefly the influence of the inverse proximity effect on the effective induced gap operator ∆ top in the topological regime h 2 > μ 2 w + ∆ 2 ind which is of crucial importance for topological superconducting electronics and topologically protected fault-tolerant quantum computing. In our estimates we take the standard limit of μ w = 0 for the sake of simplicity. First, the increase of Γ w reduces the parameter range of the topological insulator regime αp h as the magnetic field should well exceed Γ w to avoid the suppression of the critical temperature due to the van Hove singularities (see Fig. To sum up, we have studied the distinctive features of the inverse proximity effect arising in the presence of a large Zeeman energy and strong spin-orbit coupling in the hybrid systems consisting of the SM nanowires covered by thin superconducting films. Assuming a strong difference in g-factors between the wire and superconducting metal we find the range of parameters and fields corresponding to the FFLO instability and the regime of reentrant superconductivity. We focus on the topologically nontrivial regime of relatively large magnetic fields and analyze consequences of the inverse proximity effect on the quasiparticle poisoning in Majorana-based devices.