We predict that superconductivity in thin films can be stabilized in high magnetic fields if the superconductor is driven out of equilibrium by a DC voltage bias. For realistic material parameters and temperatures, we show that superconductivity is restored in fields many times larger than the Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit. After motivating the effect analytically, we perform rigorous numerical calculations to corroborate the findings, and present concrete experimental signatures. On the technical side, we also introduce a new form for the nonequilibrium kinetic equations, which generalizes and simplifies previous formulations of the problem. Introduction.-It is well-known that magnetism is harmful to conventional superconductivity; the mechanisms responsible are a diamagnetic orbital effect and paramagnetic spin effect. The orbital effect refers to the Lorentz force felt by electrons moving in a magnetic field, which forces the electronic condensate to rotate. That requires kinetic energy, and eventually makes condensation unfavourable. This can be neglected in thin films with in-plane fields, since currents perpendicular to the plane are suppressed Fig. In Fig. While both spin-split and voltage-biased superconductors have been investigated for a long time, a number of interesting discoveries have been made in recent years Analytical motivation.-Let us first consider a conventional superconductor in equilibrium, without any fields or voltages. The order parameter then satisfies a selfconsistency equation ∆ = N 0 λF(∆), where the gap function F(∆) is given by Here, N 0 is the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level, λ the BCS coupling constant, f ( ) = ∆/ √ 2 -∆ 2 the pair amplitude, h( ) = tanh( /2T) the distribution function, the quasiparticle energy, ω c the Debye cutoff, and T the temperature. We measure energies relative to the zero-temperature gap ∆ 0 , temperatures relative to the critical temperature T c , and set the cutoff ω c = 30∆ 0 . Finally, in the weak-coupling limit the above are related by N 0 λ ≈ 1/log(2ω c /∆ 0 ) and ∆ 0 ≈ πe -γ T c , where γ ≈ 0.57722 is the Euler-Mascheroni constant In response to a Zeeman-splitting field m, the quasiparticle energies become spin-split according to → ± m, and the pair amplitude in Eq. ( Following the same approach as Moor et al. At this point, we find three properties worth remarking. Firstly, the right-hand side is invariant under eV/2 ↔ m. In other words, the gap responds in precisely the same way to an applied voltage and magnetic field. Moreover, plotted as a function of these two control parameters, the superconducting gap should be symmetric around the diagonals eV/2 = ±m. Secondly, in spin-split superconductors without any voltage, it is known that a superconducting solution ∆ = ∆ 0 exists as long as the magnetic field m < ∆ 0 . Applied to Eq. ( The first term is just the gap function in the absence of fields and voltages, which by itself always results in superconductivity at low temperatures. The second is the gap function for a superconductor with a magnetic field 2m, which only contributes to superconductivity until m = ∆ 0 /2. We therefore expect the combination to yield a bulk gap until m = ∆ 0 /2, but also produce a weaker superconducting solution for much higher fields, since half the gap function is independent of m. In Fig. Fig. Note that the stabilization of superconductivity for eV/2 = m is similar to an effect previously reported by Bobkova and Bobkov Numerical treatment.-We use the quasiclassical Keldysh formalism The components are related by the identities ĝK = ĝR ĥĥ ĝA and ĝA = -τ3 ĝR † τ3 , where ĥ is the distribution matrix, and τ3 = diag(+1, +1, -1, -1) is a Pauli matrix in Nambu space. It is therefore sufficient to determine the retarded propagator ĝR and distribution matrix ĥ. It is commonly stated that ĝR describes the equilibrium state, while ĥ describes the nonequilibrium one. However, this is actually incorrect for a superconductor, since ĝR implicitly depends on ĥ via the selfconsistently determined gap ∆. In practice, one therefore has to alternate between solving a diffusion equation for ĝR , a kinetic equation for ĥ, and a selfconsistency equation for ∆, until all three converge. The propagator is governed by the Usadel equation where ∆ = antidiag(+∆, -∆, +∆ * , -∆ * ) is the gap matrix, σ3 = diag(+1, -1, +1, -1) a Pauli matrix in spin space. The film is voltage-biased via tunneling contacts, which we model with Kupriyanov-Lukichev boundary conditions As for the kinetic equations, we have derived a new form which generalizes and simplifies previous results. Our approach is similar to the treatment of nonequilibrium S/N systems in Refs. where we implictly sum over repeated indices. The distribution is parametrized as an 8-element vector h, which describes all charge, spin, heat, and spin-heat degrees of freedom. The coefficients M, Q, V, W are 8 × 8 matrices that depend on the retarded propagator ĝR and self-energy factors Σ(1) , Σ(2) , but not the distribution h. In addition to being simple and general, this formulation is very efficient numerically since all coefficients are independent of h; in fact, it takes less time to solve than the Riccati-parametrized equations for ĝR . For more details about the kinetic equations, see the supplemental. Numerical results.-Fig. Fig. if one uses the gaps ∆ in Fig. In Fig. Conclusion.-We have shown that superconductivity can coexist with a Zeeman-splitting magnetic field far beyond the Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit m = ∆ 0 / √ 2 if the superconductor is exposed to a voltage bias eV/2 = m. We present concrete setups for observing this effect in Fig. Possibilities for future work include investigating how robust this superconducting state is with respect to spin-flip scattering, spin-orbit scattering, and orbital depairing. It would also be interesting to check if a similar effect exists for unconventional high-temperature superconductors. Finally, our setup might be used as a novel circuit element for superconducting spintronic junctions. For instance, the m ≈ ∆ 0 /2 curve in Fig. Jabir Ali Ouassou, 1 Tom Doekle Vethaak, 1 and Jacob Linder In Section I, we provide some additional details on how the phase diagrams in the main manuscript were calculated. We then derive a new formulation of the nonequilibrium kinetic equations in Section II. The resulting equations are completely general, computationally efficient, and yet straight-forward to implement numerically. Corresponding boundary conditions for magnetic interfaces to general nonequilibrium reservoirs are derived in Section III. We then show numerical results for the distribution in IV, and discuss the conversion to supercurrents in V. The selfconsistency relation for the superconducting gap can be written ∆ ∼ F(∆, m, eV/2) in the presence of a magnetic field m and voltage bias V, as discussed in the main manuscript. The simplest way to solve such equations is by fixpoint iteration: for each field m and voltage V, one chooses an initial guess ∆ = ∆ 1 , and calculates successive values using ∆ n+1 ∼ F(∆ n , m, eV/2). This is repeated until the difference |∆ n+1 -∆ n | between iterations drops below some acceptance threshold, at which point the system is said to have converged to a fixed point for the gap. These fixed points that the system converges toward correspond to minima in the free energy; this is not straight-forward to verify within the Usadel formalism, but can be found by comparison to the Ginzburg-Landau However, in some systems, the situation is more complicated. In a spin-split superconductor, there is a parameter regime ∆ 0 /2 < m < ∆ 0 where the gap converges to a superconducting solution ∆ = ∆ 0 for large initial guesses, but a normal-state solution ∆ = 0 for small guesses. Both solutions are locally stable in the sense that they are robust to small perturbations, and correspond to different local minima of the free energy Originally, this bistability was resolved by comparing the energies of the two minima, since the system should eventually relax to the global minimum. In e.g. the magnetic case, this yields the Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit m = ∆ 0 / √ 2 as the exact transition point in the interval ∆ 0 /2 < m < ∆ 0 , where a first-order phase transition takes place After introducing the terminology, we now demonstrate how the phase diagram itself was calculated. In Fig. Fig. In this section, we derive an explicit linear ordinary differential equation for the distribution function ĥ. The result is a highly computationally efficient form of the kinetic equations, which is also relatively straight-forward to implement numerically. The starting point is the Usadel equation As we will see later, it will prove prudent to introduce a set of basis matrices ρn that span block-diagonal spin-Nambu space, Here, τ0 ≡ diag(+σ 0 , +σ 0 ) and τ3 ≡ diag(+σ 0 , -σ 0 ) are the diagonal basis matrices in Nambu space, while σi ≡ diag(σ i , σ * i ) forms a complete basis for the spin structure, where σ i are the Pauli matrices. This lets us rewrite the distribution matrix ĥ as ĥ = h n ρn , (S4) where we use the summation convention on the right-hand side, and define the coefficients h n as traces with the basis matrices, The kinetic equations take a simple form when written in terms of h n instead of ĥ, while Eq. (S4) makes it trivial to reconstruct the matrix structure afterwards. When implementing our results numerically, h n is treated as a real-valued 8-vector, while the kinetic equations will involve 8 × 8-matrices operating on it. Combining the definitions Ǐ = D( ǧ∇ ǧ) and ĝK = ĝR ĥĥ ĝA , we find that the Keldysh component of the matrix current is Substituting in the parametrization ĥ = h m ρm , we see that the coefficients h m and ∇h m can be factored out of the brackets, If we then multiply the entire equation by ρn /4 from the left and take the trace, the resulting equation can be written where we have defined the quantities Tr ρm ρn ( ĝR ∇ ĝR ) -ρn ρm ( ĝA ∇ ĝA )] , (S10) This has a straight-forward physical interpretation If we now go back to the Usadel equation, and multiply that by ρn /4 from the left and take the trace, we find the equation: This will later be combined with Eq. (S8) to derive the kinetic equations. First, however, we need to express the right-hand side of the equation in terms of the distribution function h m . When describing phenomena such as superconductivity and ferromagnetism, the self-energy matrix Σ = Σ is diagonal in Keldysh space and independent of the propagator ǧ. This simplifies the commutator on the right-hand side of Eq. (S12): Substituting in ĝK = ĝR ĥĥ ĝA and ĥ = h m ρm , we then find: Going back to Eq. (S12), we therefore find that it can be written where we have defined the new quantity Finally, we note that using the cyclic property of the trace, the above can be rewritten in the alternative form Since all our basis matrices ρn commute with both τ0 and τ3 , we see that V nm = 0 for a normal metal where Σ = τ3 . This implies that in the absence of other self-energy terms, all currents I n must be conserved in normal metals. When describing phenomena such as spin-dependent scattering and orbital depairing We recognize the right-hand side as a commutator with Σ, We then multiply by ρn from the left and take the trace, Substituting in ĝK = ĝR ĥĥ ĝA , the right-hand side becomes Tr [ ρn , Σ]( ĝR Σ ĝR ĥĥ ĝA Σ ĝA + ĝR [ ĥ , Σ] ĝA ) . (S22) Substituting the parametrization ĥ = h m ρm into the above, and substituting the result back into Eq. (S12), we find that where we have defined the new quantity In the previous subsections, we have shown that for a system described by a general second-order self-energy matrix Σ, which has contributions of the types Σ = Σ(1) and Σ = Σ(2) ǧ Σ(2) , the nonequilibrium distribution function satisfies the equations Combining these equations, we find a new differential equation for the distribution function components h m : This is an explicit linear differential equation for the distribution function h m . This can be made manifest by first multiplying by the 8 × 8 matrix M -1 from the left, and then rewriting the equation in terms of a 16-element state vector (h, ∇h). Note that all coefficient matrices depend only on the equilibrium solution, and can be precalculated before solving the kinetic equation. The coefficients do however depend on position, since the equilibrium propagators and self-energy terms may do so. In practice, one might therefore wish to precalculate the Jacobian of the differential equation at the discrete positions where the equilibrium problem was solved, and then interpolate between these when solving the kinetic equation. In our experience, linear interpolation may lead to convergence issues, while e.g. Catmull-Rom cubic splines work very well In order to solve Eq. (S27), we also need boundary conditions. In some cases, a satisfactory approximation can be obtained using transparent boundary conditions for the propagator ǧ. The corresponding boundary conditions for the distribution are then trivial to obtain: h n is equal on both sides of the interface. For more realistic interfaces, the boundary conditions are often written in terms of the matrix current Ǐ that is flowing outwards from the interface. This directionality means that one typically has to flip the sign of the boundary condition at one end of a material, where the current is directed opposite from the coordinate axis. Furthermore, let us assume that this matrix current is a linear function of the distribution ĥ; we will later prove that this is the case for spin-active tunneling or reflecting interfaces. Denoting the distribution function on "this" side of the interface as h m , and on the "other" side as h m , we get Extracting the current component I n flowing out of the interface from Eq. (S8), and denoting the normal derivatives by ∇ → ∂, If one uses a numerical solver that minimizes interface residuals, this is a very suitable form of the equation; but if one requires an explicit form, the derivative ∂h m is also easy to isolate. Note that the coefficients should only depend on the equilibrium properties of the system, and can therefore be precalculated. In the following derivations, we will use the notations where the symbols T and R refer to the boundary condition contributions from tunneling and reflection terms, respectively. We will now derive kinetic boundary conditions for magnetic interfaces with spin-dependent tunneling. To leading order in the tunneling probability, and all orders in the polarization, the matrix current at such an interface can be written Here, ǧ refers to the propagator on "this" side of the interface, ǧ to the "other" side, and the matrix function F is defined as The remaining parameters are the ratio t ≡ G T /G 0 between tunneling conductance and bulk conductance, material length L, interface polarization P, and magnetization matrix m ≡ m • σ, where m is a unit vector pointing along the average interface magnetization. Note that for unpolarized interfaces, we get F( ǧ) = ǧ, which simplifies the boundary condition above and the results below. For vacuum interfaces, we can also set ǧ = 0. We start our derivation by noting that since m is diagonal in Keldysh space, the function F has the following property: Applied to the commutator in Eq. (S32), we then get (S35) Substituting in ĝK = ĝR ĥĥ ĝA , and grouping similar terms, ÎK = Dt 2L F( ĝR )( ĝR ĥĥ ĝA ) -( ĝR ĥĥ ĝA )F( ĝA ) F( ĝR ĥĥ ĝA ) ĝA -ĝR F( ĝR ĥĥ ĝA ) . We then substitute in ĥ = h m ρm and ĥ = h m ρm , multiply by ρn /4 from the left, and take the trace. This results in a linear boundary condition I n = T nm h m -T nm h m , where we identify Finally, using the cyclic trace rule, these results simplify to: We will now derive the boundary coefficients for a spin-mixing interface. These boundary conditions can either be used alone, in the case of completely opaque interfaces to ferromagnetic insulators, or together with the tunneling boundary conditions from the previous subsection. The spin-mixing contribution to the matrix current is where r ≡ G φ /G 0 is the ratio between the spin-mixing and bulk conductances, and m ≡ m • σ is the interface magnetization matrix. In the case of inhomogeneous magnetic interfaces, m may be different from m, due to reflected and transmitted quasiparticles experiencing different average magnetizations. Extracting the Keldysh component of the boundary condition, and substituting in ĝK = ĝR ĥĥ ĝA on the right-hand side, Substituting in ĥ = h m ρm , multiplying by ρn /4 from the left, and taking the trace, we find the current components Rewriting the commutator with the cyclic trace rule, and identifying the trace as a boundary coefficient, we conclude that the equation follows the pattern I n = -R nm h m , where The boundary conditions above require knowledge of the distributions h in any reservoirs that couple to the system. By a reservoir, we mean a bulk material with a homogeneous quasiparticle distribution, which may be either in or out of equilibrium. In equilibrium, the electron density n e = Ψ † Ψ should be described by Fermi-Dirac statistics f ( ) = 1/[1+exp( /T)], and the holes n h = ΨΨ † by the remaining probability 1f ( ), where the quasiparticle energy is measured relative to the Fermi level. This can be used to derive that the distribution is simply given by ĥ = [1 -2 f ( )] ρ0 in equilibrium, which reproduces the conventional expression ĥ = tanh( /2T) ρ0 Taking the appropriate traces using Eq. (S5), one finds an energy mode h 0 and charge mode h 4 , while the spin-energy modes h 1 , h 2 , h 3 and spin modes h 5 , h 6 , h 7 remain zero. In a more general spin-dependent reservoir, the distribution matrix ĥ should contain components proportional to σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 as well. One way to describe such a spin dependence, is that spin-up and spin-down particles experience different voltages V ↑ and V ↓ , and possibly different temperatures T ↑ and T ↓ . This can also be parametrized in terms of an average voltage V ≡ (V ↑ + V ↓ )/2 and spin-voltage V s ≡ (V ↑ -V ↓ )/2; in nonmagnetic materials, a gradient in the former gives rise to a pure electric current, and the latter a pure spin current. Similarly, one can define an average temperature T ≡ (T ↑ +T ↓ )/2 and spintemperature T s ≡ (T ↑ -T ↓ )/2, whose gradients cause energy and spin-energy currents. Finally, the physics of the system should not depend on our arbitrary choice of coordinate axes, so a corresponding expression for a general spin quantization axis u = (u 1 , u 2 , u 3 ) can be obtained using spin rotation matrices. Introducing spin-voltages and spin-temperatures as discussed above, performing a spin rotation to an arbitrary spin axis u, and again applying Eq. (S5), we find the general result: For brevity, the above is written in terms of the distributions which describe quasiparticles with a charge index c and spin index s. For instance, h +-corresponds to c = +1 (electrons) and s = -1 (spin-down), and so on. This describes a quite general reservoir that can have a voltage, spin-voltage, temperature, and spin-temperature, with an arbitrary spin-quantization axis. The main possibility not accounted for, is that the spin-splitting of the voltage and temperature could in principle be in different directions. Also, it might be possible to excite some even more exotic distributions via e.g. optical methods, which might be unnatural to describe in terms of voltages and temperatures. In this section, we focus on how the numerically calculated distribution function ĥ varies as a function of position x and energy . To briefly reiterate, the system we consider consists of a conventional superconductor of length L = 8ξ, connected to normal contacts at voltages ±V/2 via tunneling interfaces. Since a full decomposition and exposition of the distribution function takes a lot of space to visualize, we focus on the parameters m = eV/2 = ∆ 0 at a low temperature T = 0.01T c . We note that the results for other magnetic fields and voltages are qualitatively similar to the ones shown here, and the results at higher temperatures are basically just thermally smeared out. Following the notation of previous sections, we parametrize the distribution function in terms of the modes h n = Tr[ ρn ĥ]/4. For a system with a homogeneous magnetic field along the z-axis, only four components may be nonzero: the energy mode h 0 , spin-energy mode h 3 , charge mode h 4 , and pure spin mode h 7 . Numerically, these have only been calculated for positive energies > 0. However, the energy and spin-energy modes are by definition odd functions of , while the charge and spin modes are even functions of , and these energy symmetries can be used to find obtain the distribution at < 0. The results are shown in Fig. which at low temperatures gives h 0 = 0 for 0 < < eV/2 and h 0 = 1 for > eV/2, where eV/2 = ∆ 0 here. In general, an energy-mode excitation relaxes over the inelastic scattering length, which we take to be long compared to the system size. We note that in the most relevant temperature range for experiments (below ∼ 1 K), electron-electron interactions are the dominant contribution to the inelastic scattering length The charge mode is an order of magnitude smaller than the energy mode at the interfaces. Since the voltages ±V/2 at the interfaces are opposite, the charge mode is also forced to be an antisymmetric function of position. In total, the charge mode is therefore much smaller than the energy mode even at the interfaces, and vanishes completely deeper inside the superconductor. This helps to explain the remarkably accurate agreement between the analytical and numerical calculations presented in the main manuscript [e.g. in Fig. In addition to the energy and charge modes, which were explained in the main manuscript, we see that there is also a small spin-energy and pure spin mode in the system. However, these are roughly two orders of magnitude smaller than the energy mode, which explains why these are not essential for the analytical understanding presented in the main manuscript. The origin of the spin-energy mode is actually straightforward to understand. As can be read out from Fig. Finally, in Fig. For the numerical calculations presented in the main manuscript, the interfaces between the superconductor and voltage-biased reservoirs were assumed to be relatively opaque. However, we also performed numerical tests for other parameter sets, including voltage-biased N/S/N junctions with completely transparent interfaces. These showed that superconductivity remained stable in high magnetic fields m for a voltage bias eV/2 = m, provided that the superconductor is sufficiently long compared with the coherence length ξ. The fact that a voltage drop can exist across a "superconductor" even in the absence of interface resistance may seem a bit surprising. The answer has previously been derived in e.g. Refs. 15 and 32. When a resistive current is injected into a superconductor via ideal interfaces, there is actually a layer of thickness ∼ ξ where the resistive current is converted into a supercurrent. In other words, there is still a "superconducting contact resistance" in the transparent limit, and the associated voltage drop occurs near the interfaces. For more details, see e.g. the numerical results in Ref. In a superconductor with a spin-splitting that exceeds the order parameter, an even more peculiar situation arises. Since the DOS is no longer gapped at the Fermi level, and resistive currents are only converted into supercurrents in the gapped regions of the energy spectrum, a long-ranged resistive current can exist in the superconductor in this limit. On the following pages, we derive an approximate analytical result for the length scale over which resistive currents decay inside strongly spin-split superconductors to explain this observation. The derivation itself makes a number of approximations, some more reasonable than others, but the final analytical equation is simple and agrees quite well with our numerical observations. We should stress that even though the superconductor can harbour a long-ranged resistive current in this exotic state, the name "superconductor" is still fitting. The most fundamental way to justify it is that the material still exhibits a singlet order parameter ∆ and a spontaneously broken U(1) symmetry, which are the hallmarks of a superconducting state. Another perspective is that the material also supports dissipationless currents when the order parameter has a phase-winding. This would perhaps be even clearer if we used the experimental setup sketched in Fig. The starting point for our analytical derivation is Eq. (S27). Let us assume that the system under consideration is roughly homogeneous, so that ∇g R ≈ ∇g A ≈ 0, in which case Q ≈ 0 and ∇M ≈ 0. Furthermore, let us assume that no spin-flip scattering, spin-orbit scattering, or orbital depairing effects are important in the system, so that the term W = 0 as well. The kinetic equation then reduces to the much simpler form In the most general case, M and V are 8 × 8 matrices while h is an 8-vector. If one considers a system where only one spin axis is relevant, such as a bulk superconductor with a spin-splitting along the z-axis, this can be reduced to a system of 4 × 4 matrices in the equation for a 4-vector h. This gives us a system of coupled equations for the charge, energy, spin, and spin-energy modes of the nonequilibrium distribution function, which can in principle be solved explicitly. We will now assume that the dominant relaxation process of the charge mode inside a superconductor occurs via the diagonal terms. The charge mode is given by h 4 in our notation, so neglecting the coupling to other modes, we then get (S50) Comparing this to the equation ∇ 2 h 4 = h 4 /λ 2 that would define an exponential decay, we can describe such a decay via an energy-dependent charge relaxation length λ ≡ -M 44 /V 44 . The source term V 44 above can be calculated using Eq. (S17), We are interested in the case n = m = 4, and since the basis matrix ρ4 = τ3 σ 0 , the commutator [ ρ4 , Σ] vanishes for the selfenergy terms corresponding to a regular magnet Σ = τ3 + m σ3 . The charge mode is therefore controlled by the superconducting contributions Σ = ∆ = antidiag(+∆, -∆, +∆ * , -∆ * ). If we choose a real gauge, which is possible since we already assumed that any supercurrents are negligible Q ≈ 0, this reduces to Σ = ∆i τ1 σ 2 . Substituted into the equation above, we find that Using [ τ3 , τ1 ] = 2i τ2 and ĝA = -τ3 ĝR † τ3 , this becomes We then use the cyclic rule to move the τ3 matrices to the other end of the trace, and use the Pauli identity τ3 τ2 = -i τ1 , and finally apply Tr[A + A † ] = 2 Re Tr[A] to simplify the result: This is essentially the same result as was used in Ref. In general, we can write the retarded propagator as Multiplying this by τ1 σ 2 and taking the trace, we find that Firstly, we can split the anomalous propagators into singlets and triplets using the decomposition f = ( f s + f t • σ)iσ 2 . Secondly, when the superconducting gap ∆ is purely real, the singlet component satisfies fs = -f s . This leads us to the conclusion that the only contribution to the trace of σ Thus, the final form of the source term V 44 derived above is where as usual the singlet component f s ≡ ( f ↑↓ -f ↓↑ )/2. We now turn to the matrix M, which can be interpreted as an energy-dependent renormalized diffusion coefficient Explicitly taking the complex-transpose of this matrix, and using that σ n are Hermitian while i is anti-Hermitian, we find We now calculate the product ĝR ĝR † , keeping only diagonal terms proportional to an even power of Pauli matrices, since terms proportional to σ disappear when we later take the trace: Going back to our result for M 44 , we find the final result: (S66) Putting together the pieces we have calculated so far, we find that the charge relaxation length λ = -M 44 /V 44 is: Defining the coherence length ξ ≡ D/∆, which depends on temperature via the self-consistent gap ∆, this becomes This is a somewhat general result, as it is valid regardless what mixture of singlets and triplets is present in the system, and we have not made any assumptions of weak proximity or weak inverse proximity effect. The result does, however, rest on two crucial assumptions. The first is that the charge mode couples only weakly to the other nonequilibrium modes of the distribution function, so that it was sufficient to consider the diagonal parts of Eq. (S49). This should be a reasonable approximation as long as either (i) the charge mode relaxes over a shorter length scale than the other modes, or (ii) the coupling to the other modes is weak. The second assumption is that the system is roughly homogeneous, so that we can neglect variations in the propagator and the presence of any supercurrents. In practice, this should be a fair approximation if we consider a large superconductor with tunneling contacts. Let us first consider the numerator of Eq. (S68). We see that the numerator is always larger than 1. Furthermore, for a normal metal |g s | 2 = 1 while the other quantities are zero, making the numerator simply equal to 2. On the other hand, for a BCS superconductor, we get for > 0. For energies outside the gap > ∆, we see that Im f s = 0, yielding a charge relaxation length λ → ∞. On the other hand, for energies inside the gap ∆, we find that Im f s = -1, yielding λ ≈ ξ/ √ 2. Thus, we found exactly the kind of behaviour we were expecting: the charge mode is screened over a characteristic length ∼ ξ inside the gap, but is not screened for energies that reside outside the gap. In Figs. S4 and S5, we show how the DOS N( ) and approximate charge relaxation length λ( ) vary with the spin-splitting m in a superconductor. The results confirm that resistive currents decay over a length ∼ ξ in gapped parts of the spectrum, while a long-ranged resistive current can exist in ungapped parts of the spectrum. This result agrees quite well with our numerical results, where we observe that for m = eV/2 > ∆, a resistive current contribution can persist throughout the superconductor for the energy range between the two spectral gaps. FIG. 