One-dimensional Majorana modes are predicated to form in Josephson junctions based on threedimensional topological insulators (TIs). While observations of supercurrents in Josephson junctions made on bulk-insulating TI samples are recently reported, the Fraunhofer patters observed in such TI-based Josephson junctions, which sometimes present anomalous features, are still not well understood. Here we report our study of highly gate-tunable TI-based Josephson junctions made of one of the most bulk-insulating TI materials, BiSbTeSe2, and Al. The Fermi level can be tuned by gating across the Dirac point, and the high transparency of the Al/BiSbTeSe2 interface is evinced by a high characteristic voltage and multiple Andreev reflections with peak indices reaching 12. Anomalous Fraunhofer patterns with missing lobes were observed in the entire range of gate voltage. We found that, by employing an advanced fitting procedure to use the maximum entropy method in a Monte Carlo algorithm, the anomalous Fraunhofer patterns are explained as a result of inhomogeneous supercurrent distributions on the TI surface in the junction. Besides establishing a highly promising fabrication technology, this work clarifies one of the important open issues regarding TI-based Josephson junctions. The superconducting proximity effect in the topological surface states of a three-dimensional (3D) topological insulator (TI) is of significant current interest, because it provides a promising means to engineer a two-dimensional (2D) topological superconducting state Josephson junctions (JJs) are the basic devices to investigate the superconducting proximity effect in 3D TIs. In a JJ, Andreev bound states formed in the weak link mediate dissipationless currents Here, we present our study of highly gate-tunable Josephson junctions based on one of the most bulkinsulating TI materials, BiSbTeSe 2 The TI-based JJs reported here are fabricated on bulkinsulating BiSbTeSe 2 flakes. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a typical device is shown in Figure The temperature dependence of the junction resistance R in device 1 is shown in Figure A typical I-V curve of device 1 measured at V g = 0 V is plotted in Figure The I-V curves of our JJs show no hysteretic behaviour; the values of I c obtained in up-and down-sweeps are identical. Such non-hysteretic I-V s are usually seen in overdamped JJs. The Stewart-McCumber parameter of device 1 is estimated to be where C is the shunt capacitance between the two Al electrodes. Similar values of β c are obtained for other devices (Supporting Information). Such intermediate values of β c indicate that our JJs lie in the region between the overdamped and underdamped limits. According to numerical calculations, JJs in such a region show non-hysteretic I-V characteristics similar to those of underdamped JJs Sub-harmonic peaks at V n = 2∆/ne are often observed in the dI/dV vs V dc curves of voltage-biased JJs which satisfy L < l φ . Here, 2∆ is the superconducting energy gap, n = 1, 2... is the peak index and l φ is the inelastic scattering length of the normal metal. Such sub-harmonic features are associated with multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) processes In the present experiment, clear MAR peaks were seen in the dI/dV vs V dc curves of all four devices. A typical curve measured in device 2 is plotted in Figure A key feature in Figure The amplitude of the conductance peak at V n is expected to decay with increasing n, because the probability of MAR processes generally decreases with n. However, in our experiment, the n = 12 peak shows an amplitude much larger than those of other peaks. The origin of the larger-than-expected amplitude of n = 12 peak is not clear and the reason for the absence of peaks for n = 7 -11 is unknown. Nevertheless, similar MAR phenomena have been seen in previous experiments on TIbased JJs by Jauregui et al. As-grown BiSbTeSe 2 single crystals are bulkinsulating, with E F located slightly below the Dirac point The normal-state resistance R N vs V g curve of device 1 is plotted in Figure Figure The I c R N product of device 1 is calculated as a function of V g using the data in Figures The temperature dependence of I c was measured at various V g values, as plotted in Figure The E Th values obtained from the fittings are plotted in Figure To determine the regime to which our JJs belong, it is important to estimate several characteristic lengths. As discussed above, the lower boundary of the inelastic scattering length l φ is estimated from the MAR results to be l φ > 12L = 840 nm. The superconducting coherence length ξ N in BiSbTeSe 2 is given by ξ N = D/∆ Al = E Th L 2 /∆ Al . With L = 70 nm measured in the SEM image, ∆ Al = 160 μeV obtained from the MAR data, and E Th = 187 -236 μeV extracted from the I c (T ) curves, we obtain ξ N = 76 -85 nm. The mean free path l e of the supercurrent-carrying surface electrons can be calculated by using E Th = D/L 2 and D = v F l e /2, where v F = 5.5 × 10 5 m/s is the Fermi velocity of the surface states For JJs satisfying L ≤ ξ N , the eI c R N /∆ ratio is ex- pected to be of order 1 at T = 0 K For a trivial JJ with a homogeneous current distribution, the I c vs B relation is expected to exhibit a so-called Fraunhofer pattern described by where I c0 is the critical current at B = 0, Φ J is the flux threading through the junction channel and Φ 0 = h/(2e) is the flux quantum. To elucidate the I c (B) behaviour of our JJs, the dV /dI data were measured as a function of I dc and B at various V g corresponding to the E F positions from inside the conduction band to near the Dirac point. The I c (B) patterns of device 1 are shown in Figures Regarding the origin of the other feature, i.e. missing lobes in the Fraunhofer pattern, this has been left unexplained in the literature However, these theoretical possibilities do not really explain the disappearance of some particular lobes, and one had better consider the second possibility to understand the irregular I c (B) patterns observed in our TIbased JJs. We set out to reconstruct the anomalous Fraunhofer patterns by considering an inhomogeneous supercurrent distribution j(x) along the width of the junction. The experimental data of I c (B), extracted from the dV dI (I dc ) data as the onset of rapid increase, are fitted by using a Monte Carlo algorithm to optimize the form of j(x) based on the maximum entropy method (see detailed descriptions at the end), which has not been applied to the present problem; this method removes the constraint of the standard Dynes-Fulton-type analysis We note that the j(x) curves presented in Figure An inhomogeneous j(x) can be caused by various reasons. One possible reason is the fluctuations in the junction length L(x) due to the roughness of the edges of Al electrodes. Since the critical current depends exponentially on L, for junctions with a short L, even small fluctuations in L(x) could result in a notable variation in j(x). Another possible reason is a position-dependent transparency of the Al/TI interface, which may arise from a granularity of the Al film. In addition, a possible variation of the surface carrier density due to charge puddles To conclude, we have established a highly promising fabrication technology for TI-based JJs, which allowed us to elucidate that the anomalous Fraunhofer patterns are essentially due to an inhomogeneous supercurrent distribution in the proximitized surface states. This technology and the quantitative understanding gained in this work would make it possible to fabricate an optimized device to nail down the signature of Majorana fermions in the proximitized TI surface in near future. Growth of bulk BiSbTeSe 2 crystals: The bulk BiSbTeSe 2 single crystals were grown by melting highpurity (99.9999%) Bi, Sb, Te, and Se shots with the molar ratio of 1:1:1:2 in an evacuated quartz tube via a modified Bridgman method, following our established recipe reported in Ref. Device fabrication: Ultrathin BiSbTeSe 2 flakes are obtained by mechanical exfoliation of bulk single crystals on degenerately-doped Si/SiO 2 wafers by a Scotchtape technique. Promising flakes are initially identified under a laser microscope (Keyence VK-X200), and further characterized by atomic force microscopy. The flakes with an extremely smooth surface (without atomic terraces) are chosen for the fabrication of JJ devices using electron beam lithography. Previous studies on a similar bulk-insulating TI material have shown Measurements: The devices were cooled in a dry dilution refrigerator (Oxford Instruments TRITON 200) with a base temperature of less than 10 mK. To reduce the electromagnetic noise, the electrical lines are equipped with RC-filters at room temperature and at the 4-K plate, along with additional RC and copperpowder filters at the mixing chamber plate. The junctions were electrically characterized by dc current-voltage (I-V ) and differential resistance (dV /dI) measurements in a pseudo-four-probe configuration. For the dV /dI measurement, an 18.6-Hz ac current with the amplitude of 1 nA was superimposed to a dc bias current. The magnetic-field dependence of the critical current (i.e. Fraunhofer pattern) was measured by performing the dV /dI measurements while driving the superconducting magnet with a Keithley 2450 source meter. Current density retrieval: For a JJ with a sinusoidal current-phase relation, the experimentally observed critical current I c is related to the modulus of the phase-dependent integration of the supercurrent density which allows to deduce information about the distribution of the current density j and the phase difference φ within the junction. In the present case of a narrow JJ (i.e. W λ J , where λ J is the Josephson penetration length), φ can be assumed to depend linearly on the spatial position x along the junction and on the applied magnetic field B; namely, φ(x, B) = 2πxL eff B/Φ 0 + φ 0 , where Φ 0 = h/2e is the magnetic flux quantum and 2 is the effective length of the JJ to take into account the flux focusing effect of the superconducting electrode of width d As the critical current does not contain information on the complex phase of the Fourier transform, but only on its modulus, the current density j(x) cannot be obtained unambiguously from the experimental data I exp c (B). In fact, there is an infinitely large number of current profiles j(x) that yield a similar I FT c (B). Most of previous reconstructions of the current distribution were essentially based on the Dynes-Fulton analysis Here, 2 is the square of the deviation from the experimental data taken at points B k , and the second term is the entropy of the normalized current distribution ji = j i / i j i . The weighting factor λ tunes between a pure least-square fit for λ → ∞ and an increasing contribution of the maximum entropy method for λ → 0. A larger λ gives a better fitting, but the obtained current distribution tends to become unphysically peaky; more weighting of the entropy term makes the resulting current distribution to be smoother and more physical, even though χ 2 j becomes larger. In our analysis, the value of λ is initially set to 1/(2M ), and we increase (decrease) it during the Monte Carlo steps when the iteration goes to the wrong direction, i.e., when χ 2 j becomes larger (smaller) than a given target value ξ; such a dynamical tuning of λ allows the square term χ 2 j to converge to ξ while ensuring the resulting current distribution to be smooth. Still, the algorithm does not provide a single and unique solution for the current distribution, and the smoothness of the distribution depends on the choice of ξ. To avoid over-fitting of the data, for each data set the maximal ξ was chosen so that the calculated I FT c (B) reproduces the absent lobes and the overall shape of the Fraunhofer pattern. Typically, the fits converged after about 50,000 steps. Each data set was processed about 100 times to check for the robustness of the fitting result, and we found that the obtained current distributionssave for mirror symmetry -resembled each other within a few percent of deviation. From these we pick the solution having the largest entropy and show it in Figure Author contributions: S.G., O.B. and F.Y contributed equally to this work and should be considered as co-first authors. Figure Using the estimated values of C, we obtain β c ≈ 0.2 -2.5 in different devices (see Table The transparency T J of our Al-BiSbTeSe 2 superconducting contacts were estimated from the values of I e and R I-V N by using the Octavio-Tinkham-Blonder-Klapwijk theory The presented anomalous Fraunhofer patterns have been analyzed using an advanced fitting scheme which is based on the maximum entropy principle. As a sanity check we applied the algorithm to an ideal pattern of a junction with a homogeneous current distribution given by I c (B) = I c0 sin(πx) πx , where x = Φ J /Φ 0 and Φ J is the flux through the junction. First, we initialized the current distribution to random numbers and then applied the same algorithm used to describe the anomalous patterns in the main text. Both the good fit to I c (B) as well as the flatness of the reconstructed current distribution (Figure We also applied the method to published data of SQUID oscillations measured from topological insulator Josephson junctions 