Water condensation was studied on silanized (superhydrophobic) and fluorinated (superoleophobic) micro-rough aluminum surfaces of the same topography. Condensation on superhydrophobic surfaces occurred via film-wise mechanism, whereas on superoleophobic surfaces it was drop-wise. The difference in the pathways of condensation was attributed to the various energy barriers separating the Cassie and Wenzel wetting states on the investigated surfaces. The higher barriers inherent for superoleophobic surfaces promoted the drop-wise condensation. Triple-stage kinetics of growth of droplets condensed on superoleophobic surfaces is reported and discussed. Nano-and micro-scaled surfaces are of much industrial interest in a view of their numerous applications as water-repellent (self-cleaning) Water condensation on nano-and micro-scaled surfaces has been studied intensively in the last decade Note, that a few natural and artificial nanostructured superhydrophobic surfaces retain their superhydrophobic characteristics during water condensation Micro-scaled metallic surfaces were prepared as follows. Aluminum plates were thoroughly cleaned with ethanol and acetone. The cleansed aluminum plates were immersed for 5 min in a 5% water solution of hydrochloric acid (HCl was supplied by Alfa Aesar). Etching of the aluminum plates by the HCl gave rise to the micro-rough relief depicted in Figure Superhydrophobic (abbreviated SH) metallic surfaces were prepared as follows. The samples were dried during 10 min at 100 °C after the etching stage (Section 2.1). The dried micro-rough surface of aluminum plates was hydrophobized with 3-5% solution of Polymethylhydrosiloxane (PMHS, supplied by Sigma Aldrich, MW=222.5) in organic solvent Hexanes (supplied by Alfa Aesar). The mass ratio of PMHS to the silica specimen equaled 1:10. After removal of the solvent, the specimens were dried at 100 °C for 10 minutes, and subsequently thermally treated at 200 °C for 3 hours. The surface after modification acquired SH properties demonstrating the water apparent contact angle Superoleophobic metallic surfaces (abbreviated below SO) were prepared as follows. The samples were dried during 10 min at 100°C after the etching stage (Section 2.1). Dried microrough aluminum plates were immersed for 30 min in a solution of perfluorononanoic acid, 97% C9HF17O2 (supplied by Alfa Aesar). Then the hydrophobized plates were dried during 30 min at 80 °C. After modification, the surface acquired superoleophobic properties, with a high value of the apparent contact angle, established as were registered The structures were studied in the Quanta 200FEG ESEM (Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope) while imaging the sample surface using the gaseous SE (secondary electron) detector. In-situ imaging of water condensation was performed within the ESEM at wet-mode using water vapor from a built-in distilled water reservoir (specific resistivity ). At the beginning of the experiment, the Peltier stage, which held the sample, was stabilized at 2°C while the vapor pressure in the chamber was held at 5.3 Torr. The relative humidity in the chamber was increased by elevating the pressure above dew point (to 6-7 Torr) for in-situ imaging of water condensation. Study of the stability of the Cassie wetting states on the SH and SO surfaces was carried out under the protocol described in detail in Refs. ESEM study shows the very different pathways of condensation processes on the microscaled chemically modified SH and SO surfaces. The film-wise condensation was observed on the SH surfaces as shown in Figure Note that the difference in the stability of the Cassie wetting for SO and SH surfaces is minor, as recognized from the curves, shown in Nucleation and growth of droplets on micro-and nano-rough surfaces was recently explored both theoretically The "experimental" value of exponent, namely close to that reported in Ref. The initial stage of a growth was followed by the stage, starting at s t 5 . 0 5 . 52 0   satisfactorily approximated by Eq. 2 (see Figure The established experimentally value of exponent ( 92 . 0   ) is close to the values predicted for the growth of droplets accompanied with their coalescence and also for the environmental situation, when the velocity of the atmosphere surrounding a droplet is very small place. Note, that this switch occurs, when the radius of a droplet is close to the mean free path of water molecules λ, calculated as follows: where kB = 1.38×10 -23 J/K is the Boltzmann constant, T = 276.4±0.1 K and P = 840±1 Pa (6.3 Torr) are the temperature and the pressure in the condensation camera corresponding to the dew point, and is the kinetic diameter of a molecule of water . Note, that the values of 0 r and λ are of the same order of magnitude. We suggest that this proximity is not accidental. Indeed, when the interrelation 0 r   takes place, the slowing of the droplet growth is expected, due to the lower concentration of water molecules at the bottom part of the droplet, as shown in Figure In a course of the droplet growth its radius becomes close to the mean free path of water molecules λ, and the influence of the depletion layer on the kinetics of a droplet growth, will decline (the specific surface of a droplet "shadowed" by the depletion layer will decrease in a course of growth); thus, promoting the increase in the growth exponent α. Of course, the quantitative considerations resulting in the accurate estimation of the switch point of the growth exponent are desirable. Environmental scanning electron microscopy of water condensation on silanized (superhydrophobic) and fluorinated (superoleophobic) micro-rough aluminum surfaces is reported. We observed film-wise condensation on SH surfaces and pronounced drop-wise condensation on the SO surfaces, possessing the similar topography. The stability of the Cassie wetting regime was studied on the both kinds of surfaces, within the experimental establishment of the critical value of the surface tension of a liquid giving rise to the Cassie-Wetting transition The triple-stage kinetics of droplets, which grew on SO surfaces, is reported. The time dependence r(t) (where r is the radius of a growing droplet) was approximated with power functions ) (t r ~  t [49-54]. At the initial stage of the growth the value of exponent, ( The switch in the value of the growth exponent is at least partially due to the formation of the depletion layer of water molecules adsorbed by the substrate in the vicinity of a droplet 