We examine a Josephson junction with two ferromagnet's and a magnetic impurity sandwiched between two superconductors. In such ferromagnetic Josephson junctions equilibrium spin torque exists only when ferromagnet's are misaligned. This is explained via the "conventional" mechanism of spin transfer torque, which owes its origin to the misalignment of two ferromagnet's. However, we see surprisingly when the magnetic moments of the ferromagnet's are aligned parallel or anti-parallel, there is a finite equilibrium spin torque due to the quantum mechanism of spin flip scattering. We explore the properties of this unique spin flip scattering induced equilibrium quantum spin torque, especially its tunability via exchange coupling and phase difference across the superconductors. When a spin polarized current enters a ferromagnetic layer, there is generally a transfer of spin angular momentum between the conduction electrons and the magnetization of the ferromagnet. This was first proposed by Slonczewski In ferromagnetic Josephson junction's The equilibrium spin torque seen previously in SFFS junction magnetic impurity can engender a torque in such a junction. We call this "equilibrium quantum spin torque". Thus, this new mechanism of spin flip scattering can lead to finite equilibrium spin torque which has no classical analog. The reason we are interested in spin transfer torque is because of the manifold applications like switching of the magnetization of ferromagnet's for sufficiently large current without any external magnetic field. This switching provides a mechanism to create fast magnetic random access memories The paper is organized as follows: in the next section on Theory, we first present our model and discuss the theoretical background of our study by writing the Hamiltonian, wave-functions and boundary conditions needed to calculate charge Josephson current and equilibrium quantum spin torque. In section III, we analyze our results for equilibrium quantum spin torque (subsection III. A) and discuss the physical picture of torque (subsection III. B). In section IV, we give an experimental realization and brief conclusion to our study. The explicit form of expression of equilibrium quantum spin torque is provided in the Appendix. The Hamiltonian, wave-functions, boundary conditions of our system as depicted in Fig. Our system consists of two ferromagnet's (F 1 and F 2 ) with a magnetic impurity, sandwiched between two conventional s-wave singlet superconductors. The superconductors are isotropic and our model is shown in Fig. where ∆ 0 is gap parameter, φ L and φ R are the superconducting phases for left and right superconductor respectively. The temperature dependence of ∆ 0 is given by ∆ 0 → ∆ 0 tanh(1.74 (T c /T -1)), where T c is the superconducting critical temperature Josephson junction composed of two ferromagnet's and a magnetic impurity with spin S and magnetic moment m at x = 0 sandwiched between two s-wave superconductors. In our work θ1 = θ and θ2 = 0. When ferromagnet's are aligned, i.e., θ → 0, equilibrium spin transfer torque vanishes (see Fig. where In the Hamiltonian "H 0 ", the first term describes the kinetic energy of an electron with mass m , the second term depicts interfaces-V is the strength of the δ-like potential at the interfaces between ferromagnet and superconductor, the third term describes magnetic impurity with J 0 being the strength of exchange interaction between the electron with spin s and the magnetic impurity with spin S B. Wave-functions and boundary conditions in the ferromagnetic Josephson junction in presence of a magnetic impurity The system we consider consists of two ferromagnet's with a magnetic impurity sandwiched between two conventional s-wave singlet superconductors. Our model is shown in Fig. superconductors. The wave function in the left superconductor (for x < -a 2 ) is The amplitudes r ↑↑ ee , r ↑↓ ee , r ↑↑ eh , r ↑↓ eh are normal reflection without flip, normal reflection with spin flip, Andreev reflection with spin flip and Andreev reflection without flip respectively. The corresponding wave function in the right superconductor (for x > a 2 ) is given by- where t ↑↑ ee , t ↑↓ ee , t ↑↑ eh , t ↑↓ eh represent transmission amplitudes, corresponding to the reflection process described above and φ = φ R -φ L represents the phase difference between right and left superconductors. φ S m is the eigenspinor of the magnetic impurity, with its S z operator acting as-S z φ S m = m φ S m , with m being the spin magnetic moment of the magnetic impurity. u and v are the BCS coherence factors which are defined as ), ) is the wave-vector for electron-like quasi-particle (k + ) and hole-like quasi-particle (k -) in the left and right superconducting wave-functions, ψ S L and ψ S R . Similarly solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation for ferromagnet's, we get the wave-function in ferromagnet's. The wave-function in the left ferromagnet (F 1 ) is given by- Similarly, the wave-function in the right ferromagnet (F 2 ) is given by- (5) is the wave-vector for electron (q + σ ) and hole (q - σ ) in the ferromagnetic layers, wherein In our work we have used the Andreev approximation k where k F is the Fermi wave-vector, with E F >> ∆, E. The boundary conditions can be written as follows discontinuity in first derivative), at x = 0 (see Fig. 2 (s -S + +s + S -) being the exchange coupling due to magnetic impurity in the Hamiltonian. s represents spin operator acting on electron/hole states φ s m , while S represents the spin operator acting on magnetic impurity states φ S m . φ s m and φ S m are the eigenstates of electron/hole and magnetic impurity with m and m being the spin magnetic moment of the electron/hole and magnetic impurity respectively. s is spin of electron, while S is spin of magnetic impurity, with s . The action of spin raising and spin lowering operators for magnetic impurity are discussed below. For spin up electron incident φ s m = (1 0 0 0) T , with s = 1/2, m = 1/2, T denotes transpose of matrix. Now, when the spin flip term of our Hamiltonian acts on spin up electron (1 0 0 0) T , where T stands for transpose and the magnetic impurity state φ S m we have- Now, s + (1 0 0 0) T = 0, since s + is the spin raising operator and there are no higher spin states for a spin-1/2 electron than up and so the 3rd term in Eq. 6 vanishes, while s -(1 0 0 0) T = (0 1 0 0) T , the spin lowering operator gives the down spin state (0 1 0 0) T of electron. Further, for spin-up electron s z (1 0 0 0) T = 1 2 (1 0 0 0) T , as = 1 and for magnetic impurity-S z φ S m = m φ S m . Further, the spin-raising and spin-lowering operators acting on magnetic impurity give: Thus, s. S(1 From Eqs. 6, 7 we thus have- (for both no flip and spin flip process) In quantum spin flip scattering process when spin polarized super-current (the state of spin polarized super-current is given as-|s.c ), in our case denoted by a macroscopic wave-function or R), interacts with the magnetic impurity, the magnetic impurity can flip its spin with finite probability, but there is no certainty for flipping its spin. In addition to the spin flip process, there can be the other process without any flip. Thus, the spin polarized super-current-magnetic impurity state after exchange interaction is in a superposition of mutual spin-flip as well as no flip state given by the joint entangled wave-function of spin polarized super-current (s.c) and magnetic impurity as- On the other hand when there is no possibility of spin-flip scattering, i.e., when S = m , then spin flip probability of: Thus both before as well as after the spin polarized super-current state and magnetic impurity state are not entangled and neither there is any superposition. Thus, Hamiltonian for the case wherein mutual spin flip takes place with finite probability. Finally, at x = a/2, the boundary conditions are- The aforesaid method of addressing spin-flip scattering process is not unique to our work, many other papers have used the same model of spin flip scattering in different context, mention may be made of-the first paper which introduced this model, see Ref. Following the procedure enunciated in Ref. On solving the boundary conditions, we have 8 Andreev bound states given as E i (i = 1, ..., 8) = ±ε p (p = 1, ..., 4). From Andreev bound states energies We consider only the short junction limit, i.e., a << ξ, where ξ is the superconducting coherence length and a the width of the intervening ferromagnetic layers between superconductors, such that the total Josephson current is determined by only the bound state contribution, the continuum contribution is negligible and so neglected. See Refs. herein e is the electronic charge and k F a is the phase accumulated in ferromagnetic layers. From the Free energy of our system (Eq. ( Eqs. 9, 10 are the main working formulas of our paper. The equilibrium spin torque is also referred to as equilibrium spin current in some papers where M 1 , M 2 , M 3 , M 4 , M 1 , M 2 , M 3 and M 4 are large expressions that depend on exchange interaction (J), magnetization of the ferromagnet's, spin (S) and magnetic moment (m ) of magnetic impurity, the phase (k F a) accumulated in ferromagnetic region and spin flip probability of magnetic impurity (f 2 ). Their explicit forms are given in Appendix. In Appendix we show that for no flip case, the EQST (τ eq | θ→0 ) vanishes. In the next section from figures we will see that the EQST is zero in the limit J → 0 and Z → ∞. In Figs. In Fig. In Fig. where |s.c is the state of spin polarized supercurrent, see paragraphs above and below Eq. 7 on how this aforesaid equation comes into being. Due to this spin flip scattering the direction of the spin of supercurrent will be in a superposition too and thus will differ from the direction of the magnetization vector of the ferromagnetic layer. Thus, when the supercurrent enters the second ferromagnetic layer, magnetization vector of the second ferromagnetic layer will exert a torque on the spin flipped component of the supercurrent wave function in order to rotate the supercurrent's spin along the direction of magnetization, while leaving the non spin flipped component as it is. From conservation of spin angular momentum, the supercurrent will also exert an equal and opposite torque on the magnetic moment of the second ferromagnetic layer leading to a finite EQST even at θ → 0. However, in absence of magnetic impurity (J = 0 case) and for no flip case the spin polarized supercurrent state does not flip it's spin. Thus, in absence magnetic impurity or in case of no-flip scattering the spin polarized supercurrent's spin and the magnetization vector of the ferromagnetic layers will be in the same direction. Therefore, EQST vanishes in case of J = 0 and no-flip process but for spin-flip process it is finite. This finite τ eq can be a check also on whether SF F S junctions are clean or a contaminated with magnetic adatoms. In Fig. Further, the EQST is almost zero in the tunneling regime. The theoretically predicted numerical value of equilibrium spin transfer torque (ESTT) is ∼ 10 -2 meV in Ref. 9. On the other hand, in our work for the parameter values Z = 0, J = 0.5, φ = π/2, S = 5/2 and m = -1/2, the Z=0 Z=0.5 (a) h/E F =0 h/E F =0.5 h/E F =0.9 numerical value of equilibrium quantum spin torque (EQST) is 0.04 meV. Thus, in our work the value of equilibrium quantum spin torque (EQST) is almost same with the value of equilibrium spin transfer torque as predicted in Ref. 9. Equilibrium spin current/torque in superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor junctions with inhomogeneous magnetization is studied in Ref. To understand the physical basis of the equilibrium quantum spin torque we go back to Fig. The experimental detection of the novel phenomena pointed out in this work shouldn't be difficult. Superconductor-Ferromagnet-Ferromagnet-Superconductor (S-F-F-S) junctions have been fabricated experimentally for quite some time now From Andreev bound states energies using Eq. 10 we can calculate the equilibrium spin torque (τ eq ). For transparent regime (Z = 0) we find- where M 1(2) =∆ 0 D -1 2 