CuxBi2Se3 hosts both topological surface states and bulk superconductivity. It has been identified recently as a topological superconductor (TSC) with an extraordinary nematic, i. e. C2-symmetric, superconducting state and odd-parity pairing. Here, using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), we directly examine the response of the superconductivity of CuxBi2Se3 to magnetic field. Under outof-plane fields (B⊥), we discover elongated magnetic vortices hosting zero-bias conductance peaks consistent with the Majorana bound states expected in a TSC. Under in-plane fields (B//), the average superconducting gap exhibits two-fold symmetry with field orientation; the long C2 symmetry axes are pinned to the dihedral mirror planes under B//=0.5 T but rotate slightly under B//=1.0 T. Moreover, a nodeless Δ4x gap structure is semi-quantitatively determined for the first time. Our data paint a microscopic picture of the nematic superconductivity in CuxBi2Se3 and pose strong constraints on theory. Topological superconductors, as host of Majorana fermions and Majorana zero modes (MZM) Recently, a nematic superconducting state was discovered in an NMR study of CuxBi2Se3 (Ref. The CuxBi2Se3 (x=0.31) single crystals were prepared via an electrochemical intercalation method as described in Ref. CuxBi2Se3 crystals are thin-bar shaped with the sizes of about 1.7×1.3×0.30 mm 3 for sample 1 and 2.5×1.7×0.14 mm 3 for sample 2. The demagnetization effect due to the irregular sample shape is very weak as discussed in part 1B of Ref. The cleaved CuxBi2Se3 surface exhibits three types of regions (Fig. Figures Figures [20] for details). The dI/dV spectrum obtained in SC-I regions (Fig. Besides SC-I regions, we observe another type of superconducting region (referred to here as SC-II) in sample 2, on islands with steep topographic variations as shown in Figs. The U-shaped spectrum suggests the superconducting gap is fully opened at the Fermi surface, however we find that it still has significant broadening beyond thermal effects, which can be reasonably accounted for by k-space anisotropy of the gap size [20]). A small Dynes term Γ is used to account for finite quasi-particle lifetime broadening To further examine the superconducting state, we applied an out-of-plane magnetic field and measured the SC-I regions. Figures Figures [20], ZBCPs have also been observed in some vortex cores under B⊥=0.3 T, but their intensities are slightly weaker than under B⊥=0.2 T. The spectrum near zero bias is distorted for B⊥=0.4 T, and the ZBCP is clearly absent for B⊥=0.6 T, as shown in Figs. [20]. This behavior resembles the evolution of the Majorana zero-energy mode observed in 5 QL Bi2Te3 films grown on NbSe2 (Ref. To further illustrate the nematic superconductivity in CuxBi2Se3, we apply an inplane magnetic field and study the superconducting spectra within the same area of SC-I region as a function of θ, defined as the azimuthal angle of B// with respect to the x-axis of the Se lattice (see inset of Fig. [20] for more details). This is possibly because the superconductivity on the surface (likely resides in topological surface state) is more robust to the orbital depairing of an in-plane field, so that the bulk vortex lines are pushed away from the surface, as shown theoretically in Ref. Our main results are summarized in Fig. For the SC-II region, qualitatively similar data were measured on two domains (see Figs. S12 and S13 in Ref. In the theory of Fu et al. describing the nematic superconductivity in CuxBi2Se3 (Ref. In summary, our data have revealed a unique nematic superconducting state in CuxBi2Se3, and give a semi-quantitative description of its anisotropic gap distribution, which is likely a nodeless Δ4x pairing symmetry. On the one hand, we have observed a Dirac-cone-like surface DOS in the SC-I regions, a ZBCP in vortex cores under 0.2~0.3 T out-of-plane fields, and a nematic superconducting order parameter with an anisotropic gap and a preferential symmetry axis. A nematic superconducting state with an anisotropic gap has only been predicted for odd-parity superconductivity 