Motivated by the recent observation of the time-reversal symmetry broken state in K-doped BaFe2As2 superconducting alloys, we theoretically study the collective modes and the short time dynamics of the superconducting state with s + is-wave order parameter using an effective four-band model with two hole and two electron pockets. The superconducting s + is state emerges for incipient electron bands as a result of hole doping and appears as an intermediate state between s ± (high number of holes) and s ++ (low number of holes). The amplitude and phase modes are coupled giving rise to a variety of collective modes. In the s ± state, we find the Higgs mode at frequencies similar to a two-band model with an absent Leggett mode, while in the s + is and s ++ state, we uncover a new coupled collective soft mode. Finally we compare our results with the s + id solution and find similar behaviour of the collective modes. Ultrafast pump-probe experiments recently become a powerful tool to probe the temporal dynamics of symmetry broken states and relaxation in conventional and unconventional superconductors While non-equilibrium collective modes in conventional single-gap superconductors are relatively well understood, the investigation of collective excitations in unconventional nonequilibrium superconductors with multicomponent or multiple gaps is a very intriguing topic due to a very rich spectrum of the collective excitations The time-reversal symmetry breaking s+is and s+id states possess several interesting properties and should demonstrate an unusual dynamics. For example, as a result of simultaneous breaking of U (1) and Z 2 symmetries, the vortex fractionalization and unusual vortex cluster states have been predicted to exist for the s + is state Given these theoretical and experimental developments, in this paper we study the signatures of the s+is Cooper-pairing in the pump-probe spectroscopy. Specifically, we adopt the four-band model developed in Ref. 51 to analyze the pairing dynamics. In addition, we also analyze the nature of the collective excitations. One of the our main findings are the emergence of the s + is pairing when initially the supercon-ductor is in the s ± state and existence of the sharp collective in the s+is state. In addition, we also studied the pump-probe dynamics in the s + id state and find that this state shows a very similar soft mode dynamics as it is the case for the s + is state. Our paper is organized as follows. Sections II and III contain a description of the model and its ground state within the mean-field theory approximation. In Section IV we study the non-adiabatic dynamics of the of a s ± superconductor initiated by a sudden change of the pairing strength or an application of an external electromagnetic field. In Section V we present our results for the collective excitations depending on the doping level. Section VI is devoted to the discussion of our results. We consider a model of a metal with four bands -two holelike and two-electron like -with fully local particle-particle interactions. The model Hamiltonian is: 51 Here {a, b} ∈ {h 1 , h 2 , e 1 , e 2 } are the band labels, ĉa † kσ (ĉ a kσ ) are the fermionic creation (annihilation) operators, U ab > 0 are coupling constants and ξ a k are the single particle dispersions in each band. In what follows, we simplify our model by considering two identical electron-and hole-like bands within the tight-binding approximation: where i = 1, 2, t e,h are the hopping amplitudes, μ is the chemical potential and E D accounts for the changes in the relative occupation numbers of the electron and hole bands. Lastly, we set the coupling constants as 3) (in the last expression i = j). Having formulated the model, we now review its ground state properties within the meanfield approximation. Using the standard methodology, we decouple the twofermion interaction term (2.1) in the particle-particle channel introducing the following mean-field pairing amplitudes: . Minimizing the free energy with respect to the mean-field amplitudes yields the following system of equations where we introduced for brevity and E a k = (ξ a k ) 2 + |∆ a | 2 are the single-particle energies. The mean-field equations (3.1) have to be supplemented by the particle-number equation which determines the changes in the chemical potential due to the onset of superconducting order. It turns out to be convenient to evaluate the chemical potential as a function of the carrier number n c (per spin), i.e. the difference between the electrons and holes: The detailed analysis of mean-field equations (3.1) can be easily performed numerically. Upon closer inspection of these equations, however, it becomes clear that one can basically guess the solution of these equations without resorting to numerics. Indeed, for the values of the chemical potential well below the bottom of the electronic bands, it is clear that there should be no pairing on the electronic pockets, ∆ e = 0, so from the mean field equations it follows that ∆ h1 = -∆ h2 , while the |∆ h1 | = |∆ h2 | = ∆ h will be given by the root of U hh I h [∆ h ] = 1. Thus, for μ -E D /2 the superconductivity is described by s ± order parameter. Let us now consider the opposite limit of filled electronic band, μ > -E D /2. Without any loss of generality, let us consider the pairing order parameter on the electron pockets to be purely real. Furthermore, the structure of the mean-field equations suggests that the pairing amplitudes in the hole bands must be the same: We can now insert these equations into (3.1) and separate the real and imaginary parts. It then follows that for the phases the following relation must hold where the relative phase φ is determined by while the amplitudes |∆ e | and |∆ h | are the roots of the following two equations: and Clearly, these equations have a root corresponding to the s ± state (∆ e = 0, φ = π) and a conventional s-wave state (∆ e = 0, φ = 2π). It is therefore natural to expect that there also should be a solution corresponding to the intermediate values of phase φ ∈ (π, 2π). By analyzing the mean-field equations above numerically, we have confirmed that it is indeed the case and, moreover, the solution corresponding to the state with φ ∈ (π, 2π) has the lowest energy. In Fig. In this Section we discuss the short-time dynamics of the s + is superconductor initiated by either sudden change of the pairing strength or by a short pulse of an external electromagnetic field. Although at first glance these two ways of driving a system out-of-equilibrium seem to be very different, one can employ the linear analysis of the equations of motion, i.e. consider the limit of weak deviations from the ground state, to demonstrate that for the time-dependent correction to the ground state pairing amplitude external pulse has is many ways the same effect as a quench of the pairing strength. where l = {h 1 , h 2 , e} and B l k = 2(-∆ lx , -∆ ly , ξ l k ). The xand y-component of B l k are given by the mean-field self-consistency equations and we use the shorthand notation ∆ ± = ∆ x ± i∆ y . In the equilibrium a given pseudospin S l k is collinear with the corresponding B l k , so the sudden change of one of the coupling constants entering into (4.2) brings a system far from its equilibrium state. In order to verify this result, we have performed the stability analysis by considering the pseudospin configuration corresponding to the s ± state and allowing for small fluctuations into the s + is state. Since numerical calculations show that δ∆ e (t) increases exponentially with time, we assume that and both γ and ω are some real parameters which we need to determine. Employing the equations of motion, it is easy to show that the linear correction to the pseudospins on the electronic bands are Similarly to (4.4), the correction to the pseudospins on the hole bands are found to be By inserting these expressions into the self-consistency equations (4.2), one arrives at the system of linear equations for the linear corrections to the pairing fields on each pocket. These equations will have non-trivial solution provided the determinant of the corresponding matrix is zero. This condition has the form of the following equation where The reader can easily check that this equation does not have a solution for U eh = 0 which means that the s ± remains perfectly stable. However, for U eh = 0 such that the s + is superconducting state is a ground state, we found that (4.6) has a root γ ≈ 10 -3 ∆ h and ω 2μ. A. Response to fast perturbations: non-adiabatic regime We now turn our discussion to the question of the collective response of the s + is superconductor. Therefore, we perturb the system with a pump pulse to simulate the THz experiment. The electric field of this laser pulse can be described by a time dependent vector potential E = -1 c ∂ t A. We choose the spectrum of this pulse to be a Gaussian envelope centered around a frequency ω 0 close to ∆ l , cos(ω 0 t). (5.1) Here, τ controls the width of the time dependent signal and therefore needs to be chosen in such a way, that the signal disturbs the system non adiabatically. Also, we choose A 0 small enough to not change the ground state, i.e., ∆ l ∞ ≈ ∆ l (0). The electromagnetic vector potential couples to the system via minimal substitution, i.e., ξ l k → ξ l k± eA c . This changes the pseudo magnetic field in the equations of motion (4.1) into The numerical solution of the non-equilibrium dynamics are shown in Fig. To study to collective mode at long wavelength limit, we linearize equations of motion (4.1 ) with respect to the deviations from the equilibrium, δS kl = S kl (t) -S kl , δ∆ x l (t) = ∆ x l (t) -∆ lx , δ∆ y l (t) = ∆ y l (t) -∆ y l and the effect of perturbation potential, δB z kl (t) = B z kl (t) -ξ k . The deviations are homogeneous in space so they describe the collective mode at long wavelength limit. The details of the calculations can be found in the Appendix A. Here we discuss our main results. The resulting linearized equations will have non-trivial solution provided the corresponding determinant vanishes which sets us the non-linear equation for the frequency of the collective modes. We solve the equation for mode, Eq. (A3), for all the ground states pseudospin configurations -s ± , s + is and s ++ -and near the transitions between these states. In all three states, we find a solution at ω 1 = 0: this mode is an overall phase mode without changing amplitude and relative phase difference, so this motion does not cost any energy. It is the Goldstone mode from U(1) symmetry breaking of BCS ground state. Beside this, we also find a new low energy mode ω 2 as shown in Fig. In s ± state, we find that the mode is the motion of antisymmetric phase change of two hole bands gaps coupled with amplitude change of electron band gap. We have the eigenvector of mode, δ ∆ ± = [δ∆ e , 0, δ∆ h e -iπ , 0, δ∆ h e -iπ , 0], where δ∆ e , δ∆ h are positive real values, see Fig. (5.3) Note that the first two components of δ ∆ s+is has a relative phase of π/2 which is a direct consequence of the incipiency of the electron band, as follows directly from the structure of the matrix elements (A3) and the fact that Γ e (ω) in that matrix is purely imaginary. Unlike the overall phase mode, this low energy mode vector is not continuous at the boundary between the two states. Near the boundary of s ± and s + is state, δ∆ y e = δ∆ y h = 0, the mode is a combination of δ ∆ ± mode and overall phase mode, see Fig. It is well known, the problem of non-adiabatic dynamics of the BCS model is exactly solvable FIG. order parameter, which is initiated by a sudden change of the pairing strength bears a lot of similarities with the results obtained from exactly solvable version of the model. Another important aspect related to similarities and differences for the short-time order parameter dynamics between integrable and non-integrable models is concerned with the emergence of the s + is state in the incipient electronic band. Indeed, within the both single-channel and two-channel pairing models for the degenerate atomic Fermi gases It is also important to keep in mind that the observation of the collective oscillations during the pump-probe experiments can in principle be inhibited by two effects: (i) spatial To conclude, we theoretically study the collective modes and the short time dynamics of the superconducting state with s + is-wave order parameter using an effective fourband model with two hole and two electron pockets motivated by the recent experiments on time-reversal symmetry broken state in iron-based superconductors. The superconducting s + is state emerges for incipient electron bands as a result of hole doping and appears as an intermediate state between s ± (high number of holes) and s ++ (low number of holes). The amplitude and phase modes are coupled giving rise to a variety of collective modes. In the s ± state, we find the Higgs mode at frequencies similar to a two-band model with an absent Leggett mode, while in the s + is and s ++ state, we uncover a new coupled collective soft mode. We also compare our results with the s + id solution and find similar behavior of the collective modes. Appendix A: collective mode in continuous model at q=0 The linearized equations of motion are We take δB z kl = 0 since the collective mode should not depend on the perturbation and substitute the result into self-consistency equation (4.2 ), we obtain where the quantities in the equation at T=0 are given by and α = x, y. In usual one band or two bands superconductor, after choosing proper gauge, Γ l (w) = 0 due to electron-hole symmetry, thus the amplitude and phase are decoupled in the equation. In the time reversal symmetry broken system, one can not choose a gauge to vanish all Γ l (w). Besides, the broken electron-hole symmetry of the incipient electron band makes Γ e (w) always non-vanishing. As a result, the amplitude and phase oscillation are coupled in the mode. The frequency of the mode is determined by the solution of equation where M is the 6×6 matrix in (A3). The eigenvectors of the matrix δ ∆(ω) = [δ∆ x e (ω), δ∆ y e (ω), δ∆ x h1 (ω), δ∆ y h1 (ω), δ∆ x h2 (ω), δ∆ y h2 (ω)] (A6) tell how amplitude and phase are coupled in the collective excitation. pairing amplitudes we obtain where I a was introduced in Eq. (3.2) and Since the order parameters are momentum dependent, the single-particle energies of the hole-bands now have the form Again, we take a closer look into this set of equations. Clearly, in the pure s-wave limit, i.e., ∆ d hi = 0, we reproduce our previous set of mean field equations in Eq. (3.1). In the pure d-wave limit, i.e., ∆ s hi = 0, ∆ e becomes zero and we end with only the last two equations and it follows ∆ d h1 = -∆ d h2 . Obviously this scenario is described in the case μ -E D /2, where the electron band is incipient and ∆ e = 0. Since we choose U hh,d large enough to make the solution ∆ s h1 = -∆ s h2 energetically unfavorable we end up with the pure d-wave solution. However for μ > -E D /2 we end up with finite ∆ e > 0 and thus finite ∆ s h1 = ∆ s h2 < 0. For large enough ∆ e , i.e., large enough μ, it is energetically unfavorable for the system to condense an additional d-wave component and thus ∆ d h1 = ∆ d h2 = 0. However, in between these two configurations we can end up in a state, where all five pairing amplitudes are finite. This set of equations is solved numerically in Fig. (8). Similar to Section IV we obtain the equations of motion for this model by making use of Anderson pseudospin variables. The equations of motions have the same form as in Eq. (4.1) but the pseudo magnetic field is now B l k = 2(-∆ x kl , -∆ y kl , ξ l k ), where we use ∆ kl = ∆ s l +i∆ d l cos(2φ k ) and ∆ x kl , ∆ y kl as introduced in the main text. Here, one needs to keep in mind that the electron order parameter has only the s-wave component, i.e., ∆ d e = 0. The xand ycomponent of the pseudo magnetic field are given by ∆ . (B6) Choosing A(t) as in Eq. (5.1) we solve the equations of motion for a system inside the s+id regime numerically. Due to the momentum dependence of the order parameters the result is depending on the polarization of the vector potential. However, this does not change the qualitative dynamics. Similar to the s+is scenario we obtain that the dynamics of both -amplitude and relative phase oscillation -are clearly dominated by a single frequency ω c . We find that all pairing amplitudes oscillate at the same frequency. While the relative phase between the hole order parameters remains constant for both sand d-wave component, the relative phase between s-and dwave component oscillate for each hole order parameter. In Fig. (9) we investigate this frequency over the whole s+id phase diagram. We find that ω c behaves similarly to the s+is scenario and vanished close to the borders of the s+id state. However, close to the border to the d-wave state one obtains that ω c is coupling to 2|∆ s h2 |, which can be understood as the system's decreasing Higgs-mode due to the transition into the nodal d-wave state. This non-equilibrium effect is similar to the one observed in Ref. [ 31]. Once the collective mode of a system exceeds the system's smallest possible Higgs-mode ω H , this mode couples to ω H and is therefore pushed below the quasiparticle continuum. The effect is not dominant on the border to the s-wave state, since the order parameter is fully gapped on this site. .6) cos(|φ 1 -φ 2 |)/2) FIG. 2: