An unconventional insulating phase and a superconducting phase were recently discovered in the twisted bilayer graphene [Y. Cao et al, Nature 556, 80; 556, 43 (2018)], but the relevant lowenergy electronic states have not been clearly identified yet. In this work, I show that the interlayer hopping induces a spatially modulated Dirac mass term in the continuum Hamiltonian, and leads to a low-energy band formed by Dirac zero modes in the moiré superlattice. This moiré band becomes extremely flat and thus strongly correlated as the Dirac velocity vanishes at the magic angle, and enters a quantum disordered Mott insulating phase at 1/4 and 3/4 filling, i.e., ±2 excess electrons per moiré supercell, which may account for the insulating phase discovered in experiments. Introduction.-The recent discovery of an unconventional insulating phase and an adjacent superconducting (SC) phase in the twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) The key to understanding these unconventional phases in TBG is to first identify the lowest-energy electronic states around the charge neutral point in the moiré superstructure. Some recent theoretical works studied effective models taken either from phenomenological arguments or based on global symmetry analysis The microscopic model of the moiré band has been studied intensively with tight-binding models In this work, I take the continuum model of the moiré band The spatial overlap of these zero modes leads to a lowenergy band around the charge neutral point. The effective Hamiltonian is an SU(4)-symmetric Hubbard model on the emergent honeycomb lattice, where the four flavors come from the spin and the valley degeneracies. At 1/4 or 3/4 filling, which corresponds to ±2 electrons per supercell away from the charge neutral point in TBG, the SU(4) Hubbard model on the honeycomb lattice forms a quantum disordered Mott insulating phase at the ground state Revisit to moiré band theory.-Let us start by recapitulating the moiré band theory of TBG in the continuum limit in which Ψ k = (ψ 1 k , ψ 2 k ) T , and ψ 1(2), k is the twocomponent Dirac spinor in the top (bottom) layer. An AB stacking pattern is assumed at the origin for convenience, and the energy spectrum does not depend on this choice in which ±θ/2 are the rotation angles of the two layers. k and θ k are the magnitude and the polar angle of k, respectively. σ = (σ x , σ y ) are the Pauli matrices acting on the Dirac spinors, and σ * denotes the complex conjugate. The momentum transfer induced by the interlayer hopping is small due to the large interlayer distance and the smooth interlayer hopping amplitude The interlayer hopping Hamiltonian projected onto the K valley states is spatially modulated due to the moiré superstructure Here the real-space representation is adopted for later convenience. The hopping matrix in which the interlayer hopping strength w 110 meV. q j 's are the interlayer momentum transfers. They have the same magnitude k θ ≡ | q j | = 8π sin(θ/2)/3a 0 , and are along (0, -1), ( √ 3/2, 1/2), and (-√ 3/2, 1/2) directions, respectively. The T j matrices are in which φ = 2π/3. It has been shown In this work, I shall show that the θ dependence in h(±θ/2) has a significant impact on the low-energy electronic states. Let us first absorb the θ dependence of h(±θ/2) into the electron operators by the following unitary transformation, Ψ r → e iθσz⊗τz/4 Ψ r = (e iθσz/4 ψ 1 r , e -iθσz/4 ψ 2 r ) T , in which The first term H ⊥ in Eq. ( Therefore, as a mapping from the real space to the space of Dirac mass terms, τ ( r) has a vortex structure with vorticity +1 around r 0 . Similarly, around r 1 = (4 √ 3π/9k θ , 0) with a BA stacking pattern, τ ( r) - 3 4 wθk θ ((x -4 √ 3π/9k θ )τ y + yτ x ), thus there is an antivortex with vorticity -1. Because these vortices are well separated in space, they can be treated independently at the first step. The Dirac Hamiltonian has a bound state solution with zero energy around each vortex. This is a general consequence of the celebrated index theorem of Dirac operators Here I give an explicit construction of the Dirac zero modes in the vortex background. Let us first consider the vortex at r 0 = (0, 0). Denote τ ( r) = 3 4 wθk θ f (r)(τ y cos θ r -τ x sin θ r ), in which (r, θ r ) are the polar coordinates. The radial function f (r) ∼ r as r → 0, and is assumed to approach a constant (denoted by f ∞ ) of order O(1/k θ ) as r → ∞ [24]. Let us find a zero-energy solution to the Dirac Hamiltonian H0 + H . Define the chirality operator χ = σ z ⊗ τ z . It anticommutes with the Hamiltonian, hence all nonzero-energy eigenstates are paired up, i.e., an eigenstate Ψ( r) with a nonzero energy = 0 implies that χΨ( r) is an eigenstate with energy -, and vice versa. However, the Atiyah-Singer index theorem guarantees that there is a unique unpaired normalizable zero-energy state with chirality +1 (-1) around a (anti)vortex with vorticity +1 (-1). Therefore, let us seek a zero-energy solution Ψ 0 ( r) of the Dirac Hamiltonian in the form of Ψ 0 ( r) = (ψ 1 ( r), 0, 0, The explicit solution is given by ψ and C is the normalization constant. Similarly, there is a unique unpaired zero mode with chirality -1 around the antivortex at r 1 = (4 √ 3π/9k θ , 0), which is given by Ψ 1 ( r) = (0, ψ(| rr 1 |), ψ(| r -r 1 |), 0) T . There are eight zero modes in each moiré supercell if the spin and the valley degeneracies are taken into account. The zero mode wavefunctions are exponentially localized around the vortex centers, ψ(r) ∼ Ce -r/ξ as r → ∞, in which ξ = 4ṽ F 3wθk θ f∞ is the localization length. Remarkably, as ṽF vanishes at the magic angle, ξ also vanishes and these zero modes are fully localized and separated from each other. Moreover, other eigenstates with nonzero energy are energetically separated from these zero modes due to the mass term by a characteristic energy scale wθ 2 meV, which might be further enhanced due to the Coulomb interaction. Therefore, these zero modes are the most relevant degrees of freedom at low energy closest to the Fermi energy at the magic angle, and should be responsible for the unconventional insulating and SC phases in TBG. Moiré band formed by Dirac zero modes.-The zero mode wavefunctions slightly overlap with each other in the vortex lattice. This induces effective hopping between zero modes on the emergent honeycomb lattice and leads to a moiré band structure. The effective Hamiltonian of this moiré band can be derived by projecting the Dirac Hamiltonian H0 + H into the subspace of zero modes. The result is a tight-binding model on the emergent honeycomb lattice, in which the hopping parameter exactly zero between any two zero modes with the same chirality because H0 anticommutes with χ, thus the effective hopping only takes place between zero modes with opposite chirality residing in different sublattices, if χ = +1 at site i and -1 at site j, in which θ ij is the polar angle of r j -r i . This constraint of bipartite hopping originates from the particle-hole symmetry of the linearized massless Dirac fermions in the continuum approximation and should be relaxed in real material. t ij decays exponentially with | r j -r i |, thus only the nearest-neighbor hopping will be retained. The total phase of the hopping t ij accumulated around each hexagonal plaquatte is zero, thus the phase factors in t ij can be eliminated by a gauge transformation. Therefore, this moiré band is described by a zero-flux tight-binding model on the honeycomb lattice. The upper edge of this moiré band may merge into the high-energy states if the hopping amplitude is comparable to the Dirac mass wθ. Furthermore, the amplitude of t ij is exponentially suppressed as ṽF vanishes at the magic angle due to the ṽF dependence in the ψ(r) factor, thus this low-energy moiré band becomes extremely flat and strongly correlated at the magic angle. Mott insulating phase and beyond.-Retrieving the spin and the valley degrees of freedom and including the electron Coulomb interaction, the full effective Hamiltonian of the low-energy moiré band is the following Hub-bard model, This Hubbard model has an emergent SU(4) symmetry in the combined spin-valley space. At 1/4 or 3/4 filling, i.e., ±2 excess electrons per supercell away from the charge neutral point, the strong Coulomb repulsion, U t, leads to a Mott insulating phase. The Hubbard interaction favors spin-valley singlet states. This is captured by the following spin-valley exchange interaction, which is also called the Kugel-Khomskii model with J = 8t 2 /U . S i and T i are the SU(2) generators acting on the spin and the valley spaces, respectively. The spin-valley exchange interaction Eq. ( Summary and discussions.-In summary, I have shown that the interlayer hopping in the twisted bilayer graphene gives rise to a spatially modulated Dirac mass term in the continuum model. There are two Dirac zero modes localized in each moiré supercell due to the vortex lattice structure of the mass term. These zero modes form a moiré band in this emergent honeycomb vortex lattice. This band becomes extremely flat at the magic angle in particular, thus the Coulomb interaction predominates and leads to a quantum disordered Mott insulating phase at 1/4 or 3/4 filling, which may account for the unconventional insulating phases discovered in experiments. This model is justified by the fact that the localization length of the zero modes and the moiré band width are exponentially suppressed as the Dirac velocity vanishes at the magic angle. Therefore, this moiré band constitutes the lowest-energy electronic states and should be responsible for the unconventional phases in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene. Both the spin and the valley degeneracies are maintained in this effective model because the valley-mixing term in the interlayer hopping has been neglected due to the small momentum transfer 