Throughput and resolution are both of critical importance for modern manufacturing, however, they are usually contradictory with each other. Here, a highthroughput high-resolution three dimensional (3D) printing is demonstrated by incorporating a simultaneous spatiotemporal focusing (SSTF) scheme in two-photon polymerization (TPP). Remarkably, the SSTF can ensure generation of a spherical focal spot of which the size depends linearly on the laser power. Thus, the resolution can be continuously adjusted from sub-10 μm to ~40 μm by only increasing the laser power. A multi-scale 3D structure is fabricated using this technique, for which the regions of coarse and fine feature sizes are produced at high and low resolutions, respectively. Femtosecond laser two-photon polymerization has enabled 3D laser nanofabrication at resolutions as high as tens of nanometers. Temporal focusing, or focusing in the time domain, occurs after the focal lens during propagation of the pulse toward the geometric focal point because all the frequency components tend to recombine at the focus. In this way, the initial transform-limited pulse transiently restores itself at the focus while being stretched either before or after the focus, enabling shortening of the focal depth in terms of the peak intensity. Our experimental setup is schematically illustrated in Figure To demonstrate the 3D isotropic fabrication resolution offered by the SSTF-TPP, we first fabricated two arrays of rods, one of which oriented along X direction while the other along Y direction, both embedded in a cube of SU-8 resin as shown in Figure In Figure To quantitatively determine the dependence of the fabrication resolution on the power of femtosecond laser, the lateral and longitudinal cross sectional sizes of the rods are plotted as functions of laser power in Figure Freestanding 3D structures are ideal model structures to examine the alignment-free tunability in the fabrication resolution provided by the SSTF-TPP in a straightforward way. Therefore, we fabricated a series of coils in SU-8 resin at different laser powers, as shown in Figure Furthermore, we fabricated a multi-scale 3D structures in a single continuous writing process. Figure The quality of the fabricated sculptures of the dog and elephant was further examined with a scanning electron microscope (SEM), as shown in Figure To conclude, we demonstrate fabrication of multi-scale 3D structures using the SSTF-based TPP. We show that the fabrication resolution, which is isotropic in all the three dimensions in space, can be dynamically tuned only by varying the laser power. This is important for realworld applications in which it is preferable to avoid the cumbersome and time-consuming processes of precise realignment of the optics for resetting the fabrication resolution. In the current experiment which employed a Ti:Sapphire laser of a low repetition rate of 1 kHz, it took around 10 hrs to complete the whole fabrication process for the structure shown in Fig. 