Capacitance-Voltage (CV) measurements along with the Mott-Schottky (MS) analysis are widely used for characterization of material and device parameters. Using a simple analytical model, supported by detailed numerical simulations, here we predict that the capacitance of thin film devices scale as V -2 (V is the applied potential), instead of the often used V -0.5 dependence of MS analysiswith significant implications towards extraction of parameters like doping density, built-in voltage, etc. Surprisingly, we find that the predicted trends are already hidden in multiple instances of existing literature. As such, our results constitute a fundamental contribution to semiconductor device physics and are directly applicable and immediately relevant to a broad range of optoelectronic devices like organic solar cells, perovskite based solar cells and LEDs, thin film a-Si devices, etc. Organic and hybrid materials based optoelectronic devices have attracted immense research focus due to their low processing cost, 1,2 high flexibility, In this manuscript, we develop an analytical model for the CV characteristics of carrier selective PIN devices. In particular, we find that the capacitance is governed by the injected charge carriers from the respective contacts and scales as V -2 (in contrast to traditional V -0.5 relation). Interestingly, these analytical predictions are well supported by detailed numerical simulations. In addition, curiously, we find multiple instances of direct experimental evidence from literature which broadly supports the analytical predictions. Below, we first develop an analytical formalism for the CV of carrier selective devices and then validate it through numerical simulations and experimental data. The capacitance of a semiconductor device is a measure of response of charge carriers to a superimposed small sinusoidal signal (of a certain frequency) over a particular DC voltage. where J n is electron current density, n is electron density, μ n is electron mobility, E is electric field, D n = μ n kT/q is diffusion constant for electrons, and x is the location/position inside semiconductor. Under the assumption of constant electric field in the I layer, the electron density profile as a function of position n(x) can be calculated by rearranging Eq. 1 and integrating both sides with appropriate boundary condition (n(l) = n 2 ). Hence, we obtain electron density profile n(x) as follows Here k is Boltzmann's constant, T is the device temperature, n 2 is the electron density injected from contact C2 at x = l, l is the thickness of semiconducting layer, and E = (V bi -V)/l (V bi is the built-in voltage and V is the applied bias). The total stored electron charge (n T ), at a particular voltage V, can be obtained by integrating n(x) across the thickness of semiconducting layer. Accordingly, for low bias regime (i.e. V < V bi ), we get a simplified expression of n T in terms of V as Replacing n 2 = N c exp (-φ n2 /kT), where, N c is conduction band effective density of states and φ n2 is injection barrier for electrons from metal contact C2 to semiconductor, the stored charge capacitance due to electrons (C n,d = q dn T dV ) is given as Similar methodology can be used to obtain stored charge capacitance due to the response of holes (C p,d ) and is expressed as Here, N v is valence band effective density of states and φ p1 is injection barrier for holes from metal contact C1 to semiconductor. The total capacitance C d is due to the response of electrons and holes, and therefore, is the parallel combination of C n,d and C p,d (i.e. C d = C n,d + C p,d ). In contrast to traditional linearity between 1/C 2 and V, indeed, our model (shown in Eq. 4, 5) predicts linear relation between 1/C 0.5 and V and hence can be used to estimate V bi . For asymmetrical injection barriers (i.e. φ n2 ≠ φ p1 ), the same method allows estimation of the properties of the contact that dominates carrier injectionwhich can be further probed through temperature dependent studies of CV characteristics. We performed detailed numerical simulations to validate the analytical model. For this, we consider intrinsic perovskite (with E g =1.55 eV and thickness l = 300 nm) as the test material with φ n2 = φ p1 = 0.3 eV (see Fig. Fig. Fig. We further validated the CV model by extracting barrier for carrier injection from CV characteristics and comparing it with the input value. For this, we estimated CV characteristics (numerically) at different temperatures (T = 300 -380 K). The CV characteristics due to injected charge carriers after C g correction (i.e. C d = C -C g ) are plotted in Fig. Experimental validation: So far, we showed that the proposed CV model is a convenient tool to extract the relevant parameters (V bi , n 2 /p 1 , φ) and the results are very well supported by numerical simulations. Given the simplicity of the analytical predictions and its close correlations with numerical simulations, we expect the trends from the analytical model to be reproduced in broad experimental results as well. To further investigate the claims of the analytical model, we collected several recent experimental data Effects of doping/trap density: Until now, we considered the CV characteristics of PIN device in the absence traps or dopants in the active material (see Figure The results in figure To summarize, we provided a theoretical platform with physical insights that could predict the scaling exponents of capacitance voltage characteristics of carrier selective PIN based optoelectronic devices. Our analytical results indicate that CV characteristics show linearity between 1/C 0.5 and V in contrast to the traditional Mott-Schottky analysis. Our CV model is well supported by detailed numerical simulation and by diverse experimental data. Based on these results, we recommend that every experimental report on C-V characteristics of thin film semiconductor devices should display both 1/C d 0.5 -V and 1/C 2 vs. V for appropriate parameter extraction. As such this study is relevant and influential for a broad class of optoelectronic devices. As such this study is relevant and influential for a broad class of optoelectronic devices with immediate relevance to experimentalists.