Unconventional superconductivity often arises from Cooper pairing between neighboring atomic sites, stipulating a characteristic pairing symmetry in the reciprocal space. The twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) presents a new setting where superconductivity emerges on the flat bands whose Wannier wavefunctions spread over many graphene unit cells, forming the so-called Moiré pattern. To unravel how Wannier states form Cooper pairs, we study the interplay between electronic, structural, and pairing instabilities in TBG. For comparisons, we also study graphene on boron-nitride (GBN) possessing a different Moiré pattern, and single-layer graphene (SLG) without a Moiré pattern. For all cases, we compute the pairing eigenvalues and eigenfunctions by solving a linearized superconducting gap equation, where the spin-fluctuation mediated pairing potential is evaluated from materials specific tight-binding band structures. We find an extended s-wave as the leading pairing symmetry in TBG, in which the nearest-neighbor Wannier sites form Cooper pairs with same phase. In contrast, GBN assumes a p + ip-wave pairing between nearest-neighbor Wannier states with odd-parity phase, while SLG has the d + id-wave symmetry for inter-sublattice pairing with even-parity phase. Moreover, while p + ip, and d + id pairings are chiral, and nodeless, but the extended s-wave channel possesses accidental nodes. The nodal pairing symmetry makes it easily distinguishable via power-law dependencies in thermodynamical entities, in addition to their direct visualization via spectroscopies. Strongly correlated quantum phases and superconductivity have long been predicted in single-layer graphene (SLG) at the van-Hove singularity (VHS). 1 However, their experimental realization has so far remained elusive. Recently, both correlated insulating gap 2 and superconductivity The relationships between the k-space electronic structure and direct lattice Wannier states of the SLG, GBN, and TBG are delineated in Fig. One of the most striking differences emerges when we investigate the corresponding Wannier states of individual flat band in the direct lattice, see Fig. . This sign reversal is required to compensate for the positive (repulsive) pairing potential. This theory of spin-fluctuation driven superconductivity consistently links between the observed pairing symmetry and FS topology in many different unconventional superconductors. For each material, we obtain the non-interacting, lowenergy band structures by tight-binding model in the unit cell or Moiré cell, as appropriate. Next we solve the pairing eigenvalue (SC coupling constant) and eigenfunction (pairing symmetry) solution of the linearized Eliashberg equation, where the pairing potential stems from many-body spin-and charge fluctuations. In SLG, the computed pairing eigenfunction agrees with a d + id-wave symmetry, which arises from inter-sublattice pairing between the 'A' and 'B' Wannier sites in a hexagonal primitive lattice. In GBN, the pairing solution changes to a p + ip-symmetry where the inter-sublattice pairing occurs between the nearest neighbor (NN) Wannier orbitals with oddparity phases. On the other hand, in TBG, we find an extended spairing with even parity phases between the same Wannier orbitals in NN sites. Note that the extended s-wave solution can produce accidental nodes when the FS is large near the VHS doping. The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we discuss the computational details for the electronic structure calculations, and pairing eigenvalue calculations. All results are presented in discussed in Sec. III. Finally we conclude in Sec. IV. For SLG, we use a typical two band tight-binding (TB) model as presented in the literature. To estimate the FS nesting features, and the corresponding pairing potential, we compute the multiband Lindhard susceptibility χ αβ (q, ω): where ξ ν k is the ν th band, and f (ξ ν k ) is the corresponding fermion occupation number. α, β give the orbital indices, and q and ω are the momentum and frequency transfer, respectively. F k,q as form factor arising from the eigenvectors as where u ν α represents the eigenvector for the ν th -band projected to the α th basis (Wannier orbitals). We evaluated the form-factor numerically. Next we compute the pairing symmetry and pairing strength arising from the density-density fluctuations. It should be noted that although the bandwidth is lower near the magic angles, the FS becomes large due to VHS. This enhances screening, and hence the effective Coulomb interaction is reduced. where n ασ (q) is the density operator for the α th -band with σ =↑, ↓ spins, and U αβ is the Hubbard U between the two bands. Based on this Hubbard model, we compute pairing potential from the bubble and ladder diagrams to obtain for singlet and triplet channels as Re Ũs χs (q) Ũs + Ũc χc (q) Ũc -Ũs -Ũc . ( Here we introduce 'tilde' to symbolize a quantity to be a matrix of dimension N × N , with N being the total number of bands. Superscript 's', and 'c' denote many-body spin and charge susceptibilities χs/c (q) matrix whose components are defined as Here χ αβ is the bare susceptibility defined in Eq. (1) above. The many-body susceptibilities are obtained within the random phase approximation (RPA). U s/c are the Hubbard U matrix for spin-flip and non spin-flip interactions, respectively (Eq. ( A triplet pairing channel Γ t increases when the onsite interaction dominates over spin and charge fluctuations, as in the case of GBN (see below). In both singlet and triplet cases, it is evident that the pairing potentials have strong peaks at the momenta where the underlying susceptibility itself obtains peaks, i.e., pairing potentials Γ s/t (q) also diverge at the FS nesting wavevectors, and hence stabilize a characteristic pairing symmetry in a given system. Based on the above pairing potential, we solve the linearized multiband SC gap equation, which is the pairing eigenvalue equation, as given by (see Appendix B for details) where k α is the Fermi momentum for the α th band. The eigenvalue calculation is performed over the entire 2D FS to estimate the dominant eigenvalue λ (which measures the SC coupling constant), and the corresponding eigenvector gives the leading pairing symmetry g(k). The same eigenvalue equation is solved for both singlet (ν ≡ s) and triplet (ν ≡ t) channels. Since the pairing potentials Γ s/t scale with the Hubbard U , SC coupling constant λ also increases with increasing U . Within the first-order approximation, the pairing symmetry g(k) does not scale with U (in the weak to moderate coupling regime). Therefore, our general conclusions about the pairing symmetry, and the phase diagram are dictated by the nesting strength, and remain valid for different values of U in this coupling regime. For a repulsive interaction Γ ν > 0, according to Eq.( Looking into the origin of Γ ν in Eqs. ( Here we discuss our results of the pairing eigenstates for three systems under considerations at their VHS dopings. The computed results of g(k) for the largest eigenvalue of Eq. ( where g j gives the pairing amplitude between two Wannier sites separated by a distance δ j , see Fig. For SLG, numerous calculations predicted that an exotic d x 2 -y 2 + id xy (d + id) -wave symmetry is the dominant pairing channel, constrained by the FS nesting at the VHS. These two eigenfunctions, respectively, represent d x 2 -y 2 and d xy symmetries in the hexagonal BZ. Because of the degeneracy, the E 2g irreducible representation allows a complex mixing between them which is called the d + id-pairing symmetry in SLG. In GBN, the circular FS allows small-angle nestings, and hence triplet pairing channel gains dominance, as in Sr 2 RuO 4 Compared to the other two compounds, we find a considerably lower value of λ = 0.03 in GBN. This is expected since this system does not have a strong nesting at a single wavevector, rather small-angle scattering wavevectors with lower strength. The inverse Fourier transformation of the pairing state yields g 1,2,3 = (2i, -i, -i) for the p y state and g 1,2,3 = (0, i, -i) for the p x state for the three NN Wannier sites (as shown in Fig. There have already been several proposals for unconventional pairing symmetries, and pairing mechanisms in TBG, such as d + id The pairing function is rotationally symmetric and changes sign between the Moiré-zone center and corners, governing a symmetry that is consistent with the A 2g -group and hence called extended s-wave pairing. For the large FS at the VHS doping, the tip of the FS crosses through the nodal lines and thus gapless SC quasiparticle are obtained in this pairing state. This is a purely real gap function. In the direct Moiré-lattice, this pairing symmetry stems from a nearest neighbor pairing between the Wannier sites in a triangular lattice given by g 1-6 = 1 for all components, see Fig. We also note that the computed pairing symmetry in TBG is different from that of the other triangular lattices, such as Na x CoO 2 • yH 2 O (NCOHO). (i) First we consider the case for only intra-valley nesting in the limit of U >> V . Here the results are similar to the singlevalley calculations shown in the main text. Consistently, we find an extended-s wave symmetry for both valleys, where we have a sign reversal between center and corner of the BZ, with a circular nodal line (Fig. (ii) Next we consider the case for only inter-valley nesting alone in the limit of V >> U . We obtain a completely different pairing symmetry. Here we find an onsite, s-wave pairing for each valley state, but the sign of the pairing is completely reversed between the two valleys, and hence called s ± -pairing state. The result is shown in Fig. (iii) Lastly we study the case of having both intra-and intervalley nestings. The pairing eigenfunction map, plotted in Fig. Finally, we study the doping dependence of the pairing eigenvalue λ, the SC coupling constant, in TBG, and the result is shown in Fig. All the complex d + id, and p + ip pairing symmetries do not possess SC gap nodes on the FS and thus their detection usually requires phase sensitive measurements. The extended s-wave one in TBG possess accidental nodes on both sides of the saddle-point near the VHS doping, and thus the SC gap is very anisotropic. The k-space mapping of the pairing symmetry can be measured via various modern techniques, such as angle-dependent photoemission spectroscopy, scanning tunneling probes via quasiparticle interference (QPI) pattern, field-angle dependence study of thermal conductivity, and so on. The nodal SC quasiparticle also leads to a powerlaw temperature dependence in many thermodynamical and transport properties which makes it easier to distinguish from conventional pairing. The sign reversal of the pairing symmetry leads to a magnetic spin-resonance at energy < 2∆ (∆ is SC gap amplitude), In a typical unconventional superconductor, the Wannier states of the Fermi momenta are localized on each lattice site, and hence the correspondence between the reciprocal and direct lattice pairing is trivial. In the Moiré lattice, the location of the Wannier states corresponding to the flat band in TBG depends on energy, twist angle, and inter-layer coupling. In GBN, the Wannier states are localized on a hexagonal lattice. In TBG, they form a triangular lattice for each valley, where the hexagonal symmetry is restored when both valleys are included. Because of these materials specific peculiarities, the pairing symmetry of these materials turn out to be characteristically unique. The present paper spares several open questions for future studies. Superconductivity appears at a considerably low-carrier density (∼ 10 12 cm -2 ), which may require adjustments in the theory. The competition between superconductivity and the correlated insulator is another interesting theme of research which will be perused in the future. 2 )a 0 , δ 3 = (-1 2 , 0)a 0 with a 0 denoting the carbon-carbon distance in graphene lattice. Six NNN traslation lattice vectors can be written as a 1 = ±(δ 1 -δ 2 ), a 2 = ±(δ 2 -δ 3 ), a 3 = ±(δ 3 -δ 1 ). We can write the Hamiltonian as where, with a and b are sublattice energies for sublattice A and B respectively, t and t are nearest neighbour and next nearest neighbour hopping amplitude respectively, a † and b † are creation operators on sublattices A and B respectively. Next we Fourier transform the creation and anihilation operators to get the band dispersion as The model with more tight-binding parameters and their values is given in Ref. We construct the low energy model for graphene on hBN by following Ref. where H 0 ss is the Hamiltonian that describes Dirac cones and H MB ss gives the Moiré band modulation as All the terms of the effective Hamiltonian now can be determined by the following equations In Ref. We construct the Hamiltonian for the TBG following the work of Bistritzer and MacDonald 4 . We write down the lowenergy Hamiltonian by considering two SLGs which were rotated by an angle θ with respect to each other and tunneling between the SLG layers (see Fig. where v = 3.2 eV Å-1 is the Dirac velocity, k is the momentum measured from Dirac point, and φ k = tan ky/kx , and θ is twist angle [see Fig. We consider k-points beyond the first shell approximation which resulted in a 400 × 400 matrix. After diagonalizing this matrix, we downfold the eigenvalues to the two (four) lowenergy flat bands for a single valley (both valleys) that are near the FS, and all the subsequent calculations are performed considering only these bands. where α and β are valley indices, taking values of 1 and 2 for two valleys in TBG. c † and c are creation and annihilation operators, respectively. U and V are intra-valley and inter-valley coupling strength respectively. In Eq. B1 first term is the intravalley interaction and second term is inter-valley interaction. By expanding Eq. B1 to include multiple-interaction channels, we obtain the effective pairing potential Γ αβ (k -k ) for the singlet and triplet states. The corresponding pairing Hamiltonian is The pairing potentials are Γs αβ (q) = 1 2 Re 3 Ũ s χs αβ (q) Ũ s -Ũ c χc αβ (q) Ũ c + Ũ s + Ũ c , (B3) Here U s/c = U for α = β and U s/c = V for α = β. From the superconducting Hamiltonian Eq. B2 we can construct the superconducting gap (SC) equation as Here n = s, t for singlet and triplet pairing channels where σ = ∓σ, respetively. In the limit T → 0 we have c -k βσ c k βσ → λ n ∆ β n,k which makes the above equation an eigenvalue equation In our work we solve the eigenvalue problem separately for the singlet and triplet channels. The following equations remain the same for both these pairing channels and thus the index 'n' is omitted for simplicity. This is an eigenvalue equation for the k-points in the Fermi surface (∆ α k F ). For this purpose we construct the matrix where 1,2, refer to the band/valley indices, and q = k Fk F the Fermi surface nesting vctor and Γ αβ k F k F refers to N × N matrix if N number of points on the Fermi surface is considered for each valley. Now if we denote T then we can write the matrix equation and solve for its eigenvalues and eigenvectors as By writing the SC gap function as ∆ k = ∆ 0 g k , where ∆ 0 is the gap amplitude and g k is the gap anisotropy, we obtain Eq. 4 in the main text.