We employ polarization-resolved Raman spectroscopy to study multi-band stoichiometric superconductor CaKFe4As4. The B2g symmetry Raman response shows no signatures of Pomeranchuklike electronic nematic fluctuations which is observed for many other Fe-based superconductors. In the superconducting state, we identify three pair-breaking peaks at 13.8, 16.9 and 21 meV and full spectral weight suppression at low energies. The pair-breaking peak energies in Raman response are about 20% lower than twice the gap energies as measured by single-particle spectroscopy, implying a sub-dominant d-wave symmetry interaction. We analyze the superconductivity induced phonon self-energy effects and give an estimation of weak electron-phonon coupling constant λ Γ =0.0015. Introduction -Understanding the pairing mechanism in the Fe-based superconductors (FeSC) remains focused topic of research not only due to a high superconducting transition temperature T c , but also because of the unusual properties and interplay with other electronic degrees of freedom, such as nematicity and magnetism FeSCs are believed to be unconventional superconductors because the pairing mechanism is due to electronic rather than phononic interactions. It has been proposed that spin-fluctuation can lead to s ± symmetry pairing with sign reversal gap function between Fermi surface (FS) pockets around Γ and M point Recent discovery of a new class of stoichiometric and strictly tetragonal FeSCs CaAFe 4 As 4 (A = K, Rb, Cs) with rather high T c (31-36 K) provides an ideal platform for spectroscopic investigation of superconductors in clean limit, to decide on the role of nematicity for high T c superconductivity in FeSCs In this Letter, we report polarization-resolved Raman spectroscopic study of CaKFe 4 As 4 single-crystals. In contrast to the data from many FeSCs for which strong Pomeranchuk-like electronic nematic fluctuations give rise to intense electronic Raman continuum in the XYquadrupole symmetry channel, the electronic Raman signal for CaKFe 4 As 4 is weak and isotropic. Below T c , we observe complete suppression of the low-frequency spectral intensity and development of three SC pair-breaking coherence peaks in the XY symmetry electronic Raman response, which implies that all FS pockets are fully gapped. The pair-breaking peak energies 2∆ = 13.8, 16.9 and 21 meV are about 20% lower than twice the gap energies measured by single-particle spectroscopies. We attribute such renormalization to finite-state interactions in sub-dominant d-wave SC pairing channel. We also observe superconductivity induced phonon self-energy effect and estimate the electron-phonon (e-p) coupling to be weak, with coupling constant λ Γ = 0.0015. Crystallographic structure -The CaKFe 4 As 4 single crystals (T c = 35 K) used in this study were synthesized by flux method For the body-centered CaFe 2 As 2 , the Fe layers are at the high symmetry z=1/4 and 3/4 planes, and each Fe has D 2d site symmetry with S 4 axis along z-direction, which imposes the degeneracy of Fe 3d xz and 3d yz orbitals. Such orbital degeneracy is a common feature for most of the FeSCs In contrast, for CaKFe 4 As 4 structure, the ordered alternating Ca and K layers above and below Fe-As layers cause the Fe positions shift away from the high symmetry planes The crystals were loaded into a continuous helium flow optical cryostat immediately after being cleaved in a nitrogen gas filled glove bag connected to the cryostat. We used the 647 nm line of a Kr + laser, where the laser beam was focused to a 50 × 50 μm spot. The laser power was kept below 10 mW in the normal state and 2.3 mW for the SC state to reduce laser heating. The temperatures were corrected for the laser heating. The Raman signal was collected and analyzed by a triple-grating spectrometer with 1.5 cm -1 spectral resolution. All spectra were corrected for spectral response and background determined from the X Y symmetry electronic continuum to obtain the Raman scattering intensity I μν (ω, T ) Raman continuum -In Fig. The common signature for most of the FeSCs is strong XY-symmetry Raman response. The enhancement of the Raman susceptibility has been attributed to the d XYsymmetry Pomeranchuk-like fluctuations with Drude-like low-frequency response in the normal state and sharp ingap collective mode in the superconducting state, both arising from strong oscillating charge ferro-quadrupole moments on the Fe sites due to the d xz /d yz orbital degeneracy SC pair-breaking peaks -Below T c , we observe a suppression of the low-frequency spectral weight and development of a feature between 10 to 30 meV. Upon cooling, the intensity and central frequency of this feature increase. At the lowest measured temperature (7 K), the spectral intensity below 12 meV is completely suppressed, indicating that the SC gap is nodeless. We detect no SC coherence peak for a gap near 5 meV, as reported in Refs. We fit the data with three-gap model, χ = Here α i denotes the spectral weight, and χ i (ω, ∆ i , T ) = 4∆ 2 i /ω ω 2 -4∆ 2 i * L(ω, T ) denotes BCS coherence peaks with SC gap energies 2∆ i In Fig. Phonon self-energy effects -CaKFe 4 As 4 crystal (point group D 4h ) contains 10 atoms in a primitive cell. For phonons at the Γ point, group-theoretical symmetry decomposition yields A u +E u acoustic modes, 4A 2u + 5E u infrared active modes, 3A 1g + B 1g + 4E g Raman active modes, and a B 2u silent mode. For the scattering experiments from (001) surface, we observe all three A 1g and a B 1g phonons (Fig. Above T c all modes exhibit a conventional temperature dependence: hardening and narrowing upon cooling due to anharmonic decay Similar phonon anomalies upon entering into SC state were reported for MgB 2 213 cm -1 Fe(z) It is interesting to note that in contrast to the 67 cm -1 A 1g phonon (Fig. To quantify the superconductivity induced self-energy effects and the e-p interaction strength, we fit the data with χ ph (ω) , where ω 0 is the bare phonon frequency, and Σ = Σ +iΣ is complex phonon self-energy We calculate the coupling constant λ Γ B1g around Γ point (2) Below T c , we observe complete suppression of lowfrequency spectral weight and development of three SC pair-breaking peaks in the B 2g symmetry channel, which implies that all the SC gaps are nodeless. We do not detect in-gap collective modes which are commonly observed for FeSCs with strong electronic nematic fluctuations. (3) The pair-breaking peaks energies are about 20% lower than twice SC gap energies measured by oneparticle spectroscopy, likely due to finite-state interaction effects in the sub-dominant d xy -symmetry pairing channel. (4) We study the SC induced self-energy effects for Raman-active phonons and provide an estimate of the electron-phonon coupling constant λ Γ = 0.0015, which is very small for a superconductor with T c at 35 K. By showing that the electronic nematic fluctuations and electron-phonon coupling are neglectfully small, we exclude them as a viable explanation for high-T c superconductivity in CaKFe 4 As 4 . Naturally, one would consider the remaining spin-fluctuations to provide pairing interaction. In this case, the expected pairing symmetry is s ± , which is consistent with the observation of the spin-resonance mode at nesting vector (π, π) by inelastic neutron scattering 