All non-interacting two-dimensional electronic systems are expected to exhibit an insulating ground state It is theoretically accepted that in realistic twodimensional systems, with the unavoidable disorder and at a finite T , superconductivity exists only marginally and finite resistivity is always expected For such thin-film systems the superconducting state can be dramatically terminated with a transition to an insulating phase There is, however, a growing number of independent studies The physical origin of this anomalous metallic state remains controversial with experimental measurements variously interpreted as evidence of a Bose-metal phase Our data were obtained from two very different superconducting systems. The first is amorphous Indium Oxide (a:InO) thin film (Fig. The second system we investigated is made of sheets exfoliated from a single-crystal of 2H-NbSe 2 (Fig. When we repeated the measurements, this time with low-pass filters installed (blue traces), we found that R continued to follow the activated trend down to much lower T 's, and, as T was further lowered, R continued to decrease to our noise level without saturating. The lowest R we now measure can exceed two orders of magnitude below the corresponding saturated values of the unfiltered measurements. We note that with filtering, we continue to observe deviation from activated behavior in the lowest T ranges measured. However, we believe this results from imperfect filters. Indeed, additional measurements of a:InO film in a second fridge with improved low-T filters show no deviation from activated behavior over the full range of achievable T 's (Fig. Although the effect the filters have on both systems is qualitatively similar it is important to point out that, while for a:InO it is only seen well below T C , for 2H-NbSe 2 filtering has a measurable effect right from T C , and at B = 0. In Fig. While filtering external radiation effectively eliminates the apparent metallic behavior, we found that satura-tion can be re-introduced by increasing the current used in our four-terminal measurements. For this purpose we used both DC and AC currents (I DC and I AC , see Methods) with similar results. The saturation induced by increasing I AC is demonstrated in Fig. The saturation induced by increasing I (either AC or DC) can naturally be attributed to Joule heating. Under the application of a higher power (P = I • V ) by the measurement circuit, the electronic system is unable to equilibrate with its low-T environment. This leads to an outof-equilibrium steady-state where the electrons are held at an elevated T , T eff , higher than the surrounding T We now wish to suggest that the R saturation observed in our unfiltered experiments, and which bears a striking resemblance to the I-driven saturation (see Fig Although our results clearly show that our a:InO and 2H-NbSe 2 films do not exhibit an intermediate metallic phase, we can not rule out the existence of such a phase in other superconducting systems for which a metallic state was previously reported Before we proceed to discuss the implication of this simple elevated effective-temperature scenario, we wish to point out that there are other possible mechanisms that would lead to I-dependent transport in thin-film superconductor such as ours. Non-linear vortex related response may be relevant at finite-B's, and BKT vortexantivortex unbinding may be at work at B = 0. At this stage we are unable to rule out that such mechanisms play a significant role in the I-response of the system, and may even lead to saturated, T -independent R as T → 0. We are not aware of a model that accounts for the stark difference between the results of the filtered and unfiltered measurements. The data we are presenting here show that the metallic behavior, often observed in thin-film superconductors, results from the exposure of the superconducting phase to unwanted radiation or high I's. While these can be easily eliminated, it is still worthwhile to consider why these superconductors so readily respond to excitations that leave other systems, under similar conditions, unaffected. We point out that T sat is routinely around a few K, where it is unlikely that the cryogenic environment will limit the sample's ability to cool. Since the external power couples only to the electronic system it is reasonable to conclude that the bottleneck in the heat-transfer process is between the electrons and the host phonons In this study we were able to compare two very different systems under virtually identical measurement con-ditions. It is reasonable to assume that, without filters, the radiation delivered to both types of samples would be the same. Surprisingly we find that their T sat are very different: < 0.4 K for a:InO and ∼ 2 K for 2H-NbSe 2 . Similarly the corresponding p r 's are different. If the effective-temperature picture is correct, we need to understand why two samples under similar external radiation end up responding in such a different manner. The reason, we believe, is rooted in the energy balance maintained by the electrons. Even if the radiation is the same, it is very likely that different systems will absorb this energy in different ways reflecting the specific details of their electronic state. Compounding this are possible differences between the strength of the coupling to the phonon system to which the electrons can transfer the energy absorbed from the radiation. A detailed understanding of this scenario awaits further theoretical developments. In summary, we showed that two very different thinfilm superconductors are extremely sensitive to external perturbations, and exhibit metallic-like, saturated, Tdependence in response to such perturbations. We suggested two possible mechanisms, one based on vortex depinning and in the other we assume that an overheated state exists where the electronic system is unable to equilibrate with its surrounding. In the latter case one should theoretically address not only the external power dissipated but also the heat flow away from the electronic system. In this work we studied several different a:InO and 2H-NbSe 2 samples. Their relevant parameters are presented in Table Our data was measured utilizing a standard fourterminal lock-in technique, see sketch in Supplementary Fig. The data presented in Fig. * idan.tamir@weizmann.ac.il.; Corresponding author