Understanding the impact of lattice imperfections on nanoscale thermal transport is crucial for diverse applications ranging from thermal management to energy conversion. Grain boundaries (GBs) are ubiquitous defects in polycrystalline materials, which scatter phonons and reduce thermal conductivity (κ). Historically, their impact on heat conduction has been studied indirectly through spatially-averaged measurements, that provide little information about phonon transport near a single GB. Here, using spatially-resolved time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) measurements in combination with electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD), we make localized measurements of κ within few μm of individual GBs in boron-doped polycrystalline diamond. We observe strongly suppressed thermal transport near GBs, a reduction in κ from ~1000 Wm -1 K -1 at the center of large grains to ~400 Wm -1 K -1 in the immediate vicinity of GBs. Furthermore, we show that this reduction in κ is measured up to ~ 10 μm away from a GB. A theoretical model is proposed that captures the local reduction in phonon mean-free-paths due to strongly diffuse phonon scattering at the disordered grain boundaries. Our results provide a new framework for understanding phonon-defect interactions in nanomaterials, with implications for the use of high κ polycrystalline materials as heat sinks in electronics thermal management. For many applications ranging from thermal management In this work, we develop spatially-resolved time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR) measurements, that allow us to make direct observations of thermal conductivity suppression due to phonon scattering near individual GBs. In samples of large-grained boron-doped CVD diamond (average grain size ~ 25 μm), we correlate the spatial thermal conductivity measurements with local variations in the underlying microstructure, imaged using electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) in a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Our measurements reveal that the thermal conductivity decreases significantly near a GB, by nearly ~60 % as compared to the peak conductivity inside a grain. Furthermore, we find that this suppression in thermal conductivity is detected by the TDTR probe over a surprisingly long distance, up to ~ 10 μm away from the GB. To understand these effects, we propose a new theoretical framework, of a reduced local thermal conductivity within a few phonon mean-free-paths (MFPs) of the GB due to increased boundary scattering and non-equilibrium effects. Finite element (FE) calculations carried out within this framework are in good quantitative agreement with our measurements, and point toward the key role played by diffuse phonon scattering at the disorder-rich GBs. Polycrystalline diamond samples (thickness ~ 530 μm) were grown by CVD (see Methods for details of growth process). (220) pole figure X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements (see Figure Thermal conductivity measurements were performed using TDTR, which is a well-established optical pump-probe technique voltage signals using the lock-in amplifier. This fixed probe delay time is chosen where the measurement sensitivity to the Al/Diamond thermal boundary conductance (TBC) is near-zero, thereby ensuring that variations in the measured TDTR ratio (= -V /V ) signal are entirely due to spatial variations in κ (see Methods and Figure To better quantify the reduction in κ near individual GBs, we look at a region of the sample that contains large grains. Figure This data is further normalized by the peak κ inside each grain, and plotted versus the closest perpendicular distance (L) from the nearest GB, in Figure To summarize, our spatially-resolved TDTR measurements reveal two remarkable features: ( κ is reduced by a significant amount near a GB, by almost ~60 % compared to the peak value, and, (2) the resistive effect of a GB is measured by the TDTR probe up to fairly large distances away from it, approaching ~10 μm. In order to understand the fundamental physical mechanisms responsible for these effects, we develop a modeling framework based on the concept of a spatially varying local thermal conductivity inside a single grain. In general, the local phonon MFP (Λ ) at a point located a distance x from a GB (see Figure where Λ is the intrinsic MFP due to phonon-phonon scattering in a bulk crystal, Λ corresponds to phonon scattering at point defects such as dopants, and Λ corresponds to phonon scattering at GBs. The local thermal conductivity within a grain is related to the local MFP as κ (x) = F(x)κ , where F(x) = ( ) is the suppression function. The second term in Equation 1 captures the effect of spatially-varying phonon-defect scattering rate due to an inhomogeneous distribution of boron dopants. Previous electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) studies on boron-doped polycrystalline diamond have shown that the dopant atoms preferentially segregate close to grain boundaries, typically within ~ 1-20 nm of a GB This type of local disorder, also associated with the accumulation of other types of extended defects On the other hand, the third term in Equation 1 captures the effect of phonon scattering at GBs, and related near-interfacial non-equilibrium effects within a few MFPs of the boundary. To understand the underlying physics behind this non-local effect of a GB, we turn to the Boltzmann transport equation. For phonon transport caused by a temperature gradient along the z direction, we can write an expression for the deviation from equilibrium of the phonon population, g = f -f , as follows where v is the phonon group velocity, τ is the single-mode relaxation time, and f is the Bose-Einstein distribution function. In general, g is a function of both x and z. If phonons incident on a GB are absorbed and re-emitted after diffuse scattering according to the local equilibrium distribution function, then g(0, z) = 0. The solution can be written as follows The deviation function starts from 0 at the GB, and increases to the "bulk" value of -τv∇T[df dT ⁄ ] on the length scale of the intrinsic phonon MFP Λ = vτ. In the gray approximation, the local heat flux along the z direction at a distance x from the GB is proportional to the local departure from equilibrium of the dominant phonon mode, q (x) ∝ g(x). The local thermal conductivity, given by κ (x) ~ q (x)/∇T, then has a spatial dependence of the form described by Equation In essence, we argue that the traditional picture of heat conduction in a polycrystal -where a GB acts as a discrete Kapitza resistance -is incomplete. Instead, a GB exerts its influence non-locally, decreasing the thermal conductivity of the surrounding grains by increasing the rate of phonon scattering. The Boltzmann transport equation suggests that this suppression in local heat flux occurs on a length scale on the order of the dominant phonon MFPs Moving forward, we model this effect using two simplified expressions. To first order, we assume that for a point located a distance x from a GB, the suppression in MFP is similar to that inside a film of thickness x. Using the Matthiessen's approach, the suppression function is as follows: where p is the specularity parameter, denoting the fraction of phonons that are specularly scattered at the GB, and δ = x/Λ (see thick curves in Figure We note that in general, the bulk MFP Λ and boundary-limited MFP Λ (x) are functions of phonon frequency. For the sake of simplicity, we make a gray medium approximation, i.e. assume a single frequency-independent MFP. Previous density functional theory (DFT) calculations To translate this κ (x) into a quantity that can be compared directly with the measured data, we use time-dependent FE simulations. Note that on the short delay times at which the TDTR maps are measured, the V signal has low sensitivity to κ , and nearly all our sensitivity comes from V . The out-of-phase component is proportional to the imaginary part of the temperature response of the sample at the modulation frequency f The 3D FE simulation domain consists of two grains (40 x 40 x 20 μm) separated by an interfacial plane at x = 0 (see Figure Figure The good agreement between the models and data identifies the important role played by highly diffuse phonon scattering at the disordered GBs, and related near-interfacial non-equilibrium effects, as the physical mechanism likely responsible for the strong suppression in local thermal conductivity. In conclusion, we have developed a correlative microscopy technique, combining spatiallyresolved TDTR and EBSD measurements on bulk samples of boron-doped polycrystalline diamond. These measurements have enabled, to the best of our knowledge, the first direct observations of thermal conductivity suppression in the vicinity of individual grain boundaries. From the point of view of thermal management, our findings have implications for the design of heat-sinking substrates utilizing CVD-grown polycrystalline diamond. They suggest that as device dimensions scale down to length scales comparable to typical grain sizes and phonon MFPs, the local thermal environment can be spatially inhomogeneous depending on the underlying microstructure of the substrate. Furthermore, our work motivates a fresh look at traditional models of thermal transport in polycrystalline materials, where it is commonly assumed that the GBs act as discrete Kapitza resistances. This might be especially interesting to consider in systems where the average grain size is smaller than the dominant phonon MFPs (and hence, the size of the GB influence region) Our results are an important advance over research pursued for the past many decades, where the impact of defects on thermal transport was understood in an average sense. We show that highresolution thermal conductivity measurements near individual defects can provide new insights into fundamental mechanisms of phonon-defect interactions. Similar measurements can be made in other crystalline materials that have intrinsically long phonon MFPs (e.g. silicon and III-Vs) and contain diffusely scattering lattice imperfections. Insights derived from these measurements will enable the rational design of thermal metamaterials with controlled nanoscale architecture, for applications in energy harvesting and thermal management. Methods. Sample preparation. Polycrystalline diamond substrates were grown by microwave enhanced CVD, and heavily doped with boron (~ 10 21 cm -3 ). Source process gases consisted of hydrogen and methane with diborane (B2H6) as the dopant, and the growth temperature was kept above 1000 0 C. Small pieces (~ 13 x 13 mm) were cut from the original wafer, and the top surface was polished down to a root mean square roughness < 5 nm to create a specular reflective surface for TDTR measurements. To help locate the same region of the sample for microstructural characterization (SEM-EBSD) and thermal conductivity measurements (TDTR), fiduciary marks were cut into the corners of a 250 x 250 μm square using a Ga + FIB. After EBSD measurements in the SEM, the sample was blanket coated with a ~90 nm thick Al transducer layer using electron-beam (e-beam) evaporation, while still allowing the fiduciary marks to remain visible. Thermal conductivity measurements. Details of our TDTR optical setup have been reported previously ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information. See the Supplement for additional details of XRD and SEM characterization, grain size analysis, TDTR measurements (sample alignment, spot-size measurements, full time-delay scan results, sensitivity analysis), finite-element simulations, and a note about measurement statistics. to a lower signal on the photodetector. This method allows us to pin-point the location of the FIB markers to within ~2 μm, and ensure good registry with the EBSD maps. Full delay time scans were taken at multiple spots on the sample. The ratio (= -V /V ) data were fit to the solution of a three-dimensional multilayer heat-diffusion model At each spot, we fit simultaneously for two variables: the thermal conductivity of diamond κ , and the TBC between the Al transducer and diamond G / . 