In sight of fundamental thermal limits on further substantial performance improvements of modern digital computational processing units, wave-based analog computation is becoming an enticing alternative. A wave, as it propagates through a carefully tailored medium, performs the desired computational operation. Yet, the necessary designs are so intricate that experimental demonstrations will necessitate further technological advances. Here, we show that, counterintuitively, the carefully tailored medium can be replaced with a random medium, subject to an appropriate shaping of the incident wave front. Using tunable metasurface reflect-arrays, we demonstrate our concept experimentally in a chaotic microwave cavity. We conclude that off-the-shelf wireless communication infrastructure in combination with a simple reflect-array suffices to perform analog computation with Wi-Fi waves reverberating in a room. The first steps in the history of computation were analog mechanical devices designed for specific tasks such as the Thomson brother's Harmonic Analyzer to determine an input's Fourier representation Some examples of such materials performing certain operations are well-known free-space optical components: * philipp.delhougne@gmail.com a lens yields the Fourier transform of an impinging wave front (i) Leverage a specific physical effect to perform one specific operation enabled by that effect. A notable and experimentally demonstrated example of this approach used interference phenomena arising from surface plasmon excitation to perform spatial differentiation (ii) Design a metamaterial block to perform one specific desired operation. A suitably designed metamaterial block was numerically shown to enable the implementation of one desired transfer function associated with one desired computational operation (iii) Program a coherent nanophotonic circuit to perform a desired operation. Recent advances in silicon photonics enable the fabrication of a mesh of interconntected Mach-Zehnder interferometers, programmable via phase shifters in the waveguide arms to implement arbitrary linear operations The crux in approaches (ii) and (iii), which enable implementing a desired operation, lies in intricate material designs that are difficult (if not impossible, to date) to fabricate. Here, we propose to overcome any material fabrication and (re-)configuration constraints by using a medium with random instead of carefully tailored scattering properties -at the much lower price of appropriately shaping the input wave front before it interacts with the random medium. In principle, our concept preserves all the essential advantages brought about by WBAC, in particular enhanced computation speed and power efficiency, and proposes a way of enjoying them without intricate fabrication procedures. We experimentally demonstrate the validity of our concept in the microwave domain using a chaotic cavity as random medium and a simple phase-binary metasurface reflect-array to shape the wave field. The fact that we only add a metasurface to a setup emulating standard indoor wireless communication infrastructure shows the ease of implementing our concept in practice, in sharp contrast to any of the current aforementioned WBAC schemes. Then, exploiting the low time cost of WBAC, we demonstrate a scaled-up version under time-sequential operation. Finally, we discuss perspectives for practical implementations and how they may compete with traditional electronic processors in terms of speed and energy efficiency. In the present work, we focus on implementing linear matrix-vector multiplications. As evidenced by substantial industrial efforts to design electronic hardware accelerators (ASICs, FPGAs) specialized on such operations, they are a key ingredient of many computational needs. Artificial neural networks capable of deep learning rely on "layers of neurons", each of which consists of a linear matrix-vector multiplication and a non-linear activation function At first sight, the complete scrambling of a wave front as it propagates through a complex medium may seem contrarious to our objective of performing computation for which a very specific operation is to be carried out on the impinging wave front A linear computation operation may be expressed as a matrix G that is applied to an input vector X, yielding the output vector Y = GX. To illustrate our general protocol, in Fig. In a one-off initiation step, we first characterize the impact of each pixel of the WFS device on the output wave front, yielding its "impact matrix" (IM) H. The entry H i,j gives the gain between the input pixel indexed i and the output observation point indexed j. The nature of the IM depends on the system under consideration; in the simplest case of a transmission geometry, as in the schematic in Fig. A key aspect about this initiation procedure is that to perform a different operation G one does not require any further measurements, one simply goes through the numerical optimization once again. Once a library of optimized configurations for each wave front segment is identified, an impinging wave front can be shaped such that its subsequent propagation through the complex medium carries out the desired computational task at the speed of wave propagation, as summarized in Fig. Having outlined the general principle of operation, we now proceed with an experimental demonstration that seeks to stress (i) the ease of implementation in contrast to hitherto existing WBAC proposals, and (ii) the wide applicability to all types of waves and random media. The first complex medium that comes to mind is usually a multiply scattering one. In the microwave domain, examples thereof exist, such as cities or forests, but they are highly unpractical for experiments. Instead, cavities of irregular geometry lend themselves to practical, well-controlled and stable setups, and are moreover very commonplace. Indeed, indoor environments constitute cavities of low quality factor for the microwaves used in wireless communication protocols such as Wi-Fi. Their geometries are in general rather irregular, such that these cavities may be labeled "random" or "chaotic" from the wave's perspective. The reflections off the irregular cavity walls interfere and give rise to a speckle-like wave field Despite the conceptual similarity between multiply scattering media and chaotic cavities, there are important nuances that we will discuss here to motivate our subsequent course of action. A convenient way of probing the field in a cavity is to measure the Green's function between two independent positions where ψ n and f n are eigenvector and eigenvalue of the nth cavity mode that contributes to the Green's function at the working frequency f 0 . Γ is the (average) modal line-width. An estimate of the number of modes N overlapping at f 0 , this time accounting for the threedimensional and polarized nature of the field, can be obtained from Weyl's law V and Q being the cavity's volume and quality factor, respectively. In a chaotic cavity, ψ n can be modeled as random variable, such that S(r i , r j , f 0 ) can be interpreted as a random walk of N steps in the complex plane -just as illustrated in Fig. The crucial remaining question is: How can a cavity Green's function be shaped? The concept of WFS in complex media originally emerged in optics By partially altering the cavity's boundary conditions with the tunable metasurface, we have some control over the modal sum in Eq. 1 because we essentially modify the cavity eigenmodes ψ n . The degree of control depends both on the cavity's modal overlap which fixes N (see Eq. 2) and on the amount of metasurface elements, yielding the capability of "effectively" controlling p out of the N modes that contribute to a cavity Green's function at the working frequency Unlike the simple transmission geometries used in Section II to illustrate our WBAC scheme, the physics of a chaotic cavity is richer than captured by a simple, linear transmission formalism. Here, the IM captures the impact of each metasurface reflect-array pixel on a selection of Green's function measurements. Since the reverberating wave revisits each pixel of the WFS device multiple times, the impact of a given pixel on the wave field is correlated to some extent to the configuration of the remaining pixels: H is itself a function of the metasurface reflect-array configuration. A pixel acts not like a single but multiple (secondary) sources, due to reverberation. In principle, the realm of machine learning with artificial neural networks First, we will deliberately measure only a first-order approximation of H that ignores the long-range correlations. That is, we neglect the dependence of a pixel's wave field impact on the configuration of the remaining pixels, yielding a linear forward model. Second, we will numerically identify a library of segment configurations that appropriately tame the wave front for the desired computational operation (see Section III D for the detailed numerical procedure), supposing our first-order IM is exact. Of course, the computation outcomes that we expect based on our approximated IM, Y pred , will not be exactly what we will measure, Y meas , since we did not account for the long-range correlations yet. The effect of the latter on the jth entry of the computation output can be interpreted as a random phasor δ j : Y meas j = Y pred j +δ j . For a given realization, δ j is a deterministic but seemingly arbitrary random complex number that results in an inevitable inaccuracy of our computation outcome Y meas j . A realization may be defined as one instance of the experiment with some specific (irregular) cavity geometry. A different realization will have the same global parameters (cavity volume, quality factor, . . . ) but a different geometry and thus a different random δ j . Therefore, we can exploit the realization-dependence of δ j to average out the intrinsic inaccuracy: δ j realizations = 0, and thus Y meas realizations = Y pred . By ensemble averaging over different realizations we are thus able to mitigate the adverse effects of long-range correlations in the IM. The importance of long-range correlations on the impact of pixel i on the transmission measurement indexed j is defined by two parameters that govern how likely it is that a ray that interacts with pixel i also encounters other pixels during its life-time: (i) the higher Q is, the longer the ray's life-time is and the more pixels other than i it will encounter; (ii) the higher the amount of pixels, the easier it is for the ray to encounter some of the other pixels. It is instructive to think of an IM entry H i,j as consisting of static contributions from rays that only interacted with pixel i and of variable contributions from rays that interacted also with other pixels of the metasurface reflect-array. Ultimately, we average out the effect of the latter such that our approach works as long as the former is non-zero. The impact of a given pixel of the WFS device on the wave field must not completely depend on how the other pixels are configured. An ideal fit in sight of these considerations is thus operating in the regime N > p in an electrically large cavity of (relatively) low Q. Of course, reverberation is crucial to ensure the cavity acts like a random medium; but limiting Q to the order of 10 2 rather than 10 3 or 10 4 addresses (i). Simultaneously, since N will be large under these conditions (see Eq. 2), one can fit a large metasurface with many pixels into the cavity and still respect (ii). One might speculate that as N becomes larger than p, the metasurface completely dominates the wavefield and the static cavity contribution to H i,j vanishes -ultimately, confirming this remains a topic for future work. It is clear, however, that the limiting case of veryhigh-Q, small-volume cavities in the regime N 1 < p with discrete resonances is inappropriate for our scheme In sight of the above considerations, our experimental setup thus consists of an irregularly shaped cavity with (relatively) low quality factor and the ability to access different realizations for ensemble averaging. In order to operate under stable, well-controlled conditions, we work in a metallic cavity of irregular geometry (V = 1.01 × 0.86 × 1.28 m 3 = 1.1 m 3 ). By placing absorbers on its walls, we limit to some extent the reverberation with the previously outlined motivation; the resulting quality factor Q = 179 is comparable to the one we measured in an office room. Given our working frequency f 0 = 2.65 GHz, there are thus N ≈ 106 overlapping modes. Our metasurface consisting of n = 88 elements can effectively control about p ≈ 2 × (n/3) = 59 of these modes (see Section A in Ref. We need as many independent single-frequency transmission measurements as our output vector Y is supposed to have entries. We choose to place antennas at arbitrary positions inside the cavity that are at least half a wavelength apart, which is an obvious option given the wave field's speckle-like nature with a correlation length on the order of half a wavelength; alternatively, one may also use a single pair of antennas and multiple working frequencies that are sufficiently different [63] for the detailed working principle. Electromagnetic absorbers placed on the walls lower the cavity quality factor to Q = 179, comparable to an indoor room. With a vector network analyzer, we measure the transmission between four simple monopole Wi-Fi antennas, mimicking channel state information between an access point and four mobile devices. A mode-stirrer, rotated in steps of 12 • , enables ensemble averaging over realizations of the experiment under different (irregular) cavity geometries. wireless device is exactly what we need: a complex-valued transmission measurement between two points inside the cavity. Modern multi-user telecommunication networks routinely sound channels, for instance using beacon signals, for downlink beamforming Ensemble averaging is easily achieved in our experiment since we can access a new realization either by rotating a mode-stirrer by 12 • (see Fig. Measuring the impact matrix (IM). -The entry H i,j quantifies the impact of the reflect-array element indexed i on the transmission between the pair of antennas indexed j. We measure the IM using the Hadamard rather than the canonical basis, following the procedure used in Ref. One important difference to Ref. Numerical identification of wave front segment configurations. -Given the IM, we numerically identify the reflect-array configurations for each wave front segment that yield the desired tamed walks illustrated in Fig. In the case of perfect phase and amplitude control over each pixel of the WFS device, the equation is easily solved by calculating the pseudo-inverse of [H D,1 , H D,2 , H D,3 , H D,4 ] -provided each wave front segment is assigned a sufficient number of pixels of the WFS device. Indeed, from basic considerations about the singular value decomposition of this stacked matrix it becomes clear that we need to assign at least N idealistic pixels to each wave front segment in order to be able to calculate a meaningful pseudo-inverse First, we define a normalization factor γ between the entries of G and the target amplitudes of the tamed walks. We choose γ = n , where n seg is the number of pixels in a given wave front segment. This choice corresponds to the expected value of the resultant of a random walk of n seg steps of step size |H i,j | i,j . Next, we define a cost function as CF = |γG D,j -H D,j V D | j . CF is thus the distance in the complex plane between an entry of γG, say the entry linking input segment D to observation point j, γG D,j , and the corresponding value of H D,j V D , averaged over all output points j. Starting with a random configuration of V D , we test element by element if flipping its state reduces CF in which case we update V D accordingly. We run 20 loops over all elements. Finally, we repeat the procedure with 250 different random initial V D and select the overall best final V D yielding the lowest CF as entry for the library. Note that this numerical procedure has not been heavily optimized and more efficient schemes could certainly be found Given the peculiarity of our chosen cavity implementation in which the WFS device is essentially inside the propagation medium and its pixels are secondary sources, it is convenient and most meaningful to adopt the WBAC scheme from Fig. In Fig. The dependence of on the number of realizations displayed in Fig. Incidentally, we note that ensemble averaging is also extremely useful in case of very limited wave front control. For instance, in our experiment each of the four wave front segments is made up of only 22 phase-binary pixels. As seen by the purple curve in Fig. The presented results not only constitute a proof-ofprinciple experimental implementation of our proposed scheme for WBAC with a random medium, but allow us moreover to conclude that it takes nothing but standard indoor wireless communication infrastructure and a simple tunable metasurface to perform accurate analog computation with reverberating microwaves. While we could have used any complex-valued matrix for our demonstration, we deliberately selected the (discrete) Fourier transform operation. Besides its key role in all areas of physics and engineering, it also facilitates interesting interpretations of our experimental results. Complex media in conjunction with WFS in optics, or time reversal in acoustics, have repeatedly been described as "opaque lens" or "scattering lens" in the literature Typical concerns with WBAC schemes include questions about the achievable resolution and system size. In the realm of artifical neural networks (ANNs) that constitutes as aforementioned an important potential field of application for WBAC, limited resolution is in fact by no means an insurmountable barrier. The accuracy loss of 8-bit artificial neural networks in comparison with 32-bit computers was shown to be only 0.4% on standard tasks If we were to bluntly apply our previous procedure with the same physical system to a significantly larger computational operation, identifying appropriate configurations for each segment would become doubly more difficult: (i) given the fixed reflect-array size, each wave front segment would consist of even fewer pixels, further reducing the available degrees of freedom; (ii) each segment configuration would have to simultaneously satisfy even more constraints, since there are also more observation points due to the larger size of the output vector Y. Averaging over more realizations could cushion these adverse effects to some extent, but there are more elegant solutions. In the following, we extend our previous experiment with 1-bit input resolution and 4-entry input size to a system with more than 4-bit input resolution and a 16entry input size -using exactly the same physical system. To access a better resolution, we simply perform the numerical optimization step outlined in Section III D for a larger range of values of α. Note that this is only necessary because of the phase-binary only control of our metasurface reflect-array. To access a larger system size, we exploit the extremely low time cost of WBAC. Indeed, since the computation in our cavity implementation is carried out as the stationary wave field is established, the only potentially limiting factors are the field's transient duration and the duration of the measurement itself that is required to read off the computation result. We simply break our computational task down into several smaller ones that fit our physical system's size. For ANNs, rather than processing an input signal such as an image instantaneously, it has already become common practice to feed the input into the system via multiple patches one after the other -even without the benefit of ultrafast computation times as in WBAC [63] for an illustration) that are performed one after the other. This is possible thanks to the reconfigurability of our wave-based analog computation unit -a fundamental advantage of our proposed system over metamaterial computation units fabricated for a single specific task. i (input bit index) In principle, this idea enables the computation of a subset of output entries simultaneously, in the following one at a time, depending on the size of the desired operation and the size of the available physical system. Even if we compute "only" one output entry at a time, the random medium still plays a crucial role in mixing all the tamed contributions from the different input segments to that single output observation point; the numerical optimization of wave front segment configurations during the one-off initiation step of our WBAC scheme is still more demanding than a simple focusing experiment, since we still need to accurately mimic one entire row of G. In other words, we still need to accurately tame as many random walks as there are input entries, rather than only aligning the steps of a single walk. We present in Fig. Note that the presented multiplexing in time could in principle also be implemented in space with N identical WBAC units. This might be of interest for optical hardware accelerators to circumvent a potential upper limit on computation power per system (limited degrees of freedom in complex medium, limited number of pixels on the WFS device) to maintain the ultrafast computation time. WBAC also offers further exciting opportunities for parallelization of computational tasks. One can for instance imagine to operate our scheme at two or more clearly distinct working frequencies within the same cavity equipped with one metasuraces per working frequency, each metasurface operating within a narrow band around its corresponding working frequency. At a given working frequencies, the other metasurfaces not operating at that working frequencies would simply act like a metal wall without any modulating effect. Practical, stable and efficient cavity implementation. -The size of the discussed cavity implementation can conveniently be scaled down by operating at a higher frequency. For example, operating in the K-band around 20 GHz would reduce the volume of the previous experiment by a factor of 10 -3 , yielding cavity dimensions that can potentially even be integrated into data center racks. Mode-stirring can conveniently be performed in an allelectronic manner, by adding more metasurface pixels dedicated to mode-stirring; putting these pixels into different random configurations yields different realizations Speed. -The fundamental advantage in operation speed over traditional processors originates from the fact that a WBAC unit performs a task in one go that requires many consecutive operations on a digital computer. For instance, an N × N matrix multiplication that we perform in a single run requires in general O(N 2 ) digital operations. Traditional computers, having clock rates on the order of one GHz, can perform ∼ 10 9 operations per second. In our cavity scheme, the limiting factor is the time it takes for the wave field to reach equilibrium, on the order of τ ∼ 1/∆f corr ∼ 5 ns for the K-band version, since measurements even at GHz rates are possible with standard technology -aided by the low-noise nature of the shielded cavity. Accounting for the need for ensemble averaging, we think one entire computation can be performed on the order of 1 μs. The actual averaging over realizations could be performed directly on the detector, similarly to a camera that integrates the incident light over desired time intervals. Subtracting the constant cavity contribution U j from each observation point, given prior calibration, could probably be integrated into the measurement process, too, but in any case this is only of O(N ) complexity. Thus, we expect to be able to perform the equivalent of N 2 × 10 6 digital operations per second. Clearly, the larger N gets the higher is the advantage of the WBAC scheme. The break-even is expected for operation sizes on the order of N ∼ 30. Energy efficiency. -A traditional computer uses at least 100 pJ per operation Perspectives in optics. -An optical implementation of our scheme in a transmission geometry as in Fig. We have demonstrated experimentally that any random medium can be employed as reconfigurable wavebased analog computation unit, subject to appropriate wave front shaping. Our proposal removes the hitherto crux of implementing wave-based analog computation in practice: the need for intricate metamaterial designs that are difficult (if not impossible so far) to fabricate. Moreover, our unit is reconfigurable to perform a different operation, without any additional calibration measurements. Our experimental demonstration leveraging infrastructure analogous to standard wireless indoor communication systems illustrates the applicability of our principle to all types of wave phenomena and random media, as well as the ease of practical implementation. Our scheme's practicality and reconfigurability may play important roles in the renaissance of specificpurpose computation, heralded in particular by the rapidly expanding utilization of artificial neural networks, demanding high-speed low-power processing of big data. Reconfigurability of artificial neural networks is key to enable transfer learning as well as to correct errors of previous training phases For the interested reader, here we provide numerous additional details that complement the manuscript and provide further illustrations. This document is organized as follows: A Quality Factor and Correlation Frequency. -Our metallic cavity's geometry is clearly irregular due to a few irregularly shaped metallic objects glued to the walls as well as the presence of the large mode-stirrer (see Fig. Tunable Metasurface Reflect-Array. -The metasurface reflect-array consists of n = 88 functional elements (8 of its 96 elements are broken) whose design is essentially the one presented in Ref. The impact matrix (IM) formalism links the vector V describing the configuration of the reflect-array elements to the measured transmissions Y via Y = HV To visualize the long-range correlations, we measure H i,j in our experiment for a given realization with different configurations of the reflect-array elements other than i. For notational ease, let H had i,j be the IM entry measured in the Hadamard basis, as outlined in Section III.D of the main text. To now obtain many measurements of H i,j , we work in the usual, canonical basis. We define V + and V -as being equal to the same random phase-binary configuration V, except for the ith entry that is fixed to be +1 or -1 for V + and V -, respectively. By measuring the corresponding transmissions Y + and Y -, we can obtain an estimate of H i,j as follows: H can i,j = (Y + j -Y - j )/2. We repeat this 160 times with different random vectors V, yielding 160 estimates of H can i,j . From those, we can further define an average over the 160 estimates: H av i,j = H can i,j . In Fig. Finally, we note that in Ref. we want some value in the upper right (element configuration r = +1) or lower left (element configuration r = -1) quadrant to maximize the length of the resultant. In the present work, the optimization constraints are significantly more challenging to satisfy: a specific amplitude and phase has to be achieved with the tamed walk, simultaneously at several observation points. In Fig. In this section, we first visually illustrate the principle of sequential WBAC explained in the main text. Then, we provide the 16 × 16 complex-valued discrete Fourier transform operation G that we implemented, corresponding to Fig. Here, we provide a visualization of how we can achieve a much bigger effective computation unit than our fixedsize physical system. Consider the general matrix formalism for an operation G as shown in Fig. Since in the time-sequential scheme the resultants of the complex walks (see Fig. where is the zth root of unity and we have z = Z = 16. The magnitudes of all entries of G are unity, their phases are illustrated in Fig. In Fig. For our cavity implementation, three factors potentially dominating the energy consumption come to mind: (i) generating the wave field, (ii) controlling the metasurface configuration with a micro-controller, and (iii) the feeding circuit for the tunable elements in the metasurface. Given the fantastic signal-to-noise ratio in the shielded cavity, low-power operation with emission of the continuous wave at -20 dB or lower is certainly realistic, implying that less than 10 μW are consumed for (i). The micro-controllers do not consume more than a few mW per hundreds of channels For reference and clarity's sake, we summarize the notation used throughout our main text and this supple-mental material to denote matrices, vectors and numbers, and to refer to specific entries. • Matrices are typed in bold, non-italic face, e.g. H, G. • Vectors are typed in non-italic face, e.g. X, Y, V. • Single numbers are typed in italic face, e.g. α, γ. To refer to a specific vector entry, the subscript will provide the relevant index information, e.g. Y j is the jth entry of vector Y. To refer to a specific matrix entry, the subscript will provide row and column information separated by a comma, e.g. H i,j is the entry in the ith row and jth column of H (and hence a single number). To refer to multiple specific entries of a vector, the subscript will provide the relevant index information, e.g. V D are the entries of vector V that form part of the group of WFS device pixels labeled D. Note that V D is itself a vector, hence it is typed in non-italic face. To refer to multiple specific entries of a matrix, the subscript will provide the relevant information, e.g. H D,j are the entries found in the rows forming part of group D and column j. Note that H D,j is itself a vector, hence it is typed in non-italic face. G j,: refers to the entire jth row of G. A subscript following . . . indicates the quantity over which the average is taken, e.g. Y random V denotes the average of Y over different random V. Further information about a variable may be included in a superscript, e.g. Y meas ,Y pred and Y exact refer to the measurement, prediction and exact value of Y, respectively. Moreover, we use Y D j to denote the contribution from segment D to Y j . The input vector X is indicated for each example.