We study the non-linear response of a 2+1 dimensional holographic model with weak momentum relaxation and finite charge density to an oscillatory electric field pump pulse. Following the time evolution of one point functions after the pumping has ended, we find that deviations from thermality are well captured within the linear response theory. For electric pulses with a negligible zero frequency component the response approaches the instantaneously thermalizing form typical of holographic Vaidya models. We link this to the suppression of the amplitude of the quasinormal mode that governs the approach to equilibrium. In the large frequency limit, we are also able to show analytically that the holographic geometry takes the Vaidya form. A simple toy model captures these features of our holographic setup. Computing the out-of-equilibrium probe optical conductivity after the pump pulse, we similarly find that for high-frequency pulses the optical conductivity reaches its final equilibrium value effectively instantaneously. Pulses with significant DC components show exponential relaxation governed by twice the frequency of the vector quasinormal mode that governs the approach to equilibrium for the background solution. We explain this numerical factor in terms of a simple symmetry argument. The gauge/gravity duality applied within the context of strongly correlated many-body quantum systems started out as an interesting, yet limited, source of intuition on some properties of quantum critical matter. In the past decade, it has evolved into a powerful framework capable of taking into account a number of phenomenological aspects that should not be neglected when dealing with realistic models, such as crystal lattices, disorder, nonrelativistic dispersion relations, etc. An important advantage of the holographic approach is its capacity of describing within a unique framework both equilibrium and out-of-equilibrium quantum systems by mapping them to tractable problems in general relativity, which can be systematically analyzed in real time without any need for conceptually new approaches. In the past, most of the attention towards far-from-equilibrium situations in this framework has gone to the formation of quark gluon plasmas in heavy ion collisions. Holographic models relevant for this process incorporating a number of realistic features have been suggested and explored, with interesting results in relation with experiments Our starting point is the minimal model considered in In contrast with the zero density case where, both with We study the resulting non-linear bulk dynamics with numerical methods and follow the evolution of the boundary one point functions as ω P is varied. Although we work in the non-linear regime, we find that deviations from thermality after the pump pulse ends are surprisingly well captured within the linear response theory and their decay controlled by quasinormal modes (QNMs). In particular, at zero frequency the purely imaginary longest lived QNM of the vector sector governs the decay toward the new equilibrium configuration. From the bulk point of view the origin of this dynamics can be understood from an analysis of QNM amplitudes. As we show explicitly, the amplitude of each QNM contribution is determined by the Fourier transform of the electric pump pulse evaluated at the frequency of the mode in question. The almost instantaneous approach to thermality at large frequencies is then explained by the absence of overlap between the pump spectrum and the frequency of long lived modes. A very simple toy model realized in terms of a driven harmonic oscillator effectively captures the main features of the bulk solution. With the numerical background in hand we then proceed to compute the main observable of interest for a pump-probe experiment, the probe optical conductivity after the quench. In the same way as in a pump-probe experiment, we consider the optical response of the holographic strange metal to a probe pulse that is applied only after the pump has ended. This is incorporated in the definition of out-of-equilibrium conductivity we adopt. Similarly to what happens for the background solution, the conductivity thermalizes almost instantaneously whenever the pump pulse has a negligible DC component. This behavior, although surprising from the boundary point of view, is completely natural with the insight provided by the analysis of the bulk background solution: If the geometry is described by a Vaidya solution, by causality in the bulk, the response to any perturbation applied after the light-like Vaidya shell will be insensitive to any detail of the quench other than the final equilibrium configuration. On the other hand, we find that for pump pulses with a DC component the optical conductivity relaxes with a rate set by twice the lowest vector QNM frequency. The appearance of this QNM, which governs momentum relaxation, can be understood from the fact that the zero frequency component in the pulse corresponds to a static electric field, which accelerates the finite density system. When the pulse is over, the resulting finite momentum has to relax in order to reach equilibrium. To explain the factor of two, which is less intuitive from a boundary point of view, we provide a careful but general analysis of linearized bulk fluctuations relying on the symmetries of the final equilibrium configuration. A brief summary of our main results appeared before in of the size of non-thermality from a linear response analysis, and the explanation based on symmetry of the appearance of twice the lowest vector QNM frequency. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we define the bulk model of a strange metal with momentum dissipation and briefly review its equilibrium properties. In Sec. 3, details of the used numerical techniques are outlined. In Sec. 4, we provide the non-equilibrium background solution computed numerically and discuss the behavior of the corresponding boundary one point functions. In Sec. 5, we introduce a toy model of a rapidly driven oscillator, which captures some of the important features of our holographic model and makes the phenomenological picture more transparent. Sec. 6 contains the main physical result of the paper, the time-dependent AC conductivity. Finally, in Sec. 7 we conclude with a general discussion of our results, including prospects and challenges for comparison with experiment. The model we want to consider is specified by the action with Λ = -3 and equations of motion This admits a homogeneous and isotropic charged black brane configuration with nontrivial scalar fields profiles and translationally invariant geometry and gauge field The dual field theory state is a thermal state with finite charge density and with translational symmetry breaking, whose properties can be fully specified in terms of T, ρ and k. The chemical potential μ is determined in terms of the charge density ρ by requiring the regularity condition that A should vanish at the horizon of the black brane, leading to μ = ρz 0 , with z 0 being the horizon location where f (z 0 ) = 0. The location of the horizon z 0 is associated with the temperature T of the field theory state through which gives the Hawking temperature of the black brane geometry. Notice that for fixed k, μ and z 0 , the mass parameter m appearing in the gravitational solution is not an independent quantity. It is fixed by the condition f (z 0 ) = 0 and is directly related to the energy density of the dual equilibrium state and the isotropic pressure Finally, the entropy density of this configuration is (2.8) The reason why such a holographic solution with a completely homogeneous and isotropic geometry can be used to effectively describe momentum dissipation can be grasped from the Ward identities Following the standard AdS/CFT dictionary, the operators O I are dual to the bulk scalars and the couplings φ I are directly related to the asymptotic values of the bulk scalar profiles, that is φ I = kx i δ i,I in our case. Similarly the U (1) current J μ is dual to the AdS gauge field A μ and the boundary field strength F νμ is determined in terms of the asymptotic value of A μ . Let us first notice that (2.10) implies that the charge density ρ = J t is conserved. From (2.9) instead it follows that spatial momenta T ti will generically not be conserved whenever on the r.h.s. one has non-vanishing vevs. The coupling between the scalar and the gauge field in the bulk is such that the boundary electric field E i = F it induces a non-zero expectation value for O I , and thus Before concluding this section, let us quickly review the holographic result for the equilibrium optical conductivity computed in this model x . To compute it holographically one can consider the minimal consistent set of "vector" bulk fluctuations ) around the equilibrium background (2.3 -2.4), and use the relation between the AdS asymptotic modes of δA x and the boundary quantities The computation of the optical conductivity therefore amounts to solving the following system of linearized equations for the fluctuations (2.12) subject to appropriate asymptotically AdS boundary condition for the metric, non-vanishing source for the gauge field, and vanishing source for the scalar fluctuation. Away from the zero-frequency limit these equations can be solved numerically, and one finds that for small enough values of k as compared to the other parameters of the equilibrium solution the resulting optical conductivity has the low frequency Drude form The relaxation rate τ Q associated to the Drude peak corresponds to the purely imaginary frequency of the lowest lying quasinormal mode of the bulk vector preturbations. In the small k regime we will be interested in, this has been obtained analytically in (2.17 Im(σ) To study the response of the model of the previous section to the boundary electric field, we go to ingoing Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates and, following φ 2 = ky . We solve the resulting system imposing appropriate asymptotically AdS boundary conditions under the assumption that for early enough times, when the pulse E x (v) has not been turned on yet, the solution coincides with the equilibrium configuration of Sec. 2. By now, there are standard methods for solving such numerical relativity systems (see e.g. With this notation, the equations of motion become ) ) ) Notice that we are denoting, for example, Φ = ∂ z ( Φ), i.e., the dot derivatives are taken before the z derivatives. The above set of equations represents a convenient set of nonredundant equations that can be obtained from all the non identically vanishing equations of motion following from our ansatz. More precisely, the first three equations correspond to the E zz and E zx components of Einstein's equations and to the M v component of Maxwell's equations respectively. The fourth equation is given by E zv once E zz is used to eliminate Σ . The fifth equation is given by the linear combination e 2B E xx + E yy . The remaining three equations are respectively the M x component of Maxwell's equation, the E xx component of Einstein's equations and the equation for the scalar field φ 1 . The strategy for numerically solving the equations from the specified initial and boundary conditions proceeds iteratively as follows. The fields (B, Φ, a x ) represents the free initial data. All the other fields can then be solved from the equations of motion on a constant time slice. In more detail, after specifying the initial data at a given lightcone time, we solve (3.4) for the field Σ. This is a non-linear ordinary differential equation as no time derivatives appear. Next, equations (3.5) and (3.6) provide two coupled linear ordinary differential equations for F x and a v . Given Σ, F x and a v on the fixed time slice, one can proceed similarly to solve for the dotted fields. First we can solve (3.7) for Σ. Then, we can solve the two coupled linear differential equations (3.8) and (3.9) for Ḃ and ȧx and, subsequently, the linear ordinary differential equation (3.10) for Φ. Finally, via the linear ordinary differential equation Knowing their time derivative at a given time, we can time-evolve (B, Φ, a x ) to the next time step and we can repeat the above procedure to solve for all the fields on that time step. This way we can iterate the algorithm to the time we want. To solve the equations (3.4 -3.11), we use the Chebyshev spectral method and introduce a Chebyshev grid z i in the z-direction. This way fields are replaced by vectors, X(z) → X i = X(z i ), derivative operators become matrices acting on the vectors and the differential equations translate into sets of coupled equations for the different field components X i . More precisely, the equation for Σ is non-linear and becomes a set of non-linear coupled algebraic equations for the coefficients Σ i , which we can collectively denote by The index j counts the number of components in the equation, which is the same as the number of variables Σ i . We solve this set of non-linear equations using the Newton-Raphson method. This method finds an approximate solution to f j = 0 as follows. First we start from a guess solution Σ i . Then, use the updating routine Σ (1) where J is a Jacobian matrix Now Σ (1) should provide a vector which is closer to the solution of f j = 0 than our original guess. Repeating the algorithm by taking Σ (1) as a new guess and using (3.16), we again get closer to the correct solution. Iterating this algorithm many times, one should converge to the solution of f j = 0. In practice the number of iterations needed depends on how good the initial guess was. In our numerical algorithm we use the solution from the previous time step as the initial guess. This way we only need a few (typically 3) iterations to solve the equation of motion to the desired accuracy (around 10 -13 accuracy). The rest of the equations (3.5 -3.11) are all linear in the unknown variables and can be straightforwardly solved by standard matrix inversion methods. We have used the numpy.linalg.solve and numpy.linalg.inv functions, which are included in the Python Numpy package and are based on the LAPACK library. At the practical level, when solving The functions F x , a x , a v are left intact. Note that in these redefinitions, Φr is not the dot derivative acting on Φ r , but a new variable defined through the equation in In addition to To evolve (B, Φ, a x ) we use the fourth order explicit Runge-Kutta method. The time domain is divided in discrete time-steps v n and the value of a field at step n + 1, X(v n+1 ), is obtained as the value at step X(v n ), plus the weighted average of four different time increments determined in terms of Using this algorithm, we can solve the full numerical problem modelling the pump probe experiment. In practice we have found it computationally faster to separate the problem of determining the probe conductivity as a separate problem. Thus, we use the above algorithm to solve for the spacetime corresponding to the system subject to the pump electric field. To obtain the probe conductivity, we linearize the equations of motion around the numerically known background spacetime and solve them using a similar numerical procedure as above. The main advantage of this procedure is that when solving the linearized equations of motion, we do not need to use the Newton-Raphson method, but all the equations are solved using linear algebra, which is faster. This becomes particularly useful when we consider several probe "experiments" for the same pump pulse. We have checked the numerical accuracy of solving the linearized system by comparing the results to those obtained using the (slower) full code for both pump and probe parts. Further checks are provided by testing the system on the equilibrium states, in particular by comparing the numerically obtained conductivity with the analytic formula for the DC conductivity. These agree to a very good accuracy (in the cases we have tested they agree up to 10 -7 % accuracy). There are two sources for the numerical error in our procedure. The first one arises from discretizing the z coordinate, and the second one arises from discretizing the time coordinate. As a measure of the numerical error we use the remaining three redundant equations of motion. For an exact solution, these equations would be automatically solved. Denoting the equations as Eq i = 0 where i = 1, 2, 3, we consider the following quantity We evaluate the equations on the spacetime grid using fourth order finite differences for approximating time derivatives and then find the maximum value of |Eq i | within the grid. Finally we take the root mean square of the maximum error of the three equations. This error measure is displayed in Fig. From this error measure, we find that the numerical error approximately first decays as Err ∝ N -4 t as N t is increased and then saturates to a constant value. This is expected as there is a remaining error due to finite number of spatial lattice sites N z . Increasing this number then decreases the saturated value approximately exponentially. Thus, as both N t and N z are increased the error is found to decrease rapidly, which gives strong evidence that the numerical calculation is converging towards a solution of the continuum equations of motion. Figure with the choice of parameters: A = 0.5, t 0 = 3, ∆t P = 1, ω P = π/2, ρ = 0.5, k = 1.0, m I = 0.5, where m I is the initial mass of the black hole. Here we have chosen a shorter pulse to keep the computational time shorter. The spatial size of the computational domain is z ∈ [0, 1] while the timelike size is v ∈ [0, 10]. timelike computational domain has to be large in order to get a reliable Fourier transform of the differential conductivity, without finite size effects. For example for a computational domain of length of order 10 3 we use N t of the order 10 6 . This results in a computational time of the order of tens of hours on a laptop. To model the process of applying the pump electric field, we start from an initial state corresponding to an equilibrium black brane dual to a state at a given temperature T I . The time dependent pump electric field then takes the system out of equilibrium to a configuration captured by the ansatz (3.1) to finally reach a new equilibrium configuration at a different temperature T F . Throughout this process we keep k fixed and ρ is conserved, as guaranteed by Ward's identities. In more detail, the starting equilibrium configuration in terms of the regularized fields defined in (3.18) corresponds to setting and all the other regularized fields in This represents a Gaussian wavepacket with central frequency ω P and width ∆t, centered at t 0 and cut off by a smoothed step function at t end ≡ t 0 + 3∆t (from which time onwards we consider the pumping to have finished). Throughout this section, we choose the parameters t 0 = 50, ∆t = 15 and δ = 0.01. The pulse amplitude A is instead tuned in order to obtain the desired increase in temperature. At the time of the pulse, the metric functions start time-evolving, exciting all the rescaled fields defined in and again all other rescaled fields vanishing. The final mass parameter of the black hole will increase throughout the process, m F > m I , consistently with the fact that energy has been pumped into the system. As an example, Fig. To obtain boundary theory expectation values from the bulk solution, one has to perform the corresponding holographic renormalization procedure where the different bulk function appearing on the r.h.s. are all evaluated at the AdS boundary z → 0. We start by considering the particular case where the pump field is not oscillating, ω P = 0. Fig. where ω * = -iω i is the, purely imaginary, lowest quasinormal mode in the vector channel. It is important to note that the pressure anisotropy is decaying with double the rate of the other expectation values. We are able to provide an explanation for this, working under the reasonable assumption -supported by the numerical calculations -that the deviations from thermality are sufficiently small at late times, so that the equations of motion can be expanded in powers of the deviations. For this, consider an expansion around the final thermal black brane configuration B = δB with f (z) being the equilibrium metric function defined in (2.4) and δX indicating fluctuations. At the linear level in the deviations, the equations of motion decouple into two sets. One set describes the vector fluctuations The other set describes tensor fluctuations (also often called scalar fluctuations). Imposing AdS boundary and initial conditions, on finds that δΣ, δa v and δF z vanish, after which the remaining tensor fluctuation δB is governed by At late times, the vector fluctuations decay with a rate set by the lowest vector quasinormal mode. At linear order, the δB field is decoupled from the vector fluctuations and therefore remains zero. If we go to quadratic order in the fluctuations, however, the two sectors are no longer decoupled. In particular, the B field equation of motion is now sourced by terms quadratic in the vector sector fields δΦ, δa x and δF x . Setting the linearized tensor fluctuations to zero and indicating with δδB the quadratic fluctuation for B, from the linear combination of Einstein's equations E xx -E yy one gets (4.9) From this we can argue that the decay rate of the source term sets the decay rate of the B field, which is thus twice the decay rate of the vector perturbations. That is, twice the imaginary part of the lowest vector quasinormal mode. This explains the factor of two in the decay rate we see from the numerics in Fig. So far we have studied the case of an approximately Gaussian pump electric field (4.2) with a vanishing mean frequency ω P = 0. This has reproduced the by now standard story that the late time relaxation of the black brane solution is dominated by the lowest quasinormal mode that gets excited. A slight subtlety was that some of the metric components relax with a rate given by twice the lowest quasinormal mode from a different sector. Next, we will study how this picture changes as we increase the mean frequency of the pump pulse. In Fig. These observations suggest that the spacetime could be approximated with the Vaidya spacetime, with an appropriately chosen time dependent mass function, at large enough ω P . In the rest of this section we provide evidence in support of this claim. First we will show that working in the limit of a large pulse frequency the leading order solution is exactly of the Vaidya form. We obtain this result working analytically in the large frequency expansion. Next, we analyze the amplitude associated to the quasinormal mode decay described above to show how this is determined by the relation between the power spectrum of the pump pulse and the quasinormal mode frequency. In the regime where the pump frequency is very large compared to the other parameters of the gravitational background the bulk solution can be studied analytically. 3 We assume the electric field is of the simple oscillating form where the enveloping function Ω(t) is assumed to have compact support and slow variation compared to the cosine. Using the knowledge obtained from the numerical solution and inspecting the equations of motions, we formulate an ansatz for the 1/ω P expansion of each field and for the type of time dependence (rapidly or slowly varying) for each term in the expansion, and proceed to solve the resulting system of equations order by order. The details of the analysis are reported in Appendix A. For the different fields and metric components, the leading correction to the unperturbed solution induced by the rapidly varying source E x takes the form At leading order in the frequency expansion only F z gets corrected by 4 (4.12) 3 A related but distinct situation where an analytical treatment is also possible and the resulting geometry takes the Vaidya form was considered in This directly shows that the response to the rapidly oscillating electric field takes at leading order the Vaidya spacetime form with the mass function M (v) given by the background m value plus the contribution coming from The first correction to the Vaidya form of the geometry comes from the F x component of the metric at order 1/ω P In the limiting approximation where one can treat the function Ω(t) as a constant under the integral, we would simply have F x ≈ ρz sin(ω P v)Ω(v)/(3ω P ). Notice however that in our case for those times v where E x (v) has no support, that is times where the pump pulse has been turned off, the suppression of this correction is even stronger. In fact, with a choice of E x (v) of the form (4.10) and for Ω any smooth function, F x is suppressed more strongly than any inverse power of ω P , as follows from basic Fourier analysis. At order 1/ω 2 P also Φ and a x get their leading contribution from the pulse, which we report here for comparison with the result obtained from the numerics ) while the order 1/ω 3 P gives the leading corrections to the background values of a v and B In Fig. These are plotted in Fig. In this subsection, we estimate the size of the quasinormal mode contributions to the one point functions (and thus, to the gravitational background solution) from linear response theory. That is, we assume that the electric field E x is small and we evaluate at linearized level its effect on one point functions. This assumption is clearly not a priori valid for our setup, but the final result we obtain this way is surprisingly close to the exact numerical results. Linear response theory tells us that the leading contribution to the expectation value of an operator χ(t) due to the presence of an external electric field is given by where The expectation value is taken in the final equilibrium thermal state, and in writing (4. The retarded correlator can be expanded at late times (i.e. large |t -t |) in terms of quasinormal modes where ω n are the quasinormal modes frequencies shared by the correlators of the vector sector operators and g n are the residues of the quasinormal mode poles in the Fourier transformed correlator. In the situation we are interested in, A x vanishes after the pulse is turned off. For late enough times t compared to the time where the source has been turned off, we can reliably substitute the quasinormal mode expansion inside the integral (4.26) Thus, χ(t) decays at late times with a rate set by the quasinormal modes and an amplitude set by the integral involving A x . When t is large enough to be outside the support of A x , the time integral with upper limit is formally equal to the integral over the entire temporal domain. Integrating by parts we can express this in terms of the electric field which gives for the linear response of the operator χ at late enough times where the electric pump field has been turned off The blue curve is a fit to the functional form (4.27) with a single fitting parameter (the overall scale). The root-mean-square error of the fit is RM SE ≈ 0.0036. Right: Different point functions evaluated at t = t end plotted as functions of the Fourier transformed electric field In Fig. For the vector sector operators, the relation is approximately linear while for (T xx -T yy ) the relation is approximately quadratic. The quadratic approximation appears for the same reason as the factor of two in the decay of (T xx -T yy ) , as the corresponding field is sourced by the squares of the vector sector fields. As we will show in this section, two signatures in the evolution of our holographic setup can be captured and explained by a simple toy model given in terms of a driven damped harmonic oscillator. These are the instantaneous relaxation at large driving frequency ω P → ∞ and the smallness of the quasinormal mode contributions when ω P is separated from the real parts of the quasinormal mode frequencies. The equation of motion of the driven oscillator is given by ẍ where ω 0 is the undamped oscillation frequency and κ the damping strength. We will choose the driving force to have the form where Ω(t) varies much more slowly than the cosine. Without a driving force, displacements of x decay back to zero exponentially in time as where (5.4) These complex frequencies represent the analogue of the quasinormal mode frequencies in our system. The driven system (5.1) is solved explicitly as where the time dependent amplitudes associated to each mode are dt e iω ± t f (t ) . (5.6) In writing the solution we have assumed that x(t) vanishes at early times before the driving force has been turned on. Let us consider the large ω P limit of the solution. The basic intuition is that in this case x(t) oscillates fast in which case the equation of motion can be approximated as ẍ(t) ≈ f (t), with the approximate solution x(t) ≈ -cos(ω P t)Ω(t)/ω 2 P . We can see this from the exact solution using integration by parts twice, Substituting into (5.5), we arrive at (5.8) Thus, we see that the oscillator follows the driving force instantaneously and, in particular, it relaxes instantaneously as the force vanishes. This behavior is similar to the instantaneous thermalization of Vaidya spacetimes where one point functions relax to their thermal values as soon as the boundary source turns off. Notice also that the series expansion in 1/ω P can be computed to arbitrary orders by repeatedly integrating by parts. This way the instantaneous behavior is seen to hold to all orders in the 1/ω P expansion. The next question we want to address is that what happened to the quasinormal mode contributions and whether a large ω P is a necessary condition to have instantaneous thermalization. At late times, that is for times after the driving function has been turned off, it is apparent that the solution written in the form (5.5) takes the "quasinormal mode" decay form (5.3). In fact, A ± (t) become time independent as long as one considers values of t where the driving force has been turned off, and therefore at late times give the amplitude associated to the quasinormal modes. For concreteness, let us assume that Ω(t) has support on a compact region so that the driving function is turned off after some time t end . For all those times t > t end where the driving force has been turned off, one can formally replace the integrals in (5.6) with integrals over the entire time range, that is where we denote the Fourier transforms as For any smooth choice of Ω(t), the coefficients Ω of the quasinormal modes will be suppressed more strongly than any inverse power of the arguments ω ± ± ω P . To build some more explicit intuition, we can specialize to an example close to our holographic calculation by choosing a Gaussian envelope Strictly speaking with this choice the forcing pulse is never turned off. However, for all practical purposes, at large enough times compared to the Gaussian width we can consider the driving force to be vanishing. With this choice, the amplitudes of QNMs take the form Notice that, modulo a factor 2ν, these are nothing else than the Fourier transform of the driving force (5.13) evaluated at the QNM frequencies p = ω ± . This shows explicitly how the amplitudes associated to QNMs depend on the overlap between the spectrum of the driving force and the real part of the QNM frequencies: If the driving frequency ω P coincides with the real part of a QNM frequency there will be no Gaussian suppression of the amplitude of the corresponding mode. Conversely, for Re(ω ± ± ω P ) = 0 the QNM amplitude is exponentially suppressed in the square of this combination. Let us further specialize to the over-damped case, where κ > 2m. This exactly mimics our holographic setup in the fact that the relevant QNM frequencies are purely imaginary. Since ω ± have no real part, the amplitudes of the QNM excitations are exponentially suppressed in ω P as e -ω 2 P ∆t 2 4 . (5.14) Thus, for large ω P ∆t the quasinormal mode contributions are very strongly suppressed. Next, we want to study the conductivity properties of the non-equilibrium states we have prepared with a pump pulse. For this purpose one introduces a smaller "probe" electric field δE x (t). This electric field induces a change in the current δ J x (t) . This way we can define a real-time conductivity called differential conductivity σ(t, t ) through the relation Although there is no standard definition of frequency space conductivity out of equilibrium, we will follow where t m is the time at which the experiment ends. The conductivity defined this way can be related to the current two point function as discussed in Appendix B. In thermal equilibrium, the conductivity (6.2) approaches the standard definition of optical conductivity at frequency ω, and spatial momentum k = 0 as the observation time t m is sent to infinity. This is also shown in Appendix B. In practice we calculate the conductivity in two steps. First, we calculate the differential conductivity appearing in (6.1), and then perform a Fourier transform to obtain (6.2). By choosing a probe field δE x (t) = δ(t -t 0 ), (6.1) becomes This way we obtain the differential conductivity directly from the knowledge of δ J x (t) . In the numerical implementation, we actually use a smoothed version of a delta function, which we choose to be a Gaussian In the limit δt → 0, this approaches a delta function, while in practice we keep δt nonvanishing but small enough that it does not affect our results considerably. Smoothing out the delta function over a small scale δt affects the conductivity at frequencies ω ∝ 1/δt and larger, while the main interesting time-dependence in the conductivity is seen for frequency ω = O(1). In our analysis, we have taken δt = 0.05, which has only small (order 1%) effect on the conductivity in the regime of interest. First, we consider the pump pulse profile (4.2) with different values of the pump frequency ω P . Fig. Fig. approaches a static black hole with a rate set by the lowest quasinormal mode. Thus, we might expect that the conductivity approaches its final thermalized value with the same rate. This is where we find a slightly surprising result. The conductivity approaches its thermalized value with a rate 2Im(ω * ). We will come back to this factor of two in the next subsection. Thus, the DC conductivity is consistent with the approximate form where σ th DC is the final thermalized value of the DC conductivity. The coefficient C quantifies how far out of equilibrium the conductivity gets. Defining with the approximate form (6.6) we have δσ DC = -C. In Fig. with a constant coefficient γ ≈ -0.0798. Finally we study how the deviation from thermality behaves as we change the difference between the initial and final temperatures. We have chosen to keep the final temperature T f fixed and to vary the difference ∆T = T f -T i by changing the initial temperature T i . A plot of δσ DC as a function of ∆T is shown in Fig. We have given numerical evidence that the conductivity thermalizes with a rate e -2iω * t where ω * is the lowest vector quasinormal mode. The conductivity deviates from thermality simply because the background spacetime deviates from a static black hole. Thus, it is not surprising that the thermalization time scale of the conductivity is related to that of the background spacetime. What is somewhat surprising instead is the factor of 2 relating the two rates. Here we provide a symmetry argument for it. Let us start considering the symmetries of the bulk action (2.1) of the holographic model we are studying. These include the subgroup SO(2) × SO The equilibrium solution, and more specifically the scalar field configuration (2.3) explicitly breaks this symmetry as SO(2) × SO(2) → SO(2) res , with the residual SO(2) being the subgroup that leaves the scalar field configuration invariant, that is the residual SO( As we described, at sufficiently late times the spacetime is close to thermal equilibrium and one can to a good approximation expand the equations of motion in perturbations around the equilibrium spacetime. At the linearized level the three type of perturbations completely decouple from each other. This can be immediately understood by thinking about the equation of motions in terms of the SO(2) res symmetry. In general, the linearized equations for the fluctuations can be schematically written as V S δS + L (1) V T δT = 0, (6.12) L T S δS + L V S δS + L T T δT = 0. Here δS, δV, δT collectively indicate fluctuations belonging the scalar, vector and traceless tensor sector respectively. L XY indicates operator constructed from the equilibrium solution and derivative operators, which acting on linearized fluctuations establish a map from the sector Y to the sector X. Since we only consider spatially homogeneous background fields and fluctuations, if follows that the operators L effectively do not contain any derivative operator in the boundary spatial coordinates -or rather these have a trivial effect. This, together with the fact that the equilibrium solution completely belongs to the singlet representation of SO(2) res , implies that the operators L V V δV = 0, L T T δT = 0 , ( as we explicitly discussed in Sec. 4.1. To linearized level the only non-vanishing perturbations we considered were the vector fluctuations, which decayed towards equilibrium with a rate q = e -iω * t set by the lowest vector quasinormal mode ω * . Working at the quadratic level in the fluctuations, the equations of motion can now be written according to the structure given by SO(2) res in the form L T S δδS + L V S δδS + L T T δδT = J T . Now δδX indicates quadratic fluctuations and, in a similar way as above, L XY indicates an operator constructed from the equilibrium solution and derivative operators. The sources J X collect terms that are quadratic in the linearized fluctuations δS, δV, δT . Using the same symmetry argument as above, together with the fact the we only have vectorial perturbations at the linear order, we can conclude that the equations for the quadratic fluctuations relevant to our case take the form V V δδV = 0, L T T δδT = J T . (6.15) Again, this consistently reproduces what we observed in Sec. 4.1. In particular, as the leading excitations of the scalar and tensor sector are sourced by expressions that are quadratic in δV ∝ q, we have that δδS, δδT ∝ δV 2 ∝ q 2 . All in all, this analysis teaches us that the non-equilibrium solution written in a perturbative expansion has the schematic structure Background ≈ S + δV + δδS + δδT + O(q 3 ) , (6.16) with S ∝ q 0 indicating the equilibrium, scalar sector, solution. Given this, we can proceed to analyze the linearized perturbations that compute the optical conductivity in the background We are interested in how much these fluctuations deviate from the form they would take around the background equilibrium, O(q 0 ), solution. For this we organize our computation in an expansion in q. Making this perturbative structure explicit, we have up to second order in q included Lss ≈ Lss,0 + LS δV . Similarly we write the fluctuations as δs = δs 0 + δs 1 + . . . , with δs i being order q i , and analogously for the other sectors. Solving the resulting equations order by order in q, the zeroth order problem corresponds to the study of linearized fluctuations around the thermal equilibrium value. All three sectors remain decoupled and to compute the optical conductivity one only excites the vector sector, so only δv 0 is non-vanishing. At the next order in q we have LXY,0 δY 1 + LXY,1 δY 0 = 0, (6.18) and using the fact that δs 0 = δt 0 = 0 and the explicit form of LXY,1 that can be read form above, it is easy to see that the equation for δv We therefore conclude that for the vector fluctuations the leading deviation from their thermal value is of order q 2 . That is, we showed that the rate of thermalization of the optical conductivity corresponds to e -2iω * t . In this paper we have analyzed the pattern of conductivity thermalization in a minimal holographic setting that includes finite charge density and a mechanism of weak momentum dissipation. We have shown that, when quenched by a laser pulse with a significant DC component, the equilibration time of the conductivity is given by half the lowest-lying imaginary bulk quasinormal mode: τ = -1/(2Im ω * ). The appearance of the QNM governing momentum relaxation can be understood from the fact that the DC component of the electric field sets the charges of a finite-density system in motion, thus inducing finite momentum densities in the system. We have also provided a symmetry argument for the factor of two. If the mean frequency of the wave packet is large, the pulse lacks resonance with the corresponding QNM, and the thermalization is effectively instantaneous. The latter result is surprising from different points of view and gives rise to a number of questions. The instantaneous thermalization of the conductivity is surely not intuitive from the boundary perspective, but is somewhat natural from the bulk point of view once we are given a background dynamics of the Vaidya form. However, when going to finite density, a priori we would not have expected the bulk dynamics to remain (even approximately) of the instantaneously thermalizing Vaidya form as in the zero density case From a broader perspective, our observation poses a question about the underlying principles governing such ultrafast equilibration. One might ask to which extent this surprising prediction depends on the precise details of the UV description of the field theory, and more specifically what is the role played by the large N limit, on which our classical gravity computation relies. Recently it has been shown that the causal behavior of certain observables associated with the Vaidya geometry, in the zero density case, can be explicitly recovered from conformal field theory structures in the limit of infinite central charge In the same way that the holographic predictions have been shown to enjoy some UV independence through the minimal viscosity The remaining fields receive the following corrections: E x (v )dv dv dv , (A.28) From the above formula it seems that σ might be x dependent. If the system is such that the JJ correlator is invariant under translations, then the x dependence disappears after performing the x integral. This is the case in the system we study. Next, we show that the non-equilibrium conductivity (6.2) reduces to the standard definition of optical conductivity when in thermal equilibrium and as the observation time t m → ∞. This can be seen by Fourier transforming the definition of the differential conductivity (6.1) dt dt e iωt θ(t -t )σ(t, t )δE x (t ). (B.6) In thermal equilibrium σ(t, t ) can only depend on the difference t -t due to time translational symmetry of the thermal density matrix, so that σ(t, t ) = σ(t -t , 0). Changing the integration variable t into t = t -t , the two integrals separate and we obtain dt θ(t )σ(t , 0)e iωt . (B.7) The second term on the righthand side can be recognized as the frequency space nonequilibrium conductity (6.2) evaluated at t = 0. Thus, we see that in thermal equilibrium it satisfies σ(ω, 0) = δ J x (ω) δE x (ω) , (B.8) which is the standard definition of optical conductivity in thermal equilibrium. Since σ(ω, t) is independent of t in thermal equilibrium, (B.8) holds for arbitrary t. This establishes the claim that the non-equilibrium conductivity reduces to the equilibrium conductivity in thermal equilibrium and as t m → ∞. If t m is finite, the step that fails above is the factorization of the integrals after the change of variables t = t -t , since this changes the integration limits. But as long as one considers values of t t m , the integral defining σ(ω, t) can be safely extended to infinity. dt G R,ij (x, t; x , t )E j (t ) . For the specific case of zero mean frequency, a related analysis has previously been performed in Eventually as N t and N z are sufficiently large, the error saturates again due to the finite accuracy of Python floating point numbers. Here for simplicity we work in the equivalent gauge where the electric field is generated by A x , that is E x = -∂ t A x . In writing the linear response (4.23) we are also assuming that the expectation value of the operator χ(t) is zero when the electric field is absent, which is the case for the operators we will be considering. The root-mean-square error is the positive root ofRM SE 2 = M SE = n -1 n i=1 (y i -y f it i ) 2 . Integrating cos(ω P t) and taking derivatives of the rest.