In this report, the hysteresis behaviors of Poly-ethylenimine(PEI): LiClO4 and Polyethylene-glycol(PEG): LiClO4 electrolyte gate and back gate Graphene-on-SiO2 FET (GFET) were analyzed by gate voltage-source-drain current modulation. It is shown that both the sweeping rate and the sweep range will cause hysteresis behaviors in the form of Dirac Point (Vdp) shifting or changes in the current. Different mechanisms including charge trapping and electrical double layer capacitive effect are proposed to explain the behavior qualitatively on both back gated and electrolyte gated FET and partially confirmed with the present experimental results. Graphene has been attracting a great amount of interest since its discovery and nowadays more efforts are made to utilize its unique electronic and mechanical properties, including the tunable band gap, high electron mobility, great mechanical robustness by integrating graphenebased transistors. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain its origin including charge trapping related to the surrounding environment. New experiments are proposed to look further into the physical origin and expected to have more direct proof of the hysteresis hypothesis. The graphene channel in Back Gated GFET was transferred from commercially available Cu/CVD Graphene/PMMA pieces. The Cu coil layer was etched by 1M ammonium persulfate solution for 15 minutes and Graphene/PMMA layer was bathed for 3 times in DI water, each with 5 minutes. The Graphene/PMMA was then transferred onto the pre-sonicated Si/SiO2 substrate and dried at room temperature. The PMMA layer was removed by dissolving in 1 st acetone solution for 10 minutes and 2 nd acetone solution for 1 hour. Graphene layer was retrieved on Si/SiO2 after degreasing and cleaning with PMMA removed. Gated GFET Fabrication: Back Gated GFET was fabricated by depositing Ti-Au Electrode on the Graphene-on-SiO2/Si sample made in Method 1 by sputtering. Both PEI: LiClO4 and PEG: LiClO4 were prepared at 3:1 weight ratio and sonicated for 5 minutes. Electrolyte Gated GFET was fabricated using the commercial Si/SiO2/Graphene samples. The source and drain contact was made by contacting indium wires (1'' long) + electrical wires (3" long) onto 1mm droplet of 1:1 AB silver epoxy. Epoxied wires were cured at 60°C for 30 minutes. Back Gated FET was electrically characterized on a common two terminal probe station. Details in operating the station are not described here. After the characterization of the back gated device, 1mm droplet of commercial PEI was doped on the graphene channel. The doped device was measured after 10 minutes. Similar characterization was carried out on the electrolyte gated FET on an SMU. A droplet of (~1mm) PEG: LiClO4 from Method 3 was dropped between electrodes and a Pt wire was connected to the gate to carry out the measurement. PEG: LiClO4 was washed away with methanol, acetone and isopropanol in sequence. A measurement was carried out after dropping 1mm PEI: LiClO4 from Method 3 similarly. In this report, the hysteresis behavior of Graphene field effect transistor (GFET) was analyzed by sweeping from a negative gate voltage to a positive gate voltage (a forward scan), immediately followed by a backward sweep. The mechanism of hysteresis was explored by varying the sweep range and the sweep rate and studied individually. The hysteresis behavior of the SiO2 back gated graphene transistor is shown in Figure To characterize the hysteresis quantitatively under different sweep rates, either the loop area enclosed by the transfer curve or the change in current when the gate voltage is zero can be used for comparison since all voltage-current curves share similar shapes. From Figure which ∆V dp is the change in Dirac Point and C is the gate capacitance (calculations shown in Supporting Information). Both the hysteresis "direction" (CNP shifting direction) and magnitude (current different between two sweeps under different sweep ranges) can be considered in this case. When the CNP is not shown in Figure Other similar results can also be observed when the same back gated device is doped by PEI. Such hysteresis behavior is shown in Figure Other origins of the hysteresis behavior related to the polymer electrolyte gated graphene FET are also included. Shown in Figure in which ε r is the dialectic constant of PEI and L db is the Debye Length. When tuning the gate voltage, we are tuning the Fermi Level (Vf) (the carrier density). When Vf is equal to the charge neutrality point (Vdp), the minimum conductance is reached when there is an equal number of electrons and holes in the graphene underneath. The conductance can be approximated by Equation and is directly proportional to the total number of carriers. Comparing the charge neutrality point at different sweeping rates, the minimum conductance increases with increasing sweeping rates. This indirectly supports of the "remembering" effect since under the same positive voltage but with elevated rate, result in more carriers and higher conduction at the elevated sweeping rate at the charge neutrality point. From Figure . The ) in which E is the arbitrary activation energy. The mobility could be correlated to the delay of the concentration change and measured by the electrolyte cell capacitance charging effect = 13.33nm equ. C = ( 1 2 uFcm -2 + 1 0.21cm -2 ) -1 = 1.19 * 10 -5 F cm -2 equ. PEG:LiClO4 = 14.98nm equ. -( Email: yyao13@illinois.edu; Phone: 2179792996 