Superconductivity in the topological non-trivial Dirac semimetal PdTe 2 was recently shown to be type-I. We here report measurements of the relative magnetic penetration depth, ∆λ, on several single crystals using a high precision tunnel diode oscillator technique. The temperature variation ∆λ(T ) follows an exponential function for T /T c < 0.4, consistent with a fully-gapped superconducting state and weak or moderately coupling superconductivity. By fitting the data we extract a λ(0)-value of ∼ 500 nm. The normalized superfluid density is in good agreement with the computed curve for a type-I superconductor with nonlocal electrodynamics. Small steps are observed in ∆λ(T ), which possibly relates to a locally lower T c due to defects in the single crystalline sample. Transition metal dichalcogenides display a wide variety of interesting electronic properties. Recently, these layered materials received considerable attention because they offer a fruitful playground for the realization of topological non-trivial electronic band structures Recently, the superconducting phase of PdTe 2 was characterized in detail by magnetic and transport experiments by Leng et al. The superconducting properties of PdTe 2 were further investigated by heat capacity measurements 0) reported by Leng et al. We here present measurements of the relative magnetic penetration depth, ∆λ, of PdTe 2 single crystals using the tunnel diode oscillator technique. The ∆λ(T )variation shows an exponential temperature dependence for T /T c < 0.4 consistent with a fully-gapped superconducting state. The λ(0)-value extracted by fitting ∆λ(T ), measured for several crystals, to the standard BCS expression amounts to 500 nm. The normalized superfluid density is in good agreement with the computed curve for a type-I superconductor with nonlocal electrodynamics and λ(0) = 121 nm. PdTe 2 crystallizes in the trigonal CdI 2 structure (space group P 3m1) Magnetic penetration depth measurements were carried out with the tunnel diode oscillator (TDO) technique Here ∆λ a and ∆λ c are the relative magnetic penetration depths along the a-and c-axis, respectively, and t and w are the thickness and width of the crystal, respectively. ∆f 0 is the frequency shift obtained by extracting the sample from the coil and accounts for demagnetization effects and the coil calibration factor. For thin square sample geometries the latter term in the brackets can be neglected since w ≫ t. Crystal s1 was also measured in the horizontal configuration, with H ac c, and the screening currents in the aa * -plane. For a thin square geometry, with the magnetic field applied perpendicular to the broad surface, ∆f can be converted to the in-plane relative magnetic penetration depth ∆λ a according to where R is a characteristic geometrical factor given by with t the sample thickness and w the mean of the in-plane dimensions. The overall temperature variation of the in-plane relative magnetic penetration depth of all four crystals is reported in figure The gap symmetry of the superconducting state can be elucidated by examining the temperature dependence of λ a , or ∆λ a . For a superconductor with an isotropic superconducting gap, ∆λ(T ) at low temperatures follows the relation Here λ(0) and ∆(0) are the penetration depth and superconducting gap for T → 0, respectively, and k B is the Boltzmann constant. For a weak-coupling BCS superconductor ∆(0) = 1.76k B T c . We have fitted ∆λ a to equation 4 with λ a (0) and ∆(0) as fit parameters, where a small offset has been added as a fit parameter to ∆λ a to account for the exponential variation between λ a (0) and λ a (0.38K). It appears good fits can be obtained when we restrict the temperature range to T /T c < 0.4 as shown in figure The ratio ∆(0)/k B T c ranges from 1.77 to 1.86, again with the value 1.97 as an outlier for the as-measured crystal s2. These values are close to the weak-coupling BCS value 1.76. The error bar on the fit parameters is of the order of 10 %, a value obtained by inspecting the stability of the fit when slightly changing the reduced temperature range, 0.35 < T /T c < 0.45. The values of the fit parameters listed in table In figure To further elucidate the nature of the superconducting phase of PdTe 2 , especially the type-I or type-II character, we analyze ∆λ(T ) (from now on we drop the subscript a) in terms of the normalized superfluid density ρ s (T ) ( We first trace in figure For a type-I superconductor nonlocal electrodynamics has to be taken into account, because the field penetration depends on the ratio of the BCS coherence length ξ 0 and the electron mean free path l. This results in an enhancement of the ratio λ(T )/λ L (T ), where λ L (T ) is the London penetration depth and λ(T ) is the magnetic penetration depth due to nonlocal electrodynamics A full fledged function λ(T )/λ L (T ) in the case of nonlocal electrodynamics can be computed following Miller Here the response function K(q) can be calculated with help of equations 5.26 and 5.3 in reference The theoretical expression of ρ s (T ) for a conventional type-II superconductor (in the London limit) is given by with the Fermi function f = 1/(1 + exp(E/k B T )) and the Bogoliubov quasiparticle energy E = (∆(T ) 2 + ǫ 2 ) 1/2 . ∆(T ) can be obtained from the gap interpolation formula given by where a = 2/3. We computed ρ s (T ) for crystal s1 (with steps removed and H ac ⊥ c) with help of equations 5 and 8, where we inserted ∆(0)/k B T c = 1.77 (see table The BCS fits of ∆λ a (T ), presented in figures 3 and 4, are consistent with PdTe 2 being a conventional s-wave superconductor. The ratio ∆(0)/k B T c = 1.77 to 1.97 (table 2 points to weak-or moderately-coupling superconductivity, in agreement with specific heat data With the above value λ(0) = 468 nm and ξ 0 we calculate κ ≈ 0.29. Type-I superconductivity is furthermore supported by the computed superfluid density in the non-local scenario, which matches the experimental data better than the type-II London model (see figure At the moment we cannot reconcile the different values of λ(0). A possible source of error in the calculation of λ(0) via l and ξ 0 is the assumption of a spherical Fermi surface, which is obviously an oversimplification The appearance of small steps in ∆λ a as shown in figure Besides bulk superconductivity below T c = 1.64 K, the magnetic measurements revealed superconductivity of the surface layer in applied fields below T S c = 1.33 K We have reported measurements of the relative magnetic penetration depth, ∆λ(T ), in the superconducting state (T c = 1.6 K) of the Dirac semimetal PdTe 2 using the tunnel diode oscillator technique. The experiments have been performed on several crystals and for driving fields H ac c and ⊥ c. In all cases the temperature variation ∆λ(T ) follows an exponential function for T /T c < 0.4, which is consistent with a fully-gapped superconducting state and weak or moderately coupling superconductivity. By fitting the data we extract a magnetic penetration depth λ(0) of ∼ 500 nm for T → 0. We compare the experimental normalized superfluid density ρ s to the computed curve for type-I superconductivity with nonlocal electrodynamics and the theoretical expression for type-II superconductivity in the London limit. In the nonlocal electrodynamics model we obtain λ(0) = 121 nm, with as input parameters for our crystal the London penetration depth λ L (0) = 39 nm, a mean free path l = 531 nm and the BCS coherence length ξ 0 = 1.8 μm. We conclude the nonlocal model of type-I superconductivity gives a better match to the experimental superfluid density. At the moment we cannot reconcile the different values of λ(0) extracted from the experimental data and the model. Part of the differences might be attributed to simplifications, such as a spherical Fermi surface, in the determination of the relevant parameters, and to variations in the carrier concentration n. Small steps are observed in ∆λ(T ), which possibly relates to a locally lower T c due to crystal defects in the single crystalline sample. A next step in the research is to investigate the magnetic penetration depth in small dc-fields, notably in view of the unusual superconductivity of the surface sheath that was detected in applied fields below T c = 1.33 K ‡ In reference