Topological superconductor is a timely and frontier topic in condensed matter physics. In superconducting state, an order parameter will be established with the basic or subsidiary symmetry of the crystalline lattice. In doped Bi2Se3 with a basic threefold symmetry, it was predicted however that superconductivity may have a twofold symmetry of odd parity. Here we report the proximity effect induced superconductivity in Bi2Te3 thin film on top of an iron-based superconductor FeTe0.55Se0.45. By using the quasiparticle interference technique, we demonstrate clear evidence of twofold symmetry of the superconducting gap. The gap minimum is along one of the main crystalline axis following the so-called Δ4y notation. This is also accompanied by the elongated vortex shape mapped out by the density of states within the superconducting gap, with probably the Majorana mode within the vortex core. Our results reveal the direct evidence of superconductivity with odd parity in Bi2Te3 thin film. One Sentence Summary: Superconductivity with twofold symmetry is observed by scanning tunneling microscopy in Bi2Te3 thin film, yielding the direct evidence of odd parity. Superconductivity with order parameters of odd parity is highly desired because of the expectation of Majorana Fermions and potential applications in quantum computation Proximity effect may be another way to induce possible topological superconductivity Single crystals of FeTe0.55Se0.45 with the transition temperature Tc of about 13.3 K are used as the substrates. After cleaving the FeTe0.55Se0.45 crystal in a high vacuum, we obtain a fresh and clean surface on which we grow the topological insulator (TI) Bi2Te3 film (20) by using the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) technique. As shown in Fig. The height difference between two sides of a step is about 1 nm, which corresponds to the thickness of a single QL of Bi2Te3. The exact thickness of Bi2Te3 film in local area is determined by the tunneling spectra Since the proximity effect induced superconductivity has been well formed in the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure, it is worth to detect the pairing symmetry of superconductivity. The quasiparticle interference (QPI) technology is a useful tool to detect the SC gap structure However, successful QPI measurements were carried out in places with some Te vacancies, and the topography of a typical case is shown in fig. The hexagon becomes complete when the bias voltage is about 2.5 mV (not shown here). Based on the Bogoliubov theory of DOS in the superconducting state, a reasonable explanation for the evolution of FT-QPI pattern is a twofold superconducting gap with gap minima along one pair of Γ-K direction. The twofold symmetry feature is better illustrated in the angular dependence of averaged intensity per pixel, as shown in Fig. We also tried to use the twofold SC gap functions Δ = Δ max [(1 -x)cos2φ + x] to fit the tunneling spectra, and the fitting results are shown in fig. To illustrate the gap structure from our FT-QPI measurements, in Fig. According to our experimental results, the notation Δ4y (Fig. The structure of a single vortex in a type-II superconductor usually gives rise to the information of the SC gaps The fitting results are given in section I of We also investigate the vortex bound states at the center of the vortex core in these elongated vortices on the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure. The anisotropic spatial evolution of the CdGM state can reflect the information of the SC gap states due to the small Fermi energy If we go along the elongated direction of the vortex, namely the a-axis direction, the evolution of spectra looks very spectacular. A central peak appears at the core center, stays at zero energy and does not split at all when moving away from the center. At this moment we still don't have a definite explanation of these contrasting behaviors along the two perpendicular directions. However, combining the evidence of odd parity superconductivity with two fold symmetry shown above, we would propose that this frozen zero-bias conductance peak along the elongated vortex direction may be induced by the complex mixture of a Majorana mode with the CdGM states. Actually a small bound state peak appears and remains at zero energy on the spectra measured in the direction of short vortex core size together with the two CdGM splitting peaks away from the vortex center, as marked by a mauve arrow in Fig. In the following we demonstrate the twofold superconductivity via measuring the vortex image at different energies. As shown above, the vortices have elongated shapes as evidenced by the measurements of the zero-bias conductance mapping. It is very interesting to see how the vortex image evolves with the measuring bias energy if the superconductor has indeed a very anisotropic SC gap. We try to image the vortices at different energies in the area whose topography is shown in Fig. If the measuring bias voltage is increased but still below the maximum gap of about 2 meV, the two fold image feature appears still, but the vortices change their single elongated shape to pairs of parallel-elongated patterns, as shown here by Fig. By doing STM/STS measurements and detailed QPI analysis on the 2 QL Bi2Te3/FeTe0.55Se0.45 heterostructure, we observe the twofold SC gap with the gap minima along one of the principal crystal axes, which is well consistent with the theoretical prediction The freezing of the central peak of vortex core states along the elongated direction when moving away from the vortex center may suggest the mixture of a Majorana mode and the CdGM states, which is certainly a very interesting proposal and needs further efforts to verify. Our experimental results bring about deep insight to the understanding of topological superconductivity in this system. Tables S1 References 