The number of electrons in small metallic or semiconducting islands is quantized. When tunnelling is enabled via opaque barriers this number can change by an integer. In superconductors the addition is in units of two electron charges (2e), reflecting that the Cooper pair condensate must have an even parity. This ground state (GS) is foundational for all superconducting qubit devices. Here, we study a hybrid superconductingsemiconducting island and find three typical GS evolutions in a parallel magnetic field: a robust 2e-periodic even-parity GS, a transition to a 2e-periodic odd-parity GS, and a transition from a 2e-to a 1e-periodic GS. The 2e-periodic odd-parity GS persistent in gatevoltage occurs when a spin-resolved subgap state crosses zero energy. For our 1e-periodic GSs we explicitly show the origin being a single zero-energy state gapped from the continuum, i.e. compatible with an Andreev bound states stabilized at zero energy or the presence of Majorana zero modes. A superconductor can proximitize a semiconductor and open a gap in its energy spectrum. If the two materials are strongly coupled, the induced gap can be as large as the original gap in the superconductor. The two gaps respond differently to an applied magnetic field, e.g. when the Landé g-factors differ in the two materials. A large g-factor in the semiconductor can cause the induced gap to close long before the closing of the original gap. If, in addition, the semiconductor has strong spin-orbit interaction, the induced gap can re-open, signalling a transition to a topological superconducting phase When a conductor has a finite size, it forms an island restricting the charge to an integer times the elementary charge, e Hybrid superconducting-semiconducting islands have also shown a 2e charge quantization at low B-fields Here, we harness the large g-factor (g ≈ 50) and the ballistic transport properties of InSb nanowires Our device (Fig. Fig. To understand parity transitions induced by a B-field, we illustrate four different scenarios in Figs. Fig. In the third case we illustrate the possible consequence of strong spin-orbit interaction. The zero-energy crossing of the subgap state can now be followed by a transition to a topological phase containing MZMs rigidly fixed at E 0 = 0 (Fig. Finally, in the fourth case (Fig. In Fig. In Fig. For the case shown in Fig. The data in Fig. The four columns in Figs. Fig. In contrast, transport at the 2e-periodic peaks, both for even and odd GSs, occurs via Andreev reflection. The two cartoons (Fig. Richer sequences of GS transitions as a function of magnetic field are also possible. For instance, the sketch in Fig. The features at low B ∥ (such as the position where the 2e-periodic peaks first split) can depend on the precise value of V PG . In contrast, the features at high B ∥ are strikingly regular, with only a weak dependence on V PG . This suggests that the 1e-periodicity at high fields originates from a state which is remarkably robust against gate variations. Furthermore, we note how the alternation of the conductance peak heights, already seen in Fig. In summary, we have revealed distinct types of fermion parity transitions occurring as a function of magnetic field and gate voltages in a Coulomb-blockaded InSb-Al island. These transitions provide a complete picture of all the parity phases in mesoscopic Cooper pair boxes An isolated Al segment is formed by selectively shadowing the nanowire during Al evaporation. InSb-Al nanowires with double shadows (Supplementary Fig. The device is cooled down to ~15 mK in an Oxford dry dilution refrigerator. The effective electron temperature is estimated to be 20-50 mK. Conductance across the devices was measured using a standard low-frequency lock-in technique (amplitude is 5 μV). The voltage bias V b = V S -V D is applied symmetrically between the two leads (V S = -V D = V b /2). A magnetic field is applied using a 6-1-1 T vector magnet. The direction of the magnetic field is aligned carefully with respect to the nanowire axis (Supplementary Fig. [31] Plugge, S., Rasmussen, A., Egger, R. & Flensberg, K. Majorana box qubits. New J. Phys.19, 012001 (2017).