We present a soft x-ray angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy study of overdoped hightemperature superconductors. In-plane and out-of-plane components of the Fermi surface are mapped by varying the photoemission angle and the incident photon energy. No kz dispersion is observed along the nodal direction, whereas a significant antinodal kz dispersion is identified for La-based cuprates. Based on a tight-binding parametrization, we discuss the implications for the density of states near the van-Hove singularity. Our results suggest that the large electronic specific heat found in overdoped La2-xSrxCuO4 can not be assigned to the van-Hove singularity alone. We therefore propose quantum criticality induced by a collapsing pseudogap phase as a plausible explanation for observed enhancement of electronic specific heat. The nature of the pseudogap phase in hightemperature cuprate superconductors remains an outstanding problem Quantum oscillation (QO) and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments are classical probes of the FS structure and quasi-particle renormalization effects Here, we apply SX-ARPES to reveal the FS k z dispersion of three different cuprates, namely, LSCO (x = 0.22), La the FS is well defined. Secondly, this specific composition of LSCO has body-centered tetragonal (BCT) crystal structure, and therefore, orthorhombic band folding is avoided Single crystals of LSCO (x = 0.22, T c = 22 K), Eu-LSCO (x = 0.21, T c = 15 K), and Tl2201 (T c = 20 K) were grown by the floating-zone and self-flux techniques. Crystal lattice parameters a and c are listed in Table where m is the electron mass, φ the work function, E B the binding energy, θ the photoemission polar angle, V 0 the inner potential, the reduced Planck constant, and p c is the incident photon momentum that is significant for SX-ARPES. The incident grazing angle α was set to 20 • . For the inner potential, we assumed V 0 = 15 eV consistent with what has been used for pnictide materials Maps of the electron-like To parametrize the three-dimensional FS structure, we use a simple tight-binding model decomposed into two terms: Although band structure of La-based cuprates involves hybridization of d x 2 -y 2 and d 3z 2 -r 2 orbitals [27], wefor simplicity -employ an effective single band (d x 2 -y 2 ) model: + 4t cos(k x a) cos(k y a) + 2t [cos(2k x a) + cos(2k y a)], where t, t , and t represent first-, second-, and thirdnearest-neighbor hopping parameters, and μ is the chemical potential. The out-of-plane dispersion reads: where t z denotes an inter-layer hopping parameter From the k z antinodal dispersion, we in addition extract the out-of-plane hopping parameter t z . For both LSCO (x = 0.22) and Eu-LSCO (x = 0.21), fitting with Eq. 3 provided a good description of the observed dispersion with t z = 0.07t. In overdoped La-based cuprates, t z /t thus constitutes a significant fraction. For comparison, overdoped Tl2201, with a hole-like in-plane FS, yields a k z dispersion [see Fig. Having quantified the out-of-plane hopping, it is interesting to discuss transport anisotropy ratios. Sr 2 RuO 4 and overdoped LSCO are isostructural and both display low-temperature Fermi liquid behavior From the antinodal FS k z dispersion of LSCO and Eu-LSCO, the DOS anomaly generated by the VHS can be estimated. For a given binding energy ω, the twodimensional DOS(ω) = a 2 2π 2 dA dω where A is the constantenergy-surface area. The in-plane nearest-neighbor hopping parameter t = -0.19 eV is set by the observed nodal Fermi velocity The DOS is proportional to the electronic specific heat (Sommerfeld) coefficient γ = π 2 3 k 2 B ×DOS(E F ) and hence directly comparable to measurements of Zn-LSCO In summary, we have revealed the full three dimensional FS structure of overdoped La-based cuprates using the SX-ARPES technique. A significant k z dispersion was observed on the antinodal FS portion while the nodal part of the FS is non-dispersive. The threedimensional FS was parametrized using the single-band tight-binding model. In this manner, the out-of-plane hopping term is quantified. Finally, it was shown that the three-dimensional FS structure cannot account for the large electronic specific heat observed in overdoped LSCO. Quantum criticality emerging from the pseudogap collapse provides a plausible explanation for the specific heat anomaly.