Enhanced microwave absorption, larger than that in the normal state, is observed in fine grains of type-II superconductors (MgB2 and K3C60) for magnetic fields as small as a few % of the upper critical field. The effect is predicted by the theory of vortex motion in type-II superconductors, however its direct observation has been elusive due to skin-depth limitations; conventional microwave absorption studies employ larger samples where the microwave magnetic field exclusion significantly lowers the absorption. We show that the enhancement is observable in grains smaller than the penetration depth. A quantitative analysis on K3C60 in the framework of the Coffey-Clem (CC) theory explains well the temperature dependence of the microwave absorption and also allows to determine the vortex pinning force constant. Electrodynamics of superconductors remains an intensively studied field 1 due to the wealth of attainable fundamental information, including the nature of pairing mechanism and the coupling strength, and also due to the technological importance of these materials. As an example, observation of the conductivity coherence peak in conventional superconductors The frequency dependent conductivity of superconductors, σ = σ 1 + iσ 2 , is well known for both BCS (i.e. weakcoupled s-wave pairing) and non-BCS superconductors (including strongly coupled s-wave and non s-wave superconductors) in the absence of magnetic field, B = 0. At zero temperature, T = 0, the real part, σ 1 (ω), is a delta function at ω = 0 followed by σ 1 (ω) = 0 until the gap edge at ω g = 2∆/ (Ref. 9) (usually at 0.1 -10 THz). According to the Ferrell-Glover-Tinkham (FGT) sum rule Conductivity in finite magnetic fields for the mixed state in type-II superconductors was first described by the Bardeen-Stephen (BS) model The effects of σ 1 and σ 2 are decoupled for fine grains; for a sample placed in a microwave cavity, the loss is due to σ 1 , whereas the resonance shift is due to σ 2 (Refs. 26-28). Therefore such samples provide a unique opportunity to test the predictions of the CC theory on σ 1,2 (T, B). The enigmatic and yet unexplained increase of the electron spin resonance signal in superconductors right below T c (Refs. 29,30) also highlights the need to study further the electromagnetic absorption in superconductors. This motivated us to revisit the microwave conductivity (at about 10 GHz) in the MgB 2 and K 3 C 60 superconductors as a function of T and B. We observe an excess microwave loss (or microwave absorption) in small magnetic fields (as low as a few % of the upper critical field, B c2 ) for a sample consisting of well-separated fine grains (typical size is a few microns). The excess microwave absorption is not observable in a single crystal sample. A quantitative analysis is provided for K 3 C 60 , which is a one-gap, cubic superconductor with well known magneto-transport properties We studied fine powder MgB 2 samples identical to batches in Refs. 34 and 35. Single crystal and powder K 3 C 60 samples were prepared by the conventional K intercalation method; the crystal sample was from the same batch as in Ref. 36. The powder samples were further ground together with non-conducting SnO 2 powder to prevent conducting links between the grains. Magnetometry attested that static superconducting properties (such as the steepness of the superconducting transition) were unaffected by the mixing. Samples were sealed in quartz ampules under low pressure helium. Microwave properties were measured with the cavity perturbation method Fig. We believe that the enhanced microwave absorption is an ubiquitous property of fine powders of type-II superconductors. However, we cannot quantitatively discuss this effect for MgB 2 due to the multi-band superconductivity We also show the B = 0.1 T data for the powder sample (B ≈ 0.002 × B c2 ) in Fig. The fact that the enhanced microwave absorption occurs with the application of the magnetic field hints at a flux motion related phenomenon that is discussed in the framework of the CC theory. The microwave absorption peak occurs above the irreversibility line, i.e. it is related to the physical behavior of the vortex-fluid state; for K 3 C 60 T irr (B = 0.1 T) ≈ 15 K and T irr (B = 1 T) < 5 K (Ref. 51). The strong dependence on the sample morphology is also discussed below. Superconducting fullerides are type-II (λ ≫ ξ) and have a short mean free path The phenomenological CC theory The viscous drag was introduced in the Bardeen-Stephen theory For a weaker pinning center, κ p can be significantly lower and in the bulk of a perfect superconductor, it would be zero. The CC theory introduces the concept of the complex penetration depth, λ: where δ nf is the normal fluid skin depth, λ is the usual (real) penetration depth and δ vc is the complex effective skin depth Here, we discuss qualitatively the predictions of the CC theory and some typical cases are shown in Fig. The CC theory allows to quantitatively analyze the conductivity in K 3 C 60 . The requirement of B ≫ B c1 is satisfied for our magnetic fields of 0.1 . . . 1 T as B c1 ∼ 10 mT. The CC theory was developed for a superconductor which occupies the total half space. We show in the Supplementary Material that it can be applied for a spherical sample which approximates well finite sized grains containing at least a few hundred/thousand vortices. In addition, the static and rf magnetic fields are parallel in our experiment, which is the standard case for the applicability of the CC theory. Albeit we cannot quantitatively consider the effect of the small particle size on the magnetic properties, we believe that neither the surface barriers (also known as Bean-Livingstone barriers The pinning force constant is given in the figure with respect to κ p,max = 3.84 • 10 4 N/m 2 according to Eq. (1). The figure indicates that κ p strongly affects the magnetic field dependence of σ. The sample morphology greatly affects the relation between the material conductivity, σ, and the microwave parameters, the loss and shift. Two limiting cases are known. 1) The sample is large and the field penetrates into a limited distance from the surface. This approximates the measurement in the large K 3 C 60 single crystal. 2) The sample is a small sphere with radius comparable to the penetration depth. This approximates the K 3 C 60 sample of well divided small grains. We discuss that the experimental observations for the crystal and fine powder K 3 C 60 are explained well by these two regimes. In the first case, when the rf field penetrates in the skin depth only (known as the skin limit), the following equation holds between the microwave measurement parameters and the material quantities where the complex penetration depth, λ, is related to the conductivity as λ 2 = i(μ 0 ω σ) -1 . The dimensionless ν ≪ 1 is the so-called resonator constant A suitable ν = 5.1 • 10 -4 was chosen to match the calculation to the experiment. We find that for both the calculation and experiment, the cavity loss parameter drops rapidly below T c , although σ 1 /σ n is around unity due to the vortex motion. This effect is due to the development of a significant σ 2 /σ n ∼ 100, which limits the penetration of microwaves into the sample and thus reduces the loss. This means that the microwave surface impedance measurement is not capable of providing information about σ 1 in the presence of vortex motion. We note that the experimental curves do not show such a rapid change as a function of temperature as the calculation. This may be related to the finite size and surface roughness of the single crystal sample. Second, we discuss the opposite limit, when the microwave field penetrates into the sample (known as the penetration limit), the cavity measurables depend differently on the sample parameters. It was shown where k = n ω c is the complex wavenumber, with n = i σ/ǫ 0 ω being the complex index of refraction. The dimensionless γ is a sample volume dependent constant. The right panels in Fig. Somewhat better fits could be obtained when letting λ, ρ n , and B c2 differ from the mean literature values. In addition, Eq. ( We demonstrated that moderate magnetic fields, which are small compared to the upper critical field, induces a large microwave absorption in fine powders of type II superconductors, like MgB 2 and K 3 C 60 . The effect is absent for samples containing larger grains or compacted powder pellets. The Bardeen-Stephen model of flux-flow predicts that the real part of the AC conductivity can be enhanced in the microwave range, but this effect has not been observed. We analyze the conductivity using the Coffey-Clem theory which also accounts for vortex pinning effects. It is applied to calculate the microwave properties for two kinds of samples: when the electromagnetic field penetration is limited to the surface (skin limit) or when it fully penetrates into the fine grain samples (penetration limit). We show that microwave absorption in the skin limit is little affected by the vortex-motion enhanced σ 1 but in the penetration limit, the effect is clearly observable. A quantitative analysis for K 3 C 60 yields the vortex pinning force constant that can be hardly determined by other means. Our observation allowed us to explain long-standing microwave anomalies in superconductors For usual metals, the sum rule states where n is the charge carrier density, e is the elementary charge, m * is the effective mass, Ω pl is the plasma frequency, and ǫ 0 is the vacuum dielectric constant. This is satisfied for the AC Drude model, where σ 1 and σ 2 read: For superconductors, the Ferrell-Glover-Tinkham (FGT) theory states that the sum rule In the following, we discuss the relevance of the sum rule in different superconductor regimes. In a type II superconductor, λ ≫ (ξ 0 , l),where ξ 0 is the coherence length and l is the mean free path, therefore local electrodynamics can be used. For such a case, σ 1 (ω) = 0 below the gap frequency, ω g = 2∆ except for the delta function at ω = 0. The clean limit is defined as ξ 0 ≪ l, which is equivalent to ω g ≫ 1/τ , since ξ 0 = v F /π∆. In this case, all the oscillator strength appears in the σ 1 ∝ δ(ω) function as: where λ L is the London penetration depth, related to the charge carrier concentration as: λ L = m * μ0ne 2 and also λ L = c/Ω pl (where c is the speed of light). Note that σ 1,clean clearly satisfies the sum rule. In the dirty limit, ξ 0 ≫ l (which is the case in K 3 C 60 , given that ξ 0 ≈ 3 nm and l = 1 nm) leads to the same result: A theoretical consideration of the charge carriers and effective mass in K 3 C 60 gave a clean limit result as λ L = 160 nm (Ref. 31) which is about a factor 3 smaller than the experimental value of λ ∼ 400 nm. This means that the delta function strength is reduced by about a factor 10 as compared to the clean limit case. In principle, one has two further regimes for type I superconductors, which are however not relevant for the present discussion. When ξ 0 ≪ l, σ 1 and σ 2 have similar form as in the clean limit. When ξ 0 ≫ l, one must use non-local electrodynamics, which also leads to a delta function with a reduced spectral weight. 2 millimeters. The doping then proceeded along the conventional vapor phase doping. The superconducting volume fraction of the K 3 C 60 crystal was characterized by SQUID magnetometry and reported in Ref. 68. The zero-field cooled magnetization reveals In the microwave measurements, we set ∆f /f 0 = 0 at T = T c as ∆f is affected by the quartz tube itself and the amount of helium in the cryostat, i.e. reference measurements do not give a reproducible result. This effect also influences the analysis of the data: an additional fitting parameter, the cavity shift value at T = T c , needs to be introduced. Its value is +6.7(2) × 10 -6 , i.e. this value is subtracted from the calculated shift values which returns ∆f /f 0 = 0 at T = T c . We found that this extra parameter does not influence the validity of the numerical analysis of the data. In Fig. We are aware that this small coherence peak was observed in K 3 C 60 and also in Rb 3 C 60 (T c = 28 K) back in 1994 but its observation remained unpublished The Coffey-Clem theory To estimate the complex AC conductivity, the two-fluid equation J = J n + J s is used, where J n is the normal current density, and J s is supercurrent density, which is caused by the vortex dynamics. The current density is characterized by the complex penetration depth, which is defined as follows: The quantity λ is determined from the current densities as follows. The two types of current density are obtained from J n = σ nf E and the London equations: where B = B 0 + B rf , B v = nΦ 0 B 0 is the total magnetic field in the vortices, which is the sum of the external DC field (B 0 ) and the vortex-motion-induced magnetic field. B 0 is the direction of the DC magnetic field, n denotes the local area density of vortices. These relationships together with Ampere's law yield: The last term can be obtained from the vortex equation of motion: where u is the vortex displacement from its equilibrium pinning site, μ (T ) = ǫ 0 Φ 0 B c2 (T ) is the inertial mass per unit length of vortex, η is the viscous drag coefficient in the absence of flux creep and κ p is the restoring force constant of a pinning potential. All these parameters depend on temperature. The viscous drag coefficient is directly determined by the other parameters as However, only the maximum value for the pinning force constant can be estimated where μ 0 is the vacuum permeability. In a realistic case, κ p can be substantially smaller than κ p,max depending on the quality of the pinning centers. For a harmonic rf excitation, Eq. (E5) can be rewritten with the help of the complex dynamic vortex mobility μ v = (-iωμ + η + iκ p /ω) -1 as: Note the distinction between μ (inertial mass per unit length of vortex), μ v (complex dynamic vortex mobility), and μ 0 (permeability of the vacuum). When J and B 0 are perpendicular, and the vortex-motioninduced electric field is ) and Faraday's law with harmonic rf excitation (-∇ × E = Ḃ = -iωB) with the help of equation (E10), equation (E4) can be rewritten: The components of this equation can be integrated with respect to the space variable: The latter quantity is the so-called complex penetration depth. In these equations, δ nf is the normal fluid skin depth, and δ 2 vc = 2B0Φ0 μv μ0ω is the complex effective skin depth. The latter quantity is zero for B = 0 and it becomes finite in the mixed state when vortex motion is present. Note that for B = 0, i.e. δ 2 vc = 0, λ 2 returns λ 2 and iδ 2 n /2 at T = 0 and T = T c , respectively. The temperature and magnetic field dependence of the transport and magnetic parameters are: where t = T /T c and b(T ) = B/B c2 (T ) are the reduced temperature and magnetic field, respectively. It is informative to show the temperature dependence λ, which correspond to the presented σ in the main text. This is shown for various magnetic fields and κ p values in Fig. Appendix F: Additional discussion of the vortex motion in external static and rf magnetic field In the following discussion we assume that the complex conductivity is dominated by the flux flow. So we neglect the effect of vortex pinning and flux creep. In this case the vortex motion is retarded only by the viscous damping. So we can obtain the vortex motion in the following form The current density is calculated from Ohm's law in which the electric field is induced by the external rf magnetic field: where ρ f is the flux-flow resistivity ρ f = BΦ0 η . For sphere samples the solution of the (F2) equation is the following in cylindrical coordinates: The directions of the vectors are shown in Fig. (F1) can be rewritten with this result: This result is the same, if we assume that vortex motion is caused by the change of vortex density. The reason of this change is the small oscillation in the magnetic field (small so that only the size of the primitive cell of the vortex lattice varies). The only relevant length scale is the distance between the vortices, which is proportional to Φ0 B 1/2 . where n depends only on the vortex lattice structure. The time derivative of r is: Appendix G: Frequency dependence of the conductivity in the presence of vortex motion It is assumed that conductivity can be written as a sum of two terms: σ = σ nf + σ sf , where σ nf and σ sf are the normalfluid and superconductor contributions, respectively. At low temperatures, the normal fluid term λ 2 ≪ δ 2 nf can be neglected, thus Eq. (E4) can be rewritten as follows: Note, that this equation is very similar to the kinetic equation of electrons in the AC Drude model: m ne 2 J + 1 σ0 J = E. According to the CC theory, the value of σ v can be written as where σ f = Bc2 B σ n is the flux-flow conductivity (which appears in the Bardeen-Stephen theory, i.e. it is without vortex pinning). In the absence of vortex pinning centers, σ v = σ f i.e. it is the inverse of the Bardeen-Stephen resistivity Note that (G3) satisfies the sum rule: where we exploited that Re σ (ω) is even and the The conductivity has a more complicated form according to the CC theory when κ p = 0: where λ 2 C = BΦ 0 /μ 0 κ p is the so-called Campbell penetration depth The CC theory provides the first term only in σ 1 . The presence of the second term with the delta function was inserted in order to satisfy the sum rule and to maintain the Kramers-Kronig relation between σ 1 and σ 2 . The second terms in σ 1,2 are due to the strongly pinned vortices, i.e. these appear as those in superconductors in the Meissner state. The spectral weight is distributed between the two terms in σ 1 : as the pinning force is increased, the delta function dominates and eventually it returns the case of B = 0. In the other extreme, when κ p tends to zero, the Bardeen-Stephen result is recovered. The full result is shown in Fig. As discussed in the main text, when the penetration of microwaves is limited to the skin depth only, the microwave cavity loss and shift is expressed by the complex penetration depth λ as: For the σ1 data, the curves with large κp and B = 0 T values remain zero except for a delta function. Note that for a large pinning force, σ1 and σ2 have the same form as the conductivity in zero applied magnetic field. The scale of the abscissa is logarithmic. A zoom-in is shown for the grey shaded box in the insert. FIG. 12: Calculated cavity loss and shift calculated according to Eq. (H1) using the σ1 and σ2 data shown in the main text at f = 10 GHz. We used ν = 1 in the calculation and assumed that the sample is in the node of the electric field inside a microwave cavity. where ν is called resonator constant where k = n ω c is the complex wavenumber with n = i σ ǫ0ω being the complex index of refraction. Eq. (I2) returns ∆f f0 = 0 and ∆ 1 2Q ∝ σ for small values of σ as expected where the characteristic value of the crossover is also particle size dependent. The crossover is accompanied by a change in the cavity shift. Fig. perconductor: the superconducting transition temperature, Tc; the normal state resistivity at Tc, ρn; the normal state skin depth, δn; the coherence length at T = 0, ξ0; and the magnetic field penetration depth at T = 0, λ0. The tabulated ξ0 values correspond to an upper critical field, Bc2 at T = 0 of 49 and 28 T, respectively.