A lattice of Abrikosov vortices in type II superconductors is characterized by a periodic modulation of the magnetic induction perpendicular to the applied magnetic field. For a coherent vortex motion under the action of a transport current, the magnetic induction at a given point of the sample varies in time with a washboard frequency f WB = v/d, where v is the vortex velocity and d is the distance between the vortices in the direction of motion. Here, by using a spectrum analyzer connected to a 50 nm-wide Au nanowire meander near the surface of a superconducting Nb film we detect an ac voltage induced by coherently moving fluxons. The voltage is peaked at the washboard frequency, f WB , and its subharmonics, f TOF = f WB /5, determined by the antenna width. By sweeping the dc current value, we reveal that f WB can be tuned from 100 MHz to 1.5 GHz, thereby demonstrating that patterned normal metal/superconductor nanostructures can be used as dc-tunable generators operating in the radiofrequency range. Magnetic fields are known to penetrate type II superconductors in the form of Abrikosov vortices 1 , or fluxons, each carrying one quantum of magnetic flux Φ 0 = 2.07 × 10 -15 Vs. The vortices form a triangular lattice and can be regarded as tiny solenoids producing local magnetic field variations extending over distances of 2λ perpendicular to the applied field, where λ is the magnetic penetration depth. The maximum field, B v ≈ Φ 0 2πλ 2 (ln λ/ξ) A transport current of density j exerts a Lorentz force F L = j × B on the flux lattice. If F L exceeds the pinning force, the vortex lattice moves and the oscillations of the magnetic induction at a given point in space B(x, y, t) are characterized by the washboard frequency f WB = v/d, where v is the vortex velocity and d is the distance between the vortices in the direction of motion. Previously, the washboard frequency of the moving vortex lattice was detected by ac/dc interference 3 in high-temperature superconducting cuprates. The detected sharp frequencies The different dynamic states and noise associated with the vortex motion in type II superconductors was studied in several numerical works As distinct from the previously mentioned "intrinsic" effects, according to Faraday's law, a time-varying magnetic flux within a closed loop of wire produces an electromotive force (emf) or voltage (within a circuit). This makes it feasible to observe the rf signal associated with the vortex motion externally, by placing a device which is sensitive to the magnetic flux near the surface of a superconductor. Currently, the highest flux sensitivity is provided by SQUIDs In the particular case of coherently moving fluxons their dynamics can also be studied using hybrid, superconducting/normal metal detector structures. Given that nanowires with sub-100 nm width can be fabricated by modern nanofabrication techniques, vortex velocities of the order of 100 m/s allow one to achieve ac voltage frequencies, associated with crossing of nanowires by vortices, on the order of 1 GHz. Here, we study the frequency-domain voltage response of an Au meander nanowire which picks up the magnetic induction of magnetic flux quanta in an adjacent superconducting Nb thin film. While the meander layout is similar to those widely used in superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) The device concept is sketched in Fig. ]. The values of the superconducting coherence length ξ(0) deduced from H c2 (0) were found to be around 21 nm. The estimated magnetic field penetration depth λ(0) in the Nb film amounts to 100 nm The Nb bridge was positioned by microscrews in the area encaged by the white dashed lines in Fig. The rf generation by vortices has been observed between 0.5T c and 0.8T c . At T ≥ 0.85T c the amplitude of the detected signal decreased below the sensitivity level of our setup. This can be explained by the increase of the magnetic penetration depth λ at T → T c such that the modulation of the magnetic induction at the vortex cores and between them becomes very small. The particular set of data reported here was acquired at T = 0.8T c since at this temperature the depinning current is yet rather small and the peak frequency can be efficiently tuned by rather small currents. With λ(0.8T c ) ≈ 130 nm and ξ(0.8T c ) ≈ 27 nm the magnetic induction variation at the vortex core and between the vortices can be estimated as ∆B = B v -B min ∼ 10 mT, where B v ≈ 32 nm, thus yielding ∆B/B v ≈ 30% 2 . According to Faraday's law, a uniform 30%-change of the magnetic flux for a single vortex moving with velocity v = 100 m/s should produce an emf of ε = -∆Φ/∆t = -0.3 vΦ 0 d/2 ∼ 0.6 μV. Assuming that coherently moving vortices contribute to the emf additively, the emf produced by 50 vortices in our sample can be estimated as ε ∼ 30μV. Obviously, this simple estimate is an upper-bound estimate as it does not account for signal losses due to the impedance mismatch between the nanowire and feed line. We now proceed to a quantitative analysis of the observed peaks. Both peaks can be fitted to the Lorentz distribution, which allows for a systematic analysis of their linewidth, ∆f , and magnitude, A, as a function of the vortex velocity. The deduced dependences ∆f WB (v) and ∆f TOF (v) are displayed in Fig. Outside of this range of vortex velocities, the area under the peak decreases, indicating that the number of vortices which takes part in the in-phase induction of voltage is decreasing as well. At small velocities this can be understood as a consequence of the depinning transition in the vortex dynamics. Indeed, even in high-quality films there is always a variation in the individual pinning forces acting on different vortices so that the long-range order in the vortex lattice is lost below the depinning transition. This corresponds to regime (I) in the CVC in Fig. Nevertheless, the linewidth broadening in Fig. To summarize, by using a spectrum analyzer connected to a nanowire meander near the surface of a superconducting Nb film we have detected an rf voltage induced by coherent vortex motion. The voltage is peaked at the washboard frequency and its subharmonics associated with the times needed for a vortex row to cross one meander period and the entire antenna, respectively. By sweeping the dc current value, we have been able to tune the generation frequency from 100 MHz to 1.5 GHz, thereby demonstrating that patterned hybrid nanostructures can be used as dc-tunable rf generators. The generation vanishes below the depinning transition, at high vortex velocities, and if the magnetic field value is tuned away from the matching configuration. Taken together, these findings underline the decisive role of the coherence in the vortex dynamics for the rf generation. Since the employed method relies on magnetic induction measurements rather than voltage, we anticipate that it can be applied to skyrmion systems as well 