Strontium titanate is a wide-gap semiconductor avoiding a ferroelectric instability thanks to quantum fluctuations. This proximity leads to strong screening of static Coulomb interaction and paves the way for the emergence of a very dilute metal with extremely mobile carriers at liquid-helium temperature. Upon warming, mobility decreases by several orders of magnitude. Yet, metallicity persists above room temperature even when the apparent mean free path falls below the electron wavelength. The superconducting instability survives at exceptionally low concentrations and beyond the boundaries of MigdalEliashberg approximation. An intimate connection between dilute superconductivity and aborted ferroelectricity is widely suspected. In this review, we give a brief account of ongoing research on bulk strontium titanate as an insulator, a metal, and a superconductor. Strontium titanate (STO) is an insulator with a band gap of 3.22 eV In 1964, superconductivity with a modest critical temperature of 0.3 K was discovered in lightly-doped strontium titanate Even in the 1980s, not everybody admitted that the issue of superconductivity in strontium titanate was settled. In particular, Takada In 2004, Ohtomo & Hwang discovered a metallic twodimensional electron gas at the interface between SrTiO 3 and LaAlO 3 Five decades after its discovery, strontium titanate remains by far the most dilute superconductor among doped semiconductors Electronic transport after chemical substitution in the parent insulator generates another set of questions. Introducing mobile electrons to this insulator is remarkably easy, in contrast to hole-like carriers. This dissymmetry is presumably due to the indirect gap, which puts the ndoped and p-doped constant-energy surfaces in different locations in the Brillouin zone. The precocious metallicity of the n-doped semiconductor is understandable in the light of the Mott criterion for metal-insulator transitions This review tries to give a brief account of the accumulated knowledge on this solid as an insulator, a metal and a superconductor. The focus is on the bulk solid. The interested reader can find many reviews on the superconducting properties of hetero-structures At room temperature, SrTiO 3 has a cubic structure (Figure Density functional theory has confirmed the instability of the cubic structure. The experimental lattice parameter leads to imaginary phonon frequencies both at the boundary (R-point) and the center (Γ-point) of the Brillouin zone Early X-ray measurements quantified the slight tetragonal distortion c/a= 1.0005 caused by the the AFD transition without any detectable change in the unit-cell volume The octahedra can rotate around each of the three perpendicular cubic axes. Therefore, in absence of controlled strain, three types of tetragonal domains along three different c-axes emerge. Single-domain samples have been obtained by manipulating the shape of the crystal or applying directional stress The AFD transition is extremely sensitive to the presence of a tiny amount of extrinsic atoms. Introducing oxygen vacancies reduces T AF D SrTiO 3 is subject to a second lattice instability associated with a soft mode at the Γ-point (the Γ 15 mode), which could lead to a ferroelectric instability. The softening of the Γ 15 mode has been observed by Raman This incipient ferroelectricity In a polar crystal, there is a theoretical link between the ratio of static, 0 , to high-frequency, ∞ , electric permittivity and the ratio of longitudinal, ω LO , to transverse, ω T O , phonon frequencies known as the Lyddane-Sachs-Teller expression The scaling between static electric permittivity, 0 , and the frequency of the transverse optical (TO) soft mode As discussed above, SrTiO 3 is a quantum paraelectric. Its paraelectric state shows the soft-mode behavior of a displacive ferroelectric. The potential energy of the polar soft mode as a function of the relative displacement of anions (O) and cations (Sr, Ti) exhibits a double well shape with two minima corresponding to ferroelectric ground states with opposite polarizations. In pristine SrTiO 3 zero-point fluctuations between those two states impede the emergence of a long-range ferroelectric order. This order can be stabilized by chemical substitution (of a small fraction of Sr atoms with Ca The emergence of ferroelectricity in CaSTO and STO18 has been described using two different pictures, since the transition exhibits components of both displacive and order-disorder type ferroelectrics. In CaSTO, the substituted Ca atoms have a slightly smaller ionic radius (0.99 Å) than Sr (1.12 Å) (see Figure Two rare transport phenomena, second sound and Poiseuille flow, manifestations of phonon hydrodynamics A. Charge Transport: Historical Background The first report on electronic transport in doped strontium titanate Early studies found that the electric resistivity changes by orders of magnitude when one cools the solid from 300 to 4 K Experimental fermiology Like what was reported in other dilute metals The experimentally-resolved mass at low concentration (1.8m e ) A further check of the overall consistency is provided by specific heat data, which resolved an electronic specific heat of γ = 1.55 mJ/K 2 cm -3 Quantum oscillations can be observed in this doped semiconductor in presence of a moderate magnetic field. Since this is not the case for metallic silicon, one may wonder why. It is because the parent insulator of dilute metallic strontium titanate is a quantum paralectric. The effective Bohr radius (a * B = 4π 0 2 /m * e 2 ) depends on the static permittivity, 0 , and the effective mass, m * . Because of the large magnitude of 0 , a * B becomes as long as 600 nm in metallic STO How can a shallow Fermi sea (with a depth of 1 meV on top of a band gap of 3 eV) survive without disintegrating into a collection of puddles in absence of homogeneous distribution of oxygen vacancies? The long effective Bohr radius plays a crucial role by pushing up the Thomas-Fermi screening length in the dilute metal. This protects the percolated Fermi sea even when its depth becomes more than three orders of magnitude smaller than the gap and keeps the mobility of the carriers high, because any local departure from lattice perfection is averaged over long distances. The doping dependence of mobility, which follows n -α with α close to unity, can be explained with a set of most unsophisticated assumptions, leading to an expression for the intrinsic mobility of a metallic semiconductor with a random distribution of dopants The Tokura group, studying the phase diagram of Sr 1-x La x TiO 3 , was the first to show that the lowtemperature resistivity of the dilute metal follows a T 2 behavior One expects a T -square resistivity in a Fermi liquid, because the phase space for electron-electron scattering However, the observation raises several questions. There are two known ways for collision between electrons to generate a finite contribution to electric resistivity. The first is Umklapp scattering, during which the colliding electrons lose a unit vector of the reciprocal lattice. But in the extreme dilute limit, the Fermi surface is too small for Umklapp scattering. The second possibility is often dubbed the Baber mechanism A second problem is the persistence of the T -square behavior up to the degeneracy temperature and above. In the Fermi liquid picture, one expects a T -square behavior only when the quasi-particles are well-defined and deep in the degenerate regime. Maslov & Chubukov have recently pointed out Above 100 K, the temperature dependence of resistivity is close to cubic, as reported in early studies In 1981, Although SrTiO 3-δ behaves very differently from ordinary doped semiconductors, including those with a similar hard phonon spectrum, its temperature-dependent resistivity is strikingly similar to other aborted ferroelectrics such as IV-VI semiconductors If the quasi-particles do not change their mass with temperature, then they cease to be well-defined over a time scale long enough to allow a scattering time, used in the collision-based Boltzmann picture. This is the central paradox for any collision-based picture of charge transport in this system. But what if the polarons were becoming heavier upon warming? This interesting line of thought was suggested by Eagles In the 1960s, when superconductivity was discovered in n-doped STO One puzzling feature of superconductivity in strontium titanate is that, resistive T c (the temperature at which resistivity drops to zero) and the bulk T c (the temperature at which specific heat begins to rise) are different. Figure As seen in Figure The first study of the superconducting gap in STO was by Binnig et al. The study of thermal conductivity, κ, in the superconducting state The superfluid density n s , i.e., the density of carriers condensing into Cooper pairs is unusually small in this system. This quantity is linked to the penetration depth λ by the London equation λ -2 = μ 0 n s e 2 /m Because of its low carrier density, the expected H c1 is of the order of the terrestrial magnetic field In a naive picture, when T → 0, all carriers contribute to superconductivity and as a result n s should match the normal state carrier density n H . This is indeed true in a large variety of superconductors in (or close to) the clean limit To take a closer look, the ratios n s /n H and π∆τ / reported in Ref The latter observation may be connected to the unsettled issue of multi-band superconductivity. At optimal doping, the normal carriers are distributed among three distinct Fermi surfaces. However, recent tunneling studies detect a single superconducting gap Is it a mere coincidence that this unusual superconducting dome occurs in a doped semiconductor whose insulating parent is an incipient ferroelectric? One suspects the answer to this question to be negative. This suspicion is reinforced by the simple observation illustrated in Figure Following Rowley et al. quantum critical scenario, the maximum T c enhances and the dome shifts to lower doping levels upon 18 O substitution, as isotopic substitution pushes the quantum critical point into the electron doping region that allows superconductivity Experimental support for the ferroelectric quantumcritical scenario, the subject of several recent theoretical studies Sr 1-x Ca x TiO 3-δ (0.002 < x < 0.02) is a metal, and therefore not a true a ferroelectric with a reversible bulk polarization. Nevertheless, it hosts a phase transition structurally indistinguishable from the ferroelectric transition occurring in the insulator without oxygen vacancies remains a challenge to theory. A promising possible candidate are plasmons The BCS theory based the phenomenon of superconductivity on solid theoretical grounds. But it also led to a paradigm shift. In the words of A. J. Leggett, superconductivity "was understood as occurring almost inevitably in a very degenerate Fermi system" whenever phononmediated attraction outweighs Coulomb repulsion The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review. 1. SrTiO 3 is a quantum paraelectric with a very large dielectric permittivity. The ferroelectric order can be stabilized by applying strain, chemical (Ca for Sr) or isotopic (O 18 for O 16 ) substitution. 2. The large permittivity of the insulator leads to a long effective Bohr radius for dopants, which can easily turn the system into a dilute metal. Charge transport in this metal presents intriguing features including the persistence of T -square resistivity in the extreme dilute limit and a non-saturating magnetoresistance at room-temperature and above. 3. The superconducting dome persists down to very low carrier densities where several usual assumptions in the BCS scenario cease to be valid. 4. Superconductivity and ferroelectricity are intimately linked and there is experimental support for the quantum-critical scenario according to which the critical temperature is boosted by the vicinity to the ferroelectric order. 1. A reliable theory of charge transport in the dilute metallic state is missing. 2. Do the electrons become heavier with warming or do they keep their low-temperature mass? 3. Can a quantum-critical scenario explain the persistence of superconductivity in the very dilute limit in the oxygen-reduced strontium titanate? 4. Where does the difference between the bulk and resistive T c come from? 5. Is the system a multi-gap superconductor?