Understanding conformational change is crucial for programming and controlling the function of many mechanical systems such as allosteric enzymes and tunable metamaterials. Of particular interest is the relationship between the network topology or geometry and the specific motions observed under controlling perturbations. We study this relationship in mechanical networks of 2-D and 3-D Maxwell frames composed of point masses connected by rigid rods rotating freely about the masses. We first develop simple principles that yield all bipartite network topologies and geometries that give rise to an arbitrarily specified instantaneous and finitely deformable motion in the masses as the sole non-rigid body zero mode. We then extend these principles to characterize networks that simultaneously yield multiple specified zero modes, and create large networks by coupling individual modules. These principles are then used to characterize and design networks with useful material (negative Poisson ratio) and mechanical (targeted allosteric response) functions. Many physical systems can be thought of as networks in which contacts, bonds, linkages, or hinges connect physical elements to one another. From the study of force chains in granular materials Notably, even in rigid frames, mechanical networks can undergo conformational changes that drastically alter their function, such as exotic shape transformations in metamaterials Here we develop and exercise such a simple theory. We consider a rigid Maxwell Frame with nodes connected by edges. Given the connection topology, if we know all node positions, then the nullspace of the compatibility matrix We provide analytic and geometric principles for the construction, characterization, and control of these rigid frames with arbitrarily specified node positions and instantaneous displacements in d dimensions. These principles are derived for bipartite frames, where edges are only allowed between (i) the subset of nodes whose positions and motions are specified and (ii) the subset of nodes whose positions and motions are unspecified. Building on prior work on the deformation of general and bipartite frames Consider the frame specified by the undirected graph G = (V, E) with N nodes V = {1, • • • , N } embedded in d-dimensional space, and where the position of any node i is specified by vector x i ∈ R d×1 . Further, consider a set of N B rigid edges E ⊆ V × V, where is the length of the edge constraining the node pair i, j (Fig. (1) Further, our system of N nodes has a corresponding set of dN state variables, where each edge l ij provides a nonlinear distance constraint between two nodes. Provided that there are no states of self stress where d(d + 1)/2 of these degrees of freedom are rigid body motions of translations and rotations that preserve distances between all pairs of nodes. As a simple 2D example, we consider a triangle (Fig. Three of these degrees of freedom are rigid body motions, but the fourth manifests as a conformational deformation parameterized by θ, which requires the setting of an additional fourth coordinate. Given a frame G and given all node positions x i , these degrees of freedom are all instantaneous motions u i that preserve all edge lengths according to Eq. 9. We can rewrite each constraint in terms of u i , and combine them to define the compatibility matrix where the k-th row of C, corresponding to the k-th edge connecting nodes i and j, has all zero entries except (x i -x j ) T multiplied by u i , and (x j -x i ) T multiplied by u j . Then all node displacements u are given by the nullspace N (C). In pursuing the understanding and control of mechanical materials, we are often interested in both the positions x S ∈ R dN S ×1 and displacements u S ∈ R dN S ×1 of a subset of network nodes (which we will call the specified nodes) V S ⊂ V with |V S | = N S nodes, but not those of the remaining nodes (which we will call the unspecified nodes) Consideration of a subset of specified nodes is common in the study of several materials, such as those that have a negative Poisson ratio (Fig. Given a subset V S of k nodes with positions x S and displacements u S as specified constants, and a disjoint subset V U of nodes with positions x U and displacements u U as unspecified variables, we consider bipartite frames where edges only exist between specified nodes and unspecified nodes such that E ⊆ V S × V U (Fig. By temporarily omitting the constraint that c = x T U j u U j , we can linearize Eq. 12 to Let the m-dimensional nullspace N ( Ã) be spanned by the basis set , then a particular solution is given by ṽ * = Ã+ b, and the homogeneous solutions are given by linear combinations of the nullspace basis. Then ṽ = α Finally, we apply the constraint c = x T U j u U j to yield all solutions α to Eq. 12 (see Supplementary Methods) by where Q ∈ R m+1×m+1 . The solution space of α to Eq. 14 has dimension m -1, which are points for m = 1, conic sections for m = 2, and quadric surfaces for m = 3. For the general case where Ã has full row rank, then m = 2d + 1 -k. In d = 2, given k = 3 independent specified node positions x S1 , x S2 , x S3 and motions u S1 , u S2 , u S3 such that dim(N ( Ã)) = m = 2, the solution space for x U j , u U j is one dimensional (Fig. Similarly, in d = 3 with k = 5 specified nodes, we again have dim(N ( Ã)) = 2 for another one dimensional solution space (Fig. For example, the i-th rows of Ã given by [u T Si , x T Si , -1] can be written as linear combinations of three vectors The quadrics and conics previously discussed specify all positions x U j and displacements u U j of an unspecified node j that satisfy all k edge constraints given the positions x S and displacements u S of k specified nodes. Hence, the addition of each unspecified node along these surfaces adds d state variables and k constraints while preserving the desired motions u S . Here we demonstrate that for k > d, we can judiciously constrain our system such that the only non-rigid body degrees of freedom allows desired x S , u S , thereby requiring in general that the solution space have dimension of at least 0, and at most d - in such a way that 1) there are no states of self-stress, and 2) there are no rigid subgraphs, we ensure that our motion u S is the only finitely deformable non-rigid degree of freedom. As an example in d = 2, we provide an initial N S = 4 node system with a desired outward motion (Fig. which we reduce to 4 by adding N U = 2 nodes with N B = 8 edges (Fig. nodes with N B = 12 edges (Fig. We can similarly achieve the same result for N S = 8 specified nodes in d = 3 where rank( Ã) = 4 such that dim(N ( Ã)) = 3 for a 2-dimensional solution space (Fig. The desired motion exists as the single non-rigid motion after placing N U = 5 nodes with N B = 32 edges (Fig. Using this judicious constraint principle, we characterize and create networks with specified positions x S and two distinct displacements u S1 , u S2 . As an example in d = 2 for four nodes at x S (Fig. We realize that for one set of specified positions x Si , each specified motion u Si generates a solution space Eq. 14 for the position and motion of an unspecified node x U j , u U j . For each quadratic i, this solution space has parameters αi that map to physical positions and motions based on W . We can define a projection from our solution coordinates α to common spatial coordinates β = P i αi . In this way, for Qi = P -T i Q finds the spatial coordinates where the solution spaces of both quadratics intersect. For dim(N ( Ã)) = d with a solution dimension of d -1, the map P i is simply given by the first d rows and columns of W . For dim(N ( Ã)) = d-1 with solution dimension d-2, the projection β = P i αi must also satisfy a linear constraint p T P -1 β = 1 (see Supplementary Methods). While special cases in two equations and two variables permit an analytic expression for these intersections through the resultant of the system To continue with our example in d = 2, we illustrate the solution spaces of both of these motions (Fig. We observe that by placing our unspecified nodes along the line of the surface intersections, we can constrain our system to have N D = 8 degrees of freedom (Fig. In the previous sections, we outlined how to judiciously constrain frames to allow for desired positions and motions in a subset of specified nodes. Here, we discuss a few basic approaches for combining these frames for a variety of potential applications. The core idea is to couple multiple bipartite modules each created with d(d + 1)/2 + 1 degrees of freedom in a way that leaves the entire system with N D = d(d + 1)/2 + 1. The natural way to couple these networks is to combine nodes. Consider the previously designed module in d = 2 with N D = 4 with outward motion (Fig. Hence, we require that for each module, the coupled nodes do not move as a rigid unit. For modules as these that preserve specific symmetries (see Supplementary Methods), we can create network lattices with properties such as negative Poisson ratio (Fig. We (Fig. This long-range coupled conformational regulation of separately synthesized subunits is a hallmark of allostery in enzymes Deciphering principles of control in mechanical systems is of fundamental importance to understanding and optimizing the function of allosteric enzymes, auxetics, packings, and tunable metamaterials In this work, we obtain an intuitive closed-form analytic solution space of the positions x U and motions u U of an unspecified node set V U connected to a specified node set V S to allow for the desired motions while reducing the total number of degrees of freedom. We further generalize this judicious constraint process to the design of two independent motions, and demonstrate how to design large network motions by coupling smaller modules. Taken together, our work provides fundamental analytic and geometric principles for the construction, characterization, and control of 2-D and 3-D mechanical Maxwell frames. Approaches to Network Design. Important prior work in material design has focused on the use of algorithms to tune the responses of mechanical networks and packings For example, desired motions at multiple sites of an existing spring network can be tuned by the greedy iterative removal of bonds. In contrast to these prior studies, our approach can be used to provide a fully analytic characterization of all bipartite networks that achieve desired responses in an arbitrary number of nodes. In this sense, our characterization is complete, intuitive, and invariant to any algorithm, cost function, or initial condition of network topology and geometry. We also address the problem of characterizing the solution space of networks that simultaneously achieve multiple specified motions in response to different perturbations, which can be used for the design of networks with multiple functions. Important prior theoretical contributions provide valuable conditions for motions of bipartite frames Implications for Materials Physics and Mechanobiology. Armed with the tools to generate desired motions in complex networks, we can begin thinking about applications in physics, biology, medicine, and engineering. One such application may be a bottom-up approach to designing cooperativity and allostery in proteins Methodological Considerations. Importantly, while we outlined conditions for successful network construction, ensuring no self stress is not always guaranteed. There exist pathological unspecified node placements along the intersection of multi-mode solution spaces, and along a plane in 3 dimensions that yield self stresses, some of which are explored Given the simplification of bipartite networks, these results only address the construction of more complex non-bipartite networks as the combination of bipartite modules. As such, an interesting future extension of this research would be the hierarchical judicious constraining of networks along the solution spaces in bipartite networks of specified and unspecified nodes. Similarly, the analysis of existing networks is currently restricted to those that are wellapproximated by this bipartite simplification. An interesting future extension here would be the deconstruction of existing non-bipartite networks into coupled bipartite modules. These motions are also designed in the linear regime, and as such cannot speak to the extent to which the nonlinear motion follows this linear approximation. Useful future work could use analytical and computational approaches to consider geometries along these solution spaces that yield robust nonlinear responses that can be coupled to produce robust bulk responses. Another useful future direction is the study of judicious constraint addition on non-bipartite networks, or the deconstruction of networks into interconnected modules of specified and unspecified nodes. The simple and intuitive relationship between desired network motions and the full bipartite solution space is a powerful tool for the understanding and design of mechanical motions. These results open the door to a wide range of useful theoretical, computational, and experimental applications and extensions, including the hierarchical judicious constraint addition of non-bipartite networks, algorithms to deconstruct empirical networks into coupled bipartite modules, and the design of modules with robust nonlinear responses. From novel bottom-up design principles of protein mechanics to modular construction of bulk material properties, these tools can be applied and advanced in a wide range of activities. A. Key Formulations 1. Single Edge Constraint Between Nodes i and j: 2. Degrees of Freedom of System of N Nodes and N B Edges in d Dimensions: 3. Zero Mode Motions From Complimentary Matrix: 4. Rewriting k Edge Constraints from Specified Nodes i = 1, • • • , k to One Unspecified Node j: 5. Linear Representation of Solution Space Omitting Quadratic Constraint: 6. Satisfaction of Quadratic Constraint: 7. Degrees of Freedom Given N U Unspecified Node Additions: 8. Intersection of Two Solution Spaces for Multi-Mode Construction: Consider a network of N nodes and |E| = N B edges in d dimensions. For any edge e k ∈ E of length l k connecting node i and node j, the node positions We can gather all constraints k = 1, , and take the gradient with respect to instantaneous changes in node positions to get the . . ., . . . , . . ., . . ., . . . , . . ., . . . , . . . must not change the value of any constraint Hence, the requirement Eq. 9 for edge k comes from the fact that We note that the complementary matrix only tests zero modes to linear order, and that the condition u ∈ N (C) is necessary but not sufficient for the actual motion u to be a finite deformation. Given a system has no states of self stress, the motions u ∈ N (C) are finitely deformable. Consider a system of k specified nodes where the i-th node has some constant desired position x Si and motion u Si , and all k nodes are connected to an unspecified node j with variable position x U j and motion u U j for a total of k edge constraints. Each linearized edge constraint can be written as We can then consider a vector of constraints g , from which we get Eq. 12 D. Rewriting the Vector Form into a Linear Solution with Quadratic Constraint From Eq. 13 we know that if b ∈ R( Ã), one solution for the variables ṽ * = Ã+ b, where Ã+ is the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse. The full space of solutions ṽ is given by the addition of ṽ * and any linear combination of vectors in the nullspace of Ã. Let w 1 , • • • , w m be linearly independent vectors that span N ( Ã). Then we can construct such that the solutions are given by The application of the quadratic constraint c = x T U j u U j is achieved through some basic algebraic manipulation. Recall that c is the first entry of ṽ. Hence, for vector p = [0; • • • ; 0; 1], we see that c = p T ṽ. to extract the values of x U j and u U j from solution vector ṽ x T U j u U j = ṽT Oṽ. Hence, our quadratic constraint Eq. 14 comes from satisfying and we can group the variables α to get the form To make the equation more presentable, we define The dimensionality of the positions x U j and motions u U j of an unspecified node is completely determined by the dimension of N ( Ã). Because the linear solutions of ṽ have dimension dim(N ( Ã)), and we have only one more constraint Eq. 14, the dimensionality of the unspecified node solution space is simply dim(N ( Ã)) -1. Given a system of N S specified nodes where all node positions x Si and motions u S1 are linearly independent, the solution space dimension is generally given by 2d -N S . This result follows simply from the fact that Ã ∈ R N S ×2d+1 , such that if all rows i of Ã given by [x T Si , u T Si , -1] are linearly independent, then Ã has full row rank, and dim(N ( Ã)) = 2d + 1 -N S . Finally, as a result of the quadratic constraint Eq. 14, the total solution dimension decreases by one to yield 2d -N S . If our specified node positions and motions are linearly dependent, then for each vector that is linearly dependent, the dimension of the solution space increases by one. Importantly, we note that these calculations are completely predicated on whether our specified node positions and motions are in the columnspace, , then no solution exists. Our solution space for unspecified node positions and motions is given by linear combinations ṽ = Ṽ α constrained by αT Q α = 0. However, when solving for the intersection of solutions for the design of multiple motions u S1 , u S2 , we have multiple matrices Ã1 , Ã2 , where the variables α1 , α2 are not necessarily represented in the same spatial coordinates. To meaningfully solve for these intersections, we must first transform our solution coordinates α into spatially meaningful coordinates in d dimensions (e.g., x, y, z). A crucial component of this transformation is the dimension of the coordinate space, given by dim(N ( Ã)) = m. With this transformation, we can create a transformed quadratic form where the first d entries of the solution β will be in spatial coordinates. If the number of original coordinates is m = d -1, then we have one fewer solution dimensions than spatial dimensions, and a direct linear transformation matrix P is insufficient. We move forward by treating the particular solution ṽ * as a part of the homogeneous solution in N ( Ã) such that where α should equal 1. Then similar to before, we select the spatial coordinates of our solution using matrix B = I d×d 0 d×1 0 d×d , to get the transformation However, because α must be 1, we have the extra constraint that for p ∈ R d×1 where Hence, our transformation leads to the same form as the previous case with the added condition that Intuitively, what we have done is artificially extend our solution space to d coordinates such that our quadratic constraint βT Q β = 0 defines a d-1 dimensional manifold, and we realize that the true solution space lies at the intersection of this manifold and the d-1 dimensional hyperplane defined by p T P -1 β = 1. This way, we can change the coordinates of our original quadratic forms to d spatial coordinates, and find the intersection of these quadratics and mathematically well defined hyperplanes. In the main text, we discuss how to couple two modules through judicious constraint addition. This method is the most general case, when the full nonlinear finite motions of the two modules do not overlap. Here, we will outline a simpler method of combining identical modules that share overlaps in their full nonlinear finite motions. To begin, we consider a simple module (Fig. We show this composite network (Fig. We can then replicate this composite network (Fig. We judiciously constrain the primary modules to have 4 degrees of freedom, and also judiciously constrain coupling modules C 1 , C 2 (Fig. One crucial condition to guarantee finitely deformable motions is to avoid states of self stress during the judicious constraint process. A peculiar situation arises when designing networks with 5 specified node positions and motions |V S | = 5 in d = 3. In general, for 5 specified nodes with independent motions, we have dim( Ã) = 2, with a one dimensional solution space that is the intersection of a quadric surface (defined by the first four nodes) and a plane (defined by the last node). Hence, all unspecified nodes in V U must be placed coplanar to each other, which creates a bipartite network that provably has at least two infinitesimal motions. These motions mean that if we judiciously constrain our 5 specified nodes to try to achieve a total N D = 7, we end up with 6 rigid body motions, 2 infinitesimal motions, and 1 state of self stress. For example, consider one of the modules in the main text in d = 3 concerning network we can remove the final two degrees of freedom by judiciously constraining two separate subsets of 4 specified nodes (Fig. 