Here we use angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to study superconductivity that emerges in two extreme cases, from a Fermi liquid phase (LiFeAs) and an incoherent bad-metal phase (FeTe0.55Se0.45). We find that although the electronic coherence can strongly reshape the single particle spectral function in the superconducting state, it is decoupled from the maximum superconducting pairing amplitude, which shows a universal scaling that is valid for all FeSCs. Our observation excludes pairing scenarios in the BCS and the BEC limit for FeSCs and calls for a universal strong coupling pairing mechanism for the FeSCs. The interplay between superconductivity and its normal state electronic coherence remains a central puzzle in unconventional superconductors. In the cuprate and heavy Fermion superconductors, superconductivity emerges from a non-Fermi liquid normal state with nearly vanishing coherent weight, Z k → 0, and thus motivated theoretical proposals of superconducting (SC) pairing mechanisms beyond the BCS paradigm In this study, we choose prototypical FeSCs, LiFeAs and FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , that have similar SC transition temperature. High-energy resolution ARPES data were recorded at the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences with a Scienta R4000 analyzer. We use the He Iα (hν=21.2 eV) resonance line of an helium discharge lamp. The angular and momentum resolutions were set to 0.2 • and 2 meV, respectively. All samples were cleaved in situ and measured in a vacuum better than 3×10 -11 Torr. Sample orientation and the experimental geometry for the LiFeAs and FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 measurements are the same. Our DFT+DMFT calculations were performed at 116 K within the fully charge self-consistent combination of DFT and embedded dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) We begin by establishing the distinct normal state electronic coherence of LiFeAs and FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 . As shown in Fig. The different normal state properties between LiFeAs and FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 are indeed captured by our DFT plus dynamic mean field theory (DFT+DMFT) calculations without spin-orbit coupling. Figures Having the normal state established, we now explore the corresponding A(k, ω) response in the SC state. expressed as: with where E k and ξ k are the EDC peak position in the SC and normal states, respectively, and ∆ k is the SC gap. In LiFeAs, the change of EDCs is largest near k F and get smaller when ξ k >> ∆ k , consistent with Eq. 1 and 2. In addition, we find that the total spectral weight of the symmetrized EDC at k = k β F is nearly conserved, which, again, is in agreement with the BCS spectral function. In FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 , however, the change of EDCs is very similar to those observed in the anti-nodal region of cuprates, where the SC coherent peak develops from the incoherent normal state and gains more spectral weight Despite the dramatic differences on A(k, ω) and normal state electronic coherence, we find that both LiFeAs and FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 have the same dimensionless quantity 2∆ max SC (k)/k B T c ∼ 7.2, where ∆ max SC is the largest SC gap determined by ARPES. This value is twice larger than that predicted by the BCS theory, confirming the strong pairing nature of these two materials. More intriguingly, as shown in Fig. Very recently, the BCS-BEC crossover scenario has been proposed as the possible pairing mechanism for FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45 Finally we compare our observations with the cuprate superconductors. While the origin of the electronic interactions and consequently the nature of the normal states are different between the cuprates and FeSCs, their SC response in the charge and spin excitations are remarkably similar. Spin resonance, Ω res , has been observed in both high-T c families -50 -25 0 E -E F (meV) FeTe 0.55 Se 0.45