We have determined the superconducting and magnetic properties of four samples of LuxZr1-xB12 (x = 0.04, 0.07, 0.17, and 0.8) using muon spin rotation (μSR) and magnetometry measurements. We observed a strong magnetic signal in both the μSR and magnetometry data in one sample (x = 0.07), likely caused by the formation of static moments of size ≈ 1 μB due to a clustering effect of the Lu 3+ ions. In all other samples, we find only a small magnetic signal in the μSR data thought to originate from boron nuclei in the B12 cages. The superconductivity is found to evolve with x, with a decrease in x resulting in an increase in critical temperature and a decrease of the penetration depth. Most remarkably, we find the formation of nodes in the superconducting gap for x ≤ 0.17, providing a new example of an s-to-d-wave crossover in a superconductor. Introduction -Since the discovery of superconductivity in MgB 2 ZrB 12 is BCS superconductor with one of the highest critical temperatures (T c = 6 K) among the higher borides Nonmagnetic impurity substitutions impact on superconducting properties in various ways dependent on the pair-breaking mechanism. For example, Anderson's theorem implies that a small number of nonmagnetic impu-rities can dramatically suppress superconductivity in the case of an anisotropic gap in a d-wave superconductor In this paper, we report muon spin rotation (μSR) and magnetometry experiments on four samples from the Lu x Zr 1-x B 12 family of superconductors to determine their superconducting and magnetic properties. We focus on samples relatively close to the stoichiometric LuB 12 and ZrB 12 end members of this family of compounds, in order to investigate the effect of nonmagnetic substitutions in the low-doping (≤ 20% substitution, or x ≤ 0.2 and x ≥ 0.8) regime. One sample showed evidence of magnetism from the nanodomains postulated in Ref. Experimental Details -Four single crystals of Lu x Zr 1-x B 12 were investigated in this experiment; these included one 'magnetic' sample, which had previously arXiv:1804.05626v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 16 Apr 2018 displayed the nanodomain behaviour, and three 'nonmagnetic' samples, which displayed no such phenomena. The 'magnetic' sample, x = 0.07, was identical to that used in Ref. μSR experiments Superconductivity -TF-μSR measurements were performed on all of the samples to determine their superconducting properties. x = 0.04, 0.07, and 0.17 were measured above and below T c in transverse applied fields B TF of 30 mT and x = 0.8 was measured in B TF = 2.5 mT [fields were chosen in order to lie below B c2 for each compound; see the Supplemental Information [33] for B c2 values]. A sample spectrum for x = 0.04 is shown in Fig. The data were fitted with where γ μ = 2π × 135.5 MHzT -1 is the gyromagnetic ratio of the muon and φ is related to the detector geometry [the data were divided among eight groups of detectors with φ fitted for each group]. The first term corresponds to muons that are not in the superconductor, and precess in the external field. These muons experience a small Gaussian relaxation. The second term corresponds to muons in the superconductor, which experience an approximately Gaussian relaxation arising from the field distribution of the vortex lattice. These muons also experience a small, temperature independent relaxation from nuclear moments, giving a total relaxation σ(T ) = σ 2 SC (T ) + σ 2 nucl . The transverse field dependences of σ SC for x = 0.07, 0.17, and 0.8 are shown in Fig. To determine the nature of the superconducting gaps in the samples, we fitted the data with single-gap BCS s-wave and d-wave models, as well as two-gap s + s-and s + d-wave models. The BCS model of the normalized superfluid density of a superconductor is given by We find that x = 0.04, 0.07, and 0.17 are s + d-wave superconductors, whereas x = 0.8 is purely s-wave. A key indicator of nodal superconductivity is the linear dependence of λ -2 ab at low T , which is observed in x = 0.04, 0.07, and 0.17. x = 0.8, on the other hand, shows a low temperature plateau in λ -2 ab , corresponding to a fully gapped superconductor where low-energy excitations are strongly suppressed Zr 4+ has an extra d-orbital vacancy compared to Lu 3+ ; it is likely that this results in increased d-wave orbital pairing with the B cages, and therefore nodal superconductivity dominates. The observed gap evolution in the Lu x Zr 1-x B 12 is similar to that seen in Fe-based superconductors. The Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 family of materials shows fully gapped behaviour for x = 0.4, with line nodes appearing at x = 1 Magnetism -To address the apparent discrepancy between the differing magnetic behaviours of this family of compounds observed in Refs. ZF spectra below T c for one 'magnetic' sample (x = 0.07) and two 'nonmagnetic' samples (x = 0.17 and 0.8) are shown in Fig. where A 0 and A base are the relaxing and baseline amplitudes. The Kubo-Toyabe function is often used to describe a system of static spins characterised by a width ∆ ZF /γ μ . ∆ ZF was found to be constant (0.40(3) μs -1 ) across all of the samples. The additional Lorentzian relaxation was equal and very small for the two nonmagnetic samples (≈ 0.05 μs -1 ), and significantly larger for the magnetic sample (≈ 0.2 μs -1 ). To further probe the nature of the magnetism, LF-μSR was carried out on one magnetic and one non-magnetic sample: x = 0.07 and x = 0.8 respectively. The data were fitted with a longitudinal-field Kubo-Toyabe function The observed differences in magnetism are supported by bulk magnetometry measurements of x = 0.07, 0.17, and 0.8, as shown in Fig. where μ is the effective magnetic moment per formula unit, and H = 20 Oe is the applied external field. We find that the moment per formula unit in the magnetic sample (μ 0.07 ≈ 1.18μ B ) is significantly higher than for the nonmagnetic samples (μ 0.17 ≈ 0.2μ B , μ 0.8 ≈ 0.1μ B ). From these data, we postulate that the ZF signal observed in the nonmagnetic samples, which is insensitive to Lu 3+ concentration, is dominated by B nuclei in the cages, similar to that observed in LuB 12 Conclusion -In summary, we have carried out μSR and magnetometry measurements to probe the nature of the and superconductivity in the Lu x Zr 1-x B 12 family of superconductors. ZF-μSR, LF-μSR, and magnetometry measurements reveal a strong magnetic signal in one sample, which was thought to contain magnetic nanodomains, compared to those samples with no domains. We attribute this sample dependence to a clustering effect in which the distribution of Lu 3+ may affect the formation of static moments. We find that the moments associated with this effect are of order 1 μ B per formula unit. Scanning tunnelling microscopy or scanning electron microscopy may provide further insights into this effect. TF-μSR measurements revealed that the superconductivity was robust to these variations in magnetism. We find that the increase in T c associated with the decrease of x is also accompanied by a decrease in penetration depth and the formation of nodes in the superconducting gap function. This unusual transition is similar to that observed in iron pnictide superconductors, and further study of this family of compounds may provide additional insights into the mechanisms behind nodal-to-gapped crossovers in high temperature superconductors.