FeSe is an intriguing iron-based superconductor. It presents an unusual nematic state without magnetism and can be tuned to increase the critical superconducting temperature. Recently it has been observed a noteworthy anisotropy of the superconducting gaps. Its explanation is intimately related to the understanding of the nematic transition itself. Here we show that the spin-nematic scenario driven by orbital-selective spin-fluctuations provides a simple scheme to understand both phenomena. The pairing mediated by anisotropic spin modes is not only orbital selective but also nematic, leading to stronger pair scattering across the hole and X electron pocket. The delicate balance between orbital ordering and nematic pairing points also to a marked kz dependence of the hole-gap anisotropy. Soon after the discovery of superconductivity in ironbased systems it has been proposed that pairing could be unconventional, i.e. based on a non-phononic mechanism 1,2 . This proposal has been triggered, from one side, by the small estimated value of the electronphonon coupling, and, from the other side, by the proximity in the temperature-doping phase diagram of a magnetic instability nearby the superconducting (SC) one. Within an itinerant-electron picture pairing could be provided by repulsive spin-fluctuations (SF) between hole and electron pockets, connected by the same wavevector characteristic of the spin modulations in the magnetic phase (see Fig. The success of the itinerant scenario as a unified description of Fe-based materials has been partly questioned by the discovery of superconductivity in the FeSe system. Recent experiments In this situation, the explanation of the observed anisotropy of the SC gaps in FeSe becomes intimately related to the understanding of the nematic transition itself. Extensive experimental studies on FeSe-based mate-rial, ranging from quasiparticle interference imaging one side the degree of orbital nesting between hole and electron pockets is crucial to determine the temperature scale where SF beyond RPA drive the spin-nematic instability To compute the SC properties of FeSe we start from a low-energy model adapted from where the explicit definition of the coefficients u l,k , v l,k with l = Γ, X, Y is given in Supplementary Note 1. For example, for the hole pocket in the tetragonal phase u Γ,kF ∼ cos θ and v Γ,kF ∼ sin θ, accounting for the predominant orbital character of the FS represented in Fig. Since xz states are absent at X the S xz q operator has no component at the wavevector Q X connecting the Γ and X pocket, and viceversa for the yz states. This leads to OSSF at different momenta, as depicted in Fig. The existence of OSSF provides a natural explanation of the orbital ordering observed in the nematic phase of FeSe. In fact, the self-energy corrections due to spin exchange imply a shift in the chemical potential with opposite sign for the hole and electron pockets, leading in both cases to a shrinking of the FS The effect of the nematic orbital splitting on the orbital factors below T S is shown in Fig. i.e. ∆Σ h/e ≃ 15 meV. The most dramatic changes due to the nematic order are found in the orbital occupation of the hole pocket Fig. By building up the spin-singlet vertex mediated by the SF ( The coefficients u l,k , v l,k , accounting for the pockets orbital character, preserve the C 4 band-structure symmetry above T S and reproduce the nematic reconstruction below T S . The g X/Y couplings control the strengh of the pair hopping between the Γ and X/Y pockets. Within a spin-nematic scenario, OSSF below T S are stronger along ΓX than along ΓY leading to a nematic pairing anisotropy with g X > g Y . Within the present itinerantfermions picture the SF are peaked at the wavevectors connecting hole-like with electron-like pockets. Thus, due to the absence in FeSe of the hole-like xy band at Γ one can neglect the spin-mediated pairing in the xy channel. However, SF at RPA level were found 31 to be most prominent at Q = (π, π). While this could be consistent with inelastic neutron scattering measurements at high temperatures, it does not account for the predominance of stripe-like SF at (π, 0) in the nematic phase The set of Eq.s (8)-( ∆ ∆ Here is the dispersion in the SC state, where ε l,k is the band dispersion on each pocket l = Γ, X, Y above T c and ∆ l,k is the band gap defined as: Superconducting Gaps Anisotropy The overall momentum dependence of the band gaps is determined by the interplay between the momentum dependence of the orbital factors and the hierarchy of the orbital SC order parameters. In the absence of nematic order Eq.s ( In the nematic state the band structure breaks the C 4 symmetry, making v 2 Γ,k ≫ u 2 Γ,k (see Fig. To understand the effect of the band-structure nematic reconstruction on the SC gap anisotropy we show in Fig. Y , Fig. . Thus, by neglecting logarithmic corrections in the gap ratios, from Eq.s ( and Note that Eq.s( , leading to a small modulation with a relative maximum at θ = π/2 (dashed line in Fig. The anisotropy g X /g Y = 21 extracted from this analysis is rather large, since one needs to overcome the strong suppression of the yz orbital due to nematic reconstruction at the hole pocket: one needs at least g X /g Y 2 (not shown) to start to see the correct symmetry of the gap at Γ, i.e. a maximum at θ = 0. The value of g X /g Y obtained by the SC-gaps analysis is compatible with the anisotropy of the OSSF used to reproduce the orbital selective shrinking of the FS in the nematic phase The gap obtained for the X pocket is shown in Fig. Recently, the k z -dependence of the gap anisotropy on the hole pocket has been investigated X > u 4 Y of the orbital factors in the electron pockets is enough to guarantee that ∆ yz h > ∆ xz h , leading to a hole-pocket gap anisotropy compatible with the measurements even when g X = g Y , as recently shown in The C 4 symmetry breaking of paramagnetic SF is a consequence of SF interactions beyond RPA In our case, Eq. ( To reconcile ARPES with RPA-based calculations of the spin-mediated pairing interactions the authors of 26 use the alternative approach to remove intentionally the contribution of the Y pocket from the RPA-mediated pairing interaction. This is equivalent to put g Y = 0 in Eq.s (10)-( In summary, our work provides a paradigm for the emergence of superconductivity in FeSe from an orbitalselective nematic SF mechanism. By combining the orbital ordering induced by the nematic shrinking of the Fermi surface pockets below the nematic transition with the anisotropic pairing interaction mediated by nematic SF, we explain the gap hierarchy reported experimentally on hole and electron pockets, and its variation with k z . Our findings offer also a fresh perspective on previous attempts to explain the SC properties of FeSe, highlighting from one side the crucial role of spin-mediated pairing, and from the other side clarifying the importance of spin-spin interactions beyond RPA level. This result represents then a serious challenge for a full microscopic approach, that must account self-consistently for the emergence of Ising-nematic SF below the nematic transition temperature. The mean-field equations for the pairing Hamiltonian, Eq.s ( ∆ The corresponding self-consistent BCS equations at T = 0 are the ones reported in the text, Eq.s ( where we defined u 2 The cut-off ω D represents the range of the spin-mediated pairing interaction, and it has been taken of order of 0.1 eV. The angular dependent density of state is defined as usual as where k F (θ) and v F (θ) are the wavevector and velocity at the Fermi level, respectively. For a parabolic band dispersion N X (ε F , θ) reduces to an angular-independent constant, as usual. Even though in Eq. ( To describe the band structure of FeSe above the superconducting (SC) transition, we adapt the orbital model of ref. 36. The effective band-mass parameters are extracted from ARPES measurements. These values, considerably smaller than the ones predicted by LDA, are usually reproduced remarkably well by DMFT-based calculations To illustrate the model, let us start from the low-energy Hamiltonian around the Γ point in the orbital space: Here the spinor is defined as ψ Γ k,σ = (c yz,k,σ , c xz,k,σ ). Taking into account the real part of the isotropic Σ Γ 0 and anisotropic ∆Σ h components of the self-energy, responsible for the nematic shrinking, one has that: and we defined As discussed in ref.s 19,38 the self-energy corrections are negative at the hole pocket, so the Σ Γ 0 term accounts in general for an uniform shrinking of the pocket, present already in the paramagnetic phase. Below the structural transition temperature, T S , nematic spin fluctuations induce larger corrections in the Q X direction, which translate in a |Σ Γ yz | > |Σ Γ xz |, so that ∆Σ h > 0 (ref. 19). Taking into account also the spin-orbit splitting it is easy to see 36 that the Hamiltonian (30) gets an additional term ±l/2σ 2 in the ± spin sector. As a consequence the eigenvalues defining the bands are given by: where the +/-refers to the outer/inner pocket, respectively. Since the two spin sectors have the same energy dispersion we drop from now on any explicit dependence on the spin index. By introducing the orbital weights: one can also define the rotation from the orbital to the band basis where h † + /h † -is the creation operator of a quasiparticle in the outer/inner pocket, respectively. Since in FeSe only the outer pocket crosses the Fermi level, throughout the main text we dropped the + index and we simply referred to h k and ε Γ,k as the fermionic operator and bare dispersion of the outer hole pocket. In the paramagnetic phase (∆Σ h = 0) and in the absence of spin-orbit interaction the two hole bands have a simple parabolic In this case the orbital weights only depend on the azimuthal angle θ measured with respect to k x = 0, so that u Γ,k = cos θ and v Γ,k = sin θ. However, the spin-orbit interaction and the nematic splitting mix the two orbital characters, leading to the angular dependence of the orbital weights at the Fermi level shown in Fig. For the X/Y pockets the general structure is analogous to Eq. ( for the X pocket, with where h yz,k = -ǫ yz + a yz k 2 and h xy,k = -ǫ xy + a xy k 2 . Analogous expressions hold for the Y pocket provided that one exchange the role of k x and k y , , and Σ X yz is replaced by Σ Y xz . At the electron pockets the self-energy corrections are positive, so that the Σ X/Y yz/xz terms lead again to an upward shift of the yz/xz orbitals. In the spin-nematic state Σ X yz > Σ Y xz so the yz sector of the X pocket shrinks further and the xz part of the Y pocket expands, see Fig. such that ε X/Y k,+ is the electronic band crossing the Fermi level at the X/Y point. The rotation from the orbital to the band basis is defined now as with the orbital weights given by At the Y points the definitions are again equivalent, provided that one replaces Σ X yz with Σ Y xz and k x with k y . As for the hole pocket, we drop the + index and we refer to e X/Y,k and ε X/Y,k as the fermionic operators and energy dispersions of the electronic X/Y pockets. In summary, the notations used in the main text are: With these definitions in mind the rotation from the orbital to the band basis defined in Eq.s (1)-(3) of the main text are equivalent to Eq. ( Finally, we notice that the present low-energy model describes properly the orbital character of the bands up to energy scale of order of 0.5 eV around the Fermi level, beyond which additional d orbitals should be taken into account Once established the orbital composition of the lowenergy model, one can project the general interacting Hamiltonian including the Hubbard and Hund terms into the low-energy states. As shown in Here Ũ is the intraorbital interaction renormalized at low energy and the intraorbital spin operators connecting hole and electron pocket are given by Eq.s ( where momentum dependence has been dropped for simplicity. The low-energy interacting Hamiltonian in Eq.( By computing self-energy corrections of the orbital states coming from these OSSF one obtains orbital-dependent self-energy corrections, as shown in Eq. ( Supplementary Note 3: Model parameters for FeSe We solve self-consistently the set of BCS equations for realistic parameters for the FeSe system in the nematic phase. Although the physical outcome of this work does not crucially depend on this, instead of using exactly the band parameters of ref. 19, we will adjust them to fit a smaller value of the nematic splitting of the electron pockets reported afterwards in the literature, ∆Σ e ≃ 15 meV The u, v, factors defined by Eq.s (33), (39), computed using the above set of parameters, are shown in Fig. 22 using the SC couplings as fitting parameters. The results for the orbital SC order parameters, Eq.s ( For sake of completeness in Fig. 19 the spectral function of the spin modes along the two directions has been modelled as: While at RPA level the spin modes are always degenerate, taking into account spin-spin interactions beyond Gaussian level The analysis of ARPES measurements performed in ref. 19 gives at T > T c ω Y /ω X = 1.6 and V X /V Y = 8. Here we used, in the notation of ref. 19, the values of the coupling V eh X/Y . With these numbers we obtain g X /g Y = 13.4, a ratio of the same order of magnitude of what we extracted from the gap anisotropy g X /g Y = 21. Notice that the present estimate does not take into account the feedback of the SC order on the spin modes and could explain the difference between the two results. Such a full self-consistent treatment is beyond the scope of the present manuscript and will be addressed in a future work. Let us finally address the issue of the k z gap dependence. As discussed in the main text, a crucial difference when moving from k z = 0 to k z = π is that the orbital character of the hole pocket changes considerably. Since all the FS pockets expand In the absence of a detailed comparison with the band structure above T S as done in ref. 19, we already include in ǫ Z the effect of the isotropic shrinking, (Σ Γ yz + Σ Γ xz )/2, and consider separately a further nematic splitting ∆Σ h = 10 meV. In Fig. Solving the BCS equation in this case one can easily check that, contrary to what found at k z = 0, u 4 Z ∼ v 4 Z , so that the increase of the u 4 X factor over the u 4 Y in the nematic phase is enough to have ∆ yz h > ∆ xz h . In this case already without nematic pairing one has a larger gap value at θ = 0, as observed indeed in ref. 35 (see also Fig 5 in the main text). As a con-sequence, if one retains instead the pairing anisotropy g X /g Y extracted from the fitting of the k z = 0 gaps the anisotropic effect due to the nematic pairing is amplified now by the orbital factors that cooperates to give the same gap modulation. As a result we would get larger gap values and larger anisotropy when moving from the Γ to the Z pocket. Recent ARPES experiments investigated the SC gaps at k z = π X ≫ u 4 Y anisotropy at the electron pockets. Unfortunately, the controversy on the observation of the Y pocket in ARPES Among the various attempts to theoretically understand the nematic phase from microscopic models, we have recently emphasized the outcomes of a theoretical approach which correctly incorporates the feedback between orbital degrees of freedom and SF