Graphene-on-ferroelectric structures can be promising candidates for advanced field effect transistors, modulators and electrical transducers, providing that research of their electro-transport and electromechanical performances can be lifted up from mostly empirical to prognostic theoretical level. Recently we have shown that alternating piezoelectric displacement of the ferroelectric domain surfaces can lead to the alternate stretching and separation of graphene areas at the steps between elongated and contracted domains, and the conductance of graphene channel can be increased essentially at room temperature, because electrons in the stretched section scatter on acoustic phonons. The piezo-mechanism of graphene conductance control requires systematic studies of the ambient condition impact on its manifestations. This theoretical work studies in details the temperature behavior of the graphene conductance changes induced by piezoelectric effect in a ferroelectric substrate with domain stripes. We revealed the possibility to control graphene conductance (that can change in 5 -100 times for PZT ferroelectric substrate) by tuning the ambient temperature T from low values to the critical one T cr for given gate voltage U and channel length L. Also we demonstrate the possibility to control graphene conductance changes up to one hundred of times by tuning the U from 0 to the critical value U cr at a given T and L. The critical parameters T cr and U cr correspond to complete graphene separation above contracted domains. We derived analytical expressions for the dependence of the critical voltage U cr and corresponding graphene conductance on T, L and material parameters of graphene-on-ferroelectric structure. Obtained results can open the way towards graphene-onferroelectric applications in piezo-resistive memories operating in a wide temperature range. Since graphene was obtained experimentally [ 1 , 2 ] till nowadays graphene and other related 2D-semiconductors [ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ] remain in focus of intensive studies, at that and the most recent works Most challenges associated with the practical usage of graphene, its super-lattices and other 2D-semiconductors critically depend on the optimal choice of electromechanical, electrophysical and physicochemical properties of their interfaces, substrates and gates. In particular the problem of the substrates with additional functionality degrees compatible with a given 2D-material is crucial for 2D physics nowadays It should be noted that various ferroelectric substrates with a graphene channel remain promising for research, utilizing the fact that a ferroelectric significantly affects the properties of graphene Due to the charge separation by an electric field of a FDW -surface junction Hence graphene-on-ferroelectric structures can be promising candidates for advanced field effect transistors, modulators and electrical transducers, providing that research of their electrotransport and electro-mechanical performances can be lifted up from mostly empirical to prognostic theoretical level. It is well-known that the elastic strain can change the band structure of graphene and open its band gap Recently we have shown that alternating piezoelectric displacement of the ferroelectric domain surfaces can lead to the alternate stretching and separation of graphene areas at the steps between elongated and contracted domains, and the conductance of graphene channel can be increased essentially at room temperature, because electrons in the stretched section scatter on acoustic phonons It appeared that these effects originate from the nonlinear screening of ferroelectric polarization by graphene carriers, as well as it is conditioned by the temperature evolution of the domain structure kinetics in ferroelectric substrate. However the piezoelectric mechanism of graphene conductance control requires systematic studies of the ambient condition impact on its manifestations. This theoretical work studies in details the temperature behavior of the graphene conductance changes induced by piezoelectric effect in a ferroelectric substrate with domain stripes. Performed calculations (1 Here L is graphene channel length and W is its width. The expression for separated length l was derived in Ref Here d is the distance between the flat surface of ferroelectric and graphene, and v is the Poisson ratio [ 38 ]. The thickness dof the physical gap between the graphene and ferroelectric is determined by Van-der-Waals interaction, and its value is less than 1 nm. The density J of binding energy for graphene on ferroelectric should be smaller that the one for SiO , which increase when approaching Curie temperature and then becomes zero at can be used for the case when the length l is at least longer than the lateral halfwidth 2 w of the ferroelectric surface displacement step at the FDW [see Fig. , where ) in accordance with Eq.( The critical temperature corresponding to the condition ( is given by expression At fixed temperature the critical voltage corresponding to the condition given by expression The critical temperature and gate voltage correspond to complete separation of graphene above the contracted domains [see solid curves in Fig. The conductivity of the bounded section, where the scattering of electrons at substrate ionized impurities dominate, has the form listed in Ref. In Eq.( relatively slowly and quasi-linearly increases with the U increase until ( ) , where ( ) follows from Eq.(3b). At fixed gate voltage ( ) ) value of significantly decreases with L increase, because the ratio decreases in accordance with Eq.(1). ( ) To summarize, graphene-on-ferroelectric structures can be promising candidates for advanced field effect transistors, modulators and electrical transducers, providing that research of their electro-transport and electro-mechanical performances can be lifted up from mostly empirical to prognostic theoretical level. Recently revealed piezo-mechanism of graphene conductance control This work demonstrate the possibility to control graphene conductance (that can change in 5 -100 times for PZT ferroelectric substrate with domain stripes) by tuning the ambient temperature T from low values to the critical one T cr (that can reach ferroelectric Curie temperature) for given gate voltage U and channel length L. For PZT substrate with evolved domain structure we demonstrate the possibility to control graphene conductance changes up to 100 times by tuning the U from 0 to the critical value U cr at a given T and L. The critical parameters T cr and U cr correspond to complete graphene separation above contracted domains. We derived analytical expressions for the dependence of the critical voltage U cr and corresponding graphene conductance G(U) on T, L and material parameters of graphene-on-ferroelectric structure. Obtained results can open the way towards graphene-on-ferroelectric applications in piezoresistive memories operating in a wide temperature range.