In this paper, we generalize Huygens' principle (HP), extinction theorem (ET), and Franz-Harrington formulation (FHF). In our previous works, the traditional HP, ET, and FHF in homogeneous isotropic environment are generalized to inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy environment; the traditional FHF of homogeneous isotropic material system is generalized to inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy material system and then to piecewise inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy material system; the traditional HP, ET, and FHF of simply connected material system are generalized to multiply connected system and then to non-connected system; the traditional FHF of external scattering field and internal total field are generalized to internal scattering field and internal incident field. In previous work, it is proved that the generalized HP (GHP) and generalized ET (GET) are equivalent to each other; the GHP, GET, and generalized FHF (GFHF) satisfy so-called topological additivity, i.e., the GHP/GET/GFHF of whole electromagnetic (EM) system equals to the superposition of the GHP/GET/GFHF corresponding to all sub-systems. In this paper, the above results obtained in our previous works, which focus on the EM system constructed by material bodies, are further generalized to the metal-material combined EM system in inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy environment, and traditional surface equivalence principle is generalized to line-surface equivalence principle. Index Terms-Current decomposition method, equivalent line current, extinction theorem (ET), Franz-Harrington formulation (FHF), Huygens' boundary, Huygens' principle (HP), inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy media, line-surface equivalence principle, metal-material combined system. for SEP to simultaneously satisfy these fundamental physical requirements. • The GFHF is not the mathematical expression of GHP and GET, and it is only the mathematical expression of SEP. The values of GFHF are mainly manifested in that various fields are uniformly expressed in terms of an identical set of equivalent surface currents, and this feature is very valuable for many engineering applications, such as solving the EM scattering and constructing the characteristic mode (CM) of material system. In this paper, the results obtained in previous works will be further generalized to the metal-material combined system in inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy environment, and the material part of system can be any case discussed in This paper is organized as follows. Some necessary preparations, such as some symbols used in this paper and the topological restrictions of metallic and material parts, are provided in Sec. II. The metallic and material boundaries are decomposed in Sec. III for the preparation of decomposing various currents in Sec. IV. The currents related to metal-material combined system are decomposed in Sec. IV to reveal the dependences among them. The GHP, GET, and GFHF of metal-material combined system are provided in Sec. V, based on the Sec. IV of this paper and the results given in paper Some necessary preparations for deriving the mathematical formulation of GHP, GET, and GFHF corresponding to metal-material combined EM system are done in this section. The EM system focused on by this paper is constructed by the metallic line part met L , the metallic surface part met S , the metallic volume part met V , and the material body mat V , and a typical example is shown in Fig. , met UYGENS' principle (HP) Paper submitted April 30, 2018. R. Z. Lian is with the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China. (e-mail: rzlian@vip.163.com). ■ In the aspect of EM media, the traditional HP, ET, and FHF in homogeneous isotropic environment are generalized to inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy environment; the traditional FHF of homogeneous isotropic material system is generalized to inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy material system and then to piecewise inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy material system. ■ In the aspect of topological structure of EM system, the traditional HP and ET for the case that Huygens' surface is a single closed surface is generalized to the case that "Huygens' surface" is constituted by multiple closed surfaces; the traditional FHF of a simply connected material body is generalized to a multiply connected material body and then to the EM system constructed by non-connected material bodies. ■ In the aspect of formulating fields, the traditional FHF of external scattering field and internal total field are generalized to the FHF of internal incident field and internal scattering field. For the EM system constructed by material bodies, it is found in paper • The generalized Huygens' principle (GHP), generalized extinction theorem (GET), and generalized Franz-Harrington formulation (GFHF) satisfy so-called topological additivity, i.e., the GHP/GET/GFHF of whole EM system equals to the superposition of the GHP/GET/GFHF corresponding to all sub-systems. • The GHP is equivalent to GET, i.e., the GHP of any field satisfies GET, and any GET corresponds to the GHP of a field. • The GFHF of external scattering field and internal incident field is not the mathematical expression of GHP, and it is solely the summation of scattering field GHP and incident field GHP. • The GFHF of internal total field satisfies so-called weak extinction theorem instead of extinction theorem. If the piecewise Green's functions proposed in paper • The GHP is a special surface equivalence principle (SEP), but SEP is not necessarily GHP. The GHP can be particularly called as physical equivalence principle, because it simultaneously satisfies the concept of action at a distance, the law of causality, and the principle of superposition. It is not necessary On Huygens' Principle, Extinction Theorem, and Equivalence Principle (Metal-Material Combined System in Inhomogeneous Anisotropic Environment) Renzun Lian are open sets The restriction (1.1') is equivalent to saying that the intersection between met L and met met SV can only be some discrete points, and cannot be any lines; the restriction (1.2') is equivalent to saying that the intersection between met S and met V can only be some discrete points or lines, and cannot be any surfaces. These imply that the structures in Fig. In addition, it is also restricted that mat V is a simply connected inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy material body, and that the material parameters  ,  , and  are two-order symmetrical tensors as explained in paper All currents appearing in the following parts of this paper distribute on the metallic and material boundaries of the structure in Fig. The met L , met S , and met V  can be decomposed as follows: where the 0 met L and met L are defined as The 0 met L and met L can be vividly understood as the part which is not submerged into mat can be vividly understood as the part which contacts with environment and the part which contacts with material body mat V . In addition, it is obvious that As pointed out in (1), there doesn't exist any environment-filled "point-type, line-type, and surface-type holes" on mat V , so Boundary Closed Surface Part : . 2) The boundary line part (i.e. the metal-filled "line-type holes" on mat V ) originates from the submergence of metallic lines into material body, and it is constituted by some lines only, and it does not include any surfaces and discrete points. ( ) 3 ) The boundary open surface part (i.e. the metal-filled "surface-type holes" on mat V ) originates from the submergence of metallic surfaces into material body, and it is constituted by some open surfaces only, and it does not include any lines, closed surfaces, and discrete points. 4) The boundary closed surface part originates from the contact between material body and environment, the contact between material body and metallic lines (here, the metallic lines are not submerged into material body), the contact between material body and metallic surfaces (here, the metallic surfaces are not submerged into material body), and the contact between material body and metallic bodies. The boundary closed surface part does not include any lines, open surfaces, and discrete points. In fact, the boundary closed surface part can be further decomposed as follows: where the met V  is defined as (7.2), and the 0 mat V  is defined as (i.e., the whole material boundary surface part is denoted as ), then the whole material boundary mat V  can be decomposed as follows in detail: Based on the boundary decomposition given in above section, the current decomposition method is provided in this section, and then the relationships among various sub-currents are discussed in detail for deriving GHP, GET, and GFHF in the next section. Based on (2)-( where the 0 SL J and SL J are defined as and the 0 SS J and SS J are defined as In this subsection, the equivalent current on whole material boundary mat V  is separately defined according to the boundary decomposition formulation In (30), the integral path ( ) Cr  is a circle constructed by the points r which are in the set int mat V and tend to point r ; ˆl e is the reference direction of EL J and EL M ; the ˆl e and the reference direction of ( ) Cr  satisfy right-hand rule. In summary, the whole material boundary mat V  can be decomposed into four parts as exist on the intersection be- constitute the whole of equivalent surface currents), i.e., , , Based on the above discussions, all the sub-currents on the boundary of a metal-material combined system are as follows: 0 , , , Due to the tangential boundary conditions of tot H and tot Due to the same reasons as deriving (33), the following relations for the currents defined in Sec. IV-B 2) can be derived: , and then because of (23), (24), and (26). In fact, the above (33) and ( In addition, it must be EMPHASIZED that: , because of the tangential boundary condition of the total electric field on met S ; , because of the tangential boundary condition of the total electric field on met L . Similarly, the following relationships among the currents defined in Sec. IV-B 3) can be derived: and then because of ( The equivalent currents appeared in the material boundary of metal-material combined system include equivalent line electric current besides traditional equivalent surface electric and magnetic currents, so the corresponding equivalence principle is particularly called as line-surface equivalence principle (LSEP) to be distinguished from traditional SEP. In paper In this section, the formulations and conclusions obtained in paper The domain occupied by whole metal-material combined system is denoted as sys D , i.e., and then (40. 3) The second and third equalities in (40.3) are based on (1) and (39). For material system, the Huygens' surface supporting Huygens' secondary source is not unique, and the boundary of real source is a natural and the smallest one If the "Huygens' boundary" is selected as whole material boundary mat V  , the incident field GHP can be mathematically written as (41.1) based on the conclusion given in paper where the second equality is because of that the incident sources don't distribute on met L and met S ; the mathematical formulation of the GHP corresponding to material scattering field is as follows: ) where the second equality is because of that there doesn't exist material-based scattering current distributing on met L , met S , and mat V  , and this conclusion can be strictly proven by employing the method given in paper ) where the second equality is because of that there doesn't exist any metal-based scattering magnetic currents on the met L and met S . In (41.1), the integral domains met S + and met Srespectively represent the plus and minus sides of , and points to the interior of mat V ; the various Green's functions are the environment Green's functions used in paper If the "Huygens' boundary" is selected as whole metallic boundary met met met , the incident field GHP can be mathematically written as the following (41.2) based on the conclusion given in paper where the second equality is due to that the incident sources don't distribute on met L , met S , and met V  ; the mathematical formulation of the GHP corresponding to metallic scattering field is as follows: where the second equality is due to that there doesn't exist metal-based scattering magnetic current on met L and met S ; the mathematical formulation of the GHP corresponding to material scattering field is as follows: where the second equality is due to that there doesn't exist material-based scattering current on met L , met S , and 3) The GHP and GET corresponding to the "Huygens' boundary" which is selected as system boundary: Topological additivity The summation of GHP (41.1) and (41.2) is the following incident field GHP (41'): where the first equality is due to (4), The summation of the incident field GHP (41') and scattering field GHP (42') gives the following GFHF of internal incident field and external scattering field. Following the ideas of paper In fact, the above (45) can be equivalently rewritten as follows: because of (36.1), (38.1), and that 0 tot F  on int met V . Following the ideas of paper based on (43) and (45'). In summary, above GHP, GET, and GFHF of metal-material combined system are formally identical to the inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy material system given in Part I, and the former satisfies the same topological additivity as the latter, i.e., Scattering field GHP GET of metal-material combined system Scattering field GHP GET of metallic subsystem Scattering field GHP GET of material subsystem Scattering field GHP GET of metallic line Scattering field GHP GET of The GFHF of metalmaterial combined system The GFHF of metallic subsystem The GFHF of material subsystem The GFHF of metallic line The GFHF of metallic surface The GFHF of metallic body The GFHF of material b As the typical engineering applications, the above GFHF is applied to construct the CM of metal-material combined system in the following Secs. VI and VII. In the following Secs. VI and VII, the environment is restricted to being VACUUM, and then the various environment Green's functions become free-space Green's functions, and the mathematical formulations of these free-space Green's functions can be found in For metallic system, Harrington et al. • For metallic system, Harrington's SEFIE-based CM where the inner product is defined as • For homogeneous or inhomogeneous isotropic material system, Harrington's VIE-based CM • For homogeneous isotropic material system, Harrington's PMCHWT-based CM where the minus signs originate from that the equivalent surface currents in . Recently, when material system is homogeneous isotropic. By directly combining Harrington's SEFIE-based and PMCHWT-based schemes, by following Harrington's ideas in is defined as follows: , , , and the reason to utilize "  " instead of " + " is that the dimensions of line current SL J and surface current SS J are different from each other. The power operator In (53'), the first equality is due to that for any complex scalar C ; the third equality is based on the tangential electric field boundary condition on metallic boundary and that inc tot sca F F F =-on mat V . Based on complex Poynting's theorem is the magnetization/polarization energy due to the interaction between total magnetic/electric field and material. In (57.3) and (57. Based on the same process as deriving (64.1) and (64.2) in paper The summation of (59.1) and (59.2) gives that ( ) where the second equality is based on ( where the first equality is based on ( In this subsection, the operator (53''') is transformed from current space to expansion vector space at first, and then the equivalent electric and magnetic currents are related to each other in expansion vector space To discretize the operator (53'''), the currents 0 . The symbol "  " represents the matrix multiplication, and the superscript " T " in (63.2) represents the transpose of matrix. In addition, it must be EMPHASIZED that: where superscript " H " represents transpose conjugate, and , where the subscript " -" used in integral domain 0 mat V -  is to emphasize that the integral is done on the internal surface of boundary 0 mat V  . It has been pointed out in The equivalent electric current and equivalent magnetic current on material boundary satisfy the following relations: as illustrated in in which the superscript " 1 -" represents the inverse of matrix, and the elements of various submatrices are as follows: where the subscript " -" used in integral domain 0 mat V -  is to emphasize that the integral is done on the internal surface of boundary 0 mat V  . Inserting (68) into (64), (64) becomes the following form: where . Inserting (73) into (64), (64) becomes the following form: where where In papers Based on the conclusions given in and the radiated and reactive powers are as follows: based on the results given in above Sec. VII. In papers Following the ideas of papers Based on paper where . (85) Following the normalization way proposed in papers where Following the ideas of papers In this paper, the formulations and conclusions given in our previous works, which focus on the EM system constructed by inhomogeneous anisotropic lossy material bodies, are generalized to metal-material combined EM system. The formulations appeared in both this paper and our previous works are formally unified, and the conclusions in both this paper and our previous works are consistent. In previous our works, it is pointed out that the GFHF of material system is the mathematical expression of SEP rather than the mathematical expression of GHP. In this paper, it is found out that the GFHF of metal-material combined system is the mathematical expression of line-surface equivalence principle. The values of GFHF are mainly manifested in that various fields are uniformly expressed in terms of an identical set of currents, and this feature is very valuable for many engineering applications, such as solving EM scattering problem and constructing CM set, and some typical applications are exhibited in this paper.