We have developed a concept for a traveling-wave parametric amplifier driven by a magnetic-flux wave. The circuit consists of a serial array of symmetric dc SQUIDs coupled inductively to a separate superconducting LC transmission line carrying the pump wave. The adjusted phase velocity of the pump flux-wave of frequency ωp ensures amplification of the signal (ωs) and the idler (ωi) waves, with frequencies obeying the relation ωs + ωi = ωp. The advantage of the proposed flux-driven linear circuit includes a large gain in a wide frequency range and overcoming of the pump depletion problem. Unlike the conventional traveling-wave amplifiers, the signal and pump in the proposed circuit are applied to different ports, what can greatly simplify the whole measurement setup. The experimental parameters and characteristics of this amplifier have been evaluated and show promise for applications in quantum information single-photon circuits. Josephson parametric amplifiers (JPAs) are among the most useful tools in the field of quantum technology (see, e.g., Refs. where the parameter L J0 = φ 0 /I c is the linear (smallsignal) inductance, φ 0 = h/2e is the reduced flux quantum, and I c is the critical current. Recently, the concept of a TWJPA with three-wave mixing was proposed which can be engineered with the help of the fluxbiased nonhysteretic rf SQUID having linear geometri-cal inductance L and dimensionless screening parameter β L ≡ LI c /φ 0 < 1 (or, alternatively, by using an asymmetric SQUID having a Josephson kinetic inductance in one branch applied via a separate pump line. In this case, Josephson nonlinearity is no longer used for mixing the modes, so the parametric circuit can operate in the regime with time-varying linear inductance L J (t) and hence have a larger dynamic range. This fundamental principle of parametric amplification (see, e.g., Refs. The electric diagram of our superconducting microwave circuit with nominally vanishing losses is shown in Fig. can be efficiently controlled by magnetic flux Φ = Φ dc + Φ ac . These SQUIDs are interleaved with identical ground capacitances C (Fig. The coupling inductances between SQUIDs and inductors L ′ are equal to M (≪ L ′ ) and enable ac flux drive in the SQUIDs. The flux offset Φ dc is set by means of an external static field B and ensures the SQUID critical current I c ∼ I 0 and hence the SQUID inductance L J0 (Φ dc ) ∼ L 0 ≡ φ 0 /I 0 . Then, as shown in Fig. and ω ′ 0 , keeping the signal-line impedance L J0 /C ≈ L ′ /C ′ ≈ 50 Ω. Ignoring for the moment small dispersion, Eq. ( and in the pump line, are equal, where a is the size of the cells in each transmission line. Therefore, spatial phase matching is possible, i.e., ∆k = k p -k s -k i ≈ 0. Generally, the dynamics of the electrical circuit shown in Fig. and sufficiently large power P p , the pump remains undepleted and presents a traveling flux wave having constant amplitude A p0 ∝ P p . Then, the equations for these two transmission lines decouple. Eventually, the equation of motion for the signal line in the continuum limit (valid for ω ≪ ω 0 , ω J ) reads Here, x is the dimensionless coordinate normalized on the cell size a; the normalized magnetic flux φ(x, t) = Φ(x, t)/φ 0 , where the continuous flux variable Φ(x, t) coincides with flux values Φ n on the nodes x = n. Frequency is the plasma frequency of the SQUID, which has total capacitance C J = C J1 + C J2 (see Fig. and respectively. The latter relation includes the small term ω 2 /2ω 2 J which stems from the Josephson plasma resonance in the SQUIDs. The fifth term on the left-hand side of the wave equation (9) stems from the time-dependent distributed inductance L(x, t), which is varied in a traveling-wave fashion: The dimensionless coefficient m, determines the depth of the inductance modulation and depends on the strength of coupling κ and the pump power P p . Here the product A p0 k p is equal to A p0 ω p /ω 0 = V p /φ 0 ω 0 , where V p = 2Z o P p is the voltage amplitude in the pump wave. The time-dependent inductance ( where both the direct power gain G (≫ 1) and the intermodulation power gain G i (≫ 1) depend exponentially on length N and the gain factor g ∝ mω p /ω 0 . Its inverse value, is therefore the e folding length of the amplitude gain. In the general case, an inherently broadband fluxdriven transmission line allows multiwave-mixing processes. Specifically, the basic three-wave mixing process involving conventional idler frequency can be accompanied by two additional mixing processes (frequency up-conversion) involving the idlers 42 and The latter expression for idler frequency ω 2 allows us to interpret the process in Eq. ( or, equivalently, the relations for the corresponding photon numbers, take the form The mixing processes involving the pump frequency (ωp), signal frequency (ωs) and one of three idler frequencies; that is ωi (solid brackets), ω1 (dashed brackets), and ω2 (dotted brackets). (b) Normalized phase mismatches for the mixing processes ( or, in terms of the photon numbers, where P 1,2 and n 1,2 are the powers and the photon numbers of the modes ω 1,2 , respectively. Because of large photon energies, hω 1,2 > hω p , both complementary processes, ω s,i + ω p → ω 1,2 and ω 1,2 → ω s,i + ω p , are possible, 44 so the amplified power of the signal/idler flows repeatedly from mode ω s,i to mode ω 1,2 and vice versa. Using expression (11) for pump-wave number k p and expression (12) for wave numbers k s , k i , k 1 , and k 2 of the waves ω s , ω i , ω 1 , and ω 2 , respectively, the corresponding phase mismatches for the processes ( Here the dimensionless frequency detuning is In Eqs. ( and where ∆ω = ω 0 -ω ′ 0 ≪ ω 0 is a small mismatch of the cutoff frequencies in two transmission lines (see Eq. ( or, equivalently, taking ν = η/3, one can achieve nearly perfect phase matching (∆k ≈ 0) in the basic mixing process (18) for frequencies ω s ≈ ω i ≈ ω p /2 (or small detuning |δ| ≪ 1), while keeping appreciable phase mismatches in unwanted processes (19) and (20): that is, The dependencies of these values on the normalized signal frequency are shown in Fig. In the case of sufficiently small |∆k|, or, equivalently, large coherence length N c in the basic process, and sufficiently short coherence lengths N c1 and N c2 in two additional mixing processes, i.e., the unwanted processes (19) and ( To quantify the effect of multiwave mixing (shown schematically in Fig. where A s (x), A i (x), A 1 (x), and A 2 (x) are slowly varying complex amplitudes of the signal and three idlers, obeying the condition 12,17 ) After incorporation of Eq. (37) into Eq. ( The first terms on the left-hand-sides of Eqs. ( Here the exponential gain factor is and its maximum value, is achieved at perfect phase matching, ∆k = 0, and zero detuning, δ = 0. The power gain G of the line of length N is then given by formula 14 which for zero phase mismatch, ∆k = 0, and large gain, gN ≫ 1, is reduced to Eq. ( The frequency dependence of log G has a typical semicircle shape, y = √ 1 -δ 2 , with the maximum at δ = 0. 39,40 For example, the amplifier with this ideal shape of the power gain with maximum value of 20 dB has a 3-dB bandwidth of 1 -(17/20) 2 ω p ≈ 0.5ω p , which is centered at ω s = 0.5ω p (see the dotted line in Fig. In the case of insufficiently short coherence lengths N c1 and N c2 [i.e. only slightly less than or approximately FIG. Figure for five TWJPAs having different lengths N (the set of solid curves), but nominally the same maximum gain of 20 dB (adjusted by a proper pump power, P p ∝ 1/N 2 , keeping m ∝ 1/N ). We find ξ is approximately equal to 0.13, 0.19, 0.27, 0.38, and 0.47 (in the order of the curves from top to bottom in the central part of the plot) which cover the range from the relatively small value of 0.13 up to the value 0.47 close to unity. For comparison, the dotted curve illustrates the case of ξ = 0, yielding the maximum possible gain given by Eq. ( One can see two features in the behavior of these circuits. Firstly, the gain suppression in the TWJPAs with relatively small values of ξ (ξ < 0.3 or m < 0.1) is rather small (< 2 dB) for detuning |δ| < ∼ 0.5, whereas for 0.5 < ∼ |δ| ≤ 1 the gain suppression is significant. This behavior is due to increase of the phase mismatch |∆k| = δ 2 η and hence violation of inequality (35) occurring at relatively large |δ|. Secondly, the signal gain for rather large values of ξ (ξ > 0.3 or m > 0.1) is notably less than the nominal value given by the dotted line, especially for small detuning, |δ| < ∼ 0.5. That suppression of the gain for larger detuning, |δ| > ∼ 0.5, is not so dramatic as in the case of small ξ. So, we can conclude that for our set of characteristic frequencies, a TWJPA length N of about 1000 ensures both sufficiently large bandwidth of about 0.47ω p and sufficiently small unwanted power conversion to the high-frequency idler modes. The design of the practical circuit obviously depends on specific applications of the TWJPA. Below we focus on the set of parameters typical for the TWJPAs (both with three-wave mixing and four-wave mixing) that were earlier developed for the quantum-information applications including superconducting qubits. Taking a relatively high target value of the cutoff frequency ω 0 /2π = 100 GHz and the standard transmissionline impedance Z 0 = 50 Ω, we obtain the following basic circuit parameters, and For a typical size of an elementary cell a ∼ 30 μm (see possible circuit layout, for example, in Ref. In the optimal working point the constant magnetic flux Φ opt dc /2φ 0 ≈ π/3 yields about 50 % suppression of the maximum critical current of the SQUIDs, so the Josephson inductance [Eq. ( According to formula (14), the target value of the modulation parameter m = 0.06 can be achieved by engineering a reasonably small dimensionless coupling κ = M/L ′ (e.g., on the order of 0.02) and applying sufficiently large pump power, This power passing though the superconducting transmission line is not immediately dissipated on the chip, but can cause some heating of cold attenuators installed in the base-temperature stage. However, this level of power is seemingly acceptable for the most of setups with dilution refrigerators. In conventional TWJPAs operating on the basis of wave mixing with the aid of Josephson nonlinearity, a relatively small pump power (limited by the nonlinearelement characteristics, i.e., the critical current) propagates together with the signal and idler waves in the common transmission line. Because of parametric interaction of these traveling waves the pump power is gradually converted into the signal and the idler. The resulting pump depletion leads to gradual reduction of the signal gain and, finally, to gain saturation. This effect dramatically limits the amplifier dynamic range. To evaluate this effect in the limit of pure three-wave mixing (|A 1,2 | ≪ |A s,i |), we derive from Eq. ( A s and A i : The self-Kerr (∝ γA s,i |A s,i | 2 ) and the cross-Kerr (∝ γA s,i |A i,s | 2 ) nonlinear terms both cause the effect of phase modulation The plot shows almost exponential growth of the signal power propagating in the array of SQUIDs with effective critical current I 0 = 4 μA and driven by the flux wave ensuring the modulation-parameter value m = 0.06. One can see that for sufficiently small input power the amplifier shows a nominal gain of about 20 dB (see the bottom curve, corresponding to P in s ≈ -91 dBm and P out s ≈ -71 dBm). For somewhat larger input power values (see, e.g., the middle curve with P in s ≈ -88 dBm the suppression of the nominal gain is still rather small (i.e., about -0.2 dB). In this case, the amplitude of current oscillations in the output sections of the signal transmission line approaches approximately 0.7I 0 , whereas the Josephson phase oscillations are about π/4. The upper solid curve, calculated for the largest input power of P 1dB ≈ -84 dBm, exhibits 1-dB suppression of the nominal gain of 20 dB and hence corresponds to the amplifier compression point. In this case, the signal current amplitude in the output sections of the line approaches approximately 0.9I 0 leading to an amplitude of the Josephson phase oscillations of about 1.1 rad. At such large amplitude the cubic approximation of the Josephson nonlinearity in the original wave equation ( The reason for the notable increase of the amplifier dynamic range is the almost absence of pump depletion. In the above example, the maximum output signal power is sufficiently small (i.e., P out s + P out i ≈ 2P out s ≈ -62 dBm ≪ P p = -53 dBm) and is set by saturation in the last sections of the line, as one can conclude from comparison of the solid and dashed lines in Fig. We develop a concept for a flux-driven TWJPA with a large dynamic range. Due to the separate transmissionline, fed through an isolated input port by sufficiently large pump power, the amplifier is practically free of the pump-depletion effect. Moreover, the linear regime of its operation ensures small distorsions of signal, which prevents the generation of shock waves. When required, even larger output signals can be achieved by using in each elementary cell not of a single SQUID but of a group of several serially connected SQUIDs (as reported in Ref. Finally, the design of our circuit could be useful for implementation of the superconducting-circuit analog and therefore with a flux-dependent potential energy, where E J0 = φ 0 I 0 is the Josephson characteristic energy, Φ e = Φ dc + Φ ac is the total external flux applied to the SQUID loop and φ is the phase difference on the SQUID. The kinetic energy of each SQUID is associated with the charging energies of two junctions, i.e., where φ 0 φ = V is the voltage on the SQUID, which has total capacitance C J (see the equivalent electrical circuit in Fig. To derive the equations of motion of our electrical circuit with a large number of variables, we apply Lagrangian mechanics (a similar approach was used, for example, by Wallquist et al. where L p and L s are the Lagrangians of the pump line and the signal line, respectively. In terms of the flux variables associated with the node values F n and Φ n for the pump and signal lines, respectively, these Lagrangians read and (see, e.g., the Lagrangian approach to the travelingwave parametric amplifier with Kerr nonlinearity in Ref. Here, the time derivatives Ḟn and Φn are equal to the voltages on the nth nodes of the pump and signal transmission lines, respectively. The phase difference on the nth SQUID is expressed in terms of magnetic fluxes on the corresponding nodes, i.e., φ n = (Φ n+1 -Φ n )/φ 0 . The dimensionless coefficient κ = M/L ′ determines the strength of coupling of the pump and signal lines. In the case of small coupling, κ ≪ 1, compensated by sufficiently large input pump power, where P out s is the output signal power and P out i is the output idler power, and the backaction of the signal line on the pump line can be ignored. Then the decoupled equation of motion for fluxes F n can be obtained from the Euler-Lagrange equation With use of Eq. (A5), this equation reads where ω ′ 0 = 1/ √ L ′ C ′ is the cutoff frequency of the pump transmission line. Here, the index range is n = 1, 2, ..., N -1, and the boundary values are F 0 = F in and The set of coupled differential equations given by (A9) is the discrete analog of the partial differential equation describing plane waves. It is easy to verify by substitution that, for a sufficiently small frequency ω p ≪ ω ′ 0 (i.e., when the wavelength is larger than the size of the elementary cell, λ p ≫ a), the solution describing the wave traveling, for example, in the right direction has the shape where k p is the wave number normalized on the reverse size of the cell a -1 , and χ p is an initial phase. Incorporation of Eq. (A10) into Eq. (A9) yields or, equivalently, This equation determines the dispersion relation of the transmission line (see, for example, Ref. which in our case of positive small k p yields the relation This formula describes the standard positive dispersion, d 2 k p /dω 2 p > 0. Without loss of generality, we set the pump phase χ p in Eq. (A10) in such a way that the pump wave has the form where dimensionless amplitude A p0 is real and positive. In this case, current flowing through inductance L ′ in the nth cell is expressed as and the flux induced in the nth cell of the signal transmission line is This formula describes the wave of magnetic flux that ensures the necessary time variation of the SQUID inductance. Incorporating Eq. (A17) into Eq. (A6), we obtain in the adiabatic approximation the equations of motion for the fluxes Φ n , or Here the time-dependent critical current of the nth SQUID is where magnitude I c0 is determined by the constant flux Φ dc ; that is, The small, positive value of m ≪ 1 is found by linearizing Eq. (A1) in vicinity of the optimal working point Φ dc = πφ 0 /3 (see Fig. Assuming that the phases on the SQUIDs are small, i.e., |φ n | ≪ 1, we make the approximation and ignore high-order cross terms ∝ mφ 3 n . We thus replace the nth SQUID with the time-dependent (in the general case, slightly nonlinear) inverse inductance 1/L (n) where L J0 = φ 0 /I 0 . Incorporating Eq. (A20) into Eq. (A19) and using approximation (A23), we obtain Here, the cutoff frequency of the bare transmission line ω 0 is 1/ √ L J0 C and the Josephson plasma frequency ω J is 1/ √ L J0 C J . For sufficiently small amplitude, |φ n | ≪ 1, small frequency, ω ≪ ω 0 , ω J , and the absence of a pump (m = 0), a solution of Eq. (A25) has the form of the plane wave where k is the wave number and χ is the phase. Incorporation of this expression into Eq. (A25) yields (A27) The corresponding dispersion equation reads and has the solution which for the wave propagating in the right direction (k > 0) can be approximated as In comparison with Eq. (A14), this dispersion relation includes the term ω 2 /2ω 2 J , which stems from the Josephson plasma resonance in the SQUIDs. In the case of small frequency ω (and therefore, a large wavelength λ = 2π/k ≈ 2πω 0 /ω ≫ 1), the equation of motion (A19) can be presented in terms of partial derivatives of continuous variables (see, for example, Refs. 12 and 60 ). We introduce the flux variable Φ(x, t), whose values on the grid x = n with unity step, ∆x = 1, coincide with Φ n (t), Φ n (t) → Φ(x, t). (A31) Thus, variable x is a dimensionless coordinate, whereas the genuine coordinate variable is X = ax, where a is the cell size Following the method derived by Yaakobi et al., Then, the set of the finite-difference equations (A19) takes the form of a continuum wave equation, including the wave-like variation of the distributed linear inductance of the transmission line, The fourth term on the left-hand-side of Eq. (A35) describes nonlinear effects and it is essential only in cells where the amplitude of the signal or idler is not sufficiently small. Sufficiently small variations of the line parameters is the basic requirement for proper operation of Josephson parametric amplifies based on traveling microwaves (e.g., see the evaluation of fabrication tolerances in LC cells enabling resonant phase matching in a four-wave-mixing TWJPA in Ref. The condition of zero phase mismatch for a small detuning, |δ| ≪ 1, is given by Eqs. ( Because the cutoff frequency of the bare transmission line, ω 0 , and the plasma frequency, ω J , are both proportional to I 1/2 0 (Φ dc ), this condition can be fulfilled by applying the optimal dc flux bias, Φ dc = Φ opt dc . In the case of inaccurate flux setting or instability of the flux bias in time, Φ dc = Φ opt dc + δΦ dc , the corresponding deviation of the Josephson critical current from the optimal value I 0 is Here we used the notation ǫ = -√ 3 δΦ dc /φ 0 and applied formula (A21) in the point Φ dc /2φ 0 = π/3. The nonzero value δI 0 causes deviation of the cutoff and plasma frequencies, ω 0,J → ω 0,J + δω 0,J , where The corresponding phase mismatch is where a small term ∝ ω 2 p /ω 2 J has been omitted. Taking the target frequency ω p = 0.2ω 0 (yielding ∆k = 0.1ǫ), a modulation coefficient of m = 0.06, an exponential gain coefficient g 0 of 0.25mω p /ω 0 = 0.003, and the line length N = 1000 (yielding a nominal gain of 20 dB), we obtain the corresponding suppression of the gain (see Eq. ( This formula yields the 1-dB reduction of the gain for reasonably small value of |ǫ| ≈ 0.02 or, equivalently, reasonably small inaccuracy in the magnetic flux setting of |δΦ dc | = ǫφ 0 / √ 3 ≈ 0.01φ 0 . In practical circuits, the electrical parameters can have a somewhat irregular distribution over the length of the line. This primarily concerns the Josephson inductance L J0 (x), whose local value depends on the critical current I 0 of corresponding SQUID. This critical current depends on the area of the Josephson junction, the local critical current density j c and the offset magnetic flux Φ dc , whose value, under the assumption of a homogeneous magnetic field, depends on the size and shape of the SQUID loop. In fabrication, however, variations of these parameters can be controlled only within certain limits. In our circuit, which comprises Josephson junctions with an area of about 1 μm 2 , the parameter which is most prone to random variations is the critical current. To roughly model small variations of the critical current δI 0 (x) around its mean value I 0 (leading to small variations of the reverse Josephson inductance δL -1 J0 around the mean value L -1 J0 ), we should add a corresponding small random term to the linear part of equation of motion (A35), i.e., This function is defined on the nodes, x = n, and has, presumably, a small rms value, ζ 2 (x) = σ ≪ 1 and a short correlation length (l c ∼ 1). Here, the sign ... denotes averaging over the statistical ensemble. The cutoff and plasma frequencies are now defined as ω 0 = 1/ L J0 C and ω J = 1/ L J0 C J , (B8) respectively, whereas the random values ζ(x) cause local variations of these frequencies and therefore of the wave number, which leads to a phase mismatch. The small higher-order term ∝ mζ(x) describing variation of the parametric coupling is omitted here. To roughly evaluate the random drift of the phase and therefore the resulting phase mismatch we put in Eq. (B6) the zero pump, m = 0, and find the solution in the simple wave form: (B13) This formula describes the diffusion of phase ψ(x) (the Brownian-motion process) and therefore yields the statistical average values ψ(x) = 0 and ψ 2 (x) = 0.25k 2 σx. The corresponding drift of the phase on the length x = N can be estimated as Ψ = ψ 2 (N ) = 0.5k √ σN . For critical current variations σ on the order of 0.05 (see, e.g., Ref. Finally, appreciable inhomogeneities of the circuit parameters with correlation length comparable to characteristic wavelengths (in our case, about 30-60 elementary cells) may cause partial reflections of traveling waves inside the transmission lines and hence deteriorate the TWJPA performance. Analysis of such a case, which may also occur in conventional TWJPAs based on Josephson nonlinearity, is, however, beyond the scope of this work.