A novel ridged SIW leaky-wave antenna (LWA) with controllable side lobe level and low cross-polarization is proposed and fabricated. Longitudinally continuous asymmetric ridges beside SIW sidewalls provide an asymmetric field distribution around the long slot centered on the upper plane of the structure, in way that the slot can radiate. An accurate transverse equivalent network analysis is presented for calculating the properties of the proposed LWA. The wavenumbers of the leaky-mode are calculated theoretically and numerically. The designed ridged SIW LWA shows a good SLL and cross polarization. Measurement results are also consistent with the simulation results. L EAKY WAVE ANTENNAS (LWAs) exhibit many inter- esting features in microwave and millimeter-wave applications. Advanced properties of LWAs are frequency scanning capability, wide bandwidth and high directivity with a simple feed network Various studies on LWAs have been reported. These investigations include the groove guide The conventional straight slot antenna in which the aperture field distribution is uniform has a poor side lobe level (SLL). The desired far-field pattern can be achieved by changing the width of the slot or its distance from the center. While properly tapering the aperture distribution improves SLL, it can cause an increase in cross-polarization In microwave and millimeter-wave applications, waveguide devices are preferred to microstrip devices from the aspects of power loss and power handling. However, waveguide manufacturing process is difficult and expensive. Recent investigations on substrate integrated waveguides (SIWs), suggest that SIW properties are transitional between microstrip and dielectric-filled waveguide properties. Significant advantages of SIW devices are light weight, low cost, low loss and easy integration with planar circuits SIW LWAs have been the subject of many studies in recent years Since the slot is designed in a way to have a symmetrical structure, straight slot LWAs based on SIW can improve the cross-polarization level compared to other structures. By tapering the leakage rate along the antenna length, the SLL can be controlled, and it is desirable for the leaky-mode phase constant to remain unchanged along all the antenna length, so that all parts of the antenna aperture radiate at the same angle The proposed antenna structure is an SIW long slot LWA. By transversely varying the ridge located beside the SIW sidewalls, a variable leakage rate and a fixed phase constant can be obtained to realize the desired SLL. Since the slot is symmetrical, a low cross-polarization is also achieved. Different theoretical and numerical approaches have been employed in computing the leaky-wave structures properties. Magnetic field integral equation in Another method is an analytical procedure based on a transverse equivalent network (TEN) for the LWA. This approach is accurate and not time-consuming. This method is used to analyze slit asymmetric waveguides and versatile LWAs based on stub-loaded rectangular waveguides in In this paper, a dispersion relation is obtained from the resonance of the TEN. It has to be noted that the presented TEN for the proposed structure is created based on the obtained results in The theoretical models and circuit models used to analyze the proposed antenna are outlined in Section III. Section IV presents simulation results of the HFSS software for the uniform long slot LWA and conformity between the leakage rate and phase constant resulted from the TEN models and HFSS simulations is observed. In Section V, the LWA is designed based on the curves in Section IV in order to realize an optimum SLL and cross-polarization. Section VI shows that measurement results are consistent with the simulation results and theoretical analysis. In order for the antenna to radiate, the slots should cut off the current distribution on the surface of the SIW. In other words, the field distribution on both sides of the slots should be unlike. When the SIW is operating in the dominant mode, the electric current is not cut off, if the slots are located in center of the upper plane of the antenna and the fields on both sides of the slots are symmetrical, thus the slots wouldn't radiate. Whereas distanced slots from the center of the upper plane of the SIW would make radiation possible. Lack of symmetry in the structure would improve the SLL, but on the other hand the field distribution in the slot aperture increases the cross-polarization. However if the slot is located in the center of the upper plane of the SIW, and the field distribution in the SIW is controlled in a way that provides the needed conditions, radiation would be possible. In fact, instead of varying the slot position, the field distribution inside the SIW is controlled. In this state the slot can radiate while the cross-polarization is proper. By controlling slotted SIW antenna features, the required leakage rate and consequently the proper SLL can be obtained. To vary the symmetry of the field distribution inside the SIW, a ridge can be placed alongside one of the SIW sidewalls. The electric field at the ridge would be zero, and it would not be symmetrical with respect to the SIW center. and vary based on the width and height of the ridge. Considering the fabrication process, and avoiding an increase in the SIW layers, the height of the ridge is assumed to be fixed, and the ridge is only transversely varied. Transversal variation of the ridge would change the field distribution inside the SIW and as a result is varied, but will vary as well and consequently the desired radiation pattern cannot be obtained. In order to eliminate this problem, in the proposed antenna a ridge was used alongside each sidewall of the SIW structure, instead of just one of the sidewalls, as shown in Fig. To better understand the behavior of the SIW slot antenna, the distribution of the electric field is shown in Fig. The radiation mechanism of an LWA is defined by the complex longitudinal propagation constant of the excited leaky-wave mode in the antenna. The propagation constant is formed by the phase constant and the leakage rate , as From the phase and leakage constants, the angle of maximum radiation from the broadside direction and the 3-dB beamwidth can be determined as (2) ( Where is the free-space wavelength and is the length of the LWA. Both and are in radians in ( and are known as a function of the antenna geometry and frequency. From ( The theoretical method used to obtain the numerical values proposed in this paper involves an analytical procedure based on an accurate simple transverse equivalent network for the slotted RSIW structure. The dispersion relation can be calculated by the resonance of this simple TEN. In the TEN used here, the higher order mode is not included. Simple TEN is faster than the multimode TEN, however the multimode TEN has a more accurate response. Since the simple TEN has some limitations, these limitations are accounted for in the design of the proposed structure so that the desired results can be achieved. For instance the width of the ridges should not be too large to make the ridge too close to the center of the SIW. These limitations are discussed in This TEN means that analytical expressions are possible in simple closed forms. As a result, the propagation constant itself is in a simple closed form permitting the numerical values to be calculated quickly. This method has been developed in The top and middle layers of the proposed structure are shown in Fig. The TEN for proposed structure is given in Fig. 1) Left and right sides of the SIW with respect to the center of the slot, where a ridge is located beside a sidewall. As an example, the right side can be considered as two waveguides (transmission lines), with two different heights and widths, where (b-b2)*(ar2) are the dimensions of the first waveguide (transmission line), and (b)*(a-ar2) are the dimensions of the second waveguide 2) A slot with a width of "W" on the upper plane of the RSIW Each sidewall of the SIW, which is composed of vias, has been considered as a single ideal continuous plate, and is shown as a short circuit in the equivalent circuit. The method used for creating the equivalent network is similar to the method used in The previously proposed TEN can be reduced to the simple circuit shown in Fig. The transverse resonance equation has been derived from the reduced network, where and are the total admittances introduced by the left and right arms. and are obtained by (4) where Equation ( Numerically solving (9) which is obtained from the TEN, the normalized phase and leakage constants for the geometrical parameters of the proposed antenna can be calculated. In this section, using HFSS simulations, and for different antenna dimensions and at different frequencies are obtained and compared to the results obtained from the TEN, to figure out the preciseness of this theoretical method. For calculating the antenna radiation properties, LWA is based on the RSIW dominant mode which is perturbed by removing a slot from its upper plane. Therefore, the dimensions of the RSIW based LWA must be selected for a given frequency of operation. Fig. Using (3) results, beam direction from broadside to forward end fire can be obtained. Also using (2), the 3-dB beamwidth can be calculated. Looking at the curve for , three separate frequency ranges can be seen. At the highest range of frequencies, when is above 12.5 GHz, the value of exceeds unity, because the guided wave is a surface wave (slow wave). At that frequency range, it was found that . In the second frequency range, from about 8.5 GHz to 12.5 GHz, the guided wave is above cutoff, which is a fast wave. The mode is leaky within that range, and the value of decreases as the frequency increases. In the third frequency range which is below 8 GHz, the mode goes below cutoff. The value continues to increase strongly, but this region cannot be used for antenna applications, as the wave does not radiate and is reflected back to the source. The variations in the values of the beam angle and the beamwidth as a function of frequency in the range above cutoff can be computed with ( Good agreement is observed between TEN results and HFSS simulations, therefore the TEN approach is validated. The angle of the maximum beam is obtained using the value of the phase constant and the 3-dB beamwidth related to the value of the leakage rate. Therefore, the behaviors of and vary as the dimensions of the proposed antenna are changed. The four best candidates to vary in order to modify and are the relative slot width, W, the difference in the height of the ridges, the distance between the ridges, and transversal ridge changes, i.e., their distance from the sidewalls, as seen in Fig. Fig. It is seen that varying b2/b1 changes both and simultaneously, increasing one while decreasing the other. When b1 equals b2, making the structure symmetrical, radiation from the slot stops and . Transversely modifying the ridges, the leakage rate can be controlled within the range of zero to the maximum value. The smooth leakage rate variation from the maximum value, in a highly asymmetric location of the ridges, to zero radiation, with fully symmetrical ridges can easily be seen. In order to better illustrate the asymmetric radiation mechanism, Fig. A 1.5-degree variation in beam angle, over the full range of can easily be seen, whereas the beamwidth varies from zero to a maximum value of about 2.30, which is not so large. The beamwidth can vary in a quite large range while the beam angle remains fully constant. In order to control the SLL, the designer must be able to control the leakage rate from zero to a maximum value, and keep the phase constant unchanged along the length of the tapered antenna, so that all parts of the antenna aperture radiate at the same angle. Therefore, the variation of the normalized phase and leakage constants of the proposed antenna must be studied as a function of different geometrical parameters of the designed antenna at the operating frequency at which these parameters can change the value of while maintaining unchanged. It was shown in the Section V, that varying b1 and b2, and ar1 and ar2, would vary both and , thus, none of them can be used alone to access a desirable SLL. On the other hand, if the ridge height variation is to be used for tapering, a multilayer structure should be used, which makes the structure voluminous and the layers are discontinued as the height varies, therefore assuming and ar1 and ar2 changes would be considered in the design procedure. For this purpose, In The illumination amplitude function along the antenna aperture has to follow a Taylor distribution with a -dB SLL. The required aperture distribution and the calculated radiation pattern are reported in The proposed RSIW based long slot LWA was fabricated on a Rogers5880 substrate with and mm, for each substrate, as shown in Fig. Feeding technique is an important part of the design that influences the input impedance and characteristics of the antenna. The microstrip feed is used in this structure to widen the bandwidth of the transmission line to match the needs of the proposed LWA. Simultaneous field matching and impedance matching are important for a transition design. In this structure, for impedance matching between the microstrip line and the SIW, the microstrip line has been tapered from the input impedance of a coaxial cable with an impedance of 50 ohms to the input impedance of the SIW. According to HFSS 70 ohms. Also for field matching between the microstrip line and the SIW, the microstrip line is located on the same plane as that of the top of the SIW. The input and output matching structures are the same as shown in Fig. The scattering parameter of the designed and tapered LWA is plotted in Fig. The new SIW long slot LWA is studied and realized with controllable radiation properties. To decrease the cross-polarization, the long slot was placed on the upper plane of the SIW. The advantage of the proposed LWA is that the independent ar1 and ar2 parameters provide an unchanged and a controllable . Therefore, the proposed antenna can realize an optimum side lobe level of less than dB. A simple dispersion relation for the proposed antenna which is solved numerically to yield its complex dispersion behavior can be derived by the transverse resonance network and the TEN method presented by Pariello and Olinear has been developed for the proposed structure. Also the wavenumbers of these waves are calculated by HFSS simulations. In order to validate the TEN and HFSS simulation results, the proposed antenna operating at 10 GHz has been built and measured, showing a very good agreement between theory and experiments. For the equivalent network shown in Fig. 