Black phosphorus (bP) has been recently investigated for next generation nanoelectronic multifunctional devices. However, the intrinsic instability of exfoliated bP (the bP nanoflakes) towards both moisture and air has so far overshadowed its practical implementation. In order to contribute to fill this gap, we report here the preparation of new hybrid polymer-based materials where bP nanoflakes exhibit a significantly improved stability. The new materials have been prepared by different synthetic paths including: i) the mixing of conventionally liquid-phase exfoliated bP (in DMSO) with PMMA solution; ii) the direct exfoliation of bP in a polymeric solution; iii) the in situ radical polymerization after exfoliating bP in the liquid monomer (methyl methacrylate, MMA). This last methodology concerns the preparation of stable suspensions of bPn-MMA by sonication-assisted liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) of bP in the presence of MMA followed by radical polymerization. The hybrids characteristics have been compared in order to evaluate the bP dispersion and the effectiveness of the bPn interfacial interactions with polymer chains aimed at their longterm environmental stabilization. The passivation of bPn results particularly effective when the hybrid material is prepared by in situ polymerization. By using this synthetic methodology, the nanoflakes, even if with a gradient of dispersion (size of aggregates), preserve their chemical structure from oxidation (as proved by both Raman and 31 P-Solid State NMR studies) and are particularly stable to air and UV light exposure. The feasibility of this approach, capable of efficiently exfoliating bP while protecting the bPn, has been then verified by using different vinyl monomers (styrene and N-vinylpyrrolidone), thus obtaining hybrids where the nanoflakes are embedded in polymer matrices with a variety of intriguing thermal, mechanical and solubility characteristics. Black phosphorus (bP) is nowadays one of most studied 2D layered systems Notably, polymers have been recognized as favorable in breaking down the strong interlayer interactions among nanostructured layered materials By considering this scenario, the present work proposes, for the first time, a study focused on the preparation of stabilized bPn embedded in polymers through hybrids preparation able to maintain or even to improve the structural properties of bP. In place of the previously reported exfoliation methods that use a mechanical tool (scotch tape) or LPE with non-friendly solvents, that are difficult to remove from the devices (as for example DMSO), here, for the first time, bP has been exfoliated in the PMMA matrix by using strategies aimed at improving both the exfoliation level (phosphorene or bPn being the target) and the structural and morphological stability of the exfoliated material. In particular, the bP has been directly exfoliated in the liquid vinyl monomer, the methyl methacrylate (MMA), without solvents, and after the addition of a radical initiator, the hybrid material has been obtained by in situ radical polymerization. For comparison purposes PMMA-based composites have been also prepared by the direct bP exfoliation in polymer solution or by starting from bPn previously exfoliated by LPE with DMSO and successively dispersed in the PMMA matrix. These new materials have been characterized by combining different techniques: Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS), Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) and Raman spectroscopies, X-ray Diffraction (XRD), All the materials (polymers and reagents) and the solvents below were used as received without further purification: methyl methacrylate (MMA) 99% from Sigma Aldrich, d = 0.963 mg/mL MW: 100.12 g/mol; The micro-Raman analysis was performed using a Renishaw micro-Raman inVia instrument equipped with a 1800 grooves/mm diffraction grating, a CCD detector and a 50X magnifying lens. The instrument has a Nd:YAG laser source at  = 532 nm wavelength. The samples were analyzed as polymer films or powder (bP); the measurements as well as the imaging were obtained on different portions of each specimen and the power on the samples was about 1.5 mW. X-ray Diffraction (XRD) patterns of hybrids and bP were acquired at room temperature with a PANalytical X'PERT PRO diffractometer, employing Cu K radiation ( = 1.54187 Å) and a parabolic MPD-mirror for Cu radiation. The diagrams were acquired in a 2 range between 5.0° and 80.0°, using a continuous scan mode with an acquisition step size of 0.0263° or 0.0131 ° and a counting time of 150 s. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) analyses were carried out at room temperature by using the Malvern Zetasizer nano instrument (model: ZEN1600) equipped with a HeNe laser (633 nm, 4 mW) and an avalanche photodiode detector with an angle of 173°. The DLS data were processed and analyzed with Dispersion Technology Software (Malvern Instruments). Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) and Attenuated Total Reflectance (ATR-FTIR) spectra were recorded at room temperature with a Perkin-Elmer Two Spectrometer equipped with an ATR accessory with diamond crystal. The spectra were generally acquired between 4000 and 400 cm -1 with a resolution of 4 cm -1 using 16 scans. Number average molecular weight (M n ̅̅̅̅ ) and weight average molecular weight (M w ̅̅̅̅̅ ) as well as dispersity (Ð) were determined using Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC), Agilent Technologies 1200 Series. The instrument was equipped with an Agilent degasser, an isocratic HPLC pump, an Agilent refractive index (RI) detector, and two PLgel 5 m MiniMIX-D columns conditioned at 35 °C. Chloroform (CHCl 3 ) was used as the mobile phase at a flow rate of 0.3 mL min -1 . The system was calibrated with polystyrene standards in a range from 500 to 3 × 10 5 g mol -1 . Samples were dissolved in CHCl 3 (2 mg mL -1 ) and filtered through a 0.20 micron syringe filter before analysis (twice in the case of hybrids). Number average molecular weight (M n ̅̅̅̅ ) and weight average molecular weight (M w ̅̅̅̅̅ ) were calculated using the Agilent ChemStation software. Thermal Gravimetric Analyses (TGA) were carried out with a Seiko EXSTAR 7200 TGA/DTA by introducing about 5-8 mg of sample in an alumina sample pan of 70 μL. In a typical experiment, run was carried out at a standard rate of 10°C/min from 30°C to 700 °C under nitrogen flow. T onset and T infl were determined by analyzing the TG curve (as the temperature of intercept of tangents before and after the degradation step) and DTG curve (as the maximum of the peak), respectively. Black phosphorus (bP) and phosphorene (bPn) suspension in DMSO (DMSO_bPn, r H = 500 ± 23nm) were prepared as previously described MMA_bPn, NVP_bPn, Sty_bPn suspensions were obtained by LPE in the presence of the sole monomer. In a typical procedure ~5 mg of bP carefully crashed in a mortar, were put in a test tube and then a weighted quantity of MMA, Sty or NVP was added (Table Three different methodologies were employed (see Figure METHOD A: dispersion of DMSO_bPn suspension in PMMA solution. Into a 100 mL two-necked round bottom flask, equipped with a magnetic stirrer and previously degassed, back-filled three times with nitrogen and then left under nitrogen, 25 mL of CHCl 3 and 0.523 g of PMMA (commercial product) were loaded. The solution was magnetically stirred for 10 min in a continuous stream of N 2 until the polymer was completely dissolved. Under a N 2 current, the DMSO_bPn suspension (r H = 500±23 nm) was added dropwise. The mixture was left stirring under N 2 for 15 min and then the mixing stopped. A DLS measurement of polymeric suspension provided a value of r H = 894.3±11.5 nm. The flask content, a yellow/brown solution, was precipitated (dropwise) into 400 mL of MeOH. The polymer was then filtered, and dried under vacuum till constant weight (0.430 g). By considering that the DMSO_bPn suspension was prepared by using 5mg of bP, the content of phosphorus derivative in the composite (entry PMMA_bP_A) was estimated as 1.0 % wt on the basis of starting amount. METHOD B: LPE of bP in PMMA solution. 5 mg of bP flakes were put into a test tube; then a polymer solution containing 0.513 g of PMMA (commercial product) in 30 mL of mixture acetone/DMSO 2/1 was added to the powder. The ultrasonication process was carried out for 3 hs, by varying the amplitude of the ultrasound wave between 50 and 100%, with a power of 5-9 Watt. A DLS measurement of polymeric suspension provided a value of r H =427.3 ± 96.4 nm. The collected dispersion with yellow-brown color was co-precipitated in 400 mL of MeOH. The solid fraction was then recovered via filtration and dried under vacuum until constant weight. The content of phosphorus derivatives in the composite (entry PMMA_bP_B) was estimated as 1.0 % wt on the basis of starting amount. The same treatment (solubilization and sonication) was applied to PMMA (commercial product) without adding the bP to recover a blank sample (entry PMMA_B_blank) used for comparison purpose. A Schlenk tube (10 mL) equipped with a magnetic stirrer and previously degassed, back-filled three times with nitrogen and then left under nitrogen, was loaded with the MMA_bPn or Sty_bPn or NVP_bPn suspensions (previously prepared). A weighted amount of AIBN (2 wt.% with respect to the monomer) was added and the tube was placed in an oil bath (temperature and time of polymerization depending of vinyl monomer used, as summarized in Table With the same experimental conditions MMA, Sty and NVP were polymerized to provide comparative samples obtained without bP (entries: PMMA_C_blank; PS_C_blank; PNVP_C_blank). A schematic representation summarizing the different procedures is reported in Fig. In addition a physical mixture between bP and PMMA (1wt %) was prepared to be analysed by The different methodologies used to prepare the hybrid material (schematized in Fig The structural and thermal properties of PMMA matrix in the hybrids were investigated by FTIR, Raman, SEC, TGA and DSC (Figure suggesting a reinforcing effect due to nanofiller addition; however, this increment occurred with a really low extent for the run obtained by in situ polymerization (METHOD C) suggesting for this sample a finer and homogeneous dispersion of flakes. The same trend was observed for the TGA results. Notably, the composites provided by METHODS A and B showed a certain improvement in their thermal stability with respect to both the onset and inflection temperatures, in agreement with results already reported PMMA_bP_C has a thermal behaviour similar to that of blank sample, suggesting the formation of an interpenetrated phase in which the two components (polymer and filler) are really entangled at molecular level without distinguishable effects regards to bulk thermal properties (the TGA curves are reported in Figure The optical microscopy coupled with Raman was used to investigate the morphology of the samples; the imaging of portions of each specimen showed a different flakes distribution, depending on the preparation method (Figure resembling the bPn and a really small amount of larger aggregates (see an example on the right of Figure Interestingly, from inspection of the structural features of flakes detected in samples provided by METHOD B and C, it was found that the intensity of bP peaks compared to those of polymer was different and depended on the spot investigated. PMMA_bP_B showed a remarkable decrease of bP signal intensity by moving from the particle to the apparently neat polymer; moreover, Raman spectra of larger particles (several microns) did not evidence the typical polymer signals, according to poor efficiency in the bP embedding in the polymer matrix (Figure 31 P-MAS spectra (with or without 1 H HPD) were recorded to characterize bPn after embedding in PMMA. In the literature only a few examples of 31 P-MAS spectra of bP are reported Figure All the hybrids materials showed the signal of bP at ca. 18.5 ppm and several peaks in the 0÷15 ppm spectral region, ascribable to oxidation products, mainly H 3 PO 4 and H 3 PO 3 , but possibly also other phosphates and oxidized species Remarkably, in the spectrum of the physical mixture between PMMA and bP, the bP signal at 18.5 ppm shows an asymmetric shape, observed also in the already reported bP spectra. Indeed, by exploiting a spectral fitting procedure, the signal at 18.5 ppm could be deconvoluted in two peaks, the first with a chemical shift of 18-19 ppm (linewidth 450-550 Hz) and the second at 20-21 ppm (linewidth 800-1000 Hz; see inset in Figure The bP NMR signal of PMMA_bP_A and PMMA_bP_B appears even more asymmetric, as confirmed by a 40:60 intensity ratio between the peaks at about 18-19 ppm and 20-21 ppm, as determined from spectral fitting (insets of Figure X-ray diffraction analysis was used to characterize the crystalline forms of neat bP (mixed with PMMA) and after being dispersed in the hybrids. The typical XRD patterns collected at room temperature in the scanning range 5° < 2θ < 60° are reported in Figure More in detail, the sample PMMA_bP_B showed intense narrow peaks, as it can be seen by comparing the signal at 16.90° with the broad band associated to PMMA. Even if from the experimental evidences collected by The sample PMMA_bP_C showed narrow peaks more intense than those of PMMA_bP_A but less intense than those of PMMA_bP_B. On the basis of its highly preserved bP content, assessed by SSNMR (the oxidized/degraded fraction is less than 1/3 of those of hybrids obtained by METHODS A and B), the XRD profile suggested nice output in terms of bP dispersion level and suitability of the METHOD C which can be stated to boost the bP exfoliation and at the same time to preserve the chemical nature and structure of bP nanoflakes. The stability upon exposure to air and light was also tested by repeating the Raman analysis after 6-10 months from sample preparation and even after prolonged solubilisation of the sample in anisole. Raman spectra collected on different portions of each specimen (films obtained by compression moulding or solution casting) clearly showed the characteristic modes of bP whose intensity and Raman shifts depended on the thickness of flakes: both thicker flakes and polymer portions without visible inclusions evidenced the bP peaks confirming that also thinner flakes (bPn) were not fully etched nor chemically modified after long exposure of the hybrid to air and light (Figure To better assess the bPn stability in ambient conditions, the photo-degradation induced by UV light irradiation of samples produced by METHOD C was qualitatively studied. The polymer films of PMMA_C_blank and PMMA_bP_C samples were irradiated in air at room temperature with an UV-Vis lamp at different times and the resulting sample analyzed by Raman and FTIR-ATR spectroscopies (Figures Raman spectra of PMMA_bP_C hybrid were recorded by visually heading towards a clean part of specimen (apparently without aggregates, curves labelled (b) in Figure After 250 min of exposure the ATR spectra of both samples (blank run and hybrid) showed the characteristic vibration modes due to oxidation and degradation effects (Figure The Raman analysis (Figure It is well-known from literature In summary, the in situ radical polymerization after LPE of bP in MMA (METHOD C) was here shown as an effective method to provide hybrid PMMA-based materials containing bPn (by promoting the exfoliation of bP) and whose structure was preserved i) during the preparation steps, ii) after storage in ambient condition for prolonged time, iii) owing to different thermal and solvent treatment, and iv) even when subjected to UV aging. In addition, the procedure is simple if compared with other methods and does not involve extensive use of solvents and sonication. To test the feasibility of the method and the possibility to prepare hybrids with different polymers, the in situ radical polymerization of Sty and NVP was carried out (Table After storing the samples in ambient conditions for 6 months, the hybrids PS_bP_C and PVP_bP_C were solubilized in anisole and water, respectively, and films were obtained by solution casting onto glass. They were carefully analyzed by Raman microscopy (Figure This approach affords the opportunity to obtain scalable quantities of bPn opening the way for an easier design of (optoelectronic) devices. Moreover, since PMMA is the most used resist for electron beam lithography, solutions of the PMMA nanocomposites can be directly spin-coated without further processing, and the bPn within can be processed into devices without the need of a protective environment for fabrication Additional research data supporting this publication, including FTIR-ATR and Raman spectra of starting bP and prepared hybrids, Raman spectra of PMMA_bP_C hybrid after 6-10 months from preparation, FTIR-ATR spectra of PMMA_bP_C hybrid and related polymer matrix after UV aging, FT-IR and Raman peaks assignments of all polymers used, schematic description of synthetic methodologies for hybrids preparation, are available as supplementary file (pdf). 2,2′-Azobis(2-methylpropionitrile) (AIBN) 98% from Sigma Aldrich MW: 164.21 g/mol; dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) ACS reagent ≥99.5% from Sigma Aldrich MW: 78.13 g/mol; chloroform ACS reagent ≥ 99,8 % from Sigma Aldrich MW 119.38 g/mol; acetone ACS reagent ≥ 99,5% from Sigma Aldrich, MW: 58.08 g/mol; methanol ACS reagent 99. * by supposing that the whole phosphorus amount was maintained in the composite sample PMMA_bP_C, prepared by in situ radical polymerization, was characterized by a remarkably higher value of both the average molecular weights. This experimental evidence can be explained by the hindrance in movement of the growing macroradicals which inhibits the termination reactions and thus increases the PMMA B * intercept of tangents before and after degradation step; § from DTG curves as maximum of peak; # from technical sheet * intercept of tangents; § from DTG curves as maximum of peak; nd: not determined