We demonstrate several new aspects of exceptional points of degeneracy (EPD) pertaining to propagation in two uniform coupled transmission-line structures. We describe an EPD using two different approachesby solving an eigenvalue problem based on the system matrix, and as a singular point from bifurcation theory, and the link between these two disparate viewpoints. Cast as an eigenvalue problem, we show that eigenvalue degeneracies are always coincident with eigenvector degeneracies, so that all eigenvalue degeneracies are implicitly EPDs in two uniform coupled transmission lines. Furthermore, we discuss in some detail the fact that EPDs define branch points (BPs) in the complex-frequency plane; we provide simple formulas for these points, and show that parity-time (PT) symmetry leads to real-valued EPDs occurring on the real-frequency axis. We discuss the connection of the linear algebra approach to previous waveguide analysis based on singular points from bifurcation theory, which provides a complementary viewpoint of EPD phenomena, showing that EPDs are singular points of the dispersion function associated with the fold bifurcation. This provides an important connection of various modal interaction phenomena known in guided-wave structures with recent interesting effects observed in quantum mechanics, photonics, and metamaterials systems described in terms of the EPD formalism. When propagation in a coupled-waveguide system is described in terms of a system matrix, exceptional points of degeneracy are points in the parameter space of such a system at which simultaneous eigenvalue and eigenvector degeneracies occur It is important to point out that EPDs are manifest in the parameter space of a system's eigenstates' temporal evolution (e.g., such as certain coupled resonators with loss and gain), or of a system's eigenstates' spatial evolution. This latter case represents the evolution of eigenwaves in a given spatial direction, such as in a multimode waveguide with prescribed loss and gain, which is investigated in this paper, where the multimode waveguide is a pair of uniform coupled transmission lines. Some of the earliest examples of EPDs have been also observed in structures with spatial periodicity which are explored, for instance, in In this work, we consider a coupled uniform transmission-line system, recently examined in We consider two uniform coupled transmission lines (CTLs) as depicted in Fig. where the voltage and current are 2-dimensional vectors, where the off-diagonal elements represent coupling between the two transmission lines. Furthermore, the perunit-length series impedance and shunt admittance matrices are given by Z = iωL + R and Y = iωC + G, where R, G, L, and C are matrices of the per-unit-length distributed CTL parameters, assumed nondispersive for simplicity. The matrices L and C are positive definite and symmetric A. EPD from a Linear Algebra Perspective Decoupling (1), we obtain two second-order wave equations for the voltage and current vectors The two systems lead to the same wavenumber solutions though in general, Z and Y do not necessarily commute; one common exception is for lossless lines in a homogeneous environment characterized by μ, ε, in which case Z Y = -ω 2 με1, where 1 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. Alternatively, one may form a four-dimensional state vector where Assuming that the transmission line is invariant along z, the homogeneous solutions to (3) and ( Note that the first two equations in 1. For the systems of CTLs considered above, when an EPD occurs one has m (λ) > l (λ), i.e., all degenerate eigenvalues have a deficient eigenspace, and the matrices M, Z Y, Y Z cannot be diagonalized (except for the trivial degeneracy at k=0 and in uncoupled lines). In particular, for the two uniform CTLs considered here, EPDs are associated with l (λ) = 2, and m (λ) = 1. 2. EPDs imply the presence of square-root branch points in the complex-frequency plane. As such, these complex-frequency plane singularities are generally unavailable for monochromatic problems, but may be accessed in certain pulse shaping scenarios 3. The analysis of EPD from a linear algebra perspective can analogously be studied as fold singularities of mappings in bifurcation theory. 4. PT-symmetric conditions lead to EPDs on the realfrequency axis, and, thus, to physically observable phenomena in monochromatic problems. In the following, we examine the aforementioned statements and provide analytical expressions for the eigenvalues and eigenvectors to reveal the origin of EPDs and their relation to eigenvalue and eigenvector degeneracies and branch points. In Section II B we examine EPDs from a different prospective, that of bifurcation theory. We first consider the 2 × 2 eigenvalue problem in (6); -Z Y having eigenvalues k 2 1,2 and regular voltage eigenvectors V 1,2 , obtained analytically as The trace T and determinant of Z Y are given by det For the -Y Z formulation in (6), everything is analogous; the same eigenvalues are obtained, and the regular current I 1,2 eigenvectors are retrieved using (7) by replacing It is obvious that, without considering the trivial eigenvalue degeneracy at k = 0, eigenvalue degeneracies occur when D = 0, and, moreover, from For the formulation in where the + sign in front is for n = 1, 2 , the - , and again both eigenvalues and eigenvectors become simultaneously degenerate when D = 0, and m (±k Therefore, excepting the case of uncoupled identical lines Conditions for EPDs were also presented in are necessary for an eigenvalue degeneracy (and so, in fact, are necessary and sufficient for an EPD as described previously, excepting k = 0 and uncoupled lines). These two conditions combined yield det Z Y = T 2 /4, which is the condition under which D = 0. Furthermore, when, e.g., M is similar to a diagonal matrix (away from the EPD) it can be written in the form where U is a 4 × 4 matrix representing the similarity transformation of M that brings it to a diagonal form, and Λ is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are the eigenvalues k n in (16) it is observed that det (U) = 0 occurs when D = 0 (or when Y 12 Z 22 +Y 11 Z 12 = 0, which seems to not be of practical interest, and note that D = T cannot be true since, using which again occurs at D = 0. Therefore, the previously stated conditions in In what follows, it will be useful to cast the eigenvalue problems where ξ is the vector of geometrical and material parameters of the system, and 1 is the identity matrix. In particular, in the following, all the partial derivatives in ω could be substituted with partial derivatives in ξ and analogous conclusions would be reached relative to the dispersion diagram (k, ξ) and associated BPs. In which is also given in for ς = k, ω, an mth-order eigenvalue degeneracy (i.e., an mth-order root of H (k, ω)) will satisfy where k e is the degenerate wavenumber and ω e is the frequency at which the wavenumbers become degenerate. For a second-order EPD, the condition which is equivalent to the trace condition m . The first-order coefficient is given by The Puiseux series is a direct consequence of the Jordan Block form (see for example page 65 in Applying the fractional power expansion The first two terms in and so the first-order coefficient α 1 is nonzero. An important aspect of the Puiseux series is that it provides the characteristic form of the solution in the vicinity of the EPD, as shown later in relation to Fig. where U is a 4×4 matrix constituting a similarity transformation and containing the generalized eigenvectors of that are constructed through the Jordan chain procedure ( with Ψ 1 and Ψ g 1 being the regular and generalized eigenvectors associated with the wavenumber k e at the secondorder EPD, and similarly Ψ 3 and Ψ g 3 are the regular and generalized eigenvectors associated with the wavenumber -k e . We consider the general solution of (4) subject to an initial condition at an arbitrary z = z 0 given by Ψ(z 0 ) = Ψ 0 . Its general and unique solution is given by which provides growing solutions along z as Ψ(z) ∝ ze -ikez discussed in Here, we address Statement 3, and connect the previous analysis with an entirely different method based on singularity and bifurcation theory The mapping H(k, ω) = z defines a surface in C 2 , and for the simple case of (k, ω, z) ∈ R, this is depicted in Fig. and, therefore, at a regular point the tangent of k(ω) (related to the group velocity) is well-defined. However, of particular interest are the singular points Obviously, in this case the tangent (31) is undefined. In The zero conditions Notably, the zero and non-zero conditions ( Characteristic form. In the local neighborhood of the fold point (FP)/EPD (k e , ω e ) the qualitative behavior of the mapping H can be represented by the normal form where ∆ = H kk (k e , ω e )H ω (k e , ω e ), leading to the dispersion function For the case of ∆ > 0 with ω < ω e two branching solutions (k(ω)) of (k -k e ) 2 + (ω -ω e ) generate a parabola, and for ω > ω e two equal solutions (k(ω)) exist as a straight line k(ω) = k e . This corresponds to the characteristic intersection of a parabola and a straight line that occurs at a point of fold bifurcation It should be noted that the conditions (32) and (33) define both real and complex FPs/EPDs, however, the normal form (34) is applicable for real valued FPs, where ∆ is real-valued. Otherwise, the quantitative behavior of the local structure of the function H(k, ω) in the vicinity of FP/EPD can be obtained with a Taylor series expansion. Explicitly, the Taylor series in the vicinity of the EPD can be written as Since H(k e , ω e ) = H k (k e , ω e ) = 0, and discarding the higher-order terms, k-k e ±α 1 (ω -ω e ) 1/2 +α 2 (ω -ω e )±α 3 (ω -ω e ) 3/2 +O((ω-ω e ) 2 ) (37) where The coefficient α 1 is the same as C. EDPs leading to branch points in the complex-frequency plane Regarding Statements 2 and 3, it is clear from several points of view that D = 0 defines a degeneracy in the eigenvalue plane, and a square-root-type BP in the complex-frequency plane (since A = A (ω) for A = -Z Y, -Y Z, or M). Solving D = 0 leads to the frequency where the BP/EPD occurs (this also can be obtained by substituting k 2 = -T /2 from ( which is the dual of (41). As an example, Fig. For other values of R 11 = -R 22 (i.e., maintaining PT-symmetry) the fold point remains on the (ω) axis, but moves to lower or higher frequencies as indicated in We have examined several aspects of EPDs on two coupled transmission lines, demonstrating that in the framework of the eigenvalue problem the eigenvalue degeneracies are always coincident with eigenvector degeneracies, such that all eigenvalue degeneracies correspond to EPDs. We also discussed the fact that EPDs are related to branch-point singularities in the complex-frequency plane, as can be ascertained from both linear algebra concepts and from the theory of singular points of complex mappings and bifurcation theory. Moreover, we have provided a connection between the linear algebra approach and an approach based on singularity and bifurcation theories, previously used to study modal interactions on guided-wave structures. We have presented simple closed-form expressions for the complex-frequency plane EPDs, and showed that under PT-symmetry these branch points reside on the real-frequency axis and gener-alized the branch point discussion to complex frequency and wavenumbers. This material is based upon M.O and F.C work supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-15-1-0280. In addition to the transmission-line treatment of EPDs, here we briefly comment on the matrix that arises from conventional so called "coupled-mode theory" where a 1 and a 2 are the wave amplitudes in transmission lines 1 and 2, respectively. One can proceed with examination of the eigenvectors and eigenvalues, but it suffices to consider, analogous to where β is the 2×2 matrix in 