At a superconductor-ferromagnet (S/F) interface, the F layer can introduce a magnetic exchange field within the S layer, which acts to locally spin split the superconducting density of states. The effect of magnetic exchange fields on superconductivity has been thoroughly explored at Sferromagnet insulator (S/FI) interfaces for isotropic s-wave S and a thickness that is smaller than the superconducting coherence length. Here we report a magnetic exchange field effect at an all-oxide S/FI interface involving the anisotropic d-wave high temperature superconductor praseodymium cerium copper oxide (PCCO) and the FI praseodymium calcium manganese oxide (PCMO). The magnetic exchange field in PCCO, detected via magnetotransport measurements through the superconducting transition, is localized to the PCCO/PCMO interface with an average magnitude that depends on the presence or absence of magnetic domain walls in PCMO. The results are promising for the development of all-oxide superconducting spintronic devices involving unconventional pairing and high temperature superconductors. The proximity effects at a superconductor-ferromagnet metal (S/F) interface describe the leakage of superconductivity from S into F and the penetration of a magnetic exchange field (MEF) from F into S The coherence length (ξF) of spin-singlet pairs in a F metal is short ranged and less than 3 nm in Co On the S side of a S/F interface, the MEF penetrates over a distance of less than the superconducting coherence length ξs and acts to spin split the superconducting density of states (DOS) tunneling spectroscopy has to be performed on much thicker films where the interface DOS is masked by the bulk superconductivity. Alternatively, MEFs can be probed via magnetotransport measurements around Tc. However, measurements on YBCO/La0.7Ca0.3MnO3 (LCMO) show results dominated by stray fields from Bloch domain walls in LCMO, which suppress Tc In this Letter, we report PCCO-thickness-dependent magnetotransport measurements around the Tc of PCCO proximity coupled to the FI Pr0.8Ca0.2MnO3 (PCMO). By sweeping in-plane magnetic fields around the coercivity of the PCMO as a function of PCCO layer thickness, we are able to correlate shifts in Tc to the localized MEF in PCCO at the PCCO/PCMO interface. A suppression of Tc due to stray fields from Bloch domains walls in PCMO or nonequilibrium accumulation of spin-polarized quasiparticles in PCCO are ruled out. PCCO/PCMO and PCMO/PCCO/PCMO films are grown on (001)-oriented single crystal SrTiO3 (STO) by pulsed laser deposition (KrF laser; wavelength λ = 248 nm) at a growth temperature of 780 °C in flowing N2O at 120 mTorr with a beam energy density of 1.5 J cm -2 and pulse frequency of 7 Hz for PCCO and 4 Hz for PCMO. The films are postannealed in situ at 720 °C for several minutes in 0.1 mTorr of N2O to optimize the superconductivity of the PCCO and subsequently cooled at a rate of 5 °Cmin -1 . In-plane electrical resistance (R) measurements using a current of 100 μA were performed in a cryogenfree pulse tube system using a four-terminal electrical setup with 20-nm-thick Au contacts on the films. R was measured as a function of an in-plane magnetic field (H), directed parallel to the applied current, and temperature (T) across Tc. Care was taken to ensure that the current had no effect on Tc. In Fig. We first discuss R(H) results taken from PCCO/PCMO bilayers in the superconducting transition. These results suggest that, if out-of-plane Bloch domain walls exist in PCMO, they have no measurable effect on the superconductivity of PCCO, as such fields would suppress Tc at Hc where the domain wall density is maximum (e.g. see To further eliminate any potential influence of stray fields on R(H), we fabricated a PCMO/PCO/PCCO/PCO/PCMO (53/3/94/3/106 nm) control sample in which the insulating layer of Pr2CuO4 (PCO) is nonmagnetic and blocks proximity coupling between PCCO and PCMO. As shown in Fig. Note that the Tc of PCCO in all multilayers investigated is reduced from the bulk value of 22 K In the Supplemental Material We now show that the decrease in Tc at Hc is related to an interface MEF, which acts on the superconductivity in PCCO within a distance of ξc(T) of the PCCO/PCMO interface. For H > Hc, the PCMO is magnetically saturated, and so the Cooper pairs in PCCO experience a spatially uniform MEF through an exchange interaction The shift in Tc between magnetized and demagnetized states in PCMO depends on the ratio α = ξab(0)/dw, where ξab(0) is the in-plane coherence length in PCCO (at absolute zero) and dw is the domain wall width in PCMO, via the relation in the limit of α < 1. Here, h is the magnitude of the MEF in S and Tc0 is the critical temperature of the equivalent S layer isolated from the FI-consequently, ΔR increases with α. In manganites, dw is ≈20 nm We now estimate ΔR due to domain wall superconductivity in PCCO. Taking the example of Fig. Assuming that ξab follows ξ ab (T) ≈ ξ ab (0)/ √ 1 - , ξab  dw  20 nm is obtained from Tc, onset = 18 K [see R(T) curve in Fig. where L is the distance between magnetic domain walls. Taking ΔR/RN  2% [inset of Fig. Finally, we investigated R(H) in a YBCO/PCMO (7/106 nm) bilayer In conclusion, we have demonstrated a MEF effect at an all-oxide PCCO/PCMO (S/FI) interface in which stray fields or spin accumulation have no detectable effect on the superconductivity. A MEF effect and therefore spin splitting in a HTS oxide is an important development for the fields of superconducting spintronics and oxide interfaces. The higher operating temperatures of HTS oxides over metallic-based superconductors in conjunction with their anisotropic pairing symmetries, could lead to novel forms of spin-dependent and thermal transport properties and so greatly extend the work on metallic-based systems-e.g., superconducting spin-polarized quasiparticle transport The data sets relating to the figures in this paper are available for access in Ref. For electron-doped cuprate superconductors a partial removal of Oa 2-ions is necessary in order to achieve a (bulk) Tc In-plane compressive strain in PCCO will act to enhance the Tc through an extension of Cu-Oa bond length We investigated the resistance vs in-plane magnetic field properties of YBCO(8 nm)/PCMO(106 nm)/STO and PCCO(28)/LCMO(106)/STO multilayers through the superconducting transition, as shown in Fig. In contrast to the PCCO/PCMO/STO data in Fig. 