Omnidirectional light propagation in two-dimensional (2D) photonic crystals (PCs) has been investigated by extending the formerly developed 2D finite element analysis (FEA) of in-plane light propagation in which the corresponding band structure (BS) and photon density of states (PDOS) of 2D PCs with complex geometry configurations had been calculated more accurately by using an adaptive FEA in real space for both the transverse electric (TE) and transverse magnetic (TM) modes. In this work, by adopting a waveguiding theory under the consideration of translational symmetry, the omnidirectional PDOS corresponding to both the radiative and evanescent waves can be calculated accurately and efficiently based on the in-plane dispersion relations of both TE and TM modes within the irreducible Brillouin zone. We demonstrate that the complete band gaps shown by previous work considering only the radiative modes will be closed by including the contributions of the evanescent modes. These results are of general importance and relevance to the spontaneous emission by an atom or to dipole radiation in 2D periodic structures. In addition, it may serve as an efficient approach to identifying the existence of a complete photonic band gap in a 2D PC instead of using time-consuming 3D BS calculations. In the past three decades, photonic crystals (PCs) have attracted much attention In this work, by adopting a waveguiding theory under the consideration of translational symmetry and extending the in-plane model The propagation of light in a photonic crystal can be studied by solving Maxwell's equations. Figure and where ε(r) and μ(r) are the permittivity and permeability functions of the PCs, respectively, and ω is the angular eigen-frequency. In a 2D periodic system, the dielectric function is a periodic function of x and y. We assume that the materials are linear, homogeneous, isotropic, lossless, and nonmagnetic. We have where ε r (x, y) is the dielectric function profile, and ε a and ε d are the dielectric constants of the air and dielectric regions, respectively. The two master equations are reduced to two homogeneous Helmholtz's equations for the air (dielectric) region: A two-dimensional photonic crystal is periodic in two directions (x, y) and homogeneous in the third one z.For light propagating in the system retaining translational symmetry, we can separate the modes into two independent polarizations, TM and TE modes, and consider the band structures and photon density of states accordingly. Based on the theory of waveguiding, the propagation properties of TM and TE modes can be characterized by the field components parallel to the rods or along the z direction, E z (x, y) and H z (x, y), respectively. The corresponding Helmholtz's equations, the z components of Eq. ( As the system has translational symmetry along the z-axis, we can assume the longitudinal wave functions to be a plane wave, exp(-ik z z). By using separation of variables, Eq. ( The in-plane propagation (k z = 0) can be considered as a limiting case or a cut-off condition of the omnidirectional propagation (k z ≥ 0), as shown in Fig. where ω c is the cut-off angular eigen-frequency for the omnidirectional propagating waves. Then the corresponding dispersion relations for the omnidirectional light propagation in the 2D PCs can be determined by To perform the 3D PDOS calculations, we construct two equifrequency regions ω(k x , k y , k z ) = ω and ω(k x , k y , k z ) = ω + dω, where ω is an arbitrary value of the angular frequency and dω is an infinitesimal increment where V is the volume of the system in real space and μ r = 1 for nonmagnetic material. The omnidirectional PDOS can be obtained by employing Eq. ( In order to validate the extended model, we consider the omnidirectional light propagation in an inhomogeneous, linear, and nonmagnetic medium and employ a 2D PC model with a triangular lattice of air cylinders etched into silicon (ε r = 11.90) at a filling ratio of 67% air as calculated by the plane wave expansion method (PWEM) in Ref. for a 2D PC with a triangular lattice of air cylinders etched into silicon (εr = 11.90) at a filling ratio of 67% as used in Ref. On the other hand, the FEM can be easily adapted to solve problems of great complexity and unusual geometry. The eigenvalues can be accurately and efficiently calculated no matter how complex the geometric structures are, as demonstrated in our previous work Figure In summary, omnidirectional light propagation in 2D photonic crystals has been investigated. The polarization characteristics including both the TE and TM modes was considered in our simulation model by extending the formerly developed 2D finite element analysis. The contributions to the 3D total PDOS from the radiative and evanescent waves of different polarizations can be determined separately. We have carefully validated our extended model by benchmarking the results against those calculated by the well-known PWEM, resulting in good agreement. It has been demonstrated that the complete PBGs shown by previous work considering only the radiative modes will be closed by including the contributions of the evanescent modes. Therefore, a complete PBG does not exhibit in 2D PCs retaining translational symmetry in the longitudinal direction, if one considers both radiative and evanescent modes. With our approach, an omnidirectional PDOS of 2D PCs can be determined accurately and efficiently. These results are of general importance and relevance to the spontaneous emission by an atom or to dipole radiation in two-dimensional peri-odic structures. In addition, it may serve as an efficient approach to identifying the existence of a complete PBG in a 2D PC instead of using time-consuming 3D BS calculations.