The parent compound of high-T c superconducting cuprates is a unique Mott state consisting of layers of spin-1 /2 ions forming a square lattice and with a record high in-plane antiferromagnetic coupling. Compounds with similar characteristics have long been searched for. Nickelates and iridates had been proposed but have not reached a satisfactory similarity. Here we use a combination of experimental and theoretical tools to show that commercial AgF 2 is an excellent cuprate analog with remarkably similar electronic parameters to La 2 CuO 4 but larger buckling of planes. Two-magnon Raman scattering reveals a superexchange constant reaching 70% of that of a typical cuprate. We argue that structures that reduce or eliminate the buckling of the AgF 2 planes could have an antiferromagnetic coupling that matches or surpasses the cuprates. Cuprates are said to be unique materials in that they combine layers of spin-1 /2 magnetic moments coupled by a record high antiferromagnetic interaction, strong covalence between transition-metal (TM) and ligands and no orbital degeneracy. Since the discovery of high-T c cuprate superconductors, there have been several attempts to replicate these characteristics with different TM ions While LaNiO 2 is isoelectronic and isostructural with the infinite layer parent cuprates it lacks the strong covalent character between the TM and ligand Another obvious possibility is to move down the periodic table from copper to silver (Fig. The electronic structure of silver oxides was explored in the early times of high-T c Fluoroargentates have been scrutinized some years ago A bonus property of F -in place of O 2-is that, unlike CuO 2 planes, neutral AgF 2 planes are possible, so the simplest compound is not of the 214 kind but simply 012. Unexpectedly, as we show here, the binary and commercially available AgF 2 compound turns out to be an excellent cuprate analog. Figure Density functional theory (DFT) computations show that the electronic structure of AgF 2 is very similar to that in cuprates. Fig. As a minimal model of the electronic structure we consider one d x 2 -y 2 orbital centered on the TM (as in cuprates ( The similar splitting between Hubbard bands shown in Fig. The similarity of the DFT electronic structures confirms the conclusions of the simplistic picture of Fig. The more interesting parameter for a cuprate analogue is the magnetic exchange interaction which determines the scale of magnetic fluctuations in magnetically mediated mechanisms of superconductivity in doped compounds. Not surprisingly, AgF 2 is antiferromagnetic (16) as predicted by Anderson superexchange. A perturbation theory analysis shows that the buckling tends to reduce the superexchange interaction, both because of the reduction of the direct hybridization of p with the d x 2 -y 2 orbitals, and because of the destructive interference of the p z orbital (see Methods). Unfortunately, the present lack of precise parameters does not allow to obtain an accurate value of the magnetic interactions with this method. An alternative estimate can be obtained from hybrid-DFT computations which yield J = 52 meV for the nearest-neighbor interaction (see Methods and Ref. As in La 2 CuO 4 , the TM in one plane coincides with the center of the four TM plaquette in the next plane which tends to frustrate interplanar magnetic interactions in an antiferromagnetically ordered state. In both compounds, the frustration is partially relieved by the orthorhombicity but the effect is much larger in AgF 2 . For the ratio of interlayer to intralayer couplings our DFT computations predict values of the order of 10 -2 (See Supplementary Table In order to further test the analogy we have experimentally studied high quality powder samples of freshly prepared AgF 2 (see Methods). Crystallinity was verified with powder X-ray diffraction which resulted in a spectrum with similar characteristics but less impurity signatures than a commercial sample (see Methods and Supplementary Fig. An electron pramagnetic resonance signal was searched for over a wide range of temperatures. However, despite several efforts, it was not found. This is also analogous to the situation in the cuprates and points to strong antiferromagnetic interactions (see Methods). Vibrational spectroscopy (Raman and infrared) shows phonon modes in good agreement with the prediction of hybrid-DFT, validating the latter computations (Supplementary Fig. For high Raman shifts, we detected a broad band centered at 1750 cm -1 at room temperature which hardens and becomes narrower on cooling Fig. The feature at 970 cm -1 is assigned to a two-phonon process. For 2.41 eV the two-magnon feature is weak at high temperature (compared to the two-phonon feature) but becomes stronger upon cooling, similar to the behavior for 1.17 eV (panel a) and for cuprates. Unfortunately a detailed line shape analysis is not possible in this case due to a strong energy dependent background (dashed lines). The dependence on the excitation energy suggest that the resonance profile of the two-magnon line is shifted to lower laser excitation energies with respect to what is found in cuprates The above results clearly indicate that AgF 2 is an excellent cuprate analog with a very similar electronic structure. Historically, the superconducting temperature in cuprates has been optimized starting from simple ternary compounds and increasing the number of chemical elements. In argentates, starting from a binary compound that is already stable leaves substantial freedom for such optimizations. Clearly, a high-priority is to produce doped AgF 2 planes. This should allow studying how antiferromagnetism disappears, what is the role of the electronphonon interaction The cuprate family of parent high-T c superconductors is made of materials very similar to each other. Indeed, changes in key parameters like J are smaller than 15% 