We show that multiband superconductors with broken time-reversal symmetry can produce spontaneous currents and magnetic fields in response to the local variations of pairing constants. Considering the iron pnictide superconductor Ba1-xKxFe2As2 as an example we demonstrate that both the point-group symmetric s + is state and the C4-symmetry breaking s + id states produce in general the same magnitudes of spontaneous magnetic fields. In the s + is state these fields are polarized mainly in ab crystal plane, while in the s + id state their ab-plane and c-axis components are of the same order. The same is true for the random magnetic fields which are produced by the order parameter fluctuations near the critical point of the time-reversal symmetry breaking phase transition. Our findings can be used as a direct test of the s+is/s+id dichotomy and the additional discrete symmetry breaking phase transitions with the help of muon spin relaxation experiments. Introduction. Superconducting states with spontaneously broken time-reversal symmetry (BTRS) have been recently in the focus of interest. First such states have been studied in connection with the chiral p-wave order parameter in the superfluid 3 He A phase Spontaneous currents were predicted to exist near impurities in s + id superconducting states which spontaneously break the C 4 crystalline symmetry of the parent compound More general consideration has shown The purpose of the present paper is threefold. First, we show that the spontaneous magnetic field is generated both in the s + is and s + id state due to the generalform inhomogeneities of the pairing interactions. Such form of disorder can exist in the sample even without the externally generated defects just due to the spatiallyinhomogeneous doping level. Second, we demonstrate that in the general case, when the system is inhomogeneous both in the ab-plane and in the c-direction s + is and s + id states yield the same magnitudes of spontaneous fields. However, as shown schematically in Fig. Three-band model. Here we develop general treatment of spontaneous magnetic fields in BTRS states further considering inhomogeneities created by the spatial variation of pairing constants in the minimal three-band microscopic model We assume for simplicity that the density of states ν 0 is the same in all superconducting bands. This model can be used for both the s+is and s+id states. In the former case ∆ 1,2 correspond to the gaps at hole pockets and ∆ 3 is the gap at electron pockets, so that u hh = ν 0 η 1 and u eh = ν 0 η 2 are respectively the hole-hole and electronhole interactions where we use the units with = c = 1 and introduce interband phases θ ki = θ k -θ i . Here the London penetration depth is given by λ-2 , where λk are in general the tensor coefficients characterizing contribution of each band to the Meissner screening. In the clean limit they can be expressed as follows where Kk = v k v k is the anisotropy tensor, v k is the Fermi velocity in k-th band normalized to the certain band-independent characteristic velocity vF . We normalize the gaps by T c / √ ρ, where ρ = n πT 3 c ω -3 n ≈ 0.1 and T c is the critical temperature, magnetic field by B 0 = T c ν 0 /ρ, which is close to the thermodynamic critical field at zero temperature In contrast to the usual London electrodynamics, the multicomponent superconducting systems can generate spontaneous magnetic fields due the second term in Eq.( The general field structures produced by the 3D inhomogeneity in s + is/s + id states can be found using Eq.( Second, the component B z = 0 can be generated even in s + is state Ginzburg-Landau calculation. To go beyond local approximation we can calculate spontaneous magnetic fields using GL theory derived for s + is/s + id states The inhomogeneous BTRS state however occurs for much larger amplitudes of the pairing constant variations because the additional order parameter nucleates locally at the regions where η 1 ≈ η 2 . Below, we consider the spontaneous magnetic field produced by the superconducting currents generated by the inhomogeneities of the pairing constant η 2 = η 2 (r). At first let us consider the 2D inhomogeneities in the ab plane, so that η 1 = 1 and η 2 (x, y) = 1 + 0.5 sin(x/2) sin(y/2). ( This model allows for demonstrating differences between the linear and non-linear mechanisms of the spontaneous current generation, where the former takes place for s + id and the latter is s + is pairings. The magnetic field produced by ab-inhomogeneities has only z-component. The calculated distributionc of B z = B z (x, y) is shown in Figc.2c,d. Where the magnetic field is given in the units of τ B 0 /ẽ which has an order of the upper critical field H c2 at a given temperature. One can see that for one and the same set of parameters s + is state yields the spontaneous magnetic field response about 10 2 times smaller than s + id, which is consistent with the results obtained before The former inhomogeneity (13) corresponds to the abplane defect, while the latter ( To obtain spontaneous fields produced by ca-plane defects in s + is case we assume that there is ca-plane anisotropy set by the choice of coefficient ratio in different bands Such system yields the magnetic field component B y (x, z) shown in Fig. The general analytical expression for spontaneous field in case of the 3D inhomogeneity can be obtained using the reduced GL theory in the vicinity of BTRS transition. It can be constructed assuming the main order parameter to be ψ 1 = |ψ 1 |e iφ1 with |ψ 1 | = const and introducing the BTRS order parameter Θ = -i(ψ 2 ψ * 1 )/|ψ 1 |. Then we represent the GL free energy in terms if the gaugeinvariant momentum Q = A-∇φ 1 /ẽ, the real and imaginary parts of the complex order parameter Θ = Θ r +iΘ im as follows Here αr = Equation αr (T ) = 0 gives the critical temperature of BTRS transition. In the vicinity of this transition only the variation of Θ r is important as the αim is positive and non-vanishing. Therefore we can describe the timereversal symmetry breaking phase transition in terms of the real-valued order parameter Θ r : Note that the real order parameter Θ r is still coupled to the magnetic field because the superconducting current obtained from functional ( For simplicity let us assume that the coefficients kii for i = 1, 2 are isotropic and the anisotropy is determined by k12 . Then, going to the Fourier transform Θ r (r) = V e iqr Θ r (q)d 3 q/(2π) 3 in the volume V we obtain the magnetic field B(q) = Θ r (q) 8π/k 11 (q × k12 q)/[λ(q 2 + λ -2 )], The fields produced by rotationally symmetric 3D defect Θ r = Θ r (r) have the same structure as shown in Fig. Critical magnetic fluctuations. Spontaneous magnetic field produced by the order parameter inhomogeneities allows for the direct observation of the critical phenomena and fluctuations near the BTRS phase transition. From where q ⊥ = q 2 x + q 2 y . For simplicity we consider the limiting case when the cross-coupling gradient terms in the functional ( . Now, we can calculate the average value of the spontaneous magnetic field amplitude B 2 ⊥ = V d 3 q B 2 ⊥ (q) using the ultraviolet cutoff at the scale ξ -1 0 . The dependence of the average amplitude B⊥ = B 2 ⊥ on system parameters (T, η 1 /η 2 ) for fixed η 1 = 0.5 is shown in Fig. The average amplitudes of magnetic field components B2 k = B 2 k n(B k )dB k can be derived from the magnetic field distribution function n(B k ) which is a directly measurable experimental quantity. It can be obtained as the Fourier transform of the complex muon spin polarization function in time domain Conclusion. To summarize, we have shown that in general the s+id and s+is phases in multiband superconductors can produce spontaneous currents and magnetic fields in response to the spatial inhomogeneities caused by either the fluctuations of the pairing constants or the critical fluctuations of the order parameter components. This is in contrast to the previous predictions that s + is state has much weaker magnetic signatures. However, the spontaneous field polarization is found to be dras-tically different in s + is and s + id states making it possible to distinguish between them experimentally using muon spin relaxation measurements. The random magnetic fields produced by the scalar order parameter fluctuations can reveal the critical behaviour near the BTRS transition and in general any additional discretesymmetry breaking phase transition deep in the superconducting state.