Nonreciprocal devices such as isolators and circulators are necessary to protect sensitive apparatus from unwanted noise. Recently, a variety of alternatives were proposed to replace ferrite-based commercial technologies, with the motivation to be integrated with microwave superconducting quantum circuits. Here, we review isolators realized with microwave optomechanical circuits and present a gyrator-based picture to develop an intuition on the origin of nonreciprocity in these systems. Such nonreciprocal optomechanical schemes show promise as they can be extended to circulators and directional amplifiers, with perspectives to reach the quantum limit in terms of added noise. Nonreciprocal devices, such as isolators, circulators, and directional amplifiers, are pivotal components for quantum information processing with superconducting circuits because they protect sensitive quantum states from readout electronics backaction. The commercial Faraday-effect devices typically used in these applications have a large size and weight that require bigger and more powerful dilution refrigerators, contain ferromagnetic material that does not allow them to be placed close to the quantum processor, and cause losses that limit the readout fidelity of the measurement chain. In recent years, with major advances in superconducting quantum circuits There have been numerous demonstrations of parametric nonreciprocal devices harnessing three-wave mixing in dc-SQUIDs or Josephson parametric converters (JPCs). A three-mode nonlinear superconducting circuit using a dc-SQUID and two linear LC-resonators was engineered to implement a reconfigurable frequencyconverting three-port circulator or directional amplifier Another class of superconducting devices that exhibit directionality is travelling-wave parametric amplifiers (TWPAs) Similarly, nonreciprocal devices can be engineered using the nonlinearity of the optomechanical coupling A general approach to engineer nonreciprocal photon transport compatible with optomechanical systems was outlined by Metelmann and Clerk Here we explain the origin of nonreciprocity in electromechanical circuits by using the gyrator-based isolator as a conceptual starting point. We then discuss the limitations of the current experimental implementations of electromechanical nonreciprocal devices as well as the future prospects. A starting definition for nonreciprocity is that a device is nonreciprocal when S 21 = S 12 . Physically this corresponds to a modification of the scattering process when input and output modes are interchanged. In order to develop an intuitive picture for nonreciprocity, we introduce the gyrator as a canonical nonreciprocal element. The gyrator is a 2-port device which provides a nonreciprocal phase shift An isolator is a useful nonreciprocal device that can be assembled from a gyrator and additional reciprocal elements The gyrator-based scheme helps to summarize three sufficient ingredients to realize an isolator. Firstly, an element breaks reciprocity by inducing a nonreciprocal phase shift. Secondly, an additional path is introduced for signals to interfere such that the scattering matrix becomes asymmetric in the amplitude with Finally, dissipation is required for an isolator, since its scattering matrix between the two ports is non-unitary and some signals must necessarily be redirected to an external degree of freedom. The gyrator-based isolator provides a framework to understand how nonreciprocity arises in microwave optomechanical implementations. Gyrator and optomechanical coupling. a. The gyrator is a canonical nonreciprocal component. It is a twoport device, which adds a π phase shift when a wave is traveling one way but no phase shift in the reverse direction. b. A simple multimode optomechanical system consists of two electromagnetic modes coupled to the same mechanical oscillator. Due to the two microwave drive tones which linearize the optomechanical coupling, the conversion from â1 to â2 formally imparts a nonreciprocal phase shift, similarly to the gyrator. In the case of frequency conversion, this phase shift between tones at different frequencies is not measureable, as it depends on the reference frame. Microwave optomechanical schemes for nonreciprocity rely on scattering between coupled modes The simplest optomechanical scheme to couple two electromagnetic modes â1 and â2 involves coupling them both to the same mechanical oscillator b (fig. where Ω m is the mechanical frequency, g i = g 0,i √ n c,i is the coupling rate enhanced by the photon number n c,i due to the pump field, and φ i is the phase of each pump field. For the resonant case ∆ 1 = ∆ 2 = -Ω m , the frequency conversion between the two modes through mechanical motion is characterized by the scattering matrix elements (at the center of the frequency conversion window) where κ i is the energy decay rate of mode âi , and Gyrator-based isolator compared to optomechanical multimode schemes. a. An isolator can be built by combining the gyrator with other reciprocal elements. By combining the gyrator with two beam splitters and a transmission line, a four-port circulator is realized. Dissipation (provided by line terminations) eliminates the unwanted ports. b. The three-mode optomechanical isolator in which two electromagnetic modes have a direct coherent J-coupling, and interact through a shared mechanical mode. c. The fourmode optomechanical isolator, in which two electromagnetic modes interact through to different mechanical modes. d. In the scheme (b), frequency conversion through the J-coupling (light blue) and through the mechanical modes (green) interfere differently in the forward and backward direction when combined. e. In the scheme (c), the frequency conversion through each mechanical mode (green curves) are offset in frequency to interfere in a nonreciprocal manner. decay rate of the mechanical oscillator (for simplicity, the cavities are assumed to be overcoupled). While eq. ( While a change of the origin of time turns a phasenonreciprocal system reciprocal for coupled-mode systems, it simultaneously turns reciprocal systems phasenonreciprocal. The isolator in fig. The first scheme, shown in fig. where C coh = 4J 2 /(κ 1 κ 2 ). Compared to eq. ( The second scheme to realize isolation, shown in fig. The first scheme (fig. Both methods to achieve nonreciprocal isolation can be decomposed in terms of the three ingredients identified in the gyrator-based isolator. At the heart is the breaking of reciprocity that occurs through the time-dependent drives applied to the system that impart a complex phase to the interaction. Then a loop constituted by two arms allow the unwanted signal to be canceled in the backward direction through destructive interference while preserving it in the forward direction. The mechanical dissipative baths are used to eliminate the backward signal. As a consequence, the nonreciprocal bandwidth (where S 21 and S 12 differ) is limited by the mechanical dissipation rates, as illustrated in fig. Microwave optomechanics is uniquely suited to implement the mode structure presented in fig. It turns out that the first, seemingly simplest, scheme shown in fig. An important aspect of the nonreciprocal devices based on the optomechanical interaction is their noise performance. It is apparent from the gyrator scheme presented in section II and shown in fig. Microwave optomechanical circuits form a new platform to design nonreciprocal devices that could be integrated with superconducting quantum circuits. Current realizations for isolators suffer from a narrow bandwidth, limited by the mechanical dissipation rates, as well as from high back-propagating noise. External cooling of the mechanical oscillators can mitigate both issues. Microwave circulators realized with the same technology Comment This manuscript was submitted as a contribution to a special issue titled "Magnet-less Nonreciprocity in Electromagnetics" to appear in IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters.