In noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCSs), the conversion of a charge current into spin magnetization -the so called magnetoelectric effect -is the direct indicator of the unconventional, mixed-parity order parameter. This paper proposes a scheme to detect the magnetoelectric effect by anomalous, equal-spin Andreev tunneling in NCS/ferromagnet contacts. The proposal relies on the ability to generate spin-polarized triplet pairing by passing an electric current through an NCS. Such an induced triplet pairing bears a similarity to the paradigmatic nonunitary pairing in triplet superfluids with a complex vector order parameter d. The qualitative difference is that the induced nonunitary state can be realised in NCSs with a purely real d by breaking the timereversal symmetry in current-biased setups. This offers a possibility to access the unconventional superconductivity in NCSs through electrical transport measurements. Superconductivity in materials that lack a center of inversion symmetry does not fit into traditional classification of superconducting states invoking definite (even or odd) spatial parity (see, e.g., Refs. A close analogue of the intrinsic noncentrosymmetric superconductivity is the mixedparity superconducting proximity effect in hybrid structures of conventional superconductors and normal noncentrosymmetric materials Above, σ is the Pauli matrix vector and Ω k is the SOC field depending on the electron wave vector k; α so is the SOC constant and z is the unit vector in the z-direction. On the experimental side, much effort has been put into proving the parity mixing in intrinsic NCSs, using the measurements of the nuclear magnetic resonance relaxation rate, the magnetic penetration depth, thermal conductivity, etc. (see recent reviews in Refs. The detection scheme exploits the dependence of the Andreev tunneling on the relative orientation of the pair spin polarization if × f * and magnetization m [see also Eq. ( where the bar means averaging over the k directions. This result just means that a charge current is converted into spin magnetization of the superconducting condensate, a form of the magnetoelectric effect pioneered in normal metals by D'yakonov and Perel' The present paper generalizes the above findings beyond the proximity-effect model assumed in Ref. NCSs with the Rashba SOC (1) and three-dimensional (3D) NCS of the cubic crystal group with the linear SOC: To observe the pair spin polarization, we suggest to measure the Andreev conductance of a tunnel junction between a current-biased NCS and a ferromagnet. The idea is to exploit an analogy with the spin-valve effect, as illustrated in Fig. The main conclusion is that the Andreev tunneling is asymmetric with respect to the supercurrent direction specified by vector q. This asymmetry could serve as a clear smoking gun for the magnetoelectric charge-spin conversion in NCSs, which is also interesting in the context of superconducting spintronics In this section, we examine the spin-polarized triplet pairing in NCSs carrying a dissipationless electric current. There is an instructive parallel here with the paradigmatic nonunitary pairing in triplet superfluids and superconductors with a complex d-vector sat- To illustrate this point, we adopt the description of the Cooper pairing in terms of the Green function of the superconducting condensate It is written in the standard singlet-triplet spin basis, where f 0 (E, k) and f (E, k) are the orbital amplitudes of the singlet and triplet pair correlations, respectively. The use of the condensate Green function is motivated by two further circumstances: F (E, k) is directly related to observable transport properties, and it allows for a broader classification of the Cooper pairing which covers the hybrid structures Following Ref. where 1 stands for the unit spin matrix (the arguments E and k are suppressed for brevity). The second and third terms above indicate the nonunitary pairing due to the lack of the inversion and time-reversal symmetries, respectively. We are interested in the latter case, as it pertains to spin-polarized triplet states. We will see that the current-induced pairing and the intrinsic pairing with a complex d-vector are both characterised by a nonvanishing axial vector if × f * representing Cooper-pair spin polarization. The f -vector formalism allows one to extend the paradigm of the nonunitary pairing beyond its original context, e.g., some ferromagnet/superconductor where λ is the proportionality coefficient. We begin by briefly reviewing some relevant results for the condensate Green function of a mixed-parity superconductor in the presence of both SOC and supercurrent [61]. The normal system is treated as a single-band conductor with the Hamiltonian ĥ consisting of a spin-independent isotropic dispersion ξ k (measured from the Fermi level) and the SOC. The superconducting state is described by the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) where ∆k comes from the pairing interaction in both even-parity, spin-singlet and odd-parity, spin-triplet channels and is given by The singlet pair potential ∆ k is assumed to be isotropic in k space. Furthermore, the wavevector shift q in Eq. ( The current can be treated as weak if the typical kinetic energy of a Cooper pair, hv F |q|, is much smaller than the excitation gaps |∆ k ± λ|Ω k ||. We are interested in the Green function, Ĝ(E, k), of the BdG equation: where Î is a 4 × 4 unit matrix, and Ĝ(E, k) is a matrix of the form Above, each entry is a 2 × 2 matrix in spin space: Ĝ(E, k) and Ĝ(E, k) are the quasiparticle Green functions, while F (E, k) and its hermitian conjugate F † (E, k) are the anomalous (condensate) Green functions. Eq. ( For ease of calculation we suppress the arguments of the Green functions and introduce the shorthand notations The solution for the condensate function F has the general form of Eq. ( [61]), with the singlet and triplet pair amplitudes defined as where the scalar D 0 and vector D are given by Because of the interplay of the d vector, SOC and supercurrent, the triplet pair correlations have a rather rich structure. In particular, the vector cross product terms in Eq. ( The case of the intrinsic nonunitary pairing [61]). Then, for the axial vector if × f * one readily finds where ∆ ± = d • d * ± |id × d * | are the energy gaps for the pairing with the net spin projection parallel (+) and antiparallel (-) to vector id×d * . In this case, the vector if ×f * is simply proportional to id × d * , carrying essentially the same information. An interesting question is whether the polarization if ×f * can occur in a superconducting condensate with a purely real d-vector, where id × d * = 0. Such a possibility is rather counter-intuitive, as it does not fit into the standard picture of the nonunitary pairing Here, we examine the induced nonunitary pairing in NCSs with a real d-vector given by Eq. To proceed further, we notice that for any linear-in-k SOC we can write the d-vector in Eq. ( This helps to cast Eq. ( with the renormalized scalar factors [ξ -k,q Ω k+q -ξ k,q Ω -k+q + iΩ k+q × Ω -k+q ], where ∆ k,q and ξ k,q are the renormalized functions The scalar factor Π(0, k, q) is not essential here. Perhaps the most noteworthy feature of the f -vector ( Furthermore, the imaginary part of the f -vector ( By analogy with the intrinsic nonunitary states [cf. Eq. ( Clearly, the induced spin polarization is odd in q. We can therefore linearise it with respect to q, using the expansions for Ω ±k+q in Eq. ( where the renormalized functions ∆ k and ξ k are given by Eqs. ( Importantly, the spin polarization which holds for any linear SOC. Above, Ω a,b k are the Cartesian components of the vector and N is the dimensionality of the system, i.e. N = 2 for Rashba NCSs and N = 3 for cubic ones. Besides, for Rashba NCSs the averaging in Eq. ( where we introduce the notations emphasizing the isotropic functions in k space. For the Rashba and cubic NCSs, Eq. ( Equations ( This section discusses the observability of the magnetoelectric spin polarization Summarising the outcome of the NEGF calculation (described in detail elsewhere we can write the AR current as , where n(E) is the Fermi distribution function on the normal side of the junction, V is the voltage difference across the junction, and A(E) is the AR probability given by Here, t k,k is the tunneling matrix element, ρN (E, k) and ρ * N (-E, -k) are the spectral functions of a particle and a hole involved in the AR on the normal side [the hole behaves a missing particle propagating back in time], and Tr means the spin trace operation. Equation As a suitable observable, we choose the zero-bias and -temperature conductance: G = ∂I A /∂V | V,T →0 = (2e 2 /h)A(0). It was calculated in Ref. Above, m is a unit vector specifying the magnetization direction in the ferromagnet, α = ± denote the spin projections of the majority (+) and minority (-) states on the magnetization direction m, and ρ α (E, k) = δ(E -η k + αJ) is the spectral weight for given spin state α [where η k and J are the band dispersion and the exchange energy]. Before focusing on the NCSs, let us briefly recapitulate some generic features of the model. Eqs. ( A striking example of AR occurs in junctions between NCSs and half-metallic ferromagnets that have only the majority states at the Fermi level. In this case, the ordinary (opposite-spin) AR is completely suppressed, and the conductance G is entirely due to the equal-spin AR, see Eqs. The conductance can be written as the sum of even-and odd-parity terms with respect to m, The expressions for G even and G odd appear to be particularly simple for a disordered interface with a Gaussian-distributed random matrix t k,k (see also Ref. [61]): where Γ + is the energy scale related to the single-particle tunneling rate for the majority states in the ferromagnet. Eq. ( The case of NCSs is special because Eqs. ( This result demonstrates the magnetoelectric switching of the AR conductance by the supercurrent where G(0) = G even (0) is the conductance value at zero bias current. Inserting Eqs. where c N is a constant absorbing the integrals over the wave-vector length k: In particular, for the Rashba and cubic NCSs, Eq. ( IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS The conductance asymmetry in Eq. ( A striking feature of the magnetoelectric switching effect is its strong dependence on the relative orientation of the supercurrent and magnetization, which, in turn, depends on the type of a structural or crystal lattice asymmetry [see Eq. ( In order to have an analytically tractable model, we had to work in the linear approximation with respect to the q which was treated as a small perturbation. However, the fact of the conductance asymmetry is independent of that approximation. It is inherent to NCSs where the axial vector if (0, k, q) × f * (0, k, q) must vanish for q = 0 by time reversal symmetry. Generally, the conductance ratio In a fully gapped NCS, |q| is limited by the value at which the Cooper-pair kinetic energy hv F |q| reaches the smallest of the energy gaps, ∆ min . Therefore, qualitatively |∆G(q)/G(0)| ∼ 4E so ∆ min /μ 2 , where E so = α so k F is a characteristic band splitting energy. From the available numbers E so ≈ 100 meV and ∆ min ≈ 1 meV for fully gapped NCSs The role of the ferromagnet spin polarization deserves separate comment. Although very helpful, the choice of the half-metallic ferromagnets is not crucial for understanding the present work. The equal-spin AR and the odd-parity conductance occur for any degree of the spin polarization. For a partially polarized ferromagnet, there would be an oppositespin AR contribution to the even-parity conductance, which would predictably reduce the conductance ratio In conclusion, this paper has established a link between the mixed-parity order parameter, charge-spin conversion and Andreev tunneling in NCSs. This could help to identify the symmetry of the order parameter in NCSs, using transport measurements. The established link between Andreev tunneling and nonunitary triplet pairing is valid beyond the immediate context of this paper. With some modifications the presented theory can be implemented for transport characterization of the unconventional triplet superconducting states in LaNiGa 2 (see Refs. 