The influence of the hydrostatic pressure P up to 0.95 GPa on the excess conductivity σ ′ (T ) and the pseudogap ∆ * (T ) in optimally doped YBa2Cu3O 7-δ single crystals (Tc ≃ 91.1 K at ambient pressure) is investigated by electrical resistivity measurements. A pronounced enhancement of the pseudogap under pressure of d ln ∆ * /dP ≈ 0.32, which is only a factor of 1.12 smaller than in slightly doped single crystals, is revealed for the first time. This implies a somewhat more moderate increase of the coupling strength in optimally doped cuprates with increasing pressure. Simultaneously, the ratio 2∆ * (Tc)/kBTc ≈ 5 at P = 0 GPa, which is typical for high-temperature superconductors with strong coupling, increases by 16% with increasing pressure. At the same time, the pressure effect on Tc is minor: dTc/dP ≈ +0.73 KGPa -1 , whereas d ln ρ/dP ≈ (-17 ± 0.2)% GPa -1 is comparable with that in lightly doped YBCO single crystals. This suggests that the mechanisms of the pressure effect on ρ(T ) and Tc are noticeably different. Independently of pressure, near Tc, σ ′ (T ) is well described by the Aslamazov-Larkin (3D-AL) and 2D Hikami-Larkin fluctuation theories, exhibiting a 3D-2D crossover with increasing temperature. However, the temperature interval Tc < T < T01, in which σ ′ (T ) obeys the classical fluctuation theories, is exceptionally narrow (≈ 1.16 K). Nevertheless, a peculiarity at the temperature T01, up to which the wave function phase stiffness in the superconductor is maintained, is clearly observed in the dependence ∆ * (T ). Below T01 a fast growth of ∆ * (T ) is revealed for the first time. It can be associated with a sudden increase of the superfluid density, ns, that is the density of fluctuating Cooper pairs (short-range phase correlations) forming in the sample when T approaches Tc. In addition to a high critical temperature, T c One of the most intriguing properties of cuprates is the pseudogap (PG) The role of the electron-phonon interaction (EPI) in the formation of superconducting Cooper pairs at such high temperatures as well as of paired fermions (local pairs) above T c also remains unclear We adhere the viewpoint that PG in cuprates is caused by some specific fluctuations which lead to the formation of local pairs (LPs) at T c ≤ T ≤ T * , preceding the transition to the SC state According to theory, LPs appear at some high temperature T * but they can only condensate at T c ≪ T * Since the discovery of a strong dependence of T c on pressure in the compound La-Ba-Cu-O Another mechanism, which can also raise T c , refers to the possible increase of the pairing interaction V ef f which has to depend on pressure. For underdoped cuprates the former mechanism is believed to dominate the pressure effect on T c (see Ref. Here, we investigate the effect of the hydrostatic pressure P ≈ 1 GPa (1 GPa = 10 kbar) on the temperature dependence of the resistivity ρ ab (T ) in optimally doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals with T c = 91.07 K at P = 0 GPa. We study the fluctuational contributions to the conductivity, focusing chiefly on the temperature dependence of the excess conductivity σ ′ (T ). From an analysis of the excess conductivity we obtain the PG temperature dependence ∆ * (T ) at P = 0 GPa as well as at 0.25 GPa, 0.65 GPa, and 0.95 GPa. The analysis is performed in the framework of the local pair model (LP model) YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystals (YBCO) were grown by the solution-melt technique as described elsewhere The temperature dependences of the resistivity ρ(T ) = ρ ab (T ) of the YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ single crystal with T c = 91.07 K (P = 0 GPa) and the oxygen index 7 -δ ≈ 6.94 are shown in figure The applied pressure usually increases T c (dT c /dP ≃ +4 KGPa -1 ) and reduces ρ(T ) (d ln ρ/dP ≃ -12% GPa -1 ) of cuprates However, as before, pressure strongly reduces the resistivity of the sample: d ln ρ/dP ≈ -(17 ± 0.2)% GPa -1 that is even greater than the value obtained for Y123 According to the theoretical model of nearly antiferromagnetic Fermi liquid (NAFL) where ρ N (T ) = aT + b is the linear temperature dependence of the sample in the normal state For the determination of T mf c one uses the experimental fact that in all HTSCs near T c , σ ′ (T ) is always extrapolated by the 3D Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) equation [see equation ( The dependence ln σ ′ (ln ε) is displayed in figure which is presented by the dashed straight line with the slope λ = -1/2 in figure see the solid curve in figure Analogous results have been obtained for all other pressures, including P = 0.95 GPa, refer to figure is the depairing parameter, and τ φ is the fluctuating Cooper pairs relaxation time defined as τ φ βT = (π )/(8k B ε 01 ) = A/ε 01 . Here, β = 1.203(l/ξ ab ), where l is the mean free path and ξ ab is the coherence length in the ab-plane in the clean-limit approximation At P = 0 GPa equation ( Another characteristic temperature in figure On the other hand, according to theory In the considered optimally doped single crystal, all temperature intervals, in which σ ′ (T ) can be described by the fluctuation theories, are exceptionally narrow. In particular, ∆T f l = T 01 -T G = 92.54 K -91.09 K = 1.45 K. This is in good agreement with the theory, namely the higher T c , the narrower the range of SC fluctuations Since the excess conductivity σ ′ (T ), equation Here (1 -T /T * ) stands for the number of pairs formed at T < T * , while (exp(-∆ * /T )) takes into account the number of pairs broken by fluctuations when T approaches T c . Solving equation ( . (7) where σ ′ (T ) is the excess conductivity measured in experiment. In both equations T is the given temperature and T * is the pseudogap opening temperature determined from the resistivity measurements (figure It turned out In order to find ∆ * (T ) one has to plot the experimental ln σ ′ versus 1/T Figure Independently of pressure, below T 01 down to T G ≥ T mf c a sudden growth of the pseudogap ∆ * (T ) takes place, which is distinctly observed for the first time. This is the third non-trivial result reported in this work. Such a behavior is most likely stipulated by a transition of the sample into the range of SC fluctuations, refer to figure The growth of ∆ * (T ) at T < T 01 is presented in figure 7 in detail (P = 0 GPa). One sees that similarly to slightly doped YBCO single crystals where σ Q ≡ e 2 /hd is the quantum conductivity of a stack of planar conductors with the interlayer spacing d. It was shown a noticeable increase of both, the SC gap ∆(0) and the ratio 2∆(0)/k B T c with pressure, observed in slightly doped polycrystals Bi2223, is accompanied by a marked decrease of the phonon spectrum frequencies in the superconductor. In this way, it is likely that the observed phonon spectrum softening is the primary cause for the increase of both, the SC gap The effect of the hydrostatic pressure up to 0.95 GPa on the excess conductivity σ ′ (T ) and the pseudogap ∆ * (T ) of optimally doped YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6.94 single crystals with T c ≈ 91.1 K at P = 0 GPa has been studied. For the first time, it was observed that the ratio D * = 2∆ * (T c )/k B T c as well as the pseudogap ∆ * increase at a rate d ln ∆ * /dP = 0.32, that is only a factor of 1.12 less than in lightly doped single crystals, implying almost similar influence of pressure on the coupling strength both in OD and SD YBCO. At the same time, the pressure effect on T c , which is believed to be due to the rearrangement of the charge carrier density n f in the conducting CuO 2 planes, is minor, namely, dT c /dP ≈ +0.73 KGPa -1 . One can therefore conclude that in optimally doped samples pressure feebly influences the charge carriers density n f in the CuO 2 planes, which in optimally doped YBCO is close to saturation. In consequence of this, T c is nearly independent of pressure. However, d ln ρ/dP ≈ (-17 ± 0.2) is found, which is of the same order of magnitude ≈ (-19 ± 0.2) GPa -1 as in SD YBCO single crystals. Hence, the decrease of ρ is not related to n f , but is likely to occur in consequence of phonon spectrum softening in cuprates under pressure, that also explains the observed increase of both, D * and ∆ * (T ) with increasing pressure. In this, a certain role can also be played by other specific mechanisms of the quasiparticle scattering c