Optical methods for magnetism manipulation have been considered as a promising strategy for ultralow-power and ultrahigh-speed spin switches, which becomes a hot spot in the field of spintronics. However, a widely applicable and efficient method to combine optical operation with magnetic modulation is still highly desired. Here, the strongly correlated electron material VO 2 is introduced to realize phase-transition based optical control of the magnetism in NiFe. The NiFe/VO 2 bilayer heterostructure features appreciable modulations in electrical conductivity (55%), coercivity (60%), and magnetic anisotropy (33.5%). Further analyses indicate that interfacial strain coupling plays a crucial role in this modulation. Utilizing this optically controlled magnetism modulation feature, programmable Boolean logic gates (AND, OR, NAND, NOR, XOR, NXOR and NOT) for high-speed and low-power data processing are demonstrated based on this engineered heterostructure. As a demonstration of phasetransition spintronics, this work may pave the way for next-generation electronics in the post-Moore era. these modulation features, the heterostructures are further used to demonstrate multiresistance states and implement spin logic devices with multifield operation capability. As an optical magnetism modulation strategy, the collision and blending of strongly correlated electron materials and spintronic materials may pave the way for next-generation electronics. The NiFe/VO 2 bilayer heterostructure used in this work was prepared by two steps. VO 2 was first epitaxially deposited on TiO 2 substrates by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) to ensure an optimal phase transition. NiFe was then deposited at room temperature by magnetron sputtering to get a tight interface contact. Fig. To investigate the magnetic characteristics modulated by the phase transition, hysteresis curves of a NiFe (5 nm)/VO 2 (20 nm) sample grown on a TiO 2 (100) substrate were measured for the case in which the VO 2 is in the monoclinic state (MS, 300 K) and rutile state (RS, 360 K) using a SQUID magnetometer. As illustrated in Fig. To further explore this modulation effect, the magnetic parameters of the heterostructure before and after the phase transition are processed and summarized in Table t, which increases from 0.755 erg/cm 2 to 0.885 erg/cm 2 . These results indicate the possibility of realizing an interfacial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy enhancement in similar heterostructures, which is highly desirable for high-density, nonvolatile magnetic storage After showing the magnetism modulation effect achieved though phase transition of VO 2 , we now focus on realizing the optically controlled magnetic modulation by optothermal effect. To achieve this goal, a red laser beam is used as a light source to trigger the phase transition. Fig. To further study the modulation phenomenon, a phase-transition anisotropic magnetoresistance device (PTAMR device) was fabricated. A schematic illustration of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. Magnetic and transport characteristics of this device were studied via magnetoresistance measurements. Fig. Magnetoresistance curves of the device before and after the VO 2 phase transition are shown in Fig. To clarify the relationship between the magnetism modulation and the phase transition of VO 2 , a series of experiments was carried out by MOKE measurements. As illustrated in Fig. These results suggest that the modulation effect is dominated by the phase transition of VO 2 , rather than a pure thermal effect of the NiFe layer. We then measured the magnetization-temperature (M-T) dependence of the heterostructure sample. As illustrated in Fig. Further experimental evidence indicates that this modulation is an interfacial effect. For heterostructure samples deposited on various TiO 2 substrates (Fig. for TiO 2 (001) between the MS and RS. This feature verifies that the modulation depends on the crystalline structure of the VO 2 layer. Fig. On the TiO 2 (001) substrate, the in-plane lattice constant changes are approximately 0.4% and 0.2% along the a R and b R directions, respectively (Fig. Based on the understanding that the magnetism modulation is mainly due to the interfacial strain, we focused on the origin of the magnetism modulation caused by interfacial strain during the phase transition , where x is the position of the domain wall, M s is the saturation magnetization, μ 0 is the permeability in vacuum and γ is the domain wall energy. γ can be further written as , where A is the exchange constant, K 1 is the crystal anisotropy, λ s is the magnetostriction coefficient and σ is the applied strain to the sample. Thus, γ depends on σ and further influences H c . As shown in Fig. These appreciable optically controlled modulation effects in heterostructures may further enable emerging device applications with multifield modulation capability Fig. With great potential in information processing, new strategies for spin logic applications are highly desired As illustrated in the truth table in Fig. In this work, we combine the strongly correlated electron material and the spintronic material to fabricate newly artificial heterostructures, which endow the spintronic material with optical modulation ability of magnetic and electrical properties by the reversible phase-transition process. The variation of the interfacial anisotropy energy, which reflects the modulation ability of the method, reaches 130 μJ/m 2 . It is comparable to the traditional modulation strategies based on strain To conclude, we have demonstrated optical control of electrical and magnetic modulation in a NiFe/VO 2 bilayer heterostructure. Phase-transition-induced changes in the electrical conductivity (55%), coercivity (60%) and magnetic anisotropy (33.5%) have been observed during the phase transition. Theoretical analyses and experimental evidence reveal that the magneto-elastic coupling induced by appreciable interfacial strain (up to 18.5%) may be the origin of the magnetism modulation. Further research on PTAMR devices fabricated with the heterostructure sample showed that multiresistance states and seven universal logic functions (AND, OR, NAND, NOR, XOR, NXOR and NOT) can be achieved in a single device. Our work, as a demonstration of optically controlled phase-transition spintronics, may pave the way for next-generation electronics. The VO 2 thin films were grown on (001) and (100) TiO 2 substrates using a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) system (KrF, λ=248 nm). The growth of epitaxial VO 2 thin films was performed at 500 °C with 2.0 Pa of oxygen. The laser fluence and repetition rate were fixed at 4 J/cm 2 and 2 Hz, respectively. The film thickness was 20 nm after 7200 deposition pulses. The Ni 80 Fe 20 films were magnetron-sputtered at room temperature. Raw bilayer samples were patterned by optical lithography (Micro Writer ML Baby, Durham Magneto Optics) followed by argon ion-beam etching into Hall bars with several legs with different spacings (Fig. The a