The figures-of-merit for reservoir computing (RC), using spintronics devices called magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs), are evaluated. RC is a type of recurrent neural network. The input information is stored in certain parts of the reservoir, and computation can be performed by optimizing a linear transform matrix for the output. While all the network characteristics should be controlled in a general recurrent neural network, such optimization is not necessary for RC. The reservoir only has to possess a non-linear response with memory effect. In this paper, macromagnetic simulation is conducted for the spin-dynamics in MTJs, for reservoir computing. It is determined that the MTJ-system possesses the memory effect and non-linearity required for RC. With RC using 5-7 MTJs, high performance can be obtained, similar to an echo-state network with 20-30 nodes, even if there are no magnetic and/or electrical interactions between the magnetizations. The magnetization direction of ferromagnetic metallic film is determined by the magnetic anisotropy energy, which causes non-volatility. This property can be used for magnetic random-access memory devices The recurrent neural network (RNN) The model consists of three layers, input, middle (node), and output. In the RNN, the information of the middle layer recursively propagates in itself. The middle-layer state is determined by the present input and past middle-layer state, i.e., the middle layer in the RNN possesses memory effect. All the weight matrices for the input (Win), middle (W) and output (Wout) should be precisely trained to obtain the desired output. However, when the middle layer has sufficient memory effect and non-linearity, it is feasible to perform computation by optimizing only the output matrix (Wout). This type of simple RNN is called reservoir computing (RC) that RC can be implemented in real physical systems, such as atomic switches The RC method is as follows. A Boolean-type input sin(T), is employed. T is an integer variable that represents time. sin(T) randomly assumes '0' or '1' in every time step. in 0 or 1 sT . ( The middle-layer state is defined as a node vector x(T), consisting of N elements. The time evolution of the node is determined from the input at the present time and the past state of the node. Here, f is a function for time evolution. Then, the output yout(T), is defined as the inner product of the time-independent weight vector Wout, and the node vector x(T). The training data ytrain(T) is prepared to optimize the system. Wout is determined for yout(T), reproducing ytrain(T), and is selected to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) between yout(T) and ytrain(T). The MSE is expressed as follows: The optimization of the output weight vector Wout, is called learning. In this paper, a time-independent constant is added to xN+1(T) as a bias term, in addition to x1(T) to xN(T). In this paper, two types of task are employed for learning. One is a short-term memory (STM) task Here, sin(T) are random pulses, which are described later. It is feasible to obtain a finite memory effect, even if the system is completely linear. Therefore, we need another task to characterize the computing capability. In this paper, we employ the parity check (PC) task After learning with the training data, the correlation between the output and training data is evaluated using the following equation: Capacity : . Tdelay, max should be sufficiently large. In our calculation, Cor. is always less than 0.01, when Tdelay is more than 10. Therefore, we set Tdelay, max = 30. In this paper, we define CSTM as the capacity for short-term memory and CPC as the capacity for parity check. Figure In this study, the magnetization direction of layer-1 is fixed perpendicular to the film plane. For ferromagnetic layer-2 called the free layer, the magnetization direction is not fixed and can be controlled by the current The spin-dynamics in ferromagnetic layer-2 follows the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation with spin-transfer torque Here s1 and s2 represent the unit spin-vectors for ferromagnetic layers-1 and -2, respectively. γ0 (<0) is the gyro magnetic ratio. α is the Gilbert damping constant. P is the spin polarization in vicinity of the Fermi level in the ferromagnetic layers. I (=Vin/R) is the electric current, where Vin and R are the input voltage and device resistance of the MTJ respectively. Heff is the effective magnetic field in s2. Here, U is the magnetization energy for ferromagnetic layer-2, which includes the external magnetic field Hext and the magnetic anisotropy tensor ani Ĥ .   Here μ0, MS and A are is the magnetic permeability in a vacuum, saturation magnetization and volume of the ferromagnetic layer-2, respectively. In the simulation, the external magnetic field is not applied. We assume uniaxial anisotropy perpendicular to the film plane. Here Hazz > 0 (Hazz < 0) shows in-plane (perpendicular) magnetic anisotropy. The device resistance of the MTJ varies as a function of the relative angle between the spins in the free and pinned layers. RAP and RP are the resistances, when s1 and s2 are parallel and antiparallel, respectively. The time evolution of the MTJ resistance is characterized by sequential calculation using the fourth Runge-Kutta method. For evaluating the short-term memory and parity-check capacities, an input pulse voltage, Vin, corresponding to the computational input, sin(T), was applied to the MTJs, as depicted in Fig. Additionally, an echo-state network where the following function is employed for Eq. ( The tanh function is used for componentwise projection. W and Win are matrices, whose components are time-independent random values from (-1) to 1. We normalize by dividing each component of W by the spectral radius, r, obtained by singular value decomposition x(T'). Under a positive bias voltage, the spin-polarized current flows from the free layer s2, to the pinned layer s1. Then, the spin-transfer effect induces auto-oscillation In this section, we present the figures-of-merit for RC, using a single MTJ device. The uniaxial magnetic anisotropy of the free layer s2, is fixed as Hazz = 1000 Oe. Here positive value of Hazz shows magnetic cell in MTJ is in-plane magnetized. Figure Figures Figure When multiple MTJs are employed for RC, higher figures-of-merit can be obtained. A schematic of a multiple MTJ circuit for RC is depicted in Fig. Figure Similar to a single MTJ, the binary values V0 and V1, for the input voltage are determined as shown in Fig. Figure The CSTM and CPC, using a multiple MTJ-system, are summarized in Fig. Although the CPC increases slightly as M increases, we can obtain a large CPC, if there are magnetic and/or electrical interactions between the free layers in each MTJ. In this research, we demonstrated RC, using the spin-dynamics in MTJs. With RC using 5-7 MTJs, we can obtain a high performance similar to that of an echo-state network using tanh functions with 20-30 nodes. If there are magnetic and/or electrical interactions between the free layers in each MTJ, higher performance can be obtained. 