We present a theory of phonon-mediated superconductivity in near magic angle twisted bilayer graphene. Using a microscopic model for phonon coupling to moiré band electrons, we find that phonons generate attractive interactions in both s and d wave pairing channels and that the attraction is strong enough to explain the experimental superconducting transition temperatures. Before including Coulomb repulsion, the s-wave channel is more favorable; however, on-site Coulomb repulsion can suppress s-wave pairing relative to d-wave. The pair amplitude varies spatially with the moiré period, and is identical in the two layers in the s-wave channel but phase shifted by π in the d-wave channel. We discuss experiments that can distinguish the two pairing states. Introduction.-Long-period moiré superlattices form whenever two-dimensional crystals are overlaid with a small difference in lattice constant or orientation, and have recently been employed to alter the electronic Moiré bands.-At small twist angles the single-particle physics of twisted bilayer graphene can be described using a continuum moiré Hamiltonian, in which the atomicscale commensurability plays no role. To construct the twisted bilayer, we start from AA stacked bilayer graphene, and then rotate the bottom and top layers by angles -θ/2 and +θ/2 around one of the hexagonal plaquette centers. We choose the origin of coordinates to be on this rotation axis and half-way between layers. With respect to this origin, the point group symmetry is D 6 , which is generated by a sixfold rotation Ĉ6 around the ẑ axis, and twofold rotations Mx and My respectively around the x and ŷ axes. The operations Mx,y swap the two layers. Because spin-orbit interactions are negligible in graphene At small twist angles the bilayer moiré pattern, illustrated in Fig. Here h b,t are the isolated Dirac Hamiltonians of the twisted bottom (b) and top (t) layers: where is +1 (-1) for the b (t) layer, v F is the bare Dirac velocity(∼ 10 6 m/s), and σ are Pauli matrices that act in the sublattice space. Because of the rotation, the Dirac cone position in layer is shifted to κ . We choose a moiré Brillouin zone (MBZ) in which the κ is located at the corners, and refer to the MBZ center below as the γ point. The sublattice-dependent interlayer tunneling terms vary periodically with the real space position r: where w ≈ 118 meV The velocity of the Dirac cones at κ ± varies systematically with twist angle, decreasing from near v F at large twist angles and crossing through zero at a series of magic twist angles. Near magic angle, the moiré band is nearly flat through much of MBZ, leading to a greatly enhanced density-of-states and opening the way to interaction driven phase transitions. For our choice of parameters, the largest magic angle is 1 • if defined by vanishing Dirac velocity, while flat bands with the narrowest bandwidth (∼3 meV) occur at about 1.05 • . Phonon mechanism.-We first study phononmediated pairing and then address effects of Coulomb repulsion in the discussion below. We have considered a variety of phonon modes as discussed in the Supplemental Material where ûx,y and ûa,b are the normal mode coordinates of the two E 2 modes, and of the A 1 and B 1 modes respectively, τ x,y,z are Pauli matrices in valley space, and the operator ψ is a spinor in sublattice-valley space: ( ψ+A , ψ+B , ψ-A , ψ-B ) T . (The subscripts ± refer to ±K valleys, A and B label sublattices, and the layer and spin indices are hidden.) In a nearest-neighbor tightbinding model, the coupling constants , where t 0 and a CC are respectively the nearest-neighbor hopping parameter and distance. When quantized the ûα can be expressed in terms of phonon creation and annihilation operators: where N is the number of A sites in a monolayer, M is the mass of a single carbon atom and ω α is the frequency of phonon mode α. We neglect the momentum dependence of ω α below because only phonons that are close to either Γ or ±K points are important for low-energy electrons; ω E2 and ω A1 are respectively 0.196 and 0.17 eV in monolayer graphene Here the operators ψ † and ψ are understood to be at the same coarse-grained position r, and the attractive interaction strength g α parameters are given by: where A is the sample area. We estimate g E2 and g A1 to be about 52 and 69 meV•nm 2 respectively To study the Cooper pairing instability, we restrict the interaction in (6) to the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) channel that pairs electrons from opposite valleys: where s and s are spin indices. In H BCS , there are two distinct spin-singlet pairing channels: (i) intrasublattice pairing, e.g., ss ψ † +As ψ † -As and (ii) intersublattice pairing, e.g., ss ψ † +As ψ † -Bs , where is the fully antisymmetric tensor with ↑↓ = 1. Only the ±K phonons contribute to inter-sublattice pairing, which has d-wave symmetry because electrons at different sublattices and opposite valleys share the same angular momentum under the threefold rotation Ĉ3 ψ † (r) Ĉ-1 Inter-sublattice Cooper pairs therefore carry a finite angular momentum. s-wave pairing.-In the s-wave intra-sublattice channel the local pairing amplitude, is sublattice (σ) independent by symmetry, but we allow a layer ( ) dependence. We solve the linearized gap equation by assuming that the pair amplitude has the moiré periodicity and can therefore be expanded in the form ∆ where χ is the pair susceptibility, g 0 = g E2 + g A1 , q is a momentum within MBZ, n 1,2 are moiré band labels in +K valley, ε n and |u n are the corresponding energies and wave functions, n F (ε) is the Fermi-Dirac occupation function, and μ is the chemical potential. The overlap function ... b, is the layer-resolved matrix element of the plane-wave operator exp(ib • r). Note that T symmetry has been employed to simplify The critical temperature T c is reached when the largest eigenvalue of χ is equal to 1. In Fig. We account for the Coulomb repulsion using a phenomenological model with only the atomic-scale on-site (U 0 ) and nearest-neighbor (U 1 ) repulsion on the honeycomb lattice of each graphene layer. U 0 and U 1 respectively suppress s and d wave pairings If d-wave is the leading instability, the d ± pair amplitudes have identical T c , and the corresponding superconducting state then has a two-component order parameter that can lead to either chiral or nematic superconductivity. The chiral state is more favored in mean-field theory because it is fully gapped, whereas nematic pairing with spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking results in point nodes. In a follow-up work, we will report that the chiral d-wave state is topological and carries spontaneous bulk supercurrent. The s and d wave pairings with distinct in-plane phase structures can be distinguished by phase-sensitive experiments Our theory sets up a general framework to study superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene, and can be used to predict the response of superconductivity to various perturbations, such as electric displacement field, magnetic field, pressure and disorder, which can be compared with coming experimental results. This Supplemental Material includes the following four sections: (1) the electron-phonon coupling generated by different phonon modes; (2) Coulomb repulsion effects on the pairing; (3) twist-angle dependence of the superconductivity critical temperature; (4) discussion on the coherence length and the spatial variation of the pair amplitude. We provide additional discussion on electron-phonon coupling. To estimate the coupling constants F E2 and F A1 , we used the following hopping function: where t0 = -3 eV is the static nearest-neighbor hopping parameter in monolayer graphene, and ãCC is the equilibrium nearest-neighbor carbon distance. We take the exponential decay factor β to be 3.3 where a 0 is the lattice constant of monolayer graphene. The attractive interaction strength is estimated as follows: and the numerical values of g E2 and g A1 are respectively about 52 and 69 meV•nm 2 . The E 2 , A 1 and B 1 modes have in-plane atomic displacements, and their coupling to the interlayer tunneling should be weak because (1) the interlayer coupling strength w is an order of magnitude smaller compared to the in-plane hopping parameter t 0 and (2) the in-plane displacements are ineffective in changing the out-of-plane bond length. Therefore, we neglect the coupling between in-plane phonon modes and interlayer tunneling. The layer breathing mode, in which the two layer move relative to each other in ẑ direction, can couple to the interlayer tunneling. The attractive interaction constant generated by such phonon mode will be similar to The layer shear mode should also have weak coupling to electrons. In the shear mode, the two layer move relative to each other in x and ŷ directions but there is no relative motion between two sublattices within the same layer. The rigid shear mode with zero momentum does not couple to the intralayer hopping. Its coupling to interlayer tunneling also effectively vanishes when there is a twist between layers, because a relative displacement between layers will just lead to a global shift of the moiré pattern and have no influence on the electronic energy spectrum The coupling between acoustic phonon modes and electrons is proportional to Fermi wave vector k F , which is small because the moiré period a M is much greater than the monolayer lattice constant a 0 . Thus, we do not take into account the layer breathing modes, shear modes and acoustic modes for phonon mediated superconductivity in this work, and leave a detailed investigation of these phonon modes to future work. In theories of phonon-mediated superconductivity, vertex corrections to the electron-phonon interaction can usually be neglected because of the large mismatch between Fermi and sound velocities, as stated in Migdal's theorem. This conclusion applies equally well to twodimensional Dirac systems In the main text, we have considered a phenomenological model for the Coulomb interaction that only retains the on-site (U 0 ) and nearest-neighbor (U 1 ) repulsion on the honeycomb lattice of each graphene layer. Here we show how to transform the interaction strength of a lattice model to that of a continuum model. The on-site repulsion on a monolayer graphene honeycomb lattice is described by where σ labels the A and B sublattices, N is the number of A sites in the monolayer, and the prime on the summation of the second line enforces the momentum conservation To obtain a continuum model, we retain low-energy states in ±K valleys: where τ = ±1 is the valley index, and the prime on the summation of τ i implies the valley conservation τ 1 + τ 2 = τ 3 + τ 4 . In the operator c † kτ σs , the momentum k is measured relative to τ K. We make a Fourier transformation to introduce the coarse-grained real-space position r: where A is the system area. The on-site repulsion can then be transformed to a continuum model with a deltafunction interaction: where A 0 = √ 3a 2 0 /2 is the area per A site, and operators ψ † and ψ are at the same position r. By comparing H 0 with Eq. ( We carry out similar analysis for nearest-neighbor repulsion: ) where δ denotes the three bond vectors that connect nearest neighbors on the honeycomb lattice, and the form factor is given by F(k) = δ e ik•δ . When states are restricted to ±K valleys, the form factor F(k 3 -k 2 ) suppresses inter-valley scattering, which we neglect. This leads to the continuum Hamiltonian: which suppresses d-wave pairing, and its attractive interaction strength in the gap equation is reduced to gA1 = g A1 -3U 1 A 0 /4. In the main text, we made an estimation of U 0 and U 1 in order to fit with the experimental T c value, which leads to U 0 ≈ 3.7 eV for s-wave channel and U 1 ≈ 0.5 eV for dwave channel. In free-standing monolayer graphene, U 0 and U 1 are estimated to be 9.3 eV and 5.5 eV based on the constrained random phase approximation Because of the high DOS when the flat bands are partially filled, the Coulomb interaction in real space is strongly suppressed for distance greater than a M . The screening effects of Coulomb repulsion over distance shorter than a M requires a calculation of the momentum dependent dielectric function, which we leave for future work. On the other hand, the phonon-mediated attraction combined with the local repulsion can provide a minimal model to study the competition between the superconducting and the correlated insulating states. In the experiment We find that the strongly enhanced DOS near magic angle is crucial for the superconductivity. This is consistent with the experimental fact that superconductivity only occurs within a narrow range of the twist angle. To obtain critical temperature of few Kelvins, the DOS per spin and per valley should be on the order of 5 eV -1 nm -2 given the attractive interaction strength generated by phonons. In Fig. In main text, we have used the extremely narrow bands (bandwidth about 3 meV at θ = 1.05 • ) for demonstration, and the coupling constant g 0 D can then be greater than 1. The Coulomb repulsion can reduce g 0 to the weak coupling regime, where mean-field theory is applicable. In addition, because the band structure can be tuned by the twist angle and by hydrostatic pressure, g 0 D is less than one in a large parameter space defined by twist angle, chemical potential and pressure. If the dimensionless constant g 0 D is indeed in the strong coupling regime, our weak coupling mean-field theory could break down, and other types of phonon driven instability should also be considered. Twisted bilayer graphene could be an ideal system to study the evolution from weak coupling to strong coupling regimes, because the bandwidth can be continuously tuned by pressure as demonstrated by the recent experimental work There are two different motions of the two paired electrons in one Cooper pair: one is the relative motion and the other is the center-of-mass motion. These two motions have different characteristic lengths in the superconducting ground state. For relative motion, the spatial separation between the two electrons can be roughly estimated by the coherence length ξ 0 ∼ v * F /E g ∼ (E b /E g )a M , where v * F is the renormalized velocity of the nearly flat bands, E g is the superconducting gap in the quasiparticle energy spectrum, a M is the moiré period, and E b is the bandwidth of the flat bands. For superconducting transition temperature of 1.7 K, E g is about 0.25 meV. On the other hand, E b near magic angle is about few meV. Therefore, the coherence length is about few times of a M . In the experiment On the other hand, the pair amplitude ∆(r), defined as ψ ↓ (r)ψ ↑ (r) , corresponds to the center-of-mass motion. ∆(r) varies spatially with the moiré period a M , and its spatial modulation follows the electron density variation in the normal state of the flat bands. The above discussion is not unique to twisted bilayer graphene, but actually applies to all crystalline superconductors. We take superconducting aluminum as an example, which has a long coherence length ξ 0 ≈ 1600 nm. On the other hand, the pair amplitude ∆(r) = ψ ↓ (r)ψ ↑ (r) in aluminum has the lattice periodicity and varies within one unit cell following the variation of the electron wave function. This variation of the pair amplitude in the superconducting ground state is typically ignored, because it is a modulation over a very short distance given by the lattice constant (0.4 nm in the case of aluminum). This modulation becomes dramatic in the moiré pattern because of the large lattice period of order 10 nm.