Active manipulation of spin waves is essential for the development of magnon-based technologies. Here, we demonstrate programmable spin-wave filtering by resetting the spin structure of a pinned 90 • N éel domain wall in a continuous CoFeB film with abrupt rotations of uniaxial magnetic anisotropy. Using phase-resolved micro-focused Brillouin light scattering and micromagnetic simulations, we show that broad 90 • head-to-head or tail-to-tail magnetic domain walls are transparent to spin waves over a broad frequency range. In contrast, magnetic switching to a 90 • head-to-tail configuration produces much narrower domain walls at the same pinning locations. Spin waves are strongly reflected by a resonance mode in these magnetic domain walls. Based on these results, we propose a magnetic spin-wave valve with two parallel domain walls. Switching the spin-wave valve from an open to a close state changes the transmission of spin waves from nearly 100% to 0% at the resonance frequency. This active control over spin-wave transport could be utilized in magnonic logic devices or non-volatile memory elements. Wave-like computing based on spin waves has generated interest as a potential low-power and parallel computing alternative for conventional CMOS technologies Non-collinear spin structures, such as magnetic domain walls, can also be exploited to control the amplitude or phase of spin waves In this paper, we demonstrate the use of two parallel magnetic domain walls as magnetic spin-wave valve (Fig. Interactions of spin-waves with 90 • Néel walls have been imaged in square-shaped ferromagnetic microstructures with a Landau domain state In our experiments, we focus on 50-nm-thick CoFeB because it combines full imprinting of magnetic stripe domains (Figs. We employed μ-BLS to measure spin-wave transmission through pinned magnetic domain walls. For the excitation of spin waves, we patterned 500-nm-wide microwave antennas on top of our sample using electron-beam lithography. The antennas are separated from the CoFeB film by an insulating TaO x layer and they are aligned parallel to a nearby domain wall (Fig. Figure We performed micromagnetic simulations in MuMax3 The structure was discretized using finite-difference 2.4 nm × 9.6 nm × 12.5 nm cells. To mimic anisotropy modulations in the experimental system, we abruptly rotated the uniaxial anisotropy axis by 90 • at the domain boundary. Input parameters were derived from experiments. We extracted M s = 1.15×10 In contrast, spin waves are strongly reflected by the narrow 90 • head-to-tail domain wall (Figs. Following our results on spin-wave transmission through single 90 • domain walls, we propose a new structure for active spin-wave manipulation. Our device concept consists of three stripe domains with uniaxial magnetic anisotropy and two pinned domain walls (Fig. Just like reconfigurable magnonic crystals The proposed magnetic spin-wave valve requires a regular modulation of magnetic anisotropy. Here, we used strain coupling in a CoFeB/BaTiO 3 bilayer to demonstrate the operation principle. There are, however, other means by which lateral changes in magnetic anisotropy can be realized. Examples include area-selective ion irradiation For the experimental parameters of our system, the transmission of spin waves reduces drastically by resonant reflection around 11 GHz. In analogy to magnonic crystals, we estimate a spin-wave bandgap from the transmission curve (Fig. In summary, we report on active spin-wave manipulation using a domain-wall-based magnetic spin-wave valve. Control over the transmission of propagating spin waves is realized by magnetic-field induced transformation of two pinned domain walls. If the spin-wave valve is set to comprise broad head-to-head and tail-to-tail walls, the transmission coefficient approaches 100%. Switching to a state with two narrow head-to-tail walls reduces the transmission to nearly 0% at the frequency of a domain-wall resonance mode. Both magnetization configurations are non-volatile and toggling between the two states is fully reversible and easily attained by magnetic switching in the central domain of the spin-wave valve. We grew the 50-nm-thick CoFeB film with a composition of 40% Co, 40%Fe, and 20% B on a single-crystal BaTiO 3 substrate using dc magnetron sputtering at 175 • C. At this temperature, BaTiO 3 is paraelectric and its lattice exhibits cubic symmetry. During post-deposition cooling through the paraelectric-to-ferroelectric phase transition at 120 • C, the structure of BaTiO 3 becomes tetragonal and a regular pattern of ferroelectric stripe domains forms. The polarization in the domains is oriented in-plane and, together with the elongated axis of the tetragonal unit cell, it rotates by 90 • at domain boundaries. The phase transition in the BaTiO 3 substrate strains the CoFeB film and, via inverse magnetostriction, this imposes regular rotations of the uniaxial magnetic anisotropy axis. Since domain walls are strongly pinned by the magnetic anisotropy boundaries, it is possible to control their spin structure by the application of a magnetic field The magnetic domain structure of the sample was imaged using a wide-field magneto-optical Kerr microscope with 20× and 100× objectives. We used vibrating sample magnetometry to measure the saturation magnetization of the CoFeB film. Phase-resolved μ-BLS measurements were performed using a 100× objective near the center of one of the excitation antennas and along the direction of propagating spin waves. We selected an antenna with a pinned domain wall in its vicinity. To maintain positional accuracy, we supplied the same reference image as feedback to an image recognition-based drift stabilization software in experiments on both head-to-head and head-to-tail domain walls. More details on the μ-BLS setup can be found in Ref. 42. We performed micromagnetic simulations using open-source GPU-accelerated MuMax3 software. Before spin-wave excitation, the simulation geometry was initialized by aligning the magnetization along the uniaxial anisotropy axes and letting the system reach its ground state in zero magnetic field. After selection of the domain-wall type, spin waves were excited locally by a 100 mT out-of-plane sinusoidal magnetic field. The ac field was applied to a one-cell-wide line at the center of one of the domains. To visualize propagating spin waves, we recorded the z-component of magnetization after reaching steady-state excitation. It took about 9 ns to reach this state.