Thin InN and GaN/InN films were grown on oxygen-polar (O) (0001 ) and zinc-polar (Zn) (0001) zinc oxide (ZnO) by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE). The influence of the growth rate (GR) and the substrate polarity on the growth mode and the surface morphology of InN and GaN/InN was investigated in situ by reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and ex situ by atomic force microscopy (AFM). During InN deposition, a transition from two dimensional to three dimensional (2D-3D) growth mode is observed in RHEED. The critical thickness for relaxation increases with decreasing GR and varies from 0.6 ML (GR: 1.0 ML/s) to 1.2 MLs (GR: 0.2 ML/s) on O-ZnO and from 1.2 MLs (GR: 0.5 ML/s) to 1.7 MLs (GR: 0.2 ML/s) on Zn-ZnO. The critical thickness for relaxation of GaN on top of 1.2 MLs and 1.5 MLs thick InN is close to zero on O-ZnO and 1.6 MLs on Zn-ZnO, respectively. The band gap of (In,Ga)N alloys covers a wide spectral range from ultraviolet (GaN) to infrared (InN). These alloys are widely used as the active region of optoelectronic devices like lightemitting diodes or laser diodes. ZnO is an attractive substrate material because it is isomorphic to (In,Ga)N and lattice-matched to In 0.18 Ga 0.82 N. We developed a protocol to protect the ZnO surface from Ga by depositing a ML-thick coherent InN buffer layer on ZnO prior to the GaN growth. The growth was conducted in a DCA P600 plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE) system equipped with standard effusion cells and a radio frequency plasma source to supply active nitrogen. We utilized commercial c-plane ZnO substrates from CrysTec polished on both faces: Zn-ZnO (0001) and O-ZnO (0001 ). The ZnO substrates were annealed in a resistance heat oven at 1050°C. Nitrogen-rich growth conditions during InN deposition (N/In~1.1) and stoichiometric growth conditions N/Ga~1 during GaN growth were chosen to prevent the excess of metal at the surface which may etch the ZnO substrate. We monitored the growth in situ by reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and we investigated the morphological properties of the samples ex situ by AFM. Before all growth experiments, the investigation of the bare ZnO substrates by RHEED revealed a streaky pattern on both the Zn-ZnO and the O-ZnO polarities, which corresponds well to the smooth surface that we have prepared following our annealing procedures. Importantly, in situ measurement by quadrupole mass spectrometry in the line of sight revealed that metal desorption was negligible at the low growth temperature employed. In addition, no metal droplets were found on the surface after growth and the surface revealed by AFM was clear. Thus, we infer that all supplied In and Ga amounts were incorporated into the layers. For all of these experiments, RHEED monitoring revealed a transition from a streaky pattern at the start of the InN deposition to a spotty one in the course of InN deposition larger than 1 ML. O-ZnO (0001 ) and on Zn-ZnO (0001), respectively. For all growth rates (GRs), as growth starts, the lattice spacing shows only a slight increase for the samples grown on O-ZnO while it remains unchanged for growth on Zn-ZnO. This observation indicates that InN grows at first nearly pseudomorphic to ZnO for both polarities. However, beyond a critical layer thickness the lattice spacing increases, i.e. relaxation sets in. On both polarities, the critical layer thickness increases with decreasing GR and is fairly comparable (cf. Table We next focus on the growth of GaN on InN/ZnO. In agreement with the above results, we have obtained a streaky RHEED pattern after the deposition at GR 0. MLs of GaN). This value corresponds to a remaining lattice mismatch of 1.3% for GaN. In order to understand this phenomenon, we have considered the possible alloying of the supplied InN and GaN as an (In,Ga)N layer. We considered two cases: unstrained and strained (In,Ga)N. Therefore, we also display in Figure Beyond 4.2 MLs, the experimental lattice spacing decreases slower than the model. Hence, alloying does not seem to be the mechanism at play to explain the experimental data. Therefore, we examined a third case fitting the experimental data by an exponential decay law [dotted curve in Fig. where a(h) is the a-lattice spacing as a function of the layer thickness h, a 1 is the total amplitude of the lattice relaxation, h c is a critical thickness, Λ is a characteristic thickness at which a fraction 1-1/e of the plastic relaxation has occurred, and a 0 is the unstrained reference lattice constant of the film. This model provides a nice fit of the experimental values for the fitting parameters a 1 =0.07 Å, a 0 =3.23 Å, h c =0.2 ML and Λ=0.9 ML. In striking contrast, on Zn-ZnO [Fig. For the deposition of InN layers, our results evidenced that the relaxation seems to follow the Stranski-Krastanov mechanism with critical thickness that depends not only on the ZnO polarity but also on the GR. This last effect has not been reported so far for III-N. For InAs on InP, Nakayama et. al. reported the increase of the critical thickness with increasing GR. growth sets in at the start of the InN deposition. In RHEED, the intensity of the specular reflection decreases at the onset of InN deposition on both ZnO polar surfaces, which may result from the nucleation of platelets with height 1 -2 MLs similarly to the growth of GaN/AlN heterostructures. For growth of InN on both polarities the relaxation in almost all cases occurs close to the transition from 2D to 3D growth mode. Relaxation might occur first elastically and later on plastically with introduction of dislocations, However, Figure Thus for layer thickness exceeding h crit in the order of a ML, defects form in the InN adlayer and as relaxation occurs, the InN/ZnO interface is no longer protected towards back etching that leads to the formation of In 2 O 3 inclusions similarly to the step erosion mechanism occurring during InAs quantum dot formation on GaAs. The critical thickness for the 2D -3D growth mode transition, h 2D-3D , is governed by a balance between the surface energy and the elastic energy. Interestingly, the relaxation of the 6.0 ML-thick GaN layer is not full and the GaN a-lattice spacing reaches a steady-state a-lattice spacing around 3.24 Å that corresponds either to GaN with a residual strain of 1.3% or to fully relaxed In 0.12 Ga 0.88 N. In contrast on In-polar InN/Zn-ZnO the growth of GaN is pseudomorphic until a total layer thickness of about 3.1 MLs (1.5 MLs InN + 1.6 MLs GaN) is reached. Afterwards the a-lattice constant increases. Such a behavior is unexpected and might be due to composition pulling effect that allows the formation of (In,Ga)N with a higher In-content on the surface. In fact, RHEED describes transient of surface lattice spacing during growth. The relatively high strain state of the pseudomorphic layer allows for the composition pulling effect to appear. At a thickness of 4.6 MLs the a-lattice spacing starts to decrease and concomitantly the 2D-3D transition occurs similarly to InN/ZnO. Our investigations showed that the critical layer thickness for relaxation of InN grown on ZnO is dependent on the GR and the ZnO-polarity. InN grown on O-ZnO exhibited a lower critical layer thickness than InN grown on Zn-ZnO. Within the range of our investigationswith GR between 0.2 ML/s and 1.0 ML/sthe critical layer thickness decreased with increasing GR. We determined the critical layer thickness to be between 0.6 ML (GR: 1.0 ML/s) and 1.2 MLs (GR: 0.2 ML/s) on O-ZnO and 1.2 MLs (GR: 0.5 ML/s) and 1.7 MLs (GR: 0.2 ML/s) on Zn-ZnO. This considerably limits the thickness of an InN buffer layer that is supposed to prevent chemical reactions between subsequently deposited Ga atoms and ZnO. For almost all samples grown the critical layer thickness upon which a 2D-3D growth regime transition takes place is similar to the critical layer thickness of relaxation. This sets an upper limit for the thickness of InN to be used in MQW or SPSL structures grown on ZnO. The effects of the deposition of GaN with a GR of 0.2 ML/s on 1. 642574 is gratefully acknowledged. Appl. Phys. 50, 031004 (2011).