We investigate the anisotropic superconducting and magnetic properties of single-crystal RbEuFe4As4 using magnetotransport and magnetization measurements. We determine a magnetic ordering temperature of the Eu-moments of Tm = 15 K and a superconducting transition temperature of Tc = 36.8 K. The superconducting phase diagram is characterized by high upper critical field slopes of -70 kG/K and -42 kG/K for in-plane and out-of-plane fields, respectively, and a surprisingly low superconducting anisotropy of Γ = 1.7. Ginzburg-Landau parameters of κc ∼ 67 and κ ab ∼ 108 indicate extreme type-II behavior. These superconducting properties are in line with those commonly seen in optimally doped Fe-based superconductors. In contrast, Eu-magnetism is quasi-two dimensional as evidenced by highly anisotropic in-plane and out-of-plane exchange constants of 0.6 K and < 0.04 K. A consequence of the quasi-2D nature of the Eu-magnetism are strong magnetic fluctuation effects, a large suppression of the magnetic ordering temperature as compared to the Curie-Weiss temperature, and a cusp-like anomaly in the specific heat devoid of any singularity. Magnetization curves reveal a clear magnetic easy-plane anisotropy with in-plane and out-of-plane saturation fields of 2 kG and 4 kG. Europium-containing Fe-based superconducting materials have emerged as model systems for the study of the interplay of magnetism and superconductivity In this regard, the recent discovery of superconductivity in RbEuFe 4 As 4 and CsEuFe 4 As 4 Here we present the first study of the anisotropic superconducting and magnetic properties of single-crystal RbEuFe 4 As 4 . Using magnetotransport and magnetization measurements, we determine a magnetic ordering temperature of the Eu-moments of T m = 15 K and a superconducting transition temperature of T c = 36.8 K. The superconducting phase diagram is characterized by high upper critical field slopes of dH ab c2 /dT = -70kOe/K, dH c c2 /dT = -42kOe/K, and a surprisingly low superconducting anisotropy of Γ = 1.7. Ginzburg-Landau (GL) parameters of κ c ∼ 67 and κ ab ∼ 108 indicate extreme type-II behavior. These superconducting properties are in line with those commonly seen in optimally doped Fe-based superconductors. In contrast, Eu-magnetism is highly anisotropic quasi-two dimensional as evidenced by anisotropic in-plane and out-of-plane exchange constants of 0.6 and < 0.04 K, respectively. A consequence of the quasi-2D nature of the Eu-magnetism are strong magnetic fluctuation effects, a negative magnetoresistance in high fields and at temperatures well above T c , a large suppression of the magnetic ordering temperature as compared to the Curie-Weiss temperature, and a cusp-like anomaly in the specific heat. Magnetization curves reveal a clear magnetic easy-plane anisotropy with in-plane and out-of-plane saturation fields of 2 kOe and 4 kOe, respectively. High quality single crystals of RbEuFe 4 As 4 were grown using RbAs flux X-ray diffraction (XRD) and specific heat measurements revealed single-phase material without EuFe 2 As 2 inclusions We evaluate the phase transitions occuring in singlecrystal RbEuFe 4 As 4 using zero-field specific heat measurements such as shown in Figure In single-band weak-coupling BCS theory the normalized discontinuity of the slopes of the specific heat at T c , (T c /∆C)∆(dC/dT ) Tc , has a universal value of 2.64. Strong-coupling and multi-band effects modify this value as seen for example in Pb for which a slope discontinuity of 4.6 has been reported As shown in Fig. We determine the magnetic state of RbEuFe 4 As 4 using measurements of the field cooled (FC) and zero-field cooled (ZFC) temperature dependence as well as the field dependence of the magnetization in fields applied along the ab-planes and the c-axis. In contrast to EuFe 2 As 2 , the magnetic transition of the Eu-ions occurs deep in the superconducting state. Therefore, magnetization data at low temperatures, especially ZFC data and data for which H//c, contain contributions from superconducting vortices as well as from Eu-moments. The inset of Figure In higher fields [Fig. The values for χ 0 are 3.4 × 10 -3 emu/mol G for the in-plane orientations and 3.1 × 10 -3 emu/mol G for the c-axis representing anisotropic contributions from temperature-independent Pauli paramagnetism or van Vleck magnetism. The insets of Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) show magnetization hysteresis loops measured at 4.5 K in H // (001) and H // (110). The superposition of a ferromagnetic-like signal and a hysteretic superconducting signal is clearly seen, especially for H // (001). This is expected due to the large sample cross-section and high critical current density for this field orientation. Assuming that superconducting hysteresis is symmetric around the equilibrium magnetization curve and that effects due to the hysteresis of the Eu-magnetism are small (as is indicated by results on EuFe 2 As 2 In a model of a type-A antiferromagnet, the in-plane magnetization curves for which demagnetization effects are negligible allow for an estimate of the antiferromagnetic interlayer exchange constant J ′ . Neglecting a weak in-plane anisotropy, the magnetization curve for this orientation is given by M/M s = H/H af Figure To study the superconducting anisotropy, resistivity measurements with applied magnetic field parallel to the (1 10) (ab-plane) or the (001) (c-axis) directions were performed (Fig. The resistivity data corresponding to the normal state in Fig. We determine the superconducting phase diagram of RbEuFe 4 As 4 from the resistive transitions shown in Fig. Results obtained on the non-magnetic sister compound CaKFe 4 As 4 With the help of the Rutgers relation a connection between the jump in the specific heat and the superconducting phase boundaries can be established: ∆C/T c = (dH i c2 /dT | Tc ) 2 /8πκ 2 i . With ∆C/T c = 0.21 J/mol K 2 and the upper critical field slopes from Fig. These materials parameters allow to estimate the Ginsburg number G i , which describes the importance of superconducting thermal fluctuations, as G i = [8π 2 k B ΓT c κ 2 c ξ ab /φ 2 0 ] 2 /2 ≈ 7 × 10 -5 . This relatively low value is of the same order of magnitude as seen in other 122 and 1144 Fe-based superconductors In summary, among the superconductors containing ordered sublattices of rare-earth magnetic moments RbEuFe 4 As 4 attains a special place due to its high magnetic and superconducting transition temperatures. Orbital-selective superconducting pairing and magnetic exchange may offer a frame for the coexistence of strong superconducting pairing and sizable magnetic interactions in this layered material even though the underlying microscopic mechanisms have not been clarified yet. The high value of T c , exceeding that of the non-magnetic sister compound CaKFe 4 As 4 