The utilization of alkali salts, such as NaCl and KI, have enabled the successful growth of large single domain and fully coalesced polycrystalline two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenide layers. However, the impact of alkali salts on photonic and electronic properties are not fully established. In this work, we report alkali-free epitaxy of MoS2 on sapphire and benchmark the properties against alkaliassisted growth of MoS2. This study demonstrates that although NaCl can dramatically increase the domain size of monolayer MoS2 by 20 times, it can also induce strong optical and electronic heterogeneities in as-grown large-scale films. This work elucidates that utilization of NaCl can lead to variation in growth rates, loss of epitaxy, and a high density of nanoscale MoS2 particles (4  0.7/μm 2 ). Such phenomena suggest that alkali atoms play an important role in Mo and S adatom mobility and strongly influence the 2D/sapphire interface during growth. Compared to alkali-free synthesis under the same growth conditions, MoS2 growth assisted by NaCl results in >1% tensile strain in as-grown domains, which reduces photoluminescence by ~20× and degrades transistor performance. Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) In this work, we explore the trade-offs of utilizing NaCl in MOCVD synthesis of coalesced, epitaxial MoS2 monolayer films. We directly benchmark the optical, structural and electronic properties of alkalifree and alkali-assisted MoS2 grown under the same conditions. Monolayer films grown without NaCl are found to be epitaxial and uniform across a 2×2 cm 2 sapphire substrate, while NaCl-assisted growth is shown to enhance the growth rate and domain size by 20× for some domains. Meanwhile, residual strain in NaCl-assisted films leads to a 20× quench in photoluminescence (PL) of the large domains. Additionally, when using the same growth parameters as alkali-free MOCVD, we find a high density of multi-layer MoS2 particles and an atomic layer of Na at the MoS2/sapphire interface that destroys the epitaxial relationship between MoS2 and sapphireprecluding the ability to achieve large-scale, epitaxial 2D layers. Moreover, we compare transport properties films transferred to SiO2/Si substrates to understand if the variations found in as-grown films translates to films removed from the substrate. Utilizing NaCl introduces a 1.5× decrease in mobility, 2× increase in subthreshold slope, and 100× reduction in on/off ratio when directly compared to alkali-free growths. We also find a 3× higher variation (>15V) in threshold voltage in transistors that utilize alkali-assisted MoS2, suggesting that any residual Na remaining from the transfer process dominates the transistor performance. Optimization of alkali-free metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD; Fig. Another distinct difference between alkali and alkali-free growth is the resulting surface morphology. Scanning electron micrographs (Fig 2 ) suggest that for fully coalesced monolayer films, "islands" form on the surface of NaCl-assisted films. AFM (Fig. Regardless of growth parameters, the deposition of alkali-metal atoms onto the substrate surface is unavoidable. Similar to Kim et al., Combining AFM, TEM, XPS, and TOF-SIMS (Fig. Prior work claims that transferring the MoS2 from the growth substrate to pristine SiO2/Si substrates eliminates adverse impacts Na may yield. 