Weyl semimetals (WSMs) have Weyl nodes where conduction and valence bands meet in the absence of inversion or time-reversal symmetry (TRS), or both. Weyl nodes are topologically protected as long as crystal momentum is conserved, giving rise to Fermi arcs at the surfaces. Interesting phenomena are expected in WSMs such as the chiral magnetic effect, anomalous Hall conductivity or Nernst effect, and unique quantum oscillations. The TRS-broken WSM phase can be driven from a topological Dirac semimetal by magnetic field B or magnetic dopants, considering that Dirac semimetals have degenerate Weyl nodes stabilized by rotational symmetry, i.e. Dirac nodes, near the Fermi level. Here we develop a Wannier-function-based tight-binding (WF-TB) model to investigate the formation of Weyl nodes and nodal rings induced by B field in the topological Dirac semimetal Na3Bi. The field is applied along the rotational axis. So far, studies of B field induced WSMs have been limited to cases with 4×4 effective models, which may not fully capture interesting effects. Remarkably, our study based on the WF-TB model shows that upon B field each Dirac node is split into four separate Weyl nodes along the rotational axis near the Fermi level; two nodes with Chern number ±1 (single Weyl nodes) and two with Chern number ±2 (double Weyl nodes). This result is in contrast to the common belief that each Dirac node consists of only two Weyl nodes with opposite chirality. In the context of the 4 × 4 effective models, the existence of double Weyl nodes ensures nonzero cubic terms in momentum. We further examine the evolution of Fermi arcs at a side surface as a function of chemical potential. This analysis corroborates our finding of the double Weyl nodes. The number of Fermi arcs at a given chemical potential is consistent with the corresponding Fermi surface Chern numbers. Furthermore, our study reveals the existence of nodal rings in the mirror plane below the Fermi level upon B field. These nodal rings persist with spin-orbit coupling, in contrast to many proposed nodal ring/line semimetals. Our WF-TB model can be used to compute interesting features arising from Berry curvature such as anomalous Hall and thermal conductivities, and our findings can be applied to other topological Dirac semimetals like Cd3As2. In Weyl semimetals (WSMs), bulk conduction and valence bands touch at an even number of points near the Fermi level, called Weyl nodes, which are topologically protected by conserved crystal momentum Mostly IS-broken WSMs have been experimentally well characterized, with dozens of Weyl nodes found near the Fermi level, and often off symmetry lines or planes in momentum k space One way to induce the TRS-broken WSM phase is to apply a magnetic field B or insert magnetic dopants in topological Dirac semimetals (DSMs). Despite TRS and IS, topological DSMs have degenerate Weyl nodes with opposite chirality, i.e. Dirac nodes, which are protected by rotational symmetry In order to investigate topological properties of B field induced WSMs beyond simple effective models, we develop a Wannier-function-based tight-binding (WF-TB) model for topological DSM Na 3 Bi with B field applied along the rotational axis. The electronic structure of bulk Na 3 Bi is first calculated from density-functional theory (DFT) without spin-orbit coupling (SOC) or B field. Atom-centered Wannier functions (WFs) are generated from the electronic structure, and we then construct a WF-TB model by separately adding atomic-like SOC and a Zeeman energy. Landau levels or Peierls phases are not considered in our WF-TB model. The band structure calculated from the WF-TB model still respects C 3 and 6 3 (screw) symmetries and mirror symmetry (σ h ) upon B field. We avoid maximally-localized WFs in our construction of the WF-TB model. Topological obstruction From the WF-TB model, we find that upon B field each Dirac node is split into four separate Weyl nodes along the rotational axis near the Fermi level. Two of the nodes have Chern number of ±1 (single Weyl nodes), while the other two nodes have Chern number of ±2 (double Weyl nodes). This result differs from the common belief that each Dirac node consists of two Weyl nodes of opposite chirality, which is true only when higher-order terms like cubic terms are ignored in the 4 × 4 effective model. Our calculated Chern numbers associated with the double Weyl nodes unambiguously reveals the existence of the higher-order terms in momentum. We further examine the evolution of Fermi arcs at a side surface as a function of chemical potential, finding that the number of Fermi arcs is consistent with the calculated Chern numbers associated with the Weyl nodes. This analysis corroborates our findings of the double Weyl nodes. In addition, our study reveals that with B field there are nodal rings in the mirror plane, i.e. ab plane, near the Fermi level. These nodal rings persist with SOC, in contrast to most proposed nodal ring semimetals where the nodal rings are gapped by SOC except for a few k points. Our WF-TB model with B field can be used to compute interesting features arising from Berry curvature such as anomalous Hall and thermal conductivities. Our findings can be applied to other topological Dirac semimetals like Cd 3 As 2 . We present crystal structure and symmetries of Na 3 Bi in Sec. II and the detailed procedure of constructing the WF-TB model in Sec.III. Then in Sec. IV we discuss the WF-TB model calculated band structure, the calculated Chern numbers of the Weyl nodes, the calculated nodal rings, and the evolution of the Fermi arcs versus chemical potential. We conclude in Sec. V. We consider bulk Na 3 Bi in space group P6 3 /mmc (No. 194) with experimental lattice constants of a = 5.448 Å and c = 9.655 Å We first calculate the electronic structure of bulk Na 3 Bi without SOC and B field by using DFT codes VASP We perform the ab-initio calculations using QE A Wannier function, |r -R , n , centered at position R in real space is a Fourier transform of Bloch states, |ψ nk (r) , over the k space, where n is a band index. The Bloch states can be written as e ik•r u nk (r), where u nk (r) denotes a lattice-periodic function. where V is the volume of the first BZ. Although the concept of Wannier functions was developed very early In order to first construct the SOC-free WF-TB model, we start with an initial set of 16 projected atomic orbitals, g j , comprising s-, p x -, p y -, and p z -orbitals centered at the four Bi atoms in the z ⊥ (1 20) unit Here m and n are indices of the Bloch states or bands, b is a vector between two neighboring k points, and j is the WF index. Then we apply only the disentanglement procedure within the outer energy window Now we construct the spin-free WF-TB model, by using the generated WFs, |R + s β , centered at R + s β , where R are the lattice vectors and s β denote the sites of orbital β (β=1,...,16). The spin-free Hamiltonian matrix where t αβ (R -0) is a hopping or tunneling parameter from orbital β at site s β in the home cell at R = 0 to orbital α at site s α in the unit cell located at R. Note that we have four different Bi sites within the non-primitive unit cell. The factor e -ik•(sα-s β ) in Eq. ( Since the atom-centered Wannier functions are very close to pure states of the orbitals we project onto, onsite SOC is added to the home-cell terms directly. The matrix form of SOC in the basis set of {|s, ↑ , where λ is the SOC parameter, L is the orbital angular momentum, and σ represent Pauli spin matrices. With We find that λ = 1.165 eV reproduces the DFT band structure around the Fermi level the best, which is to be favorably compared to λ Bi = 1.25 eV We add the magnetic field as a Zeeman term H Z = gμ B (L + 2S) • B, where μ B is Bohr magneton and S is the spin angular momentum. For a free electron, g = 1. We do not include Peierls phases in the hopping parameters t αβ . The total Hamiltonian for the WF-TB model is H = H 0 +H SOC +H Z . For the results presented through the rest of this work, we consider gμ B B z = 0.025 eV, unless specified otherwise. The experimentally realized Dirac semimetals exhibit large g-factors, with g ≈ 20 in Na 3 Bi We check that our WF-TB model reproduces the first-principles band structure without SOC. Figure Single and Double Weyl nodes We apply a magnetic field along the 6 3 screw axis (c axis) of Na 3 Bi, finding that each Dirac node [Fig. where φ n and E n are the n-th eigenvector and eigenvalue of H (the 32 × 32 Hamiltonian matrix discussed in Sec. III), and αβγ is the Levi-Civita symbol, though no sum over γ is implied. Then we calculate the Chern number or Berry curvature flux χ n of each Weyl node W n by enclosing it in spheres of successively smaller radius, where S is the two-dimensional surface of the sphere, or, as relevant later, S n is the Fermi surface (FS) sheet of band n, and n is a unit vector normal to S or S n . Our calculation shows that the four Weyl nodes consist of two Weyl nodes with χ n = ±1 and two nodes with χ n = ±2. The former (latter) nodes are referred to as single (double) Weyl nodes. The Berry curvature vector fields for the single and double Weyl nodes are shown in Fig. This B(k) term respects the crystal symmetries and it couples the j z = ±3/2 and j z = ∓1/2 bands, where k ± denote k x ± ik y . The Hamiltonian reads x + k 2 y )] do not affect the linear dispersion near the Dirac nodes in zero B field, the existence of the terms cannot be shown from the fitting to the DFT-calculated bands in previous studies In addition to the four Weyl nodes, we also observe nodal rings in the horizontal mirror plane upon B field along the c axis, which is consistent with the result obtained from the effective 4 × 4 model We now present our calculation of Fermi arc surface states at a single surface as a function of chemical potential μ in the presence of B field. We compute the bulk states and the surface states for a semi-infinite slab with the (1 20) surface by using an iterative Green's function method At μ=E 1 =40 meV we find two Fermi arc surface states in Fig. In order to understand the evolution of the Fermi arcs as a function of μ, we examine the Chern numbers of disjoint FS sheets at different μ values around the Weyl nodes following Gosálbez-Martínez et al. where χ n,α is the chirality of the α th Weyl node connecting bands n and n + 1, W n,α . The sum is over all Weyl nodes interior to the FS sheet; the outward pointing normal vector points toward the exterior of the FS for electron-pockets and the reverse for hole-pockets. With this convention, the band crossing point becomes a source of Berry curvature flux in the lower band (n) and a sink of Berry curvature flux in the upper band (n + 1). At μ=E 2 , bands 24 and 25 meet the chemical potential and so C 24 and C 25 are relevant to the counting of the Fermi arcs [Figs. At μ=E 5 , bands 23 and 24 cross the chemical potential which is below the energies of all four Weyl nodes. In the half-BZ (y > 0), there are two disjoint hole-pockets S 23,a (blue) and S 23,b (not shown in Fig. In summary, we have developed a WF-TB model for the topological DSM, Na 3 Bi, which reproduces the DFTcalculated band structure well while retaining the symmetries of the crystal. The projected atomic Wannier functions are atom-centered with larger spread than maximally localized WFs. Atomic-like SOC was included, and we investigated the formation of line nodes in the mirror plane and splitting of the Dirac nodes into multiple Weyl nodes in an applied magnetic field. We found that each Dirac node splits into pairs of Weyl nodes with chiral charges ±1 and ±2 from the calculations of Berry curvature. By carefully considering the Chern number of associated Fermi surface sheets, we detailed the interesting development of Fermi arc and other topological surface states as a function of chemical potential consistent with the topological charges of the Weyl nodes. Our tight-binding model can be used to calculate novel properties induced by the nonzero Berry curvature, and its qualitative features can be applied in another experimentally observed topological DSM, Cd 3 As 2 . [-0.5,0.5] eV around the Fermi level. Hence our WF-TB model reproduces the DFT electronic structure very well with and without SOC even for the non-primitive unit cell. our generated WFs, we now have a 32 × 32 matrix H SOC since there are four Bi sites per non-primitive unit cell.