The solidification theory has been accepted as a thermodynamically sound way to describe the creep reduction due to deposition of hydrated material in the pores of concrete. The concept of self-equilibrated nanoscale microprestress has been accepted as a viable model for marked multi-decade decline of creep viscosity after the hydration effect became too feeble, and for increase of creep viscosity after any sudden change of pore humidity or temperature. Recently, though, it appeared that the original microprestresssolidification theory (MPS) predicts incorrectly the diffusion size effect on drying creep and the delay of drying creep behind drying shrinkage. Presented here is an extension (XMPS) that overcomes both problems and also improves a few other features of the model response. To this end, different nano-and macro-scale viscosities are distinguished. The aforementioned incorrect predictions are overcome by a dependence of the macro-scale viscosity on the rate of pore humidity change, which is a new feature inspired by previous molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of a molecular layer of water moving between two parallel sliding C-S-H sheets. The aging is based on calculating the hydration degree, and the temperature change effect on pore relative humidity is taken into account. Empirical formula for estimating the parameters of permeability dependence on pore humidity from concrete mix composition are also developed. Extensive validations by pertinent test data from the literature are demonstrated. Until recently, the microprestress-solidification (MPS) theory The solidification theory separates viscoelasticity of the solid constituent, the cement gel, from the chemical aging of the hardened cement paste caused by solidification of gel particles and characterized by the growth of volume fraction of hydration products. This permits considering the viscoelastic constituent as non-aging. The decrease of compliance is explained by filling of the pores by growing volume fraction of a non-aging constituent, the cement gel, or C-S-H (calcium silicate hydrate) The solidification, however, cannot explain the marked decrease of creep viscosities continuing even after the hydration progress becomes feeble. Neither can it explain the drying creep effect (aka the Pickett effect) and the transitional thermal creep. To explain these phenomena, the concept of microprestress was conceived, resulting in the microprestresssolidification (MPS) theory The microprestress characterizes self-equilibrated stresses at the nano-scale level. These stresses stretch and break the interatomic bonds resisting the slip of parallel C-S-H sheets and adjacent C-S-H globules, which is believed to be the main mechanism of creep in concrete. The microprestress is considered to be the result of disjoining pressures across nanopores filled by adsorbed water layers. Micropresstress cannot be appreciably affected by the applied load and may be imagined as a the effect of a strong but very soft prestressed spring. The micropresstress is initially produced by incompatible volume changes in the microstructure during hydration. It then relaxes but later again builds up when changes of moisture content and temperature create thermodynamic imbalance between the chemical potentials of vapor, liquid and adsorbed water in the nano-pores of cement gel. The XMPS improvement in the modeling of drying creep, particularly the dependence of macro-scale viscosity on the rate of microprestress, has been inspired by recent molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of Vandamme et al. Within the service stress range (and with some exceptions for unloading and simultaneous drying), the concrete creep law can be treated as linear in stress and following the principle of superposition in time. Therefore, the creep is fully characterized by the uniaxial compliance function J(t, t ), representing the strain in time t caused by a unit sustained uniaxial stress applied at age t . The triaxial generalization need not be discussed here since it is well known how to obtain it under the assumption that the material is isotropic and the Poisson ratio is approximately independent of time (e.g., In absence of significant plastic strains that may arise at very high confining pressures, the normal strain of concrete can be decomposed as follows (Fig. where a = instantaneous strain; v = viscoelastic strain; f = flow strain (purely viscous strain); sh = shrinkage strain and T =thermal strain. Not only the flow strain, but all the concrete creep components are caused by irreversible nanoscale shear slip, occurring mainly between C-S-H sheets at highly stressed sites in the nanostructure Since the retardation spectrum of concrete creep extends smoothly to load durations t 10 -4 s, it is convenient to define the instantaneous compliance as an asymptotic extrapolation of short-time creep curves for zero load duration (i.e., for t → 0). Such an extrapolation has the advantage that the age effect on the true mean instantaneous compliance happens to be negligible (the evidence for this fact is quite scattered but deviations are not systematic). This property was demonstrated by Therefore, similar to B3 and B4 models where E 28 is the conventional elastic modulus at age 28 days (which, according to model B4, corresponds to the loading duration of about 0.001 day, or 1.44 min., while in previous model B3 it was 0.01 day). The viscoelastic strain v , which originates in the solid gel of C-S-H, may be described by the same relation type as the B3 and B4 models Function Q(t, t ) was derived by asymptotic arguments (5) where α = α(t) is a function of time (Rahimi-Aghdam, Bažant, & Qomi 2017), w/c = water-cement ratio of concrete mix (by weight); α u = ultimate hydration degree in sealed condition, which is a function of w/c; and Using the equivalent time, one can modify the expression for the evolution of Q(t, t ) (Eq. 17 in where λ 0 = 1 day, m = 0.5, n = 0.1 , and ζ = t -t . This relation can be integrated to find Q(t,t') The integral Q(t, t ) from Eq. 8 cannot be expressed in a closed form thus should be calculated numerically. An approximate asymptotic matching formula for Q(t, t ) was developed in Note that the shrinkage strain sh is here understood as a point-wise eigenstrain, whereas in the B3 and B4 models where ḣ = dh/dt = rate of humidity change, k 0 = empirical constant, and we set α 0 = 0.9α set . Likewise, the thermal strain rate reads where Ṫ = dT /dt = rate of temperature change and k T = empirical constant. To complete the creep law, we finally need the rate of flow strain f , which is discussed next. The flow strain is modelled by a viscous flow element coupled in series to the solidifying Kelvin chain, as schematized in Fig. where η M is the macro-scale viscosity. In the original MPS model, for simplicity, the viscosity is assumed to be the same at the nano-scale and macro-scale, and is in both cases assumed to be a function of microprestress, S. This assumption was obviously a simplification since the macro-scale viscosity must depend on several other phenomena as well. In particular, it must depend on the flow of water within the pores (meso-pores or capillary pores, and mainly nano-pores). The water flow accelerates as the rate of pore humidity change increases. Recently The conclusion is that the macro-scale viscosity depends not only on the microprestress, but also on the water flow through the pores, the velocity of which is determined mainly by the rate of pore humidity change. It should, of course, be kept in mind that the rate of humidity change is not the only phenomenon that can accelerate the flow between pores. Generally, the rate of any disruption of thermodynamic equilibrium has a similar effect. Since any phenomenon that causes thermodynamic imbalance increases the microprestress, one can imagine the rate of microprestress as a measure of the water flow rate in the nanopore and the corresponding viscosity to depend only on the microprestress, S. In the rheological model of Fig. where η n is the nanoscale viscosity that is a function of the microprestress only, and η f low represents the decrease in viscosity due to the water flow or the rate of any other phenomenon causing thermodynamic imbalance in nanopores. More generally one could consider 1 η M = aS p 1 + b| Ṡ| p 2 but data fitting indicates no need for such complication. The viscosity in Eq. 12 must increase with the age or, more precisely, with the degree of hydration, α, which is a fact confirmed by many experiments where a 0 and b 0 are two empirical constants. Combining Eq. 12 and 13, we can write The next important issue to consider is the evolution of microprestress. The microprestress S is imagined to characterize the average of normal stresses acting across the slip planes with hindered adsorbed water layers between them. The disjoining pressure in these layers, and thus also the microprestress, S, is considered to develop first during the initial hardening of cement paste. During the initial rapid hydration, the microprestress builds up mainly as a result of crystal growth pressures and localized volume changes close to the nanopores. Therefore, during the initial days of fast hydration, S depends mainly on the hydration degree, α, and is calculated simply as where c 0 is an empirical constant; q 4 is the creep law parameter in models B3 and B4; S 0 is the initial microprestress, and α 0 is the hydration degree prior to which the hydration reaction has the dominant control of microprestress. The value α 0 = 0.6α u can be considered. Later, after the volume changes due to hydration have almost ceased, the changes of microprestress are controlled mainly by the changes in the disjoining pressure, which responds with negligible delay to the changes in the capillary tension and surface tension at the same location. According to where ṡ(t)/C S is the time rate of Maxwell model strain due to any phenomena that may cause thermodynamic imbalance in the microstructure The main phenomena affecting ṡ(t)/C S are: 1) the temperature change and 2) the humidity change. First the temperature. Its effect is complicated by interference of several physical mechanisms which can be described as follows, 1. A temperature increase accelerates the bond breakages and restorations. 2. The higher the temperature, the faster the chemical process of cement hydration, and thus the faster the aging of concrete. 3. The temperature change alters the capillary tension, crystal growth pressure, surface tension, and disjoining pressure, all of which can alter the microprestress and creep rate. 4. The temperature changes alters the internal relative humidity, which either increases or decreases the creep rate. 5. The temperature increase alters the microstructure of C-S-H and of the weaker interfacial transition zone (ITZ), which usually weakens the concrete. The relative pore humidity affects the creep rate and does so mainly by three mechanisms, 1. As the relative humidity decreases the viscosity increases and bond breakage decelerates. 2. The higher the humidity, the faster is the chemical process of cement hydration and thus the aging of concrete, which reduces the creep rate. 3. The evolution of humidity changes the capillary tension, crystal growth pressure, surface tension and disjoining pressure, which all change the microprestress. To predict the creep rate correctly, one must consider the effect of all the aforementioned mechanisms. Except mechanisms 4 and 5 due to temperature change, they have already been considered in the original MPS model where T = absolute temperature; T 0 = reference temperature, chosen as T 0 = 293 K; R = universal gas constant; Q h = activation energies for the hydration processes (whose values depend on the cement type); and t T = value of t T at the time of loading. The effect of the first temperature related mechanism on the flow strain rate is formulated by decreasing the viscosity, to reflect the acceleration of bond breakage, and by decreasing C s , to reflect the acceleration of bond restorations. Both temperature effects can be described by an Arrhenius type equation. Since the first relative humidity related mechanism also changes the viscosity, both the temperature and relative humidity influences are considered simultaneously, as follows: where Q η , Q C = activation energies for the viscosity change and C s , while the following parameters are considered as empirical constants: p 0 = 0.5, h * = 0.75 and n h = 2. For simplicity, one may assume the same activation energy for both the macro-and nano-scale viscosities. In addition, since generally temperature increase accelerates creep, we assume the viscosity decrease to be dominant, and it is found reasonable to set The effect of the second mechanism, driven by the changes of temperature and relative humidity, is already included through the acceleration of hydration reaction, and no other modification is needed. The third and fourth mechanisms caused by temperature change, and the third mechanism caused by relative humidity, modify the microprestress value through the changes of capillary tension, surface tension, and disjoining (or crystal growth) pressure. All the aforementioned pressures have almost the same relation to the relative humidity, and they are all determined by changes in the chemical potential of pore water (μ = (RT /M ρ l ) ln h, ρ l = 1 g/cm 3 ); μ is, at each location, the same in all the phases of pore water and its change represents the ultimate driving force of hygrothermal deformations. Therefore, and in conformity to the original MPS model where R = universal gas constant, M = molecular weight of water (in moles), p 0 and C p are two unknown constants. Note that, to capture mechanism 4 due to temperature change, the humidity is here considered to be a function of not only t, as in the original MPS model, but also T (this mechanism is considered in Diluzio and Cusatis (2013) as well). The rate of effective pressure can then be written as, where the last term describes the change of relative humidity due to the temperature change (Fig. The effect of the saturation degree on the effective pressure is not used here directly since the major effects on the microprestress are those of changes in the disjoining pressure and the surface tension, dominant in the smallest pores, which remain filled by water even at very low h, such as h > 0.2. This simplification, though, may cause appreciable errors at very low relative humidities. Next we need to relate these changes to the microprestress change, which is in turn related to the effective pressure change. One can use the simple relation: The last mechanism that needs to be included is the effect of temperature change on the microstructure of C-S-H and particularly ITZ where r is a unknown exponent which is set as r = 3. The reality, though, is a bit more complicated. Having formulated the mechanisms contributing to the microprestress, we need to combine them. All these contributions are simply assumed to to be independent and additive. Thus we get, where the c p and c 1 = k 1 c p . Consequently, the equation governing the relaxation of microprestress reads: Upon inserting Eqs. 20, 22 and 30 into Eq. 31, the equation for relaxation of microprestress becomes: where η T 0 ,sat n (S) = 1/aS p 1 , and C T 0 S is a constant. As already mentioned, we assume p 1 = 1 and so the microprestress relaxation equation can be simplified as: where a S = C T 0 S /a. Finally, using p 1 = p 2 = 1 as before, we obtain the rate of flow strain: To predict the creep rate under the influence of variable humidity, a realistic model for water transport or drying is obviously important. Over the years, many were proposed. Some were transplants from other porous material, especially soil science, but did not work well since they ignored, or reflected poorly, the particular features of concrete: 1) in concrete, there is a major distributed sink of evaporable water due to continuing hydration; and 2) in normal concrete, neither the vapor phase of water, nor the liquid capillary phase, percolate, and a water molecule moving from one pore to the next must pass through the adsorbed phase in the nanopores. Because of gradual filling of pores by deposition of hydration products, the hydration sink matters for the pore relative humidity much less than changes in the specific content of evaporable water. Recognizing this, Like the Bažant Najjar model, the model of Rahimi-Aghdam et al. ( where c p is the function giving moisture permeability (kg/m.s). The condition of mass conservation of water reads: where ẇs = rate of water mass consumed by the chemical process of hydration, which is calculated from the rate of hydration degree, α, according to the Rahimi-Aghdam et al. where k(α, h) (dimension m 3 /kg) is the reciprocal moisture capacity (i.e., the inverse slope of the isotherm), and α is the hydration degree, growing with concrete age. Incorporating 35, 36, and 37, one gets the governing equation of moisture diffusion in concrete: where the last term on the right-hand side represents the self-desiccation sink, which can be calculated using Rahimi-Aghdam et al. ( where c 1 , β, h c and r are four empirical parameters. The new model by Rahimi-Aghdam et al. ( Let us now verify the ability of the current model to reproduce some typical experimental data. In each of the data sets that follow, it is easy to fit one or two curves, and many models can do that. However, it is quite difficult to fit all the curves of a set of diverse experiments on the same concrete with the same material parameters. Achieving such capability has been the objective of this study and is a requirement for a predictive model. Here we demonstrate it for several important data sets from the literature, dealing with various concretes under diverse environmental conditions. The available data deal with the basic creep (defined as the creep at no moisture exchange), creep at different temperatures, creep and shrinkage under drying exposure, and transitional thermal creep after a sudden change of temperature. Table where c b is a calibration parameter. Note that here we try to define most parameters as functions of concrete properties and thus minimize the number of unknown parameters to be calibrated by tests. Furthermore, the calibration parameters that we use do not change over a wide range. For instance, c 2 , c 3 .c 4 all vary between 0.6 and 1.5 and for crude estimates can be taken as 1. Thus the XMPS theory model does not require more tedious calibration than the original MPS theory, while its better results are achieved by capturing the underlying phenomena more realistically. 6.1 Tests of Fig. After successful prediction of drying creep for the reference size, consider slabs of different sizes (thicknesses). and the final value of drying creep is bigger. In this regard, note that Havlśek at Northwestern found the original MPS model to predict, incorrectly, the opposite-a lower final drying creep for smaller specimens, which contradicted the test results and motivated the development of XMPS. Finally we consider the prisms in which only the bottom and top are sealed and the four long faces were exposed to h = 0.6. According to the simplification suggested in model B3, the prism can be approximated by an effective cylinder whose diameter is equal 1.09×the side of prism. This approximation, though, did not yield very good results. Therefore, the specimen was simulated in two dimensions as a prism. Exploiting symmetries, only 1/4 of the prism sufficed for analysis. The simulation results using the real prism achieved closer fits (Fig. To illustrate the diffusion size effect on the drying part of creep more clearly, let us subtract the basic creep part. Fig. Until now we have analyzed the diffusion size effect in drying creep but, of course, the drying shrinkage is size dependent as well. The cause is the differences in the rate of drying of samples with different size. Fig. Finally, let us analyze the effect of considering effective time instead of normal time in Eq. 5. Fig. Note all the material parameters of the present predictions are the same for all the simulations. This cannot be achieved with other existing models. The same is also true for the fitting of the data for other concretes which follows. It should be mentioned that often (especially in bending) the cracking damage can make a significant contribution to the Picket effect 6.2 Tests of Next consider the experiments at T = 43 • C. Fig. quent data, shown as empty circles, are ignored. Fig. 6.4 Tests of The predictions are satisfactory. To achieve it, it was important to consider all the mechanisms by which the temperature can change creep rate. Especially, it was important to consider the change of relative humidity in the pores, caused by the temperature rise. Otherwise, the predicted jump for the drying condition would have been much bigger than observed. In addition, it was important to consider the compliance increase due temperature increase (30% compliance increase of sealed condition was reported). The calibration parameters were: c 2 = 0.73, c 3 = 1.2, c 4 = 0.8 and c b = 1.25. It should be mentioned that these experiments were previously by 1. The extended microprestress-solidification theory (XMPS) eliminates two main drawbacks of the original version: 1) the reverse diffusion size effect on the part of creep due to drying, and 2) the excessive delay of the drying part of creep after the drying shrinkage. Both phenomena are now predicted correctly. Predictions of the diffusion size effect on shrinkage are also improved. 2. Different nano-and macro-scale viscosities are now distinguished. The flow term is in XMPS considered to be a function of the macroscale viscosity, which depends on the pore humidity rate, a feature that transpired from earlier MD simulations showing that the apparent viscosity in sliding of two parallel C-S-H sheet should depend on the velocity of molecular layer of water moving between these two sheets. 3. In the XMPS, the age effect on creep at variable humidity and temperature histories is based not on an empirical effective age (or maturity) but on the effective hydration time calculated from the growth of hydration degree at each point of the structure (or each integration point of a finite element program). 4. The temperature change effect on pore relative humidity can be realistically described by a humidity dependent hygrothermic coefficient (introduced in Based on where k(α, h) (dimension m 3 /kg) is the reciprocal moisture capacity (i.e, the inverse slope of the isotherm), and α is the hydration degree, c p is the permeability and the last term on the right-hand side is a distributed sink representing the selfdesiccation. Same as in where α u is the ultimate hydration degree in sealed concrete, which is a function of w/c; it is estimated as α u = 0.46 + .95(w/c -0.17) 0.6 but α u < 1 (73) t + dV c t ) + (φ gp -φ np )ζ gc