The realization of the Quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE) in two dimensional (2D) metal organic frameworks (MOFs), (MC4S4)3 with M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ru and Rh, has been investigated based on a combination of first-principles calculations and tight binding models. Our results for the magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) reveal that the out-of-plane (in-plane) magnetization is favored for M = Mn, Fe, and Ru (Co, and Rh). Given the structural symmetry of (MC4S4)3, the QAHE takes place only for M = Mn, Fe and Ru. Such a quantum anomalous Hall phase has been confirmed through the calculation of the Chern number, and examining the formation of topologically protected (metallic) edge states. Further electron (n-type) doping of the MOFs has been done in order to place the Fermi level within the non-trivial energy gap; where we find that in (RuC4S4)3, in addition to the up-shift of the Fermi level, the MAE energy increases by 40%. Finally, we show that in MOF/graphene (vdW) interfaces, the Fermi level tunning can be done with an external electric field, which controls the charge transfer at the MOF/graphene interface, giving rise to switchable topologically protected edge currents in MOFs. Since the theoretical proposal of the quantum spin Hall (QSH) phase in graphene In a seminal work, Wang et al. In contrast with its counterpart, the time-reversal symmetric QSH phase, the breaking of this symmetry by intrinsic magnetization rules the emergence of the QAHE. Such an additional ingredient can be used to control the the electronic properties and the topological phases in 2D systems. Indeed, by tuning the strength of the exchange field, we may have different types of topological gaps and half-metallic phases induced by (intra/inter) spin orbital couplings (SOCs) The calculations were performed based on the DFT approach, as implemented in the VASP code The MOF Metal-Bis(dithiolene) has a hexagonal atomic structure with the metal atoms (M) forming a kagome like structure, indicated by the dashed lines in Fig. In the present (MC 4 S 4 ) 3 systems, the QAHE is constrained to an out of plane magnetization of the MOF The obtained values for the E MAE and m are shown in Table Energy (eV) Energy (eV) Energy (eV) xz, yz The net magnetization of the MOFs is (i) mostly dictated by the d orbitals of the the transition metals, where about 50% of the magnetic moment comes from the unpaired d xz,yz orbitals, while the out of plane d z 2 orbitals contribute with 40% in (RuC 4 S 4 ) 3 , followed by (FeC 4 S 4 ) 3 and (MnC 4 S 4 ) 3 , 30% and 20%, respectively. As a consequence, (ii) the in plane polarization is larger (lower) in the latter (former) system. Those transition metals are embedded in an organic framework, composed C and S atoms, which present opposite net magnetization ruled by the C-2p and S-3p orbitals; such a (opposite) spin polarization is larger (lower) in (MnC 4 S 4 ) 3 ((RuC 4 S 4 ) 3 ). Our spin density results, ∆ρ , provide a picture of (i) and (ii) discussed above, and allow us to infer that the FM coupling between the transition metals is given by an indirect exchange process, mediated by the organic host of C and S atoms. The perturbation approach proposed by Wang et al. where ξ represents the strength of the SOC. The matrix elements are divided by their (respective) single particle energy difference, indicating that the dominant contributions arise from states near the Fermi level. For M = Mn, Fe, and Ru, this model tell us that the E MAE is defined by the e 1g (d xz and d yz orbitals) orbitals, due to the PDOS peaks near the Fermi level in Figs. 2(a1)-(c1). In these cases, the empty states near the Fermi level are all of the |u + type. Moreover, group theory selection rules dictates that L x matrix operators between e 1g states are null. Therefore the dominant contributions are given by the terms . That is, the sign of E MAE is given by the competition between the positive contribution from the spin-diagonal L z matrix element, and the negative contribution from the spin-flipped L z terms. For Ru, Fig. In order to provide further support and a more clear physical picture of the QAHE in the MOFs, we calculate the Chern number of (MC 4 S 4 ) 3 , and examined the formation of topologically protected metallic edge states in (MC 4 S 4 ) 3 nanoribbons. The calculations were performed within the TB model by considering one orbital per site. Here, based on the projected energy bands [Fig. where H 0 describe the on site energy and nearest and next-nearest neighbor hopping, H SO is the intrinsic spin-orbit coupling of the sites, and H M is a Zeeman exchange field, Here T and c i = (c i↑ , c i↓ ) T , with c † iα and c iα are the creation and annihilation operators of an electron in the i-th site with spin α; σ stands for the Pauli matrices in the spin space. The d ij are the vectors connecting the i-th to the j-th site, ε i , t ij ,λ ij and b controls the on-site, hopping, spin-orbit and Zeeman field strength, respectively. The hopping and spin-orbit terms depend on the distance between the sites, respectively , where we find that the main features of the DFT bands have been nicely captured by the current TB approach Based on the same TB approach, the topological character of the energy gaps was evaluated through the calculation of the Chern number (C). By using the C-S model, as depicted in Fig. Indeed, this is what we found along the edge sites of (MC 4 S 4 ) 3 of the NRs. We have considered NR structures with a width of 30 unit cells (≈ 44, nm); and based on the C-S lattice model, in Fig. The manifestation of the QAHE, i.e. the appearance of (topologically) protected edge currents, relies on the energy position of the Fermi level with respect to the non-trivial energy gaps. In the present MOFs, as indicated in Fig. Graphene is a quite interesting substrate, since it provides both structural stability, and the n-type doping of the MOFs discussed above. The work functions (Φ) of the MOFs (see Table First, by considering a set of (RuC 4 S 4 ) 3 /G staking geometries, we find that the energetically most stable configuration is characterized by Ru atoms aligned on top of C atoms of the graphene sheet, as seen in Fig. In a previous study Based on combined first-principles DFT calculations and the tight-binding models, we have studied the electronic and the topological properties of (MC 4 S 4 ) 3 MOFs, with M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ru, and Rh. Our results of magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) reveal that the (MC 4 S 4 ) 3 systems (with M = Mn, Fe and Ru) present the easy axis out-of-plane, while the other metals (Co and Rh) are characterized by an energetic preference for in-plane magnetization. Since both inversion and out-of-plane mirror reflection symmetries are preserved, the QAH phase is not expected in the latter group Appendix A: GGA+U In Table TABLE II. Magnetic Anisotropy Energy EMAE (in meV/Matom) and the magnetization (m) of the unity cell per transition metal (M), for (MC4S4)3 (M= Mn, Fe, Co, Tc, Ru, Rh), as a function of U (U = 2-4), positive (negative) are for easy axis ê⊥ , perpendicular (ê , parallel) to the layer. . Lattice parameter a ( Å); magnetization m per TM (μ b /TM); Magnetic Anisotropy Energy EMAE = (E -E ⊥ )/NM (Kelvin/TM) positive (negative) are for easy axis perpendicular (parallel) to the layer; work function Φ = Vvac -E f (eV). All for U = 3.0 eV. E -Ef (eV) (MnC 4 S 4 ) 3 No-SOC v 1 c 2 c 3 c 1 Γ M K Γ (MnC 4 S 4 ) 3 SOC ¡ DP Γ M K Γ(FeC 4 S 4 ) 3 SOC DP