Coexistence of topological elements in a topological metal/semimetal (TM) has gradually attracted attentions. However, the non-topological factors always mess up the Fermi surface and cover interesting topological properties. Here, we find that Ba3Si4 is a "clean" TM in which coexists nodal-chain network, intersecting nodal rings (INRs) and triple points, in the absence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Moreover, the nodal rings in the topological phase exhibit diverse types: from type-I, type-II to type-III rings according to band dispersions. All the topological elements are generated by crossings of three energy bands, and thus they are correlated rather than mutual independence. When some structural symmetries are eliminated by an external strain, the topological phase evolves into another phase including Hopf link, one-dimensional nodal chain and new INRs. Topological metal and semimetals (TMs) have been new focus after topological insulators. Topological elements are usually protected by specific symmetries, for example, most nodal lines/rings are related to mirror plane, In this paper, we find that Ba3Si4 is a good candidate (see Fig. It is also found that, in the presence of SOC, the nodal rings are small gaped while the triple points change to Dirac points. Ba3Si4 can be synthesized experimentally as a single phase. We performed first-principles calculations within the density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the VASP codes. The calculated band structure for Ba3Si4 is depicted in Fig. To obtain topologically electronic structures in Ba3Si4, we search the full first BZ of the structure and find that there exist three topological elements: triple points, nodalchain network and INRs. All the elements are generated by the crossings of three bands. To describe the topological phase more clearly, we label the three bands by numbers 1, 2 and 3, according to their energies (see Figs. All the three topological elements include nodal rings/lines, but these 1D rings/lines have different topological characteristics. For example, the straight nodal line is generated by quadratic bands, while the nodal rings (in the nodal-chain network and INRs) are generated by linear bands. The former has a trivial Berry phase 2π, The topological elements in Figs. As an example, we use a 1% tensile strain along x axis to decrease the symmetry of Ba3Si4. In Fig. mz, nx and ny represent the eigenvalues of the planes kz = 0, ky = 0 and kx = 0 respectively. The red and black bands have opposite eigenvalues mz and nx along kx axis (Γ-X), while the blue and black bands have opposite eigenvalues mz and ny along ky axis (Γ-Y). The blue band along kx axis and red band along ky axis are related to each other by the C4 screw rotation symmetry, and thus two mutually vertical nodal rings for bands (1, 2) can intersect along both kx and ky axes (see the black stars in Fig. This gives rise to the intersecting of nodal rings only occurring for bands (2, 3) along ky axis, which is also the reason why the two rings form INRs in Fig. In addition, we calculate surface states of Ba3Si4 on surface [001], as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have calculated topologically electronic properties of Ba3Si4 and find that it is a TM. In the absence of SOC, its topological phase consists of three 