Atomic metallic hydrogen has been produced in the laboratory at high pressure and low temperature, prompting further investigations of its different properties. However, purely experimental approaches are infeasible because of the extreme requirements in producing and preserving the metastable phase. Here we perform a systematic investigation of the electronic, optical, mechanical and thermal properties of I4 1 /amd hydrogen at 495 GPa using first-principles calculations. We calculate the electronic structure and dielectric function to verify the metallic behaviour of I4 1 /amd hydrogen. The calculated total plasma frequency from both intraband and interband transitions, 33.40 eV, agrees well with the experimental result. The mechanical properties including elastic stability and sound velocity are also investigated. The mechanical stability of I4 1 /amd hydrogen is limited by shear modulus other than bulk modulus, and the high Young's modulus indicates that I4 1 /amd hydrogen is a stiff material. After investigating the lattice vibrational properties, we study the thermody- In 1935, Wigner and Huntington predicted that, hydrogen molecules would become a metallic solid similar to the alkalis at high pressure However, the challenge is to produce and preserve such metastable phase for experimental investigations. Several months after the synthesis, the world's only metallic hydrogen sample has disappeared. Even if the reproducibility of the sample is improved, characterizing metallic hydrogen under such pressure is extremely difficult due to the limitations of conventional techniques. For instance, for hydrogen samples in a diamond anvil cell at extremely high pressure, neutron scattering and X-ray diffraction experiments are unavailable. Thus it is imperative to develop alternative techniques for exhaustive characterization. Theoretical estimation, as a reference to the experiments, is indeed another option. Recently, computational material techniques have been developed to perform an ab initio study on materials in extreme conditions Here, we perform an exhaustive study of metallic hydrogen at 495 GPa. Our fully firstprinciples calculations shed light into its electronic, optical, mechanical and thermal properties. First we focus on ground-and excited-state properties such as electronic band structure, dielectric function and plasma frequency. Then, mechanical properties including elastic anisotropy and sound velocity are investigated. After that, we discuss the lattice vibrational properties as well as lattice anharmonicity. Finally we study the phonon transport properties of metallic hydrogen. Our results provide clear means of characterizing metallic hydrogen via these distinct features, strongly calling for experimental verifications. We start by structural optimization using the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) based on density functional theory (DFT) Moreover, the electron-hole pairs are weakened by the screening of the electronic system. Therefore, self-energy, excitonic, and other many-electron interaction effects may strongly influence the excited-state properties of metallic hydrogen Subsequent to the standard-DFT results, self-consistent GW 0 corrections are undertaken The Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) is carried out on top of GW 0 calculation with the Tamm-Dancoff approximation To evaluate the mechanical stability of I4 1 /amd hydrogen at 495 GPa, we calculate the elastic tensor coefficients of the primitive cell including ionic relaxations using the finite differences method The calculated elastic constants of metallic hydrogen satisfy the corresponding Born stability criteria, indicating the I4 1 /amd phase is mechanically stable. The bulk modulus B describes the material's response to uniform hydrostatic pressure. For tetragonal structure, the Voigt and Reuss methods are used to evaluate B 39-41 The shear modulus G the material's response to shear stress, and can be given by The Hill method calculations are as follows: The calculated bulk modulus and shear modulus are shown in Table The B/G ratio measures the malleability of materials. A high value represents ductility, while a low value is associated with brittleness. The critical value separating ductile and brittle materials is approximately 1.75 The Young's modulus can be evatulated from B H and G H 40 and the Poisson's ratio is The calculated Young's modulus and Poisson's ratios are present in Table Young's modulus is a mechanical property of linear elastic solid materials, and measures the stiffness of a solid material. A material with a higher Young's modulus is stiffer, which needs more force to deform compared to a soft material. The high Young's modulus indicates that metallic hydrogen is a stiff material. The Poisson's ratio describes the response in the direction orthogonal to uniaxial strain. Poisson's ratio close to 0 indicates very little lateral expansion when compressed, while a Poisson's ratio of exactly 0.5 represents a perfectly incompressible material deformed elastically at small strains. For I4 1 /amd hydrogen, a Poisson's ratio of 0.39 suggests it is less compressible. In most single crystals, the elastic response is usually anisotropic. Elastic anisotropy exhibits a different bonding character in different directions and is important in diverse applications such as phase transformations, dislocation dynamics. The universal anisotropy index, which represents a universal measure to quantify the single crystal elastic anisotropy, is defined as 40,42 A U is identically zero for locally isotropic single crystals. The departure of A U from zero defines the extent of single crystal anisotropy. Another way implies the estimation in compressibility and shear A value of zero denotes elastic isotropy and a value of 100% represents the largest anisotropy. The calculated anisotropy indexes are obtained in Table According to universal anisotropy index A U , the average elastic anisotropy is more than two times higher than Li The sound velocity is determined by the symmetry of the crystal and the propagation direction. The tetragonal symmetry dictates that pure transverse and longitudinal modes can only exist for [100], [001] and [110] directions. In all other directions the propagating waves are either quasitransverse or quasi-longitudinal. In the principal directions the acoustic velocities can be simply written as For [001] direction: The calculated sound velocities are presented in Table where h is the Planck constant, k B is the Boltzmann constant, N is the number of atoms in the cell, V is the volume of the unit cell, and v s is the average sound velocity given by The average sound velocity in crystals can be determined from B and G 41 , The calculated sound velocities and Debye temperature are shown in Table The speed of sound can be used to measure the speed of phonons propagating through the lattice. The ultrahigh longitudinal sound velocity of metallic hydrogen indicates high phonon velocity. The Debye temperature measures the temperature above which all modes begin to be excited The Born-Huang mechanical stability criteria provide a necessary condition for the dynamical stability, but not a sufficient one The harmonic interatomic force constants are obtained using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) within a supercell approach The phonon dispersion and thermodynamical properties are calculated from the interatomic force constants using the PHONOPY code As shown in Figure For light elements such as hydrogen, phonons play an important role in determining the thermodynamical properties of crystals both at 0 K and at finite temperatures where E tot is the total energy of the crystal, is the reduced Planck constant, ω q j is the phonon frequency of the j-th branch with wave vector q, T is the temperature, and the summation term is the Helmholtz free energy for phonons The calculated zero point energy of I4 1 /amd hydrogen at 495 GPa is 0.295 eV/atom, which is the Helmholtz free energies of phonons at 0 K. Temperature is also an important thermodynamic variable for determining the stability of materials. The Helmholtz free energies F as a function of temperature are shown in Figure From the Helmholtz free energy, the other thermodynamical behavior can be deduced The calculated entropies for the four structures as a function of temperature are shown in Fig. The difference between the entropies of different phases can be used to determine the relative stability The isometric heat capacity can be calculated as The calculated heat capacities per atom are shown in Figure Accurate simulation of anharmonic properties such as thermomechanics and thermal expansion is important for understanding thermal behaviours in solids and their realistic applications. The anharmonic properties can be derived from the volume dependences of phonon dispersion using the quasiharmonic approximation method Gibbs free energy G at given temperature T and pressure p is obtained from Helmholtz free energy F via finding a minimum value by changing volume V where F is the sum of electronic internal energy and phonon Helmholtz free energy. The calculated G is depicted in Figure The calculated isothermal bulk modulus is present in Figure The Grüneisen parameter γ describes the effect of thermal expansion on vibrational properties, and provides information on the anharmonic interactions. A larger Grüuneisen parameter indicates stronger anharmonic vibrations. As shown in Figure The volume thermal expansion coefficient β can be calculated from the Grüneisen parameter 53 Another approach is to obtain β from the calculated equilibrium volumes V at temperature T As shown in Figure The lattice thermal conductivity κ can be calculated using the self-consistent iterative approach where C q j is the heat capacity per mode, τ qj is the mode relaxation time, and v α qj is the group velocity along α direction, respectively. The lattice dynamical properties C q j and v α qj in Eq. ( The phonon scattering depends on two factors: the number of channels available for a phonon to get scattered, and the strength of each scattering channel. The former factor is determined by whether there exist three phonon groups that can satisfy both energy and quasi-momentum conservations. The latter factor depends on the anharmonicity of a phonon mode, which is described by the mode Grüneisen parameter. The mode Grüneisen parameters provide information about anharmonic interactions, and can be calculated directly from the anharmonic interatomic force constants. Figure The thermal conductivity for I4 1 /amd hydrogen at 495 GPa at 300 K are higher than 170 W/mK along the x and z directions, as listed in Table The intrinsic lattice thermal conductivity κ of I4 1 /amd hydrogen at 495 GPa is present in where purely experimental approaches are impractical, and pave way for potential applications of metallic hydrogen at extremely high pressure and high temperature. Grant No. 2013CBA01505. C 11 (GPa) C 33 (GPa) C 44 (GPa) C 66 (GPa) C 12 (GPa) C 13 (GPa)