We show that the presence of Majorana zero modes (2D), and chiral-dispersing Majorana modes (3D), in the vortex cores of superconductors are neither sufficient nor necessary conditions for one to conclude the superconductivity is topologically non-trivial. We discuss the relevance of this result to the proximity-induced superconductivity, in the presence of magnetic field, on the surface of topological insulators. In their pioneer work In the seminal work Ref. In the literature, the existence of vortex Majorana zero modes is commonly taken as the hallmark of topologically non-trivial superconductivity. In this work, we reexamine the validity of this association. We conclude that vortex Majorana zero mode is neither a sufficient nor a necessary condition for having topological superconductivity. The bulk and defect classification Our result is based on the bulk The symmetry groups given in the fourth column of table I are grouped into symmetry classes each labeled by either a mod 8 (the real class) or a mod 2 (the complex class) integer p in the first column of the table. For our purpose, it is sufficient to concentrate on symmetries generated by Q, T , Ĉ. They denote, respectively, the U The generic Hamiltonian classified by table I has the form Here χ(x) is a q-component Majorana fermion field, where q is the number of spin and orbital degrees of freedom in the problem. In the following we shall refer to the internal space spanned by the spin and orbital degrees of freedom as the "mode space" The {φ α |α = 1, ..., m} in Eq. ( The abelian groups given in the third column of table I are the zero th homotopy group of the classifying space The number of rows in y direction, ny, is 80. The φ1,2 used to generate this plot are φ1 = 0.5 cos θ and φ2 = 0.5 sin θ we have checked that for any angle (the figure shows when θ = π/8 there is no gapless edge mode signifying the bulk are trivial superconductors. R p , i.e., π 0 (R p ). The number of elements in such group is equal to the number of disconnected mass manifolds, each of which corresponds to an equivalent class of topological phases. In general π 0 (R p ) depends on n, what listed is the "stabilized" result, namely π 0 (R p ) in the limit n tends to infinity. (Note that as n → ∞ so do q and m.) To find the bulk classification one first locates the appropriate symmetry class p. For example, if the problem has time reversal ( T 2 = -1) and charge conservation ( Q) symmetries we denote the symmetry group as G -(Q, T ) (see the caption of table I for the explanation of the symbol). The symmetry class is p = 4. Next, we find the classifying space for a given space dimension d. The result (proof not given) is R p-d (for d = 0 it is R p as expected). Thus for the symmetry group G -(Q, T ) and d = 3 the classifying space is R 1 , for which the bulk classification is π 0 (R 1 ) = Z 2 . This means there are two inequivalent classes of fully gapped free fermion phases. Phases within the same class can go into each other without closing the energy gap or breaking the symmetries. These classes are represented by the elements of Z 2 : 0 stands for the trivial class (phases in this class do not have gapless boundaries) and 1 stands for the non-trivial class (phases in this class possess gapless boundary excitations). The group operation of Z 2 corresponds to the "stacking" of different phases on top of each other. This means tensoring the mode spaces and turning on all symmetry allowed local interactions between the corresponding spin and orbital degrees of freedom. For example, 1 + 1 = 0 means when two non-trivial phases are stacked together the result is a trivial phase, a phase with no gapless boundary. Defects are singularities in the free fermion Hamiltonian. For example, a vortex is a point defect in the BdG Hamiltonian of a superconductor. It is important to remember that in finding out the defect classification Armed with table I we conclude that 2D superconductor with T 2 = +1 symmetry (i.e. p = 1) is triv- , a vorticity +n vortex will harbor n Majorana zero modes. Similarly 3D superconductors with no symmetry (i.e. p = 2) are topologically trivial because π 0 (R 2-3 = R 7 ) = 0. However their vortex lines are classified by π 0 (R 2-3+2-1 = R 0 ) = Z, i.e., a vorticity n vortex line harbors n branches of chiral-dispersing Majorana modes in the vortex core. This proves that there can exist superconductors which have topologically trivial bulk, but in the cores of their vortices there are Majorana zero modes (2D) or branches of chiral-dispersing Majorana modes (3D). However since the classification results of table I are meant for the limit where the n(hence q) → ∞, it is important to check whether the statements made in the last paragraph hold for finite q, i.e., for systems that might exist in experiments. To do so we need to construct explicit models with a finite number of spin and orbital degrees of freedom. An example in 2D Let's focus on the symmetry class p = 1. Because we are interested in superconductors (where Q is not a good symmetry) there are only two symmetry groups: 1) G + (T ) (T 2 = +1 only), and 2) . For symmetry group (2), C commutes with the Hamiltonian and T , so it can be first diagonalized. After doing so the problem decouples into two sectors with ±1 eigenvalue for C. Therefore we can proceed to analyze each eigen sector of C and the problem reduces to symmetry group (1), i.e., T 2 = +1 only. For symmetry class p = 1 in two dimensions it can be shown that q 0 = 4, and the time reversal matrix is given by T = . (Here we abbreviate the Kronecker product of two matrices each equal to = iσ y as .) Hence a 4 × 4 Hamiltonian can be written down. In continuum space such a Hamiltonian read A lattice version of this Hamiltonian is given by Eq. ( Therefore the mass manifold is a circle. This is consistent with the classification table since the classifying space is Since the classifying space consists of only one disconnected mass manifold the classification is trivial, i.e., there are only topological trivial phases. To check whether the bulk superconductor given by Eq. (2) or Eq. ( To check whether the vortices harbor Majorana zero modes we use the following order parameters where (x 0 , y 0 ) and (x 1 , y 1 ) are the the centers of a pair of ±n v vortices. In Fig. The lattice version of this Hamiltonian is given by Eq. ( In Fig. Here the boundary conditions are open in x, ŷ and periodic in ẑ. A pair of chiral-dispersing gapless Majorana modes are present, with the up/down moving branch localized on the vortex/antivortex, respectively. Again, we have a trivial superconductor harboring non-trivial chiral Majorana modes in the vortex cores ! Experimental relevance The surface Dirac cone of a 3D topological insulator (such as Bi 2 Se 3 ) is protected by the T 2 = -1 and the Q symmetries. After the proximity effect induces superconductivity and the application of magnetic field (to induce vortices) the T symmetry is also broken. Under such condition the symmetry class is p = 2 (no symmetry). The topological classification of the p = 2 symmetry class is Z. For the q = 4 (which applies to the surface states of 3D topological insulators) there are three topologically inequivalent phases. The mass manifolds consist of two points (which correspond to quantized anomalous Hall phases The hamiltonian associated with the circle in Fig. In Fig. Discussions and conclusion So far we have shown that the presence of vortex Majorana modes is not a sufficient condition for concluding the parent superconductor is topologically non-trivial. However is it a necessary condition? The answer is negative. The superconductor with symmetry G - --(T, C) in the symmetry class p = 4 is an example. In 2D the classifying space is given by R The above results lead us to conclude that the presence of vortex Majorana zero mode (2D) or chiral-dispersing Majorana modes (3D) in the vortex core of superconductors are neither sufficient nor necessary condition for concluding the superconductivity being topological. Of course, this conclusion does not affect the novelty of the Majorana modes and their possible applications. In real space, the Hamiltonian is In the presence of vortices the lattice Hamiltonian we diagonalized to obtain Fig. where φ 1,2 (x i ) are given by Eq. ( The low energy effective Hamiltonian is where By going to the polar coordinate the Hamiltonian becomes It is straightforward to check that H is invariant under rotation by angle φ, namely R(φ)HR -1 (φ) = H, where The two terms are the orbital and spin angular momentum, respectively. The eigenfunctions of Ĵ has the form e ρσ e imθ with eigenvalues m -1 2 (n v ρ -σ). Here e ρσ is a four-component spinor with eigenvalues ρ, σ = ±1 under Y I, IY respectively. Their explicit forms are We expand χ(r.θ) in eigenfunctions of Ĵ as χ α (r, θ) = (e στ ) α e imθ γ στ m (r) and substitute into where l = j + 1+nv 2 and Note that γ's are complex fermions operators. Since χ † = χ and e * στ = e -σ-τ , we deduce γ † στ m = γ -σ-τ -m . Therefore Γ * j = XXΓ -j . Also a useful identity is from which it can be shown that 2πrdrΓ † j (r)D j Γ j (r) = 2πrdrΓ † -j (r)D -j Γ -j (r). It turns out a normalizable zero mode solution exists πr δ(r -r ), this implies D 0 f = 0. The zero mode solution is f = e -∆0r (i, 0, 0, -i). The phase is chosen such that ξ * = ξ. Note the Y Y in the χ basis is diag(1, -1, -1, 1) = ZZ in the Γ basis. It is also readily seen that (ZZ)f = +f . For n v = -1, the zero mode solution is f = e -∆0r (0, 1, 1, 0). It is seen that (ZZ)f = -f . The 3D version of Eq. ( The 3D version of Eq. ( and the 3D version of Eq. ( where φ 1,2 (x i ) are given by Eq. ( In the following we will show that in the interface between superconductivity and ferromagnetism, there is a chiral majorana mode. We show this by two methods: first by analytically solving the low energy effective Hamiltonian in continuum, and second by numerically diagonalize the corresponding lattice Hamiltonian. The low energy effective Hamiltonians for the 2D superconductivity and quantized anomalous Hall phases are given respectively by: Assume a configuration where for x < 0, the system is in the ferromagnetic phase with uniform φ 3 , whereas for x ≥ 0, the system is in the superconducting phase with uniform φ 1 , φ 2 . Furthermore, we may perform a local orthogonal transformation without affecting the kinetic terms and the ferromagnetic term, such that φ 1 = 0 and φ 2 = φ > 0. So It is seen that ZI commutes with the hamiltonian and the Hilbert space is decomposed into two sectors with eigenvalues ±1 under ZI. The difference between the two sectors is that the sign of the φ term changes. Without loss of generality we may assume φ 3 > 0. Then the Hamiltonian in the ZI = -1 sector reads where we assumed f (x, y) = e ik2y g(x) by translation invariance along ŷ. The solution is which is normalizable in the X = -1 sector and when E = -k 2 . All solutions in the other sectors are not normalizable or continuous at x = 0. Thus there is only one chiral majorana mode in the interface. The corresponding lattice versions of (18) are We may perform an exact diagonalization of the single body Hamiltonian defined on a cylinder geometry (Fig We observe two counter propagating majorana modes in the single body spectrum. We plotted the corresponding wavefunctions and find that the left-moving/right-moving chiral majorana modes are respectively localized on the upper/lower interface between the superconducting and ferromagnetic regions. The result still holds when a chemical potential term ∆H = -μχ T Qχ with Q = Y I is added to the Hamiltonians. See Fig In Fig. 