We report a theoretical study on the phase transition between superconducting states with and without spontaneous surface current. The phase transition takes place due to the formation of surface Andreev bound states in unconventional superconductors. Based on the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity, we examine the influence of atomic-scale surface roughness on the surface phase transition temperature Ts. To describe the surface effect, the boundary condition for the quasiclassical Green's function is parameterized in terms of specularity (the specular reflection probability in the normal state at the Fermi level). This boundary condition allows systematic study of the surface effect ranging from the specular limit to the diffuse limit. We show that diffuse quasiparticle scattering at a rough surface causes substantial reduction of Ts in the d-wave pairing state of high-Tc cuprate superconductors. We also consider a p-wave pairing state in which Andreev bound states similar to those in the d-wave state are generated. In contrast to the d-wave case, Ts in the p-wave state is insensitive to the specularity. This is because the Andreev bound states in the p-wave superconductor are robust against diffuse scattering, as implied from symmetry consideration for odd-frequency Cooper pairs induced at the surface; the p-wave state has odd-frequency pairs with s-wave symmetry, while the d-wave state does not. Theoretical studies of the d-wave pairing state in high-T c cuprate superconductors have predicted a surface state that carries a spontaneous surface current and locally breaks time-reversal symmetry T . The authors of Ref. 1 demonstrated that a pairing state with T -breaking symmetry such as d + is is stabilized near the surface by a subdominant pairing interaction and this surface state with broken T generates a spontaneous current. The spontaneous surface current was later shown to occur also in the absence of subdominant interactions 2 . The origin of the local symmetry breaking lies in the existence of Andreev bound states (ABSs) that form, in the presence of T , a flat band at zero energy (Fermi level) In this paper, we are concerned with the surface phase transition between the SC states with and without the spontaneous surface current. In general, the surface physics sensitively depends on the nature of the boundary condition. For example, surface roughness causes significant modification of the surface density of states (SDOS) in superconductors and superfluids We consider not only the d-wave state but also a p-wave (polar) state (Fig. Our calculations are based on the quasiclassical theory of superconductivity The quasiclassical theory is formulated in terms of a Green's function ĝ(r, p, ǫ), which is a 4 × 4 matrix in Nambu space. Here, r is the real-space position vector, p a unit vector to specify the Fermi-surface position, and ǫ a complex energy variable. The four-dimensional Nambu space is spanned by spin and particle-hole degrees of freedom. From symmetry consideration, the quasiclassical Green's function ĝ is found to have the matrix structure where the elements are 2 × 2 matrices in spin space. The spatial evolution of ĝ is governed by the Eilenberger equation Surface or Semi-infinite superconductor. The surface is located at y = 0 and a quasi-two-dimensional superconductor occupies the y > 0 space. The superconductor is in the dxy-wave (left) or py-wave (right) pairing states. supplemented by the normalization condition ĝ2 (r, p, ǫ) = -1 and appropriate boundary conditions depending on the geometry of system. The gradient term on the left-hand side of Eq. ( is the Nambu-space gap matrix and ρ3 is the third Pauli matrix in particle-hole space. In superconductors with a spontaneous surface current, a magnetic field B(r) = ∇ r × A(r) is induced near the surface. The currentcarrying state can be treated by replacing ǫ in Eq. ( where Q(r) = -(2e/c )A(r) with e (e < 0) being the electron charge and c the speed of light. The magnetic field B(r) is related to the current density J(r) by Maxwell's equation The gap matrix ∆(r, p) and the current density J(r) can be determined from ĝ(r, p, ǫ) on the imaginary axis of the complex ǫ plane, i.e., ĝ(r, p, iǫ n ) at the Matsubara energies ǫ n = (2n + 1)π/β with n = 0, ±1, ±2, • • • , and β = 1/k B T being the inverse temperature. The corresponding equations are where N (0) is the density of states (per spin) in the normal state at the Fermi level and V p p′ the pairing interaction. The notation denotes the average over the Fermi surface. The prime on the sum in Eq. ( where δ is an infinitesimal positive constant defining the retarded Green's function. In the actual calculation of the quasiclassical Green's function, we used the Riccati parameterization method with D(r, p, ǫ) obeying the Riccati-type differential equation We note again that ǫ in Eq. ( We apply the quasiclassical theory to a semi-infinite geometry as depicted in Fig. where e i is the unit vectors along the i-axis of real-space coordinate. The above SC system is assumed to be in d xy -wave or p y -wave states with the gap matrix For the d xy -wave state, ζ(p) = 2 √ 2 px py and s σ = iσ 2 . For the p y -wave state, ζ(p) = √ 2 py and s σ = s • σiσ 2 . Here, σ = (σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 ) is the Pauli matrix and s is a unit vector in spin space. Because our model system has rotational symmetry in spin space, the direction of s may be chosen arbitrarily. The basis function ζ(p) is normalized as ζ 2 (p) p = 1. The single-component SC states can be characterized by the pairing interaction of the form V p p′ = V ζ(p)ζ(p ′ ). The interaction parameter V is related to the transition temperature T c between the normal and bulk-SC states by where ǫ c denotes the cutoff energy for the Matsubara sum. For numerical calculation of Q x (y), B z (y), and J x (y), we introduce the dimensionless quantities where is the London penetration depth at T = 0. The dimensionless fields are determined from Maxwell's equations along with j x (y) obtained from Eq. ( The spontaneous surface current appears at low temperatures after a second-order phase transition from the conventional T -preserving SC state. To demonstrate the surface phase transition in the d xy superconductor, we plot in Fig. where the C i 's are fitting parameters and t = T /T c is the reduced temperature. The numerical data are well fitted by Eq. ( To study the rough surface effect on T s /T c in more detail, we solved the linearized Maxwell's equations numerically The left-hand side corresponds to the linear response of -j x (y) to q x (y). The kernel K(y, y ′ ) can be obtained by expanding the quasiclassical Green's function g to linear order in q x (y) and substituting the linear deviation into Eq. ( where q i = q x (ih) with i being an integer. Evaluating the y ′ integral in Eq. ( where K ij = hK(ih, jh) and μ = λ 2 0 /h 2 . This set of equations can be cast into the form of the generalized eigenvalue equation A q = μB q with A being a real symmetric matrix and B being a positive-definite real symmetric matrix. Using the GNU Scientific Library, we solved it to obtain the eigenvalue μ at a given t = T /T c (we performed the calculations down to t = 0.01). The resulting μ-t relation gives T s /T c as a function of λ 0 /ξ 0 . From the numerical calculation, we found that the maximum eigenvalue μ max reproduces T s /T c determined from the full (nonlinear) Maxwell's equation (Fig. In Fig. which can be applied to strong type-II d xy -wave and p ywave superconductors with R = 1.0. When R = 1.0, the two superconductors have almost the same T s /T c . However, the rough surface effect on T s /T c is quite different between the two states. Diffuse surface scattering results in a substantial reduction of T s /T c in the d xy -wave case. On the other hand, T s /T c in the p y -wave state is insensitive to surface roughness. This marked difference can be understood qualitatively by observing SDOS in the absence of surface current. In Fig. In the diffuse limit, n surf (0) is suppressed to unity (then SDOS in the whole energy region coincides with that of the normal state against diffuse scattering The robustness of the midgap SDOS is closely related to the symmetry of odd-frequency Cooper pairing. As has been shown in the studies of boundary effects in superconductors and superfluids, ABSs appear accompanied by odd-frequency pairs (for a review, see Ref. 34). Moreover, there is a relationship between the midgap density of states and the odd-frequency pair amplitude, which states the equivalence between them We have examined numerically the influence of surface roughness on the instability temperature T s toward the appearance of a spontaneous surface current in unconventional superconductors. This surface phase transition is driven by midgap Andreev bound states such as formed in the d-wave pairing state of high-T c cuprate superconductors We have compared the result of T s /T c for the d-wave state to that for the p-wave polar state in which the gap function has a momentum-direction dependence In the present work, we have assumed that the spontaneous surface current J(r) depends only on the coordinate perpendicular to the surface. This assumption excludes the possibility of a spontaneously-induced vortex chain structure, which has recently been predicted to appear along the surface of the high-T c cuprates The boundary condition for the coherence function is given as where C 2×2 is an arbitrary spin-space matrix. The equivalence between the boundary conditions (B2) and (B9) can be confirmed in the following way. Using the symmetry relations (A9), (B5), and (B6), one can convert Eq. (B9) into the form where C ′ 2×2 is again an arbitrary spin-space matrix. Substituting the above two relations for the coherence function into Eq. (A8), we obtain Eq. (B2). In the RSM theory, the nature of the boundary condition is specified by η where R is a momentum-independent parameter. Physically, R corresponds to the surface specularity, It is obvious that the specular surface corresponds to R = 1. The diffuse limit, where surface scattering occurs in any possible direction with equal probability 1/ p 1, is achieved for R = 0. It follows that the above oneparameter model for η When the boundary condition is parameterized with Eq. (B10), γp (ǫ) is independent of p and is given by Finally, we note that the RSM theory in the diffuse limit gives the same boundary condition obtained from Ovchinnikov's rough surface model The second equality holds because ĝ2 0 (ǫ) = -1. Equation (B21) coincides with the boundary condition derived by Vorontsov and Sauls 19 using Ovchinnikov's rough surface model.