We report the 207 Pb nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements on polycrystalline sample of PbTaSe 2 with noncentrosymmetric crystal structure and topological electronic band. The nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 shows a suppressed coherence peak below the superconducting transition temperature T c = 4.05 K and decreases as an exponential function of temperature. The penetration depth derived from the NMR spectrum is almost temperature independent below T = 0.7 T c . The Knight shift K decreases below T c . These results suggest spin-singlet superconductivity with a fully-opened gap 2∆ = 3.5 k B T c in PbTaSe 2 . In superconductors with an inversion center in the crystal structure, either spin-singlet even-parity or spin-triplet odd-parity superconducting state is realized. However, if the spatial inversion symmetry is broken, parity is no longer a conserved quantum number, then a spin-singlet and spin-triplet mixed superconducting state becomes possible. In a noncentrosymmetric (NCS) system, an antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (ASOC) interaction is induced and the parity-mixing extent is determined by the strength of the ASOC Recently, studies of NCS materials have entered a new stage for the topological aspects of the superconductivity PbTaSe 2 has a layered hexagonal unit cell with the space group of P 6m2. Although the compound has been known since 1980 Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements data showed the existence of topological nodal lines near the Fermi level In this paper, we report 207 Pb nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements of polycrystalline sample of PbTaSe 2 . In the temperature dependence of spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 , we find a suppressed coherence peak just below T c , and 1/T 1 decreases exponentially at low temperatures. The penetration depth derived from the linewidth of the NMR spectrum shows a temperature-independent behavior below T =0.7 T c . The Knight shift decrease below T c . These results are consistent with a superconducting state with a full gap and spin-singlet symmetry. Polycrystalline sample of PbTaSe 2 was prepared by the solid-state reaction method using a sealed evacuated quarts tube. Elemental starting materials of Pb (99.9999% purity), Ta (99.9%), and Se (99.999%) with a stoichiometric ratio were placed in a quarts tube, sealed under vacuum, and heated in 800 o C for one week. The melted sample was crashed into powder for X-ray diffraction (XRD) and NMR measurement. XRD measurement are performed with Cu K α radiation at room temperature. The T c was determined by measuring the inductance of the in situ NMR coil. NMR measurements were carried out by using a phase-coherent spectrometer. The 207 Pb-NMR spectra were obtained by the fast Fourier transform of the spin-echo obtained with a standard π/2 -τ -π sequence. The Knight shift K was calculated using nuclear gyrometric ratio γ N = 8.874 MHz/T for 207 Pb. In order to minimize the reduction of T c by the applied magnetic field, measurements were performed at a small field of H 0 = 0.19 T. The T 1 was measured by using a single saturating pulse, and determined by fitting the recovery curve of the nuclear magnetization to a single exponential function: , where M 0 is the nuclear magnetization in the thermal equilibrium and M (t) is the nuclear magnetization at a time t after the saturating pulse. The recovery curve was well fitted with a unique T 1 component for all temperature range. magnetic field H = 0.19 T, respectively. The T c for zero magnetic field is 4.05 K, which is higher than 3.7 -3.9 K reported previously Figure where 1/T 1N is the relaxation rate in the normal state, N S (E) is the superconducting density of states (DOS), and f (E) is the Fermi distribution function. C = 1 + ∆ 2 EE is the coherence factor with ∆ being the superconducting gap. To perform the calculation of eq. 1, we follow Hebel to convolute N S (E) with a broadening function B(E) 207 Pb (I = 1/2) has no electric quadrupole moment, so the effect of the electric quadrupole interaction is also excluded. At the moment, an anisotropic superconducting gap or the multi-band electronic structure is likely to be responsible for the suppressed coherence peak in the case of s-wave symmetry. Indeed, the multi-gap superconductivity is suggested from the thermal conductivity and the upper critical field measurements in Refs. 34 and 40. In any case, the exponential decay of 1/T 1 suggests a fully opened gap. The temperature dependence of the penetration depth derived from the NMR spectra supports the conclusion. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) as a function of temperature is plotted in Fig. Here, γ n is the gyromagnetic ratio for a nucleus, φ 0 = 2h/e = 2.07 × 10 -7 Oe/cm 2 is the quantized magnetic flux. Our result shows that the penetration depth is T -independent below T =0.7 T c , indicating a full gap superconducting state. If there are nodes in the superconducting gap function, λ(T ) will show a T -linear temperature dependence at low temperatures. For a fully gapped superconductor, the temperature dependence of λ for T /T c < 0.5 is described as following The solid line below T c in Fig. When the Knight shift is anisotropic, the observed spectrum in the polycrystalline sample will be broadened. In calculating λ from the FWHM, such broadening was not taken into account. At any rate, the temperature dependence of λ together with the result of 1/T 1 are consistent with recent the specific heat and the London penetration depth measurement Figure where K orb is the contribution due to orbital susceptibility which is T -independent, A hf is the hyperfine coupling constant, χ s is the spin susceptibility, and K dia is contribution from diamagnetism in the vortex state. The K dia is calculated by using following equation for diamagnetic field H dia here, β is 0.38 for triangular lattice of vortex, ξ is the coherence length, λ is the London penetration depth. For ξ and λ, the values obtained from the measurement of H c2 and the FWHM were used. As a result, K dia was calculated to be -0.05 % at most. Even if K dia is taken into consideration, the Knight shift decreases substantially below T c , which is consistent with the spin-singlet Cooper pairing. The large finite value of K at the lowest temperature is probably due to K orb . Further work is needed to determine K orb in the future. In addition, in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling, spin-orbit scattering can also cause a large spin susceptibility in the superconducting state In summary, a polycrystalline sample of noncentrosymmetric superconductor PbTaSe 2 was investigated by using 207 Pb-NMR method. We find that the spin-lattice relaxation rate 1/T 1 exhibits an exponential behavior with respect to temperature, with a suppressed coherence peak just below T c , which suggests a fully opened gap. The temperature variation of the penetration depth derived from the NMR spectrum supports this conclusion. The spin susceptibility measured by the Knight shift decreases below T c , suggesting that the Cooper pairs are in a singlet state.