The adsorption of molecules on surfaces affects the surface dipole and thus changes in the work function may be expected. The effect in change of work function is particularly strong if charge between substrate and adsorbate is involved. Here we report the deposition of a strong electron acceptor molecule, tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane C 12 F 4 N 4 (F 4 TCNQ) on a monolayer of hexagonal boron nitride nanomesh (h-BN on Rh( Electron transfer is an essential process that governs many elementary processes in physics and chemistry. For atomic or molecular adsorbates on metallic surfaces simple arguments predict on whether charge is transferred from the surface to the molecule or vice versa. The relevant quantities are the work function of the surface and on the other hand the ionisation potential or electron affinity of the atom or molecule: If the work function is larger than the ionisation potential, an electron is transferred to the metal substrate and the adsorbate charges positively. This effect is well known and e.g. used for surface ionisation of alkali metal atoms The charge transfer due to polarisation may be inferred from the induced change in the surface dipole. If the adsorbate density is known, the induced dipole may be determined from the Helmholtz equation that relates a change of the work function ∆Φ with the areal density n or coverage of the dipoles induced by the adsorbed species: where e is the elementary charge, p the induced dipole parallel to the surface normal, and 0 the vacuum permittivity. From Eq. 1 we see that the work function decreases if charge is transferred to the surface and oppositely increases if charge is transferred to the molecule. If the metal surface is covered with a single layer graphite (graphene, g) The high electron affinity of the tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane C 12 F 4 N 4 (F 4 TCNQ; see the chemical structure in Figure The electron affinity of F 4 TCNQ is 5.2 eV Here we report on F 4 TCNQ on the h-BN nanomesh on Rh(111). We have investigated the system with photoemission spectroscopy and scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) on the same preparations. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations complement the picture and come up with an unexpected prediction of structures with high adsorption energy and transfer of more than one electron onto the molecule. The substrate in this study is the h-BN nanomesh on Rh(111) Figure Figure As expected for an electron transfer to the molecules the work function increases with coverage. Fitting the data in Figure Figure The assignment of molecular orbitals is not possible at these low coverages, photon energy and emission angle. We observe, however, a shift in binding energy for the boron nitride related σ bands. The sharpest feature in the difference curve lies at the steep onset of the σ α band at 4.39 eV binding energy and it is accompanied by a sharp negative peak at 4.53 eV. This indicates a σ α band shift to lower binding energy with increasing coverage and is remarkable since the majority of the molecules must occupy the pores, as implied by the attenuation of the σ β intensity. The spectral weight near the broader σ β peak appears to shift towards higher binding energies with increasing coverage. This may be related to the decrease σ β intensity and the increase of F 4 TCNQ derived molecular orbitals at around 7 eV binding energy. In Figure Figure To better understand the experimental results, we carried out DFT calculations. Because the molecular orbitals (for example the highest occupied molecular orbital, HOMO) preserve their character in the free molecule to a large extent, in the following we refer to those orbitals as in the neutral gas-phase molecule, even whn the initial lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) gains electrons, to simplify the discussion. The DFT results confirm that the F 4 TCNQ molecules like to occupy the pore of the h-BN nanomesh. The theory predicts the work function change and the charge transfer upon adsorption of one mpu. In Figure In conclusion, combining controlled experimental photoemission and scanning tunneling microscopy measurements with density functional theory calculations, we demonstrate electron transfer from h-BN/Rh(111) to F 4 TCNQ. As negatively charged molecules (electron acceptors) coalesce on the surface, the work function of the system increases. Upon charging, the σ α and σ β bands of h-BN nanomesh shift towards lower and higher binding energy, respectively. The molecules occupy preferentially the pores of the h-BN/Rh(111) nanomesh, though display mobility and molecular "hopping" on the h-BN surface at room temperature. DFT results indicate that the lowest energy structure is an anionic "2-" species. Our work paves the way to tune the electronic and structural properties of two-dimensional materials by using adsorption of organic molecules. The experiments were performed in two ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) systems with base pressure of 1×10 -10 mbar. One is a variable-temperature STM (Omicron VT-STM), and the other is a user-modified Vacuum Generators ESCALAB 220 with a Mg Kα lab source at an energy of ω = 1253.6 eV, with a monochromatized He Iα ( ω = 21.2 eV) source equipped with a room-temperature STM (Park Scientific) that allows photoemission and STM measurements on the same sample Calculations were performed using the Kohn-Sham DFT formalism within the Gaussian plane wave (GPW) method 