Herein, we report an easy, straightforward, and versatile approach to build 0D/2D hybrid nanoparticle/graphene architectures by means of non-covalent chemistry and a modified Layer-by-Layer assembly. Three water soluble perylene diimides were employed to efficiently exfoliate pristine graphite into positively charged few-and multilayer graphene flakes. Further combination of these cationic building blocks with anionic zinc oxide nanoparticles led to the formation of tailor-made hybrid films via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. These supramolecular hybrid nano-structures were thoroughly characterized by UV/Vis and Raman spectroscopy, AFM as well as electron microscopy, showing outstanding long-range homogeneity and high integrity in the centimetre-scale, uniform nanometric thickness between 60 -100 nm and a close contact between the different building blocks. Due to their straightforward assembly. These architectures can be considered as promising candidates for numerous advanced applications especially in the field of energy storage and conversion. Graphene is a high performance nanomaterial, both what fundamental physical properties and practical applications is concerned. To face this challenge, we herein present the facile and versatile formation of new graphenebased hierarchical architectures by means of non-covalent chemical functionalization of pristine graphite with tailor-made PDI surfactants followed by a modified Layer-by-Layer (LbL) assembly. Based on our easy, versatile and straightforward iterative dip-coating process, we were able to achieve functional multilayered architectures by assembling 2D-positivelycharged-graphene-based building blocks with the 0D anionic ZnO-NP via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. This conjugation leads to the formation of highly integrated organicinorganic hybrid architectures exhibiting an intimate contact between their constituting building blocks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report concerning the preparation of tailormade 0D/2D NP/G hybrid nano-structures through the implementation of a modified LbLassembly procedure starting from pristine exfoliated graphite-based nanosheets. Furthermore, the use of non-covalent functionalization with cationic PDIs allowed us to precisely control the introduction of positive charges into the exfoliated carbon material without implying the disruption of the sp 2 -carbon network. Our approach is straightforward and based on ubiquitously available graphite. First of all, fresh dispersions of turbostratic graphite in bi-distilled water were prepared with the aid of cationic PDIs (1-3) by gentle magnetic stirring followed by centrifugation (Figure The synthesis protocol of the novel ester-type dendritic PDI derivative 1 is given in the experimental section and in the SI (section 1), whereas the other water soluble, amide-type cationic pyridinium terminated PDIs (PDI 2 and 3) were synthesized according to our previously published procedure. Remarkably, PDI derivative 1 proved to be the most effective agent towards the exfoliation of graphite in comparison to PDIs 2 and 3. In particular, PDI 3 was found to be the least effective dispersing agent due to its increased solubility and reduced tendency for aggregation in comparison with derivatives 1 and 2. As a matter of fact, PDI 3 possesses longer and more flexible spacer units in its periphery, which hinder a too close packing of the PDI cores due to electrostatic repulsions and translates into a lower tendency to aggregation in comparison to PDI derivatives 1 and 2. The Raman analysis of the different hybrids, measured with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm (Figure In order to acquaint for the stability of the PDI/FLG hybrids against washing in the solid state, the wafers prepared for the Raman characterization were washed by spin coating with water (1 mL) and with methanol (1 mL). After each washing step, the samples were dried and Raman characterization was performed (λ exc = 532 nm). As shown in the SI, the PDI/FLG hybrids resulted to be very stable against washing, as the characteristic Raman features of both PDI and FLG components are always present in the spectra after each washing step. This finding confirms the suitability of PDI/FLG hybrids as starting building blocks for implementation in the iterative coating-based assembly with ZnO-NP. The modified LbL assembly was performed by dip-coating a cleaned glass slide alternately into a solution of ZnO-NP in ethanol and into an aqueous dispersion of PDI (1-3)/FLG sheets. ZnO-NP of ca. 5 nm in diameter were synthesized via precipitation in ethanolic solution as previously reported by our group. The growth was stopped after 4 repetitions in order to prepare ultra-thin films which could be successfully investigated by electron microscopy. Indeed, the strong π-π stacking interactions between the PDI core and the basal plane of the extended π-carbon allotrope allowed the efficient incorporation of functionalized FLG sheets into the hybrid nanomaterial assembly. At this point, it is worth to mention that upon integration of the PDI/FLG sheets by successive coating, further re-aggregation by π-π stacking interactions In order to obtain more information about the intimate structure within the hybrid nanostructures of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG] 4 with PDI 1 or 2, Raman spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements have been carried out. Raman characterization was performed systematically in order to analyze the quality and homogeneity of the deposited material after the iterative dip-coating process. Raman maps were recorded which showed that the surface of the assembled hybrid nano-structures is highly homogeneous for, at least, areas of about 40 μm The crystalline nature of the ZnO-NP was confirmed by the HRTEM investigation, corroborating the results of the EDXS. The 5 nm size of the NP is also in good agreement with the acquired DLS data presented in the SI. Moreover, this study reveals that the assembly of the 0D NP and the non-covalent functionalized 2D FLG leads to the formation of highly homogeneous centimeter-scale thin films consisting of entangled structures with an improved interfacial contact between the different constituents in the nanometric range -a matter of utmost importance to develop new functional materials. In summary, by the exfoliation of graphite and the attachment of tailor-made cationic PDI surfactants to FLG flakes, positively charged functionalized 2D graphene-based hybrids are formed. These building blocks can easily be conjugated with anionic 0D ZnO-NP by means of a straightforward and versatile iterative dip-coating process. The full characterization of these hybrid supramolecular architectures revealed the formation of ultra-thin films with outstanding thickness, centimeter-scale homogeneity, and with an entangled structure exhibiting a close contact between the organic and inorganic building blocks. Due to their low cost and high processability, the reported [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG] n hybrid nano-architectures exhibit a interesting potential for application in the field of energy storage and conversion. Further work along this line is currently underway in our laboratories. Commercially available reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and, if not otherwise noted, used without any further purification. All analytical-reagent grade solvents were purified by distillation. Turbostratic graphite powder (serial nr. 2449.363) and sulfuric acid (98%) were purchased from VWR International Inc.; bi-distilled water from Carl Roth Inc. Synthesis and charcterization of PDI 1: 4-(tert-Butyl)-1-(2-hydroxyethyl)pyridinium bromide was synthesized according to Kuhnen-Clausen et al. The synthesis of these two derivatives was performed according to Schönamsgruber et al. Synthesis of the ZnO-NP: ZnO-NP were synthesized according to a procedure previously reported by our group. process: First of all, the glass slides were cleaned in a solution of sulfuric acid (96%) and hydrogen peroxide (2:1) for 30 minutes. Afterwards, they were rinsed with distilled water until neutrality and then dried with compressed air. For the preparation of the assemblies, a solution of ZnO-NP (1 mg/mL) in EtOH and a fresh centrifuged dispersion of PDI/FLG in bi-distilled water were employed. The immersion time was chosen of 20 minutes, adapted to previous reports from our group. The measurements were performed with an integration time of 1 s, filter D1 and 600 gr/mm gratings. For the analysis of the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG] 4 samples the hole and slit were kept half opened. DLS and Zetapotential were recorded on a Zetasizer Nano series ZEN3600 (Malvern Instrument Ltd. UK) dynamic light scattering analyser. AFM analyses were performed on the [ZnO-NP/PDI/FLG] 4 samples as prepared on the glass slides in a Veeco di 300, nanoscope IIIa equipment. Electron Microscopy: A dual-beam instrument (FEI Helios NanoLab 660) Focused Ion Beam (SEM/FIB) has been used for imaging and site-specific preparation of cross-sectional slices. After the ex-situ evaporation of two carbon threads (ca. 14 nm) a suitable area for cross-sectioning was selected. Afterwards, a layer of Pt (> 1 μm) was deposited in the SEM by electron beam, followed by deposition with the ion beam, in order to protect the area of interest during the lamella preparation. Two trenches were milled by FIB to obtain a lamella, which was transferred to an Omniprobe grid using an Easy-lift NanoManipulator and thinned with the ion beam. The final thickness of the lamella was kept below 100 nm, to allow its characterization by HRTEM. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using a CM300 UltraTWIN (Philips, Netherlands), equipped with a LaB6 filament and a nominal point resolution of 1.7 Å at the Scherzer defocus. The microscope was operated at an acceleration voltage of 300 kV. TEM images were recorded with a charged coupled device camera (TVIPS, Germany), which has an image size of 2048 × 2048 pixels. Selected analyses were performed on an aberration corrected FEI Titan Themis 3 300 TEM with a high brightness field emission gun (X-FEG) operated at 200kV. EDXS measurements were carried in a FEI Helios NanoLab 660 using a large area Oxford SDD-detector (X-Max N ). The beam energy was 3 keV allowing to probe the specific X-Ray signals of C-K (270 eV), O-K (520 eV), Zn-L (1020 eV) and Si-K (1740 eV). The integrated intensity of the respective signal was then used to construct spatially resolved maps showing the elemental distribution. Fresh solutions of PDIs 1-3 (c = 10 -5 M) were prepared in bi-distilled water and used to disperse different amounts of turbostratic graphite (c = 0.12, 1.2 and 12 mg/mL) by mild magnetic stirring for 48 h, at room temperature. Afterwards, the dispersions were let stand still for ≈ 20 h to allow the sedimentation of the un-stabilized graphite species and then centrifuged. The characterization of the supernatants by absorption spectroscopy shows clearly that efficient exfoliation of graphite could be performed only in a very well defined range of concentrations (Figure The absorption profiles of the respective 1/FLG dispersions, upon variation of the graphite content (c = 0.12, 1.2 and 12 mg/mL) by keeping constant that of the PDI (c = 10 -5 M), are plotted in Figure Figure The presence of free PDI molecules also hinders the precise determination of the attachment of the PDIs to the exfoliated graphitic substrate and therefore the efficient non-covalent functionalization in solution. As a matter of fact, their dominant absorption masks the quenched red-shifted profiles of the PDI/FLG hybrids in solution also already shown in Figure Fluorescence emission spectra of 1/FLG dispersions in pure water by varying the initial concentration of graphite (cG = 12 mg/mL, dotted line; cG = 0.12 mg/mL, dashed line; cG = 1.2 mg/mL, straight line), with PDI 1 as stabilizer (c 1 was kept constant at 10 -5 M). The existence of a preferable concentration range to allow a successful dispersion and noncovalent functionalization of the graphitic starting material was also confirmed by additional exfoliation experiments. Different dispersions were prepared by varying the concentration of PDIs 1-3 in pure aqueous solution (c = 10 -6 , 10 -5 and 10 -4 M) and keeping constant the amount of turbostratic graphite (c = 1.2 mg/mL). As shown in Figure In order to further improve the non-covalent functionalization of the FLGs, time dependent dispersion experiments were performed. Namely, a solution of 1 (c = 10 -5 M) containing turbostratic graphite (c = 1.2 mg/mL) was stirred for a certain time (6, 24, 30 and 48 h) and then immediately centrifuged avoiding the sedimentation step. The dispersions were characterized by means of absorption spectroscopy before and after centrifugation in order to determine the dispersion efficiency (DE) of the PDI surfactant and the graphene concentration in solution (cG, f). The DE value (%) was calculated by dividing the absorbance collected at 660 nm after centrifugation for that measured before. The final graphene concentration was determined by dividing the absorbance at 660 nm after centrifugation for the extinction coefficient for graphene (α660). For α660, a value of 1448 mL•mg -1 •m -1 was used, calculated as an average between those reported by Lotya et al. However, for practical reasons and due to the fact that the increase in DE between 24 h and 31 h is no more proportional to the increase of stirring time, it has been decided to employ a stirring time of 24 h followed by centrifugation to prepare the PDI-FLG dispersions needed for the iterative dip-coating experiments. Altogether, it can be summarized that the dispersion ability for the cationic PDIs employed in this study follows the order 1 > 2 > 3. As recalled from Table In section 3.1 we outlined that the best PDI/FLG ratio to determine successful dispersion and non-covalent functionalization of graphene in solution resulted to be about 0.022 (cG,i = 1.2 mg/mL with a cPDI = 10 -5 M). Here we show, through simple calculations, that by comparison between the specific surface area of the graphite (AG) and the theoretical area offered by the PDI-cores (PTCDI units) of the surfactant molecules (APTCDI) a correlation can be found to determine the conditions for optimal exfoliation/functionalization. As reported by Kozhemyakina et al. If we would like to disperse 12 mg of turbostratic graphite in 10 mL of water (cG = 1.2 mg/mL), we would obtain a value for AG of about 1.96•10 17 nm If we compare now the three values for APTCDI with that determined for AG (1.96•10 17 nm 2 ), we can see in one case (cPDI = 10 -5 M) APTCDI ≈ AG , while in the two other cases the value for APTCDI is either too high or too low with reference to AG. From our experimental results we can therefore conclude that a successful exfoliation/functionalization of graphite with PDIs can only occur when the π-surface available from graphite is comparable to that offered from the dye molecules. Instead, a too high or too low surface ratio (APTCDI/AG) results experimentally in the presence of too much free PDI molecules in solution or in the precipitation of all carbon material, respectively. We are conscious that our calculations are quite simplified as they do not take into account aggregation phenomena in solution, which play indeed a key role in determining the true efficiency of the PDI dyes with respect to successful exfoliation/functionalization of graphene. Nevertheless, they offer a first qualitative indication to rationally determine suitable πsurfactant/graphite ratios to allow the dispersion of graphite material in solution. C, CH 2 ), 38.03 (6 C, C, q), 39.56 (2 C, CH 2 ), 60.93 (2 C, C, t), 64.35 (6 C, CH 2 ), 68.87 (6 C, CH 2 ),