Quasiparticle excitations beyond Dirac-Weyl-Majorana classification can appear in lattice systems due to the less symmetry constraint compared with Poincaré symmetry in high energy physics. In particular, fermions with an integer spin can appear in a variety of lattices. Here, we show that two-dimensional spin-1 fermion may coexist with Dirac fermions in the triangular kagome lattice (TKL). We derive a four-band effective model that hosts both types of fermions. The effective model can be used to study the interplay between spin-1 and spin-1/2 fermions. As an example, using this model we show that spin-nonconserving Klein tunneling can occur in the TKL, which has the transmission coefficient T = 1 for normal incidence. Our findings pave a way to the study of the interaction and interplay between different types of fermions in lattice systems. Introduction.-Fermionic quasiparticles which have no counterpart in particle physics can emerge in condensed matter systems Fermions with higher spin could also appear in two dimensional (2D) lattices, which has been shown in a variety of cases To study the interplay between different types of fermions which can be quite interesting, systems with their coexistence is highly desired. Such coexistence has been found in several 3D systems. For example, it has been shown that Weyl fermions coexist with triple point fermions in ZrTe In this work, we investigate the fermionic quasiparticle excitations in the 2D triangular kagome lattice (TKL). While the magnetism on the TKL has been studied both experimentally Dirac fermion and spin-1 fermion on the TKL.-A schematic of the TKL is shown in Fig. We use k • p method to find the effective Hamiltonian near the threefold degeneracy. The tight-binding Hamiltonian can be written as H = k∈B.Z. Ψ † (k)H(k)Ψ(k) where Ψ(k) is a nine-component spinor. First we diagonalize H(k) at Γ point, and find the eigenenergies E i (0) in ascending order from the lowest to the highest, with the associated wave functions |ψ i (0) . Then we expand H(k) around Γ point to the first order of k, and the effective Hamiltonian near the triple degeneracy H 3 (k) has elements [H 3 (k)] ij = ψ i-5 (0)|H(k)|ψ j-5 (0) with i, j = 6, 7, 8. An arbitrarily chosen set of orthogonal basis results in H 3 (k) = + i=x,y;j=x,y,z k i v ij S j , where we choose three out of the eight Gell-Mann matrices as the spin-1 matrices which satisfy the angular momentum algebra [S i , S j ] = i ijk S k where ijk is the Levi-Civita symbol. We can choose a specific set of basis so that the velocity matrix has elements v ij = vδ ij , and then the effective Hamiltonian is simply This Hamiltonian describes a 2D spin-1 fermion, with the eigenenergies , ± v k 2 x + k 2 y . The spin-1 spectrum is shown in blue in Fig. Near the double degeneracy at K point, we use the same method to find the effective Hamiltonian H K (δk) = 1 + v D δk • σ, where δk is the momentum deviation from K, and σ i 's are Pauli matrices. So this is a Dirac point in 2D. The Hamiltonian near the other Dirac point K is related to H K by the time-reversal operation Θ = K where K is the complex conjugation, H K (δk) = 1v D δk • σ * . The spectrum of the Dirac Hamiltonian is shown in red in Fig. We have therefore shown that spin-1 fermion and spin-1/2 Dirac fermion could coexist on the TKL if the ratio of t /t is fine tuned to a critical value (t c ≈ 0.579t). Away from the critical value, a "mass" term of the form appears and opens a gap between one dispersive band and the band touching. Depending on the sign of ∆, it could be either the case as in Fig. Effective model with both Dirac and spin-1 fermions.-An effective model which hosts different types of fermions is highly desired to study their interplay. Here, we derive a four-band effective model with both Dirac fermions and spin-1 fermion from the tight-binding Hamiltonian of the TKL. Note that an effective model including the uppermost four bands could have both types of fermions. Using the k •p method as in the above section, we find the Hamiltonian of the uppermost four bands near Γ point where k = k 2 x + k 2 y . We have kept only linear terms in the upper left 3 × 3 block, but up to quadratic terms otherwise. The reason is that we would like to derive a minimal model for the coexistence of the two types of fermions, whereas including quadratic terms in the upper left block would complicate the model. If α = 0, the band structure of H 4 is simply a spin-1 cone intersecting with a quadratic band dispersing downward (parameterized by > 0 and m > 0) along a ring. The terms linear in α gap the degeneracy of the nodal ring, leaving only discrete Dirac points, as we explain later. The four-band effective Hamiltonian can be written in a more compact form, where we have defined k ± = k x ± ik y , S ± = S x ± iS y and L ± = L x ± iL y , in which The S i and L i are generators of SO(4) group which satisfy The rotational operation is represented as e iSzθ . Under C 3 operation and time-reversal operation, the momentum and the matrices are transformed as Then it is clear that H 4 (k) is invariant under Eq.7. Although H 4 (k) has threefold rotational symmetry, the band structure is sixfold rotational invariant due to the time-reversal symmetry. We show the band structure of H 4 (k) in Fig. The full expression of the spectrum is complicated, and is devoid of a simple interpretation of the appearance of the Dirac points. A better understanding of the coexistence of spin-1 and Dirac fermions can be achieved if we treat the term linear in α in Eq.5 as a perturbation, and write the Hamiltonian in two parts: H 4 = H = -vk, with the associated wave functions Obviously, the last term opens a gap along the nodal ring except at six points, θ * = nπ/3 with n = 0, 1, ...5. Since the spectrum has sixfold rotational symmetry, we expand H 2 (k) near one of the points, θ * = 0, i.e. k = (k * , 0), and get where is, for generic parameters, the Hamiltonian of a tilted anisotropic Dirac cone. The condition for the Dirac cone to be untilted and isotropic is v x = 0 and v x = v y , which yields = 3 2 mv 2 and mα = √ 2 3 . Nevertheless, the parameters derived from the tight-binding Hamiltonian H(k) do not have to satisfy this condition, since the fourband Hamiltonian H 4 is a k • p Hamiltonian around Γ point, hence, in general, it does not capture the exact band structure around K point. Spin-nonconserving Klein tunneling.-The conventional Klein tunneling occurs when a relativistic particle is incident on a high potential barrier. It has been studied in the context of graphene The perturbed wave functions of the upper two bands are, respectively, 0) . At normal incidence, θ = 0, the wave functions on the left side and right side of the potential step are respectively. From the continuity of the wave function at x = 0, we find A = C and B = D = 0. Therefore, through the spin-nonconserving Klein tunneling, a spin-1 particle tunnels to a spin-1/2 hole state near K with the transmission coefficient T = 1. Veselago lens and transistors based on Klein tunneling in graphene have been conceived Discussion.-The (breathing) kagome lattice which has three sites in each unit cell can host spin-1 fermion or Dirac fermions, but not their coexistence Since the band structure of a lattice does not depend on the statistics of the quasiparticles under study, there also exist spin-1/2 Weyl photons and Weyl magnons as well as spin-1 photons in periodic systems. Therefore, the TKL can also act as a platform for the coexistence of spin-1 bosons and spin-1/2 bosons in 2D. Experimentally, ultracold atoms in a tunable optical TKL could be designed to study the interplay between the two types of fermions or bosons. More interesting questions based on the tight-binding model of the TKL and the effective model are awaiting further studies, such as the magnetotransport properties and the topological invariant of each band once the fermions are gapped by spin-orbit coupling. The extension to three dimensions will also be an exciting direction.