The search for unconventional superconductivity in Weyl semimetal materials is currently an exciting pursuit, since such superconducting phases could potentially be topologically nontrivial and host exotic Majorana modes. The layered material TaIrTe 4 is a newly predicted time-reversal invariant type II Weyl semimetal with minimum number of Weyl points. Here, we report the discovery of surface superconductivity in Weyl semimetal TaIrTe 4 . Our scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S) visualizes Fermi arc surface states of TaIrTe 4 that are consistent with the previous angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) results. By a systematic study based on STS at ultralow temperature, we observe uniform superconducting gaps on the sample surface. The superconductivity is further confirmed by electrical transport measurements at ultralow temperature, with an onset transition temperature (T c ) up to 1.54 K being observed. The normalized upper critical field h * (T/T c ) behavior and the stability of the superconductivity against the ferromagnet indicate that the discovered superconductivity is unconventional with the p-wave pairing. The systematic STS, thickness and angular dependent transport measurements reveal that the detected superconductivity is quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1D) and occurs in the surface states. The discovery of the surface superconductivity in TaIrTe 4 provides a new novel platform to explore topological superconductivity and Majorana modes. Weyl semimetals, which possess nodal points in the bulk and Fermi arc states in the surface, have generated considerable research interest in the recent years Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov superconductors Experimentally, superconductivity has been observed in both type I and type II Weyl semimetals, such as tip induced superconductivity on TaAs Following the first-principle calculations by K. Koeperni et al. The exotic surface states supporting the quasi-1D Fermi arcs have been observed by ARPES Fermi arcs as well as Weyl nodes in the bulk of TaIrTe 4 have been identified directly by pump-probe ARPES In this work, we perform STM and STS and electrical transport studies of the ternary compound TaIrTe 4 single crystal down to 0.06 K with a high magnetic field up to 54.5 T. The Fermi arc surface states and superconducting gap are discovered by STM and STS studies at ultralow temperatures. The detected unconventional superconductivity is further verified to only occur on the surface of TaIrTe 4 by electrical transport measurements. The observed unconventional surface superconductivity is found to exhibit quasi-1D and topologically non-trivial characteristics, which demonstrate that TaIrTe 4 is a unique candidate for topological superconductors. Single crystals of TaIrTe 4 were synthesized from excess Te flux. The crystal is needle-like morphology and grows preferentially along the [100] direction (the length direction). The width direction is along the [010] and the cleavage surface of the crystal is the (001) plane. The high structural quality of the sample was confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HRSTEM) and STM. Fig. From a zoom-in image (Fig. Quasiparticle interference (QPI) based on spectroscopic-imaging STM, has shown success in identifying the topological surface states of topological insulator where k i and k f are the initial and final wavevectors, contribute dominantly to the spatial interference pattern of the local density of states. The features in Fourier transform of dI/dV mapping correspond to the scattering vector q= k i -k f of the extremal pairs. To detect Fermi arc states in our TaIrTe 4 single crystals, STS mappings were performed at the (001) surface of TaIrTe 4 single crystals. Fig. As the energy location moves upward from 50 meV, Fermi arc partially separates out from bulk bands and completely appears at the energy of Wely nodes (82.7 meV). The mixing of Fermi arc and bulk band at lower energies will lead to the obscureness of Fermi arc imaging, which is consistent with our experimental observation. This is a direct and strong experimental evidence for the existence of the topological surface states. Fig. As the temperature increases, the dip at zero bias is reduced and the gap almost vanishes near 1.28 K. The ratio Δ(0)/k B T c (k B is the Boltzmann constant) is estimated about 19.05, which is much larger than that of weak coupling BCS superconductors and reminiscent of the possibility of topological superconductivity To further demonstrate and explore the observed superconductivity in TaIrTe 4 single crystals, transport measurements at ultralow temperature were performed at the (001) surface of TaIrTe 4 single crystals. The TaIrTe 4 single crystal samples were cleaved to a smooth and fresh surface for transport measurements. More than 10 samples are studied and all samples exhibit consistent results. Fig. which is calculated to compare with known models for s-wave superconductors (Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg theory, WHH, h*(0) ≈ 0.7 We also investigate the MR at ultrahigh pulsed magnetic field. The low proportion of resistivity drop in TaIrTe 4 indicates the tiny superconducting volume fraction, and does not support the bulk superconductivity. Our STS results show uniform superconducting gap on the surface of TaIrTe 4 . More importantly, it is found that the I c remains of same magnitude when reducing the thickness of sample 3 from 30 μm to 6 μm (see Fig. value is smaller compared with typical 2D superconductors The suppression of the superconductivity close to the terrace edge as shown in Fig. 