Sampling minimum energy grain boundary (GB) structures in the five-dimensional crystallographic phase space can provide much-needed insight into how GB crystallography affects various interfacial properties. However, the complexity and number of parameters involved often limits the extent of this exploration to a small set of interfaces. In this article, we present a fast Monte Carlo scheme for generating zero-Kelvin, low energy GB structures in the five-dimensional crystallographic phase space. The Monte Carlo trial moves include removal and insertion of atoms in the GB region, which create a diverse set of GB configurations and result in a rapid convergence to the low energy structure. We have validated the robustness of this approach by simulating over 1184 tilt, twist, and mixed character GBs in both fcc (Aluminum and Nickel) and bcc (α-Iron) metallic systems. Grain boundaries (GBs) influence a wide array of mechanical In general, for single component metallic systems, there exist nine crystallographic parameters that uniquely define the structure of a GB For developing reliable GB structure-property relationships, the lowest energy GB structures, computed at 0 K, are essential. The energy landscape and the structure of a GB with fixed crystallography (the five macroscopic parameters) depends on the microscopic DOF and the atomic density λ Monte Carlo (MC) based algorithms have been routinely utilized for finding minima in energy landscapes in a variety of complex systems in condensedmatter physics As will be discussed in the next section, the trial perturbations that facilitate the MC-based approach involve both atom removal and, more importantly, atom insertions in the GB region. These two Monte-Carlo moves change the density of the GBs and are likely the most important perturbations for sampling the energy landscape of the microscopic DOF of an interface. There have been recent studies where atom removal and insertions were utilized to compute minimum energy structures or to investigate phase transitions in GB structures. For example, in For a Monte-Carlo simulation to work in an efficient manner, it is important that the increase in energy due to the perturbations are not always too large. However, if atoms are inserted randomly, the Monte-Carlo simulations will take a long time to converge due to low acceptance rates. In this article, we introduce a geometric construction to identify voids for atom insertion in the GB region, which alleviates the large increases in energy. This technique is similar to the cavity based MC method developed for the simulation of dense fluids The MC approach, introduced in this article, is also very efficient in generating the low energy GB structures. The biggest obstacle for generating large GB databases that are well-sampled in the 5-D crystallographic phase-space is the massive number of simulations required to obtain the lowest-energy GB structure. For example, determining the lowest energy structure for a typical GB using such brute force algorithms requires anywhere between 1000 to 150 000 unique energy-minimization simulations. In this article, we also show that the proposed Monte Carlo scheme is more efficient in generating the low-energy GB structures when compared to such traditional brute-force simulations. In the following sections, we describe the Monte Carlo algorithm, the trial moves and the test cases, involving the three GB databases, in greater detail. Our Monte Carlo algorithm starts with an initial GB configuration and applies random perturbations (trial moves), which are then evaluated using a Metropolis-like criterion The trial move involving atom removal (or creation of a vacancy) is inspired by investigations of von Alfthan et al. The algorithm starts with an initial random GB configuration, which is created using a random set of microscopic DOF for the interface. The next step involves choosing one of the two trial moves stochastically (i.e., the removal and insertion moves are chosen with a probability of p rm and p in = 1 -p rm , respectively). Once the decision for removal or insertion has been made, the atom to remove or the interstitial site for atom insertion is also chosen stochastically to facilitate the possibility of generating a diverse set of GB structures. For example, to determine the GB atom to remove where E i is the energy of the i th GB atom, E • is the cohesive energy of the atom in the single crystal configuration at 0 K, N GB is the number of GB atoms, and p rm,i = 1. According to this equation, the probability of removing an atom is proportional to its excess energy. In principle, we are interested in removing an atom that lowers the GB energy. Such an atom can be determined by computing the minimum GB vacancy formation energy defined in Similarly, the sites for atom insertion are also chosen stochastically within the GB. The importance of the insertion step has been highlighted in a Cu-Al binary alloy system The potential interstitial sites for inserting an atom in the GB region are In a recent study, we showed that the interstitial voids, determined using the circumcenters of the Delaunay tetrahedra, accurately predict the sites of hydrogen segregation in certain Ni GBs (refer to Figure where r v,i is the radius of the i th void, N v is the total number of GB interstitial sites considered, and p in,i = 1. Figure , where A GB is the area of the GB in the simulation box, k B is the Boltzmann constant and T R is the material specific reference temperature. Upon acceptance of a trial perturbation, the GB energy and configuration are updated and the perturbations are repeated for the new structure. Otherwise, the perturbed structure is discarded and the trial moves are repeated. As a summary, the MC algorithm is illustrated as a flowchart in Figure To test the efficiency of this Monte Carlo scheme, we simulated the set of 388 GBs in Aluminum and Nickel from Olmsted et al. For the Monte Carlo simulations, the initial configuration for each GB is generated by choosing a random set of the microscopic DOF (i.e., the relative bicrystal displacement and boundary-plane translation along the normal vector). The bicrystallographic aspects, required for simulating the GBs in LAMMPS, are computed using the the GBpy software (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/GBpy) developed by the authors We find that, in most cases, the proposed Monte Carlo scheme finds the lowest-energy structure (as compared to the energies reported in In Figure We also tested the influence of the initial configuration on the performance of the MC simulations for Aluminum GBs (as we have access to a diverse set of GB structures from the brute-force simulations). In addition to the random configuration, we performed the MC simulations with two additional configurations as the initial state: • Maximum-energy: GB structure corresponding to the highest-energy configuration from the brute-force simulations. • Most-frequent: GB configuration that occurs with highest frequency in the brute-force simulations but does not correspond to the lowest-energy state. This structure may represent a deep local minimum in the energy landscape. In Figure The lowest-energy GB structure with normal-kite units is shown in Figure On average the Monte Carlo simulations (for 5000 trial moves) were about 20 times more efficient. One reason for the efficiency is the fewer number of minimization steps required in the MC scheme. The other is related to the local nature of the MC perturbations. The computational time, to minimize a structure in the MC scheme, is a lot less than that required to minimize the bicrystal configurations created in brute force algorithms. It is important to note that the 5000 steps correspond to the total energy minimizations, including accepted and rejected moves, performed for each GB. Therefore, 5000 is not an ensemble average of many GBs but it is the maximum number of steps required to get within 5% of the brute-force energy for all 1184 GBs. In the plot below (Figure In conclusion, we present a novel and efficient technique for generating the low-energy 0 K structures for both FCC and BCC metallic GBs. It is observed that the Monte Carlo algorithm developed in this article is on average an order of magnitude faster than the traditional brute-force technique. Since the number of simulations in a brute-force algorithm depends on the symmetry aspects of the interface, the efficiency achieved by the MC simulation is shown for fifteen exemplary cases in Table More recently, the importance of analyzing metastable GB states has been highlighted by Han et al. This MC simulation scheme is general enough and can be easily extended to multi-component systems. We anticipate that adding the atom-insertion step to the traditional hybrid Monte-Carlo/Molecular-Dynamics algorithm The Monte Carlo perturbations (corresponding to either the removal or the insertion of atoms) change the structure enough that, we believe, the GB jumps from one local minima to another. For example, shown in figures S4 to S6 are three different cases that reflect the evolution of energy as a function of Monte-Carlo steps. These simulations correspond to the Aluminum GBs with the maximum-energy structure as the initial configuration. In general, the energy fluctuates a lot with each perturbation corresponding to atom removal or insertion. Qualitatively, we classified the trends in energy fluctuations, for the 388 GBs of Aluminum, into the following categories: 1. GBs where the lowest energy state is visited reasonably frequently. These GBs visited the lowest energy structure about 5 to 500 times during the MC simulation. This seems to be the most likely case for the evolution of GB energies, i. We also show a few cases where a large increase in the energy is observed during the MC simulation (figure Finally, in figures S8, S9, S10, and S11, we plotted the energy evolution during MC simulations with distinct initial configurations (maximum-energy, mostfrequent and random), for Σ21(7 5 4), Σ21( 1 0 3), Σ35(8 5 11), and Σ5(5 11 8) GBs, respectively. As such there is no discernible difference in the evolution of energies after a few initial MC trial moves. The specific GBs are chosen to show a diversity in the minimum energy configurations obtained. • The maximum-energy initial configuration resulted in the lowest energy structure for Σ21(7 5 4) GB (Figure • For Σ21( 1 0 3) GB, (Figure • For Σ35(8 5 11) and Σ5(5 11 8) GBs (Figures In FCC and BCC bicrystals, the centrosymmetry parameter We chose this asymmetric tilt GB to simply illustrate the algorithm for computing voids in the GB structure. The same concept can be utilized for any complex GB structure.