The challenge of synthesizing graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) with atomic precision is currently being pursued along a one-way road, based on the synthesis of adequate molecular precursors that react in predefined ways through self-assembly processes. The synthetic options for GNR generation would multiply by adding a new direction to this readily successful approach, especially if both of them can be combined. We show here how GNR synthesis can be guided by an adequately nanotemplated substrate instead of by the traditionally designed reactants. The structural atomic precision, unachievable to date through top-down methods, is preserved by the self-assembly process. This new strategy ́s proof-of-concept compares experiments using 4,4 ́ ́dibromo-para-terphenyl as molecular precursor on flat Au(111) and stepped Au(322) substrates. As opposed to the former, the periodic steps of the latter drive the selective synthesis of 6 atomwide armchair GNRs, whose electronic properties have been further characterized in detail by scanning tunneling spectroscopy, angle resolved photoemission and density functional theory calculations. The intensively sought integration of graphene into optoelectronic devices has driven, among other forefront research lines, the thriving quest of graphene nanoribbon (GNR) synthesis. An alternative route towards atomically precise GNR structures has been the lateral fusion of GNRs through cyclodehydrogenation, DBTP molecules adsorbed on Au surfaces are known to undergo a series of chemical reactions upon annealing (Fig. A completely different scenario is found on the stepped Au(322) surface. This surface is characterized by uniaxially aligned and regularly spaced terraces, whose steps run along the [101 ̅ ] direction. However, as displayed in Fig. Figure Annealing at higher T (~320 oC) brings along the desorption of Br Other experimental parameters being unchanged, the photoemission signal associated with PPP is proportional to its surface coverage, thus suggesting a transformation of most PPP into 6-aGNRs. It is worth noting that such a high yield has not been achieved in our STM experiments, which always revealed substantial amounts of unreacted PPP (Figs. The VB onset of 6-aGNRs appears at the same momentum as that of PPP, but its energy shifts upward by ~0.6 eV to -0.65±0.08 eV. The common momentum of the VB maxima at 1.43 Å -1 is associated to a periodicity of 4.39 Å, in turn related to the adsorbate ́s unit cell, the interphenyl spacing in PPP and the coincident armchair periodicity of 6-aGNR (Fig. Corresponding to the center of the second Brillouin zone, 1.43 Å -1 also coincides with the reciprocal space area where the reactant ́s and all product ́s photoemission intensity is seen best, since the band ́s spectral weight distribution is known to correlate with the Fourier transform of the orbitals, and the HOMO orbitals of the various structures studied are all modulated according to the armchair period. We now focus and deepen the characterization of 6-aGNRs, whose selective synthesis by substrate templating is the key point of this work. Its band gap (Eg=1.88±0.09 eV) is in excellent agreement with previous state-of-the-art calculations based on many-body perturbation theory (in particular the GW approximation) and the addition of substrate screening through a classical image charge model. Armchair graphene nanoribbons aligned along the compact [101 ̅ ] direction are commensurate every second unit cell. Another parameter of utmost relevance in graphene nanoribbons is their effective mass, as it is inversely proportional to the charge carrier mobility along the ribbon. The Au(111) and Au(322) surfaces were cleaned similarly, by standard Ar + sputtering and annealing cycles. The molecules were then deposited on the surfaces by means of a homebuilt Knudsen cell heated to ~115 oC during sublimation. During the deposition the surfaces were held at room temperature, annealed thereafter to subsequently trigger the different reaction steps. The STM characterization was performed at 4.3 K in a commercial Scienta-Omicron LT-STM/AFM. For spectroscopic point spectra and conductance maps, the dI/dV signal was measured by a lock-in amplifier, modulating the bias with 15 mV at 731 Hz. The STM images were processed with the freeware WSxM. The ARPES experiments were performed in-situ at the APE-LE beamline of the Elettra Sincrotrone-Trieste, using linearly polarized light. For the ARPES acquisition on 6-aGNRs, the photon energy was tuned from 60 eV to 35 eV because it yielded a better signal-to-noise ratio. While this does not affect the 1D dispersion of the nanoribbons, the 3D-dispersive substraterelated signal changes significantly. Nevertheless, the observed band is unquestionably associated to 6-AGNRs, as can be inferred comparing the emission from the PPP, mixed PPP/6-AGNR and 6-AGNR samples at the same photon energy (Fig. The optimized geometry and electronic structure of a free-standing 6-aGNR, composed of 6 carbon dimer lines passivated with hydrogen at the edges, were calculated using density functional theory as implemented in the SIESTA code. 