THz Time-Resolved Photoconductivity is used to probe carrier dynamics in the dilute III-V nitride GaP0.49As0.47N0.036. In these measurements a femtosecond optical pump-pulse excites electron-hole pairs, and a delayed THz pulse measures the change in conductivity. We find the photoconductivity is dominated by localized carriers. The decay of photoconductivity after excitation is consistent with bimolecular electron-hole recombination with recombination constant r = 3.2±0.8•10 -8 cm 3 /s. We discuss the implications for applications in solar energy. INTRODUCTION Dilute III-V nitride semiconductor alloys (III-V1-x-Nx with x<5%) are attractive for solar energy applications because their bandgaps are widely tunable with nitrogen concentration. 1 InyGa1-yAs1-xNx has been used to create ~1eV bandgap sub-cells for multi-junction solar cells that are lattice-matched to GaAs. 2 While the internal quantum efficiency and output voltage of InyGa1-yAs1-xNx solar cells were initially poor due to short carrier diffusion lengths in these materials, higher internal quantum efficiencies were achieved in the alloy system InyGa1-yAs1-x-zNxSbz. GaAs1-xNx , GaPyAs1-x-yNx and other dilute III-V nitrides have also been proposed for use in intermediate band solar cells (IBSCs). Originally proposed by Luque and Marti, Despite the flexibility of III-V dilute nitrides, high defect densities and short minority carrier diffusion lengths limit the efficiency of proposed devices. Carrier lifetimes in dilute III-V nitrides are strongly effected by nitrogen doping. Time Resolved Photoluminesence (TRPL) measurements at room temperature Transient photoluminescence measurements of GaPyAs1-x-yNx by We recently reported Nitrogen doping also strongly effects carrier transport in III-V semiconductors. Variable temperature Hall measurements in InyGa1-yAs1-xNx with x=2% by Kurtz, et. al., Time-resolved THz photoconductivity is particularly relevant to the characterization of solar cell materials because it measures photoconductivity directly. Time-resolved THz photoconductivity measurements of GaAs1-xNx and GaAs1-x-y NxBiy by Cooke They found that the frequency-dependence of the photoconductivity of GaAs1-xNx cannot be described by the Drude model. Instead the conductivity is suppressed at low frequencies due to charge localization. In this work we report time-resolved THz photoconductivity measurements of GaP0.49As0.47N0.036. We measure recombination rates that are consistent with our previous results from transient absorption. The frequency dependence of the conductivity indicates that the photo-carriers are weakly localized. EXPERIMENT We report time-resolved photoconductivity measurements in GaP0.49As0.47N0.036. Epitaxial GaPyAs1-x-yNx layers were grown on a GaP substrate in a modified Varian Gen-II molecular beam epitaxy system which has been described elsewhere. The BAC predicts that the interaction between the extended conduction band states of the host material and the localized energy states of the isoelectronic nitrogen impurities splits the conduction band into distinct upper and lower bands E+ and E-separated by a gap (Figure Scanning the THz beam delay at fixed probe delay allows measurement of the THz pulse waveform. The Fourier transform of the waveform yields a complex single beam spectrum ! E(ω ) . The transmission spectrum of the sample is the ratio of single beam spectra of the sample and a reference t ω = E 9 (ω)/E ; (ω). The THz conductivity was determined from the transmission spectrum. We treated the epitaxial GaPyAs1-x-yNx layer as a 2D conducting sheet at the interface between the GaP substrate and the quartz. When internal reflections are ignored, the ratio of the transmission in the presence of the pump to the transmission with the pump blocked is: where t0 is the amplitude transmission with ! σ = 0 (pump blocked), n2 is the index of refraction of GaP and n3 is the index of quartz. In our time-resolved measurements, the pump pulse excited the samples at an incident photon flux φ ~10 13 cm -2 at 800nm. The pump beam was chopped and the signal was recovered using lock-in amplifiers locked to the chopper frequency and the bias modulation frequency in series. We scanned the THz delay at a fixed pump delay relative to the probe to determine the change in the THz transmission spectrum due to the pump excitation. A series of measurements was used to map out the transmission spectrum as a function of delay. We found that the frequency-dependence of the conductivity spectrum was approximately independent of pump delay for delays ≥2.5 ps, so that a measurement of the THz signal at any point on the THz waveform yields a signal proportional to conductivity. This allowed us to set the THz delay to the peak signal point and sweep the pump delay to perform a fast and robust measurement of the decay of photoconductivity with time after photoexcitation. Our GaP0.49As0.47N0.036 sample exhibits THz photoconductivity under 800nm excitation while a GaP0.49As0.51 nitrogen-free test sample and a bare GaP substrate do not. Figure The real part of the conductivity rises with increasing frequency to a maximum at ~0.9 THz and then decreases slowly towards higher frequencies. The imaginary part of the conductivity is positive at low frequencies and changes sign at ~0.9THz. The solid and dashed lines in this figure are model fits and are discussed below. Figure The shape of the conductivity spectrum evolves rapidly during the first few picoseconds following pump excitation. For pump delays ≥4ps, the frequency-averaged magnitude of the conductivity decays with increasing delay and is almost indistinguishable from noise 1ns after pump excitation. At pump delays between 4ps and 350ps the shape of the real conductivity spectrum is approximately constant, rising with increasing frequency to a maximum near 0.9THz and then decreasing slowly with increasing frequency. The sign change in the imaginary component of the conductivity is clearly visible for delays between 4ps -40ps, but becomes unobservable at larger delays. The magnitude of the imaginary component of the conductivity decays into noise for delays ≥ 350ps. The frequency dependence of the THz conductivity probes charge localization and scattering in our sample. The three simplest models used to describe charge transport in similar materials are where σ = = ne ? τ m * is the DC conductivity. The Drude model adequately describes the conductivity of many homogeneous conducting materials like metals and doped semicoductors. The Drude-Smith models the conductivity spectra of more complex materials. It assumes that a fraction of the carriers are coherently backscattered and yields a frequency-dependent conductivity: where c is a fitting parameter that can take on values between 0 and -1. This empirical model often fits experimental conductivity spectra well, although the value of the c parameter obtained is difficult to associate with any physical property of the material. The Plasmon model assumes that the carriers are localized by a harmonic potential with a resonance frequency ω0. The conductivity versus frequency is then given by , where σ = = ne ? τ m * is now the conductivity at ω = ω = . This model can describe inhomogeneous materials in which carriers are localized into small conducting domains. The Plasmon model gives the best fit to our measurements. Comparing our data to best-fit model spectra at delay of 7.5ps (Figure The best-fit values of σ = as a function of delay obtained from the Plasmon model are plotted in Figure Because ω = and τ do not appear to vary significantly with delay, the conductivity values obtained by measuring the pump-induced change in THz transmission at the peak signal point track the photo-carrier density (Figure Here n = = 3.1 ± 0.8 • 10 PQ cm )-is the free electron concentration immediately after photoexcitation estimated from the absorbed pump photon flux. The model provides an excellent fit to our data and we obtain a rate constant r = 3.2±0.8•10 -8 cm 3 /s, where the uncertainty in r is dominated by the uncertainty in the photon flux. These results are consistent with our previous transient absorption measurements on the same sample We have used Time-Resolved THz Spectroscopy to investigate carrier dynamics in the III-V dilute nitride GaP0.49As0.47N0.036. We find that bimolecular electron-hole recombination describes carrier recombination in this material with a recombination constant of r ~ 3.2±0.8•10 -8 cm 3 /s. This value is approximately 100x larger than the predicted radiative recombination time for this material, 