My Parents exposed parts of the rocket and jet engines in oxidizing atmosphere [2]. Later on silicides were considered for various innovative applications because of their high temperature stability, excellent oxidation resistance, and low temperature coefficient of electrical resistivity. Combination of these properties and metal like behavior, attracted them in wide range of applications such as (a) high temperature structural applications (b) Schottky barrier and ohomic contacts in integrated circuit technology (c) Low resistivity metallization for gates and interconnects (d) diffusion barrier in Cu based interconnects. For example, vanadium disilicide is used as a protective coating in combination with MoSi 2 [3] and Ohmic contact for Schottky diodes [4]. Mo -and Nb-based silicides are being developed to replace Ni-based superalloys in jet engine applications [5-9]. Extensive research is in progress to improve the fracture toughness and the oxidation resistance. Ta and W are proposed as the diffusion barrier layer in Cu interconnects [10][11][12][13], since these are immiscibile with Cu even at elevated temperature [14]. Growth of silicides at the interface of the barrier metal and the substrate influence the performance of the product. Molybdenum-silicon system is important for many applications, such as * The knowledge of diffusion parameters provides important understanding of many physical and mechanical properties of materials. In most of the applications silicides are grown by a diffusion controlled process mainly in thin film condition. Because of this reason, most of the studies till date are available in thin film condition. Although more than one phase is present in all these systems, mainly disilicides were found at the interface. In this thesis bulk interdiffusion studies are conducted by coupling pure refractory metals (group IVB, VB and VIB elements) with single crystal Si. Several phase layers grow between binary refractory metal and Si systems. The layer thicknesses of the phases are measured from the microstructures. Composition profiles were measured in electron probe microanalyzer. Different diffusion parameters are estimated such as parabolic growth constants, integrated diffusion coefficients, activation energy for diffusion and ratio of tracer diffusivities of the components are estimated. Growth mechanisms of the phases are discussed with the help of diffusion parameters. The atomic mechanism of the diffusion is discussed considering crystal structure of the phases along with possible defects present. Solid diffusion couple experiments are conducted to analyse the growth mechanism of the phases and the diffusion mechanism of the components in the Ti-Si system. The calculation of the parabolic growth constant and of the integrated diffusion II coefficients substantiates that the analysis is intrinsically prone to erroneous conclusions if it is based just on the parabolic growth constants determined for a multiphase interdiffusion zone. The location of the marker plane is detected based on the uniform grain morphology in the TiSi 2 phase, which indicates that this phase grows mainly because of Si diffusion. The growth mechanism of the phases and morphological evolution in the interdiffusion zone are explained with the help of imaginary diffusion couples. The activation enthalpies for the integrated diffusion coefficient of TiSi 2 and the Si tracer diffusion are calculated as 190±9 and 170±12 kJ/mol, respectively. The crystal structure, details on the nearest neighbours of the elements and the relative mobilities of the components indicate that the vacancies are mainly present on the Si sublattice. Diffusion controlled growth of the phases in the Hf-Si and Zr-Si are studied by bulk diffusion couple technique. Only two phases grow in the interdiffusion zone, although several phases are present in both the systems. The location of the Kirkendall marker plane detected based on the grain morphology indicates that the disilicides grow by the diffusion of Si. Diffusion of the metal species in these phases is negligible. This indicates that vacancies are present mainly on the Si sublattice. The activation energies for integrated diffusion coefficients in the HfSi 2 and ZrSi 2 are estimated as 394 ± 37 and 346 ± 34 kJ/mol, respectively. The same is calculated for the HfSi phase as 485±42 kJ/mol. The activation energies for Si tracer diffusion in the HfSi 2 and ZrSi 2 phases are estimated as 430 ± 36 and 348 ± 34 kJ/mol, respectively. We conducted interdiffusion studies to understand the atomic mechanism of the diffusing species and the growth mechanism of the phases. Integrated diffusion coefficients and the ratio of tracer diffusion coefficients were estimated for these III analyses. The activation energies for the integrated diffusion coefficients were calculated as 550 ± 70 and 410 ± 39 kJ/mol in the TaSi 2 and the Ta 5 Si 3 phases, respectively. In the TaSi 2 phase, Ta has a slightly lower but comparable diffusion rate with respect to Si, although no Ta-Ta bonds are present in the crystal. In the Ta 5 Si 3 phase, Si has higher diffusion rate, which is rather unusual, if we consider the atoms in the nearest-neighbor positions for both the elements. The ratio of Si to Ta tracer diffusion coefficients is found to be lower in the Si-rich phase, TaSi 2 , compared to the Si-lean phase, Ta 5 Si 3 , which is also unusual. This indicates the type of structural defects present. An analysis on the growth mechanism of the phases indicates that duplex morphology and the Kirkendall marker plane should only be present in the TaSi 2 phase. This is not present in the Ta 5 Si 3 phase because of the very high growth rate of the TaSi 2 phase, which consumes most of the Ta 5 Si 3 phase layer. The problems in the calculation method used previously by others in this system are also explained. Experiments are conducted in the W-Si system to understand the diffusion mechanism of the species. The activation energies for integrated diffusion are found to be 152±7 and 301±40 kJ/mol in the WSi 2 and W 5 Si 3 phases, respectively. In both the phases, Si has a much higher diffusion rate compared to W. The result found in the WSi 2 phase is not surprising, if we consider the nearest neighbors in the crystal. However, it is rather unusual to find that Si has higher diffusion rate in the W 5 Si 3 phase, indicating the presence of high concentration of Si antisites in this phase. In the group IVB, VB and VIB M-Si systems are considered to show an interesting pattern in diffusion of components with the change in atomic number in a particular group. MSi 2 and M 5 Si 3 are considered for this discussion. Except in the Ta-Si IV system, activation energy for integrated diffusion of MSi 2 is always lower than M 5 Si 3 . Interestingly, in both the phases, the relative mobilities measured by the ratio of tracer diffusion coefficients, * * M Si D D decreases with the increase in atomic number in both the groups. Both the phases have similar crystal structures in a particular group in which these parameters are calculated. In both the phases Si has higher diffusion rate compared to M. Absence of any M-M bonds in MSi 2 and increase in the diffusivities of M with the increase in atomic number substantiates the increasing concentration of M anti-sites and higher interactions of M with vacancies. Only one or two Si-Si bonds are present in M 5 Si 3 , however, the higher diffusion rate of Si indicates the presence of vacancies mainly on its sublattice. On the other hand, increase in * * M Si D D with increasing atomic number in both the groups substantiates increasing interactions of M and vacancies. V Acknowledgement I am thankful to all those who helped and supported me directly or indirectly from the beginning to end of my research work and to the shaping of my thesis. First, I am grateful to the Indian Institute of Science, the premier institute of the country, (the Department of Materials Engineering) for giving me the opportunity and confidence. I would like to show my greatest appreciation to Prof. Aloke Paul. I can't thank him enough for his tireless support and help. I feel motivated and encouraged every time I attend his meeting. Without his encouragement and guidance this project would not have materialized. I thank Prof. V. Jayaram and Prof. K. Chattopadhyay, present and former Chairman, Department of Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, for extending the facilities of the Department. Specially I would like to thank Prof. S. Suwas and Dr. R. Ravi for their valuable suggestions and discussions during my research work. I would like to thank all the faculty and the staff of the department for their helping hand. Schottky contacts Tungsten disilicides, which is grown by reactive diffusion, could be important for making integrated circuits because of its low electrical resistivity and good thermal stability Wide range of applications motivated to study diffusion and growth behavior of various refractory metal silicides. In solid state diffusion, the compound phase or phases grow in between two end members which can be predicted by equilibrium phase diagrams. Moreover, in many applications, silicides are grown by a diffusion controlled process mainly in thin film condition To understand the growth mechanism of the phases and diffusion mechanism of the species, experiments in bulk conditions are required. It is much easier to estimate the relative mobilities of the species using the inert particles as the kirkendall markers in bulk diffusion couple. Although there are reasonable numbers of publications are related to study of diffusion in bulk condition, mainly the growth kinetics of the phases were calculated, which is not a material constant. Parabolic growth constant depends on the end member compositions of the diffusion couples. There are very few studies are related to estimation of the interdiffusion/integrated diffusion coefficients It is already known from the experimental analysis and theoretical calculations that diffusion in ordered phases is assisted mainly by two types of defects; vacancies and antisites. Moreover, different concentration of defects might be present on different sublattices. Many a times, this is the reason to find very different diffusion rates of the species of different elements in a phase. The aim of this study is to conduct interdiffusion studies following the solid state diffusion couple technique. The parabolic growth of the phases was examined for the present conditions. Time dependent experiments have been conducted to examine the diffusion controlled growth of the phases, and temperature dependent experiments to calculate the activation energies. Integrated diffusion coefficients and the activation energies have been calculated from the composition profiles. Grain morphology in the interdiffusion zone indicates relative mobilities of the species, which help to predict defects and diffusion of elements. There could be many silicides present in the phase diagram, however, all the phases do not grow with reasonable thickness for quantitative analysis. We have listed below the phases we considered for extensive analysis. The intermetalic phases of these silicides are purely line compounds. The calculation methodology of different diffusion parameters are discussed in chapter 3. Bulk diffusion couple experiments are conducted and the diffusion parameters are determined for all the phases mentioned in the Table In Chapter 4.1, bulk diffusion couple experiments are studied in the Ti-Si system. The Significance of the parabolic growth constant in multiphase interdiffusion is discussed. The location of the marker plane is detected by etching the sample with acid solution. Activation energy and integrated diffusion coefficients of the phases are calculated. The Si tracer diffusivity in the TiSi 2 phase is calculated with the help of the available thermodynamic data in the literature. Presence of defects in the crystal structure is discussed with help of relative mobilities of the diffusing components. Similar studies have been conducted with Zr/Si and Hf/Si systems. In Chapter 4.2 these two systems are discussed together because of their similar behavior in growth of the phases. Diffusion controlled growth of the phases in the Hf-Si and Zr-Si are studied by bulk diffusion couple technique. The activation energies for integrated diffusion coefficients in the HfSi 2 , HfSi and ZrSi 2 are estimated. The activation energies for Si tracer diffusion in the HfSi 2 and ZrSi 2 phases are estimated. Interdiffusion studies conducted to understand the atomic mechanism of the diffusing species and the growth mechanism of the phases in Ta/Si system are explained in Chapter 5. Incremental diffusion couple studies are conducted in TaSi 2 /Ta system for the growth of Ta 5 Si 3 phase. Integrated diffusion coefficients and the ratio of tracer diffusion coefficients were estimated for these analyses. Structural defects in TaSi 2 and Ta 5 Si 3 phases are discussed with the ratio of Si to Ta tracer diffusion coefficients. Growth 6 mechanism of the phases and the presence of the Kirkendall marker plane in TaSi 2 phase discussed. The problems in the calculation method used previously by others in this system are also explained. Similar studies on W/Si system is discussed in Chapter 6. Group IVB, VB and VIB M-Si systems show an interesting pattern in diffusion of components with the change in atomic number in a particular group, which are explained in Chapter 7. MSi 2 in group IVB, MSi 2 and M 5 Si 3 in group VB and VIB are considered for this discussion. The position of the Kirkendall marker plane in the disilicides shows a common trend in their respective groups. The type of defects present in the crystal is discussed with nearest neighbor of the species. The change of defect concentration also shows a systematic trend with increasing atomic number for a particular phase in the periodic table, which is discussed with the help of homologous temperature plot. Diffusion has an important role on microstructural evolution, processing and heat treatment of metals and alloys, phase transformation, precipitation, homogenisation, recrystallization, high temperature creep and oxidation. Many device performance such as turbine blades, flip chip bonding and intermetallic superconductors depends on diffusion. The Scotish chemist, Thomas Graham conducted the first systematic study on diffusion There are essentially two different ways to understand the basic concept of the diffusion theory, a phenomenological approach and an atomistic approach. Phenomenological approach based on the basic diffusion law and its mathematical solution which proposed by Adolf Fick. Atomistic approach is based on the 'random walk' of particles which developed by Robert Brown and mathematically formulated by Albert Einstein. For our explanation, we shall mostly deal with the phenomenological approach. The equations and derivations used this chapter are taken from the Refs. The phenomenological diffusion theory is proposed by Adolf Fick where J (mole/m 2 /s) is the flux, D (m 2 /s) is the diffusion coefficient, C (mole/m 3 ) is the concentration and x (m) is the position parameter. The negative sign in this relation shows that diffusion occurs in the direction opposite to the increasing concentration gradient. In the steady state condition, the flux and the diffusion coefficients are directly related by Eqn 2.1. But, in most of the practical applications, concentration always changes with annealing time. To explain that Fick's second law is derived, as below. Usually, in a simplified diffusion process, number of diffusing particles is conserved. This means that the diffusing components are neither created nor destroyed. Hence, in such a case, if we consider two planes, 1 and 2 separated by distance x ∆ (as shown in Fig 2 .1 and the corresponding flux through each plane as J(x) and J(x+∆x), from the conservation of mass, the change in concentration in time t ∂ can be written as, ( ) ( ) Combining the Fick's first law (Eqn 2.1) and law of conservation of mass (Eqn 2.2) we can write an expression which is called the "Diffusion equation" or the Fick's second law, where t is time(s). If we consider diffusion coefficient, D, is independent of composition, Fick's second law can be simplified and rewritten as Using error function analysis the above expression can be solved. In most of the practical cases, where concentration changes with position, the diffusing atoms in a system shows different diffusion coefficient, which is called the interdiffusion coefficient, D ~. The interdiffusion coefficient, which is a function of composition, in most of the cases is not constant. Therefore Fick's second law can be expressed as The term x D ∂ ∂ ~ makes the equation inhomogeneous, and it is not possible to solve this non-linear partial differential equation. However, it is very much possible to calculate the composition dependent D ~ using the classical Matano-Boltzmann analysis and Sauer-Freise which also follows a similar approach. From early 20 th century, it was evident that the diffusion coefficient in solid-state is not constant, but is a function of composition and temperature where "-" and "+" represents the left-and right-hand end of the reaction couple. In 1894, Boltzmann This above relation states that every composition will have one fixed value of λ irrespective of the position x with respect to initial contact plane, x o in a diffusion couple. It further states that one particular composition will move with respect to the x o such that it will have a fixed value after any annealing time, t. From Eqn. 2.6, we can write, Fick's second law, as given by Eqn 2.3 can be rewritten as From Eqn 2.6 and 2.7, we can rewrite Eqn 2.9 as, (2.12) Eqn 2.10 is also known as Boltzmann transformed version of the Fick's second law. Matano in 1933 • The analysis refers to an infinite system which means that during the annealing, the concentration change should not reach the end of the system • The analysis shows huge error near the end member composition. This is due to the fact that as we move farther away from the Matano plane, the integral part of the Eqn 2.14 as well as the slope term, x C B ∂ ∂ term approaches zero. • The analysis can only be applied to the systems where there is no change in the volume after reaction/mixing during the interdiffusion mixing. This is so because there is a mismatch in the position of the Matano plane when determined from the left hand side or the right hand side of the diffusion couple. To overcome the problem of molar volume change during interdiffusion, Ballufi Later on Sauer-Freise Boerder Hence, we can write, From Fick's second law as expressed by Eqn 2.3, we know that Also, from Eqn 2.6 and 2.7, we know that Now, by solving for Similarly by solving for Similarly, applying same treatment to Eqn 2.21b and integrating within the limits Now, writing Fick's first law in terms of intrinsic flux, Hence, from Eqn 2.24 and 2.25, we can write, ( ) We can also show schematically, the above expression for the calculation of the interdiffusion coefficient (Fig 2 .3) From Fig. Den Broeder In the case of line compounds or compounds with a narrow homogeneity range, it is not possible to calculate the vanishingly small concentration gradient. Hence, the expression derived for the interdiffusion coefficient in the previous section, Eqn 2. , in a particular system as shown in the schematic phase diagram Fig. of β is ∆x β ( ) . The integrated diffusion coefficient can be expressed for β as, which cannot be used because of the unknown value of ( ) In the case of a diffusion system where several line compounds exist and where no solubility in the end members of the components occur as shown in Fig. Till now we have discussed only about the composition dependent interdiffusion coefficient to describe the diffusion process, which represents average diffusivity. However, in a real system, the diffusing species have unequal transfer rate that can be expressed in terms of individual intrinsic diffusion coefficient of the species, which is again composition dependent. Due to this inequality of the flux of each species, there is net mass flow in the interdiffusion process. Because of this reason the diffusion couple swells on one side and shrinks on the other side. This effect is popularly called 'Kirkendall effect' and was discovered by Smigelkas and Kirkendall However, such effect was earlier reported by Pfiel Hence, , where K x is the position of the Kirkendall plane which moves parabolically with the annealing time, t. This confirms the process to be diffusion controlled and the Kirkendall plane is the only plane which starts moving from the beginning of the diffusion process with a velocity given as Prior to the establishment of the Kirkendall effect, it was a common belief that diffusion in solids occur by direct exchange or the ring mechanism which implies that diffusivity of both the species are equal. Subsequently, the vacancy mechanism of substitutional diffusion got an acceptance. After the establishment of the Kirkendall effect, it was quite apparent that the diffusion process cannot be described completely with the help of only single diffusion coefficient and that diffusivity of both the species is required in a binary system. In 1948, where i=A, B (2.37) Now, in terms of volume flux, we can write, Now, for an infinite binary diffusion couple, From the Fick's first law, intrinsic flux is related to the intrinsic diffusivity, that is, , hence from Eqn 2.35 and 2.36, we can write, Now, substituting Eqn 2.37 in Eqn 2.34 written for species B, we get In the special case when partial molar volumes of the components are equal and do not change with the composition, , we can rewrite Eqn 2.38 as, This relation of interdiffusion coefficient with the intrinsic diffusion coefficient is known as Darken's relation. Intrinsic diffusion coefficient of the species in an interdiffusion zone can be calculated only at the location of the Kirkendall marker plane, since only this plane moves parabolically with time starting from t=0 (contrary to markers introduced at other positions in the couple at t=0). This is the the only plane, which is immediately affected by the diffusion process at the start of the annealing and once the markers are trapped in a certain composition, they stay at that same composition for the entire annealing time and this plane acts as a reference to determine the intrinsic diffusivities. The derivation given below was done by Paul After rearranging, we get, Now, substituting for and then rearranging, we get, Similarly, for the diffusing species A, we can write, ( ) and the ratio of intrinsic diffusivity can be written as, ( ) This was also derived by van Loo where, ( ) ( ) If we consider the diffusion couple in Fig. In the special case when there is only one layer, β, growing between two end members, and the Kirkendall plane position x K is present in that phase, as shown in Fig. and if there is only one compound between two pure end member then, and Eqn. 2.45 further reduces to Till now we have discussed about the intermixing of the atoms taking place under concentration gradient, that is, in presence of a driving force. However, even in the absence of any driving force, intermixing of atoms takes place and this phenomenon of atom transport is referred to as self diffusion. It is possible to monitor the mobility of atoms by use of radioactive isotopes or tracer of the element under consideration. That is, they are chemically same with only one or two neutron mass difference. Another requirement of the tracer material is that the half life should be neither to short nor too long. Experimentally, the tracer diffusion coefficient is measured by depositing a thin layer of the tracer element over the element/alloy under consideration followed by annealing at temperature of interest, T, and annealing time, t. Subsequently, thin sections are made at different values of distance, x from the surface on which the tracer material was deposited. The concentration can then be evaluated as function of distance from the intensity of the radioactive radiation from each of the section. Hence, the tracer diffusion coefficient, D * can be calculated following the relation developed as a solution of Fick's second law for thin films where the diffusion distance is very small, ( ) The experimental procedure for determining the tracer diffusion coefficient is quite cumbersome. However, it is also possible to indirectly calculate D * from the results of Kirkendall marker experiment. Here we shall discuss indirect methodology for determining the tracer diffusion coefficient. It is fundamentally incorrect to assume that concentration gradient as the driving force in Fick's laws and more realistically, actual driving force is thechemical potential gradient. Hence Fick's law can be written as where, mobility , B v is the velocity of the species B and F is the force on the species B due to chemical potential, B μ . Hence we can write, Using standard thermodynamic relation, we can rewrite Eqn 2.51 as, We also know that, Where, the activity of the species B is γ is the activity coefficient of B and R is the gas constant. Hence, from Eqn 2.53, Eqn 2.52 can be rewritten as In case of diffusion of an infinitely thin layer of radioactive tracer of B, the volume terms and the non ideality term can be ignored and thus Eqn 2.54 can be written as, And this relation is called the Nernst-Einstein Equation. Thus form Eqn 2.55, Eqn 2.54 can be rewritten as, Similarly, we can write Equation for species A as, This relation was first time proposed by Darken Now, from Eqn 2.58, Eqn 2.60 can be rewritten as, Here, the energy per mole of B for dissociation at interface II can be represented by the Gibbs Energy, where, . Similarly, energy per mole of B for dissociation at interface I to form β can be represented by . So the total energy to form β by diffusion of one mole of B (by dissociation or reaction) can be written as ( ) . So Eqn 2.61 can be written as, ( ) It should be noted here that, . Also, if β phase forms between pure end members, that is, ( ), Eqn 2.62 can also be written as, ( ) is the Gibbs free energy for formation per mole of particles for the β phase. As the Kirkendall effect was established, Seitz The intrinsic diffusion coefficient can then be related to the tracer diffusion coefficient as where the relation of vacancy wind factor dependent on the crystal structure of the system, N i is the mole fraction of species i and Θ is the thermodynamic factor . Further the relation for interdiffusion coefficient in terms of tracer diffusion coefficient of elements can be written as where, However, in general in most of the systems the contribution of vacancy wind effect is found to be negligible The most commonly used procedure to study solid state diffusion is diffusion couple technique. In this study the diffusion couple technique was followed as the whole study is focused on solid state diffusion in bulk materials. In this method two different materials are ground and polished flat, coupled together, clamped and annealed at the temperature of interest in the vacuum furnace. The cross sections of the diffusion bonded samples were analyzed in microscope to identify and measure the phases grown in the interdiffusion zone. Pure materials as well as alloys are used in this study. The specifications of pure materials used are shown in Table 1 mm thick foils of refractory metal element and 0.7 mm thick (1 0 0) oriented one side polished silicon wafers were used to produce the diffusion couples. Samples were cut into pieces with the dimension of approximately 5 mm × 5 mm and the standard grinding and polishing method was followed. Immediately after that, the couples' halves were bonded in a special fixture and annealed in the temperature range of our interest in vacuum (~10 -4 Pa) for a fixed annealing time. The annealing temperature was controlled within ±5 °C. In most of the M/Si diffusion couples, the thickness of M 5 Si 3 was much smaller compared to MSi 2 . Even the Kirkendall marker plane was also present in the MSi 2 phase and the relative mobilities of the species are possible to calculate by the relation developed by F.J.J. van Loo After removal of Si, couples were annealed in the temperature range of interest such that mainly M 5 Si 3 could grow in the interdiffusion zone. The experimental temperature range for the different systems is listed in the table This incremental diffusion couple technique is shown in the Fig. Images were captured in a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the compositions of the phases were measured by an electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA). The interdiffusion coefficient which can be calculated from the concentration profile is only the average diffusivity of the species or the measure of the intermixing of the species involved. It does not give any information about the mobilities of the individual species involved in the diffusion process. Kirkendall Sometime scratches, pores or voids present in the interdiffusion zone act as a marker, which always not possible to detect or sometimes can draw the wrong conclusion. Thefore inclusion of the inert marker in the in the diffusion coupe during the experiment is a common practice. These markers should not react with neither of the diffusion couple nor the phases they form. Generally stable oxides ThO 2 , TiO 2 , Y 2 O 3 are used as inert markersOne should be careful about the particle size of the inert markers. Too large particle can hinder the diffusion process on other hand too small particles can be dragged by the moving grain boundary A tracer diffusion study of different elements was also conducted in the TiSi 2 phase. Importantly, the activation energy of the tracer diffusion of Ge, which is supposed to mimic the diffusion behaviour of Si, was reported to be 290 kJ/mol Because of their relevance, most recent studies have been conducted in thin film conditions. However, this might not be suitable to analyze the growth mechanism of the phases. It is known that the stress generated during the deposition of the thin film affects the growth of the phase. A metastable phase might grow in the beginning before the growth of the equilibrium phases. Sequential growth of the phases is also found very frequently The aim of this study is to conduct interdiffusion studies following the solid diffusion couple technique. The parabolic growth of the phases will be examined for the present conditions. Integrated diffusion coefficients and the activation energies are calculated from the composition profiles. The tracer diffusion coefficient of fast-diffusion component is calculated in the TiSi 2 phase and the diffusion mechanism is discussed in view of atomic arrangements in the crystal. In the interdiffusion zone of a bulk diffusion couple, all the equilibrium phases are expected to grow with different thicknesses depending on their growth rates. According to the phase diagram The grain morphology, as revealed by etching, indicates the relative mobilities of the species The resulting grain morphology is illustrated in Fig. In this particular case, it indicates that element A has a diffusion rate many orders of magnitude higher than B in α phase. Since the diffusion of B is negligible, sublayer a cannot grow. That means that the whole phase is build by sublayer b. This also indicates that there is a very high consumption of β at interface II because of the growth of α. Therefore, not only c but a part of β growing from interface III also gets consumed. That means that the β phase will have only the sublayer d. As a result, the marker plane will be missing in the β phase. It should be noted here that this does not indicate a much higher diffusion rate of A compared to B in the β phase also Before any analysis on the diffusion process, the diffusion controlled growth of the phases should be checked by time dependent experiments. Since many articles have already shown the parabolic growth of the TiSi 2 phase (although in thin film conditions), it was not necessary to repeat it. Therefore, the temperature dependent experiments were conducted in the beginning for the calculation of the activation energy for diffusion. The thickness of the phase layers are tabulated in Table There could be two reasons for this behaviour. In an incremental couple, when only one phase layer grows in the interdiffusion zone, it is not affected by any other phases. On the other hand, the growth kinetics of a phase in a multiphase interdiffusion depends on the growth of other neighbouring phases, as already explained in the 62 phenomenological process in Fig. The parabolic growth constant, for example, for the phase β , β p k is estimated using the relation where ∆ is the phase layer thickness of the phase of interest. β , and t is the annealing time. Further, the temperature dependence and the activation energy for the growth can be calculated from the Arrhenius equation expressed as where o p k is the pre-exponential factor, Q is the activation energy for growth and T is the temperature in K. The calculated values are plotted in Fig. Since the thickness variation of TiSi with temperature is very small, the slope is negligible and it makes no sense to estimate the activation energy in this phase from the estimation of the parabolic growth constants. have not calculated the diffusion parameters because of the chance of a high error in calculation The importance of the calculation of the diffusion parameters can be understood from the calculations above. It is a common practice to analyze data on the calculation of the parabolic growth constants The activation energy for the integrated diffusion coefficient in the TiSi 2 phase is calculated as 190±9 kJ/mol. This is similar to the values found in a few other disilicides ) Again the vacancy-wind effect is neglected for simplicity. Note here that this relation is applicable when a single phase is grown between two neighbouring phases in the phase diagram. The diffusion parameters are material constants and one can use these parameters calculated from a multiphase interdiffusion zone. Therefore, for the calculation of the driving force, we need to consider as if the TiSi 2 phase is grown between Si and TiSi, as shown in Fig. Atomic mechanisms of diffusion in intermetallic compounds require a special consideration. In an ordered compound, the elements occupy their own sublattices. Therefore, the migration of substitutional atoms is restricted by a general demand to maintain the given level of the atomic order Generally, four basic defects can be distinguished in an ordered binary compound, namely the vacancies on the two sublattices and the corresponding anti-sites -i.e. the atoms on a "wrong" sublattice. In fact, the diffusion mechanism of the given component depends on many factors -connectivity of the own sublattice, availability of vacancies on the different sublattices, "energy costs" for the anti-site formation, migration barriers, and the corresponding correlation effects which may even penalize specific types of atom jumps Based on this understanding, we can analyse the defects present in the TiSi Therefore, both the elements could potentially diffuse over their own sublattice provided that the corresponding vacancies are present. The fact that the growth of the TiSi 2 phase layer occurs mainly because of Si diffusion substantiates that vacancies are present mainly on the Si sublattice. This conclusion agrees with recent computation of the defect formation energies in TiSi 2 by tight binding molecular dynamics We have studied the Ti-Si system to understand the growth mechanism of the phases and the diffusion mechanism of the species. The following conclusions are drawn from this study: The diffusion couple experiments indicate that the maximum stability temperature for the Ti 3 Si phase is higher than the temperature reported in the Ti-Si phase diagram. To date, several studies have been conducted to examine the growth of the phases in Hf/Si in thin film couples This chapter is written based on S. Roy and A. Paul, Growth of hafnium and zirconium silicides by reactive diffusion, Materials Chemistry and Physics, 143 (2014) 1309-1314 Movement of the impurities during the growth of this phase indicated that Si is the faster diffusing species. So et al. Unlike the Hf-Si system, studies on diffusion controlled growth of the phases in the Zr/Si system are very limited Therefore, the aim of this present study is to conduct bulk diffusion couple experiments in these two systems to analyze the growth mechanism of the phases and the diffusion mechanism of the species. Time dependent experiments are conducted to examine the diffusion controlled growth of the phases, and temperature dependent experiments to calculate the activation energies. Grain morphology in the interdiffusion zone indicates relative mobilities of the species, which help to predict defects and diffusion of elements. end members. Since all the phases in the interdiffusion zone are line compounds, we can calculate the integrated diffusion coefficient int D using the Wagner's relation where o D int ~ (m 2 /s) is the pre-exponential factor, Q (J/mol) is the activation energy and R the universal gas constant (8.314 J/mol.K). The activation energies for HfSi 2 and ZrSi 2 are estimated as 394±37 and 346±34 kJ/mol, respectively. The activation energy for HfSi is 485±42 kJ/mol. Chapter 4 The Kirkendall marker experiments could not be conducted, because, the material halves did not join when inert particles were used. However, location of the marker plane could be detected by revealing the grain morphology, based on which physico-chemical approach is developed Similar behavior was found in the V-Si Diffusion in an ordered phase is a complex process. Different concentration of defects on different sublattices makes it even more difficult to understand. Although diffusion coefficients and activation energies are being calculated in many systems, the lack of data on defects makes it difficult to understand the process in the atomic level. Extensive theoretical and experimental studies are available only in few phases, such as MoSi 2 Based on these studies and calculated parameters in HfSi 2 and ZrSi 2 , we can qualitatively discuss the diffusion process and possible defects present in the disilicides. Both the phases have orthorhombic C49 (oC12) crystal structure with 12 atoms per unit cell, as shown in the Fig. Refractory metals are proposed as the diffusion barrier layer in Cu interconnects between the Cu interconnect lines and the SiO 2 /Si substrate A few interdiffusion studies on both thin-film and bulk conditions are available are interested, at this point, in understanding the growth mechanism of the phases and the diffusion mechanism of the species, we shall consider only the interdiffusion process in the bulk condition. Christian et al. Therefore the aim of this study is to conduct bulk diffusion couple experiments to calculate first the integrated and the tracer diffusion coefficients of the species. Afterwards, the growth mechanism of the phases will be discussed. In the end, the problem with the calculation procedure followed by Milanese et al. will be explained. which are present in the Ta-Si phase diagram Time-dependent experiments conducted by Milanese et al. When only a single-phase layer grows in the interdiffusion zone, int D can be expressed as ( )( ) In the Ta/Si couples, the layer thickness of the Ta 5 Si 3 phase is very small compared to the thickness of the TaSi 2 phase. So Eq. 5.1 can be used to calculate the integrated diffusion coefficients of the TaSi 2 phase using their phase layer thickness and ignoring Ta 5 Si 3 without introducing any significant error. The annealing temperatures, layer thickness and the integrated diffusion coefficients are listed in Table where o D int ~ (m 2 /s) is the pre-exponential factor, Q (J/mol) is the activation energy and R is the universal gas constant (8.314 J/mol.K). The activation energy is estimated as 550 ± 70 kJ/mol. In line compounds, we cannot calculate the intrinsic or the ratio of intrinsic diffusion coefficients because we cannot determine the slope of the composition profile and the partial molar volumes of the species, V i . However, we can determine the ratio of the tracer diffusion coefficients using the relation developed by van Loo in Eqn. 4.2.2 , where o x β ∆ is the initial layer thickness. The integrated diffusion coefficients 105 calculated are listed in Table The estimated activation energies for integrated diffusion coefficients are in very good agreement with the activation energy for interdiffusion coefficients calculated by Milanese et al. However, they followed a method developed by Bulcagila and Anselmi-Tamburini ) ( ) where, II relations proposed by others It is not necessary to consider the thermodynamic parameter to calculate the interdiffusion, integrated or intrinsic diffusion coefficients. These parameters can be directly calculated from the composition profiles. The unnecessary introduction of this parameter (in Eq. The atomic mechanism of diffusion in intermetallic compounds is complex since atoms cannot jump randomly like in solid solution. Till date only a very few systems have been studied extensively, such as Ni aluminides TaSi 2 has a hexagonal C40 structure (hP9), as shown in Fig. As it is already shown in Fig. To gain an idea of the growth mechanism of the phases, let us consider the schematic representation, as shown in Fig. At interface II, Si dissociates from the TiSi 2 phase to produce the Ta 5 Si 3 phase. Dissociated Si diffuses through the Ta 5 Si 3 phase and reacts with Ta at interface I to produce the Ta 5 Si 3 phase. At the same time, Ta dissociates from Ta 5 Si 3 to produce the TaSi 2 phase at interface II. Dissociated Ta diffuses through the TaSi 2 phase to react with Si and produce the TaSi 2 phase. So, it must be clear that very complex reactions and dissociation processes happen at interface II That means we are considering the presence of the Kirkendall marker plane in both the phases. It should be noted here that the diffusion parameters are the material constants. This means that the data calculated from the incremental diffusion couple can be used to understand the growth process in the Ta/Si diffusion couple. We consider the thickness of the sublayers in the Ta 5 Si 3 phase as u 1 and u 2 and the thickness of the sublayers in the TaSi 2 phase as v 1 and v 2 . The integrated diffusion coefficients of the phases with the thickness of the sublayers at 1250 °C using Eq. 2.34 are Further, the ratio of the tracer diffusivities at 1250 °C can be related as where The calculated values of integrated diffusion coefficients and the ratio tracer diffusion coefficients at 1250 o C, as listed in Table Considering annealing time of 9 h, we solve the equations to get the values as u 1 = 64.41, u 2 = -63.51, u 3 = 42 and u 4 = 79 μm. Note here the negative value of u 2 . To explain the growth process further, we need to draw the velocity diagram. The velocity of the phase, β can be determined by (5.6) In a line compound, the partial molar volumes, i V are not known and we consider (see Eq. 4.2.2). From Eq. 5.6, we calculate the velocity values as 1.87x10 -10 m/s and as 4.02x10 -11 m/s for the Ta 5 Si 3 and the TaSi 2 phases, respectively. These are drawn with respect to 2tv in Fig. x intersects once with the velocity line of the TaSi 2 phase, it indicates the presence of one marker plane in this phase only. When we extend the velocity line of the Ta 5 Si 3 phase to ( ) , the intersection point indicates the location of the virtual Kirkendall marker plane of this phase. This is basically the marker plane that would be present in this phase if the Ta 5 Si 3 phase layer would not get consumed from the interface II. In fact the negative value of the sublayer thickness, u 2 indicates that this sublayer of the Ta 5 Si 3 phase is consumed by the TaSi 2 phase. The total layer thickness of the Ta 5 Si 3 phase is (u 1 +u 2 ) = 0.9 μm. It indicates that not only u 2 but part of the sublayer grows from the Ta/Ta 5 Si 3 interface also gets consumed. This is the reason we do not have any marker plane in this phase and we should not therefore expect duplex morphology in this phase. In this manuscript, we determined the required diffusion parameters to understand the atomic mechanism of diffusion and the growth mechanism of the phases. The ratios of the diffusivities required for the analysis were not available and we determined these values at the Kirkendall marker planes. The location of the marker planes were detected from the duplex morphology developed during the interdiffusion process. Although Milanese et al. Therefore, following Wagner's approach • Activation energies estimated for diffusion in this study is very close to the data calculated by Milanese et al. Christian et al. deposited the TaSi 2 phase by CVD method and then annealed at the desired temperatures. This might be the reason to find the difference; however, it is difficult for us to make any further comment at this point. Further, the activation energies calculated in this system is much higher than the values estimated in other refractory metal-silicon systems This could be because of high activation energy for the formation of defects in this system compared to other systems. • The growth rate of the Ta 5 Si 3 phase is much lower than that of the TaSi 2 phase. This is the reason to find almost two orders of magnitude lower integrated diffusion coefficient of the Ta 5 Si 3 phase compared to the TaSi 2 phase. • The locations of the marker planes were identified from the duplex morphology in the phase layers. The calculated ratios of tracer diffusivities calculated at these planes indicate that Si is the faster diffusing species in both the phases. It is rather surprising to find comparable diffusion rates of the species in the TaSi 2 phase, since Ta-Ta bonds are not present. This indicates the presence of a high concentration of Ta antisites. The higher diffusion rate of Si in the Ta 5 Si 3 phase is also unusual if we consider the nearest neighbors of the atoms as explained in section 4.1. Similar unusual behavior was found in the Nb-Si • The velocity diagram and the negative value of the thickness of one of the sublayers calculated in the Ta 5 Si 3 phase in the Ta/Si diffusion couple indicate that the Kirkendall marker plane should not be present in this phase. This further indicates that duplex morphology should not be present in this phase. On the other hand, the positive values of both the sublayers in the TaSi 2 phase indicate the presence of the Kirkendall marker plane and the duplex morphology in this phase. 1 Chapter 6 Diffusion in tungsten silicides Tungsten-silicon is one of the important refractory metal-silicon systems to study for its potential use in integrated circuits 122 the WSi 2 phase So the bulk diffusion couple experiments are conducted in this study to estimate first the integrated diffusion coefficients at different temperatures. Following this, the activation energies for diffusion are calculated. Ratios of tracer diffusion of elements are estimated at the Kirkendall marker plane. The atomic mechanism of diffusion with the help of crystal structures are then discussed. Mainly the WSi 2 phase was found to grow in the W/Si diffusion couples. The SEM image of the interdiffusion zone annealed at 1225 °C for 9 hours is shown in Fig. Therefore, the integrated diffusion coefficients, int D , which is the interdiffusion coefficient integrated over the unknown composition range of the phase is calculated using the relation developed by However, the ratio of tracer diffusion coefficients can be determined at the Kirkendall marker plane using the relation developed by van Loo since the data on structure factor is not available in this complex crystal structure. The contribution of the vacancy wind effects are discussed previously based on the experimental studies times higher diffusion rate compared to W. In NbSi 2 was found to be 4.8±1.4 and 1.2±0.1, respectively. On the other hand, in VSi 2 Since the thickness of the W 5 Si 3 phase was negligible in the W/Si couple, experiments in WSi 2 /W incremental couples were conducted. Interdiffusion zone of the couple annealed at 1623 K (1350 °C) for 16 hours is shown in Fig. Following similar method, as explained for the WSi 2 phase, int D at different temperatures is estimated using Eq. 5.1. These are listed in Table shown the location of this plane in their W/WiSi 2 diffusion couple at 1400 °C, although they did not calculate the ratio of tracer diffusion coefficients. Using Eq. 4. W2 is surrounded by 9 W and 6 Si. Si1, on the other hand, is surrounded by 8 W and 2 Si. Si2 is surrounded by 10 W and only 2 Si. That means both W and Si have many nearest neighbor bonds of the same elements. However, since Si has higher diffusion rate, it is expected that the concentration of vacancies on the Si sublattice must be higher than the vacancies present on the W sublattice. Moreover, the relatively smaller size of Si might be another reason to find higher diffusion rate of this species. In the Ta 5 Si 3 , this ratio ( ) of diffusivities varies in the range of 2.9-10.8. In the Nb 5 Si 3 and the Mo 5 Si 3 phases, this ratio was estimated as 31±15 Bulk diffusion couple experiments were conducted to understand the diffusion mechanism in the W-Si system. In the W/Si diffusion couples, only the WSi 2 phase grows with measurable thickness in the interdiffusion zone. Si has higher diffusion rate compared to W in this phase, which is rather expected. The presence of W antisites is apparent since it diffuses through the phase layer. W/WSi 2 incremental diffusion couple experiments were conducted to study the growth of the W 5 Si 3 phase. In this phase also Si In the beginning, we compare the diffusion parameters in the phases of our interest group wise. Following we shall discuss the atomic mechanism of diffusion and possible defects present on different sublattices. As already discussed on the growth of the phases in different systems from group IVB refractory metal-silicon systems, we have only one phase that is MSi 2 , in which the integrated diffusion coefficients and the ratio of diffusivities are estimated. It can be seen in Fig. In the group VB refractory metal silicon systems, as already discussed, we have studied the Ta/Si system. For the sake of comparison, we consider the results already available in the V-Si Again, like in the case of VSi 2 phase, continuous grains were found after etching in the MoSi 2 phase. Based on this, Prasad and Paul as infinite. In fact tracer diffusion studies conducted in this phase also support this prediction Although, WSi 2 and MoSi 2 have the same crystal structure, it can be seen that the marker plane is found inside the WSi 2 phase, whereas the Kirkendall plane was found at the determined to be 13.7 in WSi 2 and 11.9 in W 5 Si 3 from the marker experiment by Lee et al. Again the trend is the same for group VB refractory metal silicon systems. It can be seen from Fig. As shown in Fig. The previous discussion reveals definite patterns in the ratio of atomic diffusivities of the two components for silicides of the subgroups IVB, VB and VIB components as a function of the atomic number of the refractory metals. These data allows to shed light onto atomistic mechanisms of diffusion of the two components in the silicides under consideration and to reveal some trends in the diffusion behavior as a function of the atomic number in the refractory metal component. In the group IV refractory metal silicon systems, all the disilicides have orthorhombic structure. However, there is difference in the atomic arrangements and number of atoms in the unit cells for TiSi 2 with other two compounds i.e. ZrSi 2 and HfSi 2 . TiSi 2 has oF24, C54 structure, as shown in Fig. Assuming the vacancy diffusion mechanism and the anti-site type of disorder, the experimentally observed significantly larger diffusion rate of Si atoms predicts straightforwardly the dominant creation of vacancies on the Si sublattice. This fact was proven for the MoSi 2 phase However, this temperature corresponds to a sequentially reduced homologous temperature, T/T m , (T is the temperature of interest and T m is the melting point of the phase of interest), which are e.g. 0.76, 0.67, and 0.64 at 1473 K following the same sequence. Thus, at a constant homologous temperature the atomic mobilities of metal species are significantly increased with an increasing atomic number of the refractory metal, Fig. One may also argue about a potential contribution of cyclic diffusion mechanisms like an updated to the hP9 structure version of the well-known 6-jump-cycle mechanism (originally suggested for B2 compounds Again, the above reasoning for the next nearest neighbor jumps with respect to the dependence of the relative diffusivity as a function of the atomic number would completely applicable, too, and bring to an explicit contradiction with the experimental data. A detailed analysis of the correlation effects for Si diffusion via simple vacancy jumps over the Si sublattice provided a perfect agreement with the experiment for the MoSi 2 system Comparison of silicides in different groups in the periodic table Alternatively to the case of MSi 2 disilicides, the metallic atom sublattice is connected with respect to the next neighbor jumps of a metallic vacancy, whereas the Si atoms have mainly M atoms as nearest neighbors and only one to two neighboring Si atoms in dependence on the given position, are available. discussed in As a result, the mobilities of the two components approach one another in Ta 5 Si 3 with respect to that in Nb 5 Si 3 . Similar trends are observed for the M 5 Si 3 silicides of the subgroup VIB, Fig. We have considered group IVB, VB and VIB refractory metal silicides to show an interesting pattern in diffusion behavior with the change in atomic number in their respective groups. Mainly MSi 2 and M 5 Si 3 (M:Si) silicides are considered for discussion, which have similar crystal structures in a group. Following important conclusions are drawn for this study: • Except Ta-silicides, MSi 2 have lower activation energy for integrated diffusion compared to M 5 Si 3 . In the Ta-Si system, TaSi 2 has higher activation energy compared to Ta 5 Si 3 . • Location of the Kirkendall marker plane is detected by the presence of uniform or duplex grain morphology and line of pores in the phases. In the Nb 5 Si 3 , both inert particles (TiO 2 ) and morphology indicates the location. • In the IVB M-Si systems, marker planes are present at the Si/MSi 2 interface. That means Si has much higher diffusion rate compared to metal component. The increase in diffusion rate with the increase in atomic number of the metal species indicate that vacancies increase on the Si sublattice. • In the group VB M-Si systems, the Kirkendall marker plane moves systematically from the MSi 2 /Si interface towards inside the MSi 2 phase, with the increase in atomic number of the metal species i.e. in the sequence of VSi 2 , NbSi 2 and TaSi 2 . Since the marker plane is located at the MSi 2 /Si interface in the V-Si system, it indicates few orders of magnitude higher diffusion rate of Si compared to V. On the other hand, the marker plane in the TaSi 2 is close to the initial contact plane (Matano plane), which indicates comparable diffusion rates of both the species. • Similar behavior is found in the group VIB M-Si systems, where marker plane is located at the MoSi 2 /Si interface and with the increase in atomic number of the metal species that is in W-Si system, the marker plane moves inside WSi 2 . • Therefore, with the increase in atomic number of the refractory metal, the relative • Since no M-M nearest neighbors are present in MSi 2 , diffusion of M must be possible because of presence of M anti-sites. High diffusion rate of Si is expected because of presence of vacancies mainly on the Si sublattice, which is determined experimentally in the MoSi 2 phase • In M 5 Si 3 , only one or two Si-Si bonds are present compared to many M-M bonds; however, Si has much higher diffusion rate. This fact may be interpreted in terms of Si diffusion over M sublattice via M vacancies. A strong contribution of the anti-structure bridge mechanism for diffusion of Si atoms is predicted. phases is found to be negligible compared to MSi 2 . Because of this reason the M 5 Si 3 phases are studied by incremental diffusion couple. Analysis shows that Si is the faster diffusing element in all the silicides in the present study. The Ti-Si system was studied to understand the growth mechanism of the phases and the diffusion mechanism of the species. All the five equilibrium phases are found to grow in Ti/Si diffusion couple up to 1225 o C. The maximum stability temperature for the Ti 3 Si phase is found to be higher than the temperature reported in the Ti-Si phase 1: Specifications of the pure elements used for the present study. : The range of annealing temperature for the systems in this study. 1.1 (a) Thicknesses of phases grown at different temperatures after 16 hrs of annealing and (b) Thickness of phases annealed for different times at 1200 o C.