Waveguide-integrated plasmonics is a growing field with many innovative concepts and demonstrated devices in the visible and near-infrared. Here, we extend this body of work to the mid-infrared for the application of surface-enhanced infrared absorption (SEIRA), a spectroscopic method to probe molecular vibrations in small volumes and thin films. Built atop a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) waveguide platform, two key plasmonic structures useful for SEIRA are examined using computational modeling: gold nanorods and coaxial nanoapertures. We find resonance dips of 80% in near diffraction-limited areas due to arrays of our structures and up to 40% from a single resonator. Each of the structures are evaluated using the simulated SEIRA signal from poly(methyl methacrylate) and an octadecanethiol self-assembled monolayer. The platforms we present allow for a compact, on-chip SEIRA sensing system with highly efficient waveguide coupling in the mid-IR. Much work has previously been performed on integrating plasmonics In this letter, we theoretically examine silicon waveguide-integrated plasmonics for surface-enhanced infrared absorption (SEIRA) Metallic nanorods are a versatile building block for both waveguide-integrated plasmonics and resonant SEIRA. They are compact and can yield high field enhancements despite having such a simple geometry. While structures with few nanorods atop waveguides have already been fabricated and well-studied, we take this structure and tune it for use on MIR waveguides us-ing dimensions similar to previous work in this area A complementary structure we propose for waveguideintegrated plasmonics are annular apertures with very small gaps (∼10s of nm), which are also promising for MIR SEIRA applications )| 2 where t 1,2 are the transmission amplitude coefficients of the cavity ends, r 1,2 are the reflection amplitude coefficients with corresponding phases φ 1,2 , and d is the thickness, we find that if the reflection phase is negative, it can cancel with 2βd and the Fabry-Perot condition is fulfilled, leading to resonant transmission and field enhancement. Since the propagation phase in the cavity is canceled upon reflection at the ends (and 2βd < 2π), the field profile is uniform, as seen in Figure Placing a single aperture on the waveguide with a 20 nm gap, we find coupling efficiencies of 40% around 3.5 Field enhancements are similar to those observed for far-field array devices (Figure μm (Figure To evaluate the SEIRA performance of each of these structures, we simulated the structures with both a uniform 200 nm layer of PMMA and a 2 nm octadecanethiol (ODT) self-assembled monolayer and examined the absorption of the C-H bond bending resonances around 3.4 μm. The 200 nm layer of PMMA is intended to probe the entire electric field distribution available for sensing, while the 2 nm layer yield information regarding the confinement of the field to the surface. As can be seen in Figure These findings suggest that coaxial nanoapertures generally exhibit higher performance, which is not surprising when taking into account the recent work of Huck, et al. Up to this point, structures with only one geometrical set of parameters have been examined. By placing multiple structures on the same waveguide with varying parameters, it is possible to create very broad resonances. As seen in Figure Waveguide-integrated plasmonics is a growing field with many promising aspects for use in the lab-on-a-chip and photonics communities. While visible/NIR sensing applications of both SERS and refractometric sensing have both been previously demonstrated, in this work we computationally push the devices to the MIR for the application of SEIRA. In comparing gold nanorods and coaxial nanoapertures using simulated PMMA and ODT layers, we find that ring-shaped coaxial nanoapertures, a gap-based device exhibiting super-coupling effects, yields superior performance to nanorods, but both can have ∼90% absorption in a near diffraction-limited size. Furthermore, using a single coaxial nanoaperture, we find up to 40% of absorption, pushing the bar towards ultrasensitive detections of low-number molecular analytes. While the devices are only theoretically studied here, the fabrication of these devices is achievable, which we plan to demonstrate in a future publication and evaluate realworld performance. Computational modeling was performed using COM-SOL Multiphysics in the frequency domain. To decrease simulation time, only half of the geometry was simulated taking advantage of the plane of symmetry parallel to the waveguide while scattering boundary conditions were used perpendicular to the waveguide direction (except for the boundary of symmetry). Perfectly matched layers were used at the ends of the waveguide to increase the accuracy of the simulation. Reflection and transmission measurements were measured across a simulation plane before and after the plasmonic devices. Only the optical power in the fundamental TE modes were included in these calculations. Optical constants for silicon, gold, alumina, PMMA, and ODT were obtained from previous works This work was supported primarily by the grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF ECCS No. Here, the rod length is 500 nm, the width is 275 nm, the period in the x-direction is 1 μm, and the period in the y-direction is 475 nm. (b) Corresponding electric field map exhibiting similar field enhancement as the waveguideintegrated device.