Measurements of charge-carrier lifetime in many early-stage thin-film photovoltaic materials can be arduous due to the prevalence of defects and limited information about material properties. In this perspective, we give a brief overview of typical techniques for measuring lifetimes and discuss the intuition involved in estimating lifetimes from such techniques, focusing on time-resolved photoluminescence as an example. We then delve into the underlying assumptions and uncertainties involved in analyzing lifetime measurements. Finally, we outline opportunities for improving accuracy of lifetime measurements by utilizing two emerging techniques to decouple different recombination mechanisms: two-photon spectroscopy, which we demonstrate on BiI3 thin films, and temperature-and injection-dependent current-voltage measurements. * Here, we prefer the term "charge-carrier lifetime" rather than the more traditional "minority-carrier lifetime." Theoretically, one can define separate "minority-carrier" and "majority-carrier" lifetimes, but most lifetime measurement techniques actually observe recombination (via the excess carrier concentration), which intrinsically involves both electrons and holes, even if one carrier type dominates. As such, we use "chargecarrier lifetime" to avoid the impression that the lifetime is determined solely by one carrier type. Efforts to discover and develop new thin-film photovoltaic (PV) absorbers comprising Earthabundant and non-toxic constituents are accelerating in hopes of lowering PV manufacturing capital costs-which limit industry growth In this perspective, we give a brief overview of lifetime measurement techniques in semiconductors, focusing on their application to early-stage PV materials. Using time-resolved photoluminescence as an example, we discuss (1) the intuition involved in planning experiments for measuring lifetimes; (2) uncertainties in such measurements and how to account for them, emphasizing the risk in naïvely conflating lifetimes with PL decay time constants; and (3) opportunities for advancing the state of the art of lifetime measurements by decoupling recombination mechanisms using (a) two-photon photoluminescence spectroscopy and (b) temperature-and illumination-dependent current-voltage measurements. In semiconductors, electrons can be excited to higher energy states (e.g., due to the absorption of a photon), creating electron-hole pairs-a process called generation. At some later time, these electrons will fall back to their ground states through recombination. The charge-carrier lifetime is typically defined as the average time it takes for electrons and holes to recombine after excitation. Because charge-carrier lifetime is defined as this statistical average-involving large populations of electrons and holes all recombining at different times via multiple pathways-it cannot be measured directly; in other words, it remains prohibitively difficult to track individual charge-carriers, sum up their individual lifetimes, and precisely calculate their average. As such, lifetime must be somehow inferred from another property such as photoluminescence, photoconductance, or photovoltaic response in which generation and recombination both occur. Rates for both generation (G) and bulk recombination (R) are incorporated into the continuity equation for charge carriers in semiconductors (shown here for electrons): where Δn is the excess carrier concentration, D is the diffusivity, μ is charge-carrier mobility, E is electric field, and x and t are dimensions of distance and time, respectively. The third and fourth terms on the right side of equation ( Lifetime (τ) relates to equation (1) through the bulk recombination term R, which typically includes Shockley-Read-Hall † (SRH) Other models that directly relate the various τ's to R are described in Refs. Simple analytic solutions to equation (1)-for example, monoexponential decay of the form . -occur only under specific situations, such as in low injection when one recombination type dominates Different optoelectronic properties can be utilized to perform lifetime measurements, the most common being (1) photoluminescence, (2) photoconductance, and (3) photovoltaic response. Figure While we do not intend to provide an exhaustive list of techniques, since that has been done previously To serve as an example for guiding intuition, we will focus on (time-resolved) photoluminescence, though its analysis is similar to that for photoconductance since both techniques monitor signals that can be related to Δn(x,t), which itself relates directly to solutions to equation (1). Approaches to measure lifetimes from photovoltaic response generally require further assumptions and/or numerical methods; we will highlight these in the "opportunities" section. with time responses of ~50 ps and ultrafast (femtosecond or picosecond) pulsed lasers, one can achieve sub-100-ps resolution in the decay of the photoluminescence (PL) signal after a generation event. Electrical contacts are not needed, and depending on the measurement setup, either optically opaque or transparent substrates can be used. However, weakly emitting samples are problematic, so materials with indirect band gaps can be difficult to measure, especially those with band gaps close to that of the detector (usually Si or InGaAs). A typical setup involves a laser, focusing optics, filters to remove excess laser light, power meter, timing electronics (for single-photon-counting setups), and detector; see Refs. TRPL measurements are designed to detect photons emitted from the sample via radiative recombination. One should be careful not to then conclude that the timescales involved in the PL decay are determined only by radiative recombination rates. In fact, PL as a function of time relates to the excess carrier concentration as a function of time (and depth within the film), Δn(x,t); thus, all types of recombination affect the PL dynamics, including Auger and SRH recombination, which are typically non-radiative in nature. It is precisely this fact that allows for the relation of lifetime to PL in the first place. This can be seen in equation (3) below: where B is a material-dependent coefficient for radiative recombination, and n0 and p0 are the equilibrium carrier concentrations for electrons and holes, respectively. Since 2 = 3 + ∆ 2 3 + ∆2 , equation ( recognizing that PL, Δn, and Δp are all time-dependent terms. Using equation ( In practice, the PL coefficient B is often unknown for early-stage PV materials, and thus is often estimated or included as a fitting parameter For defect-assisted recombination, the variation of lifetime with injection level can be directly seen from SRH statistics, where n and p affect the overall recombination rate Under low-injection conditions, equation ( and excitation wavelength during measurements can aid in separating out different recombination pathways. Additionally, because carriers may also diffuse or drift before recombining, PL must account for recombination everywhere within a film by integrating over the film thickness, and recognizing that carriers may propagate laterally. Different models used to perform this integration (e.g., front and back surface recombination vs. semi-infinite solid) can result in different fits When analyzing time-resolved measurements, ultimately one must either solve equation ( Alternative formulations to represent lifetimes or recombination can also help avoid confusion. If the purpose of lifetime measurements is to assess general recombination strength rather than identify specific recombination pathways, defining lifetime as the time nτ required for the PL decay to decrease to (1/e) n of its initial value (where n is a positive integer, typically 1 or 2) may be a more relevant way to make conclusions about how lifetime varies due to experimental parameters In Table . + 9 exp +-, -< ., and separately, the "1/e time" as described above and in Ref. If materials parameters are known with sufficient accuracy, numerical modeling can also be used to fit lifetimes using equation ( Table As boundary conditions to equation (1), surface recombination, S, can also affect the carrier concentration Δn, and thus the PL as a function of time: Thus, surface recombination can also obscure changes in PL due to recombination, providing additional complications to analysis. In thin-film materials, surfaces tend to dominate much more strongly than in bulk crystals or materials with low absorption coefficients. While surface recombination is typically used as a catch-all term for a defect-rich interface, it can be thought of as a process involving a myriad of SRH-type defects to the point that successive non-radiative recombination steps proceed in sequence. As such, surface recombination can exhibit injection dependence as well, which is beginning to be accounted for in some models Despite the many uncertainties involved in measuring lifetimes in early-stage PV materials, there remain opportunities for innovation in both measurement and analysis techniques. Employing the use of two-photon absorption, in which a semiconductor is optically excited using sub-bandgap light, offers opportunities for probing sub-surface charge-carrier dynamics. Twophoton absorption is a nonlinear optical effect that only occurs in regions of high photon flux. Typically, this requires the use of a pulsed laser system. By controlling the location of a high-photonflux region (e.g., by using a focusing optic), carriers can be generated at arbitrary locations, including below surfaces, while in low-photon-flux regions sub-bandgap light is simply transmitted or reflected. Thus, the typical Beer-Lambert generation profile common in PL measurements can be avoided. Instead, generation profiles that peak beneath the surface are possible, and it is therefore possible to decrease or eliminate the effect of surface recombination-which in some cases can dominate τeff-on lifetime measurements. We demonstrate this technique by probing CdTe single crystals (borrowing the sample and procedure from Ref. Furthermore, it is possible that different spin-selection rules for carrier excitation may result in different excited carrier dynamics, although this possibility has been little explored. With sufficient modeling capabilities, lifetime can be extracted or inferred from electrical measurements of full solar cell devices. For example, quantum efficiency measurements-typically used to diagnose current losses-can be modeled to extract mobility-lifetime product μτ, and the application of voltage and light biases can assist in this process, though uncertainties (most notably, absorption coefficient) still exist here With the advent of machine learning and advanced statistical approaches, researchers in many fields are using Bayesian-inference-type approaches to infer input parameters from simulated data. Recently, this approach has been applied to solar cells based on tin monosulfide (SnS) Additionally, the Bayesian inference approach was able to infer a surface recombination velocity of 1000-1800 cm/s in SnS devices, a previously unknown parameter To assess how the process of developing PV materials can be accelerated, we have outlined potential techniques for measuring charge-carrier lifetimes, focusing on the applicability of these techniques to early-stage thin-film materials. Our breakdown of these techniques by magnitude of resistivity and lifetime, band gap character, and sensitivity to shunting should provide researchers with a more comprehensive framework for choosing the technique that is most likely to yield positive results. We discuss the intuition involved in relating lifetimes to experimental measurements (particularly time-resolved photoluminescence), encouraging experimentalists to remain aware of uncertainties due to unknown material properties and use exponential fitting procedures judiciously. Two-photon spectroscopy measurements on BiI3 result in longer extracted PL decay time constants (1-2 ns) compared to typical one-photon excitation (below 1 ns), which demonstrates the potential for decreasing the effect of surface recombination. This and similar techniques, including advanced PV device modeling, offer other ways to reduce uncertainties in lifetime, which we hope will further facilitate the development of early-stage PV materials. The bismuth triiodide (BiI3) thin film was grown by physical vapor transport of BiI3 source powder (99.999%, Alfa Aesar) onto a sapphire substrate, both placed inside a two-zone quartz tube furnace, as described in Ref. Both one-photon (532 nm with laser pulse fluence of 1.5 μJ/cm 2 ) and two-photon (1064 nm with laser pulse fluence of 13 μJ/cm 2 ) photoluminescence measurements were performed on BiI3 and CdTe at the Molecular Foundry at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Pulsed laser light from a Coherent Chameleon Ultra II Compact OPO 150-fs pulsed Ti:sapphire laser with a 12 MHz repetition rate was reflected off a 950 nm dichroic filter, through a NA=0.95 objective, and onto the same location for both one-and two-photon excitation for each sample. Emitted light was then transmitted through the dichroic, through a 945 nm short pass filter (plus 550 nm long pass filter for one-photon excitation), spatially filtered with a 100 μm pinhole, and finally absorbed a single-photon avalanche photodiode detector (MPD PDM-series). A PicoQuant PicoHarp 300 time-correlated single-photon counting module was used to collect time-resolved data. For additional details about the microscope, objective, sample stage, and detector, and CdTe sample, see Ref. 