Topological phases of matter support robust, yet exotic quantum states at their boundaries such as spin-momentum locked transport channels or Majorana fermions Due to its exemplary role in describing chiral topological insulators, charge fractionalization and spin-charge separation in one-dimension (1D), there have been numerous efforts to realize the SSH-Hamiltonian in cold atom, photonic and acoustic experimental configurations The fundamental features of the SSH model which describes a 1D chain of dimerized, coupled and spinless fermion states are summarized in Fig. Importantly, these three extremal solutions of the SSH chain can be smoothly connected by introducing a phase factor , ∈ [0, The ability to flexibly engineer SSH-like topological quantum phases in GNRs firstly requires a suitable electronic state representing |5 6 ⟩. We identify such a state in the zero energy boundary state present at the junction of two armchair graphene nanoribbons (1-AGNR) of different width. Here 1 denotes the number of transverse carbon atom rows in the usual sense We have conceived a synthetic design to realize the staggered 7-AGNR-[ A constant-height non-contact atomic force microcopy (nc-AFM) image of the resulting structure is shown in Fig. STS investigation reveals that the 2.4 eV band gap of the pristine 7-AGNR on Au(111) In order to clarify this we exploit the bulk-boundary correspondence There is, however, a complication arising from the concomitant presence of zigzag termini related end states of the 1-AGNR backbone In order to verify this finding experimentally, the synthetic route shown in Fig. shows nearly identical spectra and no indication of an end state. This is further corroborated by dI/dV mapping at selected energies around ( = 0 (Fig. V the onset of the spatially extended VB states of the 7-AGNR-[(1,3) can be seen, at U=0.25 V we are in the gap with no particular features, and at +0.65 V the bottom of the CB can be observed which is in good agreement with the TB charge density simulation of the lowest energy CB state of the 7-AGNR -7-AGNR-[ If instead of an asymmetric 1-to (1 + 2)-AGNR junction an axially symmetric 1-to (1 + 4)-AGNR junction is considered, as illustrated in Fig. (Z E = 0). The bulk BS for the 7-AGNR-](1,3) exhibits two trans-PA like bands with $ % =0.45 eV and $ ' =0.65 eV (Fig. The synthetic route to the 7-AGNR extended 7-AGNR-](1,3) inline structure is analogous to the one for the staggered structure, but with 6,13-bis(10bromoanthracen-9-yl)-1,4,8,11-tetramethylpentacene (BATMP, monomer 3) used as the precursor molecule instead of monomer 1. Fig. dI/dV mapping at this energy shows indeed that this state is spatially localized at the two ends of the 7-AGNR-](1,3) segment (Fig. Furthermore, due to the insulator-metal-insulator transition occurring for different junction configurations of a given 1-AGNR backbone, the band gap can be tuned over a wide range without changing the width of the GNR. Using dedicated on-surface synthesis routes we have grown edge-extended 7-AGNRs exhibiting topologically trivial and non-trivial quantum phases. Given their structural and chemical stability an integration of these topological nanomaterials in electronic devices is readily conceivable. The calculations of the electronic structure are based on the nearest-neighbor hopping Tight Binding (TB) Hamiltonian considering the 2pz orbital of the carbon atoms only: Here ! 6 s and ! 6 denote the usual creation and annihilation operators on site ". 〈", z〉 denotes the summation over nearest neighbor (NN) sites, the on-site energies r 6 are all set to zero, and the NN hopping parameter is chosen to be N u =3 eV. Band structures (BS) are calculated by taking into account the wave-vector dependent complex Bloch phase factors in the TB Hamiltonian. Unfolding of the BS into the extended Brillouin zone is achieved by projection of the wave functions of energy with a=2.44 Å being the length of the graphene basis vector. Wave functions are reconstructed from the TB Eigenvectors Ä 6,% of energy ( % by summing up the C 2pz Slater type orbitals with x=1.625/au over the atomic sites " of the structure STS-mapping simulations are achieved in first approximation by displaying the charge density of the considered states in the energy interval [r Ü , r E ] at constant height Å u according to: The results of the BS calculations of the 7-AGNR-S(1,3) and 7-AGNR-I(1,3) structures are compared to DFT calculations in Fig. The chemical synthesis of the monomers 1 (BADMT), 2 (BATMP) and 3 (DBBA) is detailed in the Supplementary Materials section together with details of the on-surface synthesis of the corresponding GNRs (Scheme S1, Fig. A commercial low-temperature STM/AFM system (Scienta Omicron) with a base pressure below 1×10 -10 mbar was used for sample preparation and characterization under ultra-high vacuum conditions. Au(111) single crystal substrates were cleaned by standard argon sputtering and annealing cycles. Molecular precursors were deposited from a homemade sixfold evaporator, which allows sublimation of two molecular species at the same time. The deposition flux was around 2 Å/min as determined by a quartz crystal microbalance. STM images and differential conductance dI/dV maps were recorded in constant-current mode unless noted otherwise. Constant-height tunneling current and nc-AFM frequency shift images were recorded with a CO-functionalized tip attached to a quartz tuning fork sensor (resoncance frequency 23.5 kHz). dI/dV spectra were recorded using the lock-in technique (Urms = 20 mV at 680 Hz modulation). All data shown were acquired at a sample temperature of 5 K. The atomic structure of the graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) that we discuss in this work is based on an armchair GNR (AGNR) backbone having NN rows of carbon atoms in the transverse direction (NN-AGNR). This NN-AGNR backbone is locally asymmetrically extended to a (NN + 2)-AGNR or symmetrically extended to a (NN + 4)-AGNR, as illustrated in Fig. For the staggered SS-structure the segment length is denoted by the integer nn ≥ 1, which refers to the number of units constituting the (NN + 2)-AGNR segment (Fig. Width of the backbone, counting the number of transverse rows of carbon atoms. An identifier for "Staggered" nn: (NN + 2) segment length, starting with nn ≥ 1 mm: Across the ribbon (NN + 2) segment spacing, with mm ≥ 1 (NN odd → mm integer, NN even → mm half integer) In addition to the staggered (SS) structure the inline (II) arrangement of two (NN + 2) aligned segments across the NN-AGNR backbone is possible. NN, nn and mm retain their meaning with regard to the SS-structure with the index mm denoting the separation of the segments along the same edge as well as across the backbone. In contrast to the SS-structure, for the II-structure the NN-AGNR backbone is locally extended to a finite length (NN + 4)-AGNR segment with NN being odd. The nomenclature for this inline arrangement is NN-AGNR-II(nn, mm), with: NN: Number of transverse rows of carbon atoms in the backbone NN, must be odd. An identifier for "I"nline" nn: (NN + 4)segment length, starting with (nn ≥ 1) mm: Across the ribbon (NN + 4) segment spacing (mm ≥ 2) The specific electronic properties of the SSand II-structures are rooted in the particular electronic character of their parent NN-AGNR. The NN-AGNRs can be classified according to their electronic character in 3 families Dependence of the NN-AGNR nearest neighbor TB energy gap on ribbon width NN. The electronic family is denoted by the marker color. The three electronically different types of junctions i) -iii) for the staggered NN/(NN + 2) (Fig. Considering a NN-AGNR backbone with a single edge-extended segment (as shown in Fig. For the staggered edge extensions (SS-structure): For the inline edge extensions (II structure): where "sc" and "met" indicate the semiconducting and metallic nature of the corresponding ribbon structure, respectively. Catalogue of highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO, i.e. closed to E=0) TB wave functions for the six possible junction types i) to iii) for the staggered NN → (NN + 2)-AGNR and the inline NN → (NN + 4)-AGNR junctions. It can be seen from Fig. This behavior can be understood when looking at the staggered NN-AGNR / (NN + 2)-AGNR and the inline NN-AGNR / (NN + 4)-AGNR junctions as regions of gradual increase of AGNR width, i.e. by considering the (NN + 1) and the (NN + 1), (NN + 2) and (NN + 3) intermediate widths for the two cases, respectively (Fig. For small nn and mm the junction states interact with each other and split in energy. Furthermore, the junction states can hybridize with the metallic NN-AGNR backbone for case iii) or the metallic (NN + 2) segment in case i) of the staggered NN-AGNR-SS(nn, mm). In Fig. The DFT simulations were performed with the plane wave code quantum espresso The DFT band structures shown in Fig. The zigzag edge structure at the boundary of the N-AGNR backbone and the edge-extended ribbon segements suggests the possibility of magnetic ordering of the corresponding boundary states. To explore this, Mean-Field Hubbard Tight Binding (MFH-TB) calculations were carried out in the singleband scheme by considering only the nearest-neighbor hopping parameter γγ 0 = 3 eV in the tight binding term of the Hamiltonian, and an on-site Coulomb repulsion UU = 1 * γγ 0 The localized nature of the spin-degenerate zero energy junction states implies that they can be susceptible to Hubbard type splitting due to Coulombic electron-electron interaction. This energy splitting, which is the analogue of the opening of the Hubbard gap in regular zigzag edge GNRs, is accompanied with spin polarization of the corresponding states The terminus of a NN-AGNR-SS(nn, mm) can host two kinds of zero energy states: A topological end state originating from the segment boundary states, and the zigzag end state of the N-AGNR backbone (Fig. The dependence on backbone extension length of the hybridization between the backbone end state and the end state of topologically non-trivial staggered and inline AGNRs is illustrated in Fig. LDOS at the junction end state as a function of the length of the backbone extension in (terms of 7-AGNR unit cells) for a, the 7-AGNR-SS(1,1) and b, the 7-AGNR-II(1,3). In the case of a topologically trivial structure such as the experimentally realized 7-AGNR-SS(1,3), only the zigzag backbone end state is present. Due to particle-hole symmetry, it remains at E=0 independent of the length of the backbone extension. This can clearly be seen in Fig. Synthesis of the 7-AGNR-SS(1,3) and 7-AGNR-II(1,3) nanoribbon structures has been realized by means of dehalogenative aryl-aryl coupling and subsequent cyclodehydrogenation of the precursor monomers 1 and 3 (for details see section 7. "Precursor synthesis"), respectively, on a Au(111) surface under ultrahigh-vacuum conditions. The on-surface synthesis strategy is analogous to the one described by Cai et al. Au(111) single crystal substrates were cleaned by standard argon ion sputtering and annealing cycles. Molecular precursors were sublimated using a homemade six-fold evaporator, which allows sublimation of two molecules sequentially or at the same time. The deposition flux was around 2Å/min as determined by a quartz crystal microbalance. Fig. On-surface synthesis of backbone extended 7-AGNR / 7-AGNR-SS(1,3) heterostructures was achieved via sequential deposition of monomer 1 and monomer 2 (10,10'-dibromo-9,9'-bianthryl, DBBA). In a first step, monomer 1 was deposited on the Au(111) substrate held at room temperature, followed by an annealing step at 150° C for 10 minutes. In a second step, monomer 2 was deposited onto the sample held at 150° C, followed by annealing steps at 200° C, 250° C, and 400° C for 10 minutes at each temperature. With this recipe, the 7-AGNR segments always locate at the termini of heterostructures, as seen in Fig. 7-AGNR / 7-AGNR-II(1,3) heterostructures were synthesized using the same recipe than the one described above for 7-AGNR / 7-AGNR-SS(1,3) heterostructures, but with the precursor monomers 2 and 3 (6,13-bis(10-bromoanthracene-9-yl)-1,4,8,11-tetramethylpentacene, BATMP) (Fig. Experimental Raman data from a sample of 7-AGNR-SS(1,3) grown on Au(111) were obtained under ambient conditions using a Raman Bruker Senterra spectrometer (3 × 60 seconds, 2 mW) with an incident wavelength of 532 nm. Raman modeling of the 7-AGNR-SS(1,3) was conducted with a combination of density functional theory (DFT) based calculations to determine the normal modes of the structure and of a bond-polarization model for the determination of Raman intensities. The DFT calculations were performed with the VASP package Raman analysis of the staggered edge-extended 7-AGNR-SS(1,3) ribbon structure. a, Comparison of DFT simulated spectrum (black curve) and experimental Raman spectra taken directly after growth (blue curve) and after 5 days in air (red curve). Both experimental and simulated spectra show multiple radial breathing like modes (RBLM) centered at about 300 cm -1 (experiment: 308 and 370 cm -1 ; DFT: 307 and 370 cm -1 , labeled RBLM-a and RBLM-b) and a multitude of TO and LO mode analogues. These are located around 1580 cm -1 (experiment) and at 1579, 1587, 1595, and 1603 cm -1 (DFT) and labeled TO-a, TO-b, LO-a, and LO-b, respectively. These rich features are unique fingerprints of GNRs with non-trivial edge structure. The good agreement between experimental and theoretical data underlines the quality of the sample. A 5 days stability study proves the robustness of the 7-AGNR-SS(1,3) under ambient conditions, with no significant changes in the main Raman modes ("5 days experimental", measured under the same conditions as "0 days experimental"). b, Phonon mode schematics of selected Raman-active modes for the staggered edge-extended 7-AGNR-SS(1,3) as well as for the pristine 7-AGNR for comparison. All commercially available chemicals were purchased from TCI, Aldrich, Acros, Merck, and other commercial suppliers and used without further purification unless otherwise noted. Monomer 2 (10,10'dibromo-9,9'-bianthryl) was synthesized according to our previous report Monomers 1 and 3 were synthesized as shown in Scheme S1. 7,10-Dimethyltetracene-5,12-dione (5) was initially prepared through Diels-Alder cycloaddition of 1,4-napthoquinone and an o-quinodimethane insitu generated from 2,3-bis(bromomethyl)-1,4-dimethylbenzene (4) through iodide-induced debromination To a suspension of 9,10-dibromoanthracene (1.01 g, 3.00 mmol) in dry diethyl ether (30 mL) was added a solution of n-Butyllithium (n-BuLi) (1.5 mL, 2.4 mmol, 1.6 M in hexanes) dropwise at -78 °C. The reaction mixture was stirred for 2 h under argon to obtain an orange solution of 10-bromo-9-anthracenyllithium. To a suspension of 7,10-dimethyltetracene-5,12-dione (7) (258 mg, 0.900 mmol) in 20 mL of dry diethyl ether was added at 0 °C the separately prepared solution of 10-bromo-9-anthracenyllithium via a double-tipped needle under argon. The reaction mixture was stirred for 1 h at this temperature, and then allowed to gradually warm to room temperature. After stirring for 12 h, the reaction was quenched by adding 3 mL of glacial acetic acid. The precipitates were then collected by filtration and washed with diethyl ether. To the resulting crude material placed in a 100-mL round-bottom flask was added glacial acetic acid (45 mL), NaI (1.35 g, 9.00 mmol) and NaH 2 PO 2 ・H 2 O (1.43 g, 13.5 mmol). The reaction mixture was refluxed for 3 h under the exclusion of light. After cooling down to room temperature, the precipitates were collected by filtration, and then washed with water and methanol to afford analytically pure monomer 1 as an orange solid (288 mg, 40% yield). For the on-surface experiments, further purification was performed by recrystallization through slow diffusion of degassed methanol into a degassed solution of 1 in dichloromethane under argon, which was repeated 8 times. M.p.: >315 °C. The single crystal of 1 suitable for X-ray analysis was obtained by slow diffusion of degassed methanol into a degassed solution of 1 in dichloromethane under argon and exclusion of light. Bromine atoms are labelled in brown. The single crystal of 3 suitable for X-ray analysis was obtained by slow diffusion of degassed methanol into a degassed solution of 3 in chloroform under argon and exclusion of light . ( % (* j⃗ ∥ ) on plane waves ∥ )kh. The corresponding weight is displayed by marker size and color. Here * j⃗ ∥ and * j⃗ } denote the wave vectors parallel and perpendicular to the GNR axis, respectively. } = 2H 3⁄ and * j⃗ ∥ = 2H √3⁄