Quantum key distribution (QKD) provides an attractive solution for secure communication. However, channel disturbance severely limits its application when a QKD system is transfered from the laboratory to the field. Here, a high-speed Faraday-Sagnac-Michelson QKD system is proposed that can automatically compensate for the channel polarization disturbance, which largely avoids the intermittency limitations of environment mutation. Over a 50-km fiber channel with 30-Hz polarization scrambling, the practicality of this phase-coding QKD system was characterized with an interference fringe visibility of 99.35% over 24 hours, and a stable secure key rate of 306k bits/s over 7 days without active polarization alignment. Quantum key distribution (QKD) allows two remote parties (named Alice and Bob) to share secure keys in the presence of an eavesdropper. Its unconditional security is guaranteed by the fundamental laws of quantum physics. As the first commercial application of quantum physics at the single-quantum level In QKD systems deployed over telecom fiber networks, the field environments typically break down into two parts: operating conditions of QKD units, and environments of installed fiber channels that are used to transmit quantum states. By careful design, the operating conditions of QKD units can be well controlled, i.e., isolated from complex environments. While, the environments of installed fiber channels are uncontrollable and ever-changing, quantum states are inevitably disturbed during transmission in fiber channels. More crucially, channel disturbance induced by the external environment accumulates with distance Channel disturbance countermeasures in QKD systems can be classified into active and passive categories. In QKD systems employing active countermeasures, polarization basis alignment modules are added to compensate for birefringence variations in fiber channels Here, we overcome this speed limitation by im- proving the structure of a Faraday-Michelson QKD system. The newly developed QKD system is based on the asymmetric Faraday-Sagnac-Michelson interferometer structure. It is intrinsically stable against channel disturbance and has high-speed support. In a 50-km single mode fiber channel with polarization scrambling, the interference fringe visibility was tested over 24 hours, and gigahertz quantum key distribution was implemented over 7 days without active polarization alignment. The practicality of this gigahertz QKD system is characterized by the stabilities of visibility, QBERs, and overall gains under channel disturbance. The Faraday-Sagnac-Michelson QKD system is outlined in Fig. In comparison with our previous Faraday-Michelson QKD system The phase modulation effects in the FMI and FSMI are equivalent if all optical components are perfect. To demonstrate this, we only need to verify the equivalence of input and reflected pulses of the long arm between FMI and FSMI, since the configuration of the long arm is the only difference between FMI and FSMI, and PM lies in the long arm. As shown in the right panel of Fig. We can conclude that the phase-coding QKD system based on the asymmetric FSMI is also robust against channel disturbance, just like the system based on the asymmetric FMI, whose intrinsic stability has been demonstrated in theory where C max and C min are the maximum and minimum counts in one channel of the SPD, respectively. The driving voltage scan procedure is performed approximately once a second. The frequency of polarization scrambling is 30 Hz. Fig. In addition to the intrinsic stability, the QKD system based on the asymmetric FSMI also has the following three advantages compared with the previous one based on the asymmetric FMI. (I) High-speed support. Speed limitation is the toughest challenge we encountered with the FMI. Since the long arm of the FMI has a forward and backward configuration, the corresponding QKD system has difficulty supporting gigahertz clock rates using only a simple phase modulation scheme, in which PM driving voltage remains unchanged during each clock period. Considering the rise and fall time of the driving voltage, the minimum clock rate of the QKD system is about twice that of the flat phase modulation duration, which depends on the lengths of the PM and FM, and the fiber length between them. Even if the PM could be directly placed adjacent to the FM, the maximum supported speed is only 500 MHz. While for the long arm of the FSMI, PM is placed in the middle of the Sagnac configuration, two parts of the input pulse arrived at the PM simultaneously and with the same polarization direction. Thus, the QKD system based on the asymmetric FSMI can support gigahertz clock rates by employing a simple phase modulation scheme. (II) Low insertion loss. The insertion loss is very important in Bob's asymmetric interferometer, and its primary source comes from the PM. In the FMI, two polarization parts of the input pulse pass through the PM twice (once in FW direction and once in BW direction). While in the FSMI, two polarization parts of the input pulse become the same polarization when they pass through the PM. In terms of insertion loss, this is equivalent to the input pulse passing through the PM once.(III) Lower requirements for PM. In the FMI, both orthogonal polarization components of input light should be able to pass through the PM. The only requirement for the PM in the FSMI structure is that both input and output fibers are PMF, which is consistent with conventional PM requirements. We perform a gigahertz QKD experiment over a 50-km fiber channel with polarization scrambling, by employing a phase-coding system with the FSMI. BB84 protocol QBERs of the signal and two different decoy pulses obtained over 7 days operation are shown in Fig. The corresponding overall gains In summary, we develop a practical QKD system based on the asymmetric FSMI structure, which maintains the intrinsic stability of our previous FMI structure. Under channel disturbance, the interference fringe visibility of this practical system is concentrated around 99.35% with a standard deviation of 0.12% over a 24-h test. More importantly, the QKD system based on the FSMI structure shows high-speed support. Gigahertz QKD was implemented over a 50-km fiber channel with polarization scrambling, the QBERs and overall gains remain stable over 7 days without active polarization alignment. The results demonstrate that this in-trinsically stable and high-speed QKD implementation is practical against channel disturbance, and is particularly suitable for deployment in field environments.