A mathematical model is presented for thermal transport in nanowires with rectangular cross sections. Expressions for the effective thermal conductivity of the nanowire across a range of temperatures and cross-sectional aspect ratios are obtained by solving the Guyer-Krumhansl hydrodynamic equation for the thermal flux with a slip boundary condition. Our results show that square nanowires transport thermal energy more efficiently than rectangular nanowires due to optimal separation between the boundaries. However, circular nanowires are found to be even more efficient than square nanowires due to the lack of corners in the cross section, which locally reduce the thermal flux and inhibit the conduction of heat. By using a temperature-dependent slip coefficient, we show that the model is able to accurately capture experimental data of the effective thermal conductivity obtained from Si nanowires, demonstrating that phonon hydrodynamics is a powerful framework that can be applied in nanosystems even at room temperature. Advances in manufacturing processes have brought us to the stage where reliable nanoscale devices are now commonplace. However, in most current and predicted applications of nanostructures, there is a strong concern over the management of heat Developing mathematical models to aid in the understanding of heat flow has proved problematic due to the breakdown of Fourier's law at small time and length scales Aside from circular nanowires, studies employing the slip boundary condition are mainly confined to two-dimensional thin-film geometries The purpose of the present study is to use the phonon hydrodynamic model with a slip boundary condition to calculate the ETC in a rectangular nanowire, with the aim of gaining an improved understanding of how finite cross-sectional geometries influence nanoscale heat transport. Of particular interest is determining the nanowire geometry that leads to the most efficient transport of heat. Theoretical predictions of the ETC are compared against experimentally measured values. We show that the model is able to accurately capture the experimental data across a wide range of temperatures. The experimental setup consists of a rectangular nanowire of length L * 3 and with a cross- The paper is organised as follows. The model and boundary conditions are presented in Sec. 2 and expressions for the ETC are given in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4, the modelling results are discussed and the theoretical predictions are compared against experimental data. The paper then concludes in Sec. 5. We model the transport of thermal energy across a long nanowire with rectangular cross section that is suspended in a vacuum; see Fig. The mathematical model consists of an equation representing conservation of thermal energy and the G-K (or hydrodynamic) equation describing the evolution of the thermal flux. Under the steady-state assumption, the governing equations are where Q * = u * x * + v * ŷ * + w * ẑ * is the thermal flux written in terms of Cartesian components, k * (T * ) is the bulk thermal conductivity, and * (T * ) is a non-local length related to the bulk phonon mean free path (MFP), i.e., the mean distance between phonon-phonon collisions. In the original equation derived by Guyer and Krumhansl, the parameter * represents the bulk MFP defined as * 2 = (v * 2 g τ * N τ * R )/5, where v * g is the phonon group velocity and τ * N and τ * R are the normal and resistive mean free times, i.e., the mean times for normal and resistive scattering. Other researchers have proposed alternative definitions for * , such as the geometric mean of the bulk MFP and a local MFP, the latter of which decreases near a boundary For simplicity, the dependence of the parameters on the temperature will not be explicitly written unless required by the context. The second term on the right-hand side of (1b) accounts for non-local effects, i.e., phonon collisions. The strong increase in the length scale * as the temperature decreases can make non-local effects relevant in relatively large systems, including those with dimensions exceeding the nanoscale The size-dependent effective thermal conductivity (ETC) of the nanowire k * eff is defined as in terms of the mean thermal flux through a cross section Q * and the longitudinal temperature gradient ∂T * /∂z * as By construction, this is the only component that is not tangential to the cross-section. Therefore, to compute the effective thermal conductivity of a rectangular slab, we need to find only the normal component of the heat flux w * . The boundary conditions for the temperature at the endpoints of the nanowire are Furthermore, it is sufficient to solve the equations in the region x * , y * ≥ 0 due to the symmetry of the system. The symmetry conditions at the interior boundaries (x = 0 or y = 0) are straightforward, At the exterior boundaries of the nanowire (x * = L * 1 or y * = L * 2 ) we impose two types of boundary condition. The normal component of the flux is assumed to vanish to ensure that no energy is lost during the heating process. For components of the flux that are tangential to the surface, we impose slip conditions with a slip length * s . The boundary conditions are therefore given by Microscopically, slip refers to the mean direction that phonons travel after they collide with a boundary and are reflected. Non-zero slip implies that more phonons are reflected forwards than backwards, corresponding to a positive value of the tangential flux at the boundary. A no-slip condition implies that the same number of phonons are reflected forwards and backwards, leading to the net tangential flux being zero at the boundary. Slip and no-slip correspond to specular and diffuse modes of scattering, respectively. Thus, the use of slip conditions enables different scattering modes to be captured in the model. As previously done by other authors The governing equations can be simplified by exploiting the long geometry of the nanowire and the similarity between the steady G-K equation ) is a reference value of the bulk thermal conductivity and w 0 = k * 0 ∆T * /L * 3 corresponds to the classical value of the longitudinal thermal flux. Using these dimensionless variables in the governing equations shows that the transverse temperature gradients are small, ∂T /∂x = O(φ -2 2 ) and ∂T /∂y = O( 2 ), and may be neglected provided ( /φ) 2 1. The classical Fourier flux, in dimensionless form, can then be defined as w F = -kdT /dz. By writing the dimensionless longitudinal component of the thermal flux in terms of the Fourier flux as w(x, y, z) = w F (z)W (x, y), it can be shown that W satisfies where small terms of O( ∂W ∂y = 0, at y = 0, (6b) The dimensionless ETC can be defined in terms of the flux W as The corresponding dimensional expression k * eff is obtained after multiplying k eff with the previously chosen scale k * 0 . When C depends on the transverse coordinates x and y, solutions to ( For small cross-sectional aspect ratios, φ 1, the nanowire becomes a thin film. Taking φ → 0 with φ in (5) leads to an ordinary differential equation that can be solved using standard methods. The ETC can then be written as In the case of uniform slip coefficient, the leading-order contributions to (8) reduce to the expression for the ETC of a thin film obtained by previous authors For the remainder of this section, we will focus on solutions to the problem in the case when φ is not small. Under the assumption that the constant C is independent of space, the boundary value problem defined by ( The longitudinal flux can be written as By inserting ( which is valid for all values of the Knudsen number Kn. Furthermore, it can be shown that the terms of the series decay as (nm) -2 and therefore only a small number of terms is required in practice. Naively taking Kn → 0 in The solution in the boundary layer near x = 1 can be obtained by writing x = 1 -(φKn)x and W (x, y) = W (x, y). Using this scaling in ( with boundary conditions The solution to ( A similar approach can be used to determine the solution in the boundary layer at y = 1. By writing y = 1 -Kn ŷ and W (x, y) = Ŵ (x, ŷ) in ( The composite asymptotic solution, which is a single expression that includes contributions from each of the spatial regions (minus those from the corner layer), can be written as Using ( If the slip length is spatially uniform, Eqn. ( The strong influence of boundary effects when the Knudsen number is large leads to a substantial reduction in the thermal flux. As discussed in Calvo et al. subject to By integrating the G-K equation ( Provided that C(x, y) Kn -1 , taking Kn → ∞ in ( as Kn → ∞. In the case of spatially uniform slip lengths, Eqn. We first examine how changes to the Knudsen number affect both the longitudinal thermal flux and the ETC for fixed values of φ = 1, corresponding to square nanowires, and C = 1. Panels (a) and (b) of Figure For small Knudsen numbers, the non-local length is much less than the cross-sectional dimensions of the nanowire. Phonons in the bulk will frequently collide with each other, resulting in diffusive transport of heat that is not strongly influenced by the finite geometry of the cross section. Indeed, as shown in Fig. Given that the non-classical, ballistic region of transport is confined to a thin boundary layer when the Knudsen number is small, the ETC is well approximated by its classical value, k eff /k 1, for Kn 1. In fact, as shown in Sec. 3.3, the small O(Kn) correction in the asymptotic approximation The asymptotic approximation ( For large Knudsen numbers, the non-local length greatly exceeds the dimensions of the cross section. In this case, phonons frequently collide with the exterior boundary, leading to a substantial reduction in the transport of thermal energy across the nanowire; see Fig. Figures We now examine how changes to the cross-sectional geometry affect the ETC for a fixed value of C = 1. Figure revealing that the limiting behaviour of the ETC is indeed the same for square and circular A * for various cross-sectional aspect ratios φ. Also shown in the normalised ETC of a circular nanowire To better understand the role of the nanowire geometry, we now investigate how the ETC varies with φ for fixed cross-sectional areas A * = 4L * 1 L * 2 , keeping C = 1. In order to maintain a constant area A * in the dimensionless model, we need to account for how the Knudsen number Kn = * /L * 2 varies with φ through L * 2 . To do so, we first note that L * 2 can be written as L * 2 = φA * /4. The Knudsen number can then be written in terms of the aspect ratio φ as Kn = (2/ √ φ)K, where K = * / √ A * is an effective Knudsen number that is independent of the shape of the cross section and which remains constant as φ varies. Similar to the equivalent Knudsen number Kn , the effective Knudsen number K also accounts for the full two-dimensional geometry of the nanowire rather than the length along one particular dimension. Figure The influence of the slip coefficient C on thermal transport has been discussed by Zhu et al. Figure To explore this behaviour with our model, we consider a square nanowire (φ = 1) and a simple form of the slip coefficient given by where α and β are constants that satisfy α > 0 and, to ensure C remains positive, β > -α. The parameter β controls the curvature of the slip coefficient. If β < 0 (β > 0) then C decreases (increases) towards a corner. The lines in Fig. The upwards-and downwards-pointing triangles in Fig. To validate the model, we compare theoretical predictions of the ETC against experimental measurements carried out using silicon wires by Inyushkin et al. The experimental measurements of the ETC, normalised by the bulk thermal conductivity, are shown as circles in Fig. The existing discrepancies of our model with respect to experimental data can also be understood from the Truncated Lévy Flights (TLF) framework In silicon, when the temperature decreases below 50 K, phonons with a MFP larger than ∼3 mm (of the order of width and height of the slab) begin to appear. While at high temperature (diffusive regime) those phonons do not have a significant contribution, at very low temperatures (ballistic or hydrodynamic regime) they are removed from the model by the boundary conditions. In the diffusive-ballistic transition around 7-50 K, where these phonons can be important, the present model over-estimates the experimental data, as a single characteristic non-local length in the transport equation is not able to capture the superdiffusive transition. We use a hydrodynamic model of thermal transport, based on the Guyer-Krumhansl equation, with a slip boundary condition to calculate the ETC of rectangular nanowires. An analytical solution for the ETC is obtained in the case of a constant slip coefficient by writing the thermal flux as an eigenfunction expansion. For spatially non-uniform slip coefficients, asymptotic methods are employed to calculate the leading approximations valid for small and large Knudsen numbers. An attractive feature of the asymptotic approach is that it can be straightforwardly applied to nanowires with arbitrary cross section, enabling the ETC to be calculated with ease for a range of geometries that might be non-trivial to implement using standard computational techniques. A key advantage of the proposed model is that it is based on a minimal number of free parameters. Both the non-local length and the bulk thermal conductivity can be calculated as a function of temperature using open-source software The values of bulk thermal conductivity k * (T * ) and non-local length * (T * ), shown in Fig. In the same line, the non-local length , related with the phonon mean free paths, can be expressed as an interpolation through Σ between the collective limit derived by Guyer and Krumhansl These two magnitudes calculated from first principles are the only ones required to solve the hydrodynamic heat transport equation. For these calculations, an open-source code 