The role of electron-vibron interaction Alkali-doped fullerides (A n C 60 with A = K, Rb, Cs and n = 1 . . . 5) demonstrate surprising properties. Simple band theory arguments predict that any partial filling between 0 and 6 electrons (between empty and full molecular orbital t 1u , respectively) should give a metallic behavior. In the same time these materials are characterized with a narrow conduction band W ∼ 0.3 . . . 0.5eV and a strong on-site Coulomb repulsion U ∼ 0.8 . . . 1.0eV. Moreover electrons on t 1u molecular orbital should be distributed according to Hund's rule: spin of a molecule must be maximal. Thus alkali-doped fullerides should be antiferromagnetic Mott insulators (MI). In reality the properties of the alkali-doped fullerides are in striking contradiction to the expected they. So A 2 C 60 and A 4 C 60 are nonmagnetic insulators. Thus molecule C 60 with additional electrons in LUMO does not have spin, that contradicts to Hund's rule. Under pressure these materials become metallic. A 1 C 60 and A 5 C 60 are conductors. A 3 C 60 are superconductors with A = K, Rb for which the critical temperatures are sufficiently high T c ∼ 30K. However for A = Cs the material is insulator, but it becomes superconductor under high pressure ∼ 2kbar. The corresponding phase diagram of A 3 C 60 is shown in Fig. The mechanism of superconductivity of the alkali-doped fullerides has not been fully understood. The positive correlation between T c and the lattice constant found in K-and Rb-doped fullerides has been understood in terms of the standard BCS theory: the density of states of conduction electrons is ν ∝ 1/W , and T c = 1.14 ω exp(-1/λν), thus the smaller W the large T c . Therefore superconductivity of A 3 C 60 is often described with Eliashberg theory in terms of electron-phonon coupling and Tolmachev's pseudopotential μ * , where the spin-up and spin-down electrons are situated on a site i in the same quantum state m (here |0 is the neutral C 60 molecule, the quantum number m labels the three orthogonal states of t 1u symmetry). The local singlet state competes with the normal state (high spin state) of two electrons a + im1↑ a + im2↑ |0 dictated by Hund's rule. Using this assumption some important results have obtained. In a work In a work The local pairing hypothesis is confirmed with quantum Monte Carlo simulations of low temperature properties of the two-band Hubbard model with degenerate orbitals In the present work we are aimed to find conditions of formation of the local pairs on fullerene molecules, then, based on the local pairing hypothesis, considering the Coulomb correlations and the JT-distortion of the molecules, to propose a general approach to description of the properties of alkali-doped fullerides A n C 60 (A = K, Rb, Cs, n = 1 . . . 5), namely to demonstrate mechanism of superconductivity of A 3 C 60 , conductivity of A n C 60 with n = 1, 3, 5 and insulation of the materials with n = 2, 4 with the loss of antiferromagnetic properties, and to obtain analytically the phase diagram of A 3 C 60 with fcc structure which should be close to the experimental phase diagram. Due to the quasispherical structure of the molecule C 60 the electron levels would be spherical harmonics with the angular momentum l, however the icosahedral symmetry generates the splits of the spherical states into icosahedral representation where a + imσ (a imσ ) is the electron creation (annihilation) operator in the orbital m = 1, 2, 3 localized on the site i; n imσ = a + imσ a imσ is the particle number operator; σ(=↑, ↓) is the spin index; t ij is the hopping integral between neighboring sites and the same orbitals (the bandwidth is W = 2z|t|, where z is the number of nearest neighbors), t ii = 0; ε m is the orbital energy; μ is the chemical potential, δ ij = 1 if i = j, δ ij = 0 if i = j; the energy V is the Coulomb repulsion between neighboring sites (i = j): where V ij c (r, r ) is a operator of cross-site Coulomb interaction; U is the intra-orbital on-site Coulomb repulsion energy; U is the inter-orbital on-site Coulomb repulsion energy; J > 0 is the on-site exchange interaction energy: where V c (r, r ) is a operator of on-site Coulomb interaction. In a multi-orbital system the on-site Coulomb interaction is presented with two terms: density-density interaction energy U (U for different orbitals) and the energy of the double inter-orbital hoppings ll mm σσ J l m lm a + il σ a + im σ a ilσ a imσ (where l = l, m = m) In the C n- 60 molecule the excess electrons are coupled strongly to two A g and eight H g intramolecular Jahn-Teller phonons (electron-vibron interaction). The operators of the el.-vib. interaction and the vibrons' energy have forms accordingly where λ Ag and λ Hg are coupling constants to A g and H g intramolecular Jahn-Teller phonons respectively, the elements mm of coupling matrices V ν are determined by icosahedral symmetry. The matrix corresponding to A g phonons (ν = 0) is Coupling to H g phonons (ν = 1 . . . 5) is given by the matrixes Vibrational energies for the A g and H g modes are within the limits ω = 200 . . . 1800cm -1 As noted in Based on the local pairing approach the Hamiltonian (1) can be simplified in the following manner. Fig. Thus the ground state of the system is a state |m 1 σ, m 2 σ, m 3 σ , in order to form a local pair where n i is an average occupation number of a site i. Thus the effective Coulomb repulsion U -U + 3J ∼ 0.15eV, which is much smaller than the on-site Coulomb repulsion U ∼ 0.8eV, resists to the local pairing, unlike the usual Holstein-Hubbard model without degeneration. We can eliminate the vibron variables using perturbation theory. Let the molecular vibrations occur with a certain frequency ω 0 . Since a vibron is localized on a molecule then el.-el interaction mediated by the exchange of a vibron has a form: where λ 0 = λ Ag , λ ν = λ Hg for ν = 1 . . . 5, T is a Bose time-ordering operator, b(t) = e iω0b + bt be -iω0b + bt is an annihilation (creation) phonon operator in Heisenberg representation, |0 is a zero-phonon state. Expression under integral is propagation of a vibron in a time t. The corresponding processes are shown in Fig. where The same result we have in frequency representation of the vibron's propagator: At nonzero temperature we should pass to complex time it =→ τ , where τ = -1/T . . . 1/T . This is the same that to pass to complex frequency ω → iω n , where ω n = πnT . Then Eq.( The addendum with n = 0 is excluded from the sum, because it corresponds to scattering of electron on the thermal phonons, which do not influence on the pairing of electrons , that is at increasing of temperature the effectiveness of el.-vib. interaction is decreasing. At T → ∞ (T ω 0 ) the el.-el. coupling via vibrons is 2λ 2 3T → 0. Thus we can see that the el.-el. interaction mediated by the exchange of vibrons can be reduced to BCS-like interaction (point, nonretarded) within single orbital m that corresponds to diagonal elements of the matrixes V (ν) : Figure im↑ a im↑ a + im↓ a im↓ , the case (b) corresponds to an exchange process , where m = m . The picture (c) corresponds to the shift of electron's energy due to the el.-vib. interaction on a site. and between different orbitals m and m that corresponds to the nondiagonal elements: For simplicity we suppose that the interaction energies are the same for all orbitals m: U mmmm vib = U vib -direct (intraorbital) interaction, U mm mm vib = J vib -exchange (interorbital) interaction. It should be noticed that J vib > 0 as we can see using the matrixes m m . However, using the matrixes (8,9) we can see that A g and H g phonons give contribution to the interaction U mmm m vib with different signs: m m = -1/2, unlike the intraorbital and the exchange interorbital interactions. Hence it is possible to choose such values of the coupling constants λ Ag and λ Hg so that U vib = 0 (for example, λ Hg = 2λ Ag for the model with the same frequency ω 0 ). Thus this interaction can be much weaker than U vib and J vib , that is confirmed by numerical calculation for vibron-mediated interactions in Cs 3 C 60 where we have omitted the constant contribution in energy (the first and the second terms in Eq.( where is the order parameter. N is the number of lattice sites (number of the molecules). Eq.( is determined by the position of the chemical potential μ, and . . . = Ξ -1 T r . . . exp(-H/T ) denotes averaging procedure where Ξ is a partition function. The effective Hamiltonian where E 1 is energy of an initial electron configuration (the Hund's rule) of neighboring sites, E 2 is energy of the configuration if to transfer an electron from the site to another. A band conductor becomes insulator if an electron does not have enough reserve of kinetic energy (which is a bandwidth W ) to overcome the Coulomb blockade on a site: ∆E > W . In the absence of long-range order all numerical and analytical calculations indicate that the Mott-Hubbard transition should occur in the region 0.5W < U c < 1.7W For example, let us consider Rb 3 C 60 . According to Accounting of the el.-vib. interaction can change the situation. As we can see from Eq.( as shown in Fig. where the local pair is formed on the second site -Fig. Then we have Maximal T c of alkali-doped fullerides is 35K, then |∆| ≈ 1.76T c = 62K W ≈ 0.5eV. Thus the size of a pair is larger than average distance electrons and the pair is smeared over the crystal. That is in the metallic phase the local pairs have fermionic nature. At the border of transition to the MJT insulator the bosonization of local pairs occurs due to Coulomb blockage of hopping of electron between neighboring molecules. Thus electron configuration with the local pairs is a dynamical configuration of all molecules unlike the statical one with a compact local pair on each molecule for the MJT insulator state. Since the local pairs smeared over the crystal the anomalous averages a i↑ a i↓ exist in momentum space too: a -k↓ a k↑ , and the BCS-like theory can be applied for description of the superconducting state of alkali-doped fullerides. Following a work with ξ m (k) = ε m (k)-μ, and two last terms in Eq.( and the average number of electrons per site is Equations ( and where E m = ξ m (k) + ∆ 2 m . Thus a system with the local pairing a im↓ a im↑ is equivalent to a multi-band superconductor with a continual pairing a -km↓ a km↑ in each band. The multi-band theory where In the alkali doped fulerides the conduction band is narrow W = 0.3 . . . 0.5eV and energies of vibrons are large ω ∼ 0.2eV , thus almost all electrons take part in el.-vib. interaction (2ω ∼ W ), unlike electrons in conventional metals where only electrons near Fermi surface interact via phonons because ω W there. Hence the final results are weakly sensitive to distribution of the density of states in conduction band, that is some averaged density can be used in this case, unlike conventional conductors where the results strongly depend on the density on Fermi level. Thus we can suppose the density of states in the conduction band is a constant ν = ν 0 if -W/2 < ξ < W/2, otherwise ν = 0. Since k n(k) = V ν(ξ)dξ it can be seen from Eq.( Then Eq.( where the integration is restricted by energy Ω = min(ω 0 , W/2) proceeding from the rectangular approximation for the density of states in conduction band, narrowness of conduction band and large vibron's energy, for example for Cs 3 C 60 at normal pressure the bandwidth is W = 0.341eV < 2ω 0 ≈ 0.4eV. The coupling constant g is determined with el.-vib. interaction U vib + 2J vib , and the Coulomb pseudopotential μ c is determined with the Hund coupling U -U + 3J: The therm U vib ≡ U vib + 2J vib corresponds to the energy of attraction in a pair as discussed above. The bandwidth of alkali-doped fullerides is W ∼ 0.5eV, the energy gap is ∆ ≈ 2T c ∼ 30 . . . 60K ε F = W/2 that is a change of the chemical potential at transition to SC state can be neglected unlike the systems with the strong attraction and low particle density, where it can be ∆ > ε F and the change of the chemical potential plays important role in formation of SC state is a constant of the motion. Here p is the momentum of an electron, q is the wave vector of a phonon. The electron energy is renormalized as where α ∼ λ 2 ω 2 0 . However in alkali-doped fullerides electrons interact with internal oscillations (vibrons) of the fullerene molecules. Each vibron is localized on own molecule and cannot propagate to nearby molecules, unlike phonons in metals which propagate throw the system as waves. This means that the wave vector q is not quantum number for vibrons and Eq.( In the same time in our case the shift of the electron's energy -αω 0 is a consequence of a process of el.-vib. interaction on a cite like the el.-el. interaction via vibrons considered above. This process is shown in Fig. Expressions under the integral are propagator of a vibron and propagator of an electron located on a molecular level ε m (if we suppose ε m > 0 then δ → +0, if ε m < 0 then δ → -0). After calculation of the integral we have switched to the mass surface ε = ε m . Thus interaction of an electron with the vibron field on a molecule shifts the electron's energy as whose modulus is the binding energy of an electron with deformation of a molecule if the electron is localized on it. The BCS formula where 0 < Z ≤ 1 is the discontinuity in the single-particle occupation number n k at the Fermi surface, in other hand the function Z determines intensity of the quasiparticle peak at ω = 0 of a spectral function . For noninteracting electrons Z = 1. At transition from metal state to MI state the peak disappears and in its place an energetic gap appears separating two Hubbard subbands. The vanishing of Z therefore marks the metal-insulator transition where ∆E c is a critical energy change at transfer of an electron from a site to a nearby site. The last part of this formula is written for our model -Eqs. where ε n = πT (2n + 1). Then the self-consistency condition for the order parameter is where Ω = min(ω 0 , W/2) as discussed above. This formula for the critical temperature T c , unlike the formula with ω being the frequency and Q = q + G, where q is a wave vector in the first Brillouin zone and G is a reciprocal lattice vector. Thus the screened Coulomb interaction and the bare one are connected as Here the static dielectric constant (48) can be used since the plasmon energy in A 3 C 60 is ∼ 0.5eV In the same time the experimentally observed vibron frequencies in K 3 C 60 Thus we can see that as the crystal lattice expands (the bandwidth W decreases) the density of state in the conduction band increases -Eq.( We could see that the effectiveness of el.-vib. interaction is decreasing as temperature rises -Eqs. is increasing with temperature, then at some temperature T MI the criterion (24) of transition from the metallic state to the Mott insulator state will be satisfied: We can see that at decreasing of W the temperature T MI drops. This dependence is schematically shown in Fig. According to JT theorem any non-linear molecular system in a degenerate electronic state will be unstable and will undergo distortion to form a system of lower symmetry and lower energy thereby removing the degeneracy. Thus a fullerene molecule with partially filled t 1u orbital (C n- 60 , n = 1 . . . 5) must be distorted (to D 2h symmetry) due to the el.-vib. interaction and the degeneracy of electronic state must be removed. In the same time the molecules are combined into a crystal and their electrons are collectivized. The collectivized electrons interact with the molecular distortions and formation of polarons (bound state of an electron with induced deformation by it) can take place. According to Eq.( The Hamiltonian Using Lang-Firsov canonical transformation e S He -S where Table ωM Ag(1) Ag( , thus the collapse of the conduction band to the narrow polaron band occurs. This polaron is a statical deformation of a molecule, where an electron is in potential well of depth ∼ λ 2 /ω 0 and it supports the deformation by own field. From Eq.( This equation can be rewritten as U vib 2 = W 2 , where U vib = 2λ 2 ω0 is the attraction energy in a pair, that corresponds to Eq.( Formation of the JT deformation leads from the Hund's electron configuration | ↑, ↑, ↑ to the local pair configuration | ↑↓, ↑, 0 . As we have seen above in order to make the local pair on a site we have to overcome the configurational Coulomb barrier U -U + 3J -Fig. The polaron narrowing of the conduction band enhances Coulomb correlations in the already highly correlated system: W e W < U , that must turn the material to the Mott insulator. Above we could see that as the crystal lattice expands (volume per C 60 increases) the bandwidth W decreases and the el.-vib. coupling U vib enlarges. Thus increasing the volume per the molecule we reach the border (59). This border is shown in Fig. Using obtained results Moreover we must known the vibron frequency ω 0 . In a fullerene molecule an electron interacts with A g and H g vibrational modes presented in Tab.II. Then the parameter U vib can be calculated with a following manner: Here the coupling constants λ ν has been replaced by effective coupling constant λ: → λ 2 , because we use λ as an adjustable parameter. The integral (47) can be cut off by the largest vibron energy ω 0 = ω(H g (8)) = 0.196eV, that is confirmed by numerical calculation for vibron-mediated interactions in Cs 3 C 60 in IV. CONDUCTIVITY OF AnC60 WITH n = 1, 2, 4, 5 For materials A n C 60 , where n = 1, 2, 4, 5, we can suppose that the el.-el. interaction U vib via vibrons is approximately the same for these materials and is equal to the value in A 3 C 60 ∼ 0.4eV, it is analogously for Coulomb U, U , V and exchange J interactions. The charge transfer in these materials is shown in Fig. • A 1 C 60 . In order to form a local pair we have to transfer an electron from a site to a nearby site containing another electron. For this it is necessary to make a positive work U -V -U vib > 0. Thus formation of the pairs is energetically unfavorable, i.e. the pairs are unstable. In the same time ∆E W = U -V -U vib W < 1, because we create the pair on a neighboring molecule. Thus this material is a conductor due the el.-vib. interaction but it is not a superconductor. • A 2 C 60 . Two electrons are in the paired state on a site because the energy of the state is U -U + J -U vib < 0 (measured from the Hund's rule state). In order to transfer an electron from a site to a site we must break a pair. Thus the transfer of a electron is blocked by Coulomb interaction and the el.-el. attraction via vibrons U vib . Then the pair is compact and it could be transferred but ∆E W = 2U -4V W > 1. Hence this material is insulator and a molecule C 2- 60 does not have spin. • A 4 C 60 . Like the previous material all electrons are in the paired state on a site because the energy of this state is negative. We can transfer the charge from a site to a site by transferring of an electron with breaking of the pair or by transferring of the compact pair. In these cases ∆E W is 2U -U -V + U vib W > 1 and 2U -4V W > 1 accordingly. Thus this material is insulator and a molecule C 4- 60 does not have spin. • A 5 C 60 . In order to transfer an electron from a site to a nearby site we have to spend such energy that ∆E W = 3U -2U -V -U vib W < 1. This process forms the pair, but 3U -2U -V -U vib > 0 -energy of the pair is positive, hence the Cooper pairs are not stable like in A 1 C 60 . Thus this material is conductor due to the el.-vib. interaction but it is not superconductor. As expected, since the system is particle-hole symmetric, therefore the properties for n = 1, 2 are identically with the properties for n = 5, 4 accordingly. Thus we can see the el.-vib. interaction transforms Mott insulators A n C 60 with n = 1, 3, 5 to conductors. However for n = 2, 4 this interaction prevents conduction and it pairs electrons on each molecules so that the molecules do not have spin. We have considered the problem of conductivity and superconductivity of alkali-doped fullerides A n C 60 (A = K, Rb, Cs, n = 1 . . . 5) while these materials would have to be antiferromagnetic Mott insulators because the on-site Coulomb repulsion is larger than bandwidth: U ∼ 1eV > W ∼ 0.5eV, and electrons on a molecule have to be distributed over molecular orbitals according to the Hund's rule. We have found important role of 3-fold degeneration of LUMO (t 1u level), small hopping between neighboring molecules and the coupling of electrons to Jahn-Teller modes (vibrons). The el.-el. coupling via vibrons U vib cannot compete with the on-site Coulomb repulsion U U vib , but it can compete with the Hund coupling U -U + 3J ≈ 5J ∼ U vib (where the exchange energy is much less than direct Coulomb interaction J U ). This allows to form the local pair (10) on a molecule. Formation of the local pairs radically changes conductivity of these materials: they can make ∆E W < 1, where ∆E is the energy change at transfer of an electron from a site to nearby site, while without the el.-vib. interaction we have ∆E W > 1 that corresponds to Mott insulator. We have shown that the el.-vib. interaction and the local pairing transform Mott insulators A n C 60 with n = 1, 3, 5 to conductors. However for n = 2, 4 this interaction prevents conduction and it pairs electrons on each molecules so that the molecules do not have spin. The local pair mechanism can ensure superconductivity of A 3 C 60 which is result of interplay between the el.-el. coupling via vibrons, the Coulomb blockade on a site and the hopping between neighboring sites. It should be noted that the size of a pair is larger than average distance between electrons (between molecules) and the pair is smeared over the crystal. That is in the metallic phase the local pairs have fermionic nature. At the border of transition to Mott-Jahn-Teller insulator the bosonization of local pairs occurs due to Coulomb blockage of hopping of electron between neighboring molecules. Thus system with the local pairing can be effectively described by BCS theory. In such system we have the effective coupling constant as g -μ c > 0 (where g is determined with the el.-vib. interaction and μ c is determined with the Hund coupling -Eq.( As the bandwidth decreases the collapse of the conduction band to the narrow polaron band occurs when the condition (59) is satisfied. This Holstein polaron is a statical JT deformation of the molecule, where an electron supports the deformation by own field. According to JT theorem a fullerene molecule with partially filled t 1u orbital must be distorted due to the el.-vib. interaction and the degeneracy of electron state must be removed. In the same time the molecules are combined into a lattice and their electrons are collectivized. As the lattice expands the distortions of the molecules increase, but electrons cannot be localized because the localization radius is larger than average distance between electrons (and intermolecular distance), i.e. the electrons are collectivized. This state can be called the Jahn-Teller metal which is observed in Thus we have three phases of A 3 C 60 illustrated schematically in Fig. 