By performing pressure simulations within density functional theory for the family of iron-based superconductors AeAFe4As4 with Ae = Ca, Sr, Ba and A = K, Rb, Cs we predict in these systems the appearance of two consecutive half-collapsed tetragonal transitions at pressures Pc 1 and Pc 2 , which have a different character in terms of their effect on the electronic structure. We find that, similarly to previous studies for CaKFe4As4, spin-vortex magnetic fluctuations on the Fe sublattice play a key role for an accurate structure prediction in these materials at zero pressure. We identify clear trends of critical pressures and discuss the relevance of the collapsed phases in connection to magnetism and superconductivity. Finally, the intriguing cases of EuRbFe4As4 and EuCsFe4As4, where Eu magnetism coexists with superconductivity, are discussed as well in the context of halfcollapsed phases. Introduction.-The so-called 122 Fe-based pnictides (Fig. In contrast, a half-collapsed tetragonal (hcT) phase transition was recently reported for the 1144 material CaKFe 4 As 4 4 (Fig. Predicting the appearance of possible cT transitions in ThCr 2 Si 2 -structured intermetallic compounds is not only of relevance for the superconducting and magnetic properties of these materials but also for their potential superelastic behavior as has been recently shown. At low pressures, the structural prediction is done while imposing a "frozen" spin-vortex configuration of Fe moments (Fig. Results (zero pressure).-For all systems studied here we find that the assumption of a spin-vortex-type magnetism in our DFT calculations is crucial to reproduce the experimental structure at zero pressure as shown in Fig. First half-collapsed tetragonal transition.-Assuming a spin-vortex magnetic configuration, we performed pressure simulations for all 1144 materials over a wide range shows the low-temperature data for CaKFe4As4. of pressures. The observed evolution of the in-plane, a, and out-of-plane, c, lattice parameters with applied pressure is qualitatively similar in all cases, despite large variations in their absolute values (see Figs. 4, 5 as well as Figs. 9-13 in Appendix C). At the first hcT transition, the c parameter and the As-As interlayer distances (d As-As ) across the cation plane where the c collapse is happening decrease abruptly, while the in-plane parameter a shows an upturn. The As-As 4p z antibonding orbitals lie above the Fermi level as illustrated in Fig. One point to discuss is the consequences of invoking a spin-vortex Fe magnetic order for the structural relaxations under pressure even though these systems at zero pressure do not manifest magnetic order associated with the Fe site. This assumption may lead to slightly overestimated P c1 . Whereas we have discussed above the importance of introducing this "frozen" magnetic order, the calculations show, on top of the structural collapse, a "magnetic collapse" that is absent in the real system. Such a collapse may happen simultaneously to the structural collapse or at slightly different pressures as it is the case for CaRbFe 4 As 4 , CaCsFe 4 As 4 or BaCsFe 4 As 4 (see the grey area in Figs. 9, 10, 13). This result may be interpreted in terms of the hcT phase being a broad transition smeared by spin fluctuations. For the special cases of EuRbFe 4 As 4 and EuCsFe 4 As 4 we find the first hcT phase to occur across the Eu layer at a P c1 of about 12.5 GPa and 14 GPa respectively (Figs. Second half-collapsed tetragonal phase.-At higher pressures, the studied 1144 systems undergo a second hcT transition in our simulations. In our previous work on CaKFe 4 As 4 , we predicted the second structural collapse to occur around 12 GPa. Interestingly, the second hcT transition has a relatively smaller effect on the lattice parameters (only a small kink is observed for a and c) and is detected in our firstprinciples calculations again based on the analysis of the As-As 4p z orbital bonding, as demonstrated in Fig. As height asymmetry.-The main difference between the well-known 122 and the new 1144 (AeAFe 4 As 4 ) compounds is the broken glide-plane symmetry in the latter case, which creates two types of As sites. This asymmetry of As tetrahedra in the 1144 systems was found to play a leading role for the emergence of spin-vortex magnetism under electron doping. with h(Ae) and h(A) being the As heights on the side of the Ae and A spacer layers, respectively (Fig. We find that h(A) is always larger than h(Ae) for all studied 1144 pnictides. Also, the largest As height asymmetry at zero pressure is found for CaAFe 4 As 4 (η ≈ 1.5%), while the asymmetry gradually decreases towards 0.4% in the series Ae = Ca, Sr, Ba. As evident from Table Upon increasing pressure, the As height asymmetry η grows continuously until the first hcT transition is reached where it shows a clear upturn (Fig. Since a large As height asymmetry favors the "hedgehog" spin-vortex magnetic order in CaKFe 4 As 4 8 and increases under pressure for the studied 1144 systems (example in Fig. Based on our calculations, the critical value for the As-As distance leading to a structural collapse varies be-tween (2.8 -3.0) Å, depending on the spacer cation size. The initial As-As distance at zero pressure determines then the critical pressure necessary for a structural transition. Finding ways of bringing the 1144 systems closer to the critical As-As separation already at zero pressure will eventually allow the observation of half-collapsed phases at ambient pressure in this class of materials. For instance, the critical pressures at which the half collapses happen can be significantly reduced in uniaxially compressed systems as has been already observed in 122 systems, In view of the novel magnetism discovered recently in electron-doped CaKFe 4 As 4 , 8 the rest of the 1144 family is worth studying in terms of their magnetic properties. CaRbFe 4 As 4 and CaCsFe 4 As 4 have the largest As height asymmetry and are therefore promising candidates for a spin-vortex magnetic crystal with a high ordering temperature. Search for other 1144 materials with a larger difference in the two cation sizes, leading to a stronger asymmetry between the As sites, appears to be a natural next step. In contrast, 1144 systems with bigger cations, such as BaCsFe 4 As 4 , have a more symmetric structure and are likely to be closer to stripe order than more asymmetric 1144 compounds. The motivation to look for further spin-vortex ordered Fe-based systems is the recently proposed relation of this magnetic order to the strong unconventional superconductivity in 1144 systems. Furthermore, this is a first example of a non-collinear double-Q magnetic order in iron pnictides and presents an important part of their general phase diagram. A. Kreyssig, M. A. Green, Y. Lee, G. D. Samolyuk, P. Zajdel, J. W. Lynn, S. L. Bud'ko, M. S. Torikachvili, N. Ni, S. Nandi, J. B. Leão, S. J. Poulton, D. N. Argyriou, B. N. Harmon, R. J. McQueeney, P. C. Canfield, and A. I. Goldman, Pressure-induced volume-collapsed tetragonal phase of CaFe2As2 as seen via neutron scattering, Phys. Rev. B 78, 184517 (2008 ). 2 P. C. Canfield and S. L. Bud'ko, FeAs-Based Superconductivity: A Case Study of the Effects of Transition Metal Doping on BaFe2As2, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 1, 27 ( 2010). 3 T. Yildirim, Strong Coupling of the Fe-Spin State and the As-As Hybridization in Iron-Pnictide Superconductors from First-Principle Calculations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 037003 (2009). 4 U. S. Kaluarachchi, V. Taufour, A. Sapkota, V. Borisov, T. Kong, W. R. Meier, K. Kothapalli, B. G. Ueland, A. Kreyssig, R. Valentí, R. J. McQueeney, A. I. Goldman, S. L. Bud'ko, and P. C. Canfield, Pressure-induced halfcollapsed-tetragonal phase in CaKFe4As4, Phys. Rev. B 96, 140501(R) (2017).5 A. Iyo, K. Kawashima, T. Kinjo, T. Nishio, S. Ishida, H. Fujihisa, Y. Gotoh, K. Kihou, H. Eisaki, and Y. Yoshida, New-Structure-Type Fe-Based Superconductors: CaAFe4As4 (A = K, Rb, Cs) and SrAFe4As4 (A =