Near Edge X-ray Absorption, Valence and Core-level Photoemission and Density Functional Theory calculations are used to study molecular levels of tetracyano-2,3,5,6tetrafluoroquinodimethane (F 4 TCNQ) deposited on Ag(111) and BiAg 2 /Ag(111). The high electron affinity of F 4 TCNQ triggers a large static charge transfer from the substrate, and, more interestingly, hybridization with the substrate leads to a radical change of symmetry, shape and energy of frontier molecular orbitals. The Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) shifts below the Fermi energy, becoming the new Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (n-HOMO), whereas the n-LUMO is defined by a hybrid band with mixed π * and σ * symmetries, localized at quinone rings and cyano groups, respectively. The presence of Bi influences the way the molecule contacts the substrate with the cyano group. The molecule/surface distance is closer and the bond more extended over substrate atoms in F 4 TCNQ/Ag(111), whereas in F 4 TCNQ/BiAg 2 /Ag(111) the distance is larger and the contact more localized on top of Bi. This does not significantly alter molecular levels, but it causes the respective absence or presence of optical excitations in F 4 TCNQ core-level spectra. Organic/metal interfaces have become essential in all emerging electronic applications. Finding suitable materials combinations that fit the requirements of the desired device is a great challenge. One generally seeks sharp interfaces, in which substrate and organic layers retain their respective electronic properties. This generally defines a weak molecule-surface interaction scenario Molecules with strongly donor or acceptor character may induce a sizeable interface charge transfer, of the order of one electron per molecule, which can both trigger profound electronic and conformational molecular changes Due to its large electron affinity (-5.2 eV), the p-type organic dopant F 4 TCNQ is widely used in charge-transfer multilayers and organic blends with potential opto-electronic applications. The profound changes of orbital energies and wavefunction character revealed in the DFT calculations are all mirrored in the NEXAFS spectra acquired at the C and N Kedges. These are shown in Figs. Note the absolute electron energy scale used, which is determined from the respective C 1s and N 1s core-level binding energies (see core-levels in Fig. For occupied levels, the observed energy level spacing compares well with the DFT results in Fig. The distinct degree of localization of the N/metal bond may explain the striking differences in the N 1s core-levels shown in Fig. The absence of the N 1s shake-up satellite in F 4 TCNQ/Ag(111) (also observed for TCNQ on Cu(100) Orbital symmetry at the molecule/metal interface determines the degree of molecule/surface coupling and, hence, influences hole and electron injection and transport. As discussed by Seideman, For surface state wave functions that are symmetric with respect to the molecular plane coherent coupling is expected with σ and σ * states, whereas antisymmetric surface states couple to π and π * orbitals. Coherent molecule/metal coupling at the interface is needed in order to texture molecular states with exotic substrate properties. This is claimed to be the case of C 6 F 6 on Cu(111), where coherent coupling occurs between the molecule σ * orbital and the s, p z -like image state, leading to molecular levels with metallic, nearly-free-electron character. The presence of Bi alters the molecular level spectrum of F 4 TCNQ in a subtle way. Bi atoms intercalate the organic layer, acting as hole donors, that is, by varying Bi concentration at the interface the whole set of molecular levels shift to lower binding energy (see Supplementary Information file). Therefore, from the electronic transport point of view, a small change in hole and electron injection barriers can be smoothly tuned by adding Bi to the molecule/Ag(111) system. Notably, supramolecular ordering is not relevant, since different structural phases of F 4 TCNQ exhibit identical molecular level spectra (see Supplementary Information file). Yet remarkable differences between Ag(111) and BiAg 2 interfaces are found at the cyano/metal contact, which affect optical excitations. In the pristine Ag(111) surface the cyano/metal distance is shorter, and the molecule/metal bond is largely spread, being both characteristic signatures of the strong metallization of the contact. This leads to the effective disappearance of the HOMO-LUMO gap in the cyano group, which in turn explains the absence of the shake-up satellite in the N 1s photoemission spectrum. In the Bi-doped interface, the N contact with the out-protruding Bi atoms becomes more localized. Moreover, DFT maps indicate that charge flows mostly from Bi atoms and less from the surface Ag. Such local Bi/cyano contact explains chemical shifts in Bi core-levels, as well as the discrete series of Bi-like p z resonances that appear inside the HOMO-LUMO gap. However, the latter is effectively preserved, since the n-HOMO-nLUMO excitation that arises at the cyano group remains, as probed in the N 1s spectrum. Calculations for gas-phase and adsorbate systems were carried out within density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the computer code VASP, 46-48 using the Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation for exchange and correlation (GGA-PBE) The Ag(111) surface was prepared by standard sputtering and annealing cycles. The BiAg 2 alloy was obtained by evaporating one-third of a monolayer of Bi from a Knudsen cell with the sample kept at 300K, followed by a gentle annealing to T∼550 K. Tetracyano-2,3, Valence Band Photoemission and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy ARPES measurements were performed at T = 150 K using the He I line (21.2 eV) from a monochromatized gas discharge lamp and a SPECS Phoibos 150 electron analyzer with energy and momentum resolutions of 40 meV and 0.1 • , respectively. In this case, the binding energy of valence band spectra is calibrated taking the Fermi level as an absolute reference. STM images were measured at room temperature in a commercial Omicron VT-STM operated with Nanonis control electronics in constant current mode. The analysis of the STM images was performed with the freeware WSxM from Nanotec. 