Core-shell CdSe/CdS nanocrystals are a very promising material for light emitting applications. Their solution-phase synthesis is based on surface-stabilizing ligands that makes them soluble in organic solvents, like toluene or chloroform. However, solubility of these materials in water provides many advantages, such as additional process routes and easier handling. So far, solubilization of CdSe/CdS nanocrystals in water that avoids detrimental effects on the luminescent properties, poses a major challenge. This work demonstrates how core-shell CdSe/CdS quantum dot-in-rods can be transferred into water using a ligand exchange method employing mercaptopropionic acid (MPA). Key to maintaining the light-emitting properties is an enlarged CdS rod diameter, which prevents potential surface defects formed during the ligand exchange from affecting the photophysics of the dot-in-rods. Films made from water-soluble dot-in-rods show amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) with a similar threshold (130 μJ/cm 2 ) as the pristine material (115 μJ/cm 2 ). To demonstrate feasibility for lasing applications, self-assembled micro-lasers are fabricated via the "coffee-ring effect" that display single-mode operation and a very low threshold of ~10 μJ/cm 2 . The performance of these micro-lasers is enhanced by the small size of MPA ligands, enabling a high packing density of the dot-in-rods. Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) In 2003, Wuister et al. The larger CdS rod prevents surface defects formed during the reaction to affect the photophysics of the material. Additionally, MPA as a surface ligand leads to shorter inter-QDRs distances in assemblies than the pristine octadecylphosphonic acid (ODPA), allowing the fabrication of higher density films. The observation of a similar ASE threshold (from the emissive states of the CdSe core) from films made of MPA capped QDRs as for the pristine ODPA QDRs, and laser emission from self-assembled structures further motivates the use of water-soluble QDRs as gain media in laser architectures. The material design criteria proposed here (i.e. employing a CdS rod with a substantially larger diameter than the CdSe core) can be extended to other classes of CdSe/CdS heterostructures such as core-shell nanocrystals Figure The QDRs were synthesized via seeded-growth As-synthesized QDRs were capped with ODPA (structure shown in Figure The temporal evolution of the PL measured in a spectral range of 10 nm centered around the PL maximum at ~ 630 nm (see Figure Considering that the addition of 1 monolayer of CdS already leads to a red-shift of 7.3 nm in spherical CdSe/CdS NCs, Organic soluble CdSe/CdS QDRs have been extensively investigated as gain material, and the ASE threshold typically lies in the range of 150 μJ/cm 2 . The fabrication of these structures using water-based QDRs can be performed in ambient conditions (i.e. no chemical hood is required as it is the case for NCs in organic solvents like chloroform), and presents several other advantages compared to organic solvents. The emission spectrum in Figure Single-mode lasing can occur from the coffee-rings if the free spectral range (FSR) of the cavity is larger than the bandwidth of the gain material, and the latter was evaluated as 8 nm from the FWHM of the ASE spectra of the water soluble QDRs (Figure Using QDRs with a CdS rod with a 1.15 nm larger diameter than the CdSe core allows exchanging the surface ligands without strongly affecting the photophysics of the pristine heterostructure. By exploiting this procedure, we have demonstrated ASE and laser emission from MPA capped QDRs that are stable in water. Self-assembled coffee-ring QDR micro-lasers showed a lower lasing threshold when fabricated from water compared to organic solvents. Furthermore, the water processability of NCs greatly increases the versatility of this class of colloidal semiconductor materials. For example, by enabling the exploitation of orthogonal solvents for the fabrication of multi-layer structures (e.g. solution processable light-emitting diodes), Sample preparation: CdSe/CdS QDRs were synthesized as previously reported. Thin-films of organic and water soluble CdSe/CdS QDRs were obtained by drop-casting solutions with a concentration of 5 -10 μM onto a soda-lime glass slide and dried in solvent vapor saturated atmosphere at room temperature to obtain densely packed, uniform films. Sample characterization. Optical absorption spectra were collected from dilute solutions of both ODPA (dispersed in chloroform) and MPA (dispersed in water) capped QDRs using a Cary 5000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer from Agilent technologies. PL studies were carried out with an Edinburgh Instruments fluorescence spectrometer (FLS920), which included a Xenon lamp with monochromator for steady-state PL excitation, and a time-correlated single photon counting unit coupled with a pulsed laser diode (l = 405 nm, pulse width = 50 ps) for time-resolved PL studies. A calibrated integrating sphere was used for PLQY measurements. CdSe/CdS QDRs solutions for PLQY measurements were prepared in quartz cuvettes and carefully diluted to 0.1 optical density at the excitation wavelength (l = 450 nm). ASE and laser emission measurements: CdSe/CdS QDRs films were excited with l = 400 nm using an amplified Ti:Sapphire laser (Coherent Legend Elite seeded by a Ti:Sapphire fs laser) with a 70 fs pulse (FWHM) and a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The ASE measurements were performed by focusing the beam with a cylindrical lens onto the sample. The resulting excitation stripe dimensions were 110 x 4000 μm. Laser emission measurements on the coffee-ring were conducted using a spherical lens focusing to a spot with a 1 mm radius. All spectra were collected with a Hamamatsu Photonics streak camera, with a 7.5 cm focal length lens. ASE spectra were collected at ~90 o with respect to the excitation beam. Self-assembled micro-laser fabrication: Micro-lasers were fabricated by depositing 10 nL of a diluted CdSe/CdS QDRs water-solution (concentration ca. 0.1 μM) on a glass substrate. Deposition was carried out using a capillary jet technique as previously reported. Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library. In optoelectronic device fabrication, water solubility of nanocrystal materials is advantageous for simple and environmentally friendly processing routes. Towards light emitting devices, highly luminescent core-shell quantum dot-in-rods (QDRs) have demonstrated excellent performance as emitters. An increase in shell thickness allows the transfer of CdSe/CdS QDRs into aqueous solution without reducing their emission, and simple drop deposition leads to single mode microlasers with low threshold. Assuming the shape of a single QDR to be a cylinder, we calculated the volume of the CdSe/CdS using the sizes estimated from the TEM images (length L =15.8 nm and diameter d = 6.6 nm, see Similarly, we estimated the total volume of a QDR by adding to the CdSe/CdS diameter and length the average inter-QDRs distance measured from the TEM images (see Fig. Knowing the total volume of a single QDR (V 95: ) and the volume of the CdSe/CdS component (V %&'()%&' ), it is possible to estimate the volume fraction (V @ ) of the CdSe/CdS with respect to the total volume: V @)4567 = V %&'()%&' V 95:)4567 = 0.27 V @)867 = V %&'()%&' V 95:)867 = 0.41 The local field factor (f CD ) is defined as: ODPA capped QDRs to 8 ns for MPA capped ones, as shown in Fig. Modelling the coffee ring structure as a standard Fabry-Perot cavity, the free spectral range (FSR) can be defined as: where L is the cavity width, n the refractive index, and l the emission wavelength. Using a cavity width equal to 6.8 μm ( as the full-width-half-maximum of the deposit), we can calculate an FSR of 14.7 nm (assuming a refractive index n = 2 for the MPA capped QDRs). Single-Mode lasing from a self-assembled micro-laser: Previously reported self-assembled micro-laser fabricated with ODPA-capped QDRs consisted of coffee-rings in which the nanocrystals were mainly aligned tangential to the ring perimeter. This alignment could be detected by polarized microscopy, since it results in an anisotropy of the refractive index of the QDRs deposit. Polarized optical microscope images of a typical self-assembled micro-laser fabricated with MPA-capped QDRs. The sample in (b) was rotated by 90° with respect to (a). The images were recorded with a retardation plate at 530 nm oriented at 45° with respect to the axes of the crossed polarizers. Therefore, the magenta color corresponds to an isotropic refractive index, indicating no specific alignment order in the QDRs assembly.