The interaction between an electric field and the electric charges in a material is described by electrostatic screening, which in metallic systems is commonly thought to be confined within a distance of the order of the Thomas-Fermi length. The validity of this picture, which holds for surface charges up to ∼ 10 13 cm -2 , has been recently questioned by several experimental results when dealing with larger surface charges, such as those routinely achieved via the ionic gating technique. Whether these results can be accounted for in a purely electrostatic picture is still debated. In this work, we tackle this issue by calculating the spatial dependence of the charge carrier density in thin slabs of niobium nitride via an ab initio density functional theory approach in the field-effect transistor configuration. We find that perturbations induced by surface charges 10 14 cm -2 are mainly screened within the first layer, while those induced by larger surface charges ∼ 10 15 cm -2 can penetrate over multiple atomic layers, in reasonable agreement with the available experimental data. Furthermore, we show that a significant contribution to the screening of large fields is associated not only to the accumulation layer of the induced charge carriers at the surface, but also to the polarization of the pre-existing charge density of the undoped system. The electric field effect (i.e., the modulation of the conduction properties of a material by means of an electrostatic field) is well known and widely used in today's electronic components like field-effect transistors (FET). With respect to conventional solid-state FETs, the ionic gating technique (based on the use of an electrolyte instead of the solid dielectric) allows an enhancement up to two orders of magnitude in the field intensity, thanks to the formation of an electric double layer (EDL) at the interface between the electrolyte and the material under study, which acts as a capacitor with a nanometric inter-plate spacing and a huge capacitance In many of these experiments, the thickness of the charge accumulation layer was found to increase with the intensity of the field (eventually becoming much larger than the Thomas-Fermi value λ T F ) in stark contrast with the expectation that the screening length should decrease on increasing the carrier density. This anomaly was observed in the inversion layer of insulating SrTiO 3 In this paper we calculate the response of a metallic material to an external (static) electric field, without any specific assumption. To do so, we use a first-principles approach and a model systems that mimics the configuration used for field-effect experiments. To allow a direct comparison with experimental results, we chose NbN as the material under study. In order to study the screening in NbN, we used the ab initio approach described in Refs.34, 35 designed to mimic the configuration of a real EDL field-effect experiment, in which the electric field is created by a planar distribution of charges (the ions in the liquid gate or polymer-electrolyte solution) in close proximity of the surface of a thin film, with no solid dielectric in between. To model the NbN thin film, we considered a slab structure made of 7 atomic layers. We initially built the structure by using the lattice constant a = 4.38 Å determined from neutron scattering experiments Let us call z the axis perpendicular to the layers. The ions accumulated on the surface of the film are modeled with a sheet of uniformly distributed charges, in the following called monopole, placed at z mono . The surface density of charges σ in the monopole corresponds to the experimentally-accessible surface density of induced charges, i.e. σ = e∆n 2D . An equal amount of opposite charge is given to the lattice to mimic the fact that, in an EDL experiment, the film is not floating but connected to the measurement circuit. The dielectric is completely removed and substituted with a uniform potential barrier of width d b and height 6.0 Ry. This potential barrier is necessary because, when relaxing the structure under an applied field, one wants the ions not to move too close to the charged plate. To be able to work under periodic boundary conditions (PBC), we included ∼ 20 Å of vacuum between two successive repeated images of the system to avoid any unphysical interaction between them. Since in this vacuum region the field needs to be zero, we placed a dipole (generated by two planes of opposite charge at a distance d dip ) in the vacuum region next to the monopole, at z = z dip . The supercell including the dipole, the monopole, the lattice and the vacuum has length L and we fixed z dip = 0.005 L, d dip = 2z dip = 0.01 L, z mono = 0.011 L, and d b = 0.1 L.A sketch of the configuration is given in Fig. Once set the model, we performed ab initio computations of the charge density in the lattice by using density functional theory (DFT) within the Quantum Espresso package The simulations were performed as follows: i) first of all, the bulk NbN structure was relaxed without any external field by minimizing the total energy. This gave a lattice constant a = 4.42 Å; ii) Subsequently, the supercell was built in order to model the surface of the material, and the structure was further relaxed in zero external field; iii) Then, for every value of the surface charge density (i.e. of the electric field), the slab was relaxed in order to determine the structure corresponding to the minimum total energy in the presence of this anisotropic perturbation, and the equilibrium position of the surface with respect to the potential barrier. The equilibrium distance between the first layer and the potential barrier turned out to be ≃ 5 Å for all the field intensities analyzed here. Note that all these relaxations were performed in the harmonic approximation of the ionic potential: in principle, this may be an issue for the computation of the phonon bandstructure of the slab, since the stoichiometric rocksalt phase of bulk NbN is unstable, leading to the presence of imaginary phonons Let us first consider how the application of the electric field alters the total charge density in the NbN slab. In Fig. Fig. Further insight into the spatial distribution of the screening charge can be obtained by dropping the planar averaging, and considering two-dimensional maps along specific crystallographic planes. Hence, we directly calculated the difference ∆n 3D between the total electron density in the doped and undoped NbN slab (again, the latter was obtained with the relaxed lattice structure of the former). Note that the integral of ∆n 3D along the z axis must necessarily be equal to ∆n 2D . In Fig. Our result clearly show how, even in a metallic system such as NbN, the effects of intense electric fields extend well beyond the first atomic layer, and are not limited to pure surface accumulation of the extra induced carriers. Moreover, the charge accumulation layer extends even outside the material. Finally, the depth in the bulk over which the field is screened increases with increasing the field intensity. This last result is, at least qualitatively, in agreement with experimental findings in EDL-based field-effect measurements. A quantitative comparison with the experimental results is however not straightforward for two reasons. The first is that, as explained below, the outcome of experiments is an effective thickness of the accumulation layer that is hard to define starting from the results of DFT calculations. The second is that, in general, transport experiments (even in the superconducting state) probe only the conduction charge, i.e. the charge that falls within an energy window of width k B T around the chemical potential. Evaluating this charge, and especially determining where exactly it is located in direct space, is a difficult task in DFT, because the bandstructure of the surface is much more complicated than that of the bulk. The problem is particularly complex in the case of intrinsically metallic systems that possess mobile charges even in the absence of electric fields. This means that the ∆n || profiles shown in Fig. This said, we can propose a qualitative, preliminary comparison between the results of this study and the experimental observations, leaving a more detailed and quantitative treatment for future works. The first issue is the determination of an effective screening length, d s , from either the planar average of the charge densities in Fig. The second result that requires a more thorough quantification concerns the simultaneous induction of the accumulation layer and strong charge dipoles in the first few atomic layers, and how the relative intensity of these two contributions evolves with increasing electric fields. That is, the doped slab can be characterized not only by the additional countercharge ∆n 2D , induced by the gate, but also by the amount of pristine charge that is displaced and participates in the polarization of the structure, ∆n disp . These can be obtained easily thanks to the charge conservation law. As already pointed out, the surface density of induced charge ∆n 2D (which is equal to the charge density in the monopole, σ, divided by the elementary charge e) is simply the total integral along the z direction of ∆n || (z), the difference between the planar averages of the electron densities in the doped and undoped slab: since the planar average of the pristine charge -that is displaced in the formation of the dipoles, and that accounts for the oscillating behavior of ∆n || (z) in the slab -averages to zero when integrated. Hence, when the same integration is performed on the absolute value of ∆n || (z), the displaced charge gives a contribution equal to twice ∆n disp , i.e. : Hollow black dots are taken from the effective screening length as determined experimentally Thus, the ratio between the surface densities of induced charge and displaced intrinsic charge can be easily computed for any electric field intensity as: The values of ∆n 2D and ∆n disp and their ratio ∆n 2D /∆n disp are plotted in Fig. In summary, we have performed ab-initio DFT calculations on a [100]-oriented NbN slab in the field-effect transistor configuration. We have determined how the spatial dependence of the electron density is changed by the combined effects of the applied electric field and induction of extra charge carriers, typical of field-effect experiments. The electric field is screened by the combination of the accumulation layer (due to the induced carriers) and the polarization of the pre-existent electron density. We observed that the screening charge is localized within the first atomic layer at low and moderate fields, but extends well beyond the first unit cells at high fields. This reproduces well the anomalous expansion of the perturbed surface layer reported in recent experimental literature. Additionally, we found that the formation of dipoles deep in the slab is negligible at low and moderate applied fields, but becomes relevant at high fields, involving a charge density per unit area comparable to that involved in the accumulation layer. Overall, our result clearly establish how simplistic screening models, such as the often-used Thomas-Fermi approximation, do not offer a good approximation of a realistic treatment of electrostatic screening in the presence of large electric fields, even in normal metallic systems.