The sensitive dependence of monolayer materials on their environment often gives rise to unexpected properties. It was recently demonstrated that monolayer FeSe on a SrTiO3 substrate exhibits a much higher superconducting critical temperature Tc than the bulk material. Here, we examine the interfacial structure of FeSe / SrTiO3 and the effect of an interfacial Ti1+xO2 layer on the increased Tc using a combination of scanning transmission electron microscopy and density functional theory. We find Ti1+xO2 forms its own quasi-two-dimensional layer, bonding to both the substrate and the FeSe film by van der Waals interactions. The excess Ti in this layer electron-dopes the FeSe monolayer in agreement with experimental observations. Moreover, the interfacial layer introduces symmetry-breaking distortions in the FeSe film that favor a Tc increase. These results suggest that this common substrate may be functionalized to modify the electronic structure of a variety of thin films and monolayers. In his Nobel lecture, Herbert Kroemer opened with the statement "Often, it may be said that the interface is the device" We conclude that this enhanced superconductivity is directly related to the interaction between the FeSe monolayer (ML) and its substrate. Theoretical investigations into the role of the substrate have focused on the coupling between electronic states in the FeSe film and phonons in SrTiO3 In this Letter, we establish the structure of the interface: a Ti1+xO2 interlayer bonded to both the substrate and the FeSe ML by van der Waals (vdW) interactions, accounting for the observed large separation between the interlayer and the substrate. Both Ti1+xO2 and FeSe are essentially twodimensional monolayers floating above the substrate, making SrTiO3/Ti1+xO2/FeSe a van der Waals heterostructure. We show that the interlayer is best described as a (2x2) Ti1.5O2 layer. We demonstrate that the excess Ti in the interlayer is responsible for the vanishing of the Fermi surface at the zone center, as observed by angularly resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) High angle annular dark field (HAADF) imaging the FeSe/SrTiO3 interface was performed at 200kV with a Nion UltraSTEM 200 using an illumination half angle of 30 mrad and an inner detector half angle of 65 mrad. Image simulations were carried out using the same parameters within a multislice model In Figure A comparison of the HAADF images with our multislice STEM simulations (Figure Our calculations show that the interlayer in the FeSe/SrTiO3 system is not merely a passive glue holding substrate and film together. In fact, the interfacial Ti atoms develop magnetic moments (just under 1 μB) and ferromagnetic orientation. Forcing a (necessarily frustrated) antiferromagnetic ordering in the IL yields an excited state about 1.5 meV / Ti higher in energy. Long-range magnetic order at the interface is more likely to reduce Tc and perhaps give rise to vortices, both of which contradict experiment. To explore other possibilities, we performed additional calculations forcing no net spin. Relaxations yielded a similar atomic structure but a reduction of the IL -FeSe interlayer distance to about 2.5 Å. The distance between the IL and the STO substrate is increased to 2.8 Å. This shift in the middle vdW layer accompanies an apparent increase in the electron doping in the FeSe film. Figure 