Basically, any physical properties of a matter can find root in its quantum mechanics. So far, several macroscopic quantum phenomena have been discovered in the Josephson junction. Through introducing such a structure with a liquid membrane sandwiched between two liquid metal electrodes, we had ever observed a lighting and sound phenomenon which was explained before as discharge plasma. In fact, such an effect also belongs to a quantum process. It is based on this conceiving, we proposed here that an electrically controllable method can thus be established to generate and manipulate as much photonic quantum as desired. We attributed such electrically induced lighting among liquid metal droplets immersed inside aqueous solution as photonic quantum effect. Our experiments clarified that a small electrical voltage would be strong enough to trigger blue-violet light and sound inside the aqueous solution system. Meanwhile, thermal heat is released, and chemical reaction occurs over the solution. From an alternative way which differs from former effort in interpreting such effect as discharge plasma, we treated this process as a quantum one and derived new conceptual equations to theoretically quantify this phenomenon in light of quantum mechanics principle. It can be anticipated that given specific designing, such spontaneously generated tremendous quantum can be manipulated to entangle together which would possibly help mold functional elements for developing future quantum computing or communication system. With superior adaptability than that of the conventional rigid junction, the present electro-photonic quantum generation system made of liquid metal droplets structure could work in solution, room temperature situation and is easy to be adjusted. It suggests a macroscopic way to innovate the classical strategies and technologies in generating quantum as frequently adopted in classical quantum engineering area. The concept of quantum was first proposed by Max Planck in 1900. The fundamental notion of this theory lies in that the energy can be treated as a discrete value consisting of integer multiples of one quantum. With further endeavors from world-wide researchers, many physical properties have been gradually disclosed as discontinuous quantization, such as photon. In 1905, Einstein introduced the concept of light quantum and explained the photoelectric effect, which is well-known that when light hits the surface of a metal, the electrons inside the metal are able to be ejected through absorption of light energy. The recently emerging quantum computer is a device that performs operation, storage and processing of quantum information via the law of quantum mechanics. Its core component is generally a superconducting electronic device called Josephson junction, which is composed of a superconductor-insulator-superconductor structure. Liquid metal is an unconventional soft material with both high conductivity of the metal and flexibility and deformability of the fluid at room temperature. Nowadays, investigations on the liquid metal fundamentals and applications have become scientific hot topics and frontiers over the world. These liquid metal functional materials could offer extraordinary properties in various application fields, such as energy, thermal management, advanced manufacture, biomedicine, and so on. Figure The electric-field internsity increases with the drawing near of the positive electrode. Suddenly, when the distance falls small to a certain extent, a high puncture current would be produced between both the liquid metal electrodes, accompanied by a light emission, heat and a sound passing through the solution, and some chemical reactions are also brought about in the solution. According to the law of conservation of energy, the processes of quantum energy transfer could be characterized as follows: where, E represents the energy, the subscripts of e, o, h, a and c represent electrical, optical, heat, acoustic and chemical energy, respectively. As shown in Figure where, e is the charge of an electron, g U is the voltage of the gap between two liquid metal poles. Figure where,  , l are the electrical resistivity and length of the liquid metal stream, needle d is the inner diameter of the needle orifice, A is the expansion coefficient of the liquid metal stream after injected from the needle orifice. According to the data in the previous study, where, o  is the frequency of emitted light, h is the Planck constant, c is the velocity of light. If juming to E a through the middle enegy levels, the emitting lights include several wavelength, i.e. After collision, the electron will continue to move with the new velocity, and start the next collision and energy transfer. From the above equations, it could be found that the maximum enegy of the emited light depends on the electron momentum and the difference between the two enegy states ba E E E    . The former is determined by the electric field intensity of the gap. And the latter depends on the excitation potentials of the particles that are hit by the electrons. The heat energy here is caused by the random movement of a large number of particles. Then these particles continually hit some other particles. Thus, all the particles in the gap have obtained the non-regular kinetic energy, which is embodied at the macro level that lead to the temperature rises. Besides, the particles in the gap will also hit the particles in the solution, so that the motion of particles in the solution intensifies. On a macro level, the heat is transported through the solution. Therefore, the kinetic energy of all the participating particles could be represented on behalf of the heat energy. In the standpoint of quantum, the lattice vibrations in metals form sound waves, which is a kind of mechanical wave, consisting of many phonons with different vibrational frequencies. Similar to photons, phonons have wave-particle duality, too. When the atoms are rearranged in a reactive compound to produce new compounds, the chemical energy changes, the nature of which is the breaking of chemical bonds in the reactants and the formation of chemical bonds in the product molecules. In this process, the chemical reaction involved is First, the liquid water change to a gas phase through the increase of internal energy. Second, two H-O bond breaks, then a H-H bond and an O-O bond forms. Thus, the chemical energy for one water molecule is expressed as When the pressure is 1.01×10 In this case, we could then obtain the generalized equation to quantify the electrically induced photonic and acoustic quantum effect as: where, n are the number of electrons, photons, all particles that have no regular motion in the gap, phonons and water molecules participating in chemical reactions, respectively. Clearly, through controlling each of the terms in the above equation, one can design a specific experimental system and generate a group of desired quantum processes which can span from a wide variety of physical properties and behaviors. Further works either theoretically or experimentally can be performed along this direction. The three conditions mentioned above all involve liquid solution environment. In fact, this phenomenon could also be repeated in the air. As shown in Figure Therefore, the metal bond strength of Cu-Cu is higher than Ga-Ga. e W of Cu electrode is much larger than that of Ga. This is the reason why the Ga, In or EGaIn metal electrode could emit violet light under low voltage while Cu needs extremely high voltage. Besides, according to Figure Another potential value from the above electrophtonic quantum effect perhaps lies in that quantum entangement may be easily induced via the present system. This is because the electricity from the same source can induce lighting and sound across multiple sites even covering the whole solution whenever many different liquid metal droplets are incorporated. The lighting quantum from different regions over the continnum solution environment can affect each other, or in orther words, entangemented among them. In this sense, if well controlled, such effects can possibly be taken full use to aid develop future quantum computing or communication system. In this article, a photonic and acoustic quantum generation system was proposed and the phenomenon thus induced by electrical field was interpreted via quantum theory through the established equation consisted of "liquid metal electrode-liquid membrane-liquid metal electrode". It is found that a small voltage applied at the ends of liquid metal structure immersed in solution could produce violet light, heat, sound and chemical reaction. Drawing on the lessons of photo-electric effect theory proposed by Einstein, we attributed such quantum reasoning as energy transformation from electric energy to light, heat, acoustic and chemical energy. This theoretical strategy will promote the development of future potential quantum computing and communication system enabled by liquid metal immersed in aqueous environment and under room temperature condition. c EJ 