We analytically establish an anomalous transverse flow of heat in 8-Pmmn borophene, one of the several two-dimensional (2D) allotropes of Boron (B). The dispersion of this allotrope contains a pair of anisotropic and tilted Dirac cones which are gapped by placing the 2D B sheet under an intense circularly-polarized illumination. A gap in the Dirac dispersion leads to a finite Berry curvature and connected anomalous Hall effects. In the case of thermoelectrics, this manifests as a heat current perpendicular to the temperature gradient -the thermal Hall effect. A quantitative calculation of the attendant thermal Hall conductivity reveals dependence on the intrinsic anisotropy and tilt of the Dirac cone. Further, by estimating the longitudinal thermal conductivity using the Weidemann-Franz law, we also outline steps to compute the thermal Hall angle that gauges the generation efficiency of such transverse heat processes. Finally, we touch upon the idea of thermal rectification wherein the direction of flow of the anomalous heat reverses through a simple switch of the polarization of incident light and is of interest in thermal logic circuits. The two-dimensional (2D) boron monolayers known as borophenes As a brief summary of the results presented herein, we note that the thermal Hall conductance rises for a lower photo-induced ∆ and is further enhanced for a Fermi level located in the band gap. In addition, the conductance also shows a monotonic rise (fall) as the anisotropy of β-borophene is augmented (truncated) via a strain-like perturbation. In fact, we outline how both these observations are encapsulated in a general expression of the thermal Hall angle that potentially estimates the efficiency of the Ω (k)-aided anomalous heat flow. Lastly, the polarization of the off -resonant light beam when switched between a right-or left-circular type allows for a full rever- sal of the direction of flow of the anomalous heat current and espouses the principle of thermal rectification. To expand on these findings, we begin by writing the low-energy continuum two-band Hamiltonian 11 for βborophene that describes an anisotropic and tilted Dirac crossing along the Γ-Y direction in the Brillouin zone (see Fig. In Eq. 1, σ x,y are the Pauli matrices denoting the lattice degree of freedom while σ 0 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix. The direction-dependent velocity terms ×10 6 m/s as reported in Ref. 11 are v x = 0.86, v y = 0.69, and v t = 0.32. Note that anisotropy, ν = v x /v y , arises since ν = 1 while v t = 0 ensures a tilt through non-concentric constant energy contours. The dispersion relation using Eq. 1 is The upper (lower) sign is for the conduction (valence) band in β-borophene. This basic energy description (Eqs. 1, 2) serves as the starting point to examine models of light-matter interaction. The light source is an external electromagnetic perturbation periodic in time and serves to gap the Dirac dispersion. To quantitatively assess the change in dispersion under a periodic (with time period T ) perturbation, we must make use of the Floquet theory The terms contained in the anti-commutator are the Fourier components which have the following generalized form: H t is the timedependent part of Ĥ (t) and T = 2π/ω. The Fourier components must be calculated using the Hamiltonian in Eq. 1. Changing into a time-dependent form by applying the Peierls substitution k → k -eA (t) that represents the coupling (via the vector potential A (t)) of the electromagnetic field, Eq. 1 is The time-dependent part is therefore, Ĥt = v x σ x eA x + v y σ x eA y + v t σ 0 eA y . For circularly polarized light propagating along ẑ, the two vector components are A = A 0 (s sin ωtx, cos ωtŷ). The right (left) circularlypolarized light is s = 1 (-1). From the time-dependent part, the two Fourier components in Eq. 3 (H ± ) are where φ 1 = sv x σ x and φ 2 = (v t σ 0 + v y σ y ). Evaluating the integral in Eq. 5 gives Inserting the Fourier components H ± from Eq. 6 in the commutator of Eq. 3 and using the Pauli relation, The quantity Λ = e 2 A 2 0 v x v y in Eq. 7 has unit of energysquared and is an experimentally alterable parameter (in addition to ω) through adjustments to the experimental setup. Briefly, Λ denotes the power gained by an electron traveling with velocity v in an electric field E = Aω in one period of the electromagnetic field of the illuminating beam. A simple inspection of Eqs. 3 and 7 shows that the rearrangement of bands via the additional Floquet term introduced through Eq. 7 lets the original Hamiltonian in Eq. 1 acquire a mass term, ∆. The gapping of the massless Dirac bands therefore manifests as a nonvanishing Ω (k), in which lies the genesis of the family of AHE. We therefore derive an analytic representation of Ω (k) and subsequently evaluate the thermal variant of the AHE (see Fig. For a general two-band model Hamiltonian of the form H = σ•d (k)+Iǫ (k), where d is a vector of spin or pseudospin, ǫ (k) is a general dispersion term, and I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix, the Berry curvature for this system is 15 where . Applying this formalism to the β-borophene Hamiltonian (Eq. 1), and noting that the vector d in component notation assumes the form: (9) Substituting the d vector in Eq. 8, Ω (k) is expressed as: The upper (lower) sign is for the conduction (valence) band. The Ω (k) as a momentum-dependent magnetic field points out-of-plane (the z -axis) and evidently decays as ∆ → 0. A plot of Ω (k) for |k| values centred around the Dirac crossing is shown in Fig. The transport coefficient of interest to us is the transverse component (note the superscripts) L xy 22 -a measure of heat current in the direction of the y-axis when a temperature gradient exists along the longitudinal x -axis and the setup is subjected to an out-of-plane magnetic field. In the present context, the part of an external magnetic field is fulfilled by Ω (k). The transverse thermal trans- In Eq. 12, the Fermi distribution is identified by f (E) and Li n (z) = ∞ k=1 z k /k n is the poly-logarithmic function. A quantitative assessment of L xy 22 or the anomalous thermal Hall conductivity can be carried out by evaluating the integral in Eq. 12; a first step though lies in a reasonable estimation of Ω (k) through an evaluation of ∆ in the off -resonant condition. This is the program for the following section. We begin by setting the energy of the incident beam to a constant ω = 8.0 eV -the denominator of Eq. 7. The term Λ 2 = e 2 A 2 v x v y in the numerator is an adjustable variable assigned a pair of values (in eV): Λ = {1.0, 1.15}. corresponding band gaps in meV using Eq. 7 are 125 and 165 respectively. To carry out a numerical integration of Eq. 12, we start by assigning a k-space cut-off radius of |k| = 0.25 Å-1 and obtain L xy 22 (Fig. In the preceding sections we have sought to quantitatively estimate the thermal Hall conductivity; it would also be useful to gauge and uncover methods (qualitatively) to better the efficiency of the thermal process which supplies a measure of the 'anomalous' transverse current (J xy ) per the 'normal' longitudinal component (J xx ). We can, employing Fourier's heat law, J = -L 22 ∇T , write the efficiency as Note that Θ H is also the thermal Hall angle for the anomalous case. To this end, while we have an analytic representation of L xy 22 from Eq. 12, L xx 22 can be assessed by a direct application of the Weidemann-Franz law (WFL). x τ D (ǫ). The density of states is D (ǫ) = k δ (ǫ -E (k)) and the scattering time as a parameter is assumed to be constant in the range of energies around the Fermi level. The D (ǫ) is obtained from the dispersion relation of Eq. 2 and the identity δ where k i is a root of the equation g (k) = ǫ -E (k) = 0. The super- script prime denotes a derivative. Tacitly, when WFL holds, the per spin L xx 22 at each DC (a pair exists) is (13) Here, Υ = e 2 v 2 x τ . This equation is integrable in a closed form for specific material parameters; also, note that we have ignored changes to conductivity arising from a photo-induced band gap. A quick inspection shows how the ν parameter can be again brought to bear significant influence on L xx 22 , and thereupon on the ratio, Θ H = L xy 22 /L xx 22 . Succinctly, a complete account of optimizing Θ H involves an elaboration of its atomic and band structure under strain 21 that impacts ν; this also rearranges the phonon dispersion and mobility curves in addition to a re-evaluation of τ combining electron transport and deformation potential theory. In closing, we set up an analytic model for the anisotropy-dependent anomalous thermal Hall conductance of a β-borophene sheet placed under a circularlypolarized illuminating beam. The utility of such calculations lie in suitably harnessing the topology of the Fermi surface as a means to control thermoelectric behaviour. In case of β-borophene, the promise of such control acquires significance in light of its underlying anisotropic thermal transport. On this note, surface hydrogenation of 2-Pmmn borophene (an allotrope sharing the same space group of 59 with 8-Pmmn borophene but with two atoms per unit cell) showed remarkable changes 