The pairing mechanism and gap structure in Ba122 pnictides have been hotly discussed for long time as one of the central issues in Fe-based superconductors. Here, we attack this problem by taking account of the vertex corrections (VCs) for the Coulomb interaction U (U -VCs), which are totally dropped in conventional Migdal-Eliashberg formalism. The U -VC in the charge susceptibility induces strong orbital fluctuations, and the U -VC also enlarges the orbital-fluctuation-driven attractive interaction. By analyzing the effective multiorbital Hubbard model for Ba122 pnictides, we find that the orbital fluctuations develop in all four d-orbitals (t2g-and z 2 -orbitals), by which the FSs are composed. For this reason, nearly isotropic gap function appears on all the hole-type FSs, including the outer hole-FS around Z-point composed of z 2 -orbital. In contrast, nodal gap structure appears on the electron-FSs for wide parameter range. The obtained nodal s-wave state changes to fully-gapped s-wave state without sign-reversal (s++-wave state) by introducing small amount of impurities, accompanied by small reduction in Tc. The present microscopic theory naturally explains the important characteristics of the gap structure of both hole-and electron-FSs in Ba122 pnictides, without introducing any phenomenological pairing interaction. Ba122 pnictides have been studied for a long time as typical Fe-based superconductors, which are strongly correlated multiorbital superconductors. As possible pairing states, both the spin-fluctuation-mediated s ± -wave state When the random-phase-approximation (RPA) was applied to the three-dimensional Ba122 system To clarify the pairing mechanism, it is significant to understand the origin of the electronic nematic order at T S , which is above the magnetic order temperature T N . Both the spin-nematic scenario In our previous study for Ba122 systems In Ref. In the present paper, we revisit the study of pairing mechanism and gap structure in BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 , which has been discussed for years as one of the central issue in Fe-based superconductors. For this purpose, we construct the effective two-dimensional tight-binding model for BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 , in which the FSs are composed of four t 2g -and z 2 -orbitals. Based on this model, we analyze the electronic states based on the self-consistent vertex correction (SC-VC) method In this paper, we introduce the two-dimensional fiveorbital model for BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 with the 3d orbitals z 2 , xz, yz, xy, x 2 -y 2 on Fe-ion (orbital 1-5). We derive the present model from the three-dimensional ten-orbital model for the optimally doped BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 (30% Pdoped) introduced in Ref. The kinetic term H 0 is expressed as where k = (k x , k y ), σ =↑ or ↓ and l, m = 1 -5. H 0 l,m (k) is the two-dimensional five-orbital tight-binding model for BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 shown in Fig. Here, where σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the Pauli matrix vector. Û 0s and Û 0c are the bare Coulomb interaction matrices for spin and charge channels, which are composed of intraorbital Coulomb interaction U , inter-orbital one U ′ , Hund's interaction J and pair transfer J ′ Based on the five-orbital Hubbard model for BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 , we calculate the orbital and spin susceptibilities based on the self-consistent VC (SC-VC) theory is the Green function and μ is the chemical potential. The diagrammatic expression of Φc(s) (q) is shown in Fig. The charge (spin) susceptibility diverges when the charge (spin) Stoner factor α c(s) , which is given by the maximum eigenvalue of Û 0c(s) Φc(s) (q, 0), reaches unity. In the RPA analysis ( ΛAL,c(s) = 0), the relation α s > α c always holds for J > 0 and χ c (q) remains small even when χ s (q) develops divergently. In contrast, the spin-fluctuation-driven orbital order or fluctuations are realized when we consider the VC since the AL-VC increases in proportion to p χ s (q + p)χ s (p) near the magnetic QCP Hereafter, we carry out the calculation with 32 × 32 kmesh and 256 Matsubara frequencies. We fix the temperature at T = 20 meV and the ratio J/U = 0.1. Figures Figure Figure FIG. In this section, we solve the linearized gap equation depicted in Fig. where ∆ α (k) is the superconducting gap function and α, β are indices of FS. The eigenvalue λ is approximately proportional to T c and λ = 1 is satisfied at T = T c . V pair α,β (k, p) is the pairing interaction in the band-diagonal basis given as The intra-orbital charge susceptibilities χ c l,l;l,l (q) for (a) l = 1, (b) l = 3 and (c) l = 4. χ c 1,1;1,1 (q) shows the broad peak around q = (0, 0). χ c 3,3;3,3 (q) and χ c 4,4;4,4 (q) exhibit both the ferro and anti-ferro peaks. The inter-orbital charge susceptibilities (d) χ c 1,2;1,2 (q) and (c) χ c 1,4;1,4 (q). These charge fluctuations are enlarged by the AL-VC. where n imp is impurity concentration. We consider the diagonal impurity potential I imp in the d orbital basis. The T matrix for an impurity is given as Here, the local Green function. The normal self-energy induced by impurities is given as Then, Z α (k, ǫ n ) is given as where Beyond the ME formalism, we take the U-VC for the coupling constant into account. The MT-VC and AL-VC for U-VC are depicted in Fig. The effect of the spin-channel AL-VC on χs (q) is small since Λ AL,s(c) (k + q, k) ≪ 1 except for small Matsubara frequencies where Equations ( Here, V Λ,c(s) is given as where The pairing interaction due to the charge (spin) fluctuations is enhanced (suppressed) by the U-VC since |Λ c(s) (k, p)| 2 is larger (smaller) than 1. To discuss the importance of the U -VC, we also study the pairing interaction given by RPA without U -VC ( Λc,s = 1) in later sections: In this ME formalism, V s RPA is important because only spin fluctuations develop in the RPA. In addition, we calculate the double fluctuation exchange pairing interaction V (2) term, which corresponds to the AL process for the pairing interaction. It is given as RPA . There is sign reversal between h4 and h1, that corresponds to the schematic horizontal node gap structure in (b). The broken lines represent the expected horizontal node. (c) The nodal s wave state given by V total Λ (nearly s+-). There is no sign reversal between h4 and h1, which corresponds to the schematic gap structure without horizontal node in (d). In the present model, V (2) induces attractive (repulsive) interaction for kp ≈ (π, 0) (kp ≈ (0, 0)) as we discussed in Ref. V. THE s++ WAVE STATE WITHOUT HORIZONTAL NODE Hereafter, we discuss the obtained gap functions at α s = 0.97 and J/U = 0.1. Figure Figure In Fig. A. The J/U and impurity dependences of the gap structure As shown in Fig. The gap structure sensitively depends on the Stoner factor and model parameters. In Fig. Next, we show the α s -J/U phase diagrams of the gap structure in Fig. To discuss the impurity effect on T c , we show the impurity dependence of the normalized eigenvalue, λ/λ 0 , where λ 0 is the eigenvalue at n imp = 0. Figures B. The mechanism of the s++ wave state with the absence of horizontal node on the FS composed of the z 2 orbital Here, we explain the reason why the s ++ wave state is obtained in the present study. To clarify the pairing interaction between FSs, we define the averaged pairing interaction between α and β as where k α is Fermi wavenumber on FS denoted by α. We show V (α, β) in Fig. , and (e) V (2) . Blue and red panels mean that interaction between FSs is attractive and repulsive, respectively. In the RPA analysis, repulsive interaction by V (1)s RPA is dominant. The repulsive interaction is strong between h1-3 and e1. The repulsive interaction is given by intra-orbital spin fluctuations (χ s 2,2;2,2 , χ s 3,3;3,3 and χ s 4,4;4,4 ), and induces the s +-wave state. In contrast, the inter-FS repulsive interaction between h4 and the other FSs is weak, as shown in panels (h4,β) for β = h4 in Fig. shown in Fig. V with the U-VC for spin channel shown in Fig. (α, β) for (α, β)=(h1,h3),(h2,h3) (h3,h4) is attractive, if the U -VC is taken into account. The reason is shortly explained in Appendix A. Therefore, U-VCs for both spin and charge channels play important role for realizing the s ++ wave state, whereas the s +-wave state is suppressed. Moreover, V (2) gives important contribution to the s ++ wave state. In fact, both V (2) (e1, h1-4) and V (2) (h4, h1, 2) give attractive interaction between different FSs. In contrast, V V total Λ without impurity is shown in Fig. Next, we focus on the gap function in h4: We explain the reason why ∆ h4 is large and ∆ h4 ∆ h1 > 0 is realized as shown in Fig. We summarize the schematic pairing interactions between FSs given by RPA in Fig. In previous subsection, we explained that the horizontal node is absent ( ∆h4 ∆h1 > 0) due to inter-orbital attractive interaction. Here, we verify that this feature is very robust for wide parameter range. Figure We discuss the results only for α s = 0.96, since the results are almost independent of α s . In the RPA analysis at J/U = 0.1, we obtain ∆h4 / ∆h1 ≃ -0.1 in the whole range of n imp . The result is almost independent of J/U . It indicates that horizontal node is robust in the RPA even if impurity effect is considered. In contrast, we obtain ∆h4 / ∆h1 > 0 in the present theory with , and (e) V (2) . Blue and red panels show that interaction between FSs is attractive and repulsive, respectively. Here, we drop the bare Coulomb repulsive term, which is reduced by retardation effect. FIG. U-VCs, which means that the horizontal node is absent. We find that the ratio ∆h4 / ∆h1 becomes large with increasing n imp , from 0.5 (n imp = 0) to 0.8 (n imp = 0.05) at J/U = 0.1. The horizontal node is absent even for J/U = 0.14. We stress that the horizontal node is absent even in the s +-wave state in the present theory. The ratio ∆h4 / ∆h1 is predicted to increase with n imp . In this paper, we studied the superconducting gap structure of BaFe 2 (As,P) 2 based on the realistic twodimensional five-orbital model. The U -VCs due to the AL-processes are taken into account, not only for the charge susceptibilities but also for the superconducting gap equation. Based on the present beyond-ME formalism, the nodal s-wave state or fully-gapped s ++ -wave state is naturally obtained for wide parameter range. The nodes appear only on the electron-FSs, at which the orbital character changes between xz(yz) and xy. This result means the emergence of the loop-nodes on the electron-FSs, consistently with the theoretical prediction in Ref. The obtained results are essentially similar to the results of our previous RPA study q) is attractive due to the off-diagonal components of spin channel U-VC. The other attractive panels in Fig. 