We study the performance of fourth-order gradient expansions of the kinetic energy density (KED) in semi-local kinetic energy functionals depending on the density-dependent variables. The formal fourth-order expansion is convergent for periodic systems and small molecules but does not improve over the second-order expansion (Thomas-Fermi term plus one-ninth of von Weizsäcker term). Linear fitting of the expansion coefficients somewhat improves on the formal expansion. The tuning of the fourth order expansion coefficients allows for better reproducibility of Kohn-Sham kinetic energy density than the tuning of the second-order expansion coefficients alone. The possibility of a much more accurate match with the Kohn-Sham kinetic energy density by using neural networks trained using the terms of the 4 th order expansion as densitydependent variables is demonstrated. We obtain ultra-low fitting errors without overfitting. Small single hidden layer neural networks can provide good accuracy in separate KED fits of each compound, while for joint fitting of KEDs of multiple compounds multiple hidden layers were required to achieve good fit quality. The critical issue of data distribution is highlighted. We also show the critical role of pseudopotentials in the performance of the expansion, where in the case of a too rapid decay of the valence density at the nucleus with some pseudopotentials, numeric instabilities arise. The search for the orbital-free form of non-interacting kinetic energy functional (KEF), or more narrowly kinetic energy density functional (KEDF), remains one of the most challenging tasks in density-functional theory (DFT). = μμ -VV eeeeee (rr) Here μ is the chemical potential that aims to ensure the normalization condition ∫ nn(rr)ddrr = NN eeee , where Nel is the number of electrons, and is VV eeeeee (rr) external field (for simplicity, we will ignore spin). Indeed, while other components in DFT partitioning of the total energy -the Hartree energy, nuclear-electron interaction energy and exchange-correlation energy -can be explicitly represented via electron density with satisfactory accuracy, good approximations to the kinetic energy (KE) or kinetic energy density (KED) as a functional of only density-dependent quantities are still missing. They are the main subject of developments in orbital-free DFT (OF-DFT). One of the earliest and most straightforward methods for representing the KE is an expansion in different orders of the gradient of the electron density. Initially introduced by Kirzhnits Here we use capital T to define terms in the KEF (integrated over space) and small tt(rr) for corresponding terms in the KEDF. These corrections had some success. For example, it was shown that the fourth-order gradient expansion TT TT vvvv , TT vvvv + λλTT 4 improves the accuracy and makes the error less than 1%. Numeric convergence issues associated with higher order derivatives and their powers complicate the use of high-order gradient expansion terms. The gradient expansion terms of higher than the second-order can diverge at long range. The aim of the present work is to explore the extent of use of the fourth-order gradient expansions, as published, with tuned coefficients, and when using the terms of the expansion as density dependent variables in a non-linear fit. We consider both solid-state systems and molecules. We do so in the context of PP based calculations, which dominate materials modeling, otherwise the rapidly changing core electron density is expected to limit severely the performance of any KEF approximation. The resulting tuned KED expansions are tested on their ability to reproduce kinetic energy densities as well as potential energy curves of selected molecules and solids. Albeit the condition of positivity of the Pauli and other properties of kinetic energy desnity, Also, imposing the coordinate scaling condition does not necessarily improve machine learned KEDF, as has recently been shown for simplest real system -H2 molecule. At first, we will concentrate on training of NN's for each compound separately to underline some important features concerning pseudopotentials, technical aspects of data distribution and provide reference accuracies. We then explore NN learning simultaneously the KED of multiple components, which is necessary to arrive at a transferable KED functional. DFT calculations were performed in Abinit 7.10.5 The fitting was performed in Matlab Neural Network Toolbox. Where t is the vector of the five input variables ti defined above (Eq. 6) and Nneurons is the number of neurons in the hidden layer. When a single linear neuron is used in the hidden layer (σσ(xx) = xx), NN training is reduced to linear regression (linear fit of expansion coefficients), this is designated as "fitted" below. Non-linear NN fitting is designated as "Nneurons NN" and the neuron activation function in this case is sigmoidal (σσ(xx) = smaller than 1/5000 th of the total number of points, all of them were drawn. This is a similar approach to histogram equalization. OFDFT calculations were carried out in PROFESS 3.0 64 using PBE exchange-correlation functional with a plane wave cutoff of 3600 eV, which provided converged results. The crystal structures of Li (bcc), Al (fcc), Mg (hcp), Si (cubic diamond) as well as the molecular structures of H2O and C6H6 are shown in The 1D plots of kinetic energy densities in selected directions are shown in Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure Overall, one cannot conclude that the formal TT Among the examples covered in this work, there are two cases with numerical instability of gradient density expansions in close proximity to the nuclei: Mg with two valence electrons (Figure The shape of the valence electron density is governed by the respective pseudopotential. For modern non-local pseudopotentials, it is often the case that the s-electron pseudopotential channel is characterized by a relatively high positive value (on the order of 1 a.u. and higher) at the origin (see, for example, Figure For example, with a GTH pseudopotential for lithium, this expression also results in near-nuclei numerical instabilities, this time clearly caused by the second-order derivative. A similar issue, together with what was called by authors an "uncertainty" of pseudopotentials, was reported by Karasiev and Trickey In summary, with the proper choice of pseudopotential, in the framework of solid-state periodic calculations, the TT For individual fits we used a single hidden layer neural network, which is a universal approximator. The utility of different-order gradient expansions can be explored by fitting of the corresponding term coefficients for each of the studied systems. That might answer the question if it is possible at all to find a linear set of coefficients that allows for a close approximation to the KS kinetic energy density for a broad range of compounds. Fitting of the coefficients results in much improvement over the formal TT As expected, for molecules and Si, the fit performs worse than for elemental metals, which questions the suitability of gradient expansions to reproduce both near-nuclei and covalently bonded regions. Moreover, for these compounds TT Fitted TT However, what is common is that their contributions to the KED are one-two orders of magnitude larger than in the formal expansion. In spite of the apparent improvements offered by the fitting procedure, the results for molecules and systems with localized electrons (Si) remain unsatisfactory. On the other hand, these tests show that systems with delocalized electrons (metals) and a simpler topology of tt KKKK can be quite well reproduced. The next step for the improvement of gradient density expansions is to go beyond coefficient tuning, and this is considered next. In the previous section, it was shown that the 4 th order expansion either results in a better match to TT KKKK or does not perform worse than the fitted 2 nd order expansion. For covalently bound systems, however, fitted TT As expected, the fitting precision is systematically increased with the increase of the number of neurons Nn for small Nn. For covalently bound systems, the test error can increase for Nn larger than 10. This likely has to do with the distribution of data. While the total dataset contains millions of entries (i.e. a much larger number than the number of NN parameters thus ensuring that NN coefficients are not overfitted), there are few data in specific ranges of the KED (Figure Table 1.27×10 -5 7.26×10 -4 1.01×10 -3 7.07×10 -4 3.39×10 -3 1.19×10 -2 a 10 valence electrons; b 3 valence electrons Figure Figure On the left -the line along direction {1 1 1}; on the right -the projection of plane {1 0 1} with absolute differences between KEDs of different gradient approximations and Kohn-Sham KED: upper left quadrant -formal TT Figure Figure Figure Figure The task of producing a transferable KE functional implies the necessity for performing simultaneous trainings over multiple species of interest (further this procedure will be referred as "joint training"). Since the accuracy of individual trainings for molecules was considerably worse that the accuracy achieved with the solid compounds (although not worse than the ML KED functionals which were recently reported ) we decided to perform joint trainings for Al, Li, Mg and Si. Further, our aim was to reach the accuracy of joint trainings which is comparable with the individual non-linear fits (thus of 10 -5 Ha/Bohr 3 for simple metals and 10 -4 Ha/Bohr 3 for Si, see Table As has been shown above the difficulty of the fit is compounded by the data distribution. While for the individual NN fits the considered above 3D samplings were dense enough, the joint trainings require much denser meshes and seemingly larger neural networks that can severely increase the amount of requisite computational resources. One way to walk around this problem is to make use of the symmetry of the unit cells, i.e. to replace 3D data with 2D data, which can be extracted from the corresponding crystallographic planes. Obviously, the properties (like the electron density and KED) can be sampled much denser over planes than over 3D cells, while the total amount of sampling points will be much less. In our investigation we decided to include into training sets two planes from each of the solid compounds -thus {100} and {110} planes were chosen in the case of Al, Li and Si, {0001} and {11-20} planes were chosen for Mg. The sampling density of the planes was 0.01 Bohr per point and 1/5 of the total amount of points were taken as training data. The next important point is data compatibility -it appeared that mixing of large-core and small-core elements can make the training procedure much more error prone and more inclined to overfitting. Therefore, we decided to take pseudopotentials with 2 valence electrons for Mg and 1 valence electron for Li. Keeping in mind the pseudopotential issue that was described in section "The role of pseudopotentials", we have taken the corresponding FHI large-core pseudopotentials, which are seemingly less affected by it than the GTH pseudopotentials. The resulting RMSE's for several neural networks are presented in Table • It is necessary to pay a close attention to the data distribution and data selection for training. The KED shows very uneven distribution for all compounds. Data selection can be improved by some effective histogram equalization procedure or by sampling the respective data as close as possible. • To reduce the computational costs, a sampling over crystallographic planes can be used instead of 3D sampling. • The utilization of several hidden layers (ideally more than 2) looks important to prevent overfitting and to produce smooth KED in all space. • There is no need to use extremely large neural networks, 15-20 neurons per compound should be enough to reach a decent accuracy. In order to verify the performance of TT We explored the possibility of using the 4 th order expansions of electron density as a base for the search of orbital-free approximations to KED. It was previously suggested that due to the electron densities of different powers in denominators, these expansions would be numerically unstable. However, we have shown that with the proper choice of pseudopotential, the corresponding KED curves from 4 th -order expansions remain continuous everywhere, including low-density regions. For simple bulk metals Li, Al, Mg, the 4 th order expansion of the electron density with fitted coefficients is already able to reproduce the Kohn-Sham KED well. This is not the case for covalently bound systems such as bulk Si and molecular H2O and C6H6 tried here. A closer match to the Kohn-Sham KED, including for systems with localized electrons (covalent bonds), can be obtained by using the 4 th order expansion terms as inputs for non-linear regression, which we performed using neural networks. Our NN fits to each compound resulted in extremely low fit and test set RMSE values without overfitting of NN coefficients. For this purpose, small single layer NNs serve well, since they are already universal approximators. For covalently bonded compounds, the quality of the 4 th order expansion is strongly affected by the non-uniformity of KED distributions. A better representability of the fitting data could be achieved by consideration of problematic regions (generally near-nuclei regions) on denser grids. More advanced techniques to deal with data distribution are worth to trying for. 