One of the major strategies to control magnetism in spintronics is to utilize the coupling between electron spin and its orbital motion. The Rashba and Dresselhaus spin-orbit couplings induce magnetic textures of band electrons called spin momentum locking, which produces a spin torque by the injection of electric current. However, joule heating had been a bottleneck for device applications. Here, we propose a theory to generate further rich spin textures in insulating antiferromagnets with broken spatial inversion symmetry (SIS), which is easily controlled by a small magnetic field. In antiferromagnets, the ordered moments host two species of magnons that serve as internal degrees of freedom in analogy with electron spins. The Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction introduced by the SIS breaking couples the two-magnon-degrees of freedom with the magnon momentum. We present a systematic way to design such texture and to detect it via magnonic spin current for the realization of antiferromagnetic memory. Development of tunable magnetic structure has long been a key issue for detecting and controlling magnetic domains electrically toward application to memory devices In insulating magnets, an excitation is carried by the quasiparticle called magnon, which represents a quantum mechanical spin precession propagating in space. Such propagation is predominantly mediated by the standard magnetic exchange interaction JS i • S j , between spins, S i and S j . In a uniform ferromagnet, a simple exchange interaction, J(< 0), generates non-degenerate quadratic magnon bands. When the spatial inversion symmetry (SIS) is broken, an antisymmetric spin exchange called Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction In antiferromagnets (J > 0) with a doubled magnetic unit cell, the magnon bands are folded and a doublydegenerate linear dispersion appears at Γ-point. What if we regard two different species of magnons each belonging to the degenerate band as an analogue of the electronic spin degrees of freedom? If this degrees of freedom couples to the magnon momentum via a DM interaction, such that the SO does in electron systems, one may expect as rich phenomena as those of the Rashba-electronic systems in insulators. So far, however, non-descript bipartite antiferromagnets did not show any magnon-based phenomena such as a thermal Hall effect already found in the kagome and pyrochlore magnets We consider a quantum spin system with nearest neighbor exchange interaction, J(> 0), spin anisotropy, Λ, the DM interaction, D ij , and a uniform external magnetic field, h. The general form of the Hamiltonian is given as where S Λ i is the spin moment in the Λ-direction. In our 2D antiferromagnet, we consider an easy plane anisotropy normal to Λ-axis ( z), namely Λ > 0. If we take Λ < 0, an easy axis anisotropy is realized, which we apply shortly to a series of 1D magnets. We take the x-and y-axes in the direction rotated by π/4 from the bond direction. We place the in-plane magnetic field h perpendicular to the z-axis. The DM interaction emerges when the midpoint of two magnetic sites lacks the inversion symmetry. There are two different ways of aligning the D-vector; In defining the spin indices that couples to D ij in an order, i → j, the D-vectors can take either a uniform or a staggered configuration along that direction. The former breaks the global SIS of the crystal, whereas the latter keeps the site-centered SIS. Since the staggered DM interaction does not play any role in the physics presented here, we focus on the uniform DM in the following. We consider the physics realized for small D i,j and Λ compared to J = 1, where we always find a canted antiferromagnetic order in the ground state. The spin moments, M A and M B , on the magnetic two-sublattices are confined within the easy plane, and their directions are described by the in-plane magnetic field angle, φ against the x-axis, and the canting angle, θ M (see Fig. The magnetic excitations are described by two species of Holstein-Primakoff bosons (magnons) , where a † i /a i and b † i /b i , are the magnon creation/annihilation operators. The resultant spin wave Hamiltonian of magnons spanned on a particle-hole space is given as where H BdG (k) takes the form of the bosonic Bogoliubovde Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian (see Methods), and T represents the particle and hole pairs of A and B magnons in reciprocal space(see Methods). The eigenvalues of H BdG (k) give the magnon bands, ω ± (k). The spin moment carried by magnons on these bands at each k is evaluated as using the local spectral weight at k of ω ± -band, d A/B (ω ± (k)), on sublattice A/B (see Methods). We first demonstrate that the 2D SIS broken antiferromagnets can exhibit as rich spin textures as those of Rashba and Dresselhaus electronic systems. For a 2D square lattice, there are two different ways of constructing a model Hamiltonian Eq.( It is convenient to classify the two types of antiferromagnets by a polarization vector, P ij = e ij × D, where the unit vector e ij points to either +δ 1 or +δ 2 along the bonds. The Rashba-type antiferromagnet in the upper panel of Fig. Figure One can understand overall spin textures in analogy with the well-known electronic counterparts. The top and bottom panels of Fig. Even though the spin momentum locking itself refer to the fixing of the angle between particle momentum k and spin moment S k,± , it does not necessarily mean the emergent texture of spins. To be more precise, there are three classes of spin textures, (i) spin moment is quantized in each band, namely |S k,± | = 1 and the direction is unique throughout each band, (ii) amplitude of the spin moment depends on k, but the direction is unique for each band, and (iii) both the direction and amplitude of the spin moment vary with k. Among them, only (iii) affords rich spin texture as in Fig. One can afford (i) and (ii) even when D = 0. To have case (iii) the uniform DM interaction is thus important. For example, if we take D = 0 in Eq.( As we see shortly, the uniform DM interaction and the noncollinear spin texture together serve as a necessary condition for (iii) in antiferromagnets described by Eq.( We see how one can qualify the antiferromagnets a property analogous to the electronic systems with SO coupling. (Details of the formulation are given in Supplementary material A. ) To this end, we consider a noninteracting 1D electronic system with a SO coupling, α, and a magnetic field, h, shown in Fig. Because of this U (1) symmetry, the spin moments the two bands carry are allowed to point only along the zdirection up and down. Finally, the magnetic field h = 0 breaks the U (1) symmetry down to {e}, and the magnetic moments the energy bands carry start to depend on k. The extension of the above discussion to 2D is straightforward: to realize Rashba or Dresselhaus types of spin textures, the symmetry reduction of SU (2) to {e} is required. A similar argument applies to antiferromagnets. Let us consider a 1D system with a DM interaction and a magnetic field shown in Fig. where τ μ and σ μ (μ = x, y, z) are Pauli matrices acting on a particle-hole space and a sublattice space, respectively. It has an SU (2) symmetry, to which we intend not in terms of the spin operator, but of the product space of sublattice and particle-hole degrees of freedom. The SU (2) operator to classify this symmetry is given by BdG (k), J z ] = 0. Here, we specify U z (1) as the U (1) symmetry about the z-axis in order to discriminate from the one about the x-axis we see shortly. The classification of U (1) about the spatial axis is required, since the definition of Pauli matrices τ μ are sticked to the real space axis, which is not the case for the usual electronic spins. To obtain a k-dependent spin texture, one further needs to break the U z (1) symmetry of magnons, which is done by applying the magnetic field in the x-direction. Here, the magnetic field parallel to z only adds to the Hamiltonian a (τ 0 ⊗ σ z ) term which does not break the U z (1) symmetry. Notice that the magnon spin textures near k = 0 differ from those of the electronic systems. Also, the energy dispersions differ in that the electrons have Fermi level, whereas the magnons do not, and instead have a particlehole gap. Although the particle-hole symmetric form of the BdG Hamiltonian makes the formulation rather complicated, the A and B sublattice degrees of freedom thus plays a role similar to the electronic spins, and so as D = 0 to the SO coupling of electrons. The full breaking of SU (2) symmetry down to {e} gives a necessary and sufficient condition to afford k-dependent spin texture in 2D as well as in 1D antiferromagnets. Besides the one we showed in Fig. We now examine the easy plane antiferromagnet in Fig. By the application of h, M A and M B are canted off the collinear alignment and gain a net moment in the field direction. The excitation against this weak ferromagnetic element couples to D depending on the relative angle between h and D, which falls onto either of II-IV in Fig. Although this condition is fulfilled for Cases II-IV in Fig. In the other three cases, the spin texture is restricted by the symmetry of the BdG Hamiltonian; In Case I, the U z (1) symmetry leads to the quantization of S k,± . In Case II, the U x (1) symmetry allows |S k,± | to vary, while they all point in the same direction following Eq.( Similar discussion can be developed for the ferromagnets with uniform DM interaction and for the antiferromagnets with staggered DM interaction, that completes the classification of the role of DM interactions on ferro and antiferromagnets and adds to Fig. Based on the above mentioned classification I-IV, one can design a spin texture of a 2D antiferromagnet by hand. Our Rashba and Dresselhaus type magnon spin textures offer a good example; Let us configure the direction, δ II , that reproduce case II in Fig. Based on the symmetry arguments and the idea of constructing the 2D antiferromagnets using the building blocks of 1D antiferromagnetic chains, a strategy to design a variety of spin textures is thus provided. Previously, active discussions on the physics of magnons were given in ferro or ferrimagnets with its magnetic moments parallel to the DM interactions; for the staggered DM interaction that does not break SIS, a topological magnon contributing to the thermal Hall effect is observed, and for uniform DM interaction, a nonreciprocity of ferromagnetic magnons were reported. Here, we clarified another aspect of magnons that the uniform DM interactions breaking global SIS in the antiferromagnet can generate as rich spin-textures as the Rashba and Dresselhaus electronic semiconductors. The two degenerate energy branches of the uniform antiferromagnet carry the magnetization pointing in the nearly opposite directions, which are regarded as the internal pseudo-spin degrees of freedom relevant to magnetic sublattices. The uniform DM interaction serves as a pseudo-spin orbit coupling of magnons and generate a spin texture over the whole reciprocal space. To activate such fictitious pseudo-SO coupling of magnons, an interplay with a magnetic field and a spin anisotropy plays a crucial role, in order to fully break the pseudo-spin-SU (2) symmetry. The resultant textures are easily controlled by the magnetic field angle. The 2D Dresselhaus antiferromagnet is actually realized in a noncentrosymmetric spin-5/2 antiferromagnet Ba 2 MnGe 2 O 7 , with space group P 42 1 m. It undergoes a Néel transition at T N = 4K into an easy plane type antiferromagnetic phase Although spin textures and nonreciprocity were difficult to realize within previous considerations on antiferromagnets, there is one rare example on a honeycomb lattice The advantage of having spin texture in insulators is to store directly information by controlling the texture itself, and how to characterize and read the information is the important and challenging part of device applications. On the top of that, it is starting to be recognized that antiferromagnets have several advantages for a memory storage device over ferromagnets Our results in Fig. We perform a spin wave analysis on two sublattice antiferromagnets. The starting point is a collinear or a canted antiferromagnetic classical order. We apply a local unitary transformation, U † HU , and set the z-axis of the spin operator space to the direction of the magnetic moments. For example, the unitary operator for 2D easy plane antiferromagnets on a square lattice shown in Fig. which sets the spin operators in fictitious local space antiparallel. Here, r j , is the spatial coordinate of site-j, and the ordering wave vector Q satisfies e iQrj = ±1 for sublattices A and B, respectively. The linearized Holstein-Primakoff transformation is given as for sublattice-A, and ) for sublattice-B. After the Holstein-Primakoff and Fourier transformations, U † HU const + H SW , the spin wave Hamiltonian is written finally in the quadratic form as Eq.( Here Ξ k and ∆ k are 2×2 matrices satisfying ) is diagonalized analytically using the paraunitary matrix with Σ z = τ z ⊗ σ 0 . The eigenvectors of magnons, k)) T , satisfy the normalization condition, t † η (k)Σ z t η (k) = δ η,η with η, η = ±. We obtain the analytical form of the magnon dispersions ω ± (k) and corresponding eigenvectors t ± (k) consisting of two branches. The local spectral weight used in Eq.( Supplementary material for "Designing Rashba-Dresselhaus effect in magnetic insulators" We showed in the main text that two-sublattice antiferromagnets following the Hamiltonian H in Eq.( The 2 × 2 matrices, Ξ k and ∆ k , satisfy Ξ † k = Ξ k and ∆ † -k = ∆ * k , and can be written in the general form as, k ∈ C, and σ μ is the unit and Pauli matrix acts on a sublattice space (μ = 0, x, y, z). In addition, ∆ k satisfy the following relations, ∆ In Eq.( In the present system, the reduction of SU (2) symmetry to U (1) about the x (and y) and z-axes have different physical implication. Therefore, we denote the U (1) symmetry about the μ-axis as U μ (1) for convenience. If the system has the U x (1) symmetry, a following relation Similarly, if the system has the U μ (1) symmetry for each μ = y, z, a following relation holds from [H BdG (k), BdG (k), J μ ] = 0 for all μ = x, y, z. In such cases, Ξ k and ∆ k satisfy Eq.(S4) and (S5), leading to the following form of Ξ k and ∆ k , Then, the magnon bands, ω ± (k), become doubly degenerate and take the following form, (S7) An example of the SU (2) symmetric system is shown in Fig . One can easily check that this Hamiltonian satisfies [H BdG (k), J μ ] = 0 for μ = x, y, z, and the magnon bands are given by Eq.(S7) with ξ Next, we consider U x (1) symmetric cases. The magnon bands are generally not degenerate, and we can choose the eigenvectors of magnons, t ± (k), as the eigenvectors of J x since this operator commutes with Σ z , From this equation, we find The combination of Eq. (S9) and (S10) leads to |λ ± | = 1. Thus, a following relation holds from Eq.(S9), , and spins carried by magnons, S k,± , take the following form, Only the amplitude of S k,± depends on k, and the direction of S k,± is always opposite to the sum, An example of the U x (1) symmetric system is the 2D antiferromagnet with D = 0, and the parameters of the BdG Hamiltonian is given as, arXiv:1805.03925v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 8 Mar 2019 The canting angle is given as sinθ M = h/8JS. One can easily check that the bosonic BdG Hamiltonian with D = 0 has U x (1) symmetry, and the finite D reduces the U x (1) symmetry down to {e}. Note that cases with U y (1) symmetry are basically the same and Eq.(S12) holds. Finally, we consider cases with U z (1)-symmetry. Ξ k and ∆ k satisfy Eq.(S5) with μ = z and take the following form, The magnon bands are written as, One can see that ξ break the SU (2) symmetry and split the degenerate magnon bands. The corresponding eigenvectors are also the eigenvectors of J z , and the explicit form of these eigenvectors are In such cases, spins carried by magnons, S k,± , are This equation implies that the direction of spins varies with k if the classical spins in the ground state are noncollinear, M A + M B = 0. However, M A and M B are collinear when the system has U z (1) symmetry. Therefore, S k,± is quantized to, An example of the U z (1) symmetric system is shown in Fig. which is connected to Eq.(S21) via ξ In an applied field, h = 0, the bosonic BdG Hamiltonian is given as where and sinθ M = h/(4JS + 2ΛS) is a canting angle. This bosonic BdG Hamiltonian does not have U (1) symmetry, and the amplitude and the direction of the spin moments, S k,± , vary with k over the Brillouin zone. We discuss the relevance of our work with Ref. [35] [N. Okuma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 107205 (2017)] and clarify the difference between the two. As we discussed in the main text, the spin momentum locking generally refers to the fixing of angle between particle momentum k and spin momentum S k,± , but does not necessarily lead to the emergent spin texture itself, and is classified into three types, (i) S k,± is quantized, (ii) amplitude of S k,± depends on k but the direction does not change, (iii) the amplitude and the direction of S k,± vary with k. Okuma assumed the spin Hamiltonian with rotational symmetry and considered the ground state with long range order, partially breaking the symmetry of the Hamiltonian. He shows that if there is an unbroken generator S μ tot , which fulfills [H, S μ tot ] = 0 after spontaneous symmetry breaking, it leads to the quantization of S k,± as in Eq.(S26). The existence of unbroken generator distinguishes (i) from (ii)/(iii), and provides the sufficient condition to have (i). However, it does not give any information to realize (ii) and (iii). Our symmetry-based discussion can also distinguish (ii) and (iii), and can detect the interesting spin textures, (iii), just by examining the degree of breaking of the SU (2) symmetry of the general bosonic BdG Hamiltonian. A more intuitive explanation to distinguish (iii) from (i) and (ii) is to have different magnitude of component of M A and M B parallel to D, which is nothing but Case II in Fig. We note here briefly that the kagome lattice model discussed by Okuma assumes the ground state with 120 degree Néel ordering. While he showed that the magnons defined on a classically ordered moments on three sublattices contribute to the emergent spin texture, such three sublattice magnetic structure is unstable agaisnt gapless excitations known as "weathervane mode" or "line defects" 1 , and is hardly realized. (They are the excitations of spins particular to the frustrated kagome lattice that has a texture of weathervane or line). Even this kind of ground state were able to be stabilized by some artificial parameters, the final state realized by the symmetry reduction from U z (1) to {e} is beyond his framework. Our analysis can be extended to systems with more than two magnetic sublattices in the unit cell, which could then be applied to that kind of case as well. In the main text (Fig. Let us start from a simplest uniform ferromagnet with a gapless single cosine dispersion which is parabolic at k = 0, and by the easy axis anisotropy, Λ < 0, the gap opens. Figures The uniform antiferromagnet has two-fold degenerate magnon branches that cross at k = 0, each belonging to sublattice A and B. In the main text and in Fig. The honeycomb antiferromagnet discussed in the Discussion of the main text is also shown in Fig. We present the nonreciporocity of energy bands in the 2D case and the spin textures of the upper bands. Here, we consider both the in-plane uniform DM interaction D, and the out-of-plane staggered DM interaction D ⊥ , shown in Fig. We next show in Fig. Finally, we show in Fig. Manchon, A., Koo, H. C., Nitta J., Frolov, S.M., and Duine, R. A. New perspectives for Rashba spin-orbit coupling. Nature Mat.14, 871 (2015). 1960). (1960).