-optical ultrafast magnetization switching in magnetic material thin film without the assistance of an applied external magnetic field is being explored for future ultrafast and energy-efficient magnetic storage and memories. It has been shown that femto-second light pulses induce magnetization reversal in a large variety of magnetic materials. However, so far, only GdFeCo-based ferrimagnetic thin films exhibit magnetization switching via a single optical pulse. Here we demonstrate the single-pulse switching of Co/Pt multilayers within a magnetic spin-valve structure ([Co/Pt] / Cu / GdFeCo) and further show that the four possible magnetic configurations of the spin valve can be accessed using a sequence of single femto-second light pulses. Our experimental study reveals that the magnetization final state of the ferromagnetic [Co/Pt] layer is determined by spin-polarized hot electrons generated by the light pulse interactions with the GdFeCo layer. This work provides a new approach to deterministically switch ferromagnetic layers and a pathway to engineering materials for opto-magnetic multi-bit recording. The possibilities of deterministically manipulating magnetization solely with ultra-short light pulses have attracted a growing attention over the past ten years leading to numerous ultra-fast and low-energy data storage concepts In contrast to AO-HIS, in the case of all-optical helicity-dependent switching (AO-HDS), the final state of magnetization is determined by the circular polarization of the light. AO-HDS has been observed for a large variety of magnetic material such as ferrimagnetic alloy, ferrimagnetic multilayer, ferromagnet thin films and granular recording media Selective magnetization switching in spin-valve structures or more complex heterostructures will enable multi-level magnetic storage and memories Here we demonstrate that the four possible magnetic configurations of a magnetic spin-valve structure ([Co/Pt] / Cu / GdFeCo) shown schematically in Fig. Figure In Fig. In order to get insights on the energy and configurational changes of the switching of the [Co/Pt]/Cu/GdFeCo structures, we have studied the influence of the pump energy within the beam spot. Indeed, since the beam intensity follows a Gaussian profile, we can explore, with a single pulse, a range of energies. In Fig. The radius r 1 corresponds to the threshold for the onset of AO-HIS of the GdFeCo layer while leaving the [Co/Pt] layer unperturbed. Thus for r>r 1 the magnetization is unperturbed by the light while for r<r 1 the GdFeCo layer reverses its magnetization with each pulse from P+ to AP+ or AP+ to P+. This can be seen clearly for 0.08 μJ pulses in Fig. For increasing pulse energy of 0.2 μJ pulses (Fig. From images like those shown in Fig. , where F ! ! , r ! and 2w ! are threshold fluence, threshold radius, and 1/e ! spot size, respectively. From the fitting of our experimental data (from Fig. For low fluences (r 1 >r>r 2 ) we observe that only the GdFeCo switches with each pulse as has been observed as in single GdFeCo films. At these fluences the [Co/Pt] layer is not sufficiently excited to be perturbed. This behavior is expected from the extensive literature of AO-HIS on GdFeCo films We will focus much of the remainder of the discussion on the region r 3 >r>r 4 where we observe the simultaneous reversal of the GdFeCo and [Co/Pt] layers by single pulses. We believe that in this region, GdFeCo is switching by itself via the AO-HIS but in addition there is single shot deterministic reversal of the ferromagnetic layer through a combination of optical excitation and a dynamic coupling mechanism between the layers. We will discuss possible coupling mechanisms below and discuss additional experiments to test the validity of these mechanisms. The first possible explanation is the presence of a static exchange coupling, which has been reported to be at the origin of the single shot AOS of a [Co/Pt] bilayer coupled to a GdFeCo layer The fact that we can independently switch the GdFeCo layer and the energy required for AO-HIS of the GdFeCo layer from P+ to AP+ and from AP+ to P+ are identical, also suggest there is no exchange coupling via the Cu interlayer present in our sample. Moreover we observed this single-shot AO-HIS of the GdFeCo and [Co/Pt] layers for up to a 30 nm-thick Cu spacer layer (See supplementary information, sec C) where no exchange coupling is expected. A second possible explanation could be the presence of some dipolar coupling. While there are no dipolar fields arising from an ideal uniformly magnetized film, there are dipolar fields generated from domain states and inhomogeneous magnetization. For circular domains such are shown in Fig. "FeCo-rich") or the rare-earth sublattice (i.e. "Gd-rich"). Figure This should limit the ability to deterministically switch the [Co/Pt] layer. Figure In this study, we demonstrated that we could access the four remanent magnetic This work provides a new approach to deterministically single-pulse switch ferromagnetic layers and a pathway to engineering materials for opto-magnetic multi-bit recording using spin-valve structures. The movies of MOKE images during irradiation of fs-laser pulses were taken by CCD camera. After taking movies, the images of each slice were subtracted from the initial slice of the movies to exclude the background of the images. And then, average contrast values of the initial images were added to each subtracted images. The median and mean filters were applied to reduce noise in the images. The gray scale magnetic contrast values were converted to the color (lower contrast is blue, middle contrast is white, and higher contrast is red). kHz, respectively. The 1/e ! spot size 2w ! is ~50 μm.