We use unbiased numerical methods to study the onset of pair superfluidity in a system that displays flat bands in the noninteracting regime. This is achieved by using a known example of flat band systems, namely the Creutz lattice, where we investigate the role of local attractive interactions in the U < 0 Hubbard model. Going beyond the standard approach used in these systems where weak interactions are considered, we map the superfluid behavior for a wide range of interaction strengths and exhibit a crossover between BCS and tightly bound bosonic fermion pairs. We further contrast these results with a standard two-leg fermionic ladder, showing that the pair correlations, although displaying algebraic decay in both cases, are longer ranged in the Creutz lattice, signifying the robustness of pairing in this system. Systems exhibiting flat (dispersionless) bands come in many varieties and manifest a wide range of interesting phenomena such as exotic superfluid phases, edge states, topological insulator/superconductor phases, and bound Majorana fermion edge states to name a few. For example, at half filling in the Lieb lattice (which belongs to a large family of flat band models) Another very interesting class of systems has the lowest band flat, e.g., sawtooth Fermions in such systems, where the flat band is the lowest, are very interesting for a variety of reasons. They have been shown to exhibit a plethora of topological effects such as edge states Here, we study numerically the Creutz model with an arXiv:1805.09359v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 26 Oct 2018 attractive Hubbard interaction, U < 0, using the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) and exact diagonalization (ED). We calculate the superfluid weight, the Drude weight D s in one dimension, for various fillings as a function of |U | and show that for small |U | the predictions of Ref. 24 are accurate, i.e. the superfluid weight grows linearly with the strength of the interactions for densities away from half-filling. Going beyond the small |U | regime, the model is shown to map onto a hardcore bosonic model for large enough |U |. As a measure of the robustness of superfluidity, we calculate the one-and two-particle gaps, and the decay exponents of the pair correlation functions for the Creutz flat band model and compare with the normal two-leg model. We find that pair correlations decay algebraically with distance, whereas single-particle ones decay exponentially, for finite values of the interactions. Furthermore, we find that for all the parameters we studied, the power-law decay is slower, often much slower, in the Creutz lattice than in the normal two-leg model. We study the attractive Hubbard model on the Creutz lattice where the onsite interaction, U , is negative; A and B label the two chains, t connects both inter-and intra-chain sites j and j + 1 and the sum over j spans L unit cells. The fermion spin is labeled by σ =↑, ↓ and α = A, B is the chain index. This Hamiltonian governs a balanced population of up and down spins making inter-and intrachain hops and interacting attractively when on the same site. It is worth noting that applying a local gauge transformation, c A j,σ → exp(-iπj/2)c A j,σ and c B j,σ → exp(-iπ(j -1)/2)c B j,σ , renders all the hopping terms real. The intrachain hopping parameter on chain A (B) becomes t (-t); inter-chain hopping between site j on chain A (B) and site j + 1 on chain B (A) is given by -t (t). When applied to a lattice with periodic boundary conditions, the number of unit cells must be a multiple of four for this transformation to apply, whereas for the case of open boundary conditions, it works for any system size. This proved to be very useful in some of our DMRG calculations on large lattices, as one has to deal with a purely real Hamiltonian. One must note that, in general, local gauge transformations do not change the topological class of the system as long as the relevant symmetries are consistently modified when changing gauge FIG. For U = 0, H can be diagonalized For U ≥ 0, i.e., repulsive interactions, all states are thus localized as long as the filling is less than half, ρ ≡ (N ↑ + N ↓ )/N s ≤ 1/2, where N σ is the total number of fermions with spin σ and N s = 2L is the number of sites. The ground state energy is then trivially given by E(ρ ≤ 1/2) = -2tN s ρ, and the chemical potential is constant, μ = -2t resulting in infinite compressibility. When U < 0, the fermions can lower their energy further by pairing and, consequently, they are no longer geometrically localized. This is the situation we shall study here. We note that this model is different from that treated in Ref. Our system is like that considered in Ref. We employed complementary approaches to study pairing in this attractive model at different filling fractions. If the attractive interaction induces up and down fermions to form pairs, the resulting composite bosons (not necessarily local) may delocalize, yielding a superfluid/superconducting phase. Such behavior would be signaled by power law decay of the pair correlation function, G αβ p (r), and exponential decay of the single particle Green function, G αβ σ (r) where ∆ α j is a pair annihilation operator at site j on chain α, and α = A, B and β = A, B label the chains. We mostly focus on the case where α = β, i.e., intra-chain correlators. As detailed below, we study these correlation functions by means of DMRG Another important physical quantity characterizing transport is the superfluid weight, D s , given, in one dimension by Here, E 0 (Φ) is the ground state energy in the presence of a phase twist Φ applied via the replacement c α j → e iφj c α j , where φ = Φ/L is the phase gradient. This endows the hopping terms with a phase exp(iφ) (or its complex conjugate). We focused on four different fillings: ρ f = 1, 3/4, 1/2 and 1/4, using a combination of exact diagonalization (ED) for smaller lattice sizes and DMRG for the larger ones, with periodic boundary conditions (PBC) in both cases. In the former, we were restricted to lattices that are commensurate with those fillings, and such that the reduced Hilbert space sizes, at different momentum sectors of the translation-invariant Eq (1), are 10 8 . For example, in the fillings ρ f = 1/2 and 1/4, the largest system sizes tackled using ED had L = 10 and 16, respectively. Nonetheless, the DMRG results complemented these for larger lattices, where we have kept up to 1200 states in the truncation process and checked that the results were unchanged when more states are kept. It is well known that imposing PBC strongly degrades the efficiency of DMRG. One of the reasons is that PBC results in an effective long-range coupling between the first and last sites. On the other hand, as displayed in Fig. We start by reporting on Fig. Finite size scaling of the curvatures is displayed in Fig. Finally, by compiling the values of D s extrapolated to the thermodynamic limit, we construct in Fig. This linear dependence on |U |/t is plotted in Fig. On the other hand, at large |U |/t, the ↑ and ↓ fermions form strongly bound pairs being approximately described by a local bosonic particle. Given the constraints on the occupancy for each site, one can show that in this case, the fermionic Hamiltonian, Eq.( where n α j = b α † j b α j , and b α † j (b α j ) is a hardcore boson creation (annihilation) operator on site j and chain α = A, B. They satisfy {b α j , b α † j } = 1, and [b α j , b β † r ] = 0 for j = r or α = β. We note that this effective model is defined on the Creutz lattice, Fig. Analogously to what we have done with the fermionic Hamiltonian, we numerically studied the effect of a phase gradient on the hopping terms, implemented via the replacement b α j → e iφj b α j [φ/L ≡ Φ hcb ], in order to probe the superfluid properties of this effective model. The dependence of the ground state energy on the flux Φ hcb is shown in Fig. Beyond the qualitative description of the mapping between the two models, we show that the agreement is also quantitative for large interactions. Computing the superfluid weight via Eq. ( Turning back to the fermionic problem, Fig. We further characterize the transport properties of the system by studying the nature of particle excitations. In particular, we study the fate of one-and two-particle excitations on the Creutz Hubbard Hamiltonian to understand better the superfluid behavior. The m-particle excitation energy, i.e. the energy gap per particle to promote such excitation, can be defined as where m is the number of doped particles in a system with N particles; E 0 is the corresponding ground state at those fillings. We first describe the single particle (m = 1) excitations in Fig. Figure In the coupling regime where the pairs are tightly bound, one expects the two-particle fermionic gap [δ f 2 ≡ δ 2 ] to correspond to the single particle gap of hardcore bosons, δ hcb 1 , in the effective model language. By performing finite size scaling on the latter, we find that δ hcb 1 is finite in the thermodynamic limit as long as the interactions are also finite. Consequently, one expects δ f 2 to be finite too at strong interactions. Figure The finite gaps for the single particle excitation suggest that the single particle Green's function, Eq. ( FIG. 9. (Color online) Single-particle gap for the effective hard core boson model ( either chain A or B, result in equivalent values for this correlation. In contrast, the power-law decay of the pair Green function [Fig. We now compare the above results of the Creutz lattice with the behavior of the attractive fermionic Hubbard model on a simple regular ladder composed of two coupled chains (See Fig. where i, j indicates inter-and intra-chain nearest neighbors and, again, U < 0. To start, we highlight the main difference between the Creutz and regular ladders, which is evident when comparing the non-interacting regime: In the Creutz case, as |U |/t → 0, D s → 0 due to the geometrical localization caused by the flat band; on the other hand, in the ladder case, |U | → 0 leads to a free fermion gas with non-flat dispersion which is mobile. For finite interactions, we resort to numerical calculations. We calculate the superfluid weight via Eq. ( At half-filling, one can apply a particle-hole transformation in one of the spin components, say ci,↓ = (-1) i c † i,↓ , keeping the other component unchanged, to map the Hamiltonian onto the repulsive Hubbard model in a two-leg ladder. In this case, one expects a Mott insulating behavior, whose charge stiffness approaches zero in the thermodynamic limit. Hence, in the original Hamiltonian, both the superfluid and Drude weights should also decay to zero when L → ∞, provided the interac-tions are finite. Previous studies using zero-temperature quantum Monte Carlo techniques We investigated the superfluid properties of attractive fermions on a cross-linked ladder using numerical unbiased methods, namely exact diagonalization and density matrix renormalization group. The ladder, known as the Creutz lattice, is constructed in such a away as to render two flat bands in the tight-binding regime. We introduce local attractive interactions between fermions and show that the system displays finite superfluid weight with two distinct regimes, of weak and strong interactions if the fermionic filling is smaller than one. In the former, we show that this quantity is explained by the analysis of a projected Hamiltonian on the lower band, valid at small energy scales Quantitative study of single and two-particle excitations of the fermionic problem corroborates this picture, showing that the energy to excite a single charge is gapped for the wide range of interactions we investigate. On the other hand, pairs can be excited without an energy cost for densities ρ f < 1. We further study the single-particle (pair) correlation functions along the ladder, obtaining exponential (power law) decay with distance, denoting gapped (gapless) behavior for this excitation. Finally, we found that power law decay of pair correlations are slower, often much slower, in the Creutz lattice than in the normal ladder. Note that Fig. Note. Upon completion of this manuscript, a preprint appeared which tackled a similar problem 