We theoretically analyse the hybrid Mie-exciton optical modes arising from the strong coupling of excitons in organic dyes or transition-metal dichalcogenides with the Mie resonances of high-index dielectric nanoparticles. Detailed analytic calculations show that silicon-exciton core-shell nanoparticles are characterised by a richness of optical modes which can be tuned through nanoparticle dimensions to produce large anticrossings in the visible or near infrared, comparable to those obtained in plexcitonics. The complex magnetic-excitonic nature of these modes is understood through spectral decomposition into Mie-coefficient contributions, complemented by electric and magnetic near-field profiles. In the frequency range of interest, absorptive losses in silicon are sufficiently low to allow observation of several periods of Rabi oscillations in strongly coupled emitter-particle architectures, as confirmed here by discontinuous Galerkin time-domain calculations for the electromagnetic field beat patterns. These results suggest that Mie resonances in high-index dielectrics are promising alternatives for plasmons in strong-coupling applications in nanophotonics, while the coupling of magnetic and electric modes opens intriguing possibilities for external control. The interaction of optical modes in a structured electromagnetic (EM) environment with the photons emitted by atoms, molecules, organic dyes, quantum dots or nanomaterial defects has long been in the forefront of interest in photonics, as it is characterised by novel fundamental physics and exciting applications Among the various materials encountered in nanophotonics, high-refractive-index dielectrics hold a prominent position, as they combine low loss with -unavailable in metals -magnetic Mie modes and compatibility with existing nanoelectronic platforms Here we present a theoretical study of the hybrid Mieexciton modes that arise from the interaction of magnetic dipolar modes in silicon nanospheres and nanoshells with the excitons sustained by J-aggregates of organic molecules or two-dimensional (2D) transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) The silicon-exciton NPs considered here comprise a homogeneous spherical core of radius R 1 and a concentric shell of thickness D, so that the total radius is R = R 1 + D, as schematically shown in Fig. where ω exc is the excitonic transition frequency, γ exc the corresponding damping rate, f the oscillator strength, and ε ∞ the background permittivity. Choosing ω exc = 1.76 eV, γ exc = 0.05 eV, f = 0.4, and ε ∞ = 3 accounts fairly well for the resonance in the dielectric function of squaraine This almost negligible contribution of the electric dipole mode allows to verify whether the magnetic dipole mode of the silicon shell can significantly interact with the electric dipole of the excitonic core, once tuned to coincide in frequency. The extinction spectrum of the bare excitonic core (R 1 = 70 nm), described by the dielectric function of Eq. ( When the two components are merged in a core-shell geometry, as depicted in Fig. To explore similarities and advantages of silicon NPs over their plasmonic counterparts, we compare in Fig. For a good comparison, one should have the same geometrical parameters, extinction spectra (in terms of resonance position and linewidth), scattering and absorption contributions, and mode anticrossing. Since this is practically impossible, we focus here on a NP with similar linewidth and resonance position of its lower-energy mode before coupling -in plasmonics, this is of course ian electric dipolar mode. To tune the plasmon mode at 1.76 eV, we consider silica-gold nanoshells (ε silica = 2.13) instead of homogeneous gold spheres, and introduce plasmon hybridisation as a mode shifting mechanism For a silica core of radius 19.5 nm, total nanoshell radius (R 1 in the previous context) 25 nm, and D = 20 nm, the extinction spectrum of Fig. We explored the coupling of excitons in organic molecules and 2D TMDs with the magnetic Mie modes of silicon NPs. Such complex nanostructures are characterised by rich optical spectra, dominated by hybrid Mie-exciton modes, with splittings comparable to those seen in plexcitonics. Nevertheless, attention is required when analysing far-field spectra, as additional modes can mix with the Mie-excitons and manifest themselves in scattering, in absorption, or in both. Near-field profiles verify that these modes combine the electric and magnetic field enhancements of their constituents, thus promising easier external control with an applied bias or magnetic field. Direct comparison between the time evolution of the fields around silicon-or gold-exciton coreshell NPs shows that dielectrics are more efficient substitutes for metals when studying strong coupling dynamics. Finally, we suggest alternative architectures based on TMD-covered high-index NPs, which provide more flexibility and tuneability in practical realisations.