We design, fabricate and characterize integrated photonic routing manifolds with 10 inputs and 100 outputs using two vertically integrated planes of silicon nitride waveguides. We analyze manifolds via top-view camera imaging. This measurement technique allows the rapid acquisition of hundreds of precise transmission measurements. We demonstrate manifolds with uniform and Gaussian power distribution patterns with mean power output errors (averaged over 10 sets of 10 inputs) of 0.7 and 0.9 dB, respectively, establishing this as a viable architecture for precision light distribution on-chip. We also assess the performance of the passive photonic elements comprising the system via self-referenced test structures, including high-dynamic-range beam taps, waveguide cutback structures, and waveguide crossing arrays. The development of highly compact and energy-efficient optical interconnects 1 has been a major research objective for integrated photonics. Applications of optical interconnects range from telecommunications 2 to energy-efficient and high-bandwidth cross-chip communications in CMOS systems However, neural computing departs significantly from the von Neumann architecture. In a neural system, each processing node (neuron) contains local memory and communicates to many other nodes of the network across local and global spatial scales Light is naturally suited to perform this communication. Because photons are uncharged and massless, photons avoid charge-based wiring parasitics. Using light for communica-tion in neural systems is very promising Feed-forward neural networks commonly leverage topologies where a given layer has order N 2 synaptic connections, where N is the number of neurons in a layer. In this work, we design, fabricate and experimentally characterize a distributed passive photonic routing manifold capable of realizing connectivities of order N 2 . The routing network can be pruned to achieve any subset of connections. Communication with this manifold requires neither wavelength nor time multiplexing, yet can be straightforwardly extended to utilize either. The design of the proposed manifold (Fig. The manifold implements two layers of a feed-forward neural network with 10 upstream neurons (first layer), 10 downstream neurons with 100 synapses (second layer), and all-to-all connectivity. Figure Throughout the remainder of this paper, we will use the labeling scheme shown in Fig. The crossbar-like network allows each input node to be routed into a group of 10 outputs representing the whole input array (see the single-input case shown in Fig. The goal of the manifold is to route each input to one synapse on each output, following a pre-determined power distribution pattern. Here, we pursue two schemes to demonstrate control of the output intensity: uniform (each output synapse receives the same power) and Gaussian (the synapses from middle neurons of the upstream layer receive the most power, and the synapses from peripheral neurons receive much less). A script was developed to automatically generate the layouts for the manifolds in both cases; variables in the script set neuron numbers as well as intensity distribution profiles. The core element of the manifold is the tap-and-transition device shown in Fig. In a network of this size, significant dynamic range is required in the power-tap coefficients to achieve either uniform or Gaussian distributions. If only a single coupling gap is utilized, two limits are encountered: (1) the finite size of the sine bend in the tap waveguide results in a certain minimum coupling coefficient, and (2) an excessively long interaction length is required to achieve a high coupling coefficient. To address these issues, the manifold makes use of three coupling gaps and variable coupling lengths to improve the dynamic range of the power distribution network. The layout script selects the coupling gap from a look-up table generated from prior measurements of the tap coefficients. The three gap values are 300 nm, 400 nm, and 500 nm. Coupling lengths range from 2.7 μm to 19 μm. We fabricated the photonic routing manifolds at the NIST Boulder Microfabrication Facility on 76 mm silicon wafers. Several images of the fabricated structures are shown in Fig. The fabrication process is similar to Ref. 17. In the present work, the two waveguiding planes consist of 400 nm-thick silicon nitride (SiN), with an inter-planar pitch of approximately 1.2 μm and a nominal width of 800 nm (on-mask). The waveguides are cladded in plasma-deposited silicon dioxide (SiO 2 ) on all sides. The SiN material was deposited at a low temperature The manifolds under consideration each have 10 input ports and 100 output ports. While it is possible to measure these devices with the common approach of aligning optical fibers to grating couplers or facet-terminated waveguides, that measurement technique has significant limitations. First, repeatability strongly depends on the operator's ability to consistently optimize the fiber position on both ends using micro-positioning stages. Second, sample and fiber position drift are likely to disturb any power normalization by the time all the output ports are measured. V-groove arrays of fibers may alleviate the problem, but cannot accommodate densely packed structures, nor can the inter-fiber spacing be readily adjusted for different device configurations. Realizing precise fiber array alignment to the sub-dB level is challenging. Here we pursue an alternative method of transmission measurements for this experiment: top-view imaging with a microscope and a camera. We couple transverse-electric (TE) polarized laser light near λ = 1320 nm onto the chip through a fiber-to-waveguide grating coupler, and light is coupled out through one or more grating couplers designed for vertical emission. Instead of collecting the light with fibers, we focus it onto a 640 × 512 pixel, 12-bitdepth indium gallium arsenide image sensor array through a microscope objective. The light from each output port is integrated over a small window and normalized to the brightest port in the frame, allowing simultaneous acquisition of many outputs. For most of the devices, a reference port is included near the input to allow straightforward normalization of the input power. An in situ image of this arrangement is shown in Fig. Images from the camera are analyzed with in-house software, which locates the optical modes of the output ports, and extracts a relative power measurement from the set. The data analysis proceeds as follows: (1) Pixels corresponding to scattered light from the input fiber are set to zero; (2) the mean background intensity is subtracted from all pixels; (3) pixels with negative values are set to zero; (4) a convolution filter with a three-pixel by three-pixel window is applied to locate bright spots; and (5) power is integrated near each port, and the integration window is expanded until convergence to a specified residual is achieved. The output of the script is an array of power values, normalized to the largest value in the set. This measurement technique allows many photonic devices to be analyzed in parallel with high precision. In this work, we investigate up to 10 ports at once, but many more ports can be analyzed, limited mainly by the imaging performance of the optics and camera which dictate some minimum spacing between ports. Consider the test device in Fig. Most structures reported in this work, with the exception of the manifolds, were designed with this configuration. In the case of the manifolds, the output ports (synapses) for a given input are measured relative to each other. First, we characterized the performance of the different passive components that are used in the manifold. The most critical feature is the high-dynamic-range power distribution system. To analyze the constituent components, we measure an array of beam-tap test devices. Across the array, the three coupling gaps of 300 nm, 400 nm, and 500 nm are implemented with a variety of coupling lengths. Each test device comprises a 50:50 splitter and reference port followed by two device output ports: the tap output, and the drop output (indicating the untapped power). The measured data are plotted in Fig. Next, we analyzed the performance of the P 1 /P 2 waveguide crossings. The distribution of these crossings is not uniform in the manifold design presented here, so some waveguides experience more crossing loss than others. The T 1 bus waveguide (Fig. Waveguide propagation loss is also important to consider when trying to fabricate precision routing manifolds. Cutback test structures are shown in Fig. Finally, we discuss the characterization of the IPCs. On this mask, the IPC test structures were placed too far from the optimal zone in the middle of the wafer (where the planarization was on-target) resulting in a larger inter-planar pitch and higher than anticipated losses. Since there were 64 IPCs back-to-back, the total loss exceeded the dynamic range possible in the measurement. Fortunately, the IPC performance could still be straightforwardly characterized by comparing power transmission through two particular synapses on the manifolds: S 1,2 and S 2,2 . The only difference between them is that S 2,2 has two IPCs and 180 μm extra P 1 propagation length. We carefully aligned the fiber to each of the two inputs and recorded the power transmitted through the respective synapse. At λ = 1320 nm (the nominal wavelength for most tests in this work), a value of 0.6 dB per IPC is measured (after subtracting the 0.1 dB loss acquired from the extra propagation length). This is sufficiently low loss to enable good power uniformity, since any two synapses may differ only by up to two IPCs in their routed paths. Still, the loss is higher than anticipated, probably due to a deviation in the fabricated dimensions from the design. In future work, we expect pre-compensation information to improve this to levels similar to our previous work on amorphous silicon The first type of routing manifold we analyze is the uniform distribution pattern. For any given input, the power delivered to each connected output synapse should be equal; for example, after applying input light to port T x , we should observe a power distribution of 10 . To satisfy this requirement, the tap coefficients range from 0.1 to 0.5. An infrared image of the manifold under test is shown in Fig. Next, we consider the spectral dependence of the uniform routing manifold. For this study, we couple into a single input node T 8 , and observe the changes to output uniformity while scanning the wavelength. The power dependence on wavelength is plotted in Fig. In this work, we propose, fabricate and characterize an integrated photonic routing manifold capable of distributing light with high precision across a 10 × 100 network. The approach utilizes multiple planes of waveguides and a distributed routing scheme to make efficient use of area. The manifold can instantiate custom power distribution patterns, such as uniform or Gaussian, based on the values of beam tap coefficients. This design is topologically equivalent to a feed-forward, 10 × 10, all-to-all-connected neural network. In analyzing the network and its sub-components, we employ a method for rapidly acquiring insertion loss measurements. Using fiber-based input coupling and vertical grating emission onto an InGaAs imaging sensor, photonic routing manifolds with 100 output ports are fully characterized in less than 4 minutes. At a wavelength of 1320 nm, the uniform and Gaussian manifolds were found to have mean output power errors (averaged over 10 rows of 10 inputs) of 0.7 and 0.9 dB, respectively. These routing and measurement techniques offer new opportunities for complex integrated photonic systems in computing, telecommunications, and other applications. Official contribution of the National Institute of Standards and Technology; not subject to copyright in the United States.