Systems that produce crackling noises such as Barkhausen pulses are statistically similar and can be compared with one another. In this project, the Barkhausen noise of three ferroelectric lead zirconate titanate (PZT) samples were demonstrated to be compatible with avalanche statistics. The peaks of the slew-rate (time derivative of current dI/dt) squared, defined as jerks, were statistically analysed and shown to obey power-laws. The critical exponents obtained for three PZT samples (B, F and S) were 1.73, 1.64 and 1.61, respectively, with a standard deviation of 0.04. This power-law behaviour is in excellent agreement with recent theoretical predictions of 1.65 in avalanche theory. If these critical exponents do resemble energy exponents, they were above the energy exponent 1.33 derived from mean-field theory. Based on the power-law distribution of the jerks, we demonstrate that domain switching display self-organised criticality and that Barkhausen jumps measured as electrical noise follows avalanche theory. Critical phenomena in solids are among the most fascinating topics in physics and chemistry. At certain values of temperature or pressure or applied field, various thermodynamic parameters such as specific heat or magnetization display unusual dynamics, diverging rapidly or exhibiting discontinuities, often characterized by "critical exponents" that differ significantly from the Landau-Lifshitz 1937 mean-field values. Generally it is very difficult to measure these exponents, because the researcher must approach the critical point very slowly and with extreme accurancy. In both ferromagnetics and ferroelectrics the presence of domains complicates dynamics near the transition critical point. However, there is a special class of critical phenomena termed "self-organized criticality" for which this is less difficult. As first discussed by Bak Ferroelectrics are insulating materials that display spontaneous polarisation which is switchable by an applied electric field The displacement of the cation gives rise to a spontaneous polarisation, P s which can be switched when an electric field E greater than the system's coercive field E c is applied As a system is transitioning towards its ferroelectric phase, regions of different polarisation, called domains (Figure The electrostatic energy is minimised by forming oppositely polarised 180 • domains (Figure The jump-like change in polarisation (or magnetisation) is due to these domains; in fact, it is Barkhausen's experiment in early years that proved that domain structures exist Going back to ferromagnets: as a magnetic field is applied, the domains initially aligned along the field will grow and can be thought of as akin to walls of the domains, conveniently called domain walls across regions of non-magnetic materials in crystals from defects and become pinned As the magnitude of the field increases, the domain walls will eventually gain enough energy to overcome the inclusion and snap forward, causing an increase in magnetisation Barkhausen noise from a ferroelectric predominantly arises from rapid domain nucleation as an electric field is applied to it From unwrapping your favourite confectionery Due to universality, these exponents allow avalanche systems to be compared with one another, leading to a lot of interesting physics being unveiled Ferroelectric Barkhausen noises have commonly been addressed as observations Exponent, α 1.73 ± 0.04 1.64 ± 0.04 1.61 ± 0.04 1.33 1.65 Table In this report, the experimental details were summarised in Section 2. Our initial work (Section 3) was not fruitful, and we reviewed our methodologies in Section 4. We then shifted our emphasis towards avalanche theory using analytical methods from avalanche statistics such as the Maximum-likelihood analysis, these methods were reviewed in Section 5. The results from our later experimental avalanche works were reported in Section 6 with discussions in Section 6.5. The samples used in this project works are two types of commercially available lead zirconate titanate (PZT) ceramics, with materials labelled PIC 151 and PIC 255, from PI Ceramic Lederhose, Germany The PIC 255 is a newer PZT sample, labelled S, that was recently ordered for this project. The actual composition is proprietary and therefore undisclosed; but from the product brochure The measurements were conducted using the aixACCT TF Analyzer 2000 In our experiments, triangle or trapezoidal electric field/voltage pulses were applied through a PZT sample via the probes, and the current-time responses were measured. In the context of a hysteresis measurement, the change in polarisation, δP can be obtained by integrating the current I with respect to time t These voltage pulses were designed using a manual waveform generator from the TF Analyzer 2000 software (details in Appendix A) by providing the target voltage values at specific timestamps. As the coercive field E c of ferroelectrics changes with the voltage ramp-rate The two-pulse measurement was the basis of the experiment work in this project. A triangular or trapezoidal negative/down-switching pulse (DnSwP) was generated across the ferroelectric ceramic, followed by a positive/up-switching pulse (UpSwP) counterpart where the data were usually acquired (see Figure Since the voltage waveform was generated manually, there was a lot of freedom with regards to how the pulses were generated. A schematic of a trapezoidal antisymmetrical voltage waveform is given in Figure 1. If the region before t = 0 ms is not recorded, how do we know if the voltage pulse is generated as intended? This can easily be determined by decreasing the magnitude of DnSwP while keeping UpSwP constant. As the magnitude decreases, fewer up-domains will be switched down and the resulting current peak from following UpSwP will decrease. If DnSwP is then set to 0, no current peak from UpSwP will be observed, leaving only electrical noise. 2. If the pulses do not continue beyond t end , what actually happens at t > t end ? Without a second voltage measurement apparatus, it is impossible to tell. The voltage supply is assumed to be immediately cut off. Testing with an external voltmeter is not a good idea either since the voltages supplied are in the kV range, which poses a health hazard if not executed professionally. However, this effect will not cause any difficulties in taking the measurements as long as the region of interest is recorded. 3. How do you ensure that the up-switching voltage pulse is fully generated? Taking Figure 2.2 as an example: instead of the ramping region, one can set the recording region to encompass the whole pulse, from t = 0 to t = t end = 21 ms (the additional 1 ms arises from the 1 ms plateau). The full current spectrum of 1000 points in 21 μs-intervals will then be recorded. But this comes with a price: the time taken for data acquisition is now larger, essentially reducing our sampling rate. 4. Why is the sampling rate reduced? From the software, the maximum number of allowed points for data acquisition is 1000 points What is the maximum sampling rate? From the manual To clarify question 1 above, imagine the recording region is set at the downwards ramping region (-24 ms ≤ t ≤ -14 ms) of DwSwP in Figure Hence to conclude, care must be taken when setting the data acquisition region. One can make sure the pulses are generated as intended by encompassing the full voltage waveform but this will result in a reduced sampling rate during data acquisition. Our work initially involved applying triangular or trapezoidal, down-switching pulses (DnSwPs) and up-switching pulses (UpSwPs), respectively, to PZT samples (as detailed in Section 2.3) with maximum voltage |V max | ranging from 1 to 3 kV These early works allowed us to take a step back and think critically on how we should approach our project (see Section 4.1) and to develop new methodologies for our later experimental stage Section 4. An example of our early results is summarised in this section. DnSwPs and UpSwPs were applied in succession to PZT (PIC 151) sample B and the currenttime response during UpSwPs was recorded. Sample B had a thickness of 0.93 ± 0.01 mm with gold electrodes on both sides with an area of 28.5 ± 0.1 mm 2 (radius = 3.01 ± 0.01 mm) An example of the two pulse measurement is shown at Figure The timeline of Figure The current responses from the 1.4 kV UpSwP (blue) and 2.2 kV UpSwP (red dotted) is displayed as Figure As mentioned in the introduction (Section 1), Barkhausen pulses typically occur in the steepest region of the polarisation against electric field/voltage curve As seen in previous experimental works Section 3.1, the noises were only evident in the region where V > V c (see Figure 1. If, according to 2. If, according to Chynoweth (1958) 3. If the pulses at V > V c were indeed caused by the nucleation of new domains, then what was generating the current switching peak for the region V ≤ V c ? 4. During the initial experimentation period, the samples were degrading very quickly (as shown in Figure Though our early work had given us some insights with regards to noises in a ferroelectric current signal, the experimental results did not match the findings by Rudyak and Chynoweth; these noises might not be Barkhausen. Thus, we re-evaluated our strategy and designed new methods to investigate these pulses. We did some literature research on more recent works with regards to Barkhausen noise and discovered that a lot of research had been conducted, both theoretically and experimentally, on systems that generate crackling noise. From earthquakes to magnetic avalanches (ferromagnetic Barkhausen noise) According to Salje and Dahmen (2014) 1. The maximum voltage range was reduced from 3 kV to 1 kV (for PZT samples B and F) and 1.5 kV (for PZT sample S). 2. The ramp-rate rate was decreased from 200 kVs -1 to 40 Vs -1 (5000 times slower) for samples B and F and 60 Vs -1 for sample S. 3. Both UpSwP and DnSwP pulses were now triangular and antisymmetrical. Both of them were applied individually instead of via a single waveform file. 4. The sampling rate was decreased to To reiterate item 3 above: In contrast to previous waveforms where a DnSwP was followed by a UpSwP and the upwards ramping region (from V= 0 to V max ) was recorded, both upswitching and down-switching pulses were now applied separately. This was to ensure that the samples were really switched by reading the current responses from both pulses instead of only relying on the current response of the UpSwP. However, as mentioned in item 4, the drawback was these pulses now took a longer time to reach the voltage maximum, thus reducing the sampling rate to a smaller frequency (40 points per second). The drawback of the low sampling rate was the jerk peaks may overlap in time • The shape of the current curve is assumed to be almost identical as the ramping rate decreases. The general current response behaviour is assumed to not deviate from a fast ramp to a slow ramp. • Reducing the rate reduces a lot of ringing noise/echoes at low current signals. This generates a better current response, giving us more statistically relevant data points. The first effect we noticed going from a high to low ramping rate was the smoothing of the current response with no ringing noise present at the low current region Assuming the total polarisation change, δP of a sample is constant for all ramp-rates; a sample takes a longer time, dt to achieve a small change in polarisation, dP and thus decreasing the magnitude of I. In addition, the coercive voltage V c or field E c 5 Analytical Methods As mentioned previously, the ramp-rate was now greatly reduced and the resulting current response was neither noisy nor filled with random peaks. An example measurement of a slow ramp-rate is shown as Figure The baseline mentioned above is actually the two humps of the jerk spectrum (Figure where J is jerks, α is a critical exponent and J min is the lower-bound normalisation condition In avalanche studies, jerks are defined in multiple ways, even for the same system In our case, the jerks were defined as peaks of the square of the slew-rate Knowing that the distribution of jerks may take the form of a power-law, the most straightforward way to extract the critical exponent from a jerk spectrum is to bin the magnitude of the observed peaks into bins of constant linear width. The number of counts (or frequency) of the jerks J with various magnitudes can then be divided by the total jerk counts and can now be approximated as a probability distribution P (J) On the other hand, one can take natural logs of the data and then proceed to bin the logtransformed data to form a distribution, this is known as logarithmic binning. This reduces the number of zero and low-count entries since the linear bin width now increases linearly with the magnitude of J However, as argued by Clauset, Shalizi and Newman 1. The standard error calculated by the linear regression formula is inapplicable as the noise in the logarithmic dependent variable (ln P (J) in this case) is not Gaussian. The formula for error is only true when the assumption, where the dependent variables fitted exhibit independent Gaussian noise, holds. 2. High coefficient of determination, R 2 value of the linear fit cannot be trusted. Shown in Clauset et al.'s 2007 paper With the reasonings above in mind, linear regression fitting of the jerk distributions in the upcoming Avalanche Results Section will only function as a guide to the readers. In order to determine fully if a distribution of the data (jerk peaks in this report) truly obeys powerlaw, a maximum-likelihood analysis must be performed, which is detailed in the next section (Section 5.3). The Maximum-Likelihood (ML) analysis estimates where p is the probability, J are discrete jerk peaks and J min is the lower bound normalisation condition for the power-law. To find the best value of α that generates the jerk spectrum, the likelihood function must be maximised with respect to α. Shown in Appendix B.1, the conventional way is to log-transform eq. ( where α is the convention used to denote that the exponent is an estimate The standard error of α is: where the higher-order terms are positive When analysing experimental jerk signals, not all data points are power-law distributed; due to the limitations of the apparatus, low signals may be under-counted due to saturation effects , where J i > J min and N < N (5.5) Now, back to the unknown J min problem, one can guess the value of J min when performing the ML estimate but will run the risk of 1. Underestimating J min , performing a power-law ML estimate to non-power-law J data. 2. Overestimating J min , discarding valid data points and increasing statistical error of α. Thus to fully utilise the ML estimation, a computational algorithm of eq. (5.5) is iterated on the jerk data by a wide-range of cut-off values, J 0 (that replaces J min ) (a) ML Estimate with known exponet α = 1.5 and lower-bound J min = 0.01 (b) Log-log fit of P(J) vs J Figure An ML fit example using a perfect power-law randomly generated jerk spectrum is shown as Figure away from the known exponent as J 0 further increases, due to less statistically relevant data being fed to the iterative algorithm, consequently increasing the error in the exponent estimate. The origin of the decrement as J 0 decreases below J min can be shown mathematically (in Appendix B.3, eq. (B.5)); as J 0 traverses below J min , the estimated exponent, α decreases due to an increasing ln J min /J 0 in reciprocals However, not all ML curves exhibit plateaus exactly as above, especially in experimental settings where high or low cut-offs and saturation events might come into play Figure 1. Mixture of two power laws, a system that involves two exponents, perhaps due to two different mechanics that are involved in the avalanche. 2. Exponentially damped power-law, a power-law distribution that takes the form of P (J) = J -α e -J/Λ /J min 3. Exponentially pre-damped lower cut-off, a power-law distribution that takes the form of where λ is another damping scale that has the same units as J. This introduces a smooth cut-off to better describe the distribution at the low J limit. These usually arise from saturation effects from the apparatus The mixture of two power laws is discussed in Appendix B.4 to provide a deeper understanding of the ML method. For the other two cases, we would like to refer the readers to Salje et al.'s paper 6 Results from Later Experimental Work An example of a current-time response of PZT B is shown in Figure 1. The first time derivative of the current response curve (black in Figure 2. The background of the time derivative was removed using the Piecewise Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial (PCHIP) function (briefly described in Appendix D), leaving jerky peaks (Figure 3. The height of the peaks (now defined as jerks J) were extracted and subjected to two major analyses: (a) Log-log binning and linear regression fit (Figure • The jerks were binned in logs and a straight-line behaviour was observed between ln(J) ≈ -35 and -29. • The gradient of the straight line was -1.5. The error calculated (±0.12) is not valid since the formula for error analysis in linear regression does not apply in log-log fitting (b) Maximum-Likelihood Fit (Figure • Due to the low cut-off effect (Section 5.4), the kink for the true J min is hard to determine • A plateau that extends for two decades (-35 < ln(J 0 ) < -33) was observed with exponent = 1.65 ± 0.05 at the initial kink. As mentioned in Section 5.2.3, the exponent extracted from the log-log fitting (Figure Looking at the ML analysis (Figure = 1.6 and then deviates as ln(J 0 ) increases due to a lack of relevant data. The plateau is a good indicator to show that this jerk spectrum is power-law distributed. Comparing this to the perfect power-law ML fit that has an obvious kink, it is hard to determine the location of J min (where the power-law distributed jerks starts) in the ML curve due to saturation or lower cut-off effects Most importantly, although much research in avalanche theory has been carried out, such as ferromagnetic The jerk peaks of the five runs are normalised by the mean and combined as a grand jerk spectrum (Figure Finally, with the ML analysis in Figure Using both log-log linear regression fit and ML analysis, the combined jerks of sample B extracted from the current-response are concluded to exhibit power-law statistics with mean exponent of 1.73 and σ = ±0.04 but this spans only about two decades. The normalised J min is 0.082 ± 0.008 and can be cross-checked with J min from the first run. The mean of the jerks from run 1, JRun 1 is 8.527 × 10 -15 A 2 s -2 . Multiplying the mean with the normalised J min yields 7.0 ± 0.7 × 10 -16 A 2 s -2 , and taking the natural log of it gives -34.9 ± 0.1. This shows that J min of kink 2 from Figure Hence, for PZT sample B: • The coercive voltage V c at ramp-rate = 40 Vs -1 is 795 ± 2 V. In terms of coercive field E c = 855 ± 9 Vmm -1 . The thickness of the sample was 0.93 ± 0.01 mm. • The critical exponent is estimated to be 1.73 with σ = ±0.04. • The value for the normalised ln(J min ) = -2.5 ± 0.1. • The average value of 5 runs for J min = 6.1 ± 0.3 × 10 -16 A 2 s -2 ; ln(J min ) = -35.03 ± 0.05. 21 obtained by finding all the J min values of each run, and take the mean and standard error. PZT sample F (PIC 151 from PI Ceramic, Lederhose, Germany As mentioned in Section 6.1, these samples were at least 10 years old and they were used for fatigue experiments In Figure As mentioned above, the large peaks may or may not play a role in the avalanche statistics Looking at Figure Similar to He et al.'s analysis However, this raises a red flag; is the ML curve really reliable if the curve changes drastically (from Figure The current response (Figure The lower bound J min for F can be worked out using the method from Section 6.2.1. The averaged jerk peaks for run 1 was 1.134 × 10 -14 A 2 s -2 , whereas the normalised J min = e -2.7 = 0.067 ± 0.007. Taking the product, J min for Run 1 is 7.6 ± 0.8 × 10 -16 A 2 s -2 . The averaged J min for 10 runs is 8.5 ± 0.5 × 10 -16 A 2 s -2 . To conclude for sample F: The thickness of the sample was 0.97 ± 0.01 mm. • The critical exponent is estimated to be 1.64 with σ = ±0.04. • The value for the normalised ln(J min ) = -2.7 ± 0.1. • The average value of 10 runs for Jmin = 8.5±0.5×10 -16 A 2 s -2 ; ln Jmin = -34.70±0.06. PZT sample S was a brand new PZT sample (code: PRY+0111, material: PIC 255) that was ordered from PI Ceramic GmbH (Lederhose, Germany) Figure A total of 5 measurements were taken on sample S, and as done previously, the jerk peaks were extracted after removing the baselines. These jerks were then normalised by the mean and combined for log-log binning (Figure From the 5 measurements, a total of 1468 jerk peaks were extracted. The log-log linear regression, shown in Figure The lower bound J min for S can be worked out as previously from Sections 6.2.1 and 6.3.3. For the jerks from run 1, the average was 4.596 × 10 -13 A 2 s -2 , whereas the normalised J min = e -3.5 = 0.030 ± 0.003. Taking the product, J min for Run 1 is 1.4 ± 0.1 × 10 -14 A 2 s -2 . The averaged J min for 5 runs is 1.25 ± 0.06 × 10 -14 A 2 s -2 . To conclude for sample S: • Sample S (PIC 255) is compositionally different from samples (PIC 151) B and F. PIC 255 is designed to be harder than PIC 151. • The coercive voltage V c at ramp-rate = 60 Vs -1 is 1237 ± 5 V. In terms of coercive field E c = 1240 ± 60 Vmm -1 . The thickness of the sample (given by manufacturer) was 1.00 ± 0.05 mm. • The critical exponent is estimated to be 1.61 with σ = ±0.04. • The value for the normalised ln(J min ) = -3.5 ± 0.1. • The average value of J min for 5 runs is 1.25±0.06×10 -14 A 2 s -2 ; ln(J min ) = -32.00±0.04. The resulting estimated exponent, α and the averaged lower bound of the three samples were tabulated in Table System Esti. Exponent, α Std. Dev., σ Jmin (×10 -16 A 2 s -2 ) ∆ Jmin (×10 Table The values extracted for the jerk peaks were based on the first time derivative of the current squared ((dI/dt) 2 ), thus varying current responses taken from the measurements would yield different Jmin . There are two reasons for this: • As shown in Figures 6.1a and 6.5a, the current spectra for B and F (PIC 151) fell under the 10μA range while the range for sample S (PIC 255) fell under 100μA. Thus, sample S with a greater current response would have a larger Jmin value. • The variation between B and F might be the result of various degrees of fatigue. A ferroelectric sample that is fatigued will experience a decrease in switched charge The exponents evaluated were roughly close to each other at around 1.6 to 1.7. The values for both α and σ for each ML analysis depended highly on where the plateaus were defined and would be biased. Unlike ideal power-laws demonstrated in Section 5.3, there was no definitive kink to determine where the plateau started due to the lower cut-off effect As previously remarked in Section 5.1, there are many ways one can define the jerks in order to extract the critical exponents The critical exponents derived from mean-field theory (MFT) are also used commonly as reference points for researchers Based on the power-law distribution of the jerk peaks, we hereby conclude that these Barkhausen noises were generated in an avalanche fashion. As a single cation is displaced along the axis of the applied field, the resulting polarisation change will trigger other nearby cations to be displaced as well, causing a displacement avalanche. This switching mechanism is analogous to the coupling interaction in a random field Ising model in ferromagnetic systems There are many ideas that can be implemented in the future to improve our analyses method and deepen our understanding. For instance, these experiments will benefit highly from modern scanning probe microscopy techniques such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) Besides, a more sophisticated hysteresis instrument with a higher sampling rate will significantly improve the resolution of the jerk spectra. The allocation of 1000 sampling points over a duration of 25 seconds is unsatisfactory in measuring these fine crepitations, as low sampling rates will cause an overlapping of jerks There are other experiments that can be done in the near future. A system with tuned criticality will have its largest observed avalanche based on both its system size and external experimental parameters The other option is to look into other ferroelectric systems and their jerk distributions. Categorising other ferroelectrics such as BTO will be the first step forward for this. Barkhausen noise was also found in the relaxor The project work in investigating Barkhausen noise involved two phases. Initial experiment works involved applying high voltage pulses with fast ramp-rates on PZT commercial ceramics. Although many irregular current spikes were observed in the current response, they were only evident at voltages greater than the coercive voltage. These large spikes did not fit the theories proposed by literature and the samples were easily fatigued. In later experiments, the voltage ramp-rate was greatly reduced and the jerks from the current responses were analysed statistically. The jerks were defined as the peaks of the slew-rate squared. From three different PZT samples albeit with a low sampling rate, we showed that the jerks obeyed power-law statistics and were consistent with Barkhausen noise The initial research carried out on the noise of ferroelectrics shows that these electrical crepitations in the current response can be statistically analysed. Via the power-law distributed jerks, we conclude that the switching processes in these PZT samples take the form of an avalanche and are consistent with Barkhausen noise and many other crackling systems. The discovery and categorisation of these exponents are crucial as they show that the domain switching mechanisms in ferroelectric ceramics demonstrate self-organised criticality (SOC) In this manual waveform generator window (Figure A.1a), specific data acquisition time can be provided to record the current response at different regions of the ramp. At the bottom left of the waveform generator window, the data acquisition settings are specified by providing a starting time-stamp and the total time the current-time response was recorded. The number of points sampled will then be determined in the main measurement window, with a maximum of 1000 points, evenly distributed throughout the recording region. An example of using the waveform generator to record at 1 kHz sampling rate is described below: 1. Design an intended waveform by specifying the timeline of the pulses with their pulse heights respectively. 2. Tick the check-box next to the Trigger Time and specify the trigger time at the appropriate region of the waveform where one would like to investigate. 3. Set a total recording time of 1 s. 4. Save the waveform. 5. On the main measurement dialog (Figure A.1b), load the waveform using the load button and set the total number of points to 1000. With 1000 points sampled in this 1 s region, 1000 1 s = 1 kHz sampling rate can be achieved. However, there were some aspects of the software that were not straightforward and needed to be worked around. i 1. From the manual, the maximum number of points for recording is 1000 2. The maximum sampling rate provided in the manual is 1 MHz. If one specifies a shorter recording time with 1000 sampling points, a measurement can still be taken but the data file will consist of multiple points of the same value for each microsecond. 3. The voltage pulse will not follow through once the pulse time exceeds the specified recording time-stamp. This had created a slight complication to the experiments conducted and was one of the pitfalls during the early periods of the project. For example, if one would like to examine the first five seconds a thirty second voltage ramp, the voltage supplied to the ferroelectric sample would not reach a maximum as intended and the sample would not fully switch. As shown in eq. ( Log-transform the likelihood function to log-likelihood, L: Maximising the function: Solve for the estimated exponent, α to obtain: 1. A range of cut-off values, J k=1,2,...n 0 is generated with a finite step size. The finer the step size the longer the computational time. 2. For the k th iteration, remove all values of J < J k 0 . B.3 Decrement as J 0 < J min 3. Then, perform an iterative version of eq. (5.5), as shown below, to obtain the k th estimated exponent, αk , where J i > J k 0 and N k < N (B.2) 4. After n number of iterations, a plot of αk=1,2...n against ln J k=1,2,...n 0 is generated. B.3 Decrement as J 0 < J min In the perfect power-law ML fit (Figure Since J 0 < J min , eq. (B.2) can be expanded as follows: Part I is now a constant term; with some rearranging, let it take the form of an exponent, α 0 : Part II is a summation of two constant terms, thus: Thus the equation is reduced to: Therefore, by inspection, as J 0 decreases below J min , ln J min /J 0 increases, thus reducing α. iii B.4 Mixture of two Power-laws A distribution with a mixture of two exponents is not immediately obvious to the eye, and an attempt to extract an exponent via linear-fit might be a pitfall, yielding an averaged exponent of the two mixtures A jerk spectrum with a total of N = 10 5 jerks was randomly generated with two known exponents α = 1.5 and β = 2.0 with a 40:60 ratio. The jerks generation method is briefly described in Appendix B.5.2. The distribution was plotted and linearly fitted in Figure B.1a. Not knowing a priori that the jerk spectrum consisted of two exponents, the fit in Figure Performing an ML analysis is an easy way of avoiding this pitfall. Shown in Figure So, a distribution that resembles a straight-line may be hiding a mixture of two powerlaws. ML analysis must be performed in order to learn more about an avalanche system. Yet, even if a system is shown to demonstrate exponent mixing, the proper exponents are hard to determine. The higher exponent will be underestimated while the lower exponent will be overestimated if the jerk spectrum lacks relevant data (5.1) one must invert the cumulative distribution function (CDF), F (J) where J is a dummy variable. Let ξ be the call to a random number generator, and by replacing the lower-limit of the integral from -∞ to J min (since P (J) = 0 for J < J min ), the recipe for the sampling algorithm will be dJ where the denominator is the normalisation condition, generating the jerk data in the range J min ≤ J < ∞. One can easily decrease the range by changing the upper limit of the integral. vi B.5 Randomly Generated Jerk Spectra The equation reduces to: From here, the CDF can be inverted and becomes: where the dummy variable J is replaced by J. Therefore, for each random number ξ called, a jerk data point will be generated that follows the power-law distribution of an exponent α. To generate a jerk spectra with two different exponents, the recipe above can be used with an additional call to the RNG to determine which distribution J should be sampled from. An example to generate a 40 : 60 mixture of exponents α = 1.5 and β = 2.0 respectively is summarised below: 1. At the start of the algorithm, call a random number, ξ 1 and perform a check with the mixing ratio. (red) Fourier transformed. The Fourier spectra of both Al 2 O 3 and LaAlO 3 showed multiple peaks that represent periodicities that were caused by the oscillatory current responses. We suspect these oscillations were sample dependent and may be voltage "echoes". These "echo" effects bear a resemblance to crystal resonators For sample B's jerk spectra in Sections 6.1 and 6.2, the troughs Sample F however had deep troughs in the (dI/dt) 2 curve due to those current spikes. The Matlab ® routine that was previously used for interpolating was then modified to ignore the deep troughs (pentagram labelled in Figure D.1b). This allowed the interpolator to omit those points and form a smooth baseline. Interpolating Polynomial (PCHIP) method in Matlab ® to preserve the shape Chemical composition: BaTiO 3 . Chemical composition: Pb(Zr x Ti 1-x )O . Domains in ceramics are distributed into grains. These domains can be realigned but the grains cannot. Thus, monodomains can only be achieved in poled crystals and not ceramics Thus given the term 'hard' doped PZTs. 1001 including the point at t = 0 s. Corresponding to fields of 1 to 3 kVmm -1 for a sample with a thickness of 1 mm. Sample B was categorised in greater detail in the later section (Section 6.1). since coercive field E c for each chemically identical PZT will be dimension independent. The average thickness is 0.97 mm with a standard deviation of ±0.04 mm. low ramp-rate. For example: 1000 points ×40 Vs -1 /1 kV = 40 Hz. The ringing noise can be seen at Figure3.1b in the region t < 0.005 s. the voltage or electric field where current I = I max . Proposed by also known as Maximum-Likelihood Estimate (MLE). the common pitfalls of log-log fitting is described in Section 5.2.3 or The errors for J min arise from error propagation in logs ∆ ln(x) ≈ (∆x)/x while the errors in natural logarithms are due to the uncertainty of the kink itself being determined by eye. Due to a higher V c , a higher ramp-rate was needed to keep the measurement time and the sampling rate as a constant. A slower ramp will take a longer time to achieve V c , thus decreasing the sampling rate. A relaxor is a type of ferroelectric that has a frequency dependent permittivity Technically it is 1001 in the data output since the measurements include a data point at time t = 0 s followed by 1000 points. Coincidentally, lanthanum aluminate is also perovskite-structured A trough is defined as a point i, let the magnitude of the point be x i , where x i-1 > x i and x i+1 > x i .